Analogous to the Spin-Hall Effect (SHE), ab initio electronic structure calculations reveal that acoustic phonons can induce charge (spin) current flowing along (normal to) its propagation direction. Using Floquet approach we have calculated the elastodynamical-induced charge and spin pumping in bulk Pt and demonstrate that: (i) While the longitudinal charge pumping is an intrinsic observable, the transverse pumped spin-current has an extrinsic origin that depends strongly on the electronic relaxation time; (ii) The longitudinal charge current is of nonrelativstic origin, while the transverse spin current is a relativistic effect that to lowest order scales linearly with the spin-orbit coupling strength; (iii) both charge and spin pumped currents have parabolic dependence on the amplitude of the elastic wave. Introduction: One of the primary objectives in the field of spintronics is the development of efficient means to generate pure spin current, which can be in turn used to manipulate the magnetization configuration and damping rate in magnetic based memory bits Recently, a different approach to generate spin current was demonstrated experimentally in X/CoFeB/MgO (X=W,Pt,W) heterostructures where the spin current emerges from the lattice dynamics in strong spin-orbit nonmagnetic metals (Pt, W), and flows transverse to the propagation direction of the surface acoustic wave In this Letter, using ab initio based electronic structure calculations we reveal the emergence of a dc charge (spin) current in response to acoustic phonons in heavy metals (Pt), shown schematically in Fig. Theoretical Formalism: In the linear response regime the electronic Hamiltonian of a bulk system under a timeand position-dependent strain, ij ( R, t) (i, j = x, y, z), is given by Here, bold symbols denote matrices in real space, hat arXiv:2201.09121v1 [cond-mat.mes-hall] 22 Jan 2022 symbols denote matrices in atomic orbital Hilbert space, Ĥ0 is the Hamiltonian in the absence of strain, Ĥij = ∂ Ĥ/∂ ij | ij →0 is the deformation Hamiltonian term associated with the coupling between electrons and local strain, [ Ĥ] R, R = Ĥ R-R , R, R are the positions of the unit cells, and the time-and position-dependent local strain is a diagonal matrix with elements given by, where , N, M = 0, . . . , N ph , and N ph is the cutoff for the number of phonons. The hybrid electron-phonon Hamiltonian is shown schematically in Fig. where the Green's function is calculated from, Here, [ Ω] N M = N ωδ N M 1, is the single mode phononic Hamiltonian, f (E) is the Fermi-Dirac distribution function and η = /2τ is the energy broadening parameter which is inversely proportional to the electronic relaxation time, τ . Using density matrix given by Eq. ( where, ... is the expectation value, V is the unit of the unit cell, N k is the number of k-points in the summation and v k = ∂ Ĥ k /∂ k is the electronic group velocity operator. In the ballistic regime and in linear response to the phonon frequency, ω, the density matrix is given by, The first and second terms in Eq. ( To lowest order, the even (odd) component is expected to be independent of (inversely proportional to) η, demonstrating its intrinsic (extrinsic) character. The term "extrinsic" is defined as the odd component of the density matrix with respect to the broadening parameter η, which, TABLE I. Values of the intrinsic and extrinsic contributions to the elastodynamical-induced components of the pumped charge, I, and spin current, I S i , divided by the acoustic phonon frequency, ω, (in units of 10 10 /eΩm 2 ), for phonon wavevector, q = (±0.01, 0, 0)( Å-1 ) and strain amplitude to lowest order, is inversely proportional to η and originates from the intraband contributions (See Supplemental Material [52]). In the ballistic regime, η → 0, the intrinsic (even) component of the charge current can be written in terms of the Berry curvature, where, we use perturbation theory to express, being the group velocity matrix elements, and the energy broadening parameter, η, is introduced to avoid divergences at the degenerate points. The wavefunction, |ψ n k and energy dispersion, ε n k are the eigenvectors and eigenvalues of the Floquet Hamiltonian, Ĥ k , respectively. The intrinsic component of the pumped spin current can be calculated from an expression similar to Eq. ( where, the first term represents the kinetic component of the Hamiltonian, the second term is the SOC contribution, and ξ is the scaling factor. The effect of strain, ij , is to modify the primitive lattice vectors, a i , such that, ( a i -a i ) • e j = k a i • e k kj , where the e j 's denote unit vectors in Cartesian coordinates. The electronphonon coupling terms in Eq. ( . The self-consistent (SCF) calculations employ the Troullier-Martins type normconserving pseudopotentials Results and Discussion: Table The slope of the pumped charge and spin currents with respect to q x in the limit of q x → 0, describes the efficiency of the phonon-induced electronic transport in the material. Hence, in Fig. where, γ ch ij,kl and γ sp ij,kl are the Elastodynamical Longitudinal Charge Conductivity (ELCC) and Elastodynamical Transverse Spin Conductivity (ETSC), respectively. Given, ij = ji , in order to avoid double counting we consider only strains with, i ≤ j. One can then use the Voigt notation ([1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6] ≡ [xx, yy, zz, yz, xz, xy]) to represent the γ ch/sp ij,kl tensor elements as a 6×6 symmetric matrix. The variation of the ELCC versus the broadening energy, η, is shown in Fig. Fig. Thus far, we have focused only on the elastodynamicalinduced pumping in response to longitudinal elastic wave, xx ( R, t). In the following we present the results for the non-zero matrix elements of the 6×6 elastodynamical charge/spin conductivity matrix. The values of the diagonal matrix elements for the even (intrinsic) component of the ELCC matrix (in units of 10 9 /eΩm) for q x and η = 25 meV , are γ ch ii = [1.5, 2.5, 2.5, 0.8, 1, 1], (i=1, . . ., 6), while those of the off-diagonal matrix elements are γ ch 12 = γ ch 13 = -0.6, and γ ch 23 = -2.4, where γ ch/sp ij = γ ch/sp ji . Note that similar to the elastic stiffness and magneto-elastic tensor elements Similar calculations for the extrinsic component of the ETSC (in units of 10 7 /eΩm) with spin current along the z-axis and spin-polarization along y-axis, yields that the nonzero diagonal elements are, γ sp ii = [3.5, 2.6, -0.6, 2, 0.5, -0.4] and the off diagonal elements are, γ sp 12 = -3.3, γ sp 13 = -1.6 and γ sp 23 = 1.6. Note that all of the nonzero elements of ETSC are independent, similar to the elastic stiffness matrix elements of an orthorhombic crystal structure. This is due to the fact that the choice of the spin current direction along z renders the yz-plane (i.e., normal to q e x ) anisotropic. As demonstrated in the Supplemental Material[52], the underlying mechanism of the phonon-induced pumping can be attributed to the electron-hole asymmetry, which results in a negative (positive) sign for ELCC when the transport is electron-(hole-)like. The derivative of density of states (DOS) with respect to the energy can be employed to qualitatively determine the sign of the phononinduced charge pumping. We find a correlation between ELCC, ETSC and the derivative of DOS as a function of chemical potential shift [see Fig. An approximate value of the experimental ELCC can be determined from I ≈ ω qγ ch ef f 2 ef f , using the measured values 