Tellurium (Te) is an elemental semiconductor with a simple chiral crystal structure. Te in a two-dimensional (2D) form synthesized by solution-based method shows excellent electrical, optical, and thermal properties. In this work, the chirality of hydrothermally grown 2D Te is identified and analyzed by hot sulfuric acid etching and high-angle tilted high-resolution scanning transmission electron microscopy. The gate-tunable nonlinear electrical responses, including the nonreciprocal electrical transport in the longitudinal direction and the nonlinear planar Hall effect in the transverse direction, are observed in 2D Te under a magnetic field. Moreover, the nonlinear electrical responses have opposite signs in left-and right-handed 2D Te due to the opposite spin polarizations ensured by the chiral symmetry. The fundamental relationship between the spin-orbit coupling and the crystal symmetry in two enantiomers provides a viable platform for realizing chirality-based electronic devices by introducing the chirality degree of freedom into electron transport. Chirality, a fundamental geometric property, emerges as an important topic in many areas, including physics, chemistry, and biology. In condensed matter physics, the chiral crystal structure couples with the electrons Tellurium (Te) is an elemental narrow band gap semiconductor with a simple chiral crystal structure. Covalently bonded Te atomic chains form a trigonal crystal lattice through van der Waals interaction, as shown in Figure In this paper, we report the first systematic study of the gate-controlled chiralitydependent second-order nonlinear electrical responses under a magnetic field originating from the broken chiral symmetry of the crystal structure, including the nonreciprocal electrical transport (longitudinal direction) and the nonlinear planar Hall effect (transverse direction) in 2D Te. The chirality of the hydrothermally grown 2D Te is also studied by hot sulfuric acid etching and further confirmed by high-resolution scanning transmission electron microscopy (HR-STEM) images taken under the high-angle annular dark field (HAADF) mode and high-angle tilt condition. Our results provide a coherent approach to study the chirality-induced physical properties in 2D Te and other chiral materials. The device structure of 2D Te field-effect transistors (FETs) used for nonlinear electrical measurement is shown in Figure Nonreciprocal phenomena where the second term βB 2 represents the usual magnetoresistance, the third term γ l,r BI is the nonreciprocal contribution, and γ l,r describes the strength of the eMChA in a leftand right-handed material. The tensor nature of eMChA is revealed in Te bulk material It remains in 2D Te films also. Because of the 2D nature of the Te flakes, the carrier density and carrier type are tunable by applying a gate voltage. The nonreciprocal transport caused by the Weyl-type SOC-induced radial spin texture in the conduction band differs from that reported in the p-type bulk Te. between currents moving in +I and -I direction. An ac excitation current I ω was injected into the device from the drain electrode. Because the nonreciprocal transport is odd in B, we took the difference between the results for +B and -B to eliminate the influence of other effects, for example, the asymmetry of the device structure. on the atomic scale; as a result, the eMChA is expanded to three-dimension space when the external magnetic field couples the electron bands. The gate-tunable eMChA in 2D Te originates from the strong three-dimensional (3D) spin-orbit coupling in the inversion asymmetric Te crystal. Besides the nonreciprocal electrical response in the longitudinal direction, we also observed the nonlinear planar Hall effect Because in 2D Te, the spin-polarization is parallel to the electron momentum direction (Figure where χ l,r describes the strength of the nonlinear planar Hall effect, which can be calculated from the linear fit in Figure Here, the chirality of hydrothermally grown 2D Te flakes is investigated using hot sulfuric acid etching (see methods for details). Well-defined asymmetry etch pits are found The chirality-dependent nonlinear planar Hall effect is also observed in 2D Te. It is worth emphasizing that in Te, the electron spin is polarized along the current direction, which is different from that in Rashba spin-orbit coupling system Hydrothermal growth of 2D Te flakes. 0.09 g of Na 2 TeO 3 (Sigma-Aldrich) and 0.5 g of polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) (Sigma-Aldrich) were dissolved in 33 ml double-distilled water. 3.33 ml of aqueous ammonia solution (25-28%, w/w%) and 1.67 ml of hydrazine hydrate (80%, w/w%) were added to the solution under magnetic stirring to form a homogeneous solution. The mixture was sealed in a 50 ml Teflon-lined stainless steel autoclave and heated at 180 °C for 30 hours before naturally cooling down to room temperature. The synthesized 2D Te flakes were transferred onto a 90 nm SiO 2 /Si substrate to ensure the etching direction. 2D Te flakes were cleaned following a DI water rinse and standard solvent cleaning process (acetone, methanol, and isopropanol). 2D Te flakes were etched in hot concentrated sulfuric acid at 100 °C for 5 min. The scanning electron microscope (SEM) images were taken by a Thermo Scientific Apreo S SEM system at 5 kV. TEM, selected area diffraction, and HAADF-STEM analysis were performed with FEI TALOS F200x. This microscope was operated with an acceleration voltage of 200 kV. A high angle tilt holder was used to allow the large angle tilting required for this work. 