In this account, we describe the crazy-clock phenomenon involving the state I (low iodide and iodine concentration) to state II (high iodide and iodine concentration with new iodine phase) transition after a Briggs-Rauscher (BR) oscillatory process. While the BR crazy-clock phenomenon is known, it is the first time that crazy-clock behavior is linked and explained with the symmetry-breaking phenomenon, highlighting the entire process in a novel way. The presented phenomenon has been thoroughly investigated by running more than 60 experiments, and evaluated by using statistical cluster K-means analysis. The mixing rate, as well as the magnetic bar shape and dimensions, have a strong influence on the transition appearance. Although the transition for both mixing and no-mixing conditions are taking place completely randomly, by using statistical cluster analysis we obtain different numbers of clusters (showing the time-domains where the transition is more likely to occur). In the case of stirring, clusters are more compact and separated, revealed new hidden details regarding the chemical dynamics of nonlinear processes. The significance of the presented results is beyond oscillatory reaction kinetics since the described example belongs to the small class of chemical systems that shows intrinsic randomness in their response and it might be considered as a real example of a classical liquid random number generator. The presence of symmetry around us inspired many scientists to search for beauty, harmony, order, and regularity in Nature and Her fundamental laws The Briggs-Rauscher (BR) BR reaction typically occurs within mixtures of H 2 O 2 , H 2 SO 4 , and KIO 3 . Additionally, Mn(II) ions are added as a metal catalyst and malonic acid (H 2 MA) as an organic substrate. Substitutions of chemicals are possible; different acids, organic substrates, and ions, such as Ce(III) instead of Mn(II) catalyst, can be used to generate BR oscillations Since the time of the transition between state I and II is unpredictable, great attention must be paid to the experimental procedure. Only analytically graded reagents without further purification were used for preparing the solutions. Malonic acid was obtained from Acrōs Organics (Belgium), manganese sulphate from Fluka (Switzerland), perchloric acid, potassium iodate, and hydrogen peroxide from Merck (Germany). The solutions were prepared in deionized water with specific resistance 18 MΩ/cm (Milli-Q, Millipore, Bedford, MA, USA). All experiments were done in a container not protected from light. Reactions were monitored electrochemically (unless specified in the text). An I ˗ ion-sensitive electrode (Metrohm 6.0502.160) was used as the working electrode and an Ag/AgCl electrode (Metrohm 6.0726.100), as the reference. During the experiments, the temperature of the reaction container was regulated by a thermostat (Julabo ED, Germany) and maintained constant at 37 °C. The reaction mixture was stirred by magnetic stirrer (Ingenieurbüro, M. Zipperrer GmbH, Cat-ECM5, Staufen, Denmark). Four independent series of measurements were carried (they differed in stirring bar size and shape, as well as mixing rate) with the identical solution composition [H 2 MA] 0 = 0.0789 mol/dm 3 , [MnSO 4 ] 0 = 0.00752 mol/dm 3 , [HClO 4 ] 0 = 0.03 mol/dm 3 , [KIO 3 ] 0 = 0.0752 mol/dm 3 and [H 2 O 2 ] 0 = 1.176 mol/dm 3 in 25 ml volume: 1) without mixing (number of conducted experiments #30) 2) with mixing 100 rpm using cylindrical stirring bar 10 mm length, 4 mm diameter (BRAND magnetic stirring bar, PTFE-coated cylindrical), (number of conducted experiments #30) 3) with mixing 100 rpm using cylindrical stirring bar 20 mm length, 6 mm diameter (BRAND magnetic stirring bar, PTFE-coated cylindrical) (in triplicate) 4) with mixing 100 rpm using triangular stirring bar 12 mm length, 6 mm diameter (BRAND magnetic stirring bar, PTFE-coated triangular) (in triplicate) The obtained experimental results were analyzed in the open-source statistic software "R" using "hclust" algorithm for the hierarchical cluster analysis (HCA) The BR oscillatory period is strongly reproducible, while the transition from state I to state II occurred practically randomly (Figure It is imperative to emphasize that in our measurements (Figure However, the transition itself is very noticeable due to the intense color change of the system from colorless to yellow accompanied by solid iodine formation. This allows monitoring the state I→ state II transition with the naked eye. The cause of this unexpected transition is still unknown. Previous work highlighted the significance of mixing conditions for the appearance of state I→state II transition and crazyclock behavior Even with a low stirring rate (100 rpm), the transition does not occur with a bar exhibiting a triangular section (bar 12 mm length, 6 mm diameter) (Figure Is there a connection between the time that the system spends in the oscillatory regime and the time when the state I to state II transition occurs? Or, in other words, are the minor differences in oscillatory period duration responsible for a significant deviation in transition appearance? The detailed exploration of the relation between BR oscillatory time, τ osc , and the time τ* of the occurrence of the state I→ state II transition (Figure The results presented in Table The appearance of clusters indicates the existence of time domains where the state I to state II transition is more likely to occur. The stirring of the reaction mixture has a strong indirect influence on the state I→state II transition, delaying the crazy-clock behavior, shifting cluster centroids toward higher τ* values, and increasing the cluster separation (i. e. time domain separation), as well. The existence of clusters could be connected to different nucleation and growth mechanisms of iodine crystals in the case of mixing However, if we assumed that state I (low iodide and iodine concentration) is the symmetric state, which under some conditions becomes absolutely unstable, then, reaching the state II (high iodide and iodine concentration, with a new I 2 solid phase) could be considered as spontaneous symmetry breaking The diffusion-driven instability combined with nonlinear chemical reactions (with autocatalytic steps and radical reactions) is a broad concept and it could be responsible for the "internal stimulus" necessary for passing the energy barrier. The diffusion-driven instability is intensified by gaseous oxygen and carbon dioxide/carbon monoxide, which are released in the BR solution during the oscillatory period This proposal is actually a reformulated original idea of Turing Therefore, this work indirectly links spontaneous symmetry breaking and crazy-clock behavior (stochastic nature) in the bulk. The stochastic nature of state I to state II transition and its relation to symmetry breaking (and pattern formation), introduced a new approach in the investigation of crazy-clock behavior. On the other hand, the investigation of chemical systems with stochastic nature and symmetry breaking could improve our understanding of more complex phenomena in living organisms, such as morphogenesis. Additionally, this paper nominates state I→state II transition as an easily available chemical system for intrinsic random number generator and thus, expands the potential application of this crazy-clock reaction. In this work, we further investigated the crazy-clock phenomenon (state I to state II transition) which occurs after a strongly reproducible Briggs-Rauscher oscillatory reaction. The mixing rate, as well as the magnetic bar shape and dimensions, have a strong influence on the transition appearance. In order to better understand the stochasticity of the mentioned process, we ran more than 60 experiments (30 experiments with mixing and 30 experiments with nomixing conditions), and we applied the statistical cluster K-means analysis. Although the transition for both mixing and no-mixing conditions are taking place completely randomly, by using statistical cluster analysis, we obtained different number of clusters pointing to different time-domains where the transition is more likely to occur. Two-parameter analysis (by oscillatory time duration, τ osc and by the moment when the transition occurs, τ * ) suggests that the state I→state II is independent of the oscillatory time duration. Therefore, we performed a one parameter analysis (by τ * ). In the case of no-mixing, we found one cluster, while the statistical analysis of the results for mixing conditions revealed two compact and well-separated clusters. The clustering method reveals new hidden details regarding the chemical dynamics of nonlinear processes. The state I to state II transition could be explained through a symmetry breaking approach, and the necessity of the BR system to overcome a sufficiently large energy barrier. This is the first link of the crazy-clock behavior to the symmetry breaking phenomenon. The investigation of chemical systems with stochastic nature and symmetry breaking could improve our understanding of more complex phenomena in living organisms and therefore the scope of the presented results goes beyond oscillatory reaction kinetics. Furthermore, the described example belongs to the small class of chemical systems that shows intrinsic randomness in their response and it might be considered as a real example of a classical liquid random number generator. Supplementary Materials: A set of 60 experiments were performed without stirring and with stirring at a 100-rpm mixing rate 