CoFe2O4 thin films (5 nm and 20 nm thick) were grown by oxygen assisted molecular beam epitaxy on Pt(111) at 523 K and subsequently annealed at 773 K in vacuum or oxygen. They were characterized insitu using Auger Electron Spectroscopy, Low-Energy Electron Diffraction, Scanning Tunneling Microscopy and Conversion Electron Mössbauer Spectroscopy. The as-grown films were composed of small, nanometric grains. Annealing of the films produced an increase in the grain size and gave rise to magnetic order at room temperature, although with a fraction of the films remaining in the paramagnetic state. Annealing also induced cobalt segregation to the surface of the thicker films. The measured Mössbauer spectra at low temperature were indicative of cobalt ferrite, the both films showing very similar hyperfine patterns. Annealing in oxygen or vacuum affected the cationic distribution, which was closer to that expected for an inverse spinel in the case of annealing in an oxygen atmosphere. Hard magnetic ferrites have many technological applications, including permanent magnets, recording media, spintronic and microwave devices An ideal CFO has an inverse spinel crystal structure (AB 2 O 4 ) with space group Fd 3m, in which all cobalt cations (Co 2+ ) together with half of the iron cations (Fe 3+ B ) occupy octahedral sites (B), while the other half of iron cations (Fe 3+ A ) are located at tetrahedral sites (A), resulting in the chemical formula Fe CFO films have been grown by many different methods, such as sol-gel process Cobalt ferrite films were prepared and characterized insitu in an ultra-high vacuum (UHV) multichamber system. The system included a preparation chamber equipped with a molecular beam epitaxy doser, a LEED difractometer (OCI Vacuum Microengineering), which can be also used to record AES data using it as a Retarding Field Analyser (RFA), a chamber with STM (Burleigh Instruments microscope with Digital Instruments control electronics), and a chamber devoted to Conversion Electron Mössbauer Spectroscopy (CEMS). The home-made CEMS spectrometer, fitted with a channeltron to detect the electrons emitted from the sample, and a 100 mCi Mössbauer 57 Co(Rh) γ-ray source located outside the vacuum chamber, has been described in Ref. The substrate was a Pt(111) single crystal. Its temperature was controlled by a PtRh-Pt thermocouple pressed against the back side of the crystal. It was cleaned by cycles of sputtering with argon ion bombardment (500 eV, 5μA, for 35 min), flashing in UHV and annealing in atmosphere of oxygen (1×10 -7 mbar, 10 min, 825 K). The cycles were repeated until a sharp (1×1) Pt(111) LEED pattern was obtained. Nonetheless, some residual iron contamination could be detected by CEMS after numerous preparation cycles due to iron impurities diluted deeper into the substrate. The cobalt ferrite films were grown by co-deposition of iron, enriched to 95% in 57 Fe, and cobalt in an oxygen atmosphere on a heated Pt substrate. The oxygen partial pressure was 8 × 10 -6 mbar, and the substrate temperature was kept at 523 K. The growth rates of iron and cobalt and the annealing treatments for each film are explained in their respective sections. At each preparation step, the films were characterized by LEED and AES. At selected steps, STM and CEMS measurements were performed. The latter were acquired both at room temperature (RT) and low temperature (LT, 115-125 K). The spectra and the magnetic field distributions were fitted using the Recoil program and the NORMOS code 46 . As mentioned above, the Auger spectra were acquired by means of the fourgrid LEED spectrometer (in RFA mode) using a primary electron beam (I P ) of 1.7 keV. This sample was deposited using growth rates of approximately 0.28 nm/min for Fe and 0.14 nm/min for Co, respectively, i.e. keeping the nominal Fe flux approximately twice as large as that of Co, in order to obtain a nominal film of compo-sition close to CoFe 2 O 4 . Subsequently, the film was annealed at 673 K and 773 K in UHV for 15 min in both treatments. Figure We should mention that the inclusion of a paramagnetic Fe 2+ doublet results from the evident occurrence of a bump at around +1.5 mms -1 which makes the central "paramagnetic" part of the spectrum to be asymmetric. However, as it occurs in the case of magnetite thin films, where strong superparamagnetism is observed due to the occurrence of structural domains, this spectrum can be also fitted using hyperfine magnetic field distributions to account for superparamagnetic components. An example of this type of fit is shown in Figure Thus, the Mössbauer spectra recorded at 298 K and LT from the film annealed up to 773 K are also shown in figure The 298 K spectrum shows the presence of a broad intense magnetic component and some other small paramagnetic components (the Fe 0 singlet, a Fe 3+ doublet and a Fe 2+ doublet). The fit of the magnetic component can be performed in different ways. After trying different fitting models, we adopted finally a model considering two discrete magnetic sextets and a sextet with a hyperfine magnetic field distribution. The Mössbauer parameters of the discrete sextets (table The 125 K Mössbauer spectrum presents much narrower lines than the RT one and the two discrete sextets are now much better resolved. However, the spectrum still shows some relaxation character and an additional broad (characterized by a hyperfine magnetic field distribution) magnetic component, was included in the fit. Apart from this, the spectrum continues showing the small Fe 0 and Fe 2+ contribution. It is wellknown Fe 3+ Dist. character) with the temperature decrease as well as the particle size distribution causing line broadening since the magnetic moment stabilization does not occur at the same temperature for all particles. The superparamagnetic character in thin films caused by the small size of the particles has already been reported in the literature. J.G. S. Duque 22 studied this phenomenon for CFO films with particle sizes between 10-20 nm. Also, López et al. A /Fe 3+ B ) are in the ratio 2.1, i.e. quite far from the expected ratio (1.0) for a perfect CFO inverse spinel. This would imply that the magnetic field distribution component contains mostly octahedral contributions. We will come back to this point later. The growth of this film was performed at rates of approximately 0.16 nm/min for Fe and 0.08 nm/min for Co, thus keeping the nominal Fe flux approximately twice as large as that of Co in order to obtain a film with nominal composition close to CoFe 2 O 4 . Afterwards, the film was annealed at 673 K for 15 min and subsequently at 773 K for other 15 min, with both processes being carried out in UHV. An additional annealing treatment at 773 K in oxygen (1 × 10 -6 mbar) for 15 min was performed to check if this could improve the formation of a CFO inverse spinel. The AES spectra recorded from the as-grown 5 nm thick CFO film as well as from the annealed films both in vacuum and in oxygen are shown in figure STM images recorded from the as-grown film, as well as from the film annealed at 773 K both in vacuum and in oxygen, are shown in figure Figure The RT spectrum recorded from the as-deposited sample is characterized by an intense, broad magnetic component that is accompanied by some other minor paramagnetic components: the Fe 0 singlet mentioned before and an Fe 3+ doublet in distorted octahedral oxygen coordination. Because of the broadness of the magnetic component, the presence of a Fe 2+ contribution to the spectrum has not been considered in the fit since this would imply a large uncertainty in the determination of both its Mössbauer parameters and its spectral area. The spectrum is compatible with a broad distribution of the parti- cles sizes ranging from sufficiently small as to remain paramagnetic at RT to large enough as to give a relatively high hyperfine magnetic fields (46 T) (see Table As in the case of the thicker film, the annealing treatments induce significant changes in the nature of the deposited film. The RT spectra acquired from the annealed film both in vacuum and in the presence of oxygen are very similar, and they are also similar to the RT spectrum recorded from the annealed 20 nm CFO film: they show much better defined magnetic components and significantly less intense (super)paramagnetic contributions. Therefore, they have been all fitted using a similar model and, consequently, the same considerations mentioned in the case of the 20 nm-thick annealed film are of application here. At LT, the spectra show much narrower sextet lines although, again, some magnetic relaxation is still present, hence the need of including a low-intensity magnetic component having a hyperfine magnetic field distri- bution. Similarly to the LT spectrum of the thick film, the 125 K spectra of these films continue to show a Fe 2+ contribution. Slight differences between the LT spectrum corresponding to the thick film and the two reported in this section refer to the Fe 3+ A /Fe 3+ B discrete sextets intensity ratio. While in the former this ratio amounts to 2.1, in the present case, the values obtained are 1.9 (annealed in vacuum) and 1.1 (annealed in oxygen). For the 5 nm-thick film, the line intensity ratio in the sextet is 3:3.1:1:1:3.1:3, which corresponds to an angle between the sample average magnetization and the gamma radiation direction of 70 • . This indicates that the sample magnetization direction forms an angle respect to the surface plane close to 20 • ± 6 • . Therefore, in the present film the magnetization is slightly more out-of-plane than in the case of the 20 nm-thick film. We first consider the morphology observed by STM. The as-grown films are composed of nanometric particulates having sizes of tenths of nanometers. This explains the intense paramagnetic components and broad magnetic contributions observed in the corresponding Mössbauer spectra. However, despite having similar grain size in both as-grown Table films, a higher magnetic ordering is observed for the thinner film. Such evidence is surprising since one might think that an increase in the film thickness promotes a smaller (superpara)magnetic relaxation and not vice versa. This behavior might be related with the different deposition rates used to grow both films. As mentioned in the corresponding section, deposition rates for the 5 nm film were slower than for the thicker film by a factor of almost two. Taking into account the low temperature of growth (523 K), slower deposition rates would favour either the formation or larger surface aggreagates and/or induce the formation of a more ordered crystal structure. The LEED patterns are 1 × 1, i.e. they show the same symmetry and orientation as the substrate, with similar lattice parameter. This suggests that the films grow epitaxially on the substrate, although it is not expected that they are singlecrystalline. The lattice parameter of a spinel phase is close to double in size compared to the in-plane Pt spacing (0.59 nm vs 0.27 nm). Thus one expects for an epitaxial spinel film a pattern with a periodicity close to a 2 × 2 pattern. This is in fact observed in magnetite grown on Pt(111) First, the films might be structurally quite disordered at the cationic level. Especially for the as-grown films, this is in line with the observed Mössbauer patterns. This would imply that the only unit cell that is observed is actually the one corresponding to the in-plane oxygen-oxygen spacing in the films, which is half the size of the full spinel unit cell. We note that we have reported a similar effect during the deposition of Co on Fe 3 O 4 (100) where at some point only the oxygen unit cell was observed in LEED Annealing the samples in vacuum brings two main effects. First, it induces an enrichment in cobalt at the surface of the thicker film. This enrichment could be readily accommodated in such a Fe x Co 1-x O termination, and for both, it increases the size of the particles. The latter is not too surprising, as annealing is expected to activate surface transport and promote coarsening of the films. The increase in the size of the particles is reflected in the appearance of well-developed, much better defined magnetic components in the RT Mössbauer spectra. However, the Mössbauer spectra still show the presence of some magnetic relaxation, hence the need of including a broad hyperfine magnetic field distribution, together with a Fe 3+ doublet associated with very small particles that remain in superparamagnetic state at RT. It is also interesting to note that the differences among the RT Mössbauer spectra of the annealed films are really minute: they show a larger contribution of the tetrahedral sextet as compared to that of the octahedral sextet, the area corresponding to the hyperfine magnetic component amounts to ca. 34-40% of the total spectral area and the paramagnetic contributions together do not represent more than 14% of the spectral area. Therefore, it is difficult to conclude from the RT Mössbauer data if the difference in thickness of the films and/or the different annealing treatments (in vacuum or in the presence of oxygen atmosphere) have some influence on the structural and magnetic characteristics of the films. Fortunately, the LT Mössbauer spectra help significantly in establishing such differences. It is well-known that the cation distribution of cobalt ferrite cannot be precisely determined from its RT Mössbauer spectrum. In general, the tetrahedral/octahedral site ratio is usually overestimated from such measurement. In a recent publication, we have discussed this issue in detail In the case of the spectra of the present paper, there is an additional complication since the superparamagnetic relaxation has not disappeared completely at the lowest Mössbauer acquisition temperature (125 K). The hyperfine magnetic distribution included to account for this remanent relaxation varies between 12%-20% depending on the cases. Therefore, given that this broad magnetic component appears to contain both tetrahedral and octahedral contributions, it seems that it would not have a significant influence in changing the tetra/octa ratio determined at low temperature (or at least the trend observed) once it had been completely eliminated at lower temperatures (which we cannot reach with the present experimental set up). As mentioned above, these ratios are 2.1, 1.9 and 1.1 for the 20 nm-thick annealed in vacuum and 5 nm-thick film annealed in vacuum and annealed in an oxygen atmosphere, respectively. Such large values (for a perfectly inverse spinel a value of 1.0 would be expected) are usually obtained from the evaluation of low-temperature Mössbauer spectra recorded in the absence of applied magnetic field from cobalt ferrite The annealed films studied in this paper present significantly larger superparamagnetic relaxation than CFO films of comparable thickness prepared by IBAD These ferrite ultrathin films grown on a metallic substrate are relatively unexplored and relevant to consider for spintronic applications. A cobalt ferrite film might provide an efficient spin-polarized current from an unpolarized current injected from the metallic substrate due to the spin-filtering effect. A possible consequence of such current flow could be to reverse the magnetization of the CFO magnetic domains, of use in magnetic information storage devices Cobalt ferrite thin films of different thicknesses (5 and 20 nm) have been synthesized by molecular beam epitaxy on Pt(111) and characterized in-situ under UHV conditions. Deposition at 523 K gives rise to superparamagnetic/poorly crystalline thin films composed by a distribution of Fe 3+ containing-particles of different sizes in the nanometer scale. The results show that together with the deposition of these Fe 3+ -containing particles, a minor Fe 2+ contribution develops. The thinner film presents higher magnetic ordering than the thicker sample. This might be due to the lower deposition rate employed, which allows a cation distribution more similar to canonical CFO. Annealing in vacuum to 663 K and 773 K promotes an increase in size of the Fe 3+ particles which results in the development of magnetic ordering at RT, although the heating treatment has not completely eliminated the superparamagnetic relaxation. Annealing of the films also produces a cobalt enrichment of the thicker films surface, probably associated with the segregation of CoO. The low temperature Mössbauer spectra recorded from the various films indicate differences in the cation distribution of the deposited CFO films. In particular, annealing in oxygen atmosphere appears to promote the formation of a CFO film with a cation distribution close to that expected for an inverse spinel. a a