We investigate the quasiparticle excitations in the FFLO-type helical state of a superconductor with inversionsymmetry breaking and strong Rashba spin-orbit coupling. We restrict to a state with single finite momentum of Cooper pairs in the helical phase that is determined by minimization of the condensation energy. We derive the dependence of quasiparticle dispersions on the Rashba coupling strength and external field. It leads to a peculiar momentum-space segmentation of the corresponding Rashba Fermi surface sheets which has not yet been observed experimentally. We show that it may be directly visualized by the method of quasiparticle interference that identifies the critical points of the segmented sheets and can map their evolution with field strength, bias voltage and Rashba coupling. We also indicate a strategy how to determine the finite Cooper-pair momentum from experimental quantities. This investigation has the potential for a more detailed microscopic understanding of the helical superconducting state under the influence of Rashba spin-orbit coupling. In a superconductor (SC) with small orbital pair breaking a new state may become stable at larger fields where the conduction electrons are not bound in BCS pairs (-k ↑, k ↓) but rather in pairs (-k + q ↑, k + q ↓) with finite center-of-mass momentum 2q characterized by a gap function ∆(r) = ∆ q exp(iqr). This Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin-Ovchinnikov (FFLO) state However, such experiments do not address the microscopic nature of this state deep inside the FFLO-type phase. The latter is stabilized by a tradeoff between the loss of condensation energy due to the kinetic energy of pairs with center of mass (CM) momentum and gain in Zeeman energy due to population imbalance of spin states In reality inversion symmetry at the superconductor surface is broken and some of the promising SC materials have layered structure with broken 2D inversion symmetry in the layers or even have bulk non-centrosymmetric structure with complete lack of inversion symmetry. Then Rashba-type spin orbit coupling exists and will greatly modify both the FFLOtype states as well as QPI spectral features. In particular the Fermi surface will be doubled into two Rashba Fermi surfaces with different spin texture. This important case is therefore worthy of a separate theoretical investigation presented in this work. There is an important distinction, however, to the common FFLO case where the Zeeman term leads to different Fermi sphere radii of up and down spin electrons, whereas under the presence of a dominating Rashba coupling the two Rashba band (λ = ±1) Fermi spheres are shifted perpendicular to the field by a certain amount proportional to the field strength. This leads immediately to stable Cooper pairs with finite momentum 2q that grows with field strength characterized by an isotropic gap function ∆ qλ exp(iqr). This commonly called 'helical' state The model for the Rashba superconductor is introduced in Sec. II and the Bogoliubov quasiparticle excitations are derived in Sec. III following a method introduced by Cui et al in Ref. Here we introduce the commonly used bandstructure model including the Rashba coupling originating from inversionsymmetry breaking. We use the periodic form in view of the later QPI calculations but sometimes discuss the features of Rashba bands in the parabolic approximation for convenience. Subsequently a minimal model for the superconducting s-wave state introduced in Ref. The 2D Rashba Hamiltonian in an external field is given by in the spin representation. Here Ψ † k = (a † k↑ , a † k↓ ) are conduction electron spinors and ε k = -2t(cos k x + cos k y ) with -π ≤ k x , k y ≤ π is the periodic tight binding (TB) conduction band dispersion which is more suitable for the later treatment of QPI spectrum. Here t > 0 is the hopping element leading to a conduction band half-width D c = 4t and ξ k = ε k -μ TB . The chemical potential μ TB in the periodic band model therefore lies in the interval -D c ≤ μ TB ≤ D c and is referenced to the band center ε k = 0. It is necessary to map this to the 2D parabolic band model for μ TB ≤ 0 with ε k = ε 0 + k 2 /2m. Here ε 0 = -D c is the bottom of the band and m = 2/D c its effective mass. The chemical potential referenced to the band bottom is then given by μ = μ TB -ε 0 ≥ 0. Furthermore b = μ B B is the Zeeman energy scale given by the applied magnetic field B. The inversion symmetry breaking Rashba spin-orbit coupling is odd under inversion with g -k = -g k , explicitly g P k = (k y , -k x , 0)/k F = (sin θ k , -cos θ k , 0) in the parabolic band model where θ k is the azimuthal angle of k counted from the k x -axis where the Fermi wave number is k F = (2mμ) 1 2 and v F = k F /m the Fermi velocity. To stay consistent with the tight binding model dispersion we will take the periodic form where both forms are normalized, i.e. Equivalence in the limit of small wave vectors k x , k y π demands that the Rashba coupling constants in the two models are then related by α P = k F α TB . We suppress indices TB, P in the following and rely on the context. Diagonalization of the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( where ε kλ (b) denotes the Rashba-split and Zeeman-shifted bands (refered to μ) which have eigenfunctions corresponding to helicities λ = ±1. Here we introduce the auxiliary functions In zero field the two Rashba bands are given by where . This describes two parabolic dispersions shifted by k 0 . The ensuing two Fermi spheres have radii given approximately by are obtained where where the second and last expression correspond to TB and parabolic models, respectively. For finite but small in-plane field b = b(cos φ, sin φ, 0) (b α), where φ defines the field angle with respect to planar axes the Rashba dispersions of Eq. ( where we defined s α = sign(α). This leads to Rashba Fermi sheets with a radius given by where we assumed the physical hierarchy of energy scales according to (b < |α| < μ < 2D c ). An example for the geometry of Rashba Fermi surface sheets is shown in Fig. Thus the two Rashba sheets are shifted perpendicular to the field in opposite directions by the amount While the splitting of Rashba sheets is a measure for the coupling |α| their shifting perpendicular to B is a determined by field strength alone. These basic Rashba characteristics are shown in Fig. In this work we do not discuss the possible mechanisms behind the superconducting gap formation in noncentrosymmetric compounds without inversion symmetry, for an excellent review see Ref. In addition here we consider the possibility of a common overall momentum 2q of Cooper pairs due to the pairbreaking effect of the external field in conjunction with Rashba spinorbit coupling. One should expect that the size of q is correlated with the shift of the Rashba FS sheets (9) With the gap equation for the isotropic state of the FFLO phase given by where the prime indicates that the summation over k , λ runs only over the paired momentum regions with positve quasiparticle energies in Eq. Inserting this two-band pairing interaction into the gap equation [Eq. Introducing the Nambu spinors and the Hamilton matrix in Nambu space is given by Using the symmetries ξ k = ξ -k and g k = -g -k the diagonal elements are obtained as here we defined the auxiliary Rashba functions ζ ± kq = |αg k±q ± b| where both signs on the right are taken simultaneously + or -. We also introduce symmetric (s) and antisymmetric (a) combinations explicitly given by They fulfil the even/odd symmetry relations ε s -kqλ = ε s kqλ and ε a -kqλ = -ε a kqλ , respectively. Here we defined ξ s,a kq = In the formal limit of no Rashba coupling (α = 0) this simplifies to ζ s kq = |b| and ζ a kq = 0. In this case the two Rashba bands kλ (Eq. ( We note that in the following we will also use the property kλ ε a kqλ = 0 which is due the antisymmetry of ε a kqλ . Hereby the summation over k runs over the paired and unpaired regions as defined below. The first part in the ksymmetrized Hamiltionian in Eq. ( Here the quasiparticle energies are given by (τ = ±, τ = ∓): When for a given k, λ both E τ kqλ > 0 (τ = ±) one has a stable Cooper pair state with pair momentum 2q for this wave vector k and band λ. If, on the other hand E + kqλ < 0 or E - kqλ < 0 the pair state is broken and only unpaired quasiparticle states at exist at the wave vectors k + q, -k + q. Note the remarkable fact that although for these wave vectors |E ± kqλ | are normal quasiparticle excitations their energy nevertheless contains the gap size ∆ qλ determined by the paired states. This is because in the coherent helical ground state the unpaired electrons and holes also experience the pairing molecular field sustained by the paired electrons, even though they do not contribute to it. The mean field energy constant (last term in Eq. ( Therefore the corresponding Bogoliubov transformations for the two cases are also different: For the paired states it is given by whereas for the depaired states it may be written as Explicitly the transformation coefficients are given by These coefficients fulfil the wellknown relations Note the important fact that only the symmetrized Rashba band energies ε s kqλ appear in the transformation coefficients u kλ , v kλ . However, both momentum-symmetric ε s kqλ and anti-symmetric ε a kqλ contribute to the superconducting quasiparticle energies E τ kqλ in Eq. ( The total BCS Hamiltionian, including the constant energy in Eq. ( Here the second term H BCS is equal the total ground state energy E G (q, ∆ q± ) of the helical FFLO-type state. As in Eq. ( This energy functional should be minimized with respect to q and ∆ q± for Rashba coupling α and field strength b. It contains the possibilities of the helical (q = 0, |∆ qλ | > 0), BCS (q = 0, |∆ 0λ | > 0) and unpolarized normal (b = 0, q = 0, ∆ qλ = 0) states. For the latter the ground state energy is where f k = Θ(-ε 0 kλ ) is the zero temperature Fermi function for the unpolarized Rashba-split bands ε 0 kλ (cf. Eq. ( where the BCS zero-field quasiparticle energy is Here ξ c is an effective cutoff of the pairing potential (∆ 0 < ξ c < 2D c ). In the following calculations the gap size ∆ 0 is used directly as a fixed input parameter, then the cutoff may be absorbed in an effective coupling constant V 0 by deleting the Θfunction. For finding the ground state by numerical minimization it is useful to subtract the normal state energy from the ground state energy in Eq. ( Note that the asymmetric ε a kqλ Rashba energies of Eq. ( 1. An example of the condensation energy minimum formation in the (q, ∆ q ) plane and the resulting ∆ q (b), q(b) dependence for small fields and fixed α is shown in Fig. The Green's functions in the FFLO-type superconducing state are needed for the calculation of quasiparticle DOS and interference spectra. Using Eq. ( The normal and anomalous Green's functions elements G τ,τ qλ (k, iω n ) satisfy the following symmetry relations: and likewise The spectral function corresponding to the above Green's function is obtained as Now using the symmetry relation E τ -kqλ = E τ kqλ (with τ = ± and τ = ∓) one can define symmetrized spectral function according to Using Eq. ( This result agrees with the expression that may be directly infered from the quasiparticle Hamiltonian of Eq. ( (35) This presentation for the DOS is perfectly adequate for its numerical evaluation and will in fact be used later. However, to elucidate the distinction between conduction bands without spin-orbit coupling (α = 0) treated previously and the orthogonal pair momentum and field directions defined by θ q = π 2 (q = qŷ) and b = bx. Furthermore this leads to In this approximation the superconducting quasiparticle energies (Eq. 19) then simplify to The quasiparticle DOS ρ(ω) may be evaluated where ρ n λ (0) = ρ n (0) = m/2π is the normal state DOS equal for both Rashba bands. With the angle-independent bare Rashba dispersion ε 0 kλ = ξ k + λ|α| denoted by ε we can write Introducing now Êτ θqλ = ω -τ (v F q + λb) sin θ, the ε -integration leads to the partial radial DOS at angle FIG. and the total DOS is then given by Which has four contributions due to two quasiparticle branches for each of the two Rashba split bands characterized by (τ, λ) = (±, ±). They have the same form and are determined by their different energies Êτ θqλ which are explicitly given by (42) Note that because of the helical spin polarization of Rashba states the Zeeman contribution for a fixed field direction is now also proportional to sin θ since the spins are locked with respect to crystal axes for |α| |b|. This is an essential difference to the inversion symmetric case without Rashba spin-orbit coupling where they can align parallel to the bfield Now we turn to the main object of this work, the calculation of the quasiparticle interferenc spectrum in the helical phase which should show in a very straightforward manner the effect of the sofar hypothetical momentum-space segmentation of quasiparticles into paired and unpaired regions determined by field b and Cooper pair momentum 2q. This effect contains the microscopic essence of the helical superconducting state. For this purpose it is also necessary to define a simple model for the surface-impurity scattering of quasiparticles and transform it to the basis of helical Rashba band states. We consider the two most frequent cases of normal charge (c) impurities and magnetic moment (m) impurities being responsible for electron scattering at the surface of the Rashba FFLO-type superconductor. In the normal state, using spin representation of conduction electrons the isotropic scattering from impurities located at random sites R i is described by for the charge and exchange scattering, respectively. In the latter case we assumed an Ising-type classical local moment S z (i) at site i oriented along z-direction by a uniaxial potential, i.e. U 1 = 1 2 J ex S z (i) where J ex is the on-site exchange constant. This leads to a Hamiltonian (44) in spin representation describing the scattering by random impurities at the surface where q = kk is the momentum transfer. It has to be transformed to the helical eigenstates of the Rashba bands defined by Eq. (45) Here the momentum dependent scattering form factors Ṽ 0,1 λλ (kk ) are introduced by the transformation to helical eigenstates |kλ of each Rashba bands according to Eq. ( Explicitly we obtain in helicity space (λλ ) effective momentum-dependent c,m scattering potentials, given, respectively by (47) These scattering matrices are Hermitean fulfilling the relations ). Since we use the periodic TB band model for the QPI calculation in the next section we also must use the periodic form of the phase angle θ k = tan -1 (sin k y / sin k x ) in the above expressions appropriate for the TB model. Note that one has to be careful to pick the right branches so that the polar angle covers the whole interval [0, 2π]. This is guaranteed if we define θ 0 k = tan -1 (| sin(k y )/ sin(k x )|) and choose θ k in the whole BZ -π ≤ k x , k y ≤ π in counterclockwise fashion in the four quadrants (I-IV) (±k x > 0, ±k y > 0) according to (I) : In the helicity representation the scattering matrix includes non-diagonal inter-band terms λ = λ even though we started from a scattering potential diagonal in spin quantum numbers. Both momentum dependence and interband features of the scattering play a role in the QPI spectrum. The Fourier component of the surface charge modulation corresponding to momentum transfer q = kk (not to be confused with Cooper pair momentum 2q) and bias voltage ω = eV induced by the scattering from random impurites is given by (per impurity site) ) where tλλ (kk )(iω n ) is the scattering t-matrix due to the impurity scattering potential (Eq. ( ) in the normal (charge) and exchange (magnetic) scattering (c,m) cases, respectively. Inserting this in Eq. ( for the two cases of normal (c, κ = 0) and magnetic (m, κ = 1) scattering, respectively, whereby the sign constraint ∆ + = -∆ -= ∆(q, b) for the gap functions has to be kept. In this sum we are using the BA scattering matrix from Eq. ( (2)λλ (kk ) = Im Ṽ κ λλ (kk ) must be antisymmetric under this exchange and beacuse the expression in parentheses in Eq. ( (52) The difference between the two is due to the different influence of helical spin texture in the two scattering mechanisms. The QPI method is well suited to observe the typical changes of qausiparticle sheets in momentum space connected with the appearance of the FFLO-type helical phase. The most characteristic feature is the reappearance of Fermi surface sheets for small frequencies ω < ∆ 0 due to the pair breaking of combined Zeeman shift and Rashba splitting effects. The latter happens primarily for Cooper pairs with momenta -k + q, k + q close to the direction of the shift vector q s of Rashba Fermi surfaces which is perpendicular to the applied field. As function of applied QPI voltage ω = eV and field strength the unpaired sheets represented by the quasiparticle spectral functions undergo typical changes which contain information about the microscopic structure of the helical state. In particular it will give direct evidence for the Cooper pair momentum 2q being perpendicular to the applied field and more importantly under favorable conditions it should be possible to estimate its magnitude from analysing characteristic momenta qi of the QPI image. In the following we will therefore discuss the typical QPI charge images δN (q, ω) expected in experiment which we derived in the previous section for the charge and magnetic impurity scattering cases. It will turn out that the two are to a certain extent complementary. They will present mainly the same features due to the same quasiparticle energy denominators in Eq. ( Firstly, as a reference, we will briefly discuss the QPI image in the zero-field BCS case with conventional Cooper pairs, i.e. q = 0, of Fig. From a comparison of the model calculation for the segmented Fermi surfaces (more precisely equal-energy surfaces at bias voltage ω = eV ) and its associated theoretical QPI spectrum with the experimental one it is possible to investigate the details of the pair-breaking effect in the helical phase on the quasiparticle spectrum. In Fig. Evolution of spectral function (a, d, and g) and corresponding QPI spectrum for Rashba-helical FFLO phase: (b,e, and h) charge scattering QPI, (c,f, and i) magnetic scattering QPI, with frequency [first row: ω = 0.5∆0; second row: ω = 0.7∆0; third row: ω = 0.9∆0], and at field b = 0.5∆0 with q(b)/π = 0.005, and ∆q(b) = ∆0. Note that inter-band scatterings are contributed mostly from the non-magnetic impurities, whereas magnetic impurities mainly lead to intra-band scatterings. helical phase and its associated predicted QPI spectra and show their evolution as function of frequency or bias voltage for constant field (center and right column for charge and magnetic impurity scattering, respectively). We can identify a selection of the characteristic possible intra-(λ = λ ) and inter-(λ = λ ) band scattering vectors qi (i = 1 -6) defined in the left column as intense or at least enhanced features in the QPI image in the center and right column. These correspondences are indicated in the panels with white arrows. Particularly prominent and easy to identify are the tip-to-tip scattering vectors q4 for nonmagnetic and q2 , q6 for magnetic scattering. The other characteristic QPI vectors map out whole Fermi surface arc segments of the spectral function in the left column. In reverse this means that an experimental QPI spectrum in the helical phase of a Rashba superconductor allows one to reconstruct the segmented Fermi surface sheets that appear as a consequence of the depairing of Cooper pairs whose momenta are primarily oriented along the helical q vector. It is also noteworthy that the intensity distribution of the QPI spectrum is to a certain extent complementary for non-magnetic and magnetic scattering, emphasizing different regions of qspace: The inter-band scatterings appear most prominent for non-magnetic impurities, whereas magnetic impurities mainly lead to intra-band scatterings. This is due to the different coherence factors (numerators) in Eq. ( The Fig. Altogether our analysis demonstrates that an experimental magnetic/nonmagnetic QPI spectrum and its frequency and field evolution should contain enough information to map out the segmented quasiparticle sheets in the helical phase with finite Cooper pair momentum which is at the heart of this FFLO-type Rashba superconducting state. Finally one may ask whether the information contained in the QPI images allows to extract the size of the Cooper pair momentum q as function of field from the experimental data . We note that none of the thermodynamic experimental methods can achieve this. Since the q-vector for moderate fields has only a small fraction of the BZ extension and because it enters in a complicated manner in the spectrum of Eq. (51) one may not expect a direct identification in the QPI images of Figs. We can determine the angles θ τ kλ at the tip positions from the geometry depicted in Fig. where the first term is the Rashba FS shift q s of Eq. ( 2 → 1 in this limit. It has to be obtained from the experimentally observed q 2 (ω ). A similar procedure may be applied to other characteristic QPI vectors qi to obtain q(b). In principle this opens a way to determine the Cooper pair momentum 2q(b) directly from STM-QPI experiments. In this work we investigated microscopic features of helical phase in Rashba superconductors with isotropic and equal magnitude of the gap function on the two Rashba bands. The latter have helical spin texture enforced by the strong Rashba spin-orbit coupling. In a magnetic field they are shifted perpendicular to the field by an amount proportional to its size. Therefore Cooper pairing in a state with non-vanishing pair momentum 2q will be favored. Using the approximations for large Rashba coupling we derived the condensation energy as function of q. Minimization leads to the dependence of pair momentum and gap size on the applied field. At the same time we computed the quasiparticle energies in the helical state. Their most interesting aspect is a segmentation of momentum space into regions where Cooper pairs are stable and gapped Bogoliubov excitations exist and other regions spread around the direction of the overall pair momentum where pair breaking due to large kinetic energy destroys the Cooper pairs and leads to normal low-energy quasiparticles with corresponding Fermi surface sheets. These are present despite the fact that the gap ∆ k qλ = ∆ qλ is nodeless in kspace and real space. This basic microscopic structure of the helical state, a coherent superposition of paired and unpaired states with associated peculiar evolution of Fermi surface (surfaces of constant energy) topology as function of field and frequency has sofar not been investigated experimentally. In this work we have shown that the technique of quasiparticle interference is well suited to address this central property of Rashba superconductors with finite momentum Cooper pairing. It is able to monitor the apperance of the segmented Fermi surface sheets of unpaired quasiparticles as function of field strength and bias voltage until they evolve into those of the normal state Rashba sheets for large values of these tuning parameters. Due to the helical frozen spin texture the QPI images obtained for charge and magnetic impurity scattering on the surface show considerable difference and are complementary in the intensity distribution. Furthermore following some of the characteristic wave vectors of the segments one may derive an estimate for the size of the pair momentum 2q which is not accessible by other experimental means. The FFLO-type helical phase in the Rashba superconductor is more amenable to such QPI investigations because it appears already for small fields and does not require the extremely large fields of the genuine FFLO phase in the inversion symmetric superonductors. It may also occur more frequently since there is a considerable number of inversionsymmetry breaking (non-centrosymmetric) superconductors known by now. In particular such QPI investigations for the helical phase should be possible in layered superonductors with strong 2D character which has been assumed in our analysis. Here we give a brief derivation of Eq. ( (A1) Here the prime denotes summation over paired states only with both E ± kqλ > 0. Using the first form above the total ground state energy obtained from the mean field approximation and Bogoliubov transformation is orginally given by (A2) In the zero-field normal state (b = 0, q = 0, ∆ qλ = 0) where ε a kqλ = 0 and E ± kqλ = |ε 0 kλ | > 0 this ground state energy reduces to where f k = Θ(-ε 0 kλ ) is the zero temperature Fermi function for the unpolarized Rashba-split bands ε 0 kλ (cf. Eq. ( To obtain a more symmetric form for E G and E c we now use the identity which holds because both E ± kqλ cannot be simultaneously negative since their sum E + kqλ + E - kqλ = E kqλ > 0. Inserting this into Eq. (A2) and using k ε a kqλ = 0 we obtain after some simple rearrangements the symmetrized form of the ground state energy (A5) given before in Eq. Without a Rashba coupling it is known that the total charge current in the helical state vanishes even though the pairs have finite momentum. This is due to the fact that the current is the pair-momentum derivative of the total energy which must vanish in the ground state (B1) Transforming to Bogliubov quasiparticle states with Eqs. + (q + k)θ H (-E + kqλ ) + (q -k)θ H (-E - kqλ ) . (B2) Now we consider again the total ground state energy Eq. ( . (B3) Then, using similar small-q approximation as in Sec. IV, we arrive at the identity kλ ; E τ kqλ > 0 q + k; E + kqλ < 0 q -k; E - kqλ < 0 Therefore, similar as in the inversion symmetric case the charge current is the momentum gradient of the total energy, cf. Eq.(B2). We conclude that also in the presence of the Rashba coupling we have vanishing charge current J c q = 0 in the ground state. This situation may be different for the spin current which is already nonzero in the zero field phase of the Rashba superconductor 