Reducing the number of candidate structures is crucial to improve the efficiency of global optimization. Herein, we demonstrate that the generalized Hamiltonian can be described by the atom classification model (ACM) based on symmetry, generating competent candidates for the firstprinciples calculations to determine ground states of alloy directly. The candidates can be obtained in advance through solving the convex hull step by step, because the correlation functions of ACM can be divided into various subspace according to the defined index l. As an important inference, this index can be converted to the number of Wyckoff positions, revealing the dominant effect of geometry symmetry on structural stability. Taking Ni-Pt, Ag-Pd, Os-Ru, Ir-Ru and Mo-Ru as examples, we not only identify the stable structures in previous theoretical and experimental results, but also predict a dozen of configurations with lower formation energies, such as Ag0.5Pd0.5 Determining the material structure theoretically will provide important guidance to the experiment, where the energy evaluation and structure evolution are two main steps to predict the ground state structure. To explore configuration space, AIRSS Besides the simplification of energy evaluations, reducing the number of candidate structures is practical to accelerate global optimization. Instead of scanning the interaction parameter space It is comprehensible that these structures are closer to the edge of the feasible region in the correlation function space, approaching the convex hull. Most previous studies focused on the acceleration of energy evaluations with high accuracy combining the first-principles calculations and the interaction potential model In this letter, we show that the ground state structures of alloys can be directly obtained by the first-principles calculations, where the candidates are screened by the symmetry-based classification. Firstly, we demonstrate that atom classification model (ACM) in our previous study As shown in Fig. where J is the interaction parameter, and Π is the correlation function shown in Table In the representation of CE and ACM [see Figs. 2(b) and 2(c)], we have determined the possible ground state structures of the system by finding the vertices in the feasible region of the correlation function space, by enumerating all the structures of the one-dimensional atomic LGM Although more parameters are required in ACM compared with CE, the correspondence between the cluster environment in ACM and the structure is clearer, revealing the relation of structural stability and the symmetry of configuration. More importantly, with the benefit of the non-negative components of correlation functions, ACM brings convenience for the subsequent calculation of convex hulls to find possible ground state structures. Mathematically, the vertices of a set is defined as follows: in a point set X = {x 1 , x 2 , x 3 , ...} with any point x i belonging to X, the convex set is marked as Y = {y 1 , y 2 , y 3 , ..., y m } (m vertices in total), satisfying and Π i ≥ 0, indicating that all data points will be constrained in a finite n -1 dimensional hyperplane. To ensure that all possible ground state structures are included, we can enumerate supercells of various sizes and shapes until the convex hull no longer changes. As shown in the left of Fig. In the framework of ACM, there is a key index l, i.e., the number of non-zero components of correlation functions. The convex hull is complete if the number of structures with l = 1 is equal to the dimensionality of space, because all the possible candidates can be linearly represented by these structures. Besides the 1D atom chain (shown in Fig. When the number of structures with l = 1 is less than the dimensionality of space, we can classify the structures according to the dimensionality of l, because all the data points in the ACM correlation function space are restricted to a finite hyperplane, and those with larger l are distributed inside the hyperplane. Note that Π ACM with smaller l can not be linearly represented by the ones with larger l and the convex hull can be solved in the order of l increasing sequences, making the search becomes memorable. Furthermore, we can decompose the high-dimensional correlation function space into a combination of subspaces according to non-zero components of the correlation functions, and determine the vertices in each subspace gradually. Based on the above ideas, we have designed an algorithm from generating structures to calculating convex hull, with the flow chart shown in Fig. Taking the two-dimensional triangular lattice as an example, we study the evolution of ordered structures in the binary alloy system (A x B 1-x ) as the R cut increases (see SM. Sec. 4.2). When the truncated environment of 3 atoms [see Fig. In our previous studies, the unique configurations are obtained by structural recognition [see Fig. In summary, we demonstrate that ground states of alloy can be feasibly determined based on ACM, revealing the connection between stable alloys and geometric symmetry, i.e., the structures with lower l or N W will become ground states with greater probability. The number of candidates for the first-principles calculations is remarkably reduced. According to the formation energies of Ag-Pd, Os-Ru, Ir-Ru and Mo-Ru systems, we have predicted many configurations with higher stability. Our finding provides a standard routine to screen stable alloy structures, facilitating high-throughput firstprinciples calculations of alloys. four-body interactions in ACM, where all the 2,3-body interactions are included according to the deduction (see SM. Sec. 2.2).