Mid-infrared (MIR) spectrometers are invaluable tools for molecular fingerprinting and hyper-spectral imaging. Among the available spectroscopic approaches, GHz MIR dual-comb absorption spectrometers have the potential to simultaneously combine the high-speed, high spectral resolution, and broad optical bandwidth needed to accurately study complex, transient events in chemistry, combustion, and microscopy. However, such a spectrometer has not yet been demonstrated due to the lack of GHz MIR frequency combs with broad and full spectral coverage. Here, we introduce the first broadband MIR frequency comb laser platform at 1 GHz repetition rate that achieves spectral coverage from 3 to 13 μm. This frequency comb is based on a commercially available 1.56 μm mode-locked laser, robust all-fiber Er amplifiers and intra-pulse difference frequency generation (IP-DFG) of few-cycle pulses in χ Coherent MIR (3-25 μm) light sources are critical to the advancement of various scientific fields. This is particularly true for spectroscopic sensing and imaging, where such sources access the molecular "fingerprint" region (6.7-20 μm), enabling chemical specificity while also improving the minimum detection sensitivity limit. Spectroscopy and imaging systems using CW MIR lasers have shown unprecedented sensitivity The majority of existing broadband MIR frequency combs are generated through nonlinear downconversion of near-infrared (NIR) frequency combs, either through parametric oscillation or difference frequency generation (DFG) techniques. These sources typically have 50-200 MHz comb tooth spacing, which is defined by the repetition rate of the fundamental NIR frequency combs driving the nonlinear process. Such ~100 MHz repetition rate MIR frequency combs have been used in a DCS configuration for atmospheric sensing Since the measurement speed of DCS scales as the square of the repetition rate Addressing these challenges, we demonstrate the first 1-GHz MIR frequency comb with spectral coverage from 3 to 13 μm. A key aspect of this advance is the use of soliton self-compression in highly nonlinear fiber (HNLF) to generate NIR pulses centered at 1.56 μm with average power of 2.3 W and duration as short as 8.1 fs (1.5 optical cycles). In a simple single-pass geometry, these ultrashort pulses drive intra-pulse difference frequency generation (IP-DFG) in χ There are four main steps in our approach to generate broad bandwidth MIR combs at 1 GHz: (1) Start with a robust 1 GHz mode-locked laser at 1.56 μm; (2) Amplification in Er-doped fiber; (3) Temporal compression and spectral broadening in HNLF; and (4) IP-DFG in a χ After the amplification, the 4.3 nJ pulses are temporally compressed using a grating compressor to ~120 fs with total efficiency of 84%. The compressed pulses are then spectrally broadened in HNLF For the 7-13 μm range, we use normal dispersion HNLF (ND-HNLF) for spectral broadening in Step 3. Broadening in ND-HNLF enables the generation of a broadband spectrum with a high degree of coherence, a low timing jitter between different wavelengths, and a flat spectrum that can be easily compressed to a clean short pulse using bulk fused silica. Generation of few-cycle NIR pulses at 100 MHz repetition rate using ND-HNLF and subsequent broadband MIR to LWIR frequency comb generation using IP-DFG was successfully implemented in Since the short NIR pulse of Fig. Using soliton self-compression in an anomalous dispersion HNLF (AD-HNLF) we generate sub-twocycle NIR pulses at 1 GHz directly out of fiber and without any need for further recompression An advantageous aspect of driving the IP-DFG process with ultrashort pulses is that cascaded χ We developed the first 1-GHz MIR frequency combs based on a 1-GHz 1.56 μm mode-locked laser, all-fiber amplifiers and robust IP-DFG technique. The MIR spectrum provides full spectral coverage in the important atmospheric windows and molecular fingerprint region from 3 to 13 μm. Unique to our system is the full coverage at a 1 GHz repetition rate from 3 -5 μm using PPLN and 6.5 -14 μm using OP-GaP with total power as high as 6.2 mW. Key to generating the broad spectra in the 3 -5 μm region is the use of NIR driving pulses as short as 8.1 fs (1.5 optical cycles) that arise from soliton self-compression in AD-HNLF. We also find that spectral broadening in ND-HNLF is more appropriate to extend the wavelength coverage to longer wavelengths. We have fully stabilized the frequency comb by phase locking both the repetition rate, via stabilization against a CW laser, and the carrier envelop offset frequency, which conveniently originates from the same nonlinear crystal producing the IP-DFG. We used a simple and cost-effective FPGA-based servo system for phase locking. Overall, this system has the following important and notable characteristics: 1) broad bandwidth in MIR with continuous coverage from 3 to 5 μm and 7 to 13 μm; 2) 1-GHz repetition rate, enabling fast dual-comb measurements with high spectral resolution in the future; 3) a robust design using commercially available mode-locked lasers, all-fiber Er amplifiers, and the IP-DFG technique (a single-pass and single-pulse approach with inherent robustness and low noise). Together, these advances will enable access to a previously inaccessible regime of high-speed and broad bandwidth dual-comb spectroscopy and hyper-spectral imaging of fast non-repetitive events.