Beyond-diffraction-limit optical absorption spectroscopy provides profound information on the graded band structures of composition-spread and stacked two-dimensional materials, in which direct/indirect bandgap, interlayer coupling, sliding, and possible defects significantly modify their optoelectronic functionalities such as photoluminescence efficiency. We here visualize the spatially-varying band structure of monolayer and bilayer transition metal dichalcogenide alloys for the first time by using near-field broadband absorption microscopy. The near-field-spectral and -spatial diagrams manifest the excitonic band shift that results from the interplay of composition spreading and interlayer coupling. These results enable us to identify the top layer of the bilayer alloy as pure WS2. We also use the aberration-free near-field transmittance images to demarcate the exact boundaries of alloyed and pure transition metal dichalcogenides. This technology can offer new insights on various layered structures in the era of "stacking science" in quest of novel quantum optoelectronic devices. Transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) provide an ideal two-dimensional (2D) electronic system So far, the characterization of direct-gap or even indirect-gap TMDs has been mostly done through photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy However, in the case of multilayers, vertically-stacked heterostructures, alloys, and highly-defective samples, the PL detection becomes very inefficient because non-radiative processes then dominate the exciton recombination. To make things more complicated, in inhomogeneous structures and alloys, the band structure changes according to the fractional composition To overcome the above aberration problem in absorption mapping In this study, we use near-field broadband absorption microscopy to visualize the spatially-varying band shifting and interlayer coupling of monolayer TMD alloy, WxMo1-xS2. The spatial distribution of its excitonic bands is reconstructed from the mapping of near-field transmittance (NF-tr). The energy-location diagrams, which reflect the electronic structure of TMD alloy, reveal the energy shifting of A, B, and C excitons along a lateral spatial profile. In the case of bilayer WxMo1-xS2 alloy, the energy-location diagrams confirm that the top layer is pure WS2, and the excitonic band shifting is induced by the interlayer coupling. In addition, we show that NF-tr images at different photon energies can demarcate pure TMD from alloyed with clear-cut boundaries. These results demonstrate that, to investigate the stacking and interlayer coupling of 2D materials, near-field absorption microscopy provides a powerful tool to produce aberration-free and nanoscale-resolution imaging of the band structure over a wide range of energy, even in the presence of highly lateral inhomogeneity. We show in Figs. During alloy growth, the x fraction value typically varies along the growth direction (location). Yet, in most circumstances, this value tends to depend linearly on the location. The x value is commonly extracted from the A exciton band-shift in the PL spectra From x = 1(WS2) to x = 0 (MoS2), the A (B) exciton undergoes a 130 (280) meV redshift, denoted as EA (EB), which results from the band alignment of WS2 and MoS2 (see Fig. where E(x) denotes the exciton energy for a specific x value, E WS To go further, we calibrate the nonlinearity between x and location (d) by introducing a power n according to where d 0 stands for the distance between pure WS2 and pure MoS2. The fitted n value is close to 1 (1.02 for the A exciton and 1.00 for the B exciton), hence proving that x is linear with the location, as expected. Having After considering the monolayer TMD alloy, we now extend the methodology to the more complicated case of bilayer TMD alloy. Here again, NF-tr and near-field photoluminescence (NF-PL) techniques prove valuable in determining the layer number and the interlayer coupling. Fig. (v) Line-g cuts through the top edge of the 2L area. The fact that the top layer is pure WS2, and the bottom layer is pure MoS2 can be explained by the flatness of all four redshifted bands. This observation will be further substantiated by the NF-tr image of MoS2-B in Fig. The values of the shifted energies are: EA,WS2 =50, EB,WS2=20, EA,MoS2=30, and EB,MoS2 =40 meV. While the shifting of the exciton energy generally depends on how layers are stacked The schematics right below Figs. 3c-3g show the vertical layer stackings that correspond to these different lines. However, to delineate the exact boundary between pure TMD and alloy requires further information extracted from the NF-tr images at different photon energies given in Fig. In Fig. Indeed, the absorption image of the B exciton, shown in Fig. In Figs. 4d'-4f', NF-PL is prominent in the 1st-L WS2 and 1st-L W-rich alloy regions. But because of the defective MoS2, the NF-PL evolution stops at some x fraction; so, NF-PL images are much less informative than NF-tr images. Note that the PL distribution is not homogeneous since the PL signal is susceptible to local features, such as defects or strains With all the above information, we can understand the distribution of composition in the bilayer TMD alloy, as illustrated in Fig. In conclusion, we used near-field transmittance microscopy to resolve the spatial profile of the complicated WxMo1-xS2 bands associated with the various excitons of MoS2 and WS2. We have shown that this technique can overcome the problems of chromatic aberration and diffraction limit that plague far-field broadband microscopy. Whereas NF-PL can only measure the A exciton absorption and some monolayer features, NF-tr can moreover detect the B and C exciton absorption features and the composition of multilayer TMDs. This novel technology is here shown to be indispensable for characterizing the lateral distribution and the vertical combination of monolayer and bilayer TMDs. The WxMo1-xS2 was synthesized by a one-step CVD process. A few-nanometer MoO3 film was first deposited on the sapphire substrate, and WO3 powder was put in a home-built quartz reactor. Both of them were then put in the tube furnace and heated to 900°C. We changed the relative position of the quartz reactor (evaporated WO3) and the substrate to optimize the temperature and reactant supplement for TMD alloys growing. In this way, we could synthesize gradually alloyed interface in the WxMo1-xS2 monolayer. The details of the growth can be found in The NF-tr and NF-PL measurement was performed on the home-built SNOM instrument The a-SNOM tips were made of SiO2 hollow-pyramid tips (Nanosensors), and the fabrication processes could be found in For NF-tr and FF-tr measurements, the transmittance is defined as T(x, y) = I s (x, y)/ I ref (y), where (x, y) are the coordinates for mapping, Is is the sample signal, Iref is the reference signal, which is obtained by averaging the first five data points at the substrate region for each line. In this way, the long-term drift of transmittance can be eliminated. The spectra in Fig. 