The paper describes the capability of magnetic softening of a coarse-grained bulk material by a severe deformation technique. Connecting the microstructure with magnetic properties, the coercive field decreases dramatically for grains smaller than the magnetic exchange length. This makes the investigation of soft magnetic properties of severely drawn pearlitic wires very interesting. With the help of the starting two-phase microstructure, it is possible to substantially refine the material, which allows the investigation of magnetic properties for nanocrystalline bulk material. Compared to the coarsegrained initial, pearlitic state, the coercivities of the highly deformed wires decrease while the saturation magnetization values increase-even beyond the value expectable from the individual constituents. The lowest coercivity in the drawn state is found to be 520 A m -1 for a wire of 24-μm thickness and an annealing treatment has a further positive effect on it. The decreasing coercivity is discussed in the framework of two opposing models: grain refinement on the one hand and dissolution of cementite on the other hand. Auxiliary measurements give a clear indication for the latter model, delivering a sufficient description of the observed evolution of magnetic properties. Severely drawn pearlitic steels have drawn the attention of scientists as well as engineers due to their exceptional high strength Accompanying the nanocrystalline microstructure (see Figure Consequently, the magnetic properties of pearlitic wires experiencing high-drawing strain, featuring smallest microstructural sizes, are of large interest. The following questions are going to be answered: Does the coercivity further decrease for very high applied strains? Does the random anisotropy model explain the decreasing coercivities with increasing drawing strains, or can the explanation also be found in other microstructural changes? The hypereutectoid pearlitic steel containing 0.98 wt.% C was initially provided in the shape of a wire with a diameter dstart of 540 μm featuring an average grain size of 23 μm, measured by electron backscatter diffraction. Upon severe wire drawing, thin wires with diameters of a few tens of micrometres were produced. Besides the non-deformed state (ε = 0 for dstart = 540 μm), thin wires experiencing true drawing strains of 5.42 (dfinish = 36 μm) and 6.23 (dfinish = 24 μm) were investigated regarding magnetic properties such as coercivity and saturation magnetization. A superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID, Quantum Design MPMS XL7), a very sensitive magnetometer for detecting tiny changes of magnetic moments in magnetic fields, was used to measure the volume saturation magnetization at very high fields up to 7 T and the variations of coercivity with changing temperature. Checking reproducibility, the saturation magnetization of two wires of 36-μm thickness was determined. SQUID measurements yield the total magnetic moment of the whole sample volume and for an accurate determination of the saturation magnetization, a normalization with respect to the sample volume has to be made. For the determination of the volume of the thickest wire, a conventional laboratory scale (Sartorius Secura225D-1S, Sartorius, Gottingen, Germany) and using the known mass density of pearlite (7845 kg m -3 As an example, a small section is provided in Figure The room temperature coercivities of the wires were determined using a vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM, LakeShore 7404, LakeShore Cryotronics, Westerville, OH, USA). Due to the soft magnetic nature of the material, these measurements include the correction of the results for the remanence of the pole pieces, using a paramagnetic Pd standard, which was measured under the same conditions. For all magnetic measurements (SQUID and VSM), the wires were brought into the magnetic field with the long axis of the wire, being some millimetres of length, aligned with the magnetic field. Due to the large aspect ratio (specimen length/diameter), even for the thickest wire, the influence of shape anisotropy Scanning electron microscopy (Figure Combining the measured volume and the magnetic moment from SQUID measurements, the volume saturation magnetization can be calculated and the results for all investigated wires are presented in Figure In contrast to the thin wires, the saturation magnetization of the thick wire agrees with the value of pure pearlite. Assuming that 0.77 wt.% C (=3.5 at%) are involved in Fe3C formation, 10.5 at% of Fe are included in the cementite and the rest of Fe forms the ferritic phase. Cementite is ferromagnetic at room temperature. Using the room temperature saturation magnetization of cementite, ~62 emu g -1 An advantage of pearlitic steels is their chemical composition. An important aspect of the formation of soft magnetic materials is maintaining a high saturation magnetization Js, which can easiest be achieved with high Fe-contents. When using the bottom-up process, several other -very often non-magneticelements have to be used to accomplish the goal of formation of nanocrystalline alloys from e.g., amorphous melt-spun ribbons. Suzuki et al. In short, while the thick, non-deformed wire shows the expected pearlitic behaviour in saturation magnetization, all thin wires show values near or even above pure Fe. The slight surplus in saturation magnetization is possibly due to C in supersaturated solid solution, which is typically present in the severely deformed wires For an ideal soft magnetic material, the coercivity should tend towards zero, easing the magnetization process and reducing the hysteretic heat losses for certain applications. The coercivity does not necessarily increase with decreasing grain size, as it is the case for "coarse" grained (D > ~100 nm) materials with A being the exchange stiffness constant (Fe: 20.7 pJ/m Js is the magnetic saturation polarization in [T] (Fe: 2.15 T Focusing on pearlitic steel, References The measured coercivities Hc of the thin wires, as determined by VSM, are smaller (24 μm: 520 A m -1 , 36 μm: 610 A m -1 ) than that of the thick wire (540 μm: 1510 A m -1 ). The coercivity of the pristine state is in agreement with results of both, a cold drawn, 0.8%C steel "music wire" (Hc ~1590 A m -1 ) In a previous work by our group, a strong, beneficial influence of a low temperature annealing treatment (150 °C, 1 h) on the coercivity of severe plastically deformed materials was found If one strictly connects the grain size with coercivity, the magnetic measurements would indicate that there is hardly any further refinement of grain size when drawing the wire from 36 to 24 μm in diameter, albeit the reduction in diameter constitutes a substantial degree of further deformation. Along with the impart of additional strain, Li et al., observed a further strengthening of the material for increasing the strain from 5.1 (σmax ~6.2 GPa) to 6.52 (σmax ~6.8 GPa) Due to the findings of microstructurally refined and magnetically soft materials, Equation ( x ln(36/24) to 12.3 nm. The 540 μm wire with a grain size of 23 μm, does not follow this trend. Regarding the thin wires, there is a small tetragonal distortion (c/a < 1.01) of the bcc crystal present in the severe plastically deformed material Another proof for the dissolution of cementite to a large extent in the severely drawn wires is provided by temperature dependent measurements of coercivity. Using the SQUID, the coercivity as a function of temperature was measured for a 36-μm wire, which provides -besides the saturation magnetization -another strong hint for the predominance of the bcc Fe phase, but not of the cementite phase. This measurement involves recoil loops of going to the highest fields, saturating the sample and then accurately measuring the coercivity applying small fields. These loops are repeated in temperature steps of 20 K. No Pd-standard was available at that time for SQUID measurements, thus, the measurements of the coercivity always include a systematic offset due to the residual magnetic fields of the superconducting magnet Another aspect of the discussion of the coercivity of severely deformed wires is the already found trend of decreasing coercivity with increasing applied strain (up to ~3.5) Figure it is slightly larger (70-90 nm) for the initial state described in When comparing the two different approaches for describing the decreasing coercivity with increasing strain, it has to be mentioned that wire drawn materials feature a very pronounced texture. In Summarizing, there are two ideas, which describe the found trend in coercivity. The first one is based on the random anisotropy model, while the second is based on microstructural changes, especially taking place for the cementite. Due to the presented arguments the one relying on microstructural changes for the cementite phase is more likely to be applicable. Pearlitic wires -ferritic wires in different wire-drawn states -were subjected to magnetic measurements, focusing on the volume saturation magnetization and coercivity. According to the indirect phase analysis based on the evaluation of saturation magnetization data, the drawn wires with diameters of 24 and 36 μm behave -from a magnetic point of view -like pure Fe with cementite being dissolved. This finding is supported by an independent measurement of the temperature dependent coercivity, also fitting to the behavior of pure Fe. The measured values of volume saturation magnetization of the thin wires, who experienced a drawing strain larger than 5.4, are slightly higher as it can even be expected for pure Fe. This can be attributed to Fe being supersaturated by C, as it enlarges the magnetic moment of Fe-atoms. It was demonstrated that an annealing treatment has a positive effect to magnetically soften the wire. Annealing at 150 °C for 30 min slightly reduces the coercivity, which is most likely due to a reduction of residual stresses being present from the severe deformation process.