The oxide interface between LaAlO3 and KTaO3(111) can host an electron gas that condenses into superconductivity at low temperatures. In this work, we demonstrate a local and non-volatile control of this electron gas using a biased conducting atomic force microscope tip. By scanning the tip, charges can be accumulated on the surface of LaAlO3, which subsequently tune the conduction of the buried LaAlO3/KTaO3(111) interface largely, varying from conducting (superconducting) to insulating states. The tuning effects are stable for > 20 h at room temperature. The maximum modulation of carrier density is > 8 × 10 13 /cm 2 . This result suggests a new model system in which rewritable superconducting, normal, and insulating states can be flexibly defined in the same material on demand. Controlling conduction locally and non-volatilely is appealing for both science and technology. Oxide heterostructures provide a fertile ground for such a control. A straightforward way to achieve it is exploiting the non-volatile polarization of epitaxial ferroelectric oxides Very recently, a new family of oxide interface superconductors were discovered in heterostructures composed of KTaO3 (KTO) and other oxides (EuO or LAO) We first demonstrate that we can reliably write charges, as well as switch their sign, on the surface of LAO/KTO heterostructure by scanning the surface with a biased cAFM tip. Figure We then explore the mechanism for the surface charge writing. In Fig. From a simple electrostatic consideration, to satisfy charge neutrality, the accumulation of negative (positive) surface charges will deplete (accumulate) interface electrons, which will in turn decrease (increase) the interface conduction. In the following we show that the charges written on the surface of LAO/KTO can indeed modulate the interface conduction hugely. In order to enable more quantitative measurements of sheet resistance Rsheet and sheet carrier density nsheet, we fabricated a LAO(10 nm)/KTO sample into a standard Hall-bar configuration The tuned conduction is very stable. We have prepared the device into a high and low resistance states and found that both of them decayed only slightly, in ambient condition, in a time of ~20 hours (Fig. Finally, we demonstrate our control of superconductivity of LAO/KTO using surface charge writing. It has been a long-standing challenge to control superconductivity electrostatically because the nsheet of most superconducting systems is larger than the tuning ability of the conventional electrical field effect A following Vtip = -9 V writing fully suppressed the superconductivity and increased the overall Rsheet(T) by about one order of magnitude (Fig. To quantitatively evaluate the tuning ability of surface charges on nsheet, we performed Hall-effect measurements immediately after the respective Rsheet(T) measurements, on the device at 2 K. As shown in Fig. In summary, we have demonstrated for the first time a non-volatile control of conduction and superconductivity at LAO/KTO interface by locally writing surface charges. The non-volatile characteristic is reminiscent of ferroelectric field-effect devices. However, unlike the ferroelectric polarization, the charge writing-induced resistive states, which depend on Vtips, can be varied in a wide range by designing. Compared with LAO/STO 