We have developed a machine learning-based interatomic potential (MLIP) for the quaternary MoNbTaW (R4) and quinary MoNbTaTiW (R5) high-entropy alloys (HEAs). MLIPs enabled accurate highthroughput calculations of elastic and mechanical properties of various non-equimolar R4 and R5 alloys, which are otherwise very timeconsuming calculations when performed using density functional theory (DFT). We demonstrate that the MLIP predicted properties compare well with the DFT results on various test cases and are consistent with the available experimental data. The MLIPs are also utilized for high-throughput optimization of non-equimolar R4 candidates by guided iterative tuning of R4 compositions to discover candidate materials with promising hardness-ductility combinations. We also used this approach to study the effect of Ti concentration on the elastic and mechanical properties of R4, by statistically averaging the properties of over 100 random structures. MLIP predicted hardness and bulk modulus of equimolar R4 and R5 HEAs are validated using experimentally measured Vicker's hardness and modulus. This approach opens a new avenue for employing MLIPs for HEA candidate optimization. Alloy development is a costly, multi-year exercise. Selection of elements that produce a material with desired properties requires careful consideration of multi-component interactions. Further compounding on this difficulty is the perpetual need to optimize existing alloys for different applications, such as those for high temperature or radiation environments. The development of a computationally-based methods would serve to significantly reduce the exploratory cost when designing a new alloy or optimizing existing alloys. Highly accurate first principles calculations are limited by the simulated length and time scale. Therefore, it is practically impossible to explore the vast configurational space of multi-component alloys (MCAs) using computationally demanding ab initio methods such as density functional theory (DFT). On the other hand, molecular dynamics (MD) simulations based on empirical force fields are much faster but limited to a fewer candidates of multi-component alloys (MCAs) due to the lack of accurate potentials. Therefore, machine learning potentials or force fields trained from the relatively small data sets obtained from the highly accurate quantum mechanical calculations can be a suitable alternative, with an accuracy of ab initio methods and efficiency over order of magnitudes than the DFT. Besides, the MLIPs, once trained, interpolate over a wide range of material compositions without requiring repeated DFT calculations for all of them, which enables high-throughput search of novel MCAs with desired properties. Because of their computational efficiency and accuracy, MLIPs have recently gained wide attention in various branches of science In this work, we have used the MTP-based approach, as implemented in the MLIP package The training data sets are generated from the DFT calculations, which are described in the method section below. The trained models or MLIPs are incorporated in the well-known MD package LAMMPS for high-throughput elastic and mechanical properties calculations. Moment tensor potential (MTP) describes the atomic contribution of an atom i to the total energy as: where B j are the pre-defined basis functions, m is the number of functions in the basis, and θ are the fitting parameters. The total energy of a configuration Machine learning interatomic potential for high-throughput screening and optimization is given by: where N atm is the total number of atoms in a configuration c. The functional form of the basis function B j is defined by the moment tensor descriptors: where f α is the radial part and r 1 ij ⊗ • • • ⊗r β ij is the angular part of the moments. The functional form and other details of the moments are discussed in where x j is the atomic position. Similarly, the virial, the volume weighted stress components are given by, where a is the lattice vector. Then, the value of θ j are determined by minimization of the cost functional (L) given by: where, C all is total configurations, ∆E= E M T P -E DF T is the error in total energy. Similarly, ∆f and and ∆σ are the errors in forces and virials, respectively. w E , w f , and w σ are the weight factors for total energy, force, and stress, respectively. We have implemented the workflow illustrated in Fig. The training and validation data sets to fit the MTP potentials are obtained from the quantum mechanical calculations within the density functional theory (DFT)framework. DFT calculations were performed using the VASP package For bcc cubic phase, there are three independent single-crystal elastic constants: C 11 , C 12 , and C 44 . For the supercell model we adopted, there are nine independent elastic constants due to low symmetry and large cell size where the elastic constants on the right-hand side are the ones obtained from calculations. The elastic constants are calculated from the optimized structures from the stress-strain relationship method as implemented in the VASP and LAMMPS. The Voigt-Reuss-Hill (VRH) approximation where B V and G V is Voigt's bulk modulus and shear modulus, and B R and G R are Reuss's bulk modulus and shear modulus, respectively. For cubic phase, Machine learning interatomic potential for high-throughput screening and optimization they are given by: The mechanical stability criteria as suggested by Born and Huang are given by The ductility of materials is estimated through Pugh's criterion: the condition for the ductility of materials is that the Pugh's ratio (B/G) should be greater than 1.75 The R4 and R5 alloys were purchased from Sophisticated Alloys. All specimens were ground to a 4000 grit SiC paper and further polished to a final solution of 0.04 μm silica. A Thermo-Fisher G4 plasma focused ion beam/scanning electron microscope was used to produce elemental maps of the HEAs. Nanoindentation tests, used to measure the hardness and modulus of the HEAs, were performed on a Keysight G200 Nanoindenter equipped with a diamond Vicker's tip. All indents were made to a final displacement of 2,000 nm with a constant strain rate (loading rate divided by the load) of 0.05 s -1 . Continuous stiffness measurements (CSM) were performed at a frequency of 45 Hz and 2 nm displacement amplitude. Hardness and modulus measurements were determined using the Oliver-Pharr method The optimized parameters for the trained MTP models for the two different alloy systems are shown in Table The training history for quaternary MoNbTaW (R4) is shown in Fig. In order to ensure the statistical reproduciblity, we have computed average bulk properties of equimolar MoNbTaW from 50 random 432-atom systems using the MTP, which is shown in Table The configurational space for non-equimolar MoNbTaW spans over several orders of magnitudes. It is computationally impossible to screen the components for optimal properties using the highly expensive DFT calcualtions, before carrying out the expensive experiment. As a test case, we have tweaked the compositions of adjacent atomic number elements pair, Mo-Nb pair and Ta-W pair, one at a time by 12.5%, 25%, 37.5%, and 50% and screened their elastic response using the MTP. Also, we tested four cases of mixed variations in all four components by 25% and 50%. The MTP predicted total energies for twenty non-equimolar structures are in excellent agreement with the Although it is well established that the mechanical properties can be significantly improved by alloying, experimentally it is not feasible to fabricate and test the alloys with multiple possible compositions in a systematic way. Therefore, it is imperative to have a tool that can provide a high-throughput screening of the various fraction of the alloying element for a desired property and can guide the experiments. This section will demonstrate the applicability of MLIP in the high-throughput investigation of alloying effect of Ti in the elastic and mechanical properties of R4. We have trained a separate MTP with the training data described in the computational method section above. The training parameters are shown in Table In this work, the DFT calculated bulk modulus and shear modulus for the SQS model is 198.75 GPa and 61.91 GPa, respectively. Mishra et al. calculated the bulk modulus and shear modulus for the R5 using supercell models and the DFT, which are reported as 193.90 GPa and 70.67 GPa, respectively We have computed the average bulk properties of MoNbTaTi 0.5 W from 100 random 180-atom systems using the MTP, which is shown in Table We have demonstrated that MTP-MLIP successfully reproduces the ab initio potentials of complex high-entropy alloys, at orders of magnitude lower Machine learning interatomic potential for high-throughput screening and optimizatio computational cost. The computational efficiency of MTP enabled the screening of vast configurational space occupied by R4 and R5 alloys to optimize their compositions by statistically averaging over hundreds of structures; otherwise not feasible using DFT calculations. Selective tuning of elemental compositions of R4 (Mo, Nb, Ta, W) enabled the discovery of novel refractory HEAs with promising hardness-ductility combinations. This approach was also successfully demonstrated for Ti alloying in R4. Hence, this method can be readily extended for high-throughput screening of other HEA systems and advanced theoretical study of novel alloys for accelerated materials discovery and design. Future work entails quantum mechanical calculations under desired thermomechanical conditions and corresponding experimental validation of promising alloy candidates (e.g., Mo 0.75 Nb 1.25 TaW and MoNbTaTi 0.5 W). MTP-MLIP also exhibited improved accuracy compared to SNAP-MLIP There is a considerable discrepancy between the experimentally measured elastic and bulk properties of MoNbTaTiW by Han al. and the DFT calculated ones. Therefore, for further validation, we have measured the Vicker's hardness and bulk modulus of MoNbTaW and MoNbTaTiW from the nanoindentation technique. The MTP predicted bulk modulus for both the alloys are in excellent agreement with our experimental bulk modulus. However, some inconsistencies exist between the experimentally measured and theoretically calculated Vicker's hardness We have successfully trained MTP machine learning potentials for quaternary MoNbTaW and quinary MoNbTaTiW HEAs. High-throughput calculations of elastic and mechanical properties of hundreds of novel structures are feasible with MTP-MLIP, which are highly time-consuming using DFT calculations. MTP-MLIPs enabled the rational design of non-equimolar alloys leading to the discovery of novel HEAs with enhanced hardness-ductility combinations (e.g., Mo 0.75 Nb 1.25 TaW). Computationally efficient and accurate MLIPs are reliable predictive tools for high-throughput optimization of alloying elements and screening of other high-entropy alloys. The approach presented here will significantly reduce the exploratory cost when designing a new alloy or optimizing existing ones. and corresponding shear modulus (% error 9.72%). The predictions are better compared to the one from the SNAP machine learning model, where the percentage errors on C 11 , C 12 , C 44 , B, and G are 5.8%, 3.8%, 15.9%, 4.3% and 13.3%, respectively