The measurements (Phys.Rev.B 100, 220504(R) (2019)) do not detect noticeable thermal conductivity in superconducting UTe2 in the T=0 limit. At the same time the same crystals exhibit a large residual density of states comparable with its normal state value. The improvement of samples quality leads to the augmentation of critical temperature of transition to the superconducting state accompanied by the decreasing of residual specific heat ratio C(T )/T at T → 0. There is presented an analytic derivation of this inverse correlation property in concrete cases of triplet superconducting states with node-less and point-nodes order parameters allowed by symmetry in UTe2. The obtained explicit formulas for the residual thermal conductivity are in reasonable correspondence with observations. The recently discovered uranium superconductor UTe 2 The inverse correlation between T c and γ sc has also been observed in other unconventional superconductors UPt 3 The superconducting properties of UTe 2 are strongly dependent on the synthesis route. The relatively small RRR ratio points on the significant presence of some crystal imperfections probably originating from the nonstoichiometric composition of this material. These type of imperfections not spoiling the crystal periodicity on the large scales serve as the electron scattering centres. Here, I consider the property of inverse correlation between the critical temperature and residual density of states as well the zero temperature limit of the thermal conductivity based on the theory of resonant scattering in concrete application to the possible superconducting states in UTe 2 . The problem of compatibility of finite residual density of states and small residual thermal conductivity is discussed. The paper is organised as follows. In the next section there is obtained the explicit expressions for the residual density of states in triplet superconducting states with node-less and point-nodes order parameters. It is shown that in both cases the residual density of states in practically pure crystal may represent a significant part of its normal state value. Then in the next section there is established the T=0 limit of thermal conductivity. The residual thermal conductivity in clean enough specimens in both cases of superconducting states with node-less and point-nodes order parameter turns out to be comparable with with values observed experimentally UTe 2 has an orthorhombic structure. In view of abnormally large upper critical field in UTe 2 one must discuss the superconducting states with triplet pairing. The superconducting states with triplet pairing in a metal with orthorhombic structure are related to one of four different representations of the point group D 2h : A u , B 1u , B 2u , B 3u . The corresponding order parameters of superconducting states are Here, ∆ i , i = 0, 1, 2, 3 are the order parameter amplitudes. The functions φ ix (k), φ iy (k), φ iz (k), φ iw (k) transform as k x , k y , k z , k x k y k z correspondingly. The order parameter of A state has finite value at any point on the Fermi surface, whereas the order parameter of B i state for i = 1, 2, 3 has the point nodes at k along z, y, x direction correspondingly. To do the calculations analytically we will consider the superconducting states with more simple order parameters possessing the same properties: for unit representation A and for non-unit representations B i . The critical temperature in a dirty unconventional superconductor is determined by the Abrikosov-Gorkov equation ln where Γ is the scattering rate of electrons on impurities. The superconductivity disappears at where T c0 is the critical temperature in the absence of impurities, ∆ 00 is the order parameter amplitude in the absence of impurities at T=0, γ = e C ≈ 1.78, C ≈ 0.577 is the Euler constant. Found in the Born approximation We will be interested in the opposite situation of almost clean superconductor, where the gapless superconducting state is realised in case of resonant scattering on impurities with the scattering rate Here, N 0 is the electron density of states at the Fermi level on one spin projection. For small Γ the critical temperature is that is where Let us write now the residual density of states for the superconducting states corresponding to unit representation (1) and to anyone of non-unit representation (2). The nonzero density of states at E = 0 is derived following procedure described in The order parameter amplitude at T → 0 and small Γ is Hence, at small Γ the residual density of states is The calculation of the residual density of states for a state B i coincides with corresponding treatment for the superconducting state with structure of A-phase of superfluid 3 He presented in the textbook In case of weak disorder the difference between ∆ 00 and ∆ 0 is small. Hence, We see that the zero temperature density of states can be finite even at small enough τ . Moreover, in the samples with higher critical temperature the residual density of states N 0 (E = 0) is smaller that is in qualitative correspondence with experimental observations In neglect of vertex corrections the thermal conductivity in a superconducting state in i = x, y, z-direction is A. State A Here t = t(E) is determined by the equation The solution of this equation at Γ ≪ ∆ 0 and E → 0 is The integral over angles in Eq.( Then the thermal conductivity near the zero temperature is where Comparing the obtained result with the thermal conductivity in normal state we find The equation for the function t(E) in the state B is The solution of this equation at Γ ≪ ∆ and E → 0 is The integral over angles in Eq.( Hence, the residual thermal conductivity in the direction parallel to the point node direction is and in the perpendicular direction The ratios of residual thermal conductivity in parallel and perpendicular directions to the normal state thermal conductivity at T = T c are One can compare these expressions with corresponding ratio reported in the paper The similar estimation for the specimen S2 at the lowest temperature T = 0.1K is The comparison these values with the theoretical results given by Eqs.(20), (26, (27) yields Thus, the residual thermal conductivity in clean enough specimens in both cases of superconducting states with node-less and point-nodes order parameter turns out to be comparable with with values observed experimentally The problems of residual density of states and residual thermal conductivity in triplet superconducting states with node-less and point-nodes order parameters allowed by symmetry in UTe 2 have been investigated. There was shown that in all cases the resonant scattering on impurities leads to the formation of the gapless superconducting states with large enough density of states at zero energy. The increasing of scattering rate on impurities suppresses the critical temperature and leads to the augmentation of the residual density of states. The calculations were performed in clean enough limit when critical temperature of transition to the superconducting states is slightly deviates from the corresponding critical temperature in perfect crystal, that corresponds to the scattering rate much smaller than the zero temperature amplitude of the order parameter Γ ≪ ∆ 0 . The comparison of the derived explicit formulas for the residual thermal conductivity with corresponding experimental values is in the reasonable correspondence (30) with this demand. The residual thermal conductivity in clean enough specimens in both cases of superconducting states with node-less and point-nodes order parameter turns out to be comparable with with values observed experimentally 