Resistivity saturation is found on both superconducting and insulating sides of an "avoided" magnetic-field-tuned superconductor-to-insulator transition (H-SIT) in a two-dimensional In/InOx composite, where the anomalous metallic behaviors cut off conductivity or resistivity divergence in the zero-temperature limit. The granular morphology of the material implies a system of Josephson junctions (JJ) with a broad distribution of Josephson coupling EJ and charging energy EC , with a H-SIT determined by the competition between EJ and EC . By virtue of self-duality across the true H-SIT, we invoke macroscopic quantum tunneling effects to explain the temperature-independent resistance where the "failed superconductor" side is a consequence of phase fluctuations and the "failed insulator" side results from charge fluctuations. While true self-duality is lost in the avoided transition, its vestiges are argued to persist, owing to the incipient duality of the percolative nature of the dissipative path in the underlying random JJ system. An increasing number of recent experiments on disordered superconducting films, initially searching for a superconductor-to-insulator transition (SIT), end up instead with an "avoided" transition, where scaling about a putative zero-temperature quantum critical point fails in the limit T → 0, giving way to a phase characterized by a resistance that levels off to a constant value independent of temperature In this letter we propose a unified phenomenology for the emergence of anomalous metallic states from an avoided SIT in disordered superconducting films. Focusing on the magnetic-field tuned SIT (H-SIT) in strongly granular system of In-on-InO x composites, we show that vestiges of the self-duality observed in a true H-SIT The robustness of the anomalous metallic phase in the In/InO x system FIG. Whether samples are inherently inhomogeneous such as arrays of Josephson-junctions (JJ), or morphologically uniform such as amorphous films, superconducting pairing interaction tends to "amplify" mesoscopic fluctuations of the disorder and its associated Coulomb interaction, resulting in an effective granular morphology x /In granular composites were grown by electronbeam evaporation of In 2 O 3 in oxygen partial pressure, followed by that of In under high vacuum. Consecutive in situ depositions of the two components result in clean interface that is crucial for optimal interface coupling. The uniform underlying amorphous InO x is specifically prepared to be weakly insulating to mediate couplings among the In grains and nearby proximitized regions. Details of the sample preparation process were provided in Ref. Temperature ramps were sufficiently slow compared to the prolonged time constant. In our dilution refrigerator, all measurement wires were filtered at both room temperature and mixing chamber temperature (T 10 mK) using commercial in-line pifilters and cryogenic filters, achieving over 100 dB attenuation throughout 100 MHz-5 GHz range. Sample phonon temperature was measured by a calibrated onchip RuO 2 thermometer subject to the same mounting and wiring as the sample. Data is not considered in our analysis when sample temperature differs more than 10% from mixing chamber temperature. The refrigerator was operating at the highest cooling power with an extra circulation pump running, despite at the cost of a higher base (mixing chamber) temperature. In Fig. In contrast, annealing stage S1 or S2 develops a superconducting ground state in zero field, where the T c is just below our base temperature for S0 while T c ≈ 0.4 K for S1. Nevertheless, in low field 400 Oe, the ground state is a failed superconductor and has been discussed extensively To quantitatively analyze the evolution of resistivity behavior as a function of magnetic field on the insulating side, we adopt an empirical functional form Eq. 1, which satisfactorily fits S0 data as shown in Fig. Fig. where ρ QF is an analogous temperature-independent contribution to resistivity and E aS is activation energy on the superconducting side. Fits of this form to resistivity of S1 are shown in Fig. The evolution of zero-temperature behaviors of resistivity in S0 and S1 leads us to a holistic understanding of the T = 0 phase diagram in Fig. Starting from a single resistively-shunted-JJ with E J E C , for a small bias current a phase difference is established along the junction resulting in a zero-voltage supercurrent. However, at very low temperatures where activation is exponentially small, quantum fluctuations of the phase induce quantum tunneling of the phase variable To rationalize the analogy with a single resistivelyshunted-JJ we follow Fisher x (g D 1 , g D 2 ....g D N ) along x-direction is related to the conductance along the ydirection G y (g 1 , g 2 , ...g N ) ≡ R y (r 1 , r 2 , ...r N ) as: G D x = 1/G y . The same average behavior is expected for the random system, which is manifested in our random In/InOx composite A further consequence of the above model is the realization of the fragility of the superconducting or insulating states from which the failed superconductor and failed insulator emerge. Besides the annealing and magnetic field, any perturbation applied to the system strongly affects the distribution of junctions properties, thus leading to a shift in the potential barrier for the MQT process resulting in a shift of the saturated re-sistance. For example, external radiation can work to enhance the quantum fluctuations and thus AMS will emerge with larger saturated resistance as T → 0 In summary, we identify two regimes in anomalous metallic phase -a "failed superconductor" and a "failed insulator," as clearly suggested by resistivity saturation on both sides of an "avoided" SIT. The close connection between our granular composite and Josephson junction arrays is revealed by a set of empirical fit to the temperature dependence of resistivity. Quantum fluctuations of phase drive the transition from superconductor to anomalous metal when superconductors fail to establish global phase coherence, while quantum fluctuations of charge number drive the transition from insulator to anomalous metal when charge localization gives way to dissipative transport. A duality picture is strongly justified in our discussions by interchanging the roles of N and φ and corroborated by the resemblance of transport behaviors when exchanging the roles of ρ and σ. in this SEM picture is affected by the angle of illumination, and thus the dark side of the grains may be hard for image processing algorithm to identify. Nevertheless, the edges of the grains have sufficient contrast to be delineated manually. While it is straightforward to distinguish the larger grains, the smaller interstitial ones are often blurred and not well contrasted from the background. Furthermore, since the diameter of the smallest grains are approaching image resolution, a grain that is smaller than a few pixel squared may not be picked up at all. As a consequence, we emphasize a lower cut-off in the distribution of measured grain equivalent diameter as shown in Figure All isolated grains are identified using clustering algorithm in "scipy" package in Python. All pixels that belong to an isolated grain are collected with the same label and the location of each grain's centroid and the respective equivalent diameter can also be easily found. With this analysis, all geometric information in this picture regarding the random distribution of In grains is collected. Further analysis may reveal the distribution of intergrain distance, spacing, or coordination numbers of the grains, etc. These information may be useful in studying intergrain coupling or tunneling processes in the system. Figure 