This article updates version 1 by restricting consideration to only the resistive data and excluding the questioned 287.7-K datum reported for carbonaceous sulfur hydride in Snider et al., Nature 585, 373 (2020). The superconducting transitions are considered in terms of the theoretically-discovered compressed I4 ത 3m CSH 7 structure of Sun et al., Phys. Rev. B 101, 174102 (2020), which comprises a sublattice similar to Im3 ത m H 3 S with CH 4 intercalates. Positing an electronic genesis of the superconductivity, a model is presented in analogy with earlier work on superconductivity in Im3 ത m H 3 S, in which pairing is induced via purely electronic Coulomb interactions across the mean distance ζ between the S and H 4 tetrahedra enclosing C. Theoretical superconducting transition temperatures for I4 ത 3m CSH 7 are derived as T C0 = (2/3) 1/2 σ 1/2 β/aζ, where β = 1247.4 Å 2 K is a universal constant, σ is the participating charge fraction, and a is the lattice parameter. Analysis suggests persistent bulk superconductivity with a pressure-dependent σ, increasing from σ = 3.5, determined previously for Im3 ത m H 3 S, to σ = 7.5 at high pressure owing to additionally participating C-H bond electrons. With a and ζ determined by theoretical structure, calculations of T C0 at the highest pressures, 258 and 271 GPa, are in agreement with resistive transitions to within an overall uncertainty of ± 3.5 K. Resistive transition temperatures (T C ) in Snider et al. Pressure dependence in T C suggests a possible evolution in superconductive dominance between differing superconducting phases. Of particular note are the anomalously narrow transition widths ∆T C in most of the resistance transitions, indicative of a continuum of superconducting states. A narrow ∆T C also persists in high magnetic field, which may be evidence of strong pinning or trapping of magnetic fluxons While the precise composition and structure of C-S-H are not determined in the original work, unity ratio of elemental C to S and Raman analysis of non-metallic precursor crystals have suggested CSH x stoichiometry and possibly H 2 -containing compounds such as (CH 4 ) x (H 2 S) 2-x H 2 Several theoretical treatments have considered thermodynamically stable forms of carbon-doped H 3 S Following the stoichiometry suggested by experiment Determining the charge fraction σ = 15/2 = 7.5 from the maximum participating valence electrons of C, S, and H, divided equally between the two charge reservoirs, and ζ from the average distance between an S site in the H-S-H host sublattice and the nearest points on the eight neighboring H 4 -tetrahedra of the CH 4 intercalants, the maximum transition temperature is calculated to be T C0 = 283.0 ± 0.7 K for I4 ത 3m CSH 7 at 265 GPa; uncertainty corresponds to the theoretical extrapolation of the pressure dependence (Appendix). This result agrees remarkably well with experiment. The narrow ∆T C occurring over a wide pressure range and the concomitant behavior of T C (P) [see Figs. In this work, notation T C refers to experimental data and T C0 designates the results of the theoretical calculations. Section II presents the theoretical model for electronic mediated superconductivity in I4 ത 3m CSH 7 , with determination of maximum T C0 , and analysis of σ(P) and T C0 (P) assuming pressure-dependent dispersion of the C-H bonds. In Sec. III important features of the experimental data of Ref. 1 are analyzed, seemingly conflicting x-ray data are addressed, and supporting evidence for nonphononic superconductivity in the superhydrides, along with a comparison with other optimally-compressed high-T C materials, are provided. Summary and concluding remarks are given in Sec. IV. An Appendix is included describing the methodology of extracting the pressure dependence of the structural parameters for I4 ത 3m CSH 7 and associated errors. The inter-reservoir electronic interaction model for high-T C superconductivity has enjoyed significant success in accurately predicting the transition temperatures of numerous materials optimized to yield maximal T C , including most recently Im3 ത m H 3 S and Fm3 ത m LaH 10 where Λ (= 0.007465 Å) is a universal constant, σ is the participating charge fraction per formula unit (f.u.) from the valence electrons of constituent atoms (e.g., C, S, and H), A is the surface area per f.u. of the (type I) charge reservoir hosting the superconducting condensate, η (equal to unity for I4 ത 3m CSH 7 ) is the number of type II layers (see, e.g., Ref. 28 for the definition of type II layers and η), and ζ is the mean distance between the interacting species in the two reservoirs. The theoretical compound I4 ത 3m CSH 7 of Ref. 23, comprising an H 3 S-like host sublattice containing intercalated CH 4 , is found through analysis presented herein to be demonstrably applicable to the compressed C-S-H studied in Ref. 1. Drawing on the structural correspondence with the dual-sublattice structure of Im3 ത m H 3 S, the H 3 S-like framework is modeled as type I, making the CH 4 intercalates type II. Analogous to interaction distances determined for compounds comprising polyhedral structures, e.g., in Fm3 ത m LaH 10 and Cs 3 C 60 ) provides a compact represent-ation of Eq. ( The charge fraction σ in Eq. ( In view of experimental indications of optimization occurring over a wide pressure range, values of σ in Eq. ( According to the theoretical structure of I4 ത 3m CSH 7 at P = 100 GPa the eight distances determines ζ = 0.3142a. The area A = (3/2)a 2 is the surface area of the cube of edge length a/2, which contains the volume of one f.u. In order to predict a and ζ at higher pressures, theoretical pressure dependences of volume per f.u. (V = a 3 /8) and the S-H distance r 0 ≡ ζ 1 given in Ref. 14 are assumed and extrapolated to experimental values of pressure, as described in the Appendix. Values of V, a, and ζ calculated at experimental pressures P are given in Table Assuming the maximum value σ = 15/2 = 7.5 for CSH 7 occurs at P = 265 ± 10 GPa, which is in the range for maximum observed T C , and with a = 5.669 ± 0.027 Å and ζ = 1.755 ± 0.009 Å, one finds from Eq. ( Based on the abrupt superconductive resistance transitions observed for C-S-H over a broad range of applied pressures 1. Deleted data from susceptibility are shown in gray font color with strikeouts. The questioned resistive datum is indicated by pink-colored font. Assuming that the I4 ത 3m CSH 7 structure is preserved, where a and ζ vary smoothly with pressure, the precipitous decrease in T C with decreasing pressure below the maximum value must, therefore, be attributable to a decrease in the participating charge fraction and retained equilibrium between the two charge reservoirs. Consequently, the theoretical T C0 function of Eq. ( where pressure-dependent a and ζ are calculated from I4 ത 3m CSH 7 structure. Results for σ (X) calculated from the resistive T C according to Eq. ( Theoretically, the participating charge fraction σ equals one-half (from γ = 1/2) of the number of the participating valence electrons of the constituent atoms in the f.u. The likely origin of the unusually strong pressure dependence in σ is the presence of CH 4 , given that such behavior is not observed in H 3 S absent carbon According to Eq. ( Figure The proposed structure of the C-S-H superconducting system is rather unique, comprising intercalated CH 4 molecules within an H 3 S-like sublattice. What is even more interesting, from the perspective of the present work, is the sharp superconducting transition widths reported over a broad pressure range, indicative of a persisting charge balance between the two charge reservoirs throughout the pressure range. Taking the resistive data at face value, the analysis of T C (P) indicates that at the lowest pressure, only the H 3 S charges are involved in the superconductivity, with the number of participating charges increasing with pressure to include those of the CH 4 molecules. All three of these features make C-S-H a very special system. Experimental data for C-S-H indicate limitations on the superconducting states. At the highest measured pressures shown in Fig. X-ray refinement of the Pnma structure at 143 GPa finds a sulfur arrangement with S-S distances of 2.401(7) to 3.004(6) Å The inability of electron-phonon theory to calculate adequately high values of T C for candidate compounds, which include C-doped H 3 S suggests that phonon interactions are unlikely to be the primary pairing mechanism. Independently, evidence for unconventional superconductivity in C-S-H is also proposed through analysis of temperature dependence in normal-state resistance In identifying the pairing mechanism, a mass isotope effect may be considered within the context of observations from H-D isotopic substitutions in related (H/D) 3 S materials. Recent results report a mass isotope effect coefficient α ≈ 0.22 in T C from resistance measurements for H 3 S and D 3 S taken at nearly the same pressure, 155 and 157 GPa, respectively Given the narrow superconductive transitions observed for C-S-H over a broad pressure range, and the absence of a phonon-based explanation of the elevated T C , a companion study of C-S-D, assuming that high-T C C-S-D can be similarly synthesized, would greatly benefit the further understanding of these materials. Gray strikeouts denote deleted susceptibility data. The questioned resistive datum In Fig. The seminal work presented in Ref. Assuming the computationally derived structure, I4 ത 3m CSH 7 