We demonstrate electrically pumped III-nitride edge-emitting laser diodes (LDs) with nanoporous bottom cladding. The LD structure was grown by plasma-assisted molecular beam epitaxy. Highly doped 350 nm thick GaN:Si cladding layer with Si concentration of 6•10 19 cm -3 was electrochemically etched to obtain porosity of 15±3% with pore size of 20±9 nm. The devices with nanoporous bottom cladding are compared to the reference structures. The pulse mode operation was obtained at 448.7 nm with a slope efficiency (SE) of 0.2 W/A while the reference device without etched cladding layer was lasing at 457 nm with SE of 0.56 W/A. The design of the LDs with porous bottom cladding was modelled theoretically. Performed calculations allowed to choose the optimum porosity and thickness of the cladding needed for the desired optical mode confinement and reduced the risk of light leakage to the substrate and to the top-metal contact. This demonstration opens new possibilities for the fabrication of III-nitride LDs. Porous GaN emerged recently as an interesting alternative to classical (In,Al,Ga)N alloys in terms or refractive index engineering. Its huge advantage lies in the fact that it provides a way to obtain a reduction of refractive index beyond the possibilities available in nitride material system by increasing material porosity without losing lattice matching. Porous GaN can be obtained in a controllable manner by electrochemical etching (ECE) process using various acidic and neutral electrolytes There have been already plenty of applications reported for nanoporous GaN: distributed Bragg reflectors The application of nanoporous cladding layers to nitride edge-emitting lasers has been demonstrated in optically pumped structures by Yuan et al. In this work we demonstrate blue LDs grown on polar (0001) GaN substrate by plasma-assisted molecular beam epitaxy (PAMBE) that have a porous bottom cladding layer. We disclose the processing scheme and present device structural, electrical and optical characteristics with the comparison to the reference standard LD without etched cladding. Possible routes for the improvement of the performance of LDs with porous cladding are also discussed. In order to illustrate the effect of varied structure refractive index profile on the expected light propagation in the device we calculated the near field intensity profiles, the optical mode confinement factor, Γ, and light losses to GaN substrate as a function of the bottom cladding porosity and thickness. Impact of other structure parameters such as top cladding thickness on the losses in the upper contact is also shown for LDs with porous bottom claddings. The discussed results point out to the importance of proper LD structure design that provides a high optical mode overlap with the active region. In case of nitride material system, the unquestionable advantage -when creating GaN+air "composite" material -comes from the fact that the effective refractive index of porous GaN can be decreased beyond the values available for (In,Al,Ga)N alloys without losing ideal lattice matching to GaN. The refractive index of nanoporous GaN can be naturally tailored down to 1 with increasing porosity. Numerical analysis of the propagation of electromagnetic waves in heterogeneous non-absorbing medium consisting of small air voids showed that the effective index of refraction of a porous material can be successfully modelled using volume averaging theory (VAT). where the porosity  is defined as ratio of air volume (pores filled with air) to the total volume In order to illustrate the extremely high potential of the nanoporous GaN as a cladding layer in blue LDs and find its optimal porosity in our LD structures, we performed calculations of near-field intensity of the fundamental TE mode. We used a model that assumes a free leakage of light out of the waveguide and into the substrate which is a mechanism observed in LDs grown on bulk GaN substrates Figure The detailed change of the influence of the cladding porosity on the confinement factor is shown in Figure Cladding layers do not only confine the optical mode around the active region, increasing its overlap with the QW, but also prevent light leakage to GaN substrate. Several approaches to LD designs have been proposed, including application of different bottom cladding materials such as AlGaN, InAlN, their superlattices with GaN, highly n-doped GaN The epitaxial structure of the LD presented in this work was grown entirely by PAMBE on bulk (0001) GaN. The substrate was an Ammono-GaN crystal with a threading dislocation density ≈5•10 5 cm -2 After the epitaxy, the LD structure was processed to fabricate ridge-waveguide oxide-isolated lasers. Resonators were 5 μm wide and 700 or 1000 μm long. The device processing was modified and extended by additional steps needed for lateral ECE. A schematic drawing showing the final structure is shown in Figure In order to perform ECE, indium contact was manually placed in the corner of the sample. About 2/3 of the sample area was immersed in the 0.3 M oxalic acid and positively biased at 2.2V for 22.5 hours. Details of the ECE setup is presented in our previous work Figure LD cross-section in the middle of a device is shown in Figure Additional evidence for parasitic etching through the protective step is presented in Figure Room-temperature light-current characteristics for devices with porous and standard bottom claddings are shown in Figure Figure Figure Measured electric and optical properties of the LDs with porous bottom cladding differ quite significantly from their standard counterparts. We expected improvement in the optical mode confinement that should translate into lower threshold current density. However, we observed the opposite. There is about two-fold higher jth and almost a three-fold decrease of slope efficiency for devices with porous cladding. Both of these parameters can be influenced by increased optical losses. However, it is important to note that also injection efficiency can drop at high current densities which are required in order to compensate for the increased optical losses. Discussing the origins of high threshold current we will analyze the possible sources of the increased losses. We can identify at least five sources of losses: (1) imperfections and increased roughness of the cleaved mirrors, (2) scattering and (3) absorption related to the porous GaN:Si cladding, (4) inhomogeneous mode confinement and ( Mirror fabrication is definitely one of the most challenging tasks in nitride LD fabrication in general. The losses related to the high mirror surface roughness seem to be inevitable when cleaving is used. Figure It is very important to stress that there is very little known about possible light scattering on the interface between solid and porous layers. Theoretical works indicate that pore size <30 nm should have a negligible effect on light scattering Additionally, the reports on the absorption in the highly n-doped GaN are very limited. There is one report for absorption coefficient measured in a wavelength range from 360 to 400 nm for GaN:Si MOVPE grown layer doped to a low level of 2•10 18 cm -3 41 and few studies on oxygen-doped bulk GaN crystals with doping levels from 3•10 19 to 1•10 20 cm -3 grown either by high nitrogen pressure solution or by ammonothermal method Third issue that should be taken into account when possible losses are considered is the inhomogeneity in the optical properties of the bottom cladding along the ridge. As mentioned, the groove geometry in respect to the laser ridge was designed in a way that the ends of the ridge would remain solid after ECE and porous structure would be formed across the whole laser ridge apart from ≈25-μm-long ends, cf. Figure Last but not least the losses in the p-type layers and upper metal contact could possibly be the issue. Accordingly to the simulations, the usage of 700 nm top AlGaN cladding and 350 nm GaN cladding of porosity 15% implies small but nonnegligible optical losses in top metal contact. Also when porous cladding is used, the mode is pushed to the Mg-doped layers which can cause significant losses. We should also note that the possible issues with electrical and thermal conductivity or mechanical stability of porous GaN:Si have proven not to be the limiting factors in the implementation of nanoporous GaN to LD structures. The LDs with porous cladding had satisfactory I-V characteristics as compared to their standard counterparts. Additionally, we did not notice any cracking or structure quality deterioration under optical microscope and SEM inspection despite that some of the processing steps involved an ultrasound bath cleaning. In conclusion, we demonstrated PAMBE-grown electrically pumped III-nitride LDs with porous bottom cladding. By theoretical modelling of the optimum LD structure design we obtained a significant increase in the confinement factor for 350-nm thick GaN:Si bottom cladding with porosity of 15%. Such relatively small porosity provided high mechanical stability and good thermal and electrical conductivity, therefore this design has a potential in practical device applications. In order to obtain LDs with porous claddings via ECE, we implemented additional processing steps in the standard LD processing scheme. The devices with porous cladding were characterized by SEM and their electrical and optical characteristics were compared with the standard structures. The pulse mode operation of porous cladding LDs was obtained at wavelength of 448.7 nm with a slope efficiency (SE) of 0.2 W/A while the reference device without etched cladding layer was lasing at 457 nm with SE of 0.56 W/A. Further work is needed to improve the fabrication process of laser diodes with porous bottom cladding and their properties. This demonstration proves that the concept of porous claddings can be implemented successfully to electrically pumped laser diodes.