In recent years, interesting materials have emerged which are only available as μmscale flakes, and whose novel physics might be better understood through broadband microwave spectroscopy; examples include twisted bilayer graphene [1], 2D materials in which many-body phases are observed [2], and artificial lattices for analog quantum simulations In recent years, two-dimensional materials, such as twisted bilayer graphene Broadband conductivity spectroscopy has helped demystify the physics of some thin film materials. Such a system's conductivity spectrum depends strongly on its energy level spectrum, and thus is a direct reflection of the ground state and excited state physics. Previously, broadband microwave spectroscopy has been used to study novel physics of thin film materials which can be grown in large mm-scale flakes, such as charge density wave ground states of 2D electron systems There are several existing techniques for GHz broadband spectroscopy. Please see Table The Proposed Technique The basic idea (see Fig. The equivalent circuit is shown in Fig. the fact that the change in geometry near the gap does not significantly perturb the current flow nor the value of transmission t().We now present a brief derivation of the relationship between the t() and the thin film's ac conductance. This derivation just uses continuity of current, and voltage drops across impedances. To start, assuming the gap is much smaller than the wavelength of the microwave signal, continuity of current yields [in this derivation, we do not carry along the explicit frequency dependence of t()]: Similarly, combining this with voltage drops yields: Here, V1 is the amplitude of the incoming signal at frequency , r and t are the reflection and transmission coefficients, respectively, and Zgap is the impedance from the combination of Ccouple, Cseries and Z(). If the system were resistively coupled to the signal lines instead, we would replace Finally, a VNA (vector network analyzer) typically reports magnitude and phase of t(ω). We can note some simple, appealing limits for Equation (3): i) In the limit of a continuous (vanishingly small gap) CPW (where the series capacitance dominates the conduction, and where |1/(iωCSeries )|≪ZCPW, t(ω)  1; this is appealing because it shows that a continuous CPW has ideal transmission. ii) in the opposite limit where the conduction is dominated by the flake |1/(iωCSeries )|≫|Z(ω)|≫|1/(iωCCouple)|,ZCPW, we obtain t(ω) (2ZCPW)/Z(ω)≪1, showing that the transmission and its frequency dependence allow deduction of the flake ac conductance. We note that, for the parameters in Table II, all three conditions in limit ii) can be satisfied for |Z(ω)| varying by a range of a factor of 25; for instance, at 1 GHz, all three conditions are satisfied if |Z(ω)|∈ Value Insulating layer thickness 30 nm Table We now discuss simulations for broadband measurements of superconducting twisted bilayer graphene encapsulated in h-BN on a Si substrate and "Control"). However, as we discuss later, we note that the typical superconducting complex conductivity (pure imaginary below the gap frequency) leads to some complications which are not present in most materials of interest. We will now show simulations, with the ultimate goal of demonstrating the ability to deduce, from a simple GHz transmission measurement, i) qualitative spectral features such as resonant states in an AQS structure or a superconducting gap and ii) quantitative information of the complex conductivity of a m-scale flake (Figure The proposed experiment depends on taking transmission spectra of the twisted bilayer graphene with small |Z ()|, and then large |Z ()| as a control measurement (i.e., under zero magnetic field and then under a magnetic field large enough to make the twisted bilayer graphene non-superconducting). Figure We start with the real and imaginary parts of the complex two-dimensional conductivity spectra (σ 1 and σ 2 , respectively, with units of sq/) in Fig. We then simulate the measured complex transmission tsim Z (ω) and tsim ∞ (), for the conducting and insulating cases [Table where α is a constant of order one to estimate the number of squares in the flake (we use 3 m/7 m), t is defined by Eq'n 3 using the parameters in Table t wir-b (ω) ] Equation ( where we note that using the ratio (twir-a () / twir-b ()) allows us to remove the effects of most of the non-ideal wiring transmission and has only the irreproducible parts of the transmission. We note that Figures We now go beyond demonstrating the ability to qualitatively see spectral structure, and demonstrate how accurately we can deduce the complex conductivity of a m-scale flake. In Figure We start with the ratio defined in Equation Equation ( Using this prescription, we note in Figure . We note that we lose sensitivity to Z() at low frequencies, where Ccouple dominates. Finally, for quantitative comparison to the "Shunt in CPW" technique in Table We can now consider the optimum regime for our technique. In order for this prescription to work, we need the impedance in the gap of the CPW to be dominated by the flake impedance (condition ii above); this sets limits on the flake impedance which are functions of frequency. In Fig. Finally, having shown the qualitative and quantitative advantages and limitations of our proposed technique, we can now show in a condensed fashion the comparison with previous techniques -please see Table Challenges are also present: The first is driven by the need to have a control (i.e., insulating) measurement for comparison. We have chosen graphene as a candidate material in part because the superconducting transition provides a very convenient control. However, for twisted bilayer graphene in particular, we may need to implement a buried gate to achieve superconductivity In addition, we note that in some cases the finite real conductivity 1 will be a complicating factor. In particular, the effective RC delay in the bottom plate of the capacitor Ccouple could possibly distort the reversion to (). We have analyzed the case of a distributed RC network Also, we note that the magnitude of the total transmission (including real-world insertion loss) as shown in Fig. Another challenge is presented by the sparsity of flake coverage in many two-dimensional materials (often of order 1 % relative areal density). In such case, one will need to take care to either/both i) orient the CPW and gap with respect to predetermined flake locations or ii) fabricate many gapped CPW's in order to have a good statistical chance to overlap flake(s). We note that choice ii) would also naturally provide the desired control device on the same chip. Finally, we hope to extend the usefulness of this technique by making wafer-scale buried gapped CPW's before deposition/exfoliation/deposition of the flakes of interest, a la' the work of We have proposed a technique for performing sensitive broadband microwave conductivity spectroscopy on materials only available as micron-scale flakes, using a coplanar waveguide with a series gap above the material of interest. We have shown through theory and simulations that the conductivity of the flake effects large changes in the amplitude and phase of the transmitted signal, and can allow us to qualitatively measure important spectral features. By including realworld non-idealities, we have also shown that the new technique can be used to accurately measure broadband spectral conductivity, even if the spectral reproducibility of measurements is limited. We note the relative advantages and disadvantages summarized in Table More broadly, this setup could be used to measure the conductivity spectrum of many twodimensional materials of interest, even when the lateral size is limited to m scale, ranging from metallic systems to pinned modes of charge density waves to AQS structures The authors would like to offer special thanks to Josh Pomeroy of NIST for numerous insightful conversations and logistical and technical assistance with the low-temperature transmission measurements. We would also like to thank Zac Barcikowski, Richard Silver, Pradeep Namboodiri, Ranjit Kashid, Richard Silver, Nikolai Zhitenev, and Michael Stewart (all of NIST) for insightful conversations, and for technical training and assistance throughout this process. Node "L": Node "R": Here, Igap is the current flowing in the horizontal branch to the right of "L" and to the left of "R"; also, Zgap is the series-parallel combination of Ccouple, Cseries, and Z(), which from the values in Table Using repeatedly the suppression of CSH, current continuity requires that the current entering node "L" be equal to the current exiting node "R": (1 -r) We simulated capacitance values for the structure in Figure We use the conditions corresponding to the control experiment, where the flake is insulating or absent, so that the transmission is dominated by Cseries: Z()  (Cseries )>> ZCPW; this condition holds for the frequency range 100 MHz × (3 M / Z())  f << 100 GHz. Using Eq'n 3 and including the measured non-idealities twir() in the wiring, we can derive in this limit that gapped) CPW on a Si substrate, with wire bonds from contact pads on the Si to a PCB. The PCB was mounted in a 4 K cryostat. The total length of wiring both inside and outside the cryostat was about 6 m, with two connections. We can see that the irreproducibility is about 0.5 dB and a few degrees, which is sufficiently small to allow the measurements outlined in the main text. Part II: Mattis-Bardeen formulae for 1 and 2 As mentioned in the main text, the conductivity spectrum of the superconducting state of twisted bilayer graphene was simulated using the values from Ref. 1 at "L"; finally, the first-order estimate ( CSH ZCPW  ) yields t ≌  ZCPW  Zgap, which is the same estimate derived from Eq'n 3 in the main text. For the rest of this Appendix, and in the main text, we thus suppress any further discussion of CSH.