In a recent experiment, the out-of-plane surface susceptibility of a single-layer two-dimensional atom crystal in the visible spectrum has been measured. This susceptibility gives a measurable contribution to the reflectivity of two-dimensional materials. Here we provide a complete theoretical description of the reflective properties, considering incoming s and p polarized plane waves at any angle of incidence on the crystal, computing local, reflected and transmitted electromagnetic fields. We finally connect the microscopic polarizability to both the in-plane and the out-of-plane macroscopic surface susceptibilities. Two-dimensional (2D) crystals are the thinnest materials that can be produced These materials are usually deposited on a substrate whose optical response is added to that of the monolayer. This is enough to hide the contribution coming from the out-of-plane optical constants of the single-layer crystal Only recently an experiment successfully measured the out-of-plane optical constants of 2D crystals, namely graphene and monolayer MoS 2 One might expect that a 2D crystal with atomic thickness along the vertical direction has a vanishing χ ⊥ , being χ ⊥ a macroscopic quantity. Indeed some of the most cited papers about optics in 2D crystals assume a null χ ⊥ We will start with a microscopic description of a 2D crystal, as done in Ref. We consider an insulating 2D crystal, in the vacuum, composed by atoms with isotropic polarizability α placed on a 2D Bravais lattice (Fig. We compute the local field acting on the dipole at the origin of our reference system (Fig. where ̃ p = p(trmn c ) + rmn c ̇ p(trmn c ). p is the induced dipole moment at each lattice point, ǫ 0 is the vacuum permittivity, c is the velocity of light in vacuum, and r mn = r mn (cos θ mn x + sin θ mn ŷ) while rmn = r mn /r mn . The phase in the prefactor is given by with a phase shift δ mn whose modulus is the distance of the point (r mn cos θ mn , r mn sin θ mn , 0) from the plane wave crossing the origin of the reference frame with equation ŝ • r = 0. As a result, in quite general terms, the phase shift δ mn can be written as The components of E mn are, therefore, + p y cos θ mn sin θ mn 3(1 + k r mn ) -k 2 r 2 mn E mn,y = e iωt 4πǫ 0 r 3 mn e -ik (rmn+δmn) p y 3 sin 2 θ mn -1 (1 + ik r mn ) + k 2 r 2 mn cos 2 θ mn (5) Without loss of generality we will take φ = π/2 (see Fig. For the square lattice r mn = a √ m 2 + n 2 , where a is the lattice parameter, and tan θ mn = n/m, while for the triangular lattice r mn = a (m + n/2) 2 + 3n 2 /4 and tan θ mn = √ 3 n/(2m + n). After summing over the dipoles, and using we get numerical evidences that ′ m,n FIG. where the prime on the summation symbol indicates that the origin, n = m = 0, is excluded from the sum. C 0 is the static result already reported in our previous paper As shown in Fig. We can now easily find the local field E loc from Eqs. ( These equations show that the local field, and therefore also the macroscopic polarization vector, as we will see, are connected to the incident field via a diagonal tensor. In this section, we will find the expression for the reflected and transmitted fields and the relation in between the microscopic polarizability α and the macroscopic surface susceptibility of the crystal. Because of momentum conservation, the reflected field will propagate along the unit vector ŝr = -sin θ ŷcos θ ẑ, and the transmitted field along the same unit vector ŝ of the incident field. The first macroscopic quantity that we can introduce is the surface polarization P P = N p = ǫ 0 αN E loc In order to find the expressions for χ xx , χ yy , χ zz and E x E y , E z , we will consider the case of s and p polarized incident waves. For an s polarized incident wave the electric field oscillates along the x-direction (see Fig. x and E t = E t x for the incident, reflected and transmitted beams. Equations ( This surface current generates a macroscopic electromagnetic field that propagates in two different directions. The first goes along the unit vector ŝr and it corresponds to the reflected field. The second one goes along the unit vector ŝ and, in superposition with the incident field, it gives rise to the transmitted field (see Fig. where the subscript 1 (2) refers to the limit of the macroscopic field when it approaches the crystal from above (below). These equations show that the component of the macroscopic electric field generated by the dipoles is continuous across the crystal surface whereas the component of the macroscopic magnetic field due to the dipoles is discontinuous. Using where η is the wave impedance of the vacuum, and since ẑ ∧ ŝ ∧ E = -E cos θ, we can write Eqs. ( We have three equations with three unknown variables: E r , E t , and χ xx . Defining the reflection and the transmission coefficients as r s = E r /E i and t s = E t /E i , respectively, we obtain The Fresnel coefficients for the s polarized wave are the same already obtained in Ref. showing that non-local effects are excluded in our theory. Our microscopic theory allows us also to compute the radiation reaction electric field acting on the dipole at the origin of our reference frame This is clearly a macroscopic quantity as well as J Px . We now show that it corresponds to the macroscopic field generated by the oscillating dipoles. Using Eq. ( finding that E Rx is equal to E r and, in superposition with E i , it gives the transmitted field. For that reason we can identify E Rx with the macroscopic electric field generated by the oscillating dipoles that propagates along ŝ and ŝr directions (see Fig. For a p polarized wave the incident, reflected and transmitted magnetic fields oscillate along x-direction (see Fig. x and H t = -H t x. Since we computed the local electric field, it is useful to first write explicitly the incident, reflected and transmitted electric fields where E i = ηH i , E r = ηH r , E t = ηH t . Equations ( In the radiation zone the electromagnetic field, due to an electric dipole oscillating in the ẑ direction, is identical to an electromagnetic field due to a magnetic dipole oscillating in the -x direction We must solve two separate sets of boundary conditions for the macroscopic field In terms of the magnetic field components, Eqs. ( where H r (H r⊥ ) is the contributions to the reflected field due to the in-plane (out-of-plane) surface current and H t and H t⊥ are the total macroscopic magnetic fields immediately below the crystal for the two cases considered separately. We have, then, the following solutions This finding is a very interesting result because it shows that our crystal has an isotropic in-plane surface susceptibility (χ = χ xx = χ yy ) different from the out-of-plane susceptibility (χ ⊥ = χ zz ), namely we are dealing with an uniaxial crystal. We can also evaluate the ratio χ ⊥ /χ . Choosing the value of a = 0.26 nm, for atom polarizabilities α typically varying in the range between 1 and 30 cm -3 , the χ ⊥ /χ ratio varies in between 0.93 and 0.1 (0.94 and 0.18) for a triangular lattice (for a square lattice). This values are of the same order of magnitude of what has been observed The full reflected field from the crystal is H r = H r + H r⊥ (see Fig. and and we show that these macroscopic quantities correspond to the macroscopic fields generated by the oscillating dipoles. We can rewrite Eqs. 40) which give the following solutions We can interpret these equations in the following way. The in-plane (out-of-plane) electric surface current J Py (J Pz ) generates a macroscopic electromagnetic field propagating along the ŝ and ŝr directions. We identify E Ry (E Rz ) as the electric field component along the ydirection (z-direction) of this macroscopic field. From Eqs. ( and the first two equations on the right-hand-side of Eqs. (41) as The full reflected field (see Fig. while the full transmitted field is given by the superposition of the incident field and the two macroscopic fields propagating in the ŝ direction (see Fig. We can finally derive the transmission coefficient, defined by t p = H t /H i , getting Finally the equations in the last line of Eqs. (41) provide the macroscopic electric fields E y and E z . They are related to the radiation-reaction electric fields. Along the y-direction we have E y = E i cos θ + E Ry while along the z-direction we have E z = E i sin θ + E Rz . We have shown that a 2D crystal, microscopically composed by atoms with an isotropic polarizability α, has both a macroscopic χ and a macroscopic χ ⊥ with χ ⊥ = χ and χ ⊥ = 0, in contrast to some theoretical models, generally used to derive reflection and transmission coefficients for these materials, which assume either a null χ ⊥ Our microscopic theory provides both the local and the radiation-reaction fields when an incoming electromag-netic plane wave shines on a 2D material. The radiationreaction fields coincide with the macroscopic fields scattered by the crystal, and they contribute to the reflected and the transmitted radiations. This analysis allows us, then, to derive the complete set of Fresnel coefficients and their dependence on the angle of incidence. In particular we describe the reflection of an incident p wave, as obtained by the superposition of the scattered electromagnetic fields due to an in-plane electric and an in-plane magnetic surface currents. The first current is related to a macroscopic surface polarization oscillating in the crystal plane, the second one to a macroscopic surface polarization oscillating perpendicularly to the crystal plane. Combining the boundary conditions for these two currents we provide a simple expression for the macroscopic electric fields along the y and z directions, which turn to be the sum of the related components of the incident field with the radiation-reaction field along the same directions. For an s polarized wave, only an inplane electric surface current is involved, so the reflected field is given by the scattered electromagnetic field due to only an in-plane current and the macroscopic electric field is the sum of the incident field plus the radiation reaction field.