Topological quantum matter is typically associated with gapped phases and edge modes protected by the bulk gap. In contrast, recent work (Phys. Rev. B 104, 075132) proposed intrinsically gapless topological phases that, in one dimension, carry protected edge modes only when the bulk is a gapless Luttinger liquid. The edge modes of such a topological Luttinger liquid (TLL) descend from a nonlocal string order that is forbidden in gapped phases and whose precise form depends on the symmetry class of the system. In this work, we propose a powerful and unbiased entanglement-based smoking gun signature of the TLL. In particular, we show that the entanglement entropy profile of a TLL lacks Friedel oscillations that are invariably present in other gapless one dimensional phases such as ordinary Luttinger liquids, and argue that their absence is closely related to a long-ranged string order which is an intrinsic property of the TLL. Crucially, such a diagnostic is more robust against numerical errors and relatively easier to measure in experiments as it relies on the entanglement entropy rather than entanglement spectrum, unlike the entanglement-based diagnostics of gapped topological phases in one dimension. Introduction.-Topological quantum matter is defined by the obstruction to smooth deformation into a product state, and is usually associated with gapped phases accompanied by gapless edge modes. Symmetry protected topological phases (SPTs) are a subset of gapped topological phases that are only non-trivial in the presence of certain global symmetries On the other hand, a recent breakthrough demonstrated the existence of intrinsically gapless SPTs For the topological phases, entanglement properties such as the entanglement spectrum and the entanglement entropy In this work, we show that TLLs have a distinct entanglement entropy (EE) profile S vN (j) as a function of the subsystem size j. While it was shown to grow logarithmically with j as expected for a gapless phase All computations were performed using the density matrix renormalization group (DMRG) Ising-Hubbard.-The Ising-Hubbard model we use is given by H 1 = H Ising + H Hub + H inv where with c † j,s creating a fermion at site j with spin s, n js = c † j,s c j,s , A s = c † j+1,s c j,s + h.c. and S α j = 1 2 c † j,s σ α s,s c j,s . At t c = 0, H 1 reduces to the pure Ising-Hubbard model studied in Ref. x }, where R x = exp iπ j S x j flips S z and squares to fermion parity: R 2 x = (-1) N ≡ P . At t c = 0 and J z > 0, the ground state at half-filling is a Mott insulator -either an Ising anti-ferromagnet at small h x or a paramagnet at large h x . Tuning U and μ drives the paramagnetic insulator into an S x -polarized OLL, whereas the Ising Mott insulator transitions into a TLL protected by the Z 4 symmetry. In this work, we add second nearest neighbor imaginary hopping H inv that breaks inversion symmetry but preserves R x . Since the TLL is protected by R x , it remains robust up to moderate strengths of this hopping. The TLL can be viewed as a hidden symmetry breaking state in which arbitrary number of holes or doublons are inserted between anti-ferromagnetically aligned spins, thus reducing the long-ranged antiferromagnetic order to a quasi-long range order We now fix the parameters t c = 0, U = 5, μ = 0.5, and t = J z = 1.0 and tune h x to generate Figs. Fig. To examine whether the absence of EE oscillations is related to any correlations, we plot the absolute value of various correlation functions in the TLL and the OLL in Fig. To unambiguously disentangle the absence of oscillations in p-wave correlations from the absence in EE, we break inversion symmetry weakly in the TLL by setting t c = 0.1 in H inv . This term is expected to mix s-wave and p-wave Cooper pairs but leave the TLL robust since it is protected by R x symmetry. Indeed, as shown in Fig. We next investigate the connection between the absence of oscillations in the EE profile and the presence of protected edge modes. To do so, we consider a gapless phase that also has edge modes but is not a TLL, namely, a doped spin-1 Haldane chain Doped Haldane.-To facilitate a comparison with the Ising-Hubbard chain, we consider a fermionic realization of the doped spin-1 Haldane chain as a t-J type ladder Hamiltonian, H 2 = H t + H J : with the constraint that there is at most one electron per site In Fig. Discussion-Having provided evidence that the absence of EE oscillations is closely associated with the string order, we now provide an intuitive picture for this connection. The EE of a region can be understood as the averaged behavior of all correlation functions in that subsystem. For example, the second Renyi entropy is precisely the (negative logarithm of the) mean square expectation value of all operators in the region, and the Von Neumann entropy can be intuitively understood similarly. To see how this idea results in the non-oscillating EE profile, we show the behavior of more long-ranged string-like functions with nonvanishing magnitude in TLL. In particular, we show the products of two adjacent strings, S 1,i S i+1,j , in Fig. Finally, we study the EE profile of two other TLLs, a charge-conserving topological superconductor where B j = c † j,↑ c † j+1,↑ c j,↓ c j+1,↓ + h.c. and ∆ j = c j,↑ c j+1,↓ + h.c.. The ground state of H TSC is a TLL at g = 0.9 at half-filling For both models, we perform DMRG calculations with 222 sweeps and χ ≈ 500, resulting in truncation error ≈ 10 -10 for system size L = 50. Fig. EE profile is prevailing in these models too, further supporting our claim that TLLs generically lack Friedel oscillations in the EE. We have shown that the EE profile of TLLs lacks Friedel oscillations and argued that this behavior is closely related to the long-ranged string order present in this phase. Thus, it forms an unbiased signature of the phase as it does not require precise knowledge of the string order parameter. First, we noted that pwave pairing correlations were the only local correlations that were non-oscillating in the Ising-Hubbard TLL. We then broke inversion symmetry in the model, which induced oscillations in the p-wave correlations due to mixing with s-wave pairing while the EE profile and string order remained non-oscillating. This ruled out nonoscillating p-wave correlations -and all non-oscillating local correlations by extension -as the cause of the absence of EE oscillations in the Ising-Hubbard TLL, while indicating a deeper connection to the string order. Next, we investigated the role of edge modes in suppressing EE oscillations by studying a gapless SPT, the doped spin-1 Haldane chain, which also has edge modes. However, EE oscillations exist in this phase, implying that the mere presence of edge modes cannot suppress EE oscillations. Finally, we described an intuitive picture for the absence of EE oscillations in TLLs in terms of expectation values of composite strings. Specifically, we argued that the EE in TLLs is dominated by the expectation values of products of strings, all of which inherit long-range order from the fundamental string. Since long-ranged string order is a defining property of TLLs, the absence of Friedel oscillations in its EE profile likely is too. It would be interesting to ask whether EE oscillations are also absent in gapless topological phases protected by nonlocal symmetries, e.g., the triplet paired phase in the mass imbalanced Hubbard chain that has a string order protected by global inversion but no edge modes 