Circularly polarized optical excitation of plasmonic nanostructures causes coherent circulating motion of their electrons, which in turn, gives rise to strong optically induced magnetization-a phenomenon known as the inverse Faraday effect (IFE). In this study we report how the IFE also significantly decreases plasmon damping. By modulating the optical polarization state incident on achiral plasmonic nanostructures from linear to circular, we observe reversible increases of reflectance by 78% as well as simultaneous increases of optical field concentration by 35.7% under 10 9 W/m 2 continuous wave (CW) optical excitation. These signatures of decreased plasmon damping were also monitored in the presence of an externally applied magnetic field (0.2 T). The combined interactions allow an estimate of the light-induced magnetization, which corresponds to an effective magnetic field of ~1.3 T during circularly polarized CW excitation (10 9 W/m 2 ). We rationalize the observed decreases in plasmon damping in terms of the Lorentz forces acting on the circulating electron trajectories. Our results outline strategies for actively modulating intrinsic losses in the metal, and thereby, the optical mode quality and field concentration via opto-magnetic effects encoded in the polarization state of incident light. The reversible modulation of plasmonic resonances in metal nanostructures using external stimuli -i.e., "active plasmonics"-is currently of great interest for potential applications in sensing, optoelectronic devices, and light-based information processing In comparison, the possibility of actively tuning plasmon damping in the steady state, and the opportunities for manipulating plasmonic behavior, has been studied much less In a series of recent studies, the Vuong laboratory reported anomalously large magneto-optical (MO) responses from colloidal Au nanoparticles under small magnetic fields (~1 mT) and low intensity circularly polarized (CP) excitation (<1 W/cm 2 ) In this study we show that plasmon damping is indeed strongly modified by magnetic interactions, whether magnetism is induced externally using an applied magnetic field or created internally with light via the IFE. We observe that the normal incidence backscattering, i.e. the reflectance, of arrays of non-chiral Au nanostructures is increased by 78% when controlling the ellipticity of incident light from linearly polarized (LP) to CP during 10 9 W/m 2 continuous wave (CW) excitation. Further, we query the optical field concentration at hot spots in the metal by taking advantage of recently refined electronic Raman thermometry techniques Samples consisting of 100 μm x 100 μm arrays of 400 nm diameter by 100 nm height disk-shaped gold nanostructures in a square lattice pattern (700 nm pitch) were deposited on 38 nm thick Al2O3 layer on top of 100 nm thick gold films using electronbeam lithography (Fig. The backscattering efficiency of the nanodisks is strongly modulated based on the polarization state (ellipticity) of the incident light. As displayed in Fig. (see Methods section for details). In all locations over the array the backscattering efficiency is generally larger for CP versus LP, with a maximum relative increase of backscattering up to 78% at the edge of individual nanodisks during CP excitation. We rule out the possibility that this trend is due to inherent differences in the ellipticity-dependent scattering efficiency based on sample geometry, because the sample is not chiral. Neglecting optically induced magnetization or other non-linear effects, the total absorption and scattering of the nanostructure array is expected to show no dependence on beam ellipticity. Indeed, we have performed linear, full wave optical simulations (FDTD method, see Supporting information) that confirm no difference in the absorption or scattering efficiency based on LP or CP excitation. We hypothesize that the large difference in backscattering efficiency observed experimentally results from ellipticity-dependent modulation of the plasmon damping. This interpretation is qualitatively supported by additional optical simulations (see Supporting information) that show a comparable increase of backscattering, depending on sample location, when damping is decreased by 50% or greater. Decreased plasmon damping also results in more concentrated optical fields at hot spots, which can lead to more pronounced local photothermal heating. In terms of equation ( where EE(xx, yy, zz) is the local electric field. Thus, lower plasmon damping provides a net increase of heating power and correspondingly larger temperatures at locations with strong field enhancement. Intuitively, lower damping increases the cross section that funnels light energy into a plasmonic hot spot. See simulations of this effect for the nanodisk array geometry in Supporting information. Raman signal intensity also depends on local field enhancement, scaling as |EE| where h is Plank constant, cc is the speed of light, ∆ωω is the wavenumber (negative for anti-Stokes), and kk BB is Boltzmann constant. Spectral features that do not change with thermal activation, such as the frequency-dependent signal enhancement factor, cancel out, so that TT ll is the only unknown fitting parameter. With fixed linear polarization, we measured the aS spectra of samples as a function of excitation power to induce variable amounts of photothermal heating, and we fit for TT ll . The spectra were normalized by a spectrum collected at the lowest possible power that preserved good signal-to-noise (I = 7.2 × 10 6 W/m 2 ), with the goal of inducing minimal heating above room temperature, i.e. TT 0 ≈ 298 K. We observe that TT ll increases linearly with LP excitation intensity (Fig. We determined changes in the sample temperature, and hence modification of the plasmon damping, by measuring the eR response while varying the ellipticity of the excitation beam. However, given the complex spectral dependence of the eR signal, similar procedures as those described for the backscattering study could not be used to correct for the ellipticity-dependent instrument response. Instead, we devised a dual beam configuration (see Methods section for details). In summary, two separate CW 532 nm laser beams were coincident on the sample. A low power "Beam 1" was maintained with linear polarization. A second, higher power "Beam 2" was used to induce variable magnetization and damping in the sample by controlling excitation ellipticity. The eR spectrum resultant from Beam 1 was isolated and fit for TT ll by collecting a spectrum with both Beam 1 and Beam 2 incident, and then subtracting the spectrum collected with only Beam 2 incident. This procedure allowed us to probe the sample temperature using a beam that had non-changing incident power and linear polarization (Beam 1) while the sample was excited with variable ellipticity and power. The accuracy of this dual-beam method is confirmed in Fig. We also studied sample behavior under an externally applied magnetic field. For this experiment the ellipticity of Beam 2 was kept at either 0 (LP), +0.67 (LHCP), or -0.67 (RHCP). Note that the ellipticity for RHCP was limited to this range based on our experimental geometry (see Methods section). An external magnetic field Bapp = 0.2 T was applied parallel to the direction of light propagation (Fig. et al. theoretically analyzed the behavior of a free electron gas in a nanoparticle under CP excitation and predicted that the optically induced magnetic moment is enhanced (suppressed) when an external magnetic field is aligned (anti-aligned), due to the Lorentz forces on individual electrons that perturb their circular movement The difference in heating efficiency during LHCP and RHCP excitation allows an estimate of the strength of the optically induced magnetization, MIFE, at hot spots in terms of the magnetization, Mind, that results from Bapp (see full calculations in Supporting Information). Assuming that the temperature increase compared to LP excitation is linearly proportional to the net magnetization Mind + MIFE we determine an "effective" magnetic field, Beff, at hot spots to be 1.3T for the highest incident power of 1.45×10 9 W/m 2 and 0.67 ellipticity. Note that Beff is not the magnetic field produced by optically exciting the nanostructure, but rather, corresponds to the field strength of a hypothetical external magnet that would produce the same magnetization in the dark as observed during CP optical excitation with no Bapp. This estimate also assumes that Mind and MIFE are either aligned or anti-aligned, though their orientation may be more complex microscopically Finally, we comment that the plasmon damping can also be estimated directly by fitting to the Stokes side eR spectrum (green box, Fig. We have demonstrated the ability to modulate plasmon damping in achiral plasmonic gold nanodisk arrays by controlling incident light ellipticity. Confocal mapping revealed that CP excitation leads to enhanced efficiency for backscattering, consistent with an overall decrease of damping. A dual-beam Raman thermometry technique quantified localized heating in samples. We observe more efficient photothermal heating when the ellipticity of incident light increases, regardless of helicity (RHCP or LHCP), indicating greater field enhancement at hot spots. The simultaneous increase of scattering and absorption is a telltale signature of decreased damping in plasmonic absorbers. In comparison, under an external magnetic field, RHCP and LHCP excitation provide different amounts of heating. This behavior suggests that the microscopic origin of decreased damping is the interaction between the optically driven coherent electron motion and Lorentz forces from DC magnetic fields, whether magnetic fields are optically induced or externally applied. Our results provide further insight into electron dynamics inside plasmonic nanostructures during CP excitation and suggest multiple new strategies for controllably modulating heating, magnetization, reflectance, damping, and related photophysical effects. Prior to fabrication, a silicon substrate was cleaned using a combination of base piranha and UV-ozone. A 100 nm gold mirror was then thermally evaporated (Lesker PVD electron-beam evaporator) onto the silicon substrate. A 38 nm thick Al2O3 dielectric layer was then deposited on the gold mirror by RF sputtering (Lesker PVD RF sputterer) and the thickness was determined using ellipsometry. Next, 950 PMMA A4 was spin-coated onto the Al2O3 as the electron beam resist layer. Electron-beam lithography (TESCAN MIRA3 EBL) was performed to pattern the 100 μm × 100 μm nanodisk array into the ebeam resist. After development, a 5 nm chrome adhesion layer was thermally deposited on the surface of the exposed PMMA, followed by a 100 nm layer of gold. Finally, liftoff was performed in acetone using a combination of pipet pumping and sonication, leaving only the nanodisk array on the surface of the substrate. The morphology of gold nanodisks array is confirmed by SEM (Fig. Raman spectra were taken using a confocal microscope system (Witec RA300) and spectrometer (UHTS300, grating = 300 g/mm). For Raman spectral mapping, the excitation source was 532 nm CW Nd:YAG laser and the Raman spectra were collected by a 100x objective (Zeiss EC Epiplan Neofluar, NA = 0.9, WD = 0.31mm). A pair consisting of a holographic 532 nm notch filter (RayShield Coupler, Witec) and a 532 nm notch filter (NF533-17, Thorlab) were added to prevent saturation of the spectrometer. The obtained Raman spectra were corrected by the transmission spectra of the notch filter. The resolution of the Raman map was 50 nm in lateral dimensions (both x and y direction) and 100 nm in the z direction. The optimal z height was determined by maximizing the Raman Stokes signal. The 532 nm backscattering efficiency under different ellipticity was obtained by referencing to a silver mirror. For the dual-beam Raman spectroscopy experiment, two 532 nm CW laser were used. Beam 2 was coupled through free space, and was a 532 CW diode laser with a spot size of 2 um 2 on the sample. The ellipticity of Beam 2 was controlled by a half waveplate and a quarter waveplate optically in series. The function of Beam 2 was to generate circular currents in the gold nanostructures and actively tune the damping constant. The difference in the highest achievable ellipticity for LHCP and RHCP was a result of the limitation of the beam splitter. Beam 1 was coupled through a fiber coupler (Rayshield coupler) and was sourced by a 532 nm CW Nd:YAG laser, with a spot size of 0.55 μm 2 when focused. Beam 1 always had lower intensity than Beam 2 and was linearly polarized. Both beams were focused by a 100x objective (Zeiss EC Epiplan Neofluar, NA = 0.9, WD = 0.31mm) on the gold nanostructures. Below the sample, there was a slot for inserting a magnet, which has magnetic field parallel to the incident light (pointing downward) with magnetic field strength = 0.2 T near the surface of gold nanostructure. Three-dimensional full wave electromagnetic simulations were performed using finite difference time domain (FDTD) methods (Lumerical, Ansys Inc.). A 100 nm height and 218 nm radius (determined by the SEM image) Au nanodisk on a 40 nm thick Al2O3 layer (with a 5 nm Cr adhension layer in between) on top of Au film defined the simulation geometry. Periodic boundary conditions were applied on all sides perpendicular to the substrate with a simulation region of 700 nm x 700 nm, representing the periodicity of the nanostructure. A plane wave source was injected from above, normal to the substrate. The backscattered radiation was collected by a 2-D monitor placed above the plane wave source. The refractive index of Al2O3 was calculated as a linear combination of the experimental index values from Palik 1 for Al2O3 and Al, so that the imaginary part at 532 nm is close to 0.2, to account for excess Al in the layer during nanostructure fabrication as determined in control studies. The permittivity values for Au was modeled with the analytical function based on Drude-Lorentz model 2 : where εε(ωω) is the relative permittivity, ΓΓ 0 is the intraband damping constant, ΩΩ p = �ff 0 ωω p,0 is the plasma frequency associated with intraband transition. jj max is the number of Lorentz oscillators (in our case, 5) with strength ff j , frequency ωω j and damping constant ΓΓ j for each individual oscillator. In order to systematically study the effect of modulation of damping on optical properties observed in the experiment, we studies the dependence on the intraband damping term ΓΓ 0 , and all the interband damping terms ΓΓ j in equation (S1). Bulk Au values were used for simulations representing LP excitation in the experiment. These damping terms were reduced up to 50% of their original values to generate new permittivity values to represent the CP excitation in the experiment, applied to the Au film and the entire Au nanodisk. The confocal backscattering map in the experiment (Fig. However, with 50% damping modulation, the magnitude of backscattering change predicted by the simulation was not as large as that observed in the experiment at all locations. We hypothesize that the damping modulation is highly spatially non-uniform in the experimental system with maxima near hot spots, unlike the assumption of uniform damping modulation across the nanostructure in the modeling. A spatial dependent change in damping in experiments is likely a key factor that is not accounted for in these simulations, limiting the quantitative accuracy of the result. Nonetheless, the modeling corroborates that the observed experimental trend is consistent with decreased damping in the metal. In addition to the backscattering map, the overall backscattering intensity from the nanostructure, essentially the average of the spatial dependent backscattering intensity, was also simulated (Fig. If we label the overall backscattered percentage of power as R, the absorbed percentage of power would be 1-R, due to the opacity of the nanostructure. Therefore, the absorption spectrum of the nanostructure can be computed accordingly. Fig. We emphasize that simulation does not model any nonlinear effects. If only change the ellipticity of the excitation source in the simulations, without modulating Au permittivity values, the absorption and the backscattering intensity values of the nanostructure remain constant. This suggests that the difference in absorption and scattering seen in the simulation must come from some nonlinear effects, such as modulation of damping. where EE(xx, yy, zz) is the local electric field. We simulated the local electric field distribution EE(xx, yy, zz) on the nanodisk with damping modulation to verify the experimentally observed increase in photothermal heating with decreasing damping. Here, we mapped the electric field intensity (|E| 2 ) distribution on the top surface of the nanodisk, multiplied by the imaginary permittivity, which is proportional to the local heating power. Fig. Heating map on the top surface of the nanodisk a) with bulk damping, b) with 50% damping and c) the difference between 50% damping and bulk damping. The method used in the manuscript to extract the temperature of the plasmonic nanostructure was adopted from Xie et al 3 and from many of previous reports where h is Plank constant, cc is the speed of light, ∆ωω is the wavenumber (negative for anti-Stokes), kk B is Boltzmann constant, and TT is the temperature of the sample. CC is a scaling factor. DD(∆ωω) is a correction factor proportional to the photonic density of states (PDOS) of the nanostructure. In practice, the PDOS is approximated with reflection 4-6 , absorption, or dark-field scattering 8 spectrum. However, there is not a direct experimental measurement of the PDOS. Therefore, we follow the procedure of Xie et al The reference spectrum is usually chosen to be the spectrum at lowest illumination intensity, assuming no laser heating, and therefore the sample temperature is assumed to be at room temperature. By correctly normalizing the spectral counts to the illumination power and integration time, CC is theoretically a value of 1. Therefore, the only parameter to solve for is the unknown temperature TT l . In practice, fitting accuracy is improved if CC is a free fit parameter (usually very close to 1) to account for small changes in the collection efficiency during the course of the measurement. We have shown that the sample temperature extracted from the Raman spectrum with equation ( The fitted temperatures were compared to the corresponding thermal stage temperatures, as shown in Fig. Although bulk Au has been reported to display diamagnetism, there have been numerous reports pointing to observed paramagnetic, or even ferromagnetic behavior in various nanoscale Au systems where μμ 0 is the vacuum permeability, BB app is the external applied magnetic field and MM ind is the induced magnetization. The induced magnetization in response to the external magnetic field MM ind is a separate contribution to the sample magnetism in addition to the light-induced magnetism MM IFE (Fig. First, we calculate the strength of MM ind under a 0.2 T applied external magnetic field. By applying equation (S5), with μμ 0 = 1.257 × 10 -6 H/m, we can derive that MM ind = 1.6 × 10 5 χχ V A/m. We determine MM IFE in the experiment based the fitted temperature data at the highest incident intensity in Fig. Lastly, we can calculate the magnetic moment per Au atom mAu based on the relationship In an Au crystal lattice, the number density of Au atoms NN Au VV is 58.9 nm -3 . Therefore, II Au = 1.9χχ V μμ B . We compare our results with our previous experimental study on Au nanocolloids, as well as two experiment measurements on Au film, summarized in Table. S1, assuming that the IFE magnetism is linearly proportional to the incident optical power (as suggested by theoretical studies on the IFE For reference, if χχ V is on the order of 10 -5 (a typical value for bulk Au), the IFE induced magnetic field at hot spots during in the study is estimated to be on the order of 10 -5 T. a b At hot spots.