The Butler-Volmer (BV) equation links the current flux crossing an electrochemical interface to the electric potential drop across it with the assumption of Arrhenius kinetics and the Boltzmann factor. Applying the semilogarithmic Tafel analysis in which the logarithm of current is plotted vs. the overpotential one expects straight lines from which the fundamental reaction rate of the kinetic process can be computed. However, some Li-ion battery data, which is the focus here, show nonlinear convex profiles that cannot be adequately fitted with the standard BV model. We propose instead two deformed BV models for the analysis of such types of behaviors constructed from the superposition of cells exhibiting only local equilibrium and thus giving rise to the power-law q-exponential and κ-exponential functions. Non-Boltzmann distributions have been successfully employed for the modeling of a wide spectrum of physical systems in nonequilibrium situations, but not yet for batteries. We verify the validity of the deformed BV models on experimental data obtained from LiFePO 4 and Li-O 2 batteries. Chemical-to-electrical or electrical-to-chemical energy conversion in electrochemical energy devices and systems such as batteries and fuel cells or in electrodeposition and electrolysis require the presence of two phases in contact with each other. Generally there is an electronconducting phase but ionic insulator on the one hand, and an ionic conductor but electric insulator on the other hand. The phases can be solid, liquid or gas. At the inter-phase boundary or interface, which should be thought of as a physical and not a mathematical plane, chemical reactions accompanied with charge carriers transfer from one phase to another take place. Understanding and properly modeling the measurements carried out on such systems is important for many applications including renewable energy technologies with energy storage, electric vehicles, smart grids, and corrosion prevention. The BV equation can be derived from different approaches including the kinetic law of mass action, where R is the universal gas constant and E a is an experimental/phenomenological activation energy, The forward or oxidation (Ox + ne -→ Red) and backward or reduction (Red → Ox + ne -) charge transfer reactions can be described by the charge transfer reaction rates k f and k b . Their associate forward and backward current densities (per unit surface) crossing the interface are taken to be proportional to the surface concentrations C Ox and C Red , and can be written as: where F is the Faraday constant. Thus the net current flowing through the electrode is given by the difference: Now by incorporating the expressions for the potential and temperature-dependence of the forward and backward charge transfer reaction rates, which are assumed to follow Arrhenius profiles (with E a taken as a linear function of the potential ψ) as: Eq. 5 turns to be: This equation is known as the kinetic BV equation for the current-potential relationship with pure charge transfer overpotential. Here, the dimensionless parameters α Red and α Ox (taking values between 0 and 1 with α Red + α Ox = 1) denote the transfer or symmetry factors associated with the oxidation and reduction reactions, respectively, or qualitatively a measure of the "position" of the transition state, Note that with the use of the dimensionless overpotential scaled to the thermal voltage, η * = η/V th , the dimensionless current i * = i/i 0 , and α Red = α, Eq. 9 can be rewritten as: For the particular case of α = 0.5, which is commonly used for battery modeling, the expression for i * simplifies to: The Tafel technique of plotting ln(i * ) versus η * gives a straight line of slope -α for η * < 0 and (1 -α) for η * > 0 from which the charge transfer rates can be estimated. However, there are several instances where the semilogarithmic Tafel analysis of ln(i * ) versus η * does not result in linear profiles, but rather curved plots which is the motivation for this work. The purpose of this contribution is to formulate and study a generalized BV model by incorporating the power-law (i) q-exponential function based on Tsallis nonextensive statistics The rest of the manuscript is organized as follows. In Section we will provide a brief summary of some important deformed functions (mostly deformed exponential functions) and their properties, and formulate the corresponding modified BV expressions. In Section we analyze experimental Lithium batteries results compiled from the literature for which we compare fittings using standard, and q-and κ-deformed BV equations. We consider the simplified case model of an electrode/electrolyte system with single-step charge transfer redox reaction as described by reaction 2. The global equilibrium of the reacting system, which is driven away from equilibrium, is assumed to be influenced by fluctuations and stochastic events. Such fluctuations can originate for instance from the effects of the non-uniformity of the electrode/electrolyte interfaces, porous and fractal structures, long-range interactions, irreversibilities and parasitic reactions, particle trapping and partial charge transfer, as well as local variations in thermodynamic parameters. When modeling such stochastic dynamics, the question that comes first is how to approximate the noise distribution? This can be modeled on the one hand using non-Gaussian distributions when fluctuations are known to display heavy tails and skewness such as in the form of Levy-stable distributions, Cohen superstatistics, where f (β) represents a normalized probability distribution function (PDF, with ) and provides a weight for the distributions exp(-βE). By replacing n in Eq. 13 by any real positive number, we get the general (continuous) Gamma distribution. where β > 0, γ > 0, a > 0 and 0 F 1 (; γ; βx) = ∞ 0 (βx) k /(γ) k k!, (γ) k is the Pochhammer symbol ((γ) k = γ(γ + 1) . . . (γ + k -1), γ = 0, (γ) 0 = 1). It is clear that Eq. 14 with x = 0 reduces to the distribution: in which we used Beck and Cohen's notations The integration over dβ in Eq. 12 with f (β) given by Eq. 15 leads unambiguously to the closed-form power-law function: 39 Figure With the substitutions -1/(1 -q) = c and β 0 = ∞ 0 βf q (β)dβ = bc being the average of the fluctuating β, the r.h.s of Eq. 16 is rewritten as: where exp q (y) denotes the q-exponential function parameterized with the real number q. Because c > 0 in the Gamma distribution function (Eq. 15), q has to be larger than one in Eq. 17, but it can be rewritten with the change of variable q = 2 -q ′ in order to consider the cases where q ′ < 1. The parameter q can be thought of as a characteristic of the system's statistics, and is defined here by the ratio of standard variation and mean of the distribution f q (β), We note some of the properties of the q-exponential function: • for q = 1, exp q (y) = exp(y) for ∀y, and • for q > 1, exp q (y) = [1 + (1 -q)y] 1/(1-q) for y < 1/(q -1). Fig. where k is a positive constant, q = 1 (also known as the entropic index), and the quantities p i = p(E i ) represent the probabilities for the occurrence of the i th microstate and satisfy denotes the q-logarithm, inverse of the q-exponential i.e. ln q [exp q (y)] = exp q [ln q (y)] = y. We assumed that the parameter q is the same for both half reactions. Again, recovering the ordinary expression of BV (Eq. 10) is obtained at the limit q → 1. Furthermore, using the the expansion of the q-exponential function for sufficiently small values of y, i.e. exp q (-y) = exp(-y) 1 + 1 2 (q -1)y 2 -1 3 (q -1) 2 y 3 + . . . , one can also recover the usual BV model. In the same way used for the formulation of the q-deformed BV model, we propose the following κ-deformed BV model: where the κ-deformed exponential function of y is given by: 26 with 0 κ < 1. The function exp κ (y) emerges from a continuous linear combination of an infinity of standard exponentials as: • exp κ (y) = exp -κ (y); • for y → ∞, exp κ (-y) is ∼ (2κy) -1/κ and exp κ (y) = +∞. Its associated inverse function is the κ-logarithm: giving ln κ (exp κ (y)) = exp κ (ln κ (y)) = y. Kaniadakis' entropy associated with the κ-statistics is obtained by replacing the logarithm in the expression for the standard BG entropy by the κ-logarithm. In Fig. This nonlinear behavior becomes more significant when high rates are applied, which can be further explained as follows. Let us consider the discharge scheme consisting of the steps (i) Li + diffusion from the bulk electrolyte to the particle surface, followed by (ii) charge transfer at the particle/electrolyte interface, and then (iii) slow solid-phase diffusion of Li + or polaron diffusion from the surface to center of the particle coupled with phase transition from FePO 4 to LiFePO 4 . In other words, the system can be viewed as a combination of a spectrum of superposed kinetic processes of different origins on the electrode/electrolyte system. If the constituting subsystems are assumed temporarily in local equilibrium and follow Boltzmann exponential In the same Fig. Eq. 23 (κ-BV model), and Eq. 10 (standard BV model) with α = 0.5. We used MATLAB R2019b lsqcurvefit function for nonlinear curve-fitting in least-squares sense with the same fittings constraints and tolerances for all models for fair comparison. When considering the traditional BV model, the data is poorly fitted with a straight line in the semilogarithmic plane of ln(i) vs. η * , noting that a better fit can be obtained if a smaller portion of the data is selected closer to η * = 0 (not shown here). The goodness-of-fit using the normalized root mean square error (NRMSE) as the cost function is found to be 0.48, knowing that a value of 1 indicates a perfect fit to the data and -∞ a bad one. The BV model cannot be justified here given the morphological structure of the electrode as described in ref. We note also that the fits are in close agreement with Bai and Bazant's results 1 based on MHC theory. The MHC rate is, however, expressed in terms on indefinite integral of the exponential Boltzmann factor (which includes in its argument an extra term representing a reorganization energy) with Fermi-Dirac statistics of electron energies distributed around the electrode potential. This makes the MHC model less attractive from a computational point-of-view. On the other hand, both of the deformed BV models are clearly much simpler and easy to implement with comparable accuracy and fitting capabilities. The curvature of the Tafel plots for other materials and systems may be different, which can still be captured by the free parameters q or κ depending on the model as shown in Fig. The figure depicts the experimental Tafel plots of extracted from Viswanathan et al. BV (i 0 =16.7 A.cm -2 ) q-BV (i 0 =0.16 A.cm -2 , q=0.67) -BV (i 0 =0.08 A.cm -2 =0.42) Figure From the figure, it is clear that the standard BV model also fails to adequately fit these types of data, whereas based on different statistics than BG theory, the q-and κ-deformed BV models successfully followed the trend of the curve with (q = 0.67, i 0 = 0.16 μA cm -2 ) and (κ = 0.42, i 0 = 0.08 μA cm -2 ) respectively. The goodness-of-fit between the models and the experimental data are -0.11, 0.89 and 0.91, respectively. In this contribution, we proposed and verified the application of two deformed versions of the BV model for the analysis of convex semilogarithmic current-overpotential profiles observed with some battery data. The models assume that the nonequilibrium electrode/electrolyte system can be viewed as a multitude of subsystems temporarily in local equilibrium, and thus follow the Boltzmann exponential trend but with different statistics. These fluctuations are taken to be inverse temperature fluctuations that can be correlated for instance to spatial inhomogeneities of the interface geometry, long-range interactions, particle trapping and partial charge transfer, as well as distribution of thermodynamic quantities. Applied to two different examples of battery data, 