Analysis of X-ray Photon Correlation Spectroscopy (XPCS) data for non-equilibrium dynamics often requires manual binning of age regions of an intensity-intensity correlation function. This leads to a loss of temporal resolution and accumulation of systematic error for the parameters quantifying the dynamics, especially in cases with considerable noise. Moreover, the experiments with high data collection rates create the need for automated online analysis, where manual binning is not possible. Here, we integrate a denoising autoencoder model into algorithms for analysis of non-equilibrium two-time intensity-intensity correlation functions. The model can be applied to an input of an arbitrary size. Noise reduction allows to extract the parameters that characterize the sample's dynamics with temporal resolution limited only by frame rates. Not only does it improve the quantitative usage of the data, but it also creates the potential for automating the analytical workflow. Various approaches for uncertainty quantification and extension of the model for anomalies detection are discussed. Technological advances, such as high-brightness Xray photon sources Such dynamics are commonly represented via two-time intensity-intensity correlation functions (2T CF s) where I(q q q; t) is the intensity of a detector pixel corresponding to the wave vector q q q at time t. The average is taken over pixels with equivalent q q q values. The quantitative analysis of a non-equilibrium 2T CF (Fig. C1(q q q, t a ; t d ) = C2(q q q; t a , t d ) ta The reason for binning and averaging is increasing the accuracy of further analysis. The resulting 1T CF s are fit to a functional form that is characteristic for the dynamics under investigation. The traditional analysis of experimental data with non-equilibrium dynamics presents several challenges. Selection of the quasi-equilibrium regions is often a nontrivial and time-consuming task, which requires interventions from a human researcher for a visual inspection of the calculated 2T CF and intermediate results. Moreover, the temporal resolution of the evolution of dynamics' parameters deteriorates due the binning procedure. Besides, with increasing data collection rates, it often becomes unfeasible to properly do on-the-fly data analysis during XPCS experiments when such analysis requires inputs from a researcher. This can lead to inefficient use of beam facilities and the efforts of scientific stuff as well as to unfortunate omission of important parameter space regions during measurements. The sheer volume of collected data can reach hundreds of thousands of 2T CF s a day, making even the offline data processing a challenging task. Automating the analytical routine is an inevitable step towards high-throughput autonomous XPCS experiments. Ability to perform the analysis with experimental frame-rate resolution is the ultimate target. Since the motivation behind binning and averaging the data is to curtail the impact of noise, pre-processing a 2T CF with a noise-reducing algorithm would increase the chance of achieving a frame-rate resolution along t a during quantitative analysis. Previously, we demonstrated an approach for noise reduction in 2T CF s with equilibrium dynamics, which is based on Convolutional Neutral Network-Encoder-Decoder model (CNN-ED) Here, we build upon the previous model to address the reduction of noise in arbitrary-sized 2T CF s with nonequilibrium dynamics such as ageing. We further demonstrate how the new model, integrated into a workflow for quantitative analysis of XPCS data, eliminates the need of age binning and allows wider parameter bounds for the fit of 1T CF s. The results of such analysis have temporal resolution, which is limited only by the experimental acquisition rates. The methods for estimating the creditability of the results -uncertainty scoring for denoised 2T CF s and trust regions for dynamics' parameters -are discussed. Various options for analysis workflows are demonstrated for several XPCS experiments. For a denoising model to perform well for nonequilibrium 2T CF s, data from experiments with these types of dynamics are used for training. The data are collected from 65 XPCS experiments at the CHX beamline of NSLS-II from three different samples, recorded at different conditions and with different detector collection rates. Some of the measurements are repeated multiple times at the same conditions. The samples exhibit dynamics, common for many materials, that at various rates monotonically accelerate with age, monotonically decelerate with age or stay at quasi-equilibrium. For all considered dynamics, individual 1T CF s can be approximated with the Kohlrausch-Williams-Watts (KWW) form: where Γ is the rate of the dynamics, β is the contrast factor, α is the compression constant and C ∞ is the baseline. All parameters are functions of t a and q q q. Several regions of interest in the reciprocal space are considered for each experiment when calculating 2T CF s. There is a total of 492 2T CF s, ranging from 134 to 2950 frames. The original full-sized 2T CF s were split between training (454) and validation (38) sets prior to generating the inputs to the model and augmenting the data as described below. Inputs are obtained from raw experimental 2T CF s by cropping the 100×100 frames pieces along the t a in a similar way as was done previously The CNN-ED model architecture, used for equilibrium data, demonstrated several advantages, such as simplicity, control of overfitting as well as fast training and application. Trying the same model architecture with certain adjustments for non-equilibrium data is a natural choice. The model presented here consists of an encoder with two 10-channel convolutional layers, 8-dimensional latent vector and the decoder with two 10-channel transposeconvolutional layers. Two modifications are implemented during the model training to meet the peculiarities of non-equilibrium dynamics. Firstly, since a 'noise-free' version of an input cannot be obtained by averaging multiple cropped inputs collected from the same full-sized 2T CF , the model is trained in an autoencoder (AE) mode with an input and its target being the same. Secondly, a non-equilibrium 2T CF cannot be described by a single 1T CF and thus only the mean square loss between the output and the target are chosen as the training loss function. Despite the increased complexity of dynamics in the training data, the architecture still appears appropriate for the denoising task based on the model's good performance for the validation set [see Appendix D, E]. The effectiveness of models with convolutional kernel sizes from 1 to 17 is tested and only minor improvements in the smoothness of the output and the level of finite details preserved for larger kernels are discovered. The models with larger kernels take longer to train and the computational time during their application also becomes significant. Further in the text, unless stated otherwise, a model with the kernel size 1 is considered. The fact that the same model architecture works well for both equilibrium and non-equilibrium ageing 2T CF s confirms it robustness for different types of dynamics. Since the model has a fully connected layer (the latent vector), it can only be applied to a fixed-size input, i.e. 100×100 frames. However, the dimensions of an experimental 2T CF can vary considerably. The symmetry of a 2T CF prevents the model to be applied as a raster scan over the entire image. Application of the model in a sliding window fashion along the age axis t a can help with the noise reduction in certain cases like in out original quasiequilibrium analysis Figure For regions of very fast dynamics and for large-sized 2T CF s, this down-and-up mapping approach may impair the experimental temporal resolution. In such situations, the values near the diagonal of 2T CF raw can instead be processed in a sliding-window fashion, when the model is successively applied to parts consisting of cropped 100×100 frames equally distanced along ta, and the outputs are averaged. The results of the model's application in the down-and-up mapping and sliding window fashion are combined to obtain the final denoised version of the original 2T CF raw . This method reduces noise in the entire 2T CF raw and preserves the experimental temporal resolution for both t a and t d . weights and ordering of data butches during model's training. Approaches for quantifying uncertainty for a deep learning model often involve random perturbations of the model during training and/or application and obtaining the distribution of respective outputs We estimate the variance of the denoising AE by considering deviations of outputs for models trained with different random initializations (see Appendix E). It appears that the model's variance is generally much smaller than the corresponding values of β. Moreover, the fluctuations of values in the neighboring points of a 2T CF denoised , caused by down-and-up mapping during model application, scale linearly with the inherent variance of the model. Thus, it is not necessary to separately estimate the model's variance for experiments with more than 100 frames, as the point-to-point variations in a 2T CF denoised already influence the quantitative analysis of its 1T CF s. From the practical point of view, the main potential source of uncertainty of the model is its bias. Obviously, a denoising AE must exhibit some bias to remove noise. Hence, to drive the decision about applicability of the model in each case, the quantification of the bias ought to answer the question: how certain can one be that the model's output is a valid representation of the underlying sample's dynamics in the input? Naturally, a model returns the most trustworthy results for the inputs that are very similar to the examples in the training set. We suggest two quantitative measures -uncertainty scores - The second measure of bias of the denoising is less abstract and does not depend on the model architecture. It involves evaluation of trends in residuals, i.e., the differences between the model's targets and corresponding outputs. When the output is a valid representation of the sample's dynamics, the residual should resemble random and sometimes correlated noise in form of vertical and horizontal stripes, without trends along neither t a nor t d . Since the training examples mostly represent monotonically ageing dynamics, the model tends to perform well for similar cases. A trend in a residual can indicate a heterogeneity on top of the ageing dynamics or a completely different type of dynamics. Such situations require additional attention during analysis. To identify the trends, it is convenient to look at the projection of a two-dimensional residual to the vertical (or horizontal) direction. Without trends, the autocorrelation coefficients (ACCs) of this projection are close to zero. In contrast, when a trend is present, the absolute value of the ACCs grows. Quantitative analysis of XPCS experimental results with non-equilibrium dynamics, such as ageing, involves taking time-slices along the delay axis t d of a 2T CF at different sample's ages t a and fitting the resulting 1T CF s with an appropriate model that describes the dynamics, which in many cases is the KWW form Eq. 3. Typically, several adjacent slices within age range ∆t a need to be averaged to target a signal-to-noise ratio that is sufficient for extracting dynamics parameters with reasonable certainty. It is necessary that the dynamics do not change much within ∆t a . An example of selecting a quasi-equilibrium bin within a 2T CF is shown in Fig. We compare the possibility of conducting a quan-titative analysis of a 2T CF raw and a corresponding 2T CF denoised while considering 1T CF cuts with ∆t a = 1 f r -1 without a prior knowledge of the dynamic's parameter ranges (Fig. The fits for the 1T CF cuts from the 2T CF raw with ∆t a = 35 f r -1 are provided as ground truth values. Apparently, high noise in the 2T CF raw does not allow extracting meaningful information about temporal evolution of dynamics parameters without restricting the fit parameters within narrow regions or increasing the bins' width. The 2T CF denoised , on the other hand, produces clear, slowly evolving trends, matching the ground truth values. While binning and averaging 1T CF s reduces the noise, it is not a universal solution because material's dynamics can vary considerably within an age bin, and therefore, a single set of parameters cannot describe them. For the example shown in Fig. For an automatic analysis, it is important to flag the results that cannot be fully trusted, even when the goodness-of-fit to Eq. 3 is acceptable. If dynamics are not fully captured by the experiment, parameters of the Eq. 3 become mutually dependent and the outputs of non-linear regression can be misleading because several different sets of the dynamics' parameters can result in almost equally good fits. Therefore, we introduce the concept of trust regions for the parameters. A trust region of a parameter is a binary vector with the length equal to the number of bins along t a , which indicates whether the parameter is likely to be reliably identified within each bin. The binary values are determined by several criteria including the rate of the dynamics, correlations between parameters and parameters' relative errors. When a material's dynamics are slow with respect to the duration of the experiment, the baseline C ∞ cannot be reliably identified. Likewise, the true value of β cannot be extracted if the dynamics are not fully captured by the experiment due to them being either too fast or too slow. The quantitative measure for establishing respective thresholds for dynamics' rate is a half-time, i.e., the time it takes for the contrast to drop by half: For slow dynamics, when the half-time is larger than a user-defined portion of 1T CF 's length, the trust region values for C ∞ and β are set to zero: not trustable. In case of fast dynamics, when the half-time is less than a certain number of frames, the trust region for β is set to zero. However, the C ∞ can be reliably extracted for fast dynamics and hence its trust region values are set to one. Similarly, threshold-based conditions are defined for the correlation coefficient between parameters, relative errors of the parameters and R 2 measure of the fit. Depending on the application, there are various ways to design an analysis workflow that includes 2T CF raw s and 2T CF denoised s as well as any prior knowledge about the material's dynamics. An example flowchart for extracting dynamical parameters from a 2T CF raw is shown in Fig. The last step of the analysis results in two sets of parameters with corresponding errors and trust regions: one for the 2T CF raw and one for the 2T CF denoised . Stepby-step dynamics extraction algorithms are provided in Appendix H. Naturally, when reporting experimental outcomes, the fitting results of unprocessed 2T CF raw have a higher priority with respect to the fitting results of 2T CF denoised because signal processing, such as noise removal, introduces an uncertainty. According to the presented analysis workflow, 2T CF denoised can be used for evaluating the parameters' boundaries for fitting the raw data during the second pass with the same or greater bin width. However, it is also possible to supplement the fitting results for 2T CF raw with fitting results for 2T CF denoised for regions in parameter space where the low signal-tonoise ratio in raw data prevents from obtaining meaningful parameter values. Note that removing the noise is just an additional step in extracting parameters from the raw experimental data. Therefore, the fitting results for 2T CF denoised can be tested against 2T CF raw with goodness-of-fit measures such as R 2 . Alternatively, one can use the fitting results for 2T CF denoised to select quasi-equilibrium regions for the analysis of 2T CF raw . Upon calculating the uncertainty score for the 2T CF denoised , one may wish to extend the workflow to investigate possible dynamic heterogeneities of the sample by relying on the denoised output and the results of the 1T CF s' fit. The bias of the denoising model provides the opportunity to separate the average 'envelope' dynamics and stochastic heterogeneities by subtracting either the 2T CF denoised or the 2T CF , computed based on the fit parameters for the 2T CF denoised , from the original 2T CF raw . We test a workflow for XPCS analysis with the use of denoising AE on previously reported data for 3D printing with solution of Lithium Titanate particles There are several factors that limit the signal-to-noise ratio in this experiment: operando character of the measurements, beam-sensitivity of the ink and anisotropy of the dynamics, which requires selection of small ROIs in the reciprocal space for analysis. In the original work, unevenly spaced age bins of various width have been selected to obtain good quality 'aged' 1T CF slices The sample's dynamics for multiple ROIs is quantified according to the scheme in Fig. By using latent space representation of a denoising AE, it is possible to quantitatively compare 2T CF s from the same group of measurements even if the model was not exposed to this type of dynamics during training. This is suitable for anomaly detection in series of consecutive XPCS measurements for the same material. We test the application of the model for instabilities detection during data collection for static dynamics of a LSAT sample (MTI Corporation) at the CSX beamline of NSLS-II. Six data series, 7200 frames (exposure 1.0875 seconds) each are purposefully collected during synchrotron accelerator testing to introduce a disturbance of experimental conditions. Three of the series are collected in a stable beam regime, one series is recorded with small disturbance of the beam energy and two series are recorded during strong beam energy disturbance. From each series, 72 model's inputs (size 100×100 frames) are generated by considering every 72 nd frame with different starting points. Each of the down-mapped inputs from a single series contain the same information, but different noise. To make the comparison sensitive to the mean value and variance of the contrast, the inputs are not scaled, but are clipped within values of 1 and 2. The values at t d = 0 are extrapolated with the neighboring values as it is done for a routine model application. Figure Analysis of XCPS data is a multistep, often iterative, process that requires continuous evaluation of intermediate results by a domain expert. Large volumes of observations and subjectivity in alleviating low signal-to-noise ratio complicate proper extraction of valuable information from experiments. Computationally reducing noise in 2T CF s as a data processing step helps to achieve several goals: automating the analysis workflow, improving temporal resolution of parameters that quantify the system's dynamics and increasing quantitative usage of data with high cost of collection. Here, we demonstrate how a denoising AE model can be included into analysis workflow of XPCS data for experiments with ageing dynamics. Quantification of the model's bias helps driving the decision about the use of its outputs as well as flagging unusual observations, such as heterogeneities or dynamics that are very different from ageing. The denoised correlation function can be used for complementing the fit of the raw data. The concept of trust regions combines the assessment of the fit quality as well as domain expertise, which helps to not only report the most reliable results, but to automate sequential narrowing of the fit parameters boundaries. The model's performance for unseen 3D printing data (not included in the training/validation datasets) demonstrates the advantages of its application to actual XPCS experiments. For measurements where the material's dynamics are similar enough to the model's training dataset, the analysis does not require a human-in-theloop after all the thresholds are selected prior to analysis. Moreover, the analysis is suitable for autonomous data acquisition. It provides values of dynamics parameters, which are important for making decisions about adapting data acquisition parameters such as acquisition rate, exposure time, duration of data acquisition or about changing the sample and/or the processing parameters. We further demonstrate how encoded representations of a 2T CF can be used for quantitative comparison of two or more scattering time series, which can be useful for identifying anomalies such experimental instabilities or phase transitions. The comparison can even be done for the types of dynamics, not present in the training set. In conclusion, in this work we demonstrate how a CNN-based denoising AE can be used for 2T CF s with non-equilibrium dynamics for experimental scattering se- ries of arbitrary size. Addition of the denoising AE to XPCS analysis along with quantifying uncertainty helps automating the analysis and improves temporal resolution of extracted parameters. Besides, analysis of residuals and latent space representations of the inputs helps detect anomalous dynamics that go beyond monotonic ageing. This property can be employed for recognizing heterogeneities or phase transitions. Several examples of incorporating the denoising AE in analysis workflows for actual experimental data, collected at NSLS-II, demonstrate its effectiveness for unseen data and diversity of its applications. Denoising and encoding properties of the model are auspicious for various online and offline data analysis tasks at XPCS facilities. celerator Nvidia GeForce RTX 2070 Super. Early stopping is used for model overfitting. Aside a few changes, the same model architecture and training procedure is used as described in The model is trained in the autoencoder regime, i.e. each input serves as its target. The cost function is the mean square loss between the model's output and its target(input). Adam One 2T CF is removed from consideration because its dynamics are too fast to be captured with the downand-up mapping approach. Two other 2T CF s are removed from consideration because the trust regions for β from the first fit of 2T CF denoised contained less than two points and thus the parameter boundaries could not be established. Those 2T CF s contained very slow dynamics. Overall, 8100 single-frame 1T CF s have been fit for each kernel value. The distribution of errors for the models with kernels 1, 3 and 17 is shown in Fig. The errors produced by fitting 2T CF raw have larger median errors for both REΓ and AEα, even when the parameter bounds for β and C ∞ are narrowed. The difference in errors for β and C ∞ between fits for 2T CF raw and 2T CF denoised is not significant because in both cases the parameter boundaries were established using 2T CF denoised at the previous step. When considering denoising AEs with different kernel sizes, one needs to account for the computational time. The comparison of computational times for denoising models with different kernel sizes is shown in Fig. Just like the latent space coordinates, the ACC of residuals for each new example can be compared to the analogous values for examples in the training set. This helps to understand, what values of ACC are unusual. For quantifying the comparison, the probability density function (Fig. use 2T CF raw and wide-bin 1T CF s for the fits • report results of the fit and trust regions Algorithm 1 (offline analysis): • apply denoising AE to the 2T CF raw to obtain 2T CF denoised • calculate an uncertainty score through latent space and/or residuals • if the observation is unusual: use 2T CF raw and wide-bin 1T CF s for the fits report results of the fit and trust regions 