A family of marginally-rigid (isostatic) spring networks with fractal structure up to a controllable length was devised and the viscoelastic spectra G * (ω) calculated. Two non-trivial scaling regimes were observed, (i) G ≈ G ∝ ω ∆ at low frequencies, consistent with ∆ = 1/2; (ii) G ∝ G ∝ ω ∆ for intermediate frequencies corresponding to fractal structure, consistent with a theoretical prediction ∆ = (ln 3 -ln 2)/(ln 3 + ln 2). The cross-over between these two regimes occurred at lower frequencies for larger fractals in a manner suggesting diffusive-like dispersion. Solid gels generated by introducing internal stresses exhibited similar behaviour above a low-frequency cut-off, indicating the relevance of these findings to real-world applications. Introduction.-Many soft matter and complex systems exhibit power law rheology over a broad frequency range, manifested as parallel scaling of the linear storage and loss moduli G (ω) ∝ G (ω) ∝ ω ∆ [1-3], or equivalently a power-law relaxation spectrum It has been hypothesised that the broad distribution of relaxation times derives from a similarly broad distribution of structural length scales The relative contributions of these two non-exclusive mechanisms to power-law viscoelasticity can be elucidated by the construction and analysis of model systems that are both fractal and marginally rigid. Such systems are considered here. A family of athermal spring networks based on the Sierpinski triangle was devised in which every node connects to z = 2d = 4 others, equalling the isostatic threshold when frames first be-come rigid Methods.-Arrays of 2 n ×2 n nodes were assembled onto regular triangular lattices with spacing a in a rectangular box of dimensions commensurate to the lattice. The full system was partitioned into two system-spanning triangles with opposite orientations, each with 2 n nodes along each edge. Each triangle was then subdivided into 4 equal-sized sub-triangles with edge length 2 n-1 , and so on recursively, generating sub-triangles with edge lengths 2 n-2 , 2 n-3 etc., for n -m iterations. For the remaining m iterations, only the 3 sub-triangles at vertices were recursed as per standard Sierpinski triangle generation, thus generating fractal structure for lengths 2 m a down; see Fig. Elastic forces on network nodes were required to balance drag forces due to the surrounding fluid throughout cycles of simple oscillatory shear at frequency ω. Hydrodynamic interactions with H αβ the 2 × 2 Hessian matrix for a single spring of stiffness k between connected nodes α and β, in terms of the unit vector tαβ from α to β, the inter-node separation αβ , and the spring tension τ αβ with vanishes in the absence of internal stresses. Equations (1) were assembled into a global solution vector of all nodal complex amplitudes, and the resulting matrix equation, including Lees-Edwards shifts across sheared boundaries Viscoelastic spectra.-Example networks are presented in Fig. [39], which matches the numerical results for large ω, confirming affinity at frequencies above the highest one-spring mode G * (ω) was also calculated for networks generated by random bond dilution, where springs are present with a probability p. Such networks are known to exhibit a rigidity transition at a critical dilution p = p c that is well-defined for infinite systems The exponents for the viscoelastic scaling regimes were confirmed by the scaling framework of Tighe, which, after eliminating a correlation length, predicts G ∝ G ∝ ω 1-ν , with ν related to the variation of the magnitude of non-affine displacements, N A ∝ α |u αu α,aff | 2 ∝ ω -ν , where u α,aff is the affine displacement for node α Derivation of ∆ .-Liu recursively generated the dynamical matrix for isolated Sierpinski spring networks to derive the scaling of the density of states with the left-hand side factors 3 for the increase in degrees of freedom, and 1 2 for the reduction in stiffness. This second factor is absent in in good agreement with the measured value ∆ ≈ 0.22. Internal stresses.-Geometries that sustain states of self-stress can be rigid when networks of the same topology, but with geometries that permit fewer or no states of self-stress, are non-rigid Both the plateau modulus G 0 and the crossover frequency ω Λ smoothly approach zero as Λ → 0, suggesting internal stresses generate rigidity continuously Discussion.-It has been shown that the design of isostatic networks The author would like to thank Wouter Ellenbroek, Xiaoming Mao, Anders Aufderhorst-Roberts and Benjamin Hanson for discussions.