Quantitative phase imaging (QPI) is a label-free computational imaging technique that provides optical path length information of specimens. In modern implementations, the quantitative phase image of an object is reconstructed digitally through numerical methods running in a computer, often using iterative algorithms. Here, we demonstrate a diffractive QPI network that can synthesize the quantitative phase image of an object by converting the input phase information of a scene into intensity variations at the output plane. A diffractive QPI network is a specialized alloptical processor designed to perform a quantitative phase-to-intensity transformation through passive diffractive surfaces that are spatially engineered using deep learning and image data. Forming a compact, all-optical network that axially extends only ~200-300λ, where λ is the illumination wavelength, this framework can replace traditional QPI systems and related digital computational burden with a set of passive transmissive layers. All-optical diffractive QPI networks can potentially enable power-efficient, high frame-rate and compact phase imaging systems that might be useful for various applications, including, e.g., on-chip microscopy and sensing. Optical imaging of weakly scattering phase objects has been of significant interest for decades, resulting in numerous applications in different fields. For example, the optical examination of cells and tissue samples is frequently used in biological research and medical applications, including disease diagnosis. However, in terms of their optical properties, isolated cells and thin tissue sections (before staining) can be classified as weakly scattering, transparent objects The phase contrast imaging principle, invented by Frits Zernike, represents a breakthrough (leading to the 1953 Nobel Prize in Physics) on imaging the intrinsic optical phase delay induced by transparent, phase objects without using exogenous agents A QPI system, in general, consists of an optical imaging instrument based on conventional components such as lenses, beamsplitters, as well as a computer to run the image reconstruction algorithm that recovers the object phase function from the recorded interferometric measurements. In recent years, QPI methods have also benefited from the ongoing advances in machine learning and GPU-based computing to improve their digital reconstruction speed and spatiotemporal throughput In this work, we report the numerical design of diffractive optical networks It is important to emphasize that these QPI diffractive networks do not perform phase recovery from an intensity measurement or a hologram. In fact, the input information is the phase object itself, and the QPI network is trained to convert this phase information of the input scene into an intensity distribution at the output plane; this way, the normalized output intensity image directly reveals the quantitative phase image of the sample in radians. The diffractive QPI designs reported in this work represent proof-of-concept demonstrations of a new phase imaging concept, and we believe that such diffractive computational phase imagers can find various applications in on-chip microscopy and sensing due to their compact footprint, all-optical computation speed and low-power operation. Revealing the optical phase delay induced by an input object by converting or encoding the sample information into an optical intensity pattern at the output plane is a relatively old and well-known technique To create an all-optical QPI solution without any digital phase reconstruction algorithm, we designed diffractive networks For a proof-of-concept demonstration, here we considered the design of diffractive QPI networks with unit magnification, such that the input object features in the phase space have the same scale as the output intensity features behind the diffractive network. Since the value of the output optical intensity will depend on external physical factors such as, e.g., the power of the illumination source and the quantum efficiency of the image sensor-array, we used a background region (see Methods section) that surrounds the unit magnification output image to obtain a reference mean intensity. This mean signal intensity value at this background region is used to normalize the output intensity of the diffractive network's image to reveal the quantitative phase information of the sample in radians, i.e., I QPI (x, y) Figure The diffractive optical network shown in Fig. Although our diffractive QPI network design can successfully transform the phase information of the samples into quantitative optical intensity information, providing a competitive QPI performance without the need for any digital phase recovery algorithm, one might argue that the underlying phase-to-intensity transformation performed by the diffractive network is data-specific. To shed more light on this, we investigated the generalization capabilities of our diffractive network design by further testing its QPI performance over phase-encoded samples from two completely different image datasets, i.e., CIFAR-10 and Fashion-MNIST, that were not used in the training phase. As shown in Figs. Interestingly, the QPI signal synthesis quality turned out to be higher for CIFAR-10 images compared to the performance of the same diffractive network on the Tiny-Imagenet test samples, even though CIFAR-10 has an entirely different set of objects and spatial features (which were never used during the training phase). This could be partially attributed to the difference in the original size of the Tiny-Imagenet (64×64-pixel) and CIFAR-10 (32×32-pixel) images. Considering that the physical dimensions of the input field-of-view in our network configuration is 42.4λ×42.4λ, the size of the smallest spatial feature becomes Next, we numerically quantified the smallest resolvable linewidth and the related phase sensitivity of our diffractive QPI network design using binary phase gratings as test objects (see Fig. )) = ~0.8, which corresponds to a diffraction-limited resolvable linewidth of 0.625λ. Our numerical analysis in Fig. The input phase contrast is another crucial factor affecting the resolution of QPI achieved by our diffractive network design. To shed more light on this, we numerically tested our diffractive QPI network on binary gratings with two different linewidths, 0.67λ and 0.75λ, at varying levels of input phase contrast, as shown in Fig. We also conducted a similar analysis on the effect of the input phase contrast over the quality of QPI performed by the presented diffractive network. By setting the phase contrast parameter α test to 9 different values between 0.1 and 2.0 for all three image datasets (Tiny-Imagenet, CIFAR-10 and Fashion-MNIST), we quantified the resulting SSIM and PSNR values for the reconstructed images at the output plane of the diffractive QPI network. Figures This improved diffractive QPI performance can also be visually observed by comparing the images shown in Fig. A vital feature of the presented diffractive QPI networks is that their operation is invariant to changes in the input beam intensity or the power efficiency of the diffractive detection system; by using the mean intensity value surrounding the output image field-of-view as a normalization factor, the resulting diffractive image intensity I QPI (x, y) reports the phase distribution of the input object in radians. Moreover, the presented diffractive optical networks are composed of passive layers, and therefore perform QPI without any external power source other than the illumination light. It is true that the training stage of a diffractive QPI network takes a significant amount of time (e.g., ~40 hours) and consumes some energy for training-related computing. But this is a onetime training effort, and in the image inference stage, there is no power consumption per object (except for the illumination), and the reconstructed image reveals the quantitative phase information of the object at the speed of light propagation through a passive network, without the need for a graphics processing unit (GPU) or a computer. One should think of a diffractive network's design, training and fabrication phase (a one-time effort) similar to the design/fabrication/assembly phase of a digital processor or a GPU that we use in our computers. The output power efficiency of the presented QPI networks is mainly affected by two factors: diffraction efficiency of the resulting network and material absorption. In this study, we assumed the optical material of diffractive surfaces has a negligible loss for the wavelength of operation, similar to the properties of optical glasses, e.g., BK-7, in the visible part of the spectrum. For example, the diffractive QPI network reported in Fig. Compared to the original diffractive QPI network design that solely focuses on output image quality, the SSIM value of this new diffractive network has a negligible decrease while its diffraction efficiency at the output plane is improved by more than 2-fold. Further shifting the focus of the QPI network training towards improved power efficiency can result in a solution that can synthesize QPI signals with >11% output diffraction efficiency, also achieving an SSIM of 0.771±0.0507 (see Fig. Another crucial parameter in a diffractive network design is the number of diffractive layers within the system; Supplementary Figure In summary, the presented diffractive QPI networks convert the phase information of an input object into an intensity distribution at the output plane in a way that the normalized output intensity reveals the phase distribution of the object in radians. Being resilient to input light intensity variations and power efficiency changes in the diffractive set-up, this QPI network can replace the bulky lens-based optical instrumentation and the computationally intensive reconstruction algorithms employed in QPI systems, potentially offering high-throughput, low-latency, compact and power-efficient QPI platforms which might fuel new applications in on-chip microscopy and sensing. Fabrication and assembly of such diffractive QPI systems operating in the visible and near IR wavelengths can be achieved using two-photon polymerization-based 3D printing methods as well as optical lithography tools The optical wave propagation in air, between successive diffractive layers, was formulated based on the Rayleigh-Sommerfeld diffraction equation. According to this formulation, the free-space propagation inside a homogeneous and isotropic medium is modeled as a shift-invariant linear system with the impulse response, where r = √x 2 + y 2 + z 2 . In Eq. 1, the parameters n and λ denote the refractive index of the medium (n = 1 for air), and the wavelength of the illumination light, respectively. Accordingly, a diffractive neuron, i, located at (x i , y i , z i ) on k th layer can be considered as the source of a secondary wave, u i k (x, y, z), where the summation in Eq. 2 represents the field generated over the diffractive neuron located at (x i , y i , z i ) by the neurons on the previous, (k -1) th , layer. From Eq. 1, the function w i (x, y, z) in Eq. 2 can be written as, with r = √(x -x i ) 2 + (y -y i ) 2 + (z -z i ) 2 . The multiplicative term t(x i , y i , z i ) in Eq. 2 denotes the transmittance coefficient of the neuron, i, which, in its general form, can be written as, t(x i , y i , z i ) = a i exp(jθ i ). Depending on the diffractive layer fabrication method and the related optical materials, both a i and θ i might be a function of other physical parameters, e.g., material thickness in 3D printed diffractive layers and driving voltage levels in spatial light modulators. In earlier works on diffractive networks For all the diffractive networks that we trained, the initial value of all θ i s was set to be 0, i.e., the initial state of a diffractive network (before the training kicks in) is equal to the free-space propagation of the input light field onto the output plane. During our deep learning-based diffractive network training, we sampled the 2D space with a period of 0.53λ, which is also equal to the size of each diffractive feature ('neuron') on the diffractive surfaces. Although we described the forward optical model over continuous functions u i k (x, y, z) = w i (x, y, z)t(x i , y i , z i ) ∑ u q k-1 (x i , y i , z i ) N q=1 w i (x, y, z) = z -z i r 2 ( in the previous subsection, training of the presented diffractive networks was performed using digital computers. Hence, we denote the input and output signals using their discrete counterparts for the remaining part of this sub-section with a spatial sampling period of 0.53λ in both directions (x and y). In the physical layout of the presented diffractive optical networks, the size of the input field-of-view was set to be 42.4λ×42. is the mean background intensity value, N R denotes the number of discretized intensity samples within the reference region. According to Eq. 4, for a given input object/sample, the final diffractive QPI signal, I QPI [q, p] reports the output phase image in radians. To guide the evolution of the diffractive layers according to the QPI signal in Eq. 4, at each iteration of the deep learning-based training of the presented diffractive QPI networks, we updated the phase parameters, θ i , using the following normalized mean-squared-error where, N s is the total number of discretized samples representing the QPI signal area, i. implying that the mean intensity over this area will correspond to 1 rad. By computing the loss function in Eq. 5 based on a ground-truth vector that also includes the desired reference signal intensity, we implicitly enforce/train the diffractive QPI network to synthesize a uniformly distributed intensity over the reference signal area, although this is not a requirement for the QPI networks' operation. The multiplicative term, σ, in Eq. 5 is a normalization constant that was defined as The structural loss function, L, in Eq. 5 drives the QPI quality, and it was the only loss term used during the training of the diffractive networks shown in Fig. The training of the diffractive network designs with output diffraction efficiencies of ≥ 2.9% shown in Fig. . The coefficient γ is a multiplicative constant that determines the weight of the power efficiencyrelated term in the total loss, L′. The value of γ directly affects the diffraction efficiency of the resulting diffractive QPI network design. Specifically, for the diffractive network shown in Fig. The deep learning-based diffractive QPI network training was implemented in Python (v3.7.7) and TensorFlow (v1.15.0, Google Inc.). For the gradient-based optimization, we used the Adam optimizer with its momentum parameter β 1 set to 0.5 with 64 GB of RAM, running Windows 10 operating system (Microsoft). To avoid any aliasing in the representation of the free-space impulse response depicted in Eq. 1, the dimensions of the simulation window were taken as 1024×1024. The PSNR image metric was calculated as follows: For SSIM calculations, we used the built-in function in Tensorflow, i.e., tf.image.ssim, where the two inputs were απφ[q, p] and I QPI [q, p], representing the ground-truth image and the QPI signal synthesized by the diffractive network, respectively. The input parameter "max_val" was set to be απ in these SSIM calculations. The diffractive QPI network can resolve features as small as ~0.67λ. b, Analysis of the relationship between the input phase contrast and the resolvable feature size. The diffractive QPI network can resolve 0.67λ linewidth for a phase encoding range that is larger than 0.25π. Below this phase contrast, the resolution slowly degrades; for example, at 0-0.1π phase encoding, the background noise shadows the QPI signal of the grating with a linewidth of 0.67λ, while a larger linewidth (0.73λ) grating is still partially resolvable. 