We study the two-particle spectral functions and collective modes of weakly disordered superconductors using a disordered attractive Hubbard model on square lattice. We show that the disorder induced scattering between collective modes leads to a finite subgap spectral weight in the long wavelength limit. In general, the spectral weight is distributed between the phase and the Higgs channels, but as we move towards half-filling the Higgs contribution dominates. The inclusion of the density fluctuations lowers the frequency at which this mode occurs, and results in the phase channel gaining a larger contribution to this subgap mode. Near half-filling, the proximity of the system to the charge density wave (CDW) instability leads to strong fluctuations of the effective disorder at the commensurate wave-vector ([π, π]). We develop an analytical mode coupling approach where the pure Goldstone mode in the long wavelength limit couples to the collective mode at [π, π]. This provides insight into the location and distribution of the two-particle spectral weights between the Higgs and the phase channels. The superconductor-insulator transition in two dimensional films as a function of disorder strength is one of the most studied quantum phase transitions in nature A key observation from recent experiments 1. The disorder averaged amplitude spectral function P11(q, ω) for a system with (a) V /t = 0 corresponding to the clean case and (b) V /t = 0.1 corresponding to weak disorder. The spectral function are calculated by expanding the action around the inhomogeneous BdG saddle point. In (b), a subgap mode is clearly seen at ω/t ∼ 1 around the Γ point (q = [0, 0]). This is calcualted for a 24 × 24 lattice with U/t = 3 and n = 0.875 (Data taken from Ref. 22). two-particle excitations at finite frequencies below the continuum threshold. An important feature of the theoretical results is that the subgap weight of two-particle excitations exists even at the weakest disorder, showing that this is not a feature which can only be associated with the quantum phase transition and shows a non-perturbative (in disorder) redistribution of the spectral weight in the long wavelength limit. The details of the subgap spectral weight however crucially depends on the approximations used in the theoretical calculations: In Ref. 22 and 25, the authors only considered the fluctuations of the pairing field and obtained a subgap feature which had a narrow spectral range and was dominated by the amplitude or Higgs component. In contrast, in Ref. 23, the authors also considered the fluctuations of the density field, but focused only on the q = [0, 0] spectral function, where they obtained broad spectral weights dominated by the phase mode. In this paper, we understand the systematic trends of the subgap two-particle spectral weight in the weakly disordered s-wave superconductor using the disordered attractive Hubbard model on a square lattice as a prototype. To get analytic insights, we consider the mean-field saddle point of the translation invariant system (with no disorder) and expand the theory both in terms of static fluctuations created by the disorder and dynamic quantum fluctuations of the pairing and density fields. We thus obtain a description in terms of translation invariant collective modes being scattered by an effective disorder. Using a simple Born approximation to account for the disorder scattering, we show that we can reproduce the subgap feature seen in earlier works. We also find that the static fluctuations are peaked around the commensurate vector of Q = [π, π], a reflection of the charge density wave instability of the square lattice Hubbard model at half-filling. Although the theoretical calculations are done away from half-filling, the proximity effect causes this peak once the translation symmetry is broken by disorder. This motivates us to consider a simplified mode coupling theory, where the collective modes at q are coupled to those at q + Q. Using this mode coupling theory, we show that the twoparticle spectral weight at finite subgap frequencies at q = [0, 0] originates from the scattering of the Q = [π, π] mode by the effective disorder. Hence, at weak disorder, this weight appears around the energy of the [π, π] mode in the clean system. We find that the particle-hole symmetry at half-filling ensures that the Goldstone mode at q = [0, 0] couples only to the amplitude component of the [π, π] mode, and hence the weight shows up only in the amplitude or Higgs channel close to half-filling. As one moves away from half-filling, the phase contribution to this subgap mode increases, as seen in the numerical calculations. The inclusion of dynamic density fluctuations We note that if a disordered superconductor is close to a charge density wave transition, as in NbSe 2 The rest of the paper is organised as follows: In Section II, we provide a summary of results on the two-particle spectral function of a weakly disordered attractive Hubbard model on a square lattice, obtained from numerical calculations using BdG theory and expansions around this inhomogeneous saddle point. In Section III, we expand the theory around the translation invariant saddle point in both the disorder induced static spatial fluctuations as well as the dynamic quantum fluctuations. This leads to a model of translation invariant collective modes scattered by an effective disorder. We show that a simple Born approximation can reproduce the subgap spectral weight. In Section IV, we derive an approximate mode coupling theory by focusing on the fact that the nearby CDW instability leads to a peak in the static correlators at the corresponding commensurate wave-vector (here [π, π]). We then use this mode coupling theory to understand the systematic trends in the numerical calculations around the inhomogeneous mean-field solutions. We finally conclude by summarizing in Section V. In this section we will review the results on collective modes of disordered s-wave superconductors obtained from a theory of fermions with attractive interactions in the presence of a random disorder potential. This will give us the key phenomenology which we want to explain; at the same time it will help in setting up the basic theoretical framework that we will use in the rest of the paper. Some of these results have been previously reported in Ref. 22, 23, 24, and Ref. 25, while some of the systematics of the various trends are being reported here for the first time. We work with the attractive Hubbard model on a square lattice, with random potential disorder at zero temperature, given by the Hamiltonian (1) where c † rσ (c rσ ) is the creation (annihilation) operator for an electron with spin σ on site r, and μ is the chemical potential. Here t is the nearest neighbour hopping parameter, and U is the local attractive interaction between the electrons. v r is an independent random variable for each site that is uniformly sampled from [-V /2, V /2]; thus V characterises the scale of the disorder. The first step is to construct a mean-field theory in terms of the pairing field ∆ 0 (r) = U c † r↑ c † r↓ and the Hartree shift ξ 0 (r) = U c † rσ c rσ . This leads to the mean-field Bogoliubov H 0 (rr ) ∆ 0 (r)δ rr ∆ 0 (r)δ rr -H 0 (rr ) where H 0 (rr ) = -t rr -[μv ef f (r)]δ rr if r and r are either nearest neighbours or the same site, and 0 otherwise. Here t rr = t if r and r are nearest neighbours and 0 otherwise. The microscopic disorder potential v r is renormalized by the Hartree shift to the effective disorder potential v ef f (r) = v rξ 0 (r). We note that while v r is an independent random variable for each site, ∆ 0 (r) and v ef f (r) for different sites have finite correlations between them. The self-consistent mean field equations at 0 temperature are then given by Additionally, we fix the average density of each disorder configuration to n by solving the number equation n = 2 Ns r m:Em>0 v 2 m (r). It is well known from earlier works The collective modes in disordered superconductors arise from the spatio-temporal fluctuations of the pairing field about the inhomogeneous mean field solution. In an imaginary time (τ ) formalism, this is achieved by considering ∆(r, τ ) = (∆ 0 (r) + η(r, τ )) e iθ(r,τ ) , where η(r, τ ) is the amplitude and θ(r, τ ) is the phase fluctuation. Expanding the action to second order in these fluctuation fields, one obtains a noninteracting theory (quadratic action) of the amplitude and phase fluctuations, ) where the details of the 2 × 2 matrix inverse propagator D-1 is given in Ref. 22. The experimentally measurable amplitude spectral function is given by the analytic continuation to real frequencies, P 11 (r, r , ω) = -1 π ImD 11 (r, r , iω n → ω + i0 + ), while the corresponding phase spectral function is given by P 22 (r, r , ω) = -1 π ∆ 0 (r)∆ 0 (r )ImD 22 (r, r , iω n → ω + i0 + ). In a disordered system, the spectral functions, calculated for a particular disorder configuration, does not have translational invariance. However, translation invariance is restored on disorder averaging, so that the disorder aver- f 11 (q, q 1 , ! q ) f 21 (q, q 1 , ! q ) g 21 (q, q 1 , ! q ) g 11 (q, q 1 , ! q ) q1 q1 q1 q1 q (b) q q q FIG. aged spectral function can be Fourier transformed in spatial co-ordinates. This disorder averaged spectral functions, P 11 (q, ω) and P 22 (q, ω), have been studied in detail previously as a function of disorder at zero temperature In order to understand the systematic changes in the longwavelength spectral functions, we plot the energy distribution curves (EDCs) at q = [0, 0] for the amplitude and phase channel in Fig. Finally, in Ref. 23, the fluctuations of the Hartree (local density) field ξ(r, τ ) were considered along with those of the pairing field. Expanding up to quadratic order, one gets an action similar to Eq. 4, now with a three component field (η, θ, ξ) and a 3 × 3 matrix propagator. The density fluctuations were then integrated out to obtain the effective collective modes for the η and θ fluctuations in the system. It was found that the subgap weight is shifted to much lower energy and overlaps with the spectral weight from the Goldstone (phase) mode. The systematic changes in the EDC on adding density fluctuations are shown in Fig. To summarize, the following effects are seen in these calculations: (1) The presence of a weak disorder seems to give rise to an excitation at a finite ω below the two-particle continuum. (2) This mode is observed to be purely in the amplitude channel for n ∼ 0.875, with the phase contribution increasing both as we move away from half-filling and when we include density fluctuations. (3) The location of this mode in ω space was initially part of a flat mode, however it gets drastically uple the disorder with the fluctuating modes, and the Feynman diagrams contributing to the born approximation. entum q to the fluctuation mode, and then takes it away which results in terms proportional to h| q | 2 i, h|⇠q| 2 i and ! below the two particle continuum to be purely in the amplitude mode e contribution increasing both as we g and when we include density flucof this mode in ! space was initially ever it gets drastically pulled down s are included. While these trends tain additional insights from these an only be accessed by large scale tion we will formulate this problem modes of the translation invariant n effective disorder to get additional , the disorder is modelled by a ranelectrons at every site. The disor-der strength (the width of the probability distribution of the random potential) can be related to experimentally observable quantities like sheet resistance, and one can make detailed comparison with realistic systems. However, there is a price to pay for this exact treatment of the microscopic disorder. The eigenstates of the mean field theory can only be determined numerically and varies from one disorder configuration to another. Hence calculations of collective modes are numerically expensive and are limited to small system sizes. Further, it is hard to get any insight behind the observed phenomena. ifficulties, we wish to obtain a deation invariant collective modes are disorder. One can then obtain anandom scattering of these collective e note that within the mean field Bves rise to a local pairing 0 (r) and ial (microscopic disorder potential, renormalized by Hartree shifts) v ef f (r). We can treat these as new random variables, which determine the properties of the mean field solutions as well as the spectral properties of the collective modes. We break them up into an average ( 0 and v 0 ) and a static spatial fluctuation ( 0 (r) = 0 (r) 0 and v(r) = v ef f (r) v 0 ). Note that, by construction 0 (r) and v(r) are correlated random variables with zero mean. We first consider a translation invariant saddle point with 0 and (a) (b) 3. The vertices that couple the disorder with the fluctuating modes, and the Feynman diagrams contributing to the born approximation. The disorder first adds momentum q to the fluctuation mode, and then takes it away which results in terms proportional to h| q | 2 i, h|⇠q| 2 i and h⇠q qi. to a excitation at a finite ! below the two particle continuum (2) This mode is observed to be purely in the amplitude mode ⇢ ⇠ 0.875, with the phase contribution increasing both as we move away from half filling and when we include density fluctuations (3) The location of this mode in ! space was initially part of a flat mode, however it gets drastically pulled down when density fluctuations are included. While these trends are clear, it is hard to obtain additional insights from these calculations, since they can only be accessed by large scale numerics. In the next section we will formulate this problem in terms of the collective modes of the translation invariant system interacting with an effective disorder to get additional insight into these trends. In the fermionic theory, the disorder is modelled by a random potential felt by the electrons at every site. The disor-der strength (the width of the probability distribution of the random potential) can be related to experimentally observable quantities like sheet resistance, and one can make detailed comparison with realistic systems. However, there is a price to pay for this exact treatment of the microscopic disorder. The eigenstates of the mean field theory can only be determined numerically and varies from one disorder configuration to another. Hence calculations of collective modes are numerically expensive and are limited to small system sizes. Further, it is hard to get any insight behind the observed phenomena. To circumvent these difficulties, we wish to obtain a description where the translation invariant collective modes are scattered by an effective disorder. One can then obtain analytic insights from the random scattering of these collective bosons. To achieve this, we note that within the mean field B-dG theory, the disorder gives rise to a local pairing 0 (r) and an effective local potential (microscopic disorder potential, renormalized by Hartree shifts) v ef f (r). We can treat these as new random variables, which determine the properties of the mean field solutions as well as the spectral properties of the collective modes. We break them up into an average ( 0 and v 0 ) and a static spatial fluctuation ( 0 (r) = 0 (r) 0 and v(r) = v ef f (r) v 0 ). Note that, by construction 0 (r) and v(r) are correlated random variables with zero mean. We first consider a translation invariant saddle point with 0 and The self-energy diagrams in the leading order Born approximation. The self-energy terms are proportional to |δ∆(q)| 2 , |δv(q)| 2 and δv(q)δ∆(-q) . pulled down when density fluctuations are included. While these trends are clear, it is hard to obtain additional insights from these calculations, since they can only be accessed by large scale numerics. In the next section, we will formulate this problem in terms of the collective modes of the translation invariant system interacting with an effective disorder to get additional insight into these trends. In the fermionic theory, the disorder is modelled by a random potential felt by the electrons at every site. The disorder strength (the width of the probability distribution of the random potential) can be related to experimentally observable quantities like sheet resistance To circumvent these difficulties and obtain analytic insight into the subgap spectral weight, we obtain a description where the translation invariant collective modes are scattered by an effective disorder. To achieve this, we note that within the mean-field BdG theory, the disorder gives rise to a local pairing ∆ 0 (r) and an effective local potential (microscopic disorder potential, renormalized by Hartree shifts) v ef f (r). We can treat these as new random variables, which determine the properties of the mean-field solutions as well as the spectral properties of the collective modes. We break them up into an average (∆ 0 and v 0 ) and a static spatial fluctuation (δ∆ 0 (r) = ∆ 0 (r)-∆ 0 and δv(r) = v ef f (r)-v 0 ). Note that, by construction δ∆ 0 (r) and δv(r) are correlated random variables with zero mean. We first consider a translation invariant saddle point with ∆ 0 and v 0 , where the fermion Green's function in the Nambu basis in momentum space is given by where ω n = (2n + 1)πT with integer n is the fermionic Matsubara frequency at temperature T . Here is the bare band dispersion, and the BCS coherence factors are given by u Our model of translation invariant bosons coupled to effective disorder is obtained by considering ∆(r, τ ) = ∆ 0 + δ∆(r) + λ(r, τ ) and v(r, τ ) = v 0 + δv(r) + ξ(r, τ ), and ex-panding the action both in the dynamic quantum fluctuations (λ(r, τ ), ξ(r, τ )) and the disorder induced static fluctuations δ∆(r) and δv(r). This leads to the fluctuation action where ω m = 2mπT , with integer m, is the bosonic Matsubara frequency, and the three-component field Λ † (q, iω m ) = [λ * (q, iω m ), λ(-q, -iω m ), ξ(q, iω m )]. We note that when we will analyse the theory without density fluctuations, we will set ξ = 0 and work with a two-component field. Here, M -1 is the inverse propagator for the translation invariant collective modes, where the trace is over Nambu indices, α i = +, -, 3 for i = 1, 2, 3 respectively and β j = -, +, 3 for j = 1, 2, 3 resepctively. Here σ i=1,2,3 denote the Pauli matrices and σ ± = σ 1 ± iσ 2 . The detailed evaluation of M -1 is given in Appendix A (also see Ref. 20, 21, and 23 for earlier derivations of the propagator). The low energy poles of M (q, ω + i0 + ) determine the collective mode frequencies of the translation invariant system, which disperse linearly at low momenta. The second term in the action scatters a fluctuation at momentum q to a fluctuation at q + q 1 (with the same frequency), and is linearly dependent on the (Fourier transformed) static fluctuations δ∆ q1 and δv q1 . The scattering matrix F can be written as where i, j run between 1and 3. The coupling functions are given by Tr N G(k Tr N G(k Other than the matrix structure, these terms have the general interpretation of an effective disorder scattering the collective modes at low energy. The explicit evaluation of the coupling functions f αβ and g αβ is shown in Appendix A. For real frequencies below the two-particle continuum, these coupling functions are real. Since we are interested in the scattering of the collective modes due to disorder, the coupling of interest to us is obtained by considering the analytic continuation iω m → ω q + i0 + , where ω q is the collective mode frequency at q. These couplings are the amplitude for scattering a collective mode at q by a momentum q 1 . In Fig. After constructing the effective action for the collective bosons and their scattering due to disorder, we need an approximate way of incorporating the effects of these scatterings into the spectral function of the fluctuations. This is done by dressing the inverse propagator M -1 by the self-energies due to disorder scattering M -1 → M -1 -Σ, and constructing the imaginary part of the propagator obtained from this dressed Green's function for the fluctuations. For this, we use the simplest Born approximation scheme (the self-energy diagrams are shown in Fig. We note that there is a self-energy term linear in F , which vanishes on averaging over disorder, leaving this as the leading order contribution. The Born approximation is valid at weak disorder and will fail to capture non-perturbative effects due to disorder scattering. To see the effectiveness of our approximations in capturing the phenomena described in the previous section, we consider the static correlators e iq(r-r ) δv(r)δv(r ) δv(q)δ∆(-q) = 1 N s r,r e iq(r-r ) δv(r)δ∆(r ) where N s is the number of sites in the system and the correlators are calculated in the inhomogeneous BdG solutions of the disordered system. Here, the averaging is over disorder realizations. These correlators then give the disorder averaged self-energy, which are used to construct the spectral functions of the fluctuations. We first consider a superconductor at a density n = 0.875 at a weak disorder V /t = 0.1 on a 24 × 24 lattice. We suppress the quantum density fluctuations and work in the two-component formalism. The spectral function for the λ fluctuations in this case are plotted in Fig. In the previous section, we have converted the problem of attractive fermions in the presence of a disorder potential to that of bosonic collective fluctuations of the superconducting order parameter scattered by an effective disorder in pairing amplitudes and local potentials. We have also seen that a Born approximation calculation using the variance and covariance of the effective disorder fields obtained from BdG solutions reproduce the basic phenomena of a narrow subgap weight below the continuum threshold at q = [0, 0]. In order to make further analytic progress, we need an analytic handle on the static fluctuation correlators, |δv(q)| 2 , |δ∆(q)| 2 and δv(q)δ∆(-q) . We consider a system with U/t = 3 and n = 0.875 and plot the correlators |δv(q)| 2 , |δ∆(q)| 2 and δv(q)δ∆(-q) , calculated from the spatially inhomogeneous mean-field solutions. Fig. show the cross-correlator between the pairing amplitude and the effective potential. Two interesting trends can be seen in these plots: (a) |δv(q)| 2 |δ∆(q)| 2 , δv(q)δ∆(-q) , so that it is reasonable to only consider the effects of effective static potential fluctuations and neglect the other correlators. We have specifically checked that keeping the other correlators finite does not change the qualitative understanding we get from this simplified assumption. (b) We immediately notice that the correlations are peaked at Q = [π, π] for weak disorder. As we increase the disorder strength, the peak at Q broadens (See Fig. We can tune the system away from the CDW instability by changing the average density away from half-filling. In Fig. where Γ(q, iω m ) = [η(q, iω m ), θ(q, iω m ), ξ(q, iω m ) is a three-component field containing the amplitude (η), the phase (θ) and the Hartree potential (ξ) fluctuations. In some cases, we will suppress the density fluctuations and work with a two-component Γ field. Here D-1 (q, iω m ) is the inverse propagator of the quantum fluctuations in the translation invariant system in the amplitude-phase-potential co-ordinates, where κ is the generalized compressibility Θ δ is the kinetic energy, and χ is the current-current correlator in the system given by The details of the D -1 matrix is derived in Appendix B. The off-diagonal scattering matrix F , which gives the amplitude to scatter between q and q + Q modes, are given by with where Tr N is the trace over Nambu indices, and σ 0 is the identity matrix. One can now invert the full 6 × 6 inverse propagator matrix to obtain the Green's functions, and then construct the spectral functions of the collective bosons. Note that if we are interested in the spectral function of the fluctuations at a fixed q (as opposed to the matrix element to scatter from q to q + Q), the answers only involve |δv(Q)| 2 . We can then replace |δv(Q)| 2 by its disorder average |δv(Q)| 2 , and consider the problem as a function of this single parameter. This simplified model, where the effects of disorder has been reduced to a single parameter, contains all the physics behind the systematic changes of the two -particle spectral functions at weak disorder. We first apply our mode coupling model to investigate the collective modes solely in presence of dynamic pairing fluctuations, i.e. we set the density fields, ξ(r.τ ) = 0. In Fig. scattering due to the disorder thus creates the narrow subgap weight at q = [0, 0]. Note that as a consequence a mirror image of the mode near [0, 0] shows up around [π, π], which is seen as a pileup in the low energy spectral weight around the M point. Fig. We now focus on the amplitude and phase components of The subgap mode is clearly seen at (f) n = 0.875 while it is strongly supressed at (h) n = 0.98. Moreover the phase channel is supressed close to half-filling. The EDC at q = [0, 0] for the amplitude (blue) and phase (red) spectral functions for the cases corresponding to (a)-(d) are plotted in (i)-(l) respectively. All the plots have a low energy tail from the pure phase Goldstone mode. In the disordered cases (j) and (l), the subgap mode is clearly seen. At n = 0.98 close to half-filling the subgap weight is dominated by the amplitude component while at n = 0.875 away from half-filling the phase component dominates. The calculations are done on a 100 × 100 lattice. the spectral weight at q = [0, 0] at finite frequency. In the numerical results, we have seen that as we move away from half-filling the phase component of the spectral weight increases at the expense of the amplitude. To understand this trend, we consider the scattering matrix F (Q, iω m ) at the particle-hole symmetric half-filling limit, where the chemical potential μv 0 = 0. Using the fact that k+Q =k , and Here F 21 (Q, iω m ) = -F 12 (Q, iω m ). We note that the q = [0, 0] mode is always a pure phase mode. Since particlehole symmetry prohibits a coupling between the phase component at q = [0, 0] with the phase component at q = [π, π] (F 22 = 0) at half-filling, the Goldstone mode primarily couples to the amplitude component of the [π, π] mode near halffilling. Hence, in the weak disorder limit, when the offdiagonal coupling between the modes are much smaller that ω Q , the finite frequency weight is mostly in the amplitude channel. To see this, we plot the two-particle spectral function for a system with n = 0.98 close to half-filling at a weak In this case we can clearly see that at q = [0, 0], the finite frequency subgap spectral weight is seen mostly in the amplitude channel, while the phase spectral weight is concentrated near ω = 0. This is clearly illustrated in the energy distribution cuts (at q = [0, 0] in Fig. We have so far considered the quantum fluctuations in the superconducting order parameter to determine the collective mode spectrum, while the Hartree field was accounted for only through its static fluctuations; i.e. the standard deviation of its spatial variations in the inhomogeneous mean-field solutions. We now consider the effects of dynamic density fluctuations on the two-particle spectral weight by consider-ing ξ(r) → ξ 0 + δv(r) + ξ(r, τ ) where ξ represent the temporally and spatially varying particle-hole fluctuations. We note that this is a key difference between approximations made in Ref. 22 In this case, Γ is a three-component vector, and the collective modes can be found from the zeroes of the determinant of the 3 × 3 matrix that forms the inverse propagator for the fluctuations. In Fig. We now consider the effects of density fluctuations on the spectral functions in the disordered system through the modecoupling theory. In Fig. In this paper we have shown that the collective modes and two-particle spectral weight of a weakly disordered superconductor can be obtained from a model where the translation invariant collective modes are scattered by an effective disorder. Starting with a microscopic theory of attractive fermions in presence of random potential disorder, we construct this effective theory by expanding the action around a translation invariant saddle point in both the static spatial fluctuations induced by disorder and the dynamic quantum fluctuations. We can thus construct the parameters of this effective model starting from a fermionic theory. We show that a simple Born approximation for the disorder scattering of the collective modes reproduces the long wavelength (q = [0, 0]) subgap spectral weight at finite frequencies, which have been seen earlier in numerical calculations around the inhomogeneous BdG mean field solution. In the attractive Hubbard model on a square lattice, the system undergoes a CDW instability with Q = [π, π] at halffilling. In presence of disorder, there are strong static fluctuations of density and pairing fields at this commensurate wavevector, even when the system is away from half-filling. Such strong fluctuations will be a generic feature of systems near a CDW instability. The effective disorder seen by the collective modes thus shows a strong peak at this wave-vector. This leads to a simple mode coupling theory (coupled by random static fluctuations), which provides analytic insight into the subgap weight in the two-particle spectral functions at q = [0, 0] and captures the trends seen in the numerical calculations. The subgap weight is formed by disorder scattering of the [π, π] mode, and appears around the energy of this collective mode. The particle-hole symmetry at half-filling ensures that this mode consists primarily of amplitude fluctuations near half-filling. As we move away in density, the phase contribution to this mode increases. Including dynamic density fluctuations lowers the frequency of the [π, π] mode substantially, and hence the spectral separation between the tail of the Goldstone weight and this mode is lost. The lower frequency also implies a larger mixing of the q = [0, 0] Goldstone mode (which is a pure phase mode), and hence phase contribution to the subgap weight increases substantially in this case. We have thus obtained a generic framework to obtain two-!/t (a) Where kμ + v 0 = ζ k . The action is given by We can expand the action upto second order in fluctuationg fields and first order in V as in Appendix A to get the following. The term linear in K contains terms linear in the fluctuations which goes to 0 because of the mean field equation, while the quadratic term gives us the gaussian couplings. These couplings are given by where Γ(q, iω m ) = [η(q, iω m ), θ(q, iω m ), ξ(q, iω m ) is a three component field containing the amplitude (η), the phase (θ) and the Hartree potential (ξ) fluctuations. The components of D -1 are given by Tr N G(k + q, iω n + iω m )σ 3 G(k, iω n )σ 3 = -D -1 32 (q, iω m ) = -i 4 (iω m ) k (uv + vu ) 2 I(k, q, iω m ) where κ is the generalized compressibility and Θ δ is the current-current correlator in the system given by κ(q, iω m ) = 1 8 k,iωn Tr N G(k + q, iω n + iω m )σ 3 G(k, iω n )σ 3 = 1 8 k (uv + vu ) 2 I(k, q, iω m ) Here, u, v, E ≡ u k , v k , E k and u , v , E ≡ u k+q , v k+q , E k+q respectively. Next, we investigate only the disorder couplings. We will define Ṽ = G(k + q + q 1 , iω m + iω n )V (k + q + q 1 , k + q). Next, we analyse the terms of the action that correspond to the scattering of η, θ, ξ fields by the disorder potential V . There are two terms which goes as ∼ θθδv. The term coming from Tr GΓ 2 GV is given by k,q1,q,ωn,ωm Tr N G(k, iω n )Γ 2 (k, k + q 1 )G(k + q 1 )V (k + q 1 , k) (B8) =q,q1,iωm θ q θ -q-q1 δv q1 k,iωn The term coming from Tr GΓ 1 GΓ 1 GV is given by k,q1,q,iωn,iωm Tr N G(k + q, iω m + iω n )Γ 1 (k + q, k, iω m )G(k, iω n )Γ 1 (k, k + q + q 1 , -iω m ) Ṽ (B9) = -q1,q,iωm -1 4 θ q θ -q-q1 δv q1 Where G ≡ G(k, iω n ), G ≡ G(k + q, iω n + iω m ), G ≡ G(k + q + q 1 , iω m + iω n ) and The term coming from Tr GΓ 1 GKGV is given by k,q1,q,iωn,iωm The term coming from Tr GKGΓ 1 GV is given by k,q1,q,iωm,iωn Tr N G(k + q, iω m + iω n )K(k + q, k, iω m )G(k, iω n )Γ 1 (k, k + q + q 1 , -iω m ) Ṽ (B11) = -q1,q,iωm -i 2 η q θ -q-q1 δv q1 k,iωn The term coming from Tr GKGKGV is given by k,q1,q,iq Tr N G(k + q, iω m + iω n )K(k + q, k, iω m )G(k, iω n )K(k, k + q + q 1 , -iω m ) Ṽ (B12) = -q1,q,iωm η q η -q-q1 δv q1 k,iωn Tr N G σ 1 Gσ 1 G σ 3 The terms coming from Tr GΓ 1 GΓ 3 GV is given by k,q1,q,iωm,iωn Tr N G(k + q, iω m + iω n )Γ 1 (k + q, k, iω m )G(k, iω n )Γ 3 (k, k + q + q 1 , -iω m ) Ṽ (B13) = -q1,q,iωm -i 2 θ q ξ -q-q1 δv q1 k,iωn The term coming from Tr GΓ 3 GΓ 1 GV is given by k,q1,q,iωm,iωn Tr N G(k + q, iω m + iω n )Γ 3 (k + q, k, iω m )G(k, iω n )Γ 1 (k, k + q + q 1 , -iω m ) Ṽ (B14) = -q1,q,iωm -i 2 ξ q θ -q-q1 δv q1 k,iωn The term coming from Tr GΓ 3 GKGV is given by k,q1,q,iωm,iωn Tr N G(k + q, iω m + iω n )Γ 3 (k + q, k, iω m )G(k, iω n )K(k, k + q + q 1 , -iω m ) Ṽ (B15) = -q1,q,iωm ξ q η -q-q1 δv q1 k,iωn The term coming from Tr GKGΓ 3 GV is given by k,q1,q,iωm,iωn Tr N G(k + q, iω m + iω n )K(k + q, k, iω m )G(k, iω n )Γ 3 (k, k + q + q 1 , -iω m ) Ṽ (B16) = -q1,q,iωm η q ξ -q-q1 δv q1 k,iωn The term coming from Tr GΓ 3 GΓ 3 GV is given by k,q1,q,iωm,iωn Tr N G(k + q, iω m + iω n )Γ 3 (k + q, k, iω m )G(k, iω n )Γ 3 (k, k + q + q 1 , -iω m ) Ṽ (B17) = -q1,q,iωm ξ q ξ -q-q1 δv q1 k,iωn Tr N G σ 3 Gσ 3 G σ 3 Considering only the case of δv q1 = δv(Q)δ q1,Q , the disorder coupling can be written as S f l = 1 2 q,ωm [Γ(q, iω m ), Γ(q -Q, iω m )] D-1 (q, iω m ) δv(Q) F (q, iω m ) δv(Q) * F (q + Q, iω m ) D-1 (q + Q, iω m ) Γ(-q, -iω m ) Γ(-q + Q, -iω m ) (B18) where Γ(q, iω m ) = [η(q, iω m ), θ(q, iω m ), ξ(q, iω m )] is a three component field containing the amplitude (η), the phase (θ) and the Hartree potential (ξ) fluctuations. F (q, iω m ) is a 3 × 3 matrix that couples the modes at q with the mode at -q + Q, and is first order in M . We can write the off diagonal coupling term as δv(Q) Where we've defined Where σ a are the Pauli matrices for a = 1, 2, 3 and σ 0 is the 2 × 2 identity matrix. Note that terms that contain linear factors of the form ζ k1ζ k2 must be 0, because they induce a finite current in our system. To evaluate the Matsubara sum of product of 3 Green's functions, we use Eq A19.