We present an experimental set-up developed to perform optical spectroscopy experiments (Raman scattering and photoluminescence measurements) with a micrometer spatial resolution, in an extreme environment of low temperature, high magnetic field and high pressure. This unique experimental setup, to the best of our knowledge, allows us to explore deeply the phase diagram of condensed matter systems by tuning independently these three thermodynamic parameters, while monitoring the low-energy excitations (electronic, phononic or magnetic excitations), to spatially map the Raman scattering response or to investigate objects with low dimensions. We apply this technique to bulk FePS 3 , a layered antiferromagnet with a Néel temperature of T ≈ 120 K. Extreme conditions of low temperatures, high magnetic field, high pressure or high doping, in condensed matter physics are sought-after as they allow us to drive electronic systems into exotic electronic ground states that cannot exist/emerge in other conditions. Relevant examples of such ground states include the appearance of superconductivity in metals at cryogenic temperatures or in ultra-doped two dimensional semiconductors 1 , magnetic orders that build up in magnetic materials below a critical temperature and once established, require high external magnetic fields to be altered 2 , pressure induced superconductivity such as, for instance, in Fe-based compounds like FePSe In the last fifteen years, microscopic techniques have been implemented in low-temperature and highmagnetic-field environments produced by resistive solenoids, mainly thanks to the development of commercial piezo inertial motors 6 compatible with cryogenic temperature and high magnetic fields, and allowing for sub-micrometer displacements In this manuscript, we present an experimental setup for optical measurements with a micrometer spatial resolution in an extreme environment of low temperature (He4 cryostat), high magnetic fields (compatible with 50mm bore resistive magnets at LNCMI-Grenoble producing fields up to B = 31 T) and high pressure with the use of a DAC. This system allows for spatial mapping of the optical response in such conditions, or to investigate the optical response at a specific location (nanostructures, patterned surface, etc ...) while tuning the extreme conditions. Our experimental setup is presented in Fig. A circular or linear polarization can be imposed before the last reflection on the beam splitter. The collimated excitation beam is then focused on the pressure cell with a 12 mm working distance objective of numerical aperture NA=0.35. The spot size offers a micrometer spatial resolution. A schematic of this part of the probe is presented in Fig. The gasket has been indented and compressed down to a thickness of 85 μm and a hole of 250 μm was drilled in its center. The test sample, a triangular flake of bulk FePS 3 , a layered antiferromagnet, was placed in the hole together with two ruby balls used to measure the pres-sure Finally, despite the fact that our experimental setup is not confocal, still, the optical response has a depth selectivity which allows us to identify, from the response, if we are focusing on the pressure chamber or not. This can be seen in Fig. The low-temperature Raman scattering response of FePS 3 includes a doubly degenerate antiferromagnetic magnon excitation close to 122 cm -1 identified by both its peculiar temperature dependence When applying a magnetic field transverse to the FePS 3 layers, the two-fold degeneracy of the magnon excitation is lifted, the energy of one branch increases with the magnetic field while the energy of the other branch decreases citation up to highest value of the magnetic field. This result illustrates the possibility to probe magnetic and phonon excitations in the very specific environment of low temperature, high pressure and high magnetic fields. To conclude, we have presented an experimental set-up for spatially resolved optical investigations (Raman scattering, photoluminescence and reflectance) of condensed matter systems in an extreme environment of low temperature, high magnetic fields provided by the resistive magnets of LNCMI-Grenoble (France), and of high pressure produced in a diamond anvil cell. This set up allows for the spatial mapping of the optical response of the sample with a sub-micrometer resolution at B = 0 or with an applied magnetic field, or to investigate a well-defined location or systems with reduced dimensions such as van der Waals heterostructures. This work unlocks for condensed matter physics the novel and exciting possibility of inducing exotic electronic ground states at low temperature and high pressure, and to trace the evolution of their elementary excitations as a function of the magnetic field produced by a superconducting or a resisitive magnet, by optical means. Additional functionalities such as measurements of reflectance or photoluminescence with a time resolution are in the process of being implemented. This work has been partially supported by the EC Graphene Flagship project and by the ANR projects ANR-17-CE24-0030 and ANR-19-CE09-0026. M-A. M. acknowledges the support from the ERC (H2020) (Grant agreement No. 865826). We acknowledge the support of the LNCMI-EMFL, CNRS, Univ. Grenoble Alpes, INSA-T, UPS, Grenoble, France. The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.