The optical properties of thin films of intermetallic Au3Hf were experimentally investigated for the first time, which display clear plasmonic properties in the optical and near infrared region with negative permittivity. In contrast to similar alloys, such as films of Au3Zr, the films express more negative e¢ values and lower e¢¢ values across most of the wavelengths (370-1570 nm) investigated. The Au3Hf films were fabricated by DC magnetron sputtering at a range of deposition temperatures, from room temperature to 415 o C, and annealed at different vacuum levels. The films mostly formed as a combination of Au3Hf, Au2Hf and Au4Hf phases when deposited below 400 o C, and exclusively Au3Hf phase at above 400 o C, indicating key conditions for isolating this phase. The films were stable when annealed at 10 -8 Torr, but when annealed again at 10 -6 Torr the films oxidised and changed into a mix of Au-Hf phases, suggesting resistance to oxidization may be an issue for un-encapsulated applications at elevated temperatures. I. With the ability to confine optical energy below the diffraction limit In an earlier investigation Investigation into the Au-Hf system began with initial structural identification of some of the phases in the system by K. Schubert in 1960 However, to date, no experimental data has been presented on the optical properties of Au-Hf system. Here we present for the first time the optical properties of Au3Hf, demonstrating its plasmonic properties and thermal stability when annealed at elevated temperatures. Thin films of Au3Hf close to 100 nm thick were co-sputtered 3:1 at an argon pressure of 0.8 mTorr using DC magnetrons (Kurt J. Lesker CMS-A), from elemental gold and hafnium targets of purity better than 99.99% and 99.9% respectively, in a cryo-pumped UHV process chamber with base pressure below 10 Au3Hf manifests as an orthorhombic structure, belonging to the Cu3Ti prototype Å The optical properties of the structures were determined by the use of a J. A. Woollam Co. Inc, M-2000VI spectroscopic ellipsometer operating within a spectral range from 370 nm to 1690 nm. To establish the thermal stability the films were annealed for a second time in a vacuum oven purged with argon gas. The temperature was raised to 500 o C, at 3 o C /min, and dwelled at this peak for 1 hour, with a chamber pressure of 1.5×10 -6 Torr. The thickness of the films was between 90 and 95 nm as measured by XRR. Figure (211) and presence of Au3Hf (210), and for the films made between 132 o C and 350 o C Au3Hf (210) peak decreases and Au2Hf (110) peak increases with temperature. The film deposited at RT is dominated by an asymmetric peak aligning with Au3Hf (002) and Au4Hf (020). The film fabricated at 415 o C is exclusively dominated by Au3Hf (211) orientation. The optical properties of the films were characterised by spectroscopic ellipsometry and the results are displayed in Fig. The RT film is set apart from the other films. It has a smaller real part permittivity in the visible range and a larger real part permittivity in the near infrared range beyond 1000 nm, compared to the films fabricated at higher temperatures. The imaginary permittivity of the RT film exhibits a similar trend but is generally smaller than those of high temperature films. The notable deviation in the optical properties of RT film could be attributed to the Pnma crystal structure of the dominant Au4Hf. As seen in Fig. In Fig. Where ε # is the permittivity at ultra-high frequency, wp is the plasma frequency associated with the Drude component, ω ! ! is the plasma frequency associated with the Lorentz component, w is the frequency of oscillation, γ & is the damping factor, and ω % ! is the eigenfrequency. We used the Ref-fit software Table Table In Fig. This reduction in both e components is thought to be from a reduction in the damping within the film as a result of the anneal. To further test the stability of the films, we annealed the films again in an oven of a lower vacuum level of 1.5×10 -6 Torr at 500 o C for 1 hour, after the films had been annealed in-situ within the process chamber when fabricated. The XRD spectra of the films are shown in Fig. the average Au3Hf displays relatively high ε "" compared to the other materials between 370 -970 nm, but lower than the metal-nitrides in the near infrared region beyond 1170 nm. While not exhibiting the metallicity of the nitrides in the infrared, the lower losses might make it an attractive candidate in the toolbox of alternate plasmonic materials. Fig. Table 