The application of color centers in wide-bandgap semiconductors to nanoscale sensing and quantum information processing largely rests on our knowledge of the surrounding crystalline lattice, often obscured by the countless classes of point defects the material can host. Here we monitor the fluorescence from a negatively charged nitrogen-vacancy (NV -) center in diamond as we illuminate its vicinity. Cyclic charge state conversion of neighboring point defects sensitive to the excitation beam leads to a position-dependent stream of photo-generated carriers whose capture by the probe NV -leads to a fluorescence change. This "charge-tophoton" conversion scheme allows us to image other individual point defects surrounding the probe NV, including non-fluorescent "single-charge emitters" that would otherwise remain unnoticed. Given the ubiquity of color center photo-chromism, this strategy may likely find extensions to material systems other than diamond. As applications of color centers to precision sensing and quantum information processing continue to grow (1), the charge state of a point defect -ultimately defining its spin and optical properties -has emerged as a valuable experimental handle. A nice illustration is the case of the nitrogen vacancy (NV) center in diamond, where the interplay between spin, photon emission, and charge state has been exploited to demonstrate optical ionization conditional on its starting spin state (2). Since the charge state is more resilient to optical illumination than the spin, this "spin-to-charge conversion" (SCC) strategy has, in turn, been used to boost spin detection sensitivity beyond that possible via standard optical readout Continuous green illumination of an NV leads to cyclic ionization and recharging, thus allowing us to think of the point defect as a local "charge pump" injecting free carriers into the conduction and valence bands as it consecutively changes its charge state from negative to neutral and vice versa Carrier recapture far from the injection site is typically marked by a drastic, long-lived change in the spin and photon emission properties of the trapping defect, meaning that, even in the absence of collecting electrodes, defectassisted carrier generation and capture can serve as a practical tool, this time to shed light on the microscopic composition of the host crystal. Indeed, experiments articulating local laser excitation of NVs followed by nonlocal fluorescence imaging reveal the formation of welldefined charge state patterns whose response as a function of the excitation laser duration, intensity, and wavelength reveals valuable information on the dynamics of carrier transport and capture Here we shift the attention back from the carrier capturing defect to the carrier source, which we indirectly image by monitoring the charge state of a probe NV center as we vary the point of laser excitation. Starting with a pair of NVs a few microns apart, we first show single-charge emitters can be revealed individually, a result we attain by working with suitably engineered "islands" formed by few (or single) NVs. We subsequently extend this approach to image more complex color center sets comprising both nitrogen-and silicon-vacancy (SiV) centers, and show that, unlike the former, the latter do not serve as efficient charge sources under optical excitation in the visible. In the process, we uncover the presence of yet-unseen charge emitting sites, which we tentatively associate with nonfluorescent vacancy-based complexes. The sample we study in the present experiments has been described in detail before The experiments in Fig. Since red illumination excites NV -but not NV 0 (whose zero-phonon line amounts to 575 nm), the dynamics at play markedly changes if we use a 632 nm laser during the park (Fig. When combined, the experiments in Fig. not depending on the excitation wavelength. This correspondence can thus be recast as a "charge-to-photon conversion" (CPC) scheme, which, in principle, can be exploited to expose photo-activated "charge emitters". To demonstrate the idea, we return to the pair of NVs highlighted in Fig. Fig. To benchmark our approach in yet more general scenarios, we carried out experiments in a different region of the same diamond crystal, this time in areas implanted with Interestingly, 520 nm confocal microscopy also reveals a broader strip of NV centers spreading to the sides of the Si implanted area (Fig. Given the large fluence we chose for Si implantation (5×10 13 ions/cm 2 , orders of magnitude greater than for nitrogen, see above), it is hard to imagine NVs are the only byproduct. Fig. These observations are revealing in several ways: Silicon-vacancy centers are known to exist in multiple charge states (26-29) -ranging from SiV 2-to SiV + -but since their photochromism is poorly understood it is not a priori clear whether their charge state cycles under red excitation (particularly because red light can excite both SiV -and SiV 0 ). On the other hand, the mismatch between the CPC and confocal images -both for SiVs and NVs -hints at a distinct type of point defect, cycling its charge under red excitation without generating fluorescence. We are not aware of prior experiments able to selectively reveal similar fluorescence-free, light-driven charge emitters with diffraction limited resolution. The results in Fig. Without attempting an in-depth examination of the type of emitter at play -beyond the scope of this article -CPC detection can provide some initial clues: This is shown in Fig. Although the information presently at hand is insufficient to ascertain the microscopic nature of these dark emitters, the observation of collateral, Siimplantation-induced NVs suggests the concomitant formation of vacancy-related complexes, some of which we can already examine in light of the above constraints. Concrete illustrations are the V (31) and N 2 V (32-34) centers, the latter arguably stemming from the binding of a vacancy with a pair of adjacent substitutional nitrogens (the symbol V denotes a diamond vacancy). Both defect types are known to exhibit photochromism In summary, using an NV center as a charge probe we demonstrated the ability to image individual or small groups of NVs microns away via changes in the probe fluorescence stemming from the capture of photogenerated holes. Applying this approach to areas of the diamond crystal previously implanted with Si ions, we found that SiV centers do not undergo photochromism under red excitation. These same observations, however, revealed the presence of previously unseen pockets of nonfluorescent point defects presumably undergoing charge state cycles of ionization and recombination under red illumination (but not green). The physical nature of these charge emitters is presently unclear though the use of CPC detection already imposes some constraints on future models. In this vein, we see CPC as a technique akin to photo-luminescence excitation spectroscopy (PLE), both reporting on the integrated number of quantum particlescharge carriers or photons -produced by a source under illumination of a given color. Correspondingly, extending the above results to systematically monitor the system response as a function of the excitation wavelength would amount to spectrally fingerprinting the carrier emitter. The latter, in turn, could be exploited to separate different classes of point defects very much as in PLE. Given the ubiquity of photochromism and carrier capture, it is reasonable to assume the present approach will also find use in the investigation of other semiconductor platforms of interest. An immediate example is the case of silicon carbide, known to host color centers whose charge properties are similar to those found in diamond We carry out all experiments using a multi-color confocal microscope with an oil-immersion objective (NA=1.3) adapted to focus all incoming beams and collect the sample photo-luminescence. Green (520 nm), red (632 nm), and orange (594 nm) lasers are coupled into a singlemode fiber in order to ensure a similar beam intensity profile and best possible overlap of the excitation volumes. A combination of long-pass, short-pass, and band-pass optical filters is used when separating the photo-luminescence from SiV -and NV -. We readout the NV charge state by scanning an area around the probe NV with a low-power (7 μW) 594nm orange excitation beam, and then integrate the photo-luminescence from the pixels corresponding to the position of the probe NV. By slightly increasing the integrated area of the scan, we can account for potential instabilities in the sample position, which otherwise would have compromised the contrast in the single-point-illumination readout. At high red laser power and/or short distances between the target area and the probe NV, it is possible to bleach the probe NV -photo-luminescence due to ionization caused by the red beam tail and by scattered red light. This hinders the bleaching caused by hole capture and is therefore unwanted in the CPC protocol. We circumvent this effect by recording reference bleaching curves where the target is at the same distance from the probe NV but in a section of the crystal with no charge emitters. CPC-compatible conditions are those where no bleaching is observed (the case in all our experiments). G. Wolfowicz, F.J. Heremans, C.P. Anderson, S. Kanai, H. Seo, A. Gali, G. Galli, D.D. Awschalom, "Quantum guidelines for solid-state spin defects", Nat. Rev. Mater. (2021). B.J. Shields, Q.P. Unterreithmeier, N.P. de Leon, H. Park, M.D. Lukin, "Efficient Readout of a Single Spin State in Diamond via Spin-to-Charge Conversion", Phys. Rev. Lett. 114,