We consider the problem of soliton generation in PT-symmetric optical fiber networks, where soliton dynamics is governed by nonlocal nonlinear Schrodinger equation on metric graphs. Exact formulae for the number of generated solitons are derived for the cases, when the problem is integrable. Numerical solutions are obtained for the case, when integrability is broken. The problem of soliton generation in optical fibers is of fundamental and practical importance for modern optoelectronics and information technologies. It were Hasegawa and Tappert A nonlocal nonlinear Schrodinger equation providing PT-symmetry was proposed first by Ablowitz and Muslimani in Introducing the PT-symmetric self-induced potential, V = -2q(x, t)q * (-x, t), one can write Eq.( Due to the PT-symmetry of potential V (x, t), given by the relation V (x, t) = V * (-x, t), Eq.( (3) An important task of soliton generation problem is finding the number of solitons generated for a given initial pulse profile. From the mathematical viewpoint, such a task represents initial value (Cauchy) problem for a given initial pulse profile. An effective method for solving such task was proposed in where q(x, 0) is the initial condition (initial pulse profile) for NNLS equation. Let us consider the special family of the initial potentials where Q(x, 0) is the real function and δ (0 ≤ δ ≤ 2π) is arbitrary constant. One can show that the transformations lead to the following eigenvalue problem ∂x = ikV (2) + iQ(-x, 0)V (1) . Following the Ref. If the initial condition is symmetric to the point x = 0: Q(x, 0) = Q(-x, 0) then the formal solution of Eq.( where = 0, and we have where From Eqs. Noting that for the initial pulses given by Eq. ( we have from Eqs.( Here we consider number of generated solitons for the rectangular initial pulse profile: Using the above approach for this profile leads to This equation provides relation between the initial pulse profile and number of generated solitons, described by the PT-symmetric nonlocal nonlinear Schrodinger equation The above approach can be applied for soliton generation in branched waveguides, by modelling these lattes in terms of so-called metric graphs, which are the systems of wires connected to each other at the nodes (vertices) according to some rule, called topology of a graph. Such process is described in terms of the nonlocal nonlinear Schrodinger equation on graphs studied recently in where q ±j (x, t) at x ∈ b ±j and j = 1, 2, 3. Eq.( The problem given by Eqs.( Here we briefly recall these results, which will be utilized for solving of soliton generation problem. Below, using FIG. Then solution of NNLS equation ( For the soliton solution given by Eq. ( φ, φ, η are arbitrary complex constants. Here we will provide brief derivation of the relation between the number of generated solitons and the initial pulse profile in a branched optical waveguide, which is modeled in terms of the star graph presented in Fig. where q ±j (x, 0) are the initial conditions (initial pulse profiles) for Eq.( where Q ±j (x, 0) are the real functions and δ ±j (0 ≤ δ ±j ≤ 2π) are arbitrary constants, one can show that the transformations lead to the following eigenvalue problem From a physical viewpoint, the generation of the single quiescent soliton will occur with a smaller energy than the soliton pair. Therefore, following the Ref. If one chooses V -j (x, 0) → 0 for x → -∞ and V j (x, 0) → 0 for x → +0, then C (2) ±j = 0, and we have Noting that for the initial pulses given by Eq.( (24) From Eqs. ( Now consider the star graph with rectangle initial pulse (see, , where b > 0. The number of generated solitons Another initial pulse profile is the Gaussian one given by Using the above approach for this profile leads to We note that Eq.( The central branch, i.e. the branch st the middle of the graph is chosen as an origin of coordinates. Then the bonds can be determined as b where L 1n are the lengths of b ±1n bonds and n = 1, 2, m = 1, 2. Here the "+" sign is for right-handed bonds and the "-" sign is for left-handed bonds from the center of the tree graph. Soliton solutions on each bond can be written as q ±1mn (x, t) = 2 β ±1mn q(x + S ±1mn , t). Note that solutions given by Eq.( Furthermore, we choose the initial pulse profile at each vertex (q e (x, 0) = 2 βe ψ e (x)) in the forms . Then for the number solitons we have where Again, for the case, when the constraints given by Eq.( In this paper we studied the problem of soliton generation for PT-symmetric optical waveguides and their networks described in terms of NNLS equation. The problem of finding the number of generated solitons for a given initial pulse profile is reduced to the Cauchy problem for NNLS equation on a line and on metric graphs, where the initial condition is give in terms of the initial pulse. Exact expression for the number of solitons generated is derived. In case of optical waveguide networks, the problem is solved for star-and tree-branched networks. The results obtained in this paper and proposed models can be applied for the problem of tunable generation of solitons in branched optical fiber networks providing PT-symmetry via "gain-loss" property. Experimental realization of such a model is of importance for engineering and practical implementation of PT-symmetric optical fiber networks, capable to generate solitonic pulses and tunable signal propagation. Although the above treatment deals with star-and tree graphs, the method can be extended for arbitrary graph topologies having semiinfinite incoming and outgoing bonds.