This work proposes to use magnetic material as the substrate of planar antennas to overcome the platform effect caused by the conducting ground plane. The upper bound of the radiation efficiency of an electric-current-driven low-profile antenna is theoretically derived, which is inversely proportional to the Gilbert damping factor of the magnetic material. Meanwhile, the improvement of radiation due to the use of magnetic material is demonstrated by a three-dimensional (3D) multiphysics and multiscale time-domain model. The simulation results match the theoretical derivation, showing 25% radiation efficiency from a planar antenna backed by a FeGaB thin film with 2.56 μm thickness. Furthermore, for conductive ferromagnetic materials, it is shown that the eddy current loss can be well suppressed by laminating the thin film into multiple layers. The radiation efficiency of the modeled antenna with a conductive ferromagnetic substrate is improved from 2.2% to 11.8% by dividing the substrate into 10 layers, with a ferromagnetic material fill factor of 93%. down the antenna. Planar dimensions of traditional antennas must be on par with the electromagnetic (EM) wavelength to transmit efficiently One of the effective ways to increase efficiency is to replace the regular dielectric substrates with magnetodielectric materials, which provide high values of both relative permittivity ε ! and relative permeability μ ! . In patch antennas with such substrates, the effective EM wavelength is reduced by approximately √ ε ! μ ! times, leading to a reduction of antenna characteristic length by approximately the same scale factor Magnetic Thin-Films include a strain-mediated antenna composed of composite multiferroic materials The magnetic material used in magnetic antennas should possess an FMR frequency in the gigahertz range, large value of permeability, as well as low eddy current loss, i.e. low electric conductive loss. To achieve gigahertz FMR frequency and large permeability at the same time, in-plane biased magnetic thin films should be used. The reason is that, compared to that of bulk materials, the FMR frequency of an in-plane biased thin film is increased by the factor of (M # /H $ , where M # is the saturation magnetization and H $ is the magnetic DC bias. As the FMR frequency is increased in the in-plane biased case, lower bias magnetic fields can be used to achieve the same FMR frequencies, easing the requirements on the strength of the electromagnets used to provide the bias magnetic fields. Moreover, rather than ferrites, ferromagnetic materials are preferred. The reason is that in saturated ferromagnetic materials, all the spins are aligned to the bias direction, leading to a large spontaneous magnetization and a higher permeability near FMR. This is in contrast to the saturated ferrites, where adjacent spins are opposite to each other and different in magnitude, leading to a low saturation magnetization. Such spin orientation results in a smaller net magnetization thus lowering the magnitude of the permeability near the FMR frequency. However, even though ferromagnetic materials provide large permeability, they are typically conductive, leading to severe eddy current loss. Therefore, one also needs to resolve the dilemma between having the large magnetic permeability from ferromagnetic materials and requiring low conductive losses. It is proposed in this work to suppress the eddy current loss by segmenting the ferromagnetic film into thin layers, so that the giant eddy current loops are broken, and the conductive loss is reduced. In summary, this work proposes that by inserting in-plane biased, multi-layered, ferromagnetic thin films between the radiating source and the conducting ground plane, one can drastically improve the radiation performance, such as radiation efficiency. In this manuscript, the elimination of the platform effect is demonstrated by studying a planar antenna. The antenna is composed of a planar electric current backed by a ferromagnetic thin film. At the bottom of the thin film, a perfect electric conducting (PEC) ground plane is assigned. The radiation efficiency of this idealized radiator is derived theoretically, based on the plane wave assumption. Furthermore, a three-dimensional (3D) finite difference time domain (FDTD) algorithm is developed Consider an infinite, uniform current sheet i % that radiates EM waves into free space, as shown in Fig. where E $ is the aperture electric field amplitude at the interface between the free space and the substrate. The radiated power into the free space is thus calculated as Note that in Equation ( Note that in Equation ( Hence, for an antenna working around 2 GHz, Q E8F is on the order of 10 4 when the thickness of the substrate is 1.5 μm if the material is non-magnetic, or in mathematical form, μ ! " = 1 and μ ! "" = 0 . Since traditional antennas are mostly made of conductors and rely on conductive current to radiate, the platform effect is an inevitable shortcoming of traditional low-profile antennas. The platform effect results in more energy being stored in the structure instead of being radiated away into free space, raising the antenna quality factor. On the other hand, a magnetic substrate with high relative permeability offers the capability of significantly lowering Q E8F and improving the radiation performance of low-profile antennas. According to the definition, the radiation efficiency can be calculated as In saturated ferromagnetic materials that is biased in-plane, the relative permeability is calculated by ( In Note that in the derivation of Equation ( Similarly, Substituting Equation ( Equation ( In order to accurately simulate the performance of the low-profile antenna considered in this work, an algorithm that describes both the EM wave propagation and the micromagnetic dynamics is applied In Equation ( Fig. 1. Artificial nonconductive ferromagnetic substrate. The setup of this control case is identical to the one previously introduced, except that the conductivity of FeGaB is artificially set to be zero. Therefore, this case is the optimal circumstance with a nonconductive ferromagnetic material. 2. No substrate under the current. In this case, the space between the current source and the PEC ground is filled with air, which is the original platformed antenna with the current source close to the PEC. As can be seen in Fig. It is evident that magnetic materials with high relative permeability help overcome the platform effect. However, unfortunately, most of the materials that have such high permeability are ferromagnetic materials, which are highly conductive and suffer significant eddy current loss. By briefly analyzing Faraday's law in the integral form ∮ E , one can quickly conclude that the eddy current loss can be well suppressed by reducing the magnetic flux by laminating the thin film into multiple layers, as shown in the inset of Fig. Fig. In this work a layered ferromagnetic material is explored as a method to increase radiation efficiency in planar electrically small antennas. Air-filled planar electrically small antennas radiate almost no power into the space due to an image current that is anti-parallel to the source current. Furthermore, the radiation quality factor (Qrad) is large due to the reactive energy associated with this antenna geometry. Inserting a ferromagnetic material between the source and ground plane enhances the radiation efficiency by reversing the direction of the image current in addition to reducing Qrad through the high relative permeability of the material. Radiation efficiency is further improved by dividing the ferromagnetic material into several layers reducing eddy current losses, thus, lowering the negative effects caused by the materials conductivity. An ADI-FDTD model is developed coupling the LLG Equation with Maxwell's Equations to study the complicated dynamics of a planar antenna with a laminated ferromagnetic substrate. Numerical results show that inserting FeGaB into the airgap increases efficiency from lower than 0.00001% to greater than 2%. Furthermore, dividing the FeGaB into 10 layers further improves the radiation efficiency to approximately 2% to 11.8%. These results show that the radiation efficiency of planar electrically small antennas can be dramatically increased by using a ferromagnetic material inserted between the source plane and the ground plane. APPENDIX A: CIRCUIT MODELLING OF DISPLACEMENT EDDY CURRENT FLOW As discussed in the main body of this work, a common method to reduce eddy currents in a ferromagnetic material is to laminate the material into several thin sheets separated by insulators. This has the effect of restricting the possible paths of the eddy currents, limiting the amount of current that flows and thus, limiting the power dissipated. However, as the layers get too thin, interlayer coupling can grow as the layer boundaries become closer together. One type of interlayer coupling is the capacitive coupling between the ferromagnetic laminations through the dielectric gaps. To study the effect of the air gap thickness on power loss due to eddy currents, a simple structure of two conductive ferromagnetic layers separated by an air gap (Fig. Electromotive force acting on eddy current loops contained solely in the ferromagnetic layer Electromotive force acting on eddy current loops crossing between the adjacent two layers Table There are six unknown currents in the circuit shown in Fig. V + -2I + R * -(I + + I P )R + = 0 , (A1a) I + -I P = I * , (A1d) V Assuming R + ≫ R * , in the limit of a perfectly insulating air gap (Z `→ ∞), these equations reduce down to the following equations. I * = 0 (A5b) In this limit, there is no coupling between the layers and the entirety of the eddy currents are contained within the individual ferromagnetic layers (Fig. Again assuming R + ≫ R * , in the limit where the air gap goes to zero (t (b! → 0, V * → V + , Z `→ 0), Equations (A4b), (A4c), and (A4d) reduce down to the following equations. The total power dissipated due to eddy currents is simply the sum of the power dissipated in each of the resistors in the equivalent circuit. Note that because of the reactive contribution from capacitive coupling between the layers, the currents found through Equations (A4b), (A4c), and (A4d) are generally complex. Equation (A7) is a strong function of t (b! , as it not only tunes the capacitive coupling between the layers (Z `), but also the electromotive force felt by the central current loop (V * ). For small thickness, the power dissipation will increase as it approaches the limit of completely shorted ferromagnetic layers. As the thickness increases, the impedance of the air gap also increases and eventually approaches the limit of the perfectly insulating air gap. Shown below is Equation (A7) plotted as a function of air gap thickness. Here, the structure has in-plane dimensions of 300 μm × 300 μm and the two ferromagnetic layers are 0.24 μm thick. The ferromagnetic material is FeGaB at ferromagnetic resonance (2.4 GHz for a DC bias of 60 Oe). The plot is normalized to the power dissipated in the no air gap limit. O -I + ) = I O -I + (A2e) The only way Equation (A2e) can be true for any value of a " a 7 is if I O -I + is zero. Combining this with Equation (A2b), gives the following two equations for I Z and I O . I Z = I P (A2f) I O = I + (A2g) With Equations (