Power semiconductor device architectures require the inclusion of a diffusion barrier to suppress, or at best prevent the interdiffusion between the copper metallisation interconnects and the surrounding silicon substructure. The binary pseudo-alloy of titanium-tungsten (TiW), with >70 at.% W, is a well established copper diffusion barrier but is prone to degradation via the out-diffusion of titanium when exposed to high temperatures (≥400°C). Here, the thermal stability of physical vapour deposited (PVD) TiW/Cu bilayer thin films in Si/SiO 2 (50 nm)/TiW(300 nm)/Cu(25 nm) stacks were characterised in response to annealing at 400°C for 0.5 h and 5 h, using a combination of soft and hard X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (SXPS and HAXPES) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Results show that annealing promoted the segregation of titanium out of the TiW and interdiffusion into the copper metallisation. Titanium was shown be driven toward the free copper surface, accumulating there and forming a titanium oxide overlayer upon exposure to air. Annealing for longer timescales promoted a greater out-diffusion of titanium and a thicker oxide layer to grow on the copper surface. However, interface measurements suggest that the diffusion is not significant enough to compromise the barrier integrity and the TiW/Cu interface remains stable even after 5 h of annealing. Power semiconductor device technologies are at the core of the power-train and battery-management systems in hybrid and electric vehicles. The binary pseudo-alloy of titanium-tungsten (TiW) has long been considered a viable copper diffusion barrier candidate and has a well-established history. TiW was first proposed by Cunningham et al. as a means of improving a) Electronic mail: a.regoutz@ucl.ac.uk the corrosion resistance and metallurgical properties of metal-Au systems in integrated circuits. Thermal exposure during production or service has shown to initiate and propagate the segregation of titanium out of the barrier, and the subsequent diffusion into the adjacent metallisation, given sufficient time. In order to obtain a greater insight into the thermal stability of the TiW/Cu system, we employ a combination of soft and hard X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (SXPS and HAXPES) to study the chemical states and electronic structure across post-deposition annealed Si/SiO 2 /TiW/Cu thin film stacks. HAXPES extends the probing depth of conventional SXPS by utilising a higher photon energy, thus turning the technique from surface-to bulk-sensitive. The combination of SXPS and HAXPES provides the opportunity to gain information from two depth perspectives and so offers a non-destructive approach for characterising the buried TiW/Cu interface in its true state. Complimentary transmission electron microscopy (TEM) with energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) is employed in an effort to better map out the titanium diffusion process and assess any changes to the microstructure in response to annealing. Additionally, laboratory-based SXPS was utilised to conduct depth profile measurements and quantify the elemental distribution across the bilayer, complimenting the synchrotron XPS measurements. Un-patterned Si(100)/SiO 2 (50 nm)/TiW(300 nm)/Cu(25 nm) thin film stacks were manufactured using a standard industrial process. Both the TiW and copper films were deposited via DC magnetron physical vapour deposition (PVD) using an argon (Ar) discharge. Both TiW and Cu deposition stages were conducted in the same deposition chamber and without a vacuum break. The deposition chamber operated under a base pressure of 10 -8 -10 -7 mbar. The TiW film was deposited using a composite TiW sputter target containing 30 at.% Ti concentration. A detailed description of the deposition process used can be found in Refs. In order to investigate the microstructural changes and the Ti diffusion process, an as-deposited and a 5 h annealed sample were analysed using a state-of-the-art FEI Titan (G3) Cubed Themis 60-300 kV TEM (with probe and C s corrector). The instrument is equipped with a X-FEG source and CMOS-based FEI CETA 16-megapixel camera. Images were acquired using a 300 kV accelerating voltage. Energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) maps were obtained with Super-X EDX System with four windowless Silicon Drift Detector (SSD) of 120 mm 2 . The microstructural images were acquired via conventional TEM mode and the elemental distribution maps of Cu, Ti, W and O signals were recorded using Scanning TEM (STEM) mode. TEM lamellas are prepared using Helios NanoLab 450 -FEI focused ion beam in-situ lift out technique. The microstructure of the TiW/Cu bilayer was first explored with bright-field TEM to ascertain whether the interface is stable during annealing. Cross sectional images of the 5 h annealed sample are displayed in Fig. However, the primary mode of degradation of this system is the out-diffusion of Ti and this is difficult to observe in the TEM images. To address this as-received samples were characterised using synchrotron-based SXPS (hν = 1.6 keV). The collected survey spectra are displayed in Supplementary Information II, and show, as expected, a dominant copper signal, with minor signals from oxygen, carbon and nitrogen due to exposure to the ambient environment. Additionally, in the annealed samples only, a subtle titanium signal appears in the survey spectra, confirming that at 400°C, titanium diffuses out of the barrier layer, through the metallisation and accumulates at the copper surface. To address this further, high-resolution Cu 2p 3/2 and Ti 2p core level spectra collected with SXPS for each sample are displayed in Fig. The Cu 2p 3/2 core level spectra displayed in Fig. The BE position of the main Ti 2p peaks (458.5 and 464.2 eV) and the spin orbit splitting (SOS) distance of the doublet peaks (5.7 eV) suggest that the primary contribution in both SXPS and HAXPES spectra is from the Ti(IV) oxidation state. The out-diffusion of Ti and accumulation at the Cu surface is further corroborated with EDS. Fig. Quantification with either SXPS or HAXPES at synchrotron facilities is challenging due to the lack of critical parameters necessary to obtain reliable quantification, such as relative atomic sensitivity factors (RASFs) and a precise characterisation of the transmission function of the analyser. However, for laboratory-based SXPS systems these critical parameters are known. Therefore, to quantitatively determine the distribution of titanium across the metallisation and the depletion within the bulk TiW, a depth profile was conducted using a Kratos Axis Supra laboratory-based SXPS instrument. The depth profile was conducted via in-situ Ar + sputtering, whereby the copper capping layer was gradually removed until the TiW was reached. Fig. Peak fit analysis of the W 4f core level is particularly challenging due to the close proximity of the W 4f core lines to the W 5p 3/2 core line. The elemental distribution profiles of the metals present for all samples are displayed in Fig. The depth profiles suggest that the interface does not broaden or migrate significantly with annealing, confirming its stability upon thermal treatment at 400°C for prolonged timescales. The point of cross-over between the Cu and W signals changes only subtly and the slight variations observed are attributed to different sputter removal rates and the thickness of the adventitious carbon overlayer for each sample. Annealing at 400°C will affect the crystal structure and density of the copper film due to extensive recrystallisation, affecting the sputter removal rate. The reason for the good stability of the TiW diffusion barrier in response to annealing may be attributed to the Ti:W ratio present. Cunningham et al. state a solubility limit of Ti in W of 10 at.% at 600°C and from the depth profiles values close to 10 at.% Ti are found in the present samples. C. TiW/Cu Interface Only two reported detailed studies have explored the TiW layer using XPS, the first from Alay et al., who focused on conducting an extensive chemical and structural characterisation of TiW films using not just XPS but also X-ray diffraction (XRD), RBS, electron probe microanalysis (EPMA), and AES, Survey spectra collected with both synchrotron-based SXPS and HAXPES at the TiW/Cu interface after the in-situ thinning of the copper can be found in Supplementary Information VI. The SXPS and HAXPES recorded survey spectra display Cu, Ti, W and O signals, whereas the signal from carbon is very small and is only identifiable in the SXP spectra. The key core levels measured with both techniques at the TiW/Cu interface are displayed and compared in Fig. The Cu 2p 3/2 core level spectra collected with both SXPS and HAXPES are displayed in Fig. Subtle spectral changes are observed in the SXPS W 4f spectra, highlighted in the difference plot, whereas the changes in the HAXPES spectra are much smaller. Fig. The origin of the inclusion of oxygen into this system and its accumulation at the interface will be further discussed in Section IV B. However, to summarise, it is assumed that given that the deposition process occurs under high vacuum, residual concentrations of oxygen will be present. Therefore, prior to the deposition of copper, the TiW face will be exposed to the chamber environment gettering oxygen and leading to the development of M-O environments. Due to the presence of titanium, oxidation of the TiW interface even at low residual oxygen concentrations is favourable as titanium has excellent gettering properties, The HAXPES Ti 2p core level displayed in Fig. The O 1s spectra collected with HAXPES, displayed in Fig. Overall, it is clear that by comparing the SXPS and HAXPES W 4f and Ti 2p spectra, an interfacial oxide consisting of a local co-ordination of Ti-O and W-O states are present at the TiW/Cu interface but not a bulk oxide layer. This assumption is further corroborated by the fact that titanium is observed to diffuse during annealing and, if the interface was fully oxidised, titanium oxide would be precipitated and immobile to diffuse through the copper metallisation. The electronic structure of occupied states across the TiW/Cu interface can be probed through collection of the valence band (VB) spectra. The VB is the highest measurable kinetic energy region (lowest BE region) in XPS, and therefore electrons originating from the VB have the largest IMFP and the signal is representative of the maximum probing depth. Fig. by the remaining copper metallisation and closely resembles the valence band of copper reported by others. The HAXPES spectra show negligible change with increasing annealing duration. The titanium diffusion mechanism and changes to the concentration within the bulk of the TiW is too small to warrant significant change in the VB, reflecting the core level spectra. Additionally, the one-electron photoionisation cross section of Ti 3d at 5.9 keV is 3.1×10 -25 cm 2 , compared to 5.1×10 -23 cm 2 for the W 5d orbital and given the significantly higher concentration of tungsten in the TiW layer, the tungsten overshadows the contributions of titanium to the VB. Therefore, even if the depletion was significant, it would be difficult to infer this from VB spectra. Several studies have explored the metallurgical stability of Ti/Cu and TiW/Cu systems during thermal treatments, tracking the temperature of failure and assessing any occurring chemical reactions. Copper and tungsten are completely immiscible, 79 therefore, in TiW/Cu systems the only potential reactions are Cu-Ti reactions at the interface. However, from the core level analysis at the interface no BE shifts or changes in line-shape occur that would suggest the formation of such a compound. If a reaction was to occur one would expect to observe a significant change when comparing the AD sample, where the Ti-Cu reaction should not occur and the 5 h annealed sample, where the conditions favour intermetallic phase formation. Cocke et al. report that for Ti 36 Cu 64 alloys, the Ti 2p 3/2 core level should shift by +0.5 eV relative to the pure titanium metal core level BE, whereas the Cu 2p 3/2 peak should shift by -0.2 eV relative to the pure copper metal core level BE position. In Ti/Cu systems, several studies have detected the formation of intermetallic compounds during annealing as low as 350°C. Olowolafe et al. studied Si/SiO 2 /TiW(50 nm)/Cu(100 nm)/TiW(50 nm) multi-layer stacks. The structures were annealed at 500°C for 1-2 h and from AES and XRD measurements, no sign of interdiffusion or intermetallic compound formation was observed. From the acquired SXPS data at the interface, it is clear that there is an accumulation of oxygen at the interface leading to the formation of a thin interfacial layer of Ti-O and W-O states. Given that the TiW interface is not subjected to excessively high temperatures and the concentration of oxygen is insufficient to form an extended bulk oxide, it is expected that the TiW oxidation behaviour will not follow the parabolic law outlined by the classic Wagner theory but rather obey the Cabrera-Mott theory which is applicable low temperature oxidation and the formation of thin oxide films. It is difficult to confirm the exact origin of the oxygen that has accumulated at the TiW interface, but three potential routes can be identified: (a) the diffusion of oxygen through the 25 nm-thick copper layer (whether that be during deposition, annealing or when the sample is removed from the deposition chamber) and/or (b) the gettering of residual oxygen within the deposition chamber by the bare TiW surface prior to the deposition of copper and/or (c) oxygen within the copper deposit accumulating at the TiW interface. Considering route (a), the SXPS measurements on the as-received samples show that significant oxidation of the copper surface does not occur as only a native Cu(I) oxide is present rather than Cu(II) oxide. Leon et al. conducted polarised reflectometry measurements on sputter deposited 32 nm-thick copper films exposed to room temperature (300 K), ambient pressure conditions (0.1 MPa), and a relative humidity of 87 % after 1 and 253 days of exposure. From their measurements, the native oxide thickness was extracted to be 1.81 nm after 1 day, growing to 6.59 nm after 253 days. Alternatively, TiW may getter residual oxygen within the deposition chamber following route (b). As assumed above, residual quantities of oxygen are expected in the deposition chamber. Therefore, when the TiW is deposited its surface will be exposed to this atmosphere prior to the deposition of copper, providing the perfect opportunity for oxygen to accumulate at the TiW/Cu interface and partially oxidise. The third potential route, (c), involves the accumulation of oxygen from within the copper deposit at the TiW/Cu interface. The complete depth profiles displayed in Supplementary Information V show oxygen is present within the copper layer. This can be attributed to the purity of the target and sputtering conditions as residual oxygen in the chamber may be incorporated into the copper film. Therefore, the source of oxygen at the TiW/Cu interface may be due to residual oxygen at the base of the copper film being drawn to the TiW interface. Overall, routes (b) and (c) appear most likely and the source of oxygen can be assumed to be largely from the deposition chamber environment. The inclusion of oxygen at the interface may be of benefit to the system and improve the stability of the TiW/Cu interface and effectiveness of the TiW barrier. Oparowski et al. showed that the performance of TiW diffusion barriers against Au or Al interdiffusion could be improved by varying the sputter gas composition during deposition. Wang et al. explored this further by studying a Si/Ti 27 W 73 /Cu sample configuration with and without a venting break between the TiW and Cu deposition steps. The venting break involved opening the deposition chamber and exposing the TiW face to air for 30 minutes. This work probes the chemical states present in both TiW and Cu as well as across their interface for the first time. The Ti concentration close to the solubility limit in W as well as the unintentional presence of oxide species at the interface can explain the exceptional stability of the TiW diffusion barriers. The combined use of SXPS and HAXPES coupled with depth-profiling allows the exploration of the depth dependence of elemental distributions and chemical states, enabling the characterisation of the titanium diffusion mechanism that occurs during annealing. Titanium diffuses out of the barrier and accumulates at the copper surface when annealed at 400°C, with prolonged annealing timescales resulting in a greater out-diffusion of titanium from the TiW. Accumulated titanium at the copper surface undergoes oxidation to the predominately Ti(IV) oxide state with a small contribution from Ti(III) states. Annealing at 400°C for 0.5 h and 5 h did not lead to the failure of the TiW barrier, indicated by the lack of Cu-Si and Cu-Ti intermetallic formation. Furthermore, TEM images show that after 5 h of annealing the TiW remains stable and copper is not observed to diffuse downward but is rather constrained above the TiW. HAXPES measurements were able to characterise the TiW layer in its true state, showing that the TiW is representative of a binary metal alloy system, with trace quantities of oxygen attributed to the gettering of residual oxygen by the TiW face prior to the deposition of copper. SXPS measurements across the interface detected low concentrations of metal-oxygen states (W-O and Ti-O), suggesting that a thin interfacial oxide forms between the TiW and Cu layers. Despite the depletion of titanium from the barrier layer, the electronic structure of bulk TiW does not change with annealing, suggesting that the extent of titanium depletion is too small to have any observable influence. Results obtained for the specific metallisation technology explored in this work, exemplify the usefulness of the employed characterisation protocol to study not only the spacial distributions of elements, but importantly the chemical states present. In addition, the in-situ partial decapping of the Cu overlayer makes it possible to study the true state of the interface in-situ. This approach holds promise for the exploration of other metallisation schemes and their buried interfaces, where similar open questions regarding stability and breakdown remain. The Supplementary Information contains TEM images collected for the as-deposited sample, the complete EDS dataset including W and Cu signals for both the as-deposited and 5 h anneal samples, survey spectra collected with synchrotron-based SXPS and HAXPES, peak-fit analysis of the Ti 2p core level spectra collected at the copper surface of as-received samples, the complete SXPS depth profile including the C and O signals, photoionisation cross section profiles for the core levels analysed across the measured photon energy range and additional figures aiding with the assessment of the core level spectra collected at the interface. IV. PEAK FIT ANALYSIS OF DEPTH PROFILE DATA Peak fit analysis of the depth profile data was conducted in CasaXPS, implementing a Shirley-type background and applying the RASFs taken from the Kratos-modified Scofield photoionisation cross section database (values used are listed in Table J. H. Scofield, Theoretical Photoionization Cross Sections from 1 to 1500 keV, Tech. Rep. (Lawrence Livermore Laboratory, 1973). C. Kalha, N. Fernando, and A. Regoutz, "Digitisation of Scofield Photoionisation Cross Section Tabulated Data," (2020).