The classical treatment of the electrical double-layer (EDL) structure at a planar metal/electrolyte junction via the Gouy-Chapman-Stern (GCS) approach is based on the Poisson equation relating the electrostatic potential to the net mean charge density. The ions concentration in the diffuse layer are assumed to follow the Boltzmann distribution law, i.e. ∝ exp(-ψ) where ψ is the dimensionless electrostatic potential. However, even in stationary equilibrium in which variables are averaged over a large number of elementary stochastic events, deviations from the mean-value are expected. In this study we evaluate the behavior of the EDL by assuming some small perturbations superposed on top of its Boltzmann distribution of ion concentrations using the Tsallis nonextensive statistics framework. With this we assume the ion concentrations to be proportional to [1 -(1q) ψ] 1/(1-q) = exp q (-ψ) with q being a real parameter that characterizes the system's statistics. We derive analytical expression and provide computational results for the overall differential capacitance of the EDL structure, which, depending on the values of the parameter q can show both the traditional inverse bell-shaped curves for aqueous solutions and bell curves observed with ionic liquids. The electrical double-layer (EDL) is more than a century-old fundamental topic of electrochemistry and physical chemistry Several computational models such as Monte-Carlo (MC), molecular dynamics (MD) and density functional theory (DFT) simulations are now very apt to provide good descriptions of the EDL structure The purpose of this study is to incorporate into the mean-field GCS model the Tsallis q-deformed exponential distribution The standard model to describe the equilibrium EDL structure at the junction metal/electrolyte (dilute solutions) is the GCS mean-field model which can quantitatively explain most experimental results. It consists of subdividing the EDL into (i) a first sheet of uniform constant electronic charges on the metal surface, (ii) a charge-free inner compact layer or Helmholtz layer (also known as Stern layer) of a few angstrom in width and constant charge, and (iii) an outer, semi-infinite diffuse layer (also known as Gouy-Chapman layer) that extends into the bulk electrolyte and contains anions and cations of a certain distribution In the diffuse layer part of the GCS's model, the electrolyte is treated using the mean-field PB model. For dilute solutions with negligible correlations, the ions' concentrations at a perpendicular distance x 0 from a large lateral surface area metal electrode (one-dimensional problem in which the edge effects are ignored) are assumed to be related to the mean electrostatic potential ψ x by the continuous Boltzmann distribution function: where C 0 x i and z i are the average ion concentration (for ψ x = 0) and charge number of species i (cation and anion), respectively. The term RT/F = k B T/e (with R the ideal gas constant, F the Faraday's constant, k B the Boltzmann's constant, e the elemental electronic charge, and T the absolute temperature) is the thermal voltage. The molar electrical interaction energy in the Boltzmann factor takes into account the term z i Fψ x only, and other contributions are ignored in this study. The approximation of C x i by a Boltzmann distribution is a standard tool used to evaluate many other thermodynamic properties of systems, but is valid for some ideal conditions only, i.e. elastic collision between particles, particles are identical and independent of one another, etc. It assumes that the ratio of equilibrium ionic concentrations at two locations x i and x j in the solution, i.e. C x i /C x j , at which the mean electrostatic potentials are ψ x i and ψ x j , respectively, is related to the work needed to carry an ion of charge ze from x i to x j , i.e, -ze(ψ x i -ψ x j ), through the exponential Boltzmann factor given in Eq. 1 where ǫ is the uniform dielectric permittivity of the solvent in units of the vacuum dielectric constant ǫ 0 . The mean charge density ρ x can be expressed as the sum ρ x = i z i FC x i over the ions species, which leads to the second-order nonlinear differential equation: With the change of variables p = dψ x /dx, such that d 2 ψ x /dx 2 = dp/dx = p dp/dψ x , we rewrite Eq. 3 as: The integration constant B is determined using the boundary conditions ψ x (x → ∞) = 0 (electroneutrality) and dψ x /dx = 0 (electrostatic field must vanish at the mid-plane) so that: If we consider the special case of a symmetric electrolyte (i.e. two ionic species; one positively charged and one negatively charged with |z i | = z and C 0 x i = C 0 x , ∀i), we obtain the analytical solution of GCS model for a positively charged electrode as: in which physical arguments impose that the appropriate sign should be as shown. Note that Eq. 6 can be written in the dimensionless form d( ψx /2)/d x =sinh( ψx /2), where ψx = ψ/(RT/zF) and x = x/λ D with λ D = ǫRT/2z 2 F 2 C 0 x being the Debye screening length for the symmetric electrolyte. It can also be linearized in the limit of low potentials leading to the Debye-Hückel model. With Eq. 6 one can obtain the total net charge per unit surface Q x within the diffuse layer as: Combining Eq. 6 and Eq. 7 gives the total net charge within the diffuse layer as: To determine the specific capacitance of the diffuse layer, the net charge (Eq. 8) is differentiated with respect to the potential, which gives the well-known nonlinear expression: that depends on both the potential ψ d and the properties of the electrolyte C 0 x and ǫ. The expression for C diff can also be expressed in a dimensionless form as Cdiff = λ D C diff /ǫ = cosh( ψx /2) A plot of C dl vs. potential (ψ d > 0) for different values of the bulk concentrations C 0 x is shown in Fig. For ψ d = 0, we have the reciprocal of the overall capacitance . The Boltzmann distribution function, as mentioned above, provides a valid approximation only under certain assumptions for equilibrium thermodynamic Moy et al. Motivated by these observations, the purpose of this study is to evaluate the behavior of the EDL structure using a more general Boltzmann factor as proposed by Tsallis where β is a local inverse temperature. At a larger scale, the local variable β (other variables can be considered) is not well-defined and experiences fluctuations following a certain probability distribution function f (β), which depends on the underlying dynamics of the system and is a priori unknown For most physical systems a distribution where the random variable β is nonnegative is needed. In particular, if f (β) is assumed to follow a gamma probability distribution function which arises naturally for a fluctuating environment with a finite number of degrees of freedom, such that: where c and b are positive parameters, Eq. 11 leads to the generalized Boltzmann factor in Tsallis statistics is the average of the fluctuating β, and exp q (y) denotes the q-exponential function. The parameter q is a real number that characterizes the system's statistics, and is defined by the ratio of standard variation and mean of the distribution f (β) (q = 1 if there are no fluctuations) By applying generically the generalized Boltzmann factor given by Eq. 13 to the concentrations of charged ions in the EDL structure (instead of Eq. 1), we write the q-exponential relation Again, this means that the fluctuations of the mean-field value of the ion concentrations are assumed to follow a gamma distribution with the parameter q = 1 + 1/c representing the extent of these fluctuations. The adequate determination of the statistical distribution of such ions concentration is very difficult to obtain. If q = 1, the traditional Boltzmann factor given in Eq. 1 is immediately recovered from Eq. 14. Plots of C q x i as a function of potential ψ x for different values of q 1 are shown in Fig. The q-modified PB model becomes then: which leads after integration to: We verify that for q = 1, Eq. 16 readily simplifies to the expression given in Eq. 5. For the case of a symmetric 1:1 electrolyte, we obtain: where the q-hyperbolic functions cosh q and sinh q are defined respectively as 2 sinh q (y) = exp q (y)exp q (-y) (18b) Now using the q-identities: sinh q (y) = 2 sinh 2q-1 (y/2) cosh 2q-1 (y/2) (19b) we obtain the following expression for the electric field: where the function h q (y) is given by: It is clear that when q → 1, the classical relation given by Eq. 6 for the electric field is immediately recovered. We can write Eq. 20 in a dimensionless form as d( ψx /2)/d xq =sinh 2q-1 ( ψx /2)h( ψx ) where xq is the normalized dimension x with respect to a modified Debye length, λ q D = λ D 2q, which depends on the properties of the liquid as well as the extent of the fluctuations through the parameter q. λ q D is larger than λ D for q < 1 which implies that the scale over which the electrolyte screens the surface charge is larger with the presence of fluctuations. Finally, the q-parameterized net charge Q q x in the diffuse layer using the generalized Boltzmann factor is found as: and its associated diffuse capacitance is found numerically from C q diff = ∂Q q x /∂ψ x . The overall EDL capacitance C q dl is then computed as per Eq. 10, i.e.: The total charge Q q dl is obtained from the voltage integral of C q dl . Plots of C q dl (ψ x ) for different values of q for a constant bulk concentration of C 0 x = 10 -3 mol L -1 , are shown in Fig. From Fig. What is also remarkable from these results is the bell-shaped-like trend of the total capacitance when q takes values less than zero. A similar profile is observed for metal/ionic liquid double layer capacitance which exhibit a local maximum at the point of zero charge Finally, the authors recognize that the main limitation of this theoretical description is the lack of a proper physical meaning for the parameter q in terms of a microscopic model. The analysis presented here is unable to provide an effective description of ion correlations (i.e., the Coulombic attraction of charged particles of opposite valence and the Coulombic repulsion of charged particles with the same valence) and ionic excluded volume effects (i.e., the fact that two ions cannot overlap due to its finite size), but this is the subject of ongoing investigations. A measurable atomistic model supporting the physical reality of the parameter q will follow to validate the use of non-extensive Tsallis statistics in EDL systems. In this sense, the parameter q can be viewed as mathematically well-fit to capture the change of curvature of the differential capacity, as it is the case for instance of fractional integro-differential equations for capturing anomalous time-domain and frequency-domain features in several physicochemical systems In this paper, we analyzed the effect of superposing fluctuations onto the mean-value Boltzmann distribution of ion concentrations in the GCS model on the capacitive properties of the EDL structure. This was done via the q-exponential function which allows to embrace a spectrum of empirical processes connected to the degree of fluctuations in the intensive inverse temperature parameter. This compact and efficient approach provides an extended version to the classical GCS model specifically for the description of the EDL at scales in which correlation between subsystem are possible. The analytical expression for the EDL capacitance as a function of voltage and ion concentration, and parameterized with the index q < 1, predicts lower values than its GCS counterpart (i.e. for q = 1) which has been explained by super-additive entropy feature in Tsallis statics. Additionally, for values of q less than zero, the model reverses the general trend of capacitance at a metal/electrolyte junction towards that of a bell-shaped-like profiles which are observed in ionic liquid EDL structure. Further investigations in this direction with comparison with atomistic models are being developed for future contributions. 