The ability to extend the time scale of the coherent optical response from large ensembles of quantum emitters is highly appealing for applications in quantum information devices. In semiconductor nanostructures, spin degrees of freedom can be used as auxiliary, powerful tools to modify the coherent optical dynamics. Here, we apply this approach to negatively charged (In,Ga)As/GaAs self-assembled quantum dots which are considered as excellent quantum emitters with robust optical coherence and high bandwidth. We study 3-pulse spin-dependent photon echoes subject to moderate transverse magnetic fields up to 1 T. We demonstrate that the timescale of coherent optical response can be extended by at least an order of magnitude by the field. Without magnetic field, the photon echo decays with T2 = 0.45 ns which is determined by the radiative lifetime of trions T1 = 0.27 ns. In the presence of the transverse magnetic field, the decay of the photon echo signal is given by spin dephasing time of the ensemble of resident electrons T2,e ∼ 4 ns. We demonstrate that the non-zero transverse g-factor of the heavy holes in the trion state plays a crucial role in the temporal evolution and magnetic field dependence of the long-lived photon echo signal. The coherent optical response, which results after resonant excitation of quantum emitters with multiple optical pulses, carries rich information about the energy structure and dynamical properties of the studied system Excitons in semiconductor nanostructures can be addressed resonantly by sub-ps optical pulses on very short timescales enabling access to exceptionally high bandwidths, but unavoidably leading to a short radiative lifetime, which imposes limitation on the optical storage time. One of the solutions is to use the spin degrees of freedom of resident electrons in semiconductors which makes it possible to extend the timescale of coherent optical response by several orders of magnitude For realistic quantum memory protocols it is necessary to apply resonant optical pulses with an area of π, i.e. to perform robust Rabi flops. This is very difficult in semiconductor quantum wells and bulk crystals due to the strong damping of Rabi oscillations by excitation-induced dephasing In this work, we demonstrate that in spite of strong inhomogeneous broadening it is possible to perform a robust transfer between the optical and spin coherence and to observe long-lived spin-dependent photon echoes (LSPE) in an ensemble of charged self-assembled QDs in a moderate transverse magnetic field. Moreover, in self-assembled (In,Ga)As/GaAs QDs the Zeeman splitting of the hole is of the same order of magnitude as that of the electron. We demonstrate that the heavy-hole splitting has a strong impact on the formation of three-pulse LSPE. In order to understand and describe properly the dynamics of LSPE in self-assembled QDs and its dependence on magnetic field, we develop a model, that accounts for both the electron and heavy-hole Zeeman splittings. The studied sample (# 14833) was grown by molecular beam epitaxy. It consists of 4 layers of n-doped (In,Ga)As QDs in GaAs matrix, embedded in the antinodes of the standing wave electric field in the microcavity. The QDs in each layer have a density of about 10 10 cm -2 . The resident electrons were supplied to the QDs by introducing δ-doping with Si donors at a distance of 64.5 nm below each QD layer. After the epitaxial growth, the sample was annealed at the temperature of 900 • C to reduce the inhomogeneous broadening of the optical transitions. The QD emission is represented by the photoluminescence (PL) spectrum in Fig. The 5/2λ microcavity is formed by 11 and 14 pairs of GaAs/AlAs layers in the top and bottom distributed Bragg reflectors, respectively, having a gradient axis in the plane of the sample along which the energy of photonic mode can be tuned. All the experiments were performed in the sample area where the photon energy of the cavity mode is in resonance with the emission peak of QDs. The corresponding transmission spectrum with a band centered at 1.434 eV and FWHM of 1.4 meV is shown by the red line in Fig. The pulse energy of P = 5 pJ corresponds to the pulse area of about π. The resulting transient four-wave mixing (FWM) signal is detected in reflection geometry in the direction of k S = 2k 2 -k 1 using heterodyne detection In what follows we use the magnitude of the electric field amplitude at the PE peak maximum |P PE | to characterize the strength of the photon echo signal. In order to address various spin configurations, we use different linear polarization schemes in the excitation and detection paths. The direction of polarization is assigned with respect to the magnetic field direction, i.e. H and V polarizations are parallel and perpendicular to B, respectively. The polarization scheme is labeled as ABD or ABCD for two-or three-pulse echoes. Here, the first two (AB) or three (ABC) letters indicate the linear polarizations of the optical pulses in the excitation sequence and the last letter (D) corresponds to the polarization direction in the detection, e.g. the data in Fig. In order to observe long-lived spin-dependent echoes it is necessary to address trion X -(charged exciton) complexes, which correspond to the elementary optical excitation in a charged QD. The energy spectrum in the charged QD can be well described by a four-level energy scheme with Kramers doublets in the ground and excited states at B = 0, which are determined by the spin of the resident electron S = 1/2 and the angular momentum of the heavy hole J = 3/2, as shown in Fig. We note that the small increase of the PE amplitude by about 15% in HHH as compared to HVH remains the same under rotation of the sample around z-axis which excludes an anisotropy of dipole matrix elements in xy-plane as possible origin of asymmetry (see the blue pattern in Fig. We evaluate the optical coherence time T 2 and the population lifetime T 1 of trions in QDs from the decay of PE amplitude of the two-and three-pulse echoes, respectively. The data measured at B = 0 in HHH polarization are shown in Fig. Application of the transverse magnetic field (B||x) leads to Zeeman splitting of the Kramers doublets in the ground resident electron and optically excited trion states. The electron spin states with spin projections S x = ±1/2 are split by ω e = g e μ B B, while the trions states with angular momentum projections J x = ±3/2 are split by Here, ω e and ω h are the Larmor precession frequencies of electron and heavy hole spins, g e and g h are the electron and hole g factor, and μ B is the Bohr magneton. Optical transitions between all four states are allowed using light with H or V linear polarization, as shown in Fig. In case of cross-polarized HV sequence the spin grating is produced in the plane perpendicular to the magnetic field direction (see Eqs. 36 and 37 in the supplementary material) The spectral gratings appear due to inhomogeneous broadening of the optical resonance frequencies ω 0 . The evolution of spin gratings for trions and resident electrons is governed by their population and spin dynamics. The hole spin grating lifetime is limited by the trion lifetime. The electron spin grating in the ground state is responsible for the long-lived spin-dependent echo which appears if the third pulse is applied Further insight can be obtained from the magnetic field dependence of LSPE signal which is measured at the long delay τ 23 = 2.033 ns when the contribution from trions in three-pulse PE is negligible, see Fig. In order to describe the experimental results quantitatively, we extended the theory from Ref. Here T -1 is the spin lifetime of the trion. For moderate magnetic fields B ≤ 1 T we can assume that the spin relaxation time of hole in QDs T h is significantly longer than τ r and, therefore, in our case T T = τ r For HVVH polarization we obtain where for simplicity we introduce the following parameters: phases φ e , φ h and amplitudes r e and r h . The subscript e, h corresponds to the electron or trion contributions which are given by the first and second terms on right-hand side in Eq. 4, respectively. The parameters are given by Eqs. 55-57 in supplementary material. They are determined by the Larmor precession frequencies ω e and ω h , delay time τ 12 , trion lifetime τ r . The g-factors of electrons and holes are known from previous studies In order to determine T * 2,e (B), we fit the transient signals in HVVH polarization for different magnetic fields as shown exemplary for the transient at B = 0.1 T in Fig. where T 2,e is the transverse spin relaxation time and ∆g e is the inhomogeneous broadening of the electron g-factor. The linear fit with this expression shown in Fig. After evaluation of T * 2,e (B), we can reproduce the LSPE signals as a function of τ 23 and B using Eqs. 3 and 4 which are shown by red curves in Fig. In conclusion, we have demonstrated that the spin degrees of freedom can be used for substantial temporal extension of the coherent optical response in self-assembled quantum dots which has important implications for applications of this system in quantum memory devices with high bandwidth. In particular, we show that in spite of strong inhomogeneous broadening of optical transitions in the ensemble of quantum dots it is possible to store and retrieve the optical coherence in the spin ensemble of resident electrons and to extend the optical coherence time by about an order of magnitude from 0.5 ns to 4 ns. This is manifested in the emergence of long-lived spin-dependent photon echo signals under resonant excitation of trions in (In,Ga)As/GaAs quantum dots in the presence of a moderate transverse magnetic field. We have developed a theoretical model, that quantitatively describes the behavior of threepulse photon echo in quantum dots and takes into account the spin precession of both electrons and holes. The decay of the long-lived signal is attributed to spin dephasing of resident electrons. Therefore, the time scales can be further extended into the microsecond range by spin-echo techniques using dynamic decoupling via excitation with radio-frequency pulses. Extending the time of coherent optical response in ensemble of singly-charged InGaAs quantum dots The original theoretical description of 3-pulse spin dependent photon echo (LSPE) from trions can be found in the supplementary information of Ref. The description of 2-and 3-pulse photon echoes in the trion system subject to a transverse external magnetic field can be split into several steps since the duration of the optical pulses used is shorter than any characteristic relaxation times and periods of Larmor spin precession. Thus, we can neglect the relaxation processes and spin precession during the action of laser pulses, and vice versa, consider only the relaxation and evolution of the system in an external magnetic field between pulses without taking into account the interaction with light. The following sections provide a step-by-step solution: • General approach; • Action of optical pulses; • Evolution of off-diagonal matrix elements of density matrix in magnetic field • Evolution of diagonal matrix elements of density matrix in magnetic field; • Three pulse PE (3PE) signals in HHHH and HVVH polarization configurations. We consider an ensemble of negatively singly charged quantum dots. In this system, the ground state corresponds to a resident electron in a quantum dot, which has two possible states with spin-up |S ↑ and spin-down |S ↓ . The optical pulse excites the quantum dots into a singlet trion state (a hole and two electrons with opposite spins in the ground state). The trion also has two possible states corresponding to the hole spin-up |J ↑ and down |J ↓ . The eigenstates | ± 1/2 for electrons and | ± 3/2 for heavy-holes correspond to the spin projections along the main quantization axis z. The Liouville equation describes the evolution of the system: where V is the operator of interaction with light, H B describes the action of magnetic field, H 0 is the Hamiltonian of unperturbed system, ρ is the density matrix, and Γ describes relaxation processes phenomenologically. In the basis |S ↑ , |S ↓ , |J ↑ and |J ↓ , operators H 0 and H B look as follows where ω 0 is the energy of optical transition corresponding to resonant excitation of the trion state with the lowest energy, ω e , ω h are the electron and hole (trion) Larmor precession frequencies ω e = g e μ B B/ , ω h = g h μ B B/ . μ B is the Bohr magneton. We assume the in-plane g-factors of electron g e and hole g e to be isotropic. The magnetic field B is applied perpendicular to the propagation direction of the incident light along the x axis. The interaction with the electromagnetic wave in the dipole approximation is described by the Hamiltonian: where d± (r) are the circularly polarized components of the dipole moment density operator, and E σ ± (r, t) are the correspondingly polarized components of the electric field of a quasi-monochromatic electromagnetic wave. The electric field of this wave is given by where o ± are the circularly polarized vectors that are related to the unit vectors o x x and o y y through Here the components E σ + and E σ -contain temporal phase factors e -iωt . The strength of the light interaction with the electron-trion system is characterized by the corresponding transition matrix element of the operators d± (r) calculated with the wave functions of the valence band, |±3/2 , and conduction band, | ± 1/2 : The Hamiltonian V in our basis is given by: The f ± (t) are proportional to the smooth envelopes of the circularly polarized components σ + and σ -of the excitation pulse, given by: Here α is the angle between the x axis and the polarization plane of light if it is linearly polarized. Relaxation processes Γ are taken into account in the following way: Here, T 2 is the optical coherence decay time, τ r is the trion recombination time, T 1e(1h) is the electron (hole) longitidual spin relaxation time and T 2e(2h) is the electron (hole) transverse spin relaxation time. We assumed that T 2 /2 = T 1 = τ r and the magnetic field is directed along the x axis. The Liouville equation 1 with operators 2, 3, 7 and relaxation 8 is written for the density matrix ρ, which in our basis is a 4x4 matrix: For description of the density matrix evolution in a magnetic field, it is more convenient to consider separately the evolution of (i) off-diagonal elements of the density matrix ρ 13 , ρ 14 , ρ 23 , ρ 24 (+ c.c.) which are associated with optical coherences and (ii) diagonal elements ρ 11 , ρ 22 , ρ 33 , ρ 44 (populations of electron and trion spin states) in combination with off-diagonal elements ρ 12 , ρ 21 , ρ 34 , ρ 43 , which are associated with spin coherences of trions and electrons. This splitting has the following physical reasoning: The first category of off-diagonal elements ρ 13 , ρ 31 , ρ 24 , ρ 42 are responsible for the optically induced macroscopic polarization P = Tr [ d, ρ] ∼ ρ 31 d + + ρ 42 d -+ c.c., while the second category of components are responsible for the spin state of the carriers. First we consider the effect of photoexcitation by a short laser pulse with frequency ω close to the trion resonant frequency ω 0 . For simplicity we consider optical pulses with rectangular shape, which allow us to get analytical solutions for the density matrix. Other off-diagonal components for elliptically polarized excitation: Here ρ 11 (0), ρ 33 (0), ρ 13 (0), ρ 32 (0), ρ 12 (0) and so on are initial conditions for the components of the density matrix. These values are equal to the corresponding matrix elements before pulse arrival. θ ± are pulse areas, θ ± = f ± t p , t p is pulse duration. ∆ = ω -ω 0 is the detuning between the pump frequency and the trion resonance frequency. It is worth noting that if the excitation is linearly polarized, then K + = K -, L + = L -, and θ ± can be written (see eq.( The density matrix elements associated with optical coherence in transverse magnetic field taking into account the relaxation are given by where ρ ij (0) describes initial state of the system (initial conditions). The remaining non-diagonal elements of the density matrix can be obtained from The correspondence between spin of electron and trion and density matrix elements is the following: The time evolutions of spins are described by the following equations: Here we again assumed that the magnetic field is applied along x-axis. We also neglected the anisotropy of hole's spin relaxation T h = T 1h = T 2h because both transverse and longitudinal hole spin relaxation are much longer then τ r . Introducing the hole spin life time in the trion state 1/T T = 1/T h + 1/τ r , one can obtain solution for hole time evolution: Introducing γ = 1/T T -1/T 2e one can obtain the solution for electron spin and population dynamics: Here It is also useful for the subsequent calculations to introduce the following coefficients: V. CALCULATION OF 3PE SIGNALS This section provides a procedure for calculating the 3-pulse spin dependent photon echo signal from a trion system. In this case, the specific form of the final and intermediate expressions for simplification regards some experimental conditions: • using linearly polarized pulses, polarized parallel to the direction of the magnetic field (H) or orthogonal to the magnetic field (V); • neglecting anisotropy of the g-factor of the electron and hole. This condition is equivalent to the specific orientation of the magnetic field relative to the crystal axes for which the effective magnetic field acting on electrons and holes is parallel or orthogonal to the external one The calculation procedure is divided into several serial steps corresponding to the experimental protocol. In this case, we track only those components of the density matrix, as well as their terms, which finally contribute to the detected signal. In the previous chapters, a detailed calculation of each of the possible steps was presented. The initial condition for each following step is the result of the previous one. The calculation starts with the initial condition for the density matrix: This corresponds to the ground state of the system with an equiprobable distribution of electron spin projections. Note, in a magnetic field this assumption is correct only if μ B g e B k B T which holds for the experimental conditions used. Here, k B is the Boltzmann constant, and T is the temperature. The calculation procedure has the following steps: 1. The action of the first pulse (with H polarization). To calculate the final signal, the knowledge of the off-diagonal components of the density matrix corresponding to the optical coherence is sufficient. 2. Evolution of the off-diagonal density matrix elements assosiated with optical coherence in the time interval τ 12 . 3. The action of the second pulse (with H or V linear polarization). To calculate this signal, only the components of the density matrix which define the population and spin state of electrons and trions are sufficient. 4. Evolution of elements of the density matrix which define the population and spin state of electrons and trions in the time interval τ 23 . 5. Calculation of the detected signal in the required polarization configuration. The intermediate results of calculations at each of the steps are presented below. Here, to identify the step, two-digit superscripts are introduced for the density matrix ρ ij , where j -corresponds to the ordinal number of the pulse that has acted (is acting) on the system, i = (b, a) corresponds to the state before or after the action of the pulse. a. Step 1. Action of the first pulse. If the first pulse is linearly polarized along the direction of B (H-polarization), then polarization angle of the first pulse is α 1 = 0. We denote In this way Step 2. Evolution of off-diagonal elements between 1st and 2nd pulses. Using simple trigonometric algebra one can simplify equations above as follows: c. Step 3. Action of second pulse. The second pulse is polarized linearly along direction α 2 . This means that For further calculations of the stimulated echo signal, we only need terms proportional to θ ±1 θ * ±2 (or to θ * ±1 θ ±2 ), because only they contribute to the non-linear coherent response determined by the E * 1 E 2 E 3 contribution which corresponds to the rephasing scheme and consequently the photon echo signal Substituting ρ b2 31 , ρ b2 42 , ρ b2 32 , ρ b2 41 , we get: Here e -τ12/T2 . Note, here for simplicity we also have omitted multipliers cos (ω 0 τ 12 ) and sin (ω 0 τ 12 ). These multipliers describe formation of spectral grating responsible for the stimulated photon echo signal formation (see details in Suppl. Mat. of Ref. Thus, the spin state after the action of two pulses is: T T cos (α 2 ) sin([ω e -ω h ]τ 12 /2) (40) Step 5. Calculation of detected signal in required polarization The spin state of the system at the moment of arrival of the third pulse determines the detected 3-pulse spin-dependent long-lived photon echo signal. Below we provide the explanation and the final expression for the detected signal. The third pulse is also linearly polarized, therefore θ +3 = θ 03 e -iα3 , θ -3 = θ 03 e iα3 , K +3 = K -3 ≡ K 3 , L +3 = L -3 ≡ L 3 . For calculation of stimulated echo signal, we only need terms proportional to θ * ±3 , because before we have chosen terms proportional to θ ±1 θ * ±2 . This combination of elements (θ ±1 θ * ±2 θ * ±3 ) will give the radiation corresponding to the photon echo. In accordance with Eqs. ( The detected signal is proportional to the macroscopic polarization of the system at the time moment τ 12 after the action of the third pulse: Omitting common multiplier (-iθ * 03 K 3 L 3 e -τ12/T2 ): The 3PE signal has two components which have short and long decay time with increasing τ 23 . The first one is decaying with trion lifetime τ r and its spin lifetime T T . In case of long trion spin relaxation time T h τ r this signal decays with trion lifetime only. The long-lived component decays with spin relaxation time of resident electrons. The 3PE signal in HHHH polarization configuration is: Here A 3p = iθ 01 θ 02 θ 03 L 1 L 2 L 3 K * 1 K * 2 K 3 and the LSPE signal is the last term on the right hand side. For example, for resonant (∆ = 0) π/2-pulses A 3p = -i/8. Stimulated PE signal in HVVH polarization configuration is: * 01 L 1 K 1 (cos(ω e τ 12 /2) sin(ω h τ 12 /2) -sin(ω e τ 12 /2) cos(ω h τ 12 /2))e -τ12/T2 * 01 L 1 K 1 (sin(ω e τ 12 /2) cos(ω h τ 12 /2) -cos(ω e τ 12 /2) sin(ω h τ 12 /2))e -τ12/T2 * 01 L 1 K 1 (sin(ω e τ 12 /2) sin(ω h τ 12 /2) + cos(ω e τ 12 /2) cos(ω h τ 12 /2))e -τ12/T2