In this report, we describe a large-area Laser Beam Induced Current (LBIC) microscope that has been adapted to perform Intensity Modulated Photocurrent Spectroscopy in an imaging mode. Microscopy-based IMPS method provides spatial resolution of the frequency response of the solar cell, allowing correlation of the optoelectronic response with a particular interface, bulk material, specific transport layer or transport parameter. We apply this system to study degradation effects in PSCs and find that IMPS imaging can differentiate areas based on their markedly different frequency response; the low frequency response can be used to show degradation in the ambipolar diffusion length whilst the high frequency response is determined by degradation in the local series resistance. In the mid-frequency image contrast appears to be from interfacial recombination related to halide ions. In recent years, metal halide perovskites have attracted enormous attention as they absorb broadly across the solar spectrum and are easily processed into photovoltaic structures using low-cost and low-temperature solution processing. Being able to probe and measure the spatial variation of the transfer function across the active area enables a more complete characterization and potential refinement of equivalent circuits used. Furthermore, combining LBIC and IMPS in-situ and in-operando should provide an unprecedented ability to investigate PSC stability and degradation under controlled conditions as the ability of IMPS to discriminate between properties of interfaces, absorber, and ionic motion points towards monitoring these quantities spatially as the dynamics of the device evolve. The method may prove critical in better understanding and tracking the decomposition of perovskite cells subjected to a variety of stimuli. In this work we introduce IMPS microscopy and use it to study the spatial dependence of moisture related degradation in a back-contact device and illustrate how moisture ingress from the cell periphery readily degrades device performance. It is important to point out that this article's primary aim is to introduce the method; latter papers will focus on its application to the stability of PSCs. Frequency domain techniques such as impedance spectroscopy (IS) and intensitymodulated photocurrent or photovoltage spectroscopy (IMPS/IMVS) The IMPS measurement yields information on the differential external quantum efficiency (EQE PV-diff ) of the device through the low frequency limit of the transfer function, given by: where j ̅ e and j ̅ φ are the steady-state photocurrent and photon current, respectively. Since there is no active gain in these devices, Q ranges from 0 to 1, with 1 being the condition for complete extraction of generated electron-hole pairs. which responds to a particular frequency band. The analysis of IMPS spectra of solar cells is usually carried out by either of two methods. The first method employs the use of equivalent circuit (EC) modelling to predict the IMPS response in terms of passive electrical elements (resistances, capacitances, and inductors). It also requires a well-established EC, which is still under debate for PSCs. The second method, and the one employed here, uses the solution of the diffusion-recombination model to obtain characteristic parameters of transport and recombination. Following the process described by Peter et al. where z is the depth into the absorber and G ̅ (cm -3 s -1 ) and U ̅ (cm -3 s -1 ) are the generation and recombination rates respectively and j̅ is the electron current density. The generation term for the perturbing light source with photon current density j Φ ̅ is given by the Beer-Lambert law: where α is the absorption coefficient. The recombination term is governed by Shockley-Read-Hall (SRH) recombination which is simply: where n i is the intrinsic carrier concentration and τ n and τ p are the electron and hole lifetimes respectively Substituting equations ( Light generated carriers also determine the bulk recombination rate: under high injection the minority carrier lifetime tends to be dominated by radiative bimolecular recombination which decreases with injection reducing carrier lifetime and diffusion length by corollary. where the effective lifetime τ eff = τ n + τ p . The above equation can be analytically solved in the frequency domain using the following boundary conditions: n ̃(d) = 0 (perfectly extracting contact) The transfer function as derived by Peter In the low-frequency limit ω → 0 where attenuation A → 1 , the transfer function approaches: Fitting a spline to the function Q(ω → 0) as shown in Appendix 3.3 allows one to construct a look-up table to convert low frequency Q' images into maps of L amb . This assumes the absence of other low-frequency processes such as ionic movement as discussed in the results section. Using the above model, a series of simulations were performed to observe the spectral shapes generated for varying absorption, transport, and recombination frequencies ( ω a , ω d and ω rec respectively). Optical absorption parameters including extinction coefficients k for thin film MAPbI3 were taken from Leguy et al. At longer wavelengths close to 700 nm Q curves display the Warburg impedance represented by a straight 45 o degree line to zero. and does not normally reveal information about recombination and/or transport processes Under these conditions however, IMPS imaging should allow mapping of series resistance, itself an extremely useful parameter for photovoltaics. Performing IMPS microscopy relies on adapting already existing methods such as Laser or Optical Beam Induced Current (LBIC) microscopy. LBIC and OBIC are both widely employed throughout the semiconductor industry The background illumination I o which light biases the device is another point where this technique differs from typical LBIC. A simple diagram for the IMPS imaging setup is given in Figure Figure The same lock-in provide a reference modulation signal which controls the laser output. A temperature stage also exists but is not used here. A reflectivity probe can also collect an image of the surface for alignment and dust inspection etc. A brief example of the methods application to a novel back contact PSC is given with an emphasis on the technique's imaging aspects. With traditional sandwich structures approaching their PCE limits, new architectures are required to further improve the PCE of perovskite solar cells. Details on fabrication including the use of ZnO and NiOx as the electron selective layer (ESL) and hole selective layer (HSL), respectively are detailed by Jumabekov et al. The main advantage of this architecture for IMPS measurements is that top illumination ensures electrons and holes diffuse vertically through the 500 nm thick absorber for collection at their respective contacts which are spaced laterally spaced 2 μm apart. This Low powers were employed to keep the signal perturbation as small as possible and to avoid other phases appearing. Barbe et al. noted the generation of PbI2 islands in a MAPI device for irradiation powers in the mW regime It is worth noting the caveat of rapid large area scanning is the loss in spatial resolution to around 10 m or so for the system devised here. The broader laser profile used Carriers diffuse towards the electrode structure and are separated once they feel any drift field between the electrodes which remains highly localized due to perovskites high dielectric constant. Bottom SEM image taken with permission from Jumabekov et al. According to Song et al. the hydration of the MAPI layer is probably irreversible for this length of exposure where data is plotted on a complex Q plane and results in several arcs, generally in the upper 1 st or 2 nd quadrant. Large heterogeneities in the degraded cell response seem to stem from the outer rims and move into the device proper which seems consistent with the fact that MAPbI3 being hydroscopic absorbs moisture from the device periphery once the encapsulation fails. Initially let us focus on the low-frequency response where diffusion length maps can be estimated. The more complex higher frequency response is then discussed for the bright (high |Q|) and dark (low |Q|) regions represented by the assorted shapes shown in Figure As outlined in Section 2.2, it is possible to extract a map of the ambipolar diffusion length using the low-frequency limit of Q(ω) where the attenuation factor approaches unity. However, IMPS models presented earlier are based on carrier transport and do not account for ionic motion which is known to dictate the very low frequency response due to their large effective masses To the right of the figure is a histogram plot indicating the total scan (black) as well as a representative portion of the background (BACK) which is green. A square around the cell is blue. The assorted ROIs defined in Figure Figure ) However, whilst Lamb values have decreased from their pre-degradation values, the decrease is not nearly large enough to explain this discrepancy. For example, a cell thickness of 0.5 m and d of 3.6 kHz would result in a diffusion coefficient of 9×10 -6 cm 2 /s, which is orders of magnitude smaller than those recently reported in the literature. However, as noted in the Q xy ′ (ω) images of Figure Based on the shapes of these contours, it is tempting to assign them to interfacial recombination related to defect ingression from oxidative attack as done by Yao et al. In summary, we have presented a novel new implementation of IMPS imaging which we envisage becoming a versatile method for investigating degradation and stability in next generation photovoltaic cells. The potential of the method to spatially resolving the IMPS response has been explored on a moisture degraded back-contact perovskite solar cell. Ambipolar diffusion maps at low frequency and corrosive like morphology in the IMPS maps at higher frequencies illustrate the level of heterogeneity that bulk IMPS would simply average over. Series resistance is shown to limit the high frequency response thereby providing proxy maps for its variation across a device. Possible interfacial recombination linked to halide ions was conjectured to cause large negative photocurrents along the corrosive pathways although more work is to prove this point. In summary, the technique is able to separate the various components leading to cell degradation thereby providing a unique tool for better understanding cell degradation at scales of important for commercial applications. directly sets the recombination regime and minority carrier lifetimes as the AC component should be a small perturbation on this level. However, imaging with focused beams necessarily drives local injection levels considerably higher meaning lifetime will be marginally reduced for the bimolecular regime. MAPbI3 based PSCs are known to degrade more rapidly for multi-sun concentrated sunlight, especially at higher temperatures. 