Mn-based superconductor is rare and recently reported in quasi-onedimensional KMn6Bi5 with [Mn6Bi5] -columns under high pressure. Here we report the synthesis, magnetic properties, electrical resistivity, and specific heat capacity of the newly-discovered quasi-one-dimensional NaMn6Bi5 single crystal. Compared with other AMn6Bi5 (A = K, Rb, and Cs), NaMn6Bi5 has larger intra-column Bi-Bi bond length, which may result in the two decoupled antiferromagnetic transitions at 47.3 K and 52.3 K. The relatively lower antiferromagnetic transition temperatures make NaMn6Bi5 a more suitable platform to explore Mn-based superconductors. Anisotropic resistivity and non-Fermi liquid behavior at low temperature are observed. Heat capacity measurement reveals that NaMn6Bi5 has similar Debye temperature with those of AMn6Bi5 (A = K and Rb), whereas the Sommerfeld coefficient is unusually large. Using first-principles calculations, the quite different density of states and an unusual enhancement near the Fermi level are observed for NaMn6Bi5, when compared with those of other AMn6Bi5 (A = K, Rb, and Cs) compounds. Finding unconventional superconductors violating the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) theory is a promising routine to reach room-temperature superconductivity under ambient pressure and brings out fruitful results in the past decades, like cuprates Mn-based superconductor was first reported in three-dimensional MnP with its helical magnetic order suppressed under pressure Single Crystal Growth. NaMn6Bi5 single crystals were grown by a high-temperature solution method modified from that reported in our former work Structure Characterization and Composition Analysis. X-ray diffraction data were obtained using a PANalytical X'Pert PRO diffractometer (Cu Kα radiation, λ = 1.54059 Å) operated at 40 kV voltage and 40 mA current with a graphite monochromator in a reflection mode (2θ = 5  -100  , step size = 0.017  ). Indexing and Rietveld refinement were performed using the DICVOL91 and FULLPROF programs Five spots in different areas were measured on one crystal using EDS and the ICP-AES measurement was performed on two pieces of single crystal. The crystal structure and chemical composition of CsMn6Bi5 single crystal have also been determined. Physical Property Measurements. The magnetic susceptibility, resistivity, and heat capacity measurements were carried out using a physical property measurement system (PPMS, Quantum Design). Magnetic susceptibility was measured under a small magnetic field (0.1 T) parallel (H // rod) and perpendicular (H  rod) to the rod ([010] direction) using the zero-field-cooling (ZFC) and field-cooling (FC) protocols as reported in RbMn6Bi5 First-Principles Calculations. The first-principles calculations were carried out with the projector augmented wave (PAW) method as implemented in the Vienna ab initio simulation Package (VASP) Monkhorst-Pack K-point meshes were employed for the Brillouin zone (BZ) sampling of the unit cell and the conventional cell, respectively. Crystal Structure. As shown in the inset of Fig. The determined crystal structure based on the SCXRD data is shown in Fig. NaMn6Bi5 crystallizes in a monoclinic space group (Table The effective moment can be derived following the equation μeff = , where n is the number of magnetic atoms. For NaMn6Bi5, the effective moment is μeff ~1.72 μB/Mn for H // rod and μeff ~2.76 μB/Mn for H  rod, respectively. As discussed in RbMn6Bi5 and high-spin 2 3 1.67 (5.48 μB) of octahedrally coordinated d 4.67 , corresponding to the Zintli phase The magnetization of NaMn6Bi5 under magnetic field parallel and perpendicular to the rod ([010] direction) are shown in Fig. , where sat represents the saturation resistivity, ideal is the ideal resistivity that satisfies the Boltzmann equation. ideal is proportional to the temperature in the high temperature region and can be described by ρideal = ρr + aT In comparison, temperature dependent resistivity with I  rod shows an increase below the AFM transition temperature (Fig. Specific Heat Capacity. Temperature dependent specific heat capacity for NaMn6Bi5 single crystal measuring from 2 K to 200 K is shown in Fig. These temperatures are close to the transition temperatures of magnetic susceptibility and resistivity, which are sample-independent and reversible for cooling down and warming up (Fig. (mol-Mn) -1 ], much larger (3~5 times) than that of RbMn6Bi5 (28.2 mJ K -2 per formula) We then tried to understand the effect of structure anomaly in pressure should be the effective means to induce superconductivity within such quasione-dimensional materials with possible helical magnetic order. Table 