We analyze triply degenerate nodal points [or triple points (TPs) for short] in energy bands of crystalline solids. Specifically, we focus on spinless band structures, i.e., when spin-orbit coupling is negligible, and consider TPs formed along high-symmetry lines in the momentum space by a crossing of three bands transforming according to a 1D and a 2D irreducible corepresentation (ICR) of the little co-group. The result is a complete classification of such TPs in all magnetic space groups, including the non-symmorphic ones, according to several characteristics of the nodal-line structure at and near the TP. We show that the classification of the presently studied TPs is exhausted by 13 magnetic point groups (MPGs) that can arise as the little co-group of a high-symmetry line and which support both 1D and 2D spinless ICRs. For 10 of the identified MPGs, the TP characteristics are uniquely determined without further information; in contrast, for the 3 MPGs containing sixfold rotational symmetry, two types of TPs are possible, depending on the choice of the crossing ICRs. The classification result for each of the 13 MPGs is illustrated with first-principles calculations of a concrete material candidate. The discovery of Weyl and Dirac semimetals Triple points appear in two flavours: (1) as threedimensional (3D) irreducible corepresentations (ICRs) of the little group of high-symmetry points (HSPs) in the Brillouin zone (BZ) In contrast, TPs in spinless band structures, which describe bosonic systems as well as electronic systems without magnetic order and negligible SOC, became the subject of a systematic analysis only recently In the present work, we complete the missing aspects of the TP classification by considering the case of TPs lying on HSLs in spinless band structures. In Ref. The manuscript is structured as follows. We start in Sec. II by setting the terminology necessary for describing the nodal structure near TPs. Importantly, we report that even type-A TPs are often associated with a nexus of NLs that lies on the HSL in the vicinity of the TP, and which can collapse onto the TP after fine-tuning some model parameters. Our main classification result, summarized by Tables I and II, therefore includes not only the TP type, but also the codimension for merging type-A TPs with a nexus of nodal lines. The summary of results is followed by an outline of the actual derivation of the TP classification, starting with MPGs without PT symmetry in Sec. III, and followed by the MPGs with PT symmetry in Sec. IV. In the latter case, we briefly touch upon the non-Abelian topology The manuscript is supplemented by several appendices and supplementary data and code In this section, we summarize the key terminology adopted throughout the manuscript, and summarize the obtained classification of TPs in spinless band structures. We begin in Sec. II A by defining the notion of triple points (TPs) and nexus points. This allows us to classify TPs according to their type (A vs. B) and certain additional characteristics (codimension for a nexus point coinciding with a TP for type-A TPs, number of NL arcs attached to a nexus and linear/quadratic attachment). In Sec. II B, we discuss which high-symmetry lines (HSLs) in various space groups can potentially harbor TPs (of some type). Here, the key criterion is that the little group (G HSL ) along the HSL should harbor both 1D and 2D irreducible corepresentations (ICRs). This happens only if the little co-group (the quotient of little group by the translation group, G HSL = G HSL /T) is one of the 13 magnetic point groups (MPGs) listed in Table Finally, Sec. II C presents and briefly discusses the result of our classification, summarized in Table Before introducing the classification scheme in more detail, we set some terminology. Consider a HSL with little group G HSL ; the little group G k of k is defined as the subgroup of the space group that leaves the momentum k invariant modulo translations by reciprocal lattice vectors. Note that G k always contains as a subgroup the (infinite) group T of translations by Bravais vectors. The existence of a TP along the HSL means that a non-degenerate band (1D ICR of G HSL ) crosses a doubly degenerate band (2D ICR of G HSL ), such that the nodal line formed by the latter (which we call the central NL) changes the energy gap [cf. Fig. Often, TPs are accompanied by additional NLs that coalesce with the central NL of the same color at some point on the HSL. We call such a point a red or blue nexus (point), depending on the gap in which it appears -see Fig. Going beyond the terminology of Ref. The presence of stable TPs requires the crossing of 1D and 2D ICRs on the HSL. Thus, a necessary condition is the existence of both 1D and 2D ICRs in the little-group of the HSL. To analyze which HSLs obey these conditions, it is necessary to distinguish the case of symmorphic vs. non-symmorphic space groups. In symmorphic space groups, the ICRs of any little group G k are readily deduced from the ICRs of the corresponding little co-group G k , which is defined as the quotient group G k /T and equal to one of the 122 MPGs. By screening through the irreducible representations of MPGs characterizing HSLs In non-symmorphic space groups, on the other hand, the ICRs of the little group G k are generically not related to the ordinary ICRs of the little co-group G k , but they are instead obtained from the projective ICRs of G k . More precisely, one needs to identify representations ∆ : where the factor system μ : teristics) are fully determined by the corresponding ordinary ICRs of the little co-group. In this work, we classify triple points based on their properties (notably according to their associated NL structure) given a concrete little group of a HSL, while we leave the systematic identification of the space groups that host TPs to other works. Given Table Having determined which HSLs of which space groups can potentially harbor TPs, one can proceed to analyze their type and the other characteristics. This involves a detailed study of k • p expansions near the TP for the various choices of (1) the little co-group and of (2) a pair of its 1D and 2D ICRs. Such a technical analysis constitutes the bulk of Secs. III and IV (further supplemented by Appendices A, C and D). The classification result derived from our analysis is summarized in Table Frequently, even type-A TPs are accompanied by one or more nexus points (in the same or in different gaps) that attach to the central NL near the TP. We therefore determine the TABLE II. Classification of triple points (TPs) on high-symmetry lines in spinless systems as type A vs. type B q vs. type B l based on the little co-group of the high-symmetry line. In the last three columns we list the number n nexus a of nodal-line (NL) arcs attached to a nexus point occurring near or at the TP (for 4 and 6 no NL arcs are possible, which is denoted by the entry '-'), the scaling μ of those NL arcs at the nexus point [k z ∝ (k 2 x + k 2 y ) μ/2 ], and the codimension for colliding at least one nexus point with the TP (for type-B this is naturally 0 and if nexus points cannot be stabilized we write '∞'). For point groups with C 6 rotational symmetry, type and codimension of the TP additionally depend on the irreducible corepresentations (ICRs) ρ 2D ⊕ ρ 1D of the bands involved in the formation of the TP. number n nexus a of NL arcs attached to the nexus point and the codimension (i.e., the number of parameters that have to be fine-tuned) to collide at least one of the nexus points with the TP. The MPGs 4 and 6 are exceptions to this feature, because they do not support NL arcs away from the central line; this is denoted in Table II by a codimension '∞'. For type-B TPs, on the other hand, the codimension can be interpreted as being zero. Note that in contrast to nexus points coinciding with a type-B TP, nexus points near a type-A TP are not enforced by symmetry and therefore not a parameter-independent consequence of the TP. Finally, we observe that the subtype of type-B TPs is determined by the order of rotational symmetry. Writing k 2 = k 2 x + k 2 y , we find that three-fold rotational symmetry results in three NL arcs attaching linearly to the TP k z ∝ k [cf. Fig. In the next two sections, we present the derivation of these results by constructing minimal k • p models for each possible combination of a 2D and a 1D ICR of each of the 13 MPGs shown in Table We begin the derivation of the classification of TPs in Table II by swiftly considering those MPGs in Table I that contain neither space-time-inversion symmetry PT nor mirror symmetry m v . This includes MPGs 4 and 6 that are generated by a single element: C 4z PT and C 6z PT , respectively. These symmetries act like rotations inside the k-space. Therefore, the little co-group of all points lying off the rotation axis contains only the identity element, in which case the codimension for node formation is three (i.e., point nodes in 3D) We continue with the characterization of TPs in those MPGs in Table For each of the listed MPGs we first derive a k • p expansion near the TP within the two-dimensional mirror planes. More precisely, we perform the expansion only in the distance from the rotation axis (k x coordinate inside the mirror plane), whereas we keep the full dependence on the coordinate along the rotation axis (k z ). The derived k • p expansions allow us to determine the TP type and the number of NL arcs attached to a nexus point. For the cases where the TPs are identified as type-A, we derive the codimension for colliding the TP with a nexus point. We also determine the minimal number of nexus points that can simultaneously collide with the TP, which requires us to relate the parameters in the k • p model within symmetry-unrelated sets of mirror planes. The discussion is subdivided into four parts: Secs. III B 1 and III B 2 about MPGs 4mm, 4 2 m and 6mm, Sec. III B 3 about MPG 6 m2 , and finally Sec. III B 4 about MPG 3m. The MPGs 4mm, 4 2 m and 6mm, are all generated by two elements: a rotational symmetry C n (or antiunitary rotational symmetry C n PT ) with n = 4, 6 and a vertical mirror symmetry m with mirror plane containing the rotation axis. For each of these MPGs, the vertical mirror planes come in pairs that are orthogonal to each other: 4mm has two mirror planes along the x-and y-axes (for suitably chosen coordinates) and two diagonal mirror planes [cf. Fig. To introduce concrete labels, say that a TP is formed along the HSL by the crossing of a 1D ICR ρ 1D with a 2D ICR ρ 2D . The common feature of ρ 2D in all the present cases is that any mirror symmetry m ∈ MPG satisfies tr ρ 2D (m) = 0. Combined with the fact that the possible eigenvalues of m are just +1 and -1, the vanishing trace implies that the 2D ICR is spanned by two states with opposite eigenvalues of m. Additionally, m and m ⊥ commute, meaning that they can be diagonalized simultaneously. Adopting a basis in which the two symmetry operators are diagonal, the possible mirror eigenvalues of the ICRs ρ 2D and ρ 1D (which appear on the operator diagonals) are shown in Table Let D be the representation that captures the three bands involved in the triple point, D = ρ 2D ⊕ ρ 1D . We work in the basis in which ρ 2D (m) and ρ 2D (m ⊥ ) are diagonal, and we permute the basis of ρ 2D such that the second eigenvalue of ρ 2D (m) is TABLE III. Possible mirror eigenvalues for the irreducible representations involved in a triple point in one of the following magnetic point groups: 4mm, 4 2 m and 6mm. The two rows of ρ 2D correspond to the eigenvalues in the order defined by a particular choice of basis of the 2D representation. This is well-defined, because m and m ⊥ commute, such that the corresponding matrix representations can be simultaneously diagonalized. Subscripts to ± indicate independent signs. In the analysis of Sec. III B 1, we always rotate the basis such that ± r 1 = ∓ p 1. equal to ρ 1D (m). Referring to Table Recall that a unitary symmetry g with representation D(g) leads to the following constraint on the Hamiltonian We define orthogonal coordinates (k x , k z ) in the m-plane such that k z runs along the rotation axis and such that the TP is located at (k x , k z ) = 0. An expansion to leading order in k x around the TP then takes the following form (see Appendix C 1 a for the derivation): where s = -(± q )(± t ) is a sign corresponding to the sign of the product of the C 2 -characters of ρ 2D and ρ 1D , a(k z ), b(k z ), c(k z ) are continuous real-valued functions, and A(k z ) is a continuous complex-valued function. We suppress the k z argument of the four functions in Eq. ( x . For (1), recall that spectral degeneracies of a matrix correspond to the roots of the characteristic polynomial, and that coinciding roots of a polynomial can be diagnosed by a vanishing discriminant. Therefore, we compute the discriminant of the characteristic polynomial of h 23 (k x , k z ), Because s = ±1, the left-hand side of the equation is a sum of two squares, and as such it has no real solutions except for k x = k z = 0, which, by construction, is the TP. On the other hand, condition (2) is satisfied if and only if where in the second line we dropped the functional dependences of a, b, c and A. Equation ( and find the explicit root that describes the NL arcs. To analyze the result in Eq. ( . We further read from Eq. ( x + k 2 y ) 1/2 , i.e., k arc z (k)k arc z (0) ∝ k 2 . Thus, we conclude that the TP is type A (type B q ) if the product of C 2characters of ρ 2D and ρ 1D is negative (positive). Additionally, we see from the more general Eq. ( To finalize the type classification for the 3 MPGs discussed here, we determine the value of s for each combination of 2D and 1D ICRs ρ 2D ⊕ ρ 1D . This is achieved by looking up the ICRs and C 2 -characters on the Bilbao crystallographic server To begin, note that the band structure respects the MPG symmetry, which readily implies that (i) NL arcs described by the same Eq. ( Additionally, note that the sign s is a characteristic of the two crossing ICRs at the HSL; especially, it does not depend on the particular choice of m. Therefore, the whole algebraic analysis can be repeated for vertical mirror planes m that are not symmetry-related to m [colored differently in Fig. Note that for 4mm the mirrors m and m ⊥ are different, for 6mm we have m = m ⊥ , and for 4 2 m there is no m . We therefore deduce that (ii) NL arcs in the m -plane are defined by the same implicit Eq. ( In the following, we study the implications of observations (i) and (ii) for the NL structure near the discussed TPs. Let us first analyze the implications when s = +1, i.e., when the NL arcs are attached to a type-B TP. It follows from (i) and (ii) that the TP must be connected to one NL arc in each vertical mirror plane [such as shown in Fig. To determine in which gap the NL lies, we need to compare it to the energy of the third band, which can be deduced from Eqs. ( It follows from comparing the three band energies that the NL arc is in the red (blue) gap if a 0 < 0 (a 0 > 0). Observation (ii) seems to suggest that the NL arcs in symmetry-unrelated planes are independent of each other. However, as revealed in Appendix C 2, the four functions describing the expansions in m and m obey certain constraints (explicitly derived in the supplementary data and code x , and that this is also equal to tr(H) after substituting for the bottom-right element of the matrix in Eq. ( x , the result in Eq. ( Therefore, the NL arcs in one set of planes are in the red gap, while the NL arcs in the other set of planes are in the blue gap. Which set of planes contains NL arcs in which gap, depends on the parameter values as illustrated in Fig. In the remainder of this section, we analyze the implications of (i) and (ii) for s = -1, i.e., when the NL arcs connect to the rotation axis away from a type-A TP. Here, note that a crossing of NLs in the two different gaps would automatically imply a threefold degeneracy (i.e., a TP) at the crossing; therefore, it follows that the nexus of NL arcs associated with type-A TPs are formed in the same gap (red/blue) as the central nodal line at which the arcs converge [cf. Fig. First, for MPG 4mm, the derived constraints on the functions describing the expansion in m and m are while a(k z ) and a (k z ) are unrelated. When plugged into Eq. ( A 0 is fine-tuned to 0, the two nexus points (independently of their color) simultaneously collide with the TP. An analogous discussion applies for HSLs with little co-group 4/m mm, with the only relevant change being the reduction of A 0 to be a real (rather than complex) parameter. simultaneously. Notably, if sign(a 0 ) = sign(a 0 ), such that the two nexus points are on the same side of the TP for A 0, all the NL arcs converging at the fine-tuned type-A TP for A 0 = 0 would be in the same gap, cf. Fig. Next, we analyze type-A TPs in the MPG 6mm. It is derived in Appendix C 2 that the expansions in the two planes obey Looking at Eq. ( Lastly, for 4 2 m there is only one set of symmetry-related mirror planes; in this case, there is only a single nexus point with four NL arcs: n nexus a = 4. The group 6 m2 is similar to the cases discussed above in Secs. III B 1 and III B 2, with one crucial difference: each of the three C 3 -symmetry-related vertical mirrors m [cf. Fig. where D(g) is the matrix corepresentation of g. (See Appendix A for a brief review of the representation theory of groups with antiunitary symmetries.) For the two possible combinations of irreducible corepresentations of 6 m2 (E; A 1 ) [upper sign in Eq. ( where a, b, c, d are continuous real-valued functions o f k z . We observe that Eq. ( From here, assuming the functions a, b, c, d are approximately constant near the TP, we obtain the result for the NL arcs where d 0 = d(k z = 0). Therefore, we find that TPs in 6 m2 are always type A. Since there is only one set of symmetry-related planes, only one nexus point is present in the k • p expansion, and n nexus a = 6, because there are three mirror planes with two NL arcs starting at the nexus point each. Additionally, because d is a real parameter, the codimension for colliding the nexus point with the TP is 1. Finally, we discuss the remaining MPG 3m, which has three-fold rotational symmetry with three vertical mirrors that are not associated with corresponding orthogonal (pseudo-)mirror planes [cf. Fig. where a, b, c are real-valued functions and A is a complexvalued function of k z . Degeneracies in the spectrum are obtained (1) if with the only solution k x = k z = 0 (the TP), and (2) if The latter equation has two solutions. First, k x = 0 (the central NL), and second, after approximating a, b, c, A as constants in the vicinity of the TP, (the NL arc). Since lim k x →0 k arc z (k x ) = 0, the NL arc attaches to the TP and it does so linearly as a function of (k 2 x + k 2 y ) 1/2 , such that the TP is always type B l . We again find that n nexus a = 6 (due to three symmetry-related mirror planes with two NL arcs in each). There are six relevant MPGs with PT symmetry listed in Table Initially, we proceed similarly to the previous section: we construct minimal k • p models for the Hamiltonian near the TP in the various MPGs (see Appendix D 1). However, due to the presence of PT symmetry, we cannot restrict to mirror planes and need to study the full 3D k • p models. In contrast to Sec. III, we here find it more convenient to perform the expansion in all three momentum components of k. In the present section, we focus on introducing the relevant methods; in particular, in Sec. IV A, we describe the techniques we developed to determine the leading-order terms of the k • p expansion, while in Sec. IV B we show how to deduce the NL structure near the TP from the obtained leading-order expansions. While we defer concrete calculations and proofs to a supplementary Mathematica notebook In addition, the presence of PT symmetry implies further topological aspects of the triple points: the central NLs containing the triple points are characterized The first step in deriving the classification is once more the construction of minimal k • p models describing the Hamiltonian near the TP (this time we use the full 3D k • p models). We keep only traceless terms of leading order in k (leading in each momentum component separately) and without loss of generality we set the energy of the 2D ICR for k = (0, 0, k z ) to zero and the TP position to the origin k = 0. It is always possible to find a basis in which PT is represented by complex conjugation K x + k 2 y ) μ/2 : type-B q TPs have μ = 2 and type-B l TPs have μ = 1. For all TP types we further define n nexus a as the number ‡ of NL arcs attached to a generic nexus point (coinciding with the TP for type B, in the vicinity of the TP for type A). These properties depend on G k and, in general, on the irreducible corepresentations (ICRs) of the bands involved in the TP formation. The notation for the ICRs follows Ref. for k and ã related to k and a by linear transformations (in Appendix D 2 a we discuss one example of such an equivalence). In particular, this implies that the Hamiltonian spectra are also equal up to the same linear transformations of k and a. Defining equivalence according to Eq. ( with parameters a over k ∈ R 3 to find the NLs. By construction, the line k x = k y = 0 is always a solution with some multiplicity r. Determining the NL arcs (if there are any) corresponds to finding additional real roots of Eq. ( with real coefficients c αβ (θ, a). The particular exponents (α, β) of the bivariate monomials that appear in Eq. ( in the vicinity of the TP. Such a root of ∆ a,θ (k, k z ) is only attainable if the exponents (α , β ) of the leading-order monomials k α k β z obey α + μβ = const. To determine all leading terms in Eq. ( We now describe a systematic procedure for identifying the leading terms. Let be the set of monomials that appear in ∆ a,θ (k, k z ), where " f 1 f 2 " indicates that functions f 1 and f 2 are not identical; then, for each fixed scaling 0 < μ < ∞, the set of leading monomials is Geometrically, L μ (M) is the set of points in M that lie on a line of slope -1/μ, such that the origin (α, β) = (0, 0) is on one side and all the other points of M are on the other side of this line (cf. We note that this is equivalent to the part of the convex hull of M that faces the origin, which is useful for explicitly computing L(M). For more details see the example discussed in Appendix D 2 c and Fig. D.13 therein. Knowing the general principles that determine the leadingorder terms of the discriminant in Eq. ( Note that while there are no NL arcs attached to the TP, there is a possibility (analogous to the corresponding cases without PT symmetry) of nexus points occurring near the TP, i.e., additional NL arcs coalescing at the central NL away from the TP [Fig. The described analysis of the quartic polynomial reveals that there is either a single real root (indicating a NL) or no real root (indicating the absence of NLs away from the rotation axis), depending on the values of the parameters a and θ. In particular, the requirement of a real root restricts θ to discrete values, π 4 , 7π 12 (mod 2π 3 ) for 3 m [ π 12 , π 4 (mod π 3 ) for class-II 6/m mm], which correspond exactly to the mirror planes [cf. Fig. More specifically, we find that the leading-order k • p model for the MPGs without mirror symmetry has two additional terms compared to the corresponding k • p models with mirror symmetry (discussed in Sec. IV B 2). The particular structure of these additional terms is rather fortunate: they can both be generated from terms already present in the mirror-symmetric k • p expansion via an SO(2) rotation of (k x , k y )-coordinates. In particular, one can always find a suitable rotation of the coordinates that removes one of these additional terms (the rotations needed to remove either of the two additional terms are generically different, making it impossible to rotate away both of these new terms simultaneously). Therefore, a suitable rotation of the momentum coordinates leaves us with only one extra term compared to the k • p models with mirror symmetry. Additionally, while the one remaining new term cannot be removed on the level of the leading-order k • p Hamiltonian, it can be removed on the level of the characteristic polynomial by another momentum space rotation and reparametrization. In Appendix D 2 f we discuss this reduction using a concrete example. After performing both of these coordinate transformations and the reparametrization, we reduce the characteristic polynomials of 3 and for class-II 6/m to those of 3 m and of class-II 6/m mm, respectively. Therefore, the TP characterization derived in Sec. IV B 2 translates directly to the MPG without mirror symmetry. The results are summarized in Table IV. For two-band spinless PT -symmetric systems, the winding number of a 2D ICR, i.e., computed on a contour around the corresponding NL, is an integer topological invariant To determine the winding number of the 2D ICRs, we construct additional minimal two-band k • p models. Because the k z -dependence is not directly relevant to the winding number and is not restricted by symmetry, it can be absorbed in the coefficients of the k • p expansion. This results in traceless models of the form with σ = (σ x , σ z ) the real Pauli matrices, h a (k x , k y ) a real twocomponent vector and a a (minimal) list of real parameters. By construction h a (0, 0) = 0 for all a, which corresponds to the central NL along the HSL. The explicit models we used are provided in the supplementary data and code The winding number w 2D of h a (k) along a tight contour around that NL (suppressing the dependence on the parameter a) is given by This calculation can easily be completed analytically by simply plugging h a (k x , k y ) in Eq. ( The fact that three-fold symmetric MPGs give rise to type-B l TPs with |w 2D | = 1 can be intuitively understood (at least in the presence of mirror symmetry) based on Berry phases as follows. Recall that the PT symmetry quantizes the Berry phase φ B on any closed contour (along which a specific energy gap of the spectrum is preserved) to 0 vs. π. In particular, this holds for contours around nodal lines, such that we can assign the quantized Berry phase to each NL (in analogy with assigning the integer winding number to NLs in twoband models). Nodal lines that are protected by either PT or mirror symmetry m v generally carry Berry phase φ B = π Finally, we consider the implications of the winding number for the non-Abelian charge. Note that the integer winding number is only defined for two-band blocks that are separated from the remaining bands by energy gaps; in particular, for the full three-band model exhibiting the TP, the winding number of the central NL cannot be defined anymore. In fact, the central NL is transferred from one gap to another at the TP, such that on the two sides of the TP the integer winding number would have to be computed with respect to different energy gaps. In contrast, the non-Abelian band invariant x + k 2 y ) μ/2 ), and finally a reference to the figure containing the relevant data. The identified type, and values of n nexus a , μ for all materials match our theoretical predictions in Table ( We therefore conclude that TPs of type A and B q are associated with a non-Abelian charge q = -1 computed on a contour encircling the central NL. The two values of the non-Abelian invariant in Eq. ( The classification of TPs derived above allows us to predict, based on symmetry properties, the possibility of stable TPs (including their type) in real materials. In Table For each listed material, we analyze selected TPs and verify their type against the predictions we made in the previous sections. We provide access to all the first-principles data in the supplementary data and code Based on the little groups that can stabilize TPs (listed in Table We analyzed the selected materials as well as the materials from Refs. 36, 45, 47, 48, 50, and 51 in detail by performing first-principle calculations ourselves as detailed below. For that, DFT calculations with the projected augmented wave (PAW) method are implemented in the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) Here we discuss some examples of TP materials in order to illustrate how we used first-principle calculations to verify the predictions of our classification for the NL structure near the TPs. We start with the following four materials: Na 3 N hosting a type-A TP without nexus points, CaNaP hosting a type-A TP with nexus points, TiB 2 hosting a type-B q TP and B 2 CN hosting a type-B l TP. The first-principles data for these four compounds are shown in Figs. 8 to 11, in the given order. In each figure, the band structure on high-symmetry lines is shown in panel (a); therein, the TP is indicated by a yellow dot and arrow, and the bands involved in the TP formation are labelled by their irreducible corepresentations. The corresponding Brillouin zone is illustrated in panel (b). To detect NLs, we perform additional DFT calculations in the appropriate planes containing the nodal lines close to the TP. For compounds with mirror symmetries, these are the mirror planes; for the other compounds we first study slices of fixed k z to detect any NLs close to the central nodal line, and if there are any, we determine the plane in which they lie in the vicinity of the central NL. In panel (c) we then plot the magnitude of the two gaps between the three bands involved in the TP formation (larger color saturation implies smaller energy gap), with the lower (upper) gap data shown in red (blue) color, as usual. The TP is located where the central NL changes color (and sum of the two gaps is minimal). Choosing a suitable cutoff for the gap size, we can also easily recognize the additional NLs and infer the number of NLs attached to the TP as well as their momentum space behaviour μ, which directly determines the type of the TP. We briefly discuss one peculiar TP found in ZrO. According to Tables II and V, ZrO supports type-A TPs on the HSL ∆ (little co-group 4/m mm). However, in Fig. In this work we have presented a classification of triple nodal points (TPs) on high-symmetry lines (HSLs) in spinless systems. In contrast to earlier works, which focused on the classification of such TPs based on their dispersion in k as linear vs. quadratic Curiously, we find (both in k • p models and in firstprinciples calculations) that sometimes a collection of NL arcs meet at a nexus point along the HSL in close vicinity of a type-A TP. By fine-tuning the model parameters it is possible to accidentally collide the two, i.e., to accidentally attach NL arcs to the otherwise type-A TP. To estimate the likelihood of this scenario, we have determined the codimension for realizing such fine-tuned models. We have shown that for certain symmetries, this is achieved by tuning a single parameter; indeed, we have identified a concrete material (ZrO) in which such an accidental fine-tuning happens to be realized. Additionally, while type-B TPs are convergence points of an equal number of NL arcs in both adjacent energy gaps, the NL arcs meeting at such fine-tuned type-A TPs can (for a suitable choice of model parameters) all be realized in the same energy gap. It is worth noting that TPs of a remarkable variety of types and codimensions are realizable in spinless band structures, especially if contrasted to the spinful case. In this respect, note that a HSL can only exhibit TPs if its little group exhibits both 1D and 2D irreducible corepresentation (ICRs). While for spinful systems there are only two magnetic points groups (MPGs) that have both 1D and 2D ICRs and that arise as little co-groups along HSLs We further find that non-symmorphicity influences the derived classification of TPs in spinless band structures in a rather trivial way: it either renders TPs impossible [for HSLs on the Brillouin zone (BZ) boundary when the projective factor system is non-trivial] or keeps the characterization of TPs unchanged (for HSLs inside BZ and when the projective factor system belongs to the trivial equivalence class). The presented characterization of TPs applies to spinless representations in all space groups (magnetic or not, nonsymmorphic or not), and as such provides that next essential piece of information towards the growing catalogue of symmetry-protected and symmetry-enforced band nodes We conclude with one speculation that may constitute an interesting research avenue for the near future. For the "altermagnets" mentioned above, "spin symmetry groups" Given a little group G k (which generally is non-unitary) we are interested in finding all ICRs. We start by factorizing G k into left cosets with respect to the translation group T: where {R|v} denotes the symmetry operation that acts on a position vector as {R|v}r = Rr+v and R is either unitary or antiunitary. We make the unitarity and antiunitarity more explicit by using unprimed and primed indices for unitary elements and antiunitary elements, respectively: This decomposition is unique only up to changes of each w α by arbitrary lattice vectors t α ∈ T, where the Greek subscripts encompass both unitary and antiunitary elements. The coset representatives {S α |w α } do not form a group, but satisfy where 1 is the identity rotation, S γ = S α S β with w γ the corresponding translation in the coset decomposition and Given a CR D of G k , then according to Eq. (A2) and using it holds that where S l = S i S j , S l = S i S j , S l = S i S j , and S l = S i S j , respectively. One can show that D only depends on the coset in the decomposition shown in Eq. (B1) and therefore is a matrix-valued function on the quotient group G k /T, which is isomorphic to the little co-group G k . This implies that we can write and ∆ forms a projective CR of G k with factor system μ(S α , S β ) = f (t αβ ) (the definition of PCRs and some of their properties are reviewed in Appendix B 2). Furthermore, all ICRs of G k can be found by finding the projective ICRs of G k and only keeping those with the correct factor system μ(S α , S β ) = e -ik•(w α +S α w β -w γ ) . (B8) Projective corepresentations of a finite-order group G with unitary subgroup H and antiunitary complement G -H generalize the notion of (ordinary) representations. A PCR ∆ is a map from G to the group of invertible matrices that satisfies for any g ∈ G, h ∈ H and a ∈ G -H [in contrast, for ordinary CRs one demands, μ(g, g ) = 1 for all g, g ∈ G]. The map μ : G × G → C forms a so-called factor system and satisfies for all g, g ∈ G, h ∈ H and a ∈ G -H. As for ordinary CRs, similarity transformations [cf. Eq. (A3)] map a PCR to an equivalent PCR. If the factor system satisfies |μ(g, g )| = 1 for all g, g ∈ G [which it does in our use case, cf. Eq. (B8)], we can always find a transformation such that ∆(g) is unitary for all g ∈ G. Additionally, given a PCR ∆ for all g ∈ G and C : G → C \ {0} a function into non-zero complex numbers, ∆ forms another projective representation with factor system for all g ∈ G, h ∈ H and a ∈ G -H. The transformation in Eq. (B11) defines equivalence classes of factor systems: two factor systems μ and ν are equivalent if and only if there exists a complex-valued function C such that Eq. (B12) is satisfied. We now prove the following theorem. Although we expect the theorem to be known among the experts, we failed to find it explicitly stated within the literature on representation theory of (magnetic) space groups. Theorem. Let G k be a little group that has at least one 1D ICR D 1 . Then, the ICRs of G k are deduced from projective ICRs of the corresponding little co-group G k with factor system belonging to the trivial equivalence class. Proof. The little group G k has CRs deduced from PCRs of G k with factor system μ given by Eq. (B8). Because G k has a 1D ICR D 1 , there must be a corresponding 1D projective ICR ∆ 1 of G k with the same factor system μ. Consider the equivalence transformation of factor systems induced by Then, according to Eqs. (B9) and (B12), one easily verifies that the transformed PCRs will have factor system for all g, g ∈ G. This immediately implies that μ is a factor system in the trivial equivalence class (but not necessarily trivial itself). Now that we know the relationship between CRs of G k and PCRs of G k we can rewrite Eq. (A7) in terms of elements of G k and the corresponding PCR ∆: for S i , S i ∈ G k , S i unitary and S i antiunitary. The little groups we study support stable TPs. Therefore, they must have at least one 1D ICR, such that, according to the theorem in Appendix B 3, ∆ has factor system in the trivial equivalence class. We therefore consider where e iφ(g) = ∆ -1 1 (g) plays the role of the equivalence transformation C(g) by the 1D unitary projective ICR [cf. Eq. (B13)], and ∆ is an ordinary CR of G k (but not a CR of G k ). Then, because the factors e iφ(S α ) and e -iφ(S α ) cancel. The observation here is that the symmetry constraints on the k • p expansion are unaffected by the equivalence transformation in Eq. (B16). By matching the ICRs of G k to ordinary ICRs of G k via Eq. (B16), the set of constraints for any given CR D of G k is therefore reduced to a set of constraints for the corresponding ordinary CRs D of G k . The classification of triple points in non-symmorphic space groups is therefore reduced to their classification in symmorphic space groups by properly identifying ICRs of the little group with ICRs of the little co-group. That identification of ICRs can be easily performed by looking up ICRs of both groups, matching generators of G k to those of G k = G k /T and identifying the necessary phases φ(S α ). As discussed in Sec. III B 1, the MPGs 4mm, 4 2 m and 6mm, have mirror symmetries that appear in orthogonal pairs (m, m ⊥ ). With D the representation capturing the transformation of the three bands involved in the triple point, D = ρ 2D ⊕ ρ 1D , a basis can be chosen such that the two mirror symmetries have the following matrix representations Note that in the main text Table and implies that with i being real-valued functions and f a complex-valued function of k x and k z . Note that, as emphasized in the main text, for groups without PT symmetry we derive the low-order expansion only in k x , while keeping the full dependence on k z . To that end, first note that m ⊥ constrains the Hamiltonian by This implies that i are even in k x , and that i.e., f is even (odd) in k x if the product of the signs of the C 2characters of ρ 2D and ρ 1D is positive (negative), cf. Table Let us denote the sign of that number by Finally, the (antiunitary) rotational symmetry (C 4 , C 4 PT , and C 6 for the three discussed MPGs, respectively) leads to the following additional constraints: 1 (0, k z ) = 2 (0, k z ) and f (0, k z ) = 0. Assuming there is a TP at k z = 0 at energy E = 0, we have i (0, 0) = 0 for i = 1, 2, 3 and with ã, b, c, d, ẽ real-valued functions and A a complex-valued function of k z . The degeneracies of the spectrum are clearly independent of constant energy shifts (i.e., terms in the Hamiltonian that are proportional to the identity matrix), such that we can subtract 1 2 ( ̃ 1 + ̃ 2 )1 and arrive at the following Hamiltonian with a, b, c real-valued functions and A a complex-valued functions of k z . b. 6 m2 The MPG 6 m2 has three vertical mirror planes m, which are related by C 3 symmetry, and another set of symmetryrelated pseudo-mirror symmetry m ⊥ PT , where m ⊥ is the mirror perpendicular to m. Therefore, we proceed analogously to Appendix C 1 a, with the key difference that the analog to Eq. (C4) involves the antiunitary symmetry m ⊥ PT instead of m ⊥ . Therefore, in the mirror planes of m, the Hamiltonian takes the form given in Eq. (C3) and is subjected to the constraint [cf. Eq. (A7b)]: We find that in an appropriate choice of basis where the upper (lower) sign corresponds to choosing representation ρ 1D = A 1 (ρ 1D = A 2 ). The above constraint implies that i are even functions of k x , and that further implying that for d ∈ R. By repeating the final steps of Appendix C 1 a, we arrive at with a, b, c, d being real-valued functions of k z . Note that the final result in Eq. (C13) corresponds exactly to Eq. (C8) with A = d(1 ∓ i) and s = -1. Finally, we discuss the remaining MPG 3m, which has three-fold rotational symmetry with three vertical mirrors that do not come in pairs with orthogonal mirror planes. Again, we choose coordinates (k x , k z ) in the mirror plane under consideration (the three mirror planes are equivalent due to rotational symmetry), then the Hamiltonian takes again the form given in Eq. (C3). In this case, however, there are no constraints on i and f to be even or odd functions of k x , such that to leading order in k x : with a, b, c real-valued functions and A a complex-valued function of k z . The functional form of the k • p models in Eq. (C8) has been derived with rather general assumptions, such that it applies to arbitrary mirror planes containing the rotation axis. In this respect, note that point groups 4mm and 6mm each have two sets of symmetry-related mirror planes (cf. differently colored planes in Fig. Nevertheless, a relationship between the two sets of functions can be established. This is achieved by considering the full 3D k • p model, i.e., one not restricted to mirror planes, but which reduces to the functional form in Eq. (C8) (with suitable choice of functions a, b, c, A) for both sets of mirror planes. In this section, we clarify how to relate the parameters of the k • p model in the independent sets of mirror planes of point groups 4mm and 6mm without determining the full 3D k • p model. We consider a point group G with two generators: an nfold rotation C n (for simplicity, n is assumed even; in our application n = 4, 6) and a vertical mirror m 0 (such that the mirror plane contains the axis of rotation). The elements of G; for brevity we call them coefficients) that multiply matrixvalued polynomial functions h i (k M ) subject to Eq. (C20) (for brevity we call h i (k M ) terms in the k • p model). Finally, we truncate the expansion such that the polynomials have order of at most N in k M . Then, for k ∈ M, and collecting the parameters a i in the vector a, we write To summarize, the multiple decorations of the Hamiltonian appearing on the left-hand side of Eq. (C21) remind us that H (N) M [a] is a parameterized (parameters a) and truncated (order N) expansion of the Hamiltonian H(k) restricted to the plane M. Note that Eq. (C21) is incarnated, for example, in Eq. ( It is important to keep in mind that an equation with the same functional form as Eq. (C21) applies to any of the n mirror planes [because for each such a plane one can choose a pair of orthogonal mirror symmetries characterized by constraints analogous to Eq. (C20)]; in particular, the functional form of h i can be considered to be independent of M (while both its argument k M as well as the basis in which the resulting H (N) M is given depend on the mirror plane under consideration). To simplify our subsequent analysis of the symmetry constraints, we find it convenient to further adopt the notation (one should keep in mind here that h i M depends non-trivially only on the k M -component of k). Generically, the parameters a are different in different mirror planes. However, due to rotational symmetry, they are constrained to be identical in all mirror planes in the same conjugacy class. We are therefore left with two sets of parameters a and a for the mirror planes M 0 and M 0 , respectively. The goal of this appendix is to relate a and a . To motivate the subsequent technical analysis, let us summarize here the steps that have to be taken to arrive at the sought relation (working out these steps fills the remainder of this Appendix). M (k) that appears in the k • p expansion of the Hamiltonian restricted to a mirror plane, i.e., satisfies Eq. (C20), we show in Eqs. (C23) and (C25) to (C28) that by symmetrizing h i M (k) we obtain a term ĥi c(m) (k) that appears in the k • p expansion of the full Hamiltonian, i.e., satisfies Eq. (C19). As indicated by the notation, the terms in the full Hamiltonian produced by such a symmetrization, only cover one conjugacy class of mirror planes; some terms that would appear in a k • p expansion of the full Hamiltonian and are relevant in its restriction to mirror planes from the other conjugacy class are missing. 2. We next turn to relating the two conjugacy classes. We observe that the point groups and representations under consideration satisfy a useful property that relates the representations of symmetry-unrelated mirror symmetries to each other, cf. Eq. (C29a), giving us the previously unknown transformation U between the bases in which h i M 0 (k) and h i M 0 (k) are expressed in terms of the same functions h i , cf. Eq. (C31). c(m 0 ) (k) and ĥi c(m 0 ) (k), we next define the reconstructed k • p model Ĥ(N) [B](k) as the k • p model obtained from all those symmetrized terms, i.e., from both c(m 0 ) and c(m 0 ), cf. Eq. (C33). The basis transformation U then allows us to write all those terms using the matrix-valued polynomial functions h i , cf. Eq. (C34). 4. Finally, we evaluate Ĥ(N) [B](k) in the planes M 0 and M 0 and compare the result to [a ](k), respectively. This allows use to express a and a in terms of B and therefore determine if and how a and a are related. To start the analysis of step 1 in the above list, note that each term h i M (k) in H (N) M [a](k) satisfies Eq. (C20) and originates from a term in the full k • p Hamiltonian H (N) (k) that satisfies Eq. (C19). Let further n M = C n/2 n e M be the normal of the mirror plane M corresponding to the mirror symmetry m (here m is chosen to be one of the representatives of the conjugacy classes, i.e., either m 0 or m 0 ). In order to find symmetrycompatible terms appearing in the 3D expansion H (N) (k), we define for any k ∈ R 3 a symmetrized matrix-valued polynomial function where M l = C l n M and Note that where we utilized that n • k = (S n) • (S k) for any orthogonal symmetry S . The final line of Eq. (C25) reveals that the argument of h i M in Eq. (C23) lies in M as it is supposed to. We proceed to show that ĥi c(m) (k) defined by Eq. (C23) satisfies Eq. (C19). First, by substituting l = p + 1 and using C 0 n = C n n (both corresponding to the identity element), we eas- which reveals that ĥi c(m) (k) obeys Eq. (C19a). Furthermore, for any mirror symmetry m, it holds that m-1 where we again used that n • k = (S n) • (S k), and additionally that mirrors are their own inverses, m = m-1 . Using Eqs. (C16), (C23), (C25) and (C20a) and where in the second line we further used hat m acts trivially inside M (and therefore its addition to the argument of h i M does not alter the expression), and in the fourth line we substituted p = nl. The final line above confirms that ĥi c(m) (k) also respects Eq. (C19b). Therefore, we have shown that ĥi c(m) (k) is a term that appears in the 3D expansion H (N) (k) (even though it does not generally reduce to h i M (k) in the mirror plane M). Up to here, we have treated each of the two independent sets of symmetry-related mirror planes independently, reflected in the use of the generic mirror m. We now turn to step 2 of the above list. Looking up where in indicating the momentum arguments we used that the (symmetry inequivalent) planes M 0 and M 0 (and the corresponding in-plane components k M 0 and k M 0 ) are related by a C 2n rotation (not an element of G). Note that in the resulting k • p Hamiltonian these terms appear with different coefficient functions a compared to the ones that appear in the expansion for M 0 : Next, in step 3, we define the reconstructed k • p model as the family of Hamiltonians with symmetrized terms ĥi c(m 0 ) (k) and ĥi c(m 0 ) (k) parametrized by the k z -dependent components of some vector B. Since there are twice as many terms, B has twice as many components as a making it convenient to introduce vectors b and b , B = (b, b ), such that the terms originating from c(m 0 ) and c(m 0 ) appear with components of b and b , respectively, as coefficients: Substituting Eq. (C23), and comparing to Eq. (D3) we can rewrite the terms as symmetrizations of where for the last equality we applied Eq. (C31) to the terms in The family of Hamiltonians Ĥ(N) M 0 [a](k) and Recognizing the terms h i (k) on the both sides of the above two equations and comparing their respective coefficients, allows us to express a and a in terms of B. Subsequently, we can simply read off the relationship between a and a (cf. Eqs. 2 , 1 2 (dashed parameters) and find, for type-A TPs that a = a, b = b, c = c and A = (∓ p )(± q )A [cf. Eq. ( TABLE VI. Generators of the magnetic point group 6/m mm, including their action on position as well as the matrix corepresentation (E 1 ; A 1 ). Action on position Matrix corepresentation In Appendix A we have described how to obtain k • p models for magnetic point groups (MPGs) based on the knowledge of only the irreducible representations of the unitary subgroup. Below, we work through an example and in the supplementary data and code As an example we consider the MPG 6/m mm and representation (E 1 ; A 1 ). The representation matrices of the two generators of the unitary subgroup 6mm of 6/m mm can be easily obtained from the Bilbao crystallographic server (BCS) [first two rows of Table where we used that PT commutes with all g ∈ 6mm and (PT ) 2 = 1. For the 1D IR A 1 a solution is N A 1 = 1 and for E 1 N E 1 = σ x , [this can be verified using the lower (upper) diagonal 1 × 1 (2 × 2) block in the corepresentation matrices of the generators given in Table The resulting CR matrices UD(g)U † for g = C + 6 , σ d3 and UD(PT )U are provided as input to the Python package kdotp-symmetry. That returns a set of eleven Bloch matrices H i (k) with entries that are polynomials in k x , k y , k z . Not all of those terms are actually relevant for our purposes. Diagonal matrices that are k-independent and those that are proportional to the identity encode only constant shifts in energy and can thus be dropped. Therefore, we make all matrices traceless and then keep only an independent set of those. Finally, we are interested in the behavior near the expansion point, such that leading order matrices are sufficient. After this procedure we end up with four matrices and the full k • p model can be written as where a is the vector with components a i . The terms H 2,3 contribute directly to the three eigenenergies, while H 1 couples the two bands transforming in the same 2D ICR and H 4 couples the 2D ICR to the 1D ICR. Here, we illustrate the derivation of the classification of triple points (TPs) for magnetic point groups with PT symmetry, i.e., the MPGs 3 , 4/m , 6/m , 3 m, 4/m mm and 6/m mm, by presenting a number of representative example calculations. The full calculations for all MPGs are provided in a Mathematica notebook In the subsequent subsections we show some representative calculations for MPGs without sixfold rotational symmetry. First, in Appendix D 2 e, we discuss the MPG 4/m mm giving rise to a type-A TP, while highlighting that although there are no additional nodal lines attached directly to the TP, there might be a nexus of NL arcs a short distance away from the TP. Finally, we consider the MPG 3 to illustrate the reduction of the characteristic polynomial of models without mirror symmetry to the characteristic polynomial of the corresponding models with mirror symmetry in Appendix D 2 f. Let us briefly illustrate the equivalence of certain ICR combinations as discussed in Sec. IV using (E 2 ; A 1 ) and (E 2 ; A 2 ) of 6/m mm as an example. The characteristic polynomials χ[H (i) a (k)](E) of the k • p Hamiltonians for the ICR combinations (E 2 ; A i ) are (in polar coordinates (k x , k y ) = k(cos(θ), sin(θ)) and with energy E the polynomial variable) χ H (1) a We observe that We first construct a • p model for the 2D ICR E 1 of 6/m mm as described in Appendix D 1: The resulting model can be written in terms of Pauli matrices as indicated in Eq. ( The winding number defined in Eq. ( Noting that the discriminant of a third-order polynomial is defined as we find (by fully utilizing Mathematica) the discriminant of the characteristic polynomial to be We next determine the leading-order terms in the discriminant following the method outlined in Eqs. ( near the TP. From the obtained leading-order expansion it is apparent that there are no real roots apart from k = 0 (the central NL), and we conclude that the TP is type A. For class II the algebra is much more involved, mainly because none of the terms in the discriminant of the characteristic polynomial is subleading. Again, we first determine the relevant k • p model for the corepresentation (E 1 ; B 1 ). The only difference to Eq. (D3) is the replacement of H 4 (k) by We omit the explicit expressions for the characteristic polynomial and for the discriminant ∆ a,θ (k, k z ) here; they can be found in the supplementary data and code The nature of its real roots, i.e., the number of distinct real roots and their multiplicities, is determined The following cases are possible: (1) a single real root of multiplicity Evaluating all these conditions with Mathematica, we find that only cases (1) and ( and case Because for 6/m mm the NL arcs lie in the mirror planes, we can find explicit expressions k arc z (k) for them by substituting the conditions on θ given in Eq. (D17) into ∆ a,θ (k, k z ) = 0 and solving for k z : We observe that lim k→0 k arc z (k) = 0, such that the NL arcs attach to the TP and from Eq. (D18) we can read off that μ = 2, since k z (k) ∝ k 2 ; thus, the TP is type B q . As long as |a 5 | a 1,3,4 , i.e., as long as the coupling of the 1D to the 2D ICR is small, these NLs attach to the central NL close to the TP, such that the k • p expansion is still reliable enough. In both sets of mirror planes (θ = 0 and θ = π/4), the position of the nexus is proportional to the same parameter a 5 ∈ R, which implies codimension 1. The two sets of NL arcs that lie within the two inequivalent sets of mirror planes generically lie at different distance from the TP, implying n nexus a = 4. They are of the same (different) color if sign(a 4 a 5 ) = +1 (-1). Fine-tuning to a 5 = 0 collides both nexus points with the type-A simultaneously [cf. inset to Fig. Analogously, we find for class-I 6/m mm Note that the expressions for k arc z (k) in the two sets of planes are identical, such that there is only a single nexus point with n nexus a = 12 NL arcs in the same gap and with the same functional dependence on k for small k (including higher-order terms reveals that the NL arcs generically do behave differently as a function of k in the two sets of planes). Fine-tuning to a 4 = 0 collides the nexus point with the type-A TP, such that the codimension is 1. f. Analysis in the absence of mirror symmetry ( 3 ) Finally, we discuss the reduction of the characteristic polynomial of the k • p Hamiltonian for the MPG 3 to the one resulting from 3 m as a concrete example of the abstract discussion presented in Sec. IV B 3. After a reparametrization of the k • p model for the ICR combination (E; A 1 ) of 3 , the Hamiltonian takes the form with i.e., formed by only the first three terms in Eq. (D22). In the following we show that by appropriate rotations of k and reparametrizations, i.e., transformations of a, the characteristic polynomial χ[H We first observe that the momentum-space coordinate transformation k = R z (-θ 1 )k, where R z (θ) denotes a rotation around the k z -axis about the angle θ, with with a 3 = a 2 3 + a 2 5 , (ii) leaves H 2 (k) invariant, and (iii) transforms a 1 H 1 (k) + a 4 H 4 (k) to with (a 1 , a 4 ) = R(-θ 1 )(a 1 , a 4 ), where R(θ) ∈ SO(2) is the 2 × 2 rotation matrix about the angle θ. Therefore, we find that with a = (a 1 , a 2 , a 3 , a 4 , 0). Next, we compute the characteristic polynomial of transforms the first term in Eq. (D28) to 2(a 3 ) 2 (k ) We conclude that in the rotated coordinates k the characteristic polynomial of the leading-order k • p model for 3 is, up to reparametrization, identical to the characteristic polynomial obtained from the leading-order k • p model for 3 m. Any properties that only depend on the characteristic polynomial, which include nodal structures such as TPs and NL arcs attached to TPs, are therefore the same. Therefore, we find that TPs on HSLs with little co-group 3 are always type B l with n nexus a = 6 and μ = 1. In this appendix we provide figures supporting the results in Table V that are not already included in the main text. The presented data clarify the types and values for n nexus a and μ listed in the table. All the first-principles data and the code used to analyze them is published in a data and code collection Note that the set M is called m-plane in the main text; however, the mathematically involved discussion that follows requires a more compact notation (only adopted in the present Appendix C 2).