Topological insulators constitute one of the most intriguing phenomena in modern condensed matter theory. The unique and exotic properties of topological states of matter allow for unidirectional gapless electron transport and extremely accurate measurements of the Hall conductivity. Recently, new topological effects occurring at Dirac/Weyl points have been better understood and demonstrated using artificial materials such as photonic and phononic crystals, metamaterials and electrical circuits. In comparison, the topological properties of nodal lines, which are one-dimensional degeneracies in momentum space, remain less explored. Here, we explain the theoretical concept of topological nodal lines and review recent and ongoing progress using artificial materials. The review includes recent demonstrations of non-Abelian topological charges of nodal lines in momentum space and examples of nodal lines realized in photonic and other systems. Finally, we will address the challenges involved in both experimental demonstration and theoretical understanding of topological nodal lines. Degeneracies in energy-momentum relations, so-called band structures, play an important role in many fields of physics from classical mechanics to condensed matter physics and optics. Recently, the study on degenerate points in band structures opened a new path to observe many exotic topological behaviors. For instance, Dirac points, point degeneracies with a linear dispersion relation in two-dimensional momentum space By recovering the broken symmetry in a structure with Dirac/Weyl points, i.e., making it P and T symmetric, a nodal line To study the topological characteristics of the nodal * ohs2@cardiff.ac.uk lines, the starting point is to define topological invariants which are the conserved quantities when any topological phase transitions do not occur, i.e., the topological phase do not change under certain perturbations Along with the progress in understanding band topology, recent years saw the rapid development of topological photonics which studies and demonstrates the topological states of photons in metamaterials (including metallic photonic crystals) In this review, we will aim to cover the basic theory of topological physics with a focus on topological nodal lines and introduce important examples of topological nodal lines demonstrated in various artificial material systems. In Section II, we describe the degeneracies in band structures including Weyl points and nodal lines. In Section III, we explain Abelian and non-Abelian topological invariants using two examples, the Berry phase and the Wilczek-Zee connection. In Section IV, we highlight examples of topological nodal lines in metamaterials, photonic crystals and photonic systems with synthetic dimensions. In Section V, we discuss examples in electronic crystals, phononic crystals and electrical circuits. In an electronic band structure, two adjacent bands may touch each other in one or more k-point(s) meaning that the two bands have the same energy but different eigenstates. This is 'degeneracy'. The concept of de-generacy can also be applied to photonic/phononic band structures which are the frequency-wavevector relations for waves in a periodic array of photonic/phononic atoms. In three-dimensional momentum space, the degeneracies can be classified as zero-, one-, and two-dimensional depending on their dimensionality. In this section, we will explain zero-and one-dimensional degeneracies which can be Weyl points and nodal lines, respectively, and introduce diverse categories of nodal lines that are classified by their shapes. A. Zero-dimensional degeneracies: Weyl points A representative example of a zero-dimensional degeneracy is a Weyl point In the early 2010s, significant efforts have been made to realize Weyl points One-dimensional degeneracies (co-dimension N -1 in a N -dimensional space), called 'nodal lines', can be found when two bands touch each other on a line in momentum space As shown in Figure If two rings intersect each other, they form a nodal chain Multiple nodal rings may form an infinite nodal chain In some cases, multiple nodes of different types can appear mixed. First, the mixed shape of the nodal rings appear as earring nodal links For the above classification, we make one assumption for brevity. As we will look at a periodic system, the momentum space is periodic. When a nodal line crosses a Brillouin zone boundary, it intersects at the same point at the opposite Brillouin zone boundary. Therefore, a nodal line and a double helix (Figure The physical behaviors of bands in momentum space are interpreted using several kinds of topological invariants. The topological invariant is a quantized number that characterizes the topological status of a given system, and the Chern number or Berry phase are examples of the topological invariants. The topological invariants are related to the various phenomena (e.g., surface states) of the topological insulators, which act as an insulators in their bulk and permit the electronic/photonic/phononic waves on their boundaries. For example, in T -symmetry broken topological insulators, one-way surface states are formed at the interface of two band-gapped materials due to the difference in Chern numbers between two bands In the following, we review Abelian and non-Abelian topological invariants. We introduce the Berry phase As noted in Section II, a Weyl point and a nodal line are zero-and one-dimensional degeneracies, respectively. In fact, a nodal line in three-dimensional space has the similar features to a Dirac point In case of the Abelian charge of nodal lines, to describe the topological nature of multiple degeneracies between the same pair of bands, e.g., in a two-band system, the topological invariants are obtained by simply summing up the invariants of all the degeneracies. However, such an invariant cannot express the full topological nature of the multi-band systems. For example, when the Abelian charges are used, the nodal lines between the first and second bands and between the second and third bands commonly exhibit a topological charge of ±π. Thus, this invariant cannot distinguish which bands make the degeneracy, and the relation of the charges between a different pair of bands cannot be described. The non-Abelian band topology gives a solution for the multi-band systems Berry phase is a geometrical phase that is obtained by a system when it moves along a closed path in a parameter space Here, we assume that the eigenstates in Eqs. ( A state |ψ (t) satisfying the time-dependent Schrödinger equation is considered. If the parameter k changes adiabatically (that is, k varies slowly with time), the state |ψ (t) that was in n-th state at t = 0 remains in the same state at t = T where T is the period of the cycle where the first exponential term is the dynamical phase factor. By substituting |ψ (t) into the time-dependent Schrödinger equation, the geometric phase γ n can be obtained as an integral form. If a closed loop Γ in k-space is considered such that k (0) = k (T ), we have where As we consider a closed loop, the phase difference k) |u n (k) should be an integer multiple of 2π, so that γ n in Eq. ( Here, γ n and A n (k) are called Berry phase and Berry connection, respectively From the orthonormality relation Thus, the integrand in Eq. ( Nodal lines are generated when both P and T symmetries are conserved. Such a situation corresponds to the lack of σ 2 in the Weyl Hamiltonian. In this case, the Berry phase in Eq. ( A state |η m (t) of the m-th band satisfying the Schrödinger equation can be expressed as a linear combination of the basis |u n (k (t)) in Eqs. (1) (2): If we assume that |η m (t) remain normalized, we have (8) This equation can be arranged as follows: or where T and [W] mn = W mn . Using the orthonormality condition in Eq. ( (11) Then the path-ordered integrals of this can be expressed as or if we consider a closed loop Γ, and if we recall that Here, the component of A (k) is given by and is called the Wilczek-Zee connection In this section, the expressions derived in the previous section are applied to a three-band system. Following formalism will be the basis of the rigorous description of quaternion charges To calculate the topological charges of an arbitrary nodal line, first, a closed loop Γ (α) (α ∈ (0, 2π]) around the nodal line is considered (see Figure Eq. ( where β = [-A 23 , -A 31 , -A 12 ] and (L i ) jk =ijk If the closed loop encircles the nodal line formed by the bands m = 1 and n = 2, A (k) is rewritten as where β 12 (k) = [0, 0, -A 12 ]. Substituting Eq. ( The spin Wilczek-Zee connection which is a spin (N )valued 1-form is then written as where the components of σ = [σ 1 , σ 2 , σ 3 ] are the Pauli matrices and t = (-i/2) σ. From Eqs. ( If the integral Γ(α) -A 12 dk is ±π, the charge n Γ becomes ∓iσ 3 . Now, if the closed loop encircles the nodal line formed by the bands m = 2 and n = 3, A (k) in Eq. ( . Substituting this into Eq. ( The spin Wilczek-Zee connection is Ā , and the charge in Eq. ( In the same way as the first case, we obtain n Γ = ∓iσ 1 when Γ(α) -A 23 dk = ±π. To describe the non-Abelian band topology, Q. Wu et al. Thus, the topological charges calculated in Eqs. ( We apply the above formalism to a system expressed by a 3 × 3 Hamiltonian. First, the rightmost side of Eq. ( where Let us suppose that |u n k (n = 1, 2, 3) are the eigenstates of the Hamiltonian of the given system. To satisfy Eqs. ( In the above, we mentioned that the quaternion ∓iσ 3 is obtained if this integral is ±π. Thus, we can deduce g (2π) = ±π, and one can define g (α) = ±α/2 where We assume = [0, -sin (g (α)) , cos (g (α))] with the same g (α). The integral in Eq. ( and we get similar results; the eigenstates u 2 k and u 3 k rotate by ±π around u 1 k that corresponds to the quaternion ∓iσ 1 . Thus, if the nodal line system is described by a 3×3 Hamiltonian, the eigenstates u 1 k , u 2 k , u 3 k along the closed loop can be calculated and plotted along an arbitrary coordinate system (see Figure Let us think more about the rotation behaviors of the eigenstates u 1 k , u u 3 k0 , these eigenstates u n k0 are the same as the unit vectors of the coordinate system. For an arbitrary orthonormal coordinate system |e n , the eigenstates |u n k can be mapped to (u ) n k by the following rotation matrix The resulting new eigenstates (u ) Now, we want to render a plot similar to Figure In the same manner, if the correlations C In the previous sections, the non-Abelian topological charges in three-band systems were introduced. On top of discovering the nodal line systems with non-Abelian charges, it has been studied how the non-Abelian charged degeneracies evolve with the tuning of the Hamiltonian. Such evolutions include the annihilation or creation of the degeneracies In a recent experimental work As we described in Section III E, nodal line degeneracies can be described by the Weyl Hamiltonian without σ 2 term. Therefore, the goal of designing a structure with nodal lines is to find geometrical or coupling parameters for a structure that has such a dispersion. Although there is no general recipe that can be applied to different systems, the spatial symmetry consideration can be a good guide to find nodal lines because a structure with nodal lines respects P and T symmetry as mentioned earlier. For instance, if we know a structure with Weyl degeneracy, that respects P or T symmetry only, we can start from the structure to recover both symmetries. Alternatively, if we start with a structure with excessive symmetries including P and T symmetries, which is the case for most of the Bravais lattices, we need to introduce perturbations in the direction of reducing the number of symmetries. Numerical simulations are often used to see how the dimension of degeneracies changes during the symmetry reduction process. In this section, we will introduce examples of nodal lines in photonic systems using metamaterials, metallic photonic crystals and dielectric photonic crystals. Photonic metamaterials emerge as a prominent light matter interaction platform and have attracted enormous research interest within the past two decades Topological photonic metamaterials have emerged in recent years as a salient topic within the grand regime of topological photonics. For instance, bianisotropic metamaterials were used to realize a photonic topological insulator The first topological metamaterial was designed in 2015 An ideal photonic nodal line was discovered in a type-I hyperbolic metamaterial An ideal type-II nodal line has been discovered recently in Bragg reflection mirror type layered photonic crystals as the phase transition point between trivial and nontrivial Zak phase regimes Another example of crystallographic symmetry mediated optical response of meta-atoms was demonstrated in the discovery of hourglass nodal lines in a photonic metamaterial In this section, we explain how to realize nodal lines in dielectric materials with two examples: double gyroid and double diamond structures. Although fabricating dielectric photonic crystals is challenging, these crystals have advantages such as scalability and convenience in theoretical descriptions. The nodal ring was theoretically realized using an Psymmetric double gyroid and its space group is I4 1 32 (No. 214) where 3 i=1 a i is a local coordinate that expresses the translation of the single diamonds along the ± [1, 1, 1]-directions, adjusted by the coefficient γ. Selecting A 0 = A 1 = A 2 = A 3 and γ = 0 generates the conventional diamond structure In momentum space the degeneracies between the first and second bands form the nodal chain, the degeneracies between the third and fourth bands form the simple nodal lines, and the degeneracies between the third, fourth, and fifth bands form the nodal link (see Figure Meanwhile, the nodal link consists of the non-touching orange (between the third and fourth bands) and cyan rings (between the fourth and fifth bands), as shown in Figure One more significance of this research A simple post-processing calibration was also proposed in this photonic study As described in the previous sections, diverse topologies of nodal lines can be created using metamaterials and photonic crystals because one can design a periodic structure and tune geometric and optical parameters. However, the freedom in photonic designs is not simply limited to a spatially periodic system but one can extend the design freedom into the frequency domain based on a new concept called 'synthetic dimension'. Indeed, this can provide another possibility to create more complex topologies. Very recently, K. Wang et al. In this section, we review recent achievement in finding nodal lines in electronic crystals, phononic crystals and electrical circuits. Historically, the study on nodal lines in electronic crystals started earlier than all other systems. Several review papers have been published on nodal line semimetals The discovery of nodal lines starts from the prediction of the cubic antiperovskite material Cu 3 NX, where X={Ni; Cu; Pd; Ag; Cd}, as Z 2 protected topological semimetals when ignoring spin-orbit interaction Soon after, other nodal line materials in the absence of spin-orbital interaction were predicted, such as alkalineearth compounds AX 2 (A = Ca, Sr, Ba; X = Si, Ge, Sn) More recently, diverse topologies have been reported in electronic crystals. For example, nodal chains were predicted in IrF 4 (Figure Phononic crystals, also known as acoustic crystals, are also a good platform to demonstrate the topological physics because the couplings between meta-atoms can be easily controlled and the displacement field of the modes can be easily measured giving the full profile of the modes and band structure. A nodal chain by the phononic wave was theoretically proposed using a granular metamaterial W. Deng et al. proposed a phononic crystal that exhibits nodal rings in momentum space where and are the sublattice pseudospins. For t > 0 and δt > 0, the hopping amplitude in the z-direction is -t ± δt as illustrated in Figure , and the degeneracies are formed when d x = d y = 0. This indicates that the pseudospins are arranged as that corresponds to nodal rings formed on the k z = nπ plane (n is an integer). For experimental observation of the nodal rings, they prepared a layer-stacked-phononic crystal made of plastic stereolithography material. In the three-dimensional structures shown in Figure Very recently, B. Jiang et al. used a two-dimensional phononic crystal to observe non-Abelian topological charges and topological phase transitions Having explained the necessity to implement nodal knots using electrical circuits, we now describe how they can be concretely implemented and detected. An electrical RLC circuit is an undirected network with nodes α = 1, • • • , N connected by resistors, inductors, capacitors or combinations of them. Its behavior can be fully characterized by Kirchhoff's law as I α = J αβ V β , where I α is the external current at junction α and V β is the voltage at junction β. Each entry J αβ of the Laplacian J contributes r ab to the Laplacian, where r ab = R, iωL, (iωC) -1 for a single resistor, inductor and capacitor and whose combinations follows. The strictly reciprocal (symmetric) form of J αβ constrains the possible Laplacian, which prevents nodal knot circuits from being developed using mathematical models of nodal knots proposed before, since those imply broken reciprocity. Thus in order to construct nodal knot circuits, new models which preserve reciprocity need to be invented A very recent work discovered a method to overcome this obstacle, which goes beyond existing approaches that requires broken reciprocity, by pairing nodal knots with their mirror images to realize pairs of nodal knots in a fully reciprocal setting There are other advantages that we have not mentioned so far in using electronic circuits to construct nodal knot as well as other nodal lines. Take the non-Hermitian nodal knots as an example, the positive, negative and non-reciprocal couplings needed for non-Hermitian nodal knots can be realized through carefully chosen combinations of RLC components and operation amplifiers, which can introduce non-reciprocal feedback needed for the skin effect To summarize, we have explained the concept of nodal lines in band structures and showed that a wide range of types from a simple nodal line, a nodal link and a chain to mixed nodal lines can exist. Indeed, the extension from zero-dimensional degeneracy allows for a wider range of topology for the degeneracies in band structures of particles/waves including electrons, photons and phonons. Then, we have reviewed the theoretical description of the topological invariants of nodal lines with the Berry phase and the Wilczek-Zee connection based on the two seminal papers by M. V. Berry To supplement, we have introduced the examples of nodal lines in electronic crystals, phononic crystals, and electrical circuits. Moreover, non-Hermitian systems, which have complex energy eigenvalues due to the exchange of energy with the environment, can be used to extend the dimension of parameters space. Indeed, new non-Hermitian systems with optical ring resonators and RLC circuits are being introduced to implement more complex topology of nodal lines such as knots and we expect many undiscovered topological nodal lines will be implemented soon with these new approaches. However, there are still challenges in understanding the physical consequence of topological phase of nodal lines and also implementing the proposed ideas in artificial materials. First, no bulk-edge/surface correspondence for the non-Abelian charges has been mathematically proven There are also unexplored areas in relation to nodal line physics in photonic systems. First, 3D nanoplasmonic systems can be used to implement and observe nodal lines of surface plasmon polaritons. In 2D topological photonics, there is already a theoretical study that shows unidirectional propagation and corner states in 2D metallic arrays The remaining question is what applications could be enabled using nodal lines. There are very few reports or proposals regarding practical applications and it is hard to discuss a general way of applying nodal lines. For electronic crystals with nodal lines, high-temperature surface superconductivity using drumhead surface states 