Short-range chemical order (SRO) has been recently demonstrated to play a decisive role in modulating a wide range of physical properties in medium-entropy alloy (MEA) and high-entropy alloy (HEA). The enormous configurational space of these alloys implies multiple forms of SRO are likely to develop concurrently but such structural diversity has not been reported. Here we show, through extensive ab initio-based sampling study, that SiGeSn medium-entropy alloys spontaneously develop two distinct forms of SRO. Remarkably, the two types of SROs, which carry different energies, distinct degrees of local ordering, and dissimilar electronic structures, are found to co-exist in a wide range of compositions of SiGeSn alloys. The co-existence of two SROs is rationalized through their virtual degeneracy of thermodynamic stability, due to the subtle balance in the change of enthalpy and configurational entropy upon the transformation between the two SROs. Such co-existence of SROs thus suggests an inherent structural heterogeneity, a diffuse electronic structure, and a new route for band engineering in SiGeSn MEA. More generally, our finding indicates the possible ubiquity of the co-existence of multiple forms of SRO in a broad range of MEAs and HEAs, which has profound implications on their diverse physical properties. Alloys composed of elements with distinct physical and chemical nature often develop a short-range chemical order (SRO), where certain types of elements either attract or repel each other, leading to a distribution of atoms apart from a perfect randomness. Although SRO has been long conceived to exist in alloys, 1 the explicit roles of SRO have been identified only recently, including, for example, modulating mechanical properties in metallic alloys, The development of ordering in random alloys can be rationalized through the energy gain when certain types of neighbors form more (or less) frequently than in a truly random distribution. As a result, an alloy can effectively lower its enthalpy of mixing ∆H mix through adopting an ordering. However, the development of ordering also leads to a deviation from a random distribution, thus lowering configuration entropy of mixing ∆S mix . Therefore, depending on the magnitude of the change in ∆H mix and ∆S mix , three possible scenarios may occur: First, when enthalpy gain due to ordering |δ∆H mix | significantly overweights entropy loss | -T δ∆S mix |, alloy strongly favors ordering, and possibly even develops a longrange order (LRO), i.e., formation of compound or intermetallics; Second, when enthalpy grain cannot compensate entropy loss, a random distribution is thermodynamically preferred; Third, when enthalpy gain becomes greater than entropy loss but not by too much, alloy develops a thermodynamic driving force sufficient to favor a local ordering but not enough for a LRO. This is where SRO emerges. Therefore, the occurrence of SRO in an alloy strongly depends on the free energy landscape in alloy's configurational space. For such, some binary alloys can already develop an SRO even though their configurational space is relatively small. Here we investigate the SRO behaviors in SiGeSn MEA alloys that have attracted a substantial interest as potential candidates for mid-infrared photonics owing to their tunable band gap, low-cost, and Si-compatibility. Through explicitly computing their enthalpy gain and entropy loss with respect to a random alloy, we confirm the virtual degenerate stability of the two types of SROs. To explore SRO of an alloy, we employ Metropolis Monte Carlo method combined with Density Functional Theory (MC/DFT) (see Method), which samples alloy's configurational space with high-fidelity. An important point that should be taken into consideration is the significant configurational space of a MEA alloy. For example, the total number of configu-rations for a 64-atoms cell of the binary Ge 0.75 Sn 0.25 alloy is on the order of 10 14 (including symmetry-equivalent structures), while that of Si 0.25 Ge 0.5 Sn 0.25 becomes 10 27 . Therefore, to ensure sufficient sampling, we carry out 5∼8 independent MC sampling studies, each consisting of 15,000∼ 20,000 MC moves, from different initial random structures for each alloy composition. This leads to a level of sampling ∼ 2,000 moves per atom, and a total number of over 1 million DFT calculations for the entire investigated composition domain. The large-scale MC/DFT study identifies the complex energy landscape of SiGeSn MEA alloy. As shown in Fig. The large energy difference between the two energy basins may thus well indicate a distinction in the structures associated with the two energy basins. To examine the structural origin, we examine the statistics of all the six types of first nearest neighbors in Si 0.125 Ge 0.625 Sn 0.25 , namely, Si-Si, Si-Ge, Si-Sn, Ge-Ge, Ge-Sn, and Sn-Sn. Fig. To understand the nature of the two types of SROs, we sample in both energy basins and compute the corresponding average tetrahedral structures around a center atom and the SRO parameter α m ij for the pair between element i and j (see Methods for its definition). and Sn-Ge distribution. We note that this overall structural signature is virtually identical to that identified in Ge 0.75 Sn 0.25 , which is attributed to the Sn-Sn repulsive interaction. In comparison, when the energy falls within the low-energy basin, all the structural motifs are found to undergo changes with respect to a random alloy. The most prominent change occurs in the first coordination shell of Sn atoms, where all the Si and Sn atoms are found to be replaced by Ge atoms. As a result, each Sn atom is surrounded by 4 Ge atoms. Since this change leads to a local Sn structure more ordered than that in R-SRO, we refer it as enhanced-SRO (E-SRO). The elimination of Sn-Sn and Sn-Si bonds then yields the corresponding changes in Si and Ge local structures. For Si, the complete depletion of Sn atoms from its first coordination shell means the bond conservation can only be achieved through Si neighboring with more Ge and/or Si atoms. Our analysis shows that in the case of Si 0.125 Ge 0.625 Sn 0.25 , this change is mainly achieved through the augmentation of Si-Ge bonds. On the other hand, the increased number of both Sn-Ge and Si-Ge bonds must be balanced by a depletion of Ge-Ge bonds, as required by the conservation of total number of bonds around Ge. Correspondingly, the Ge-Ge coordination number in E-SRO is found to be lower than that of R-SRO. Therefore, all six types of pairs in E-SRO are found to display substantial deviations from the random distribution, with the most significant deviations occurring in Sn-Sn, Si-Sn, and Si-Si pairs, which lead to a severely distorted SRO polygon, as shown in Fig. Therefore, the overall structural signature of E-SRO in Si 0.125 Ge 0.625 Sn 0.25 can be characterized through the strong repulsive interactions of Sn-Sn and Sn-Si nearest neighbors. The Sn-Sn repulsion has been recently identified in both GeSn and SiSn alloy, which was found to yield a substantially low Sn-Sn coordination number in both alloys. For example, both atom probe tomography An intriguing manifestation of the sampling study is the spontaneous occurrence of both R-SRO and E-SRO, albeit E-SRO clearly being energetically more favorable than R-SRO. In fact, Fig. The analysis then leads to a question as to whether the co-existence is of a general relevance at other compositions. Obviously, an exhaustive search over the entire compositional space of SiGeSn can be computationally demanding. In view of the active role of configurational entropy, we address this question by limiting our investigation near the center of the compositional space of the ternary alloy. For each composition, we carry out 5∼8 From the compositions that show a clear coexistence, we can obtain a meaningful average of energy and structure within the corresponding high-and low-energy basins in the MC trajectories, which enables a similar thermodynamic analysis to compute ∆G mix for R-SRO, E-SRO, and random distribution. The calculation indeed shows the co-existence of two types of SROs is generally associated with the virtual degeneracy of their ∆G mix , as shown in Fig. Finally, it is noted that other contributions to ∆G mix also include the vibrational Helmholtz free energy F vib mix and electronic free energy F el mix , which are not included in MC sampling. Although electronic contribution is typical small at room temperature, vibrational contribution may not be always negligible. The occurrence of SRO has been shown to substantially affect the band gaps in both GeSn The corresponding indirect band gap is ∼0.75 eV. This significant change in band gaps and band characters thus highlights the substantial role of alloy structure, particularly the degree of SRO, plays in the optoelectronic properties of group IV alloys. The co-occurrence of R-SRO and E-SRO observed in our modeling study, along with the analysis showing their nearly degenerate thermodynamic stability, thus may well indicate a co-existence of both types of SROs in real SiGeSn MEA. Since a dynamic transition between the two SROs requires re-arrangement of atoms in the lattice, which can be kinetically pro-hibited at room temperature, such co-existence is more likely to bear a static form. One possible scenario for static co-existence is that SiGeSn MEAs are composed of iso-compositional domains with different degrees of SRO. Although the sizes of these domains are unclear, they are expected to be significantly smaller than a typical grain, and possibly around nanoscale, because the interface separating different SRO domains does not involve energetically unfavorable structures such as crystalline defects, thus the interfacial free energy is expected to be low. Consequently, SiGeSn alloys at equilibrium are expected to be structurally and spatially inhomogeneous at the microscopic level, albeit being macroscopically homogeneous and isotropic. Regardless of its spatial distribution, the identified co-existence of two types of SROs has significant implications on the optoelectronic properties of SiGeSn alloys. First, the prediction of the key optoelectronic properties of SiGeSn alloy, e.g., band gap, type of band gap, critical compositions for indirect-to-direct transition, must take into account the significant role of SRO. Given the large difference in the calculated band gap (∼0.5 eV) between a random and E-SRO model for Si 0.125 Ge 0.625 Sn 0.25 , it is highly likely that a prediction based on a random structure model may substantially underestimate the band gap. This has already been shown in GeSn Lastly, and perhaps even more importantly, it is expected that the observed phenomenon can exist generally in many other alloys. The co-existence of the two SROs is essentially due to the subtle balance between the enthalpy gain and the entropy loss upon an enhanced ordering of alloy configurations. Certainly, such balance cannot be always expected in any alloy, thus the discovery of the co-existence of two SROs in SiGeSn MEA can be a fortunate case in this sense. However, we note that as the number of alloying elements increases, the configurational space of alloy increases combinatorially. As a consequence, both the energy landscape and free energy landscape become inevitably more complex. Therefore it is increasingly likely that there exist multiple local free energy minima with comparable stability in the SRO-parameter space. If this were true, multiple forms of SRO could emerge at equilibrium. These forms of SRO can be reflected by different combinations of various neighbors within the first few atomic shells that are nearly equally favorable over a random distribution. As a consequence, these alloys can be intrinsically heterogeneous in nanoscale, which has profound implications on the mechanical, optoelectronic, and thermal transport properties. In this regard, we note that MEA and HEA are very probable alloy systems to potentially exhibit this type of behavior. In fact, some of the very recent studies have already provided the sign for this. For example, a theoretical study on CoCuFeNiPd HEA The Metropolis Monte Carlo (MC) method Our density functional theory (DFT) calculations were performed with Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) The SRO parameter α m ij is defined as where N m 0,ij and N m ij are the numbers of pairs between element i and j in the m th coordination shell for a random distribution and the actual distribution, respectively. By definition, a random distribution yields α m ij = 0. 0 < α m ij ≤ 1 indicates a depletion of i, j pairs, with α m ij = 1 meaning a complete depletion, while α m ij < 0 suggests a preference of i, j pairs. Note that α m ij is different from but related to the commonly adopted Warren-Cowley SRO parameter. 1 The configuration entropy of mixing ∆S con mix is estimated based on the extension of quasichemical approximation x i ln x i + j x j ln x j -x j ln x 0 j , where k B is the Bolzmann constant, x i is the concentration of species i, x 0 j is the concentration of the micro-cluster j in the random solution model, and x j is the concentration of the cluster j in the real solution modeled by MC sampling through taking SRO into account. We use triplets as micro-clusters here to account for SRO reflected by both 1NN and 2NN, and it can be shown that there are a total of 18 types of distinguishable micro-clusters in a ternary alloy. For band structure calculations, we employ the modified Becke-Johnson (mBJ) exchange potential, 