Realization of novel topological phases in magnonic band structures represents a new opportunity for the development of spintronics and magnonics with low power consumption. In this work, we show that in antiparallelly aligned magnetic multilayers, the long-range, chiral dipolar interaction between propagating magnons generates bulk bands with non-zero Chern integers and magnonic surface states carrying chiral spin currents. The surface states are strictly localized and can be easily toggled between non-trivial and trivial phases through an external magnetic field. The realization of chiral surface spin currents in this dipolarly coupled heterostructure represents a magnonic implementation of the coupled wire model that has been extensively explored in electronic systems. Our work presents an easy-to-implement system for realizing topological magnonic surface states and low-dissipation spin current transport in a tunable manner. Exploration of novel topological phases in quantum matter has become one of the central topics in nowadays' condensed matter research, opening up avenues towards electronics with high speed and low power consumption In this letter, we theoretically study the magnonic band structure and corresponding topological properties of antiparallelly aligned magnetic multilayers. We find that the long-range dipolar interaction between propagating magnons is chiral in nature, whose strength depends on the wave vector direction and therefore breaks time-reversal symmetry (TRS). This chiral dipolar interaction correlates the sublattice and momentum degrees of freedom, playing a similar role as the spin-orbit coupling does in electronic systems. Consequently, it generates bulk bands with non-zero Chern integers and ultralocalized magnonic surface states that carry chiral spin currents. Through an external magnetic field, the existence of topologically non-trivial surface states can be switched on and off, which therefore provides a tunable and efficient way for transferring spin angular momenta in this synthetic antiferromagnetic heterostructure. We focus on the magnonic band structure in magnetic multilayers shown in Fig. We start by considering the simplified case, where each layer is a infinitely long strip along the x axis and the magnetic moment distribution along the y and z axes within the same layer is uniform, i.e., the lowest-order standing wave mode. As a result, magnons are confined to transport along the x axis in each individual layer. We denote the annihilation operator for a circularly polarized magnon with wave vector k x in the jth (j = 1, 2 for sublattice index) layer of the nth (n = 1, 2, ..., N for cell index) cell as b jn,kx . Neglecting the interlayer interactions, we can write the magnonic Hamiltonian for the multilayers in Fig. x + Ω j stems from the intralayer exchange interaction and the effective static field experienced by each sublattice ), with the intracell (intercell) coupling strength ∆ S(D) . Since the interlayer dipolar interaction between magnons decays exponentially as the distance of two considered layers increases [27], we only consider the dipolar interaction between nearest neighboring layers throughout the work. When |k x | is not large compared with the Brillouin zone (BZ) boundary, ∆ S Combining Ĥ0 and Ĥint , adopting the periodic boundary condition along the z axis, and implementing Fourier transformation, i.e., b jn,kx = (1/ √ N ) kz β j,k e ikznd with k = k x x + k z ẑ, we get the bulk magnonic Hamiltonian for the multilayers on the basis of (1) Eq. ( x , either of which has no dispersions along the k z direction, suggesting a flat band when k x is fixed. Since our model is 2D in the xz plane with broken TRS, we can calculate the Chern integer as the topological invariant. Denoting |χ -as the eigenstate corresponding to ω -, we can calculate the Chern integer Ch -= (2π) -1 BZ Ω -(k)dk x dk z for the lower band, where Ω - suggesting that the bulk bands possess non-zero Chern integers when (A The surface states can be explicitly obtained by considering multilayers with open boundary condition along the z direction. The magnonic Hamiltonian for the Ncell multilayers is Ĥ Solving the eigenvalue equation H |χ = ω |χ , we can get 2N eigenfrequencies and corresponding eigenstates. When k x < 0, corresponding to ∆ S = 0 and ∆ D > 0, two surface states emerge, which are separately localized in the 1st layer of the 1st cell (bottom layer) with ω 1e = ω 1 , |χ 1e = [1, 0, 0, ..., 0] T , and in the 2nd layer of the N th cell (top layer) with ω 2e = ω 2 , |χ 2e = [0, 0, ..., 0, 1] T . We note that both of them are strictly localized on the surfaces without decay into the bulk. Figs. 2(a) to 2(c) show the evolution of the magnonic band structure, when the strength of applied external magnetic field H varies. In this cal- culation, we consider an example consisting of alternating 10 nm yttrium iron garnet (YIG, 1st sublattice) and 10 nm permalloy (Py, 2nd sublattice) thin films, with reported material parameters of A ex 1 = 3.7 × 10 -12 J/m, A ex 2 = 8.7 × 10 -12 J/m, M s1 = 1.4 × 10 5 A/m, and M s2 = 7.4 × 10 5 A/m The formation of ultra-localized surface states in the magnetic multilayers can be further understood as a magnonic implementation of the coupled wire model that has been widely investigated in the circumstance of quantum Hall effect (QHE) in electronic systems Until now, we have demonstrated tunable magnonic Chern bands and ultra-localized surface states carrying chiral spin currents in the magnetic multilayers under a few simplified assumptions, including: 1) the magnon propagation is confined in the x direction, which is orthogonal to the equilibrium moment orientations, 2) we neglect the intralayer dipolar interaction and dynamic interfacial exchange interaction. In the following, we extend our discussion to a generic case where magnons can propagate within the whole xy plane in each individual layer, i.e., with in-plane momenta k = k x x + k y ŷ, and both the intralayer dipolar interaction and dynamic interfacial exchange interaction are included. With the periodic boundary condition along the z axis, the bulk magnonic Hamiltonian for the multilayers in Fig. with k = k + k z ẑ. The diagonal block h(k) in Eq. ( with with where The derivation for Eqs. ( With open boundary condition along the z direction, the magnonic band structure can be solved through numerical methods based on the Cholesky decomposition In summary, we study the magnonic band structure and corresponding topological properties in antiparallelly aligned magnetic multilayers. We demonstrate that the long-range, chiral interlayer dipolar interaction between propagating magnons correlates the sublattice and momentum degrees of freedom and breaks TRS. It further generates bulk bands with non-zero Chern integers and ultra-localized surface states carrying chiral spin currents. The topology of magnonic bands can be switched between non-trivial and trivial through an external field. We also reveal that the dipolarly coupled magnetic multilayers represents a magnonic implementation of the coupled wire model. We believe our study provides an easyto-implement system for realizing topologically protected magnonic surface states and low-dissipation spin transport in a tunable manner, and will therefore benefit the development of modern spintronics. This work is supported by AFOSR under award FA9550-19-1-0048, and National Science Foundation under award DMR-2104912. we can rewrite Eq. (A4) as where and where N has a form of N (k; d) = (1 -e -kd )/(kd). We note that in Eq. (A7), the moments m1 and m2 are expressed in the global coordinate system. After switching to local coordinate systems, we would get a new matrix g(k ) instead of G(k ) to express E d : Defining the rotation matrix as and only considering magnons confined to transport in the x axis, which means k = |k x | and k y = 0 (i.e., the simplified case mentioned in the main text, where each layer is a infinitely long strip along the x axis and the magnetic moment distribution along the y axis is uniform), we get (A12) Right now, the interlayer dipolar energy is written as and the interlayer dipolar field hd j (k x ) in each layer is given by hd The unperturbed eigenfrequencies and eigenstates of each layer are therefore given by where A j = 2A ex j γ/M sj characterizes the intralayer exchange strength and Ω j = γμ 0 H j is the Larmor precession frequency. From Eq. (B5), we see that the unperturbed eigenstate mj± is a right-(left-) handed circularly polarized magnon mode, which corresponds to the positive (negative) eigenfrequency, representing a particle (hole). Applying the intralayer exchange field [Eq. (B4)] and interlayer dipolar field [Eq. (A15)] into the linearized LL equation [Eq. (B3)], we can get the eigenvalue equation where the diagonal terms are exactly unperturbed eigenfrequencies [Eq. (B5)] and the off-diagonal terms are originated from the interlayer dipolar coupling, which can be written as Since we are interested in bilayers with antiferromagnetic spin textures with θ 1 = π/2, θ 2 = -π/2, or θ 1 = -π/2, θ 2 = π/2, δ j± vanishes and Eq. (B6) becomes block diagonalized. We can further express the magnonic excitations using the Holstein-Primakoff (HP) transformation where S xy is the area of the interface, and b j,kx (b † j,kx ) annihilates (creates) a circularly polarized magnon with wave vector k x in the jth layer. If we define b kx = [b 1,kx , b 2,kx ] T , Eq. (B6) can be equivalently written as where The bosonic Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian H 2L (k x ) only possesses the diagonal blocks, so the bilayer Hamiltonian operator can be simplified as As for the antiparallelly aligned multilayers shown in Fig. First, let's derive the interlayer dipolar field with finite k y . For two layers within a unit cell, we have θ 1 = π/2 and θ 2 = -π/2. Substituting them into Eq. (A11) gives Applying these rotation matrices into Eq. (A9), we get Right now, the interlayer dipolar energy is written as ) and the interlayer dipolar field in each layer is give by which can be written in the form of components where v = 2 for j = 1 and v = 1 for j = 2. f ′ j can be obtained by replacing |k x | with |k | in the expression of f j . Next, let's derive the intralayer dipolar field, which is similar to what we've done for the interlayer dipolar field. The difference is that there is only one continuous body now, so r and r ′ are in the same layer, as shown in Fig. where N ′ j = N (|k |; d j ). After switching to the local coordinate system, we find g j (k ) = (R ′ j ) -1 G j (k )R ′ j = G j (k ), where R ′ j is shown in Eq. (C1). Right now, the intralayer dipolar energy is written as E d0,j = 1 2 m † j (k )g j (k ) mj (k ) with Eqs. (C12) and (C13) give the eigenvalue equation for two layers within the same unit cell (θ 1 = π/2 and θ 2 = -π/2). As for two layers belonging to neighboring cells (θ 1 = -π/2 and θ 2 = π/2), the only difference in the eigenvalue equation is Then we can do the HP transformation on mj+ and mj-[Eq. (B8)] and apply the periodic boundary condition along the z direction. We finally get the bulk magnonic Hamiltonian for the 3D multilayers [Eqs. (3) to (6) of the main text]. [1] M. H. Cohen and F. Keffer, Phys. Rev. * zhongqhu@mit.edu