Reversible logic can provide lower switching energy costs relative to all irreversible logic, including those developed by industry in semiconductor circuits, however, more research is needed to understand what is possible. Superconducting logic, an exemplary platform for both irreversible and reversible logic, uses flux quanta to represent bits, and the reversible implementation may switch state with low energy dissipation relative to the energy of a flux quantum. Here we simulate reversible shift register gates that are ballistic: their operation is powered by the input bits alone. A storage loop is added relative to previous gates as a key innovation, which bestows an asynchronous property to the gate such that input bits can arrive at different times as long as their order is clearly preserved. The shift register represents bit states by flux polarity, both in the stored bit as well as the ballistic input and output bits. Its operation consists of the elastic swapping of flux between the stored and the moving bit. This is related to a famous irreversible shift register, developed prior to the advent of superconducting flux quanta logic (which used irreversible gates). In the base design of our ballistic shift register (BSR) there is one 1-input and 1-output port, but we find that we can make other asynchronous ballistic gates by extension. For example, we show that two BSRs operate in sequence without power added, giving a 2-bit sequential memory. We also show that a BSR with two input and two output ports allows a bit state to be set from one input port and then conveyed out on either output port. The gate constitutes the first asynchronous reversible 2-input gate. Finally, for a better insight into the dynamics, we introduce a collective coordinate model. We find that the gate can be described as motion in two coordinates subject to a potential determined by the input bit and initial stored flux quantum. Aside from the favorable asynchronous feature, the gate is considered practical in the context of energy efficiency, parameter margins, logical depth, and speed. Modern superconducting digital logic Arguably, the earliest influential SFQ work 12 is a proposal for a "Flux Shuttle" by the Bell Labs team of Anderson, Dynes, and Fulton Here we introduce and study ballistic shift registers (BSRs). Due to their reversible design (time-reversal symmetry), they can in principle incur an energy cost < ln(2)k B T per bit operation. The devices operate without shunt resistors, and a key feature is that the inertia of the input bits solely powers an operation that leaves the device near a new steady state after the operation. Unlike the 'asymmetric' bit-state encoding in RSFQ, based on SFQ presence versus absence, BSRs use the two degenerate flux states (polarities) to represent the bit states, both for the moving bit (at input and output) and the stored bit. Since the data SFQ travels freely and the gate is unpowered, it is considered "ballistic". In the gate, the moving SFQ interacts with an SFQ stored by an inductor. Nonlinear dynamics allow an input bit to transform the stored state to the input bit state and also to carry away the input bit energy as an output SFQ with the previously stored bit state. This constitutes a shift register operation from the forward-scattering dynamics of an SFQ. To accomplish the near-ideal reversible dynamics, the gates utilize capacitive shunts in the JJs within the gate circuit. The BSR gates expand upon previous work BSR gates, as a new development of RFL, are asynchronous. Asynchronous ballistic gates require a stored state such that the ballistic bit can interact with it As the BSR operation is unpowered, it relies on the free scattering dynamics of the input fluxon. The dynamics depend on the difference between the input and stored bit states, such that there are 2 dynamical types. We chose a combination of dynamical types that are favorable in terms of parameter margins. If the input and stored bit states differ, the dynamics are similar to a 1-bit NOT gate, which uses a resonance for polarity inversion This article is organized as follows: In Sec. II we present a 1-input BSR, analyze its steady states, and discuss the operations of the BSR for both a 1-bit and multi-bit serial shift register. A 2-input BSR is introduced in Sec. II E, and Sec. II F gives an overview of the operation margins. In Sec. II G we investigate the fluxon delay times, and give estimates for the timing uncertainty (jitter), induced either by the gate or by thermal fluctuations. In Sec. III, we analyze the BSR dynamics by means of a collective coordinate model (CCM), which is shown to quantitatively describe the BSR dynamics and to help with the interpretation of the gate dynamics. A discussion section, Sec. IV, includes technical findings on: energy efficiency, speed, energy-delay product, and logical depth. The Anderson-Dynes-Fulton (ADF) flux shuttle is an important historical step in the development of SFQ digital electronics, because it interprets SFQ as bits and it is closely related to RSFQ shift registers even though it predates RSFQ by approximately a decade 12 . In the ADF flux shuttle, the SFQ can be localized in a potential well generated by device geometry or magnetic fields, and can be moved forward to the next potential well by current pulses In contrast, RSFQ shift registers In the RSFQ shift registers, and RSFQ gates generally Reversible fluxon logic (RFL) represents the bit states 0 and 1 by the two possible polarities σ = ±1 of a fluxon, corresponding to the sign of its flux ±Φ 0 and denoted as fluxon (+) and antifluxon (-). Switching between the degenerate bit states (polarity inversion) and other logic operations may be achieved in ballistic gates Asynchronous multi-bit gates have the advantage that the timing of the input bits no longer needs to be precise. They merely have to arrive with a minimum delay time between them to allow quiescence before the next arrival. Asynchronous ballistic gates require an internal state, by which an interaction between subsequent input bits is mediated. In order to generate output that depends on the input of a previous scattering, the internal state has to: be changeable by an input bit, and determine the output state of the ballistic scattering. The storage cell of the ballistic shift register (BSR) provides exactly such functionality, in that it can store a bit state in form of a flux quantum with positive or negative flux orientation S = ±1. As we describe below, the stored state S may change during the scattering dynamics, depending on the input fluxon state σ. The scattering type (output fluxon state) in turn depends on the current value of S, but is independent of the input timing, regardless of what input ports are used. Circuit schematic for a 1-input BSR, consisting of one input and one output LJJ (3 cells shown for each) connected by a circuit interface, which is made from three capacitance-shunted JJs, where two of these are left and right 'termination JJs' with ( ĈJ , Îc) and the third is the 'rail JJ' with (C B J , I B c ). An inductor Ls in parallel with the rail JJ is made to store one SFQ, where a clockwise (counterclockwise) circulating current Is corresponds to flux state S = 1 (S = -1) and rail phase φ B ≈ 2πS. The parameters of the interface and storage cell are set to enable energy-efficient forward-scattering from one LJJ to the other for all combinations of stored flux state S = ±1 and input flux state σ = ±1, for a range of input velocities. External circuitry coupled inductively to Ls may be optionally used to assist initialization of the BSR (loading), giving |S| = 1. (b) Operation table for 1-input BSR characterized by SWAP-operation between stored and moving flux states: (S , σ )=SWAP(S, σ). Schematical illustration of BSR operation is shown for third row of table, with S = -1, σ = 1, and resulting S = 1, σ = -1. The LJJ trilayer is illustrated using grey for superconductor and blue for tunneling barrier. (c) Operation table for the pioneering ADF flux shuttle The most basic BSR is the 2-port circuit shown in Fig. Similar to the 1-bit ballistic RFL gates, the NOT or ID, the interface of the BSR is designed to enable forward-scattering, i.e., starting from a fluxon entering on one LJJ and resulting in a fluxon exiting on the other LJJ. By making the in-and output LJJs sufficiently long ( 10λ J ) we ensure that the ballistic fluxons can move freely. The ballistic gates require specific parameter values in the interface to achieve the operation. The ballistic scattering involves the temporary breaking of the fluxon at the gate interface and a short oscillation of an interface mode. In previous 1-bit ballistic RFL gates, i.e., the NOT and ID, the polarity of the exiting fluxon is determined by the polarity of the incoming fluxon alone. In contrast, the output bit of the BSR is dependent on the stored bit state S. The ballistic scattering dynamics generates the regular operations of a shift register, summarized in the table of Fig. We refer to the BSR of Fig. n-1 ) 2 2(a/λ J ) Herein, L l,r are the Lagrangian components of the left and right LJJ, respectively, and L I describes the in-terface which connects them. The JJs in the discrete LJJs have capacitance and critical current of (C J , I c ), and each unit cell of length a has the inductance L. The characteristic time, length, speed and energy scales of the LJJ are set by the Josephson plasma frequency ω J = 2πν J = 2πI c /(Φ 0 C J ), the Josephson penetration depth, λ J = a Φ 0 /(2πLI c ), the Swihart velocity c = ω J λ J , and the energy scale E 0 = I c Φ 0 λ J /(2πa) (A static fluxon in the LJJ has energy 8E 0 , cf. Eq. ( In our design the inductance in the interface cell is assumed to be negligible, as indicated in Fig. where we introduce shorthand notations for the termination JJ phases in Eq. (3). With this approximation, the interface Lagrangian corresponding to Fig. where the parameter f E quantifies an external flux f E Φ 0 applied to the storage cell, cf. Fig. To analyze the bit-storage characteristics of the BSR we first study the steady states of the BSR circuit (in the absence of a moving fluxon). It is helpful to first compare the BSR to the earlier ballistic gate circuit without a storage cell. Schematically, in the limit of infinite storage cell inductance L s → ∞ the BSR circuit is equivalent to the circuit of the ID and NOT gates Z), while the rail phase assumes the value φ B = 2π(k L -k R ). Herein, the integers k L,R label the 'vacuum' states (ground states) of the φ-periodic LJJ potential In the presence of finite L s in the BSR the degeneracy of different configurations (k L , k R ) is lifted due to the contribution ∝ (φ Lφ R ) 2 /(2L s ) in the potential, cf. Eq. ( , where μ is the inverse decay length. Assuming that the bound-state amplitudes φ L,R -2πk L,R are small, the corresponding rail-phase, The flux state S in the storage cell is determined by the difference in configuration at the left and right side of the interface, S = k Lk R . Inserting Eq. ( Referenced from the interface, each LJJ contribution is reduced to an effective JJ and an effective inductance, where both are in parallel with the corresponding termination JJ ( Îc ). In these expressions the inverse decay length μ of the bound state is not yet determined. However, we can estimate μ from the condition that the bound state fulfills the dispersion relation in the LJJ bulk, ω 2 bulk = ω 2 J + 2c 2 /a 2 (1cosh(aμ)). Being interested in steady states of the interface, we can set ω = 0 and obtain the estimate μ = a -1 cosh -1 1 + a 2 /(2λ 2 J ) . The potential shown in Fig. in the bound-state approximation, Eq. ( 2π-periodicity in the two components. However, the potential has an approximate parabolic dependence on φ B = φ Lφ R . For not too large φ B , the potential U S has a local minimum in each of the domains (k L , k R ), and these steady states correspond to a stored flux state From the vertical position of the minima, φ L + φ R = 2π(k L + k R ), it follows that the bound-state amplitudes on the left and right sides of the interface are equal and opposite, (φ During normal operation of the BSR, the parameters satisfy f E = 0, max(I B c , Îc , I c,eff ) Φ 0 /(2πL s ), and |S| ≤ 1, where the bound-state amplitudes are small and the phase fields in the left and right LJJ are nearly uniform. For a single stored flux quantum S in the BSR, we can thus approximate (φ L , φ R ) in Eq. ( If the BSR is initialized with |S| ≤ 1, an incoming fluxon with velocity v and energy Figure . We compute the fluxon dynamics from numerical integration of the (N l + N r + 3) classical circuit equations of motion for the (N l + N r ) JJs in the LJJs, together with the termination and rail JJs of the interface. The left panels of Fig. Figure Simulated operations of the shift register initialized with the stored flux quantum S = -1, under four different input sequences of two fluxons: (σ1, σ2) = (1, 1), (1, -1), (-1, 1), (-1, -1). Left panels show dynamics of JJ-voltages Vn at positions xn ≶ 0 in the left (input) and right (output) LJJ, respectively. The color scale shows blue tracks for fluxons (σ = 1) and orange for antifluxons (σ = -1). Right panels show evolution of the rail-JJ phase φ B from initial state φ B ≈ 2πS. In cases where σ = -S, the fluxon scatters forward as an output fluxon with inverted polarity, σ = S, and the stored state after the scattering becomes S = σ. In the other cases, σ = S, the fluxon is simply transmitted with short delay, and the stored state remains unchanged. All cases fulfill (S , σ ) = SWAP(S, σ), thus generating the state map of a 1-bit shift register, cf. Fig. form of time-dependent evanescent fields. The localized excitation lasts long enough for its own brief oscillation, and afterwards generates a large field profile in the right LJJ, which eventually moves as a free fluxon in the right LJJ, away from the influence of the interface. During the whole process, the phase φ B of the rail JJ changes monotonously from φ B ≈ -2π to ≈ 2π. This 4π-phase change indicates the simultaneous transfer of the input fluxon's (positive) SFQ-state σ = 1 into the storage cell and of the initially stored (negative) SFQ S = -1 out of the storage cell. Thusly after the scattering, the new orientation of the stored flux quantum is S = 1, and the output fluxon carries the negative SFQ-state, σ = -1, as indicated by the negative sign of the voltage peak. The fluxon scattering dynamics in this case are similar to that of the fundamental (1-bit) NOT gate When the second input fluxon with σ = 1 arrives (Fig. Figure The BSR operations can be illustrated as inter-well transitions in the circuit potential U S , induced by the incoming fluxon. This is illustrated in Fig. The dynamics shown in Fig. The above initialization procedure seems suitable for individual BSRs. Another procedure may be favorable in a large circuit with many BSR gates. A suitably designed circuit could in principle be made to trap flux solely in the BSR storage cells. To initialize many BSR gates in such a circuit one would cool through the superconducting transition in a magnetic field, and then turn off the field. A multi-bit shift register can be constructed from sequentially arranged BSRs, constituting a Serial-In-Serial-Out (SISO) register. As an example, Fig. A 2-bit Serial-In-Serial-Out (SISO) shift register (a) and its dynamics (b-e) for a single input fluxon, σ = +1, and four different initial configurations of the two stored bits: (S1, S2) = (-1, -1), (-1, 1), (1, -1), and (1, 1). As in Fig. we use initial velocity v 0 = 0.6c, corresponding to an initial energy of E fl (v 0 ) = 10E 0 . The lowest velocity ratio (0.91) corresponds to 95% energy conservation according to Eq. (10). For each scattering type (NOT and transmission), both stages of the 2-bit shift register give approximately the same velocity ratios (≈ 0.91 for NOT, ≈ 0.95 for transmission), corresponding to those of a 1-bit BSR (see Sec. II F). The observed small variability in forwardscattering efficiency at the 1st and 2nd BSR (e.g. between 0.95 and 0.96 for the two consecutive transmissions in panel (e)) can be attributed to the presence of fluctuations in the connecting LJJ and at the 2nd BSR prior to the fluxon arrival there. These fluctuations are emitted from the first BSR during the first scattering event. Due to a relatively sharp lower cut-off velocity of the transmission dynamics of one BSR, cf. Fig. The 1-bit BSR, shown in Fig Despite the shared storage cell there is no strong dynamic coupling between the upper and lower part of the gate. By that we mean that even during the NOT-type scattering an input fluxon on the upper (lower) LJJ induces a large phase change of 4π only in the adjacent φ B (φ C ), and a relatively small temporary excitation in φ C (φ B ), resulting in an output fluxon only on the upper (lower) output LJJ. A similar observation holds for the transmission-type scattering, however in this case no significant phase change takes place even in the adjacent rail JJ. With this property, the 2-input BSR may be used as an SFQ memory with separate write and read lines. An optimal set of circuit parameters for an energyefficient BSR are given by the first and second columns in Table according to Eq. (10). Figure The current limiting factor of the BSR design, as shown in Fig. In addition to the variation of interface parameters presented in Fig. The margins of the 2-input BSR, shown in the last three columns of Table In most SFQ logic, including RSFQ and its descendants, the gates are clocked, and the SFQ data bit is processed in gates once the clock pulse arrives. Although data bits do not need to arrive at a precise time, the gates are still considered synchronous because the data SFQs must be processed with a clock pulse. In asynchronous reversible logic gates, the requirements on the arrival time are reduced: operations are not clocked, and bits only need to arrive in a definite order. To achieve definite order, the input constraint is a negligible direct interaction between successive input bits. In the LJJ the interaction strength decays exponentially for large distances compared to λ J 29 , and in our LJJs we find that 10λ J is a suitable distance for negligible interactions. For an asynchronous 1-input gate like the 1-bit BSR, this corresponds to a minimum required delay time between two input fluxons, T d > max (10λ J /v 0 , τ max ), where v 0 is the (common) input velocity and τ max is the maximum duration of all possible gate operations. To explore the role of the delay time T d , this section investigates (i) the dependence of the BSR on T d and (ii) vice versa, i.e. the modification of the fluxon delay after the BSR gate. Finally, the gate-induced timing uncertainty is compared with that arising from fluxon jitter. ( 1, -1) FIG. Next we describe uncertainties created by variation of the fluxon delay time and different gate operations. In the underlying simulations we study a 1-bit BSR initialized with S = -1 and two consecutive input fluxons with a delay time T d between them. The initialized gate is in a steady state, but the first gate operation leaves residual energy at the interface. Thus the efficiency of the second operation will depend not only on its own dynamics (operation type), but also that of the preceding one. As a result, each of the four input combinations (σ 1 , σ 2 ) generate distinct curves (different colors) for the output velocity v f of the second fluxon, as shown in Fig. Variability of the gate output velocities and the operation-dependent gate durations gives rise to timing uncertainties for the fluxon arrival at a later gate. Take for example the 2-bit SISO register of Fig. ), where ∆x = (N + 2)a is the length of the LJJ section between the two BSR gates. Here the τ j and v f,j depend on operation type and on T d . We estimate the final delay time T d from the simulations of two fluxons given in Fig. As mentioned above, asynchronous gates require a minimum delay time between bits to ensure their interactions are negligible. Since the delay time T d after the gate can decrease as function of the LJJ length ∆x (due to one operation type dominantly) the LJJ should not be too long to still meet the minimum delay criterion. We estimate an upper limit of ∆x in the following way: The initial delay time T d will likely be a factor p > 1 of the minimum delay time T d,min = 10λ J /v 0 . After the gate operation, the final delay time may be decreased to min(T d ) = p10λ J /v 0 -0.14∆x/v 0 . Since T d > T d,min has to be fulfilled, one obtains the upper limit for the LJJ length of ∆x < 70(p -1)λ J . As a lower limit for the gate-connecting LJJ length we set ∆x > 10λ J , i.e. the same value that also ensures negligible fluxon-fluxon interactions. In our experience, LJJs shorter than that can hinder the free fluxon motion between gates. Another source of timing error is jitter from the LJJs, which is the fluctuation σ t of fluxon passage times caused by thermal noise during its motion in the LJJ. In the ballistic regime of underdamped LJJs, where αω J t LJJ 1, the jitter error (standard deviation of arrival times/time) is expected to be small For solitons and other collective excitations of a manybody system, the collective coordinate (CC) method is a powerful way to reduce the many degrees of freedom to a few essential coordinates Each (left and right) field consists of a linear superposition of a fluxon and its mirror antifluxon, where φ (σ,X) is the phase field of a fluxon of polarity σ which we model as a kink equivalent to the soliton solution of the LJJ field The ansatz (11) neglects that for S = 0 the LJJ fields may deviate in the vicinity of the interface from the vacuum levels, as modelled by the bound states, Eq. ( Examples for the parametrization of Eq. ( , Eq. ( Using Eq. ( where U (X L , X R ) is the dimensionless CC potential, and the mass matrix M is composed of the coordinatedependent, dimensionless elements The CC potential U , masses m i and mass coupling m LR are given in Eqs. (A7), (A5) and (A6), respectively. Compared with the CC model of the 1-bit RFL gates 2 contributes to the CC potential U , cf. Eq. (A7), which stems from the shunt current through the inductor L s . The diagonal elements m i of the mass matrix M vary with X i near the interface, but asymptotically (|X i | λ J ) approach a constant value, m i = 8λ J /W . The mass coupling m LR is exponentially suppressed far away from the interface, but is finite near it. It is proportional to the rail-JJ capacitance C B J , and this explains the important role of C B J for the forward-scattering of a fluxon from one LJJ to another in many gates. In the fundamental (NOT and ID) RFL gates, mass coupling is the dominant coupling mechanism between the LJJs, whereas coupling generated by the potential is negligible since the potential gradient always acts perpendicular to the coordinate axes, ∂U/∂X i | Xi=0 = 0. Relative to the fundmental RFL gates, the BSR has an added contribution u s in the CC potential U which can generate a much stronger coupling between X L and X R , depending on the configuration (k L , k R ). The CC potential U is shown in Fig. Most contributions to the CC potential, U 0 , u 1 , and u 2 in Eq. (A7), have mirror symmetry about the line X R = -X L , whereas u s has this symmetry only for σ(k Lk R ) = -1, as can be seen from Eq. ( A fluxon initially at position X -λ J , moving with velocity v 0 , is parametrized by (X L , X R ) = (X, 0), ( ẊL , ẊR ) = (v 0 , 0), and the related fluxon width W/λ J = 1v 2 0 /c 2 . For these initial conditions, the initial energy of the system is found from Eq. (12) to be E init = E S + E fl (v 0 ). Herein, E fl (v 0 ) is the initial fluxon energy, Eq. (10), and E S is the energy of the initially stored flux quantum S, as given in Eq. ( The Lagrangian, Eq. ( which describe the free dynamics of the coordinates X L,R for fixed initial values of S and σ. Recall that in our CC model, Eq. ( From Eq. ( Next we describe how an empty BSR circuit is loaded with an SFQ such that it is initialized for regular BSR operation. In Fig. Figure Figure As these examples show, the CC model -though heavily simplifying the many-JJ circuit to a reduced system with two degrees of freedom -describes the fluxon scattering in the BSR accurately. Furthermore, it is good tool to interpret and predict fluxon dynamics at circuit interfaces. With the help of the CC model, we were able to understand how the product σ•S, which represents the relative polarity of moving and stored bit states, changes the potential landscape. This in turn changes the scattering dynamics, as we described for the three relevant cases (initialization and the two distinct BSR gate operations). Shift registers In the future we intend to describe how to build large shift registers. The 2-bit shift register described above is made from two 1-bit BSRs. It shows that ballistic gates can in principle be executed in a sequence of two without external power with certain defined constraints. The same holds for the 2-input BSRs and furthermore the simulation data indicates that multi-bit line BSRs can be operated with similar performance. This would allow some bit lines to be used for input and others to be used for sending data to the needed outputs. Having a logical depth of two without external power provides a useful feature because almost every gate is currently clocked (and not sequenced) in most SFQ logic. This could also lead to new methods to incorporate memory with logic (cf. Ref. 50). In principle, RFL BSRs could allow greater density than shift register that use dual rail encoding The 2-input BSRs in this work (with 2-outputs) can in principle be used to shift information on-demand in two dimensions (vertically and horizontally). In previous work, we also showed how to make a CNOT gate Logic gates generally have different execution times (delays) Superconducting logic can in principle approach thermodynamic reversibility, meaning that there is no lower limit to energy dissipation. In the past this was studied with so-called adiabatic logics When setting the gate energy efficiency to ≥ 86%, we obtain the wide parameter margins shown in Table I. It follows that the energy cost per operation is E op < 0.14E B , where E B is the energy of the input bit (which is independent of its bit state). For the assumed input velocity of the fluxon v 0 /c = 0.6 this bit energy is E B = 10E 0 , compared with the rest energy 8E 0 of a stationary bit (cf. Eq. ( Although it is beyond the scope of this work to specify a full architecture for RFL, it is obvious that the BSRs could be tested by a train of fluxons traveling with some interval between them. For example in the simulation data of Fig. Reversible logic may progress digital computing generally because it allows great improvements in computing efficiency at the gate level. In contrast, end-of-theroadmap CMOS will have orders of magnitude higher energy cost per bit switching. The type of reversible logic gates which we studied here (RFL BSRs) are ballistic. By introducing the asynchronous feature to ballistic gates, as we have done in this work, we expect greater practicality in our reversible logic family (RFL) since the timing requirements are reduced. The ADF (Anderson, Dynes, and Fulton) flux shuttle provided a pioneering design for a shift register prior to the start of SFQ logic. That logic is thermodynamically irreversible with the bit's energy dissipated during every logic operation. In contrast to the ADF shuttle, which has bits encoded by SFQ presence, our RFL bal-listic gates conditionally invert fluxon polarity, where the fluxon polarity encodes the bit state. In this work, we introduce BSRs (Ballistic Shift Registers) which add the feature of memory to previous ballistic multi-port gates. The BSRs rely only on ballistic scattering dynamics between the input fluxon and stored SFQ. Here the gate dynamics fall into two cases which consist of the resonant NOT case, generally used in RFL, and a simpler transmission case. We have performed circuit simulations of a 1-input BSR, as well as a shift register composed of two 1-input BSR gates in sequence. In another design we introduced a 2-input BSR which can be used as a register with separate write and read ports or alternatively as a device to shift the bit state between different bit lines. Furthermore, we discuss how this may be helpful for a registerbased memory. Since the ballistic scattering depends on the stored bit state (unlike previous RFL gates), the 1-input and 2input BSR constitute the first set of asynchronous reversible logic gates appropriate for feed forward computing. The former (1-input) gate is shown to allow the execution of two in sequence without external power. The latter gate allows more bit lines to be added. We discussed how this is related to logical depth and timing requirements. Most importantly technically, perhaps, is that the BSR has wide parameter margins, where all margins are above 46% when the energy efficiency is set to 86%. This is far above the variation in today's standard fabrication processes such that BSRs can be tested. In addition to full circuit simulations, we have modeled the BSR dynamics by a collective coordinate model which reduces the many-JJ degrees of freedom to only two coordinates. With the help of this model, the statedependent scattering dynamics can be understood from effective potentials in fluxon coordinate space -the BSR scattering potentials are dependent on the initial fluxon and SFQ states. All SFQ logic types switch in a time equal or greater than the natural oscillation period of the Josephson junctions. Our logic is a fast reversible logic type in that it is designed to switch in only a few Josephson periods, and it has the potential to be faster than adiabatically powered reversible logic which is generally slowed by the adiabatic power source. Consecutive BSR operations are shown to be possible in less than 8 Josephson periods. We do not currently see the need for an adiabatic clock in contrast to other reversible logic families and this helps enable logic at high speed. Thus, we are optimistic that our ballistic logic may enable high-throughput high-efficiency computation with unpowered gate sequences. where z i = X i /W (i = L, R). To obtain these expressions, we have replaced the LJJ sums in L l,r by integrals, based on the small discreteness, a/λ J 1. We have evaluated all integrals with boundaries (-∞, 0) and (0, ∞), which corresponds to including the interface's termination JJs as part of the LJJ. To correct for this, the corresponding energies have to be subtracted in the interface Lagrangian L I , Eq. ( Herein, the interface modifies the dimensionless mass of Eq. (A3) and also contributes a mass-coupling term, where the factor g I (X i ) = 4 (λ J /W ) sech(X i /W ) describes the local influence of the interface. The dimensionless CC potential of Eq. (A2) is also modified, with the interface contributions to the potential, 4 sech(z i ) tanh(z i ) 1 -2 sech 2 (z i ) and Using φ L = φ(x = 0 -) = 8 arctan e σX L /W +2π(k L -1+σ) and φ R = φ(x = 0 + ) = 8 arctan e -σX R /W + 2π(k R -1) from Eq. ( 8 arctan e X L /W -8 arctan e -X R /W + 2πσ(k Lk R ) + 2π(1 + σf E ) Appendix B: LJJ parameter margins Similar to the variation of interface parameters in Fig. LJJ energy scale E 0 = (Φ 0 /2π) 3/2 I c /L, and (iv) LJJ impedance Z = L/C J , as shown in the table of Fig. Panel (d) shows the varied capacitance C J relative to its nominal value C (0) J . We note that all of our simulations are performed with a/λ J as the sole free parameter, and absolute values of C = 120 fF. Panel (d) shows wider C J -margins (140%) compared with the inductance margins of panels (a,b). We attribute this increase to the fact that the fluxon energy is not changed here, unlike in cases (a,b), cf. the table in Fig. 