While boosting signals with amplification mechanisms is a well-established approach, attenuation mechanisms are typically considered an anathema because they degrade the efficiency of the structures employed to perform useful operations on these signals. An emerging alternate viewpoint promotes losses as a novel design element by utilizing the notion of exceptional point degeneracies (EPDs)-points in parameter space where the eigenvalues of the underlying system and the associated eigenvectors simultaneously coalesce. Here, we demonstrate a direct consequence of such eigenbasis collapse in elastodynamics-an unusual enhancement of actuation force by a judiciously designed non-Hermitian metamaterial supporting an EPD that is coupled to an actuation source. Intriguingly, the EPD enables this enhancement while maintaining a constant signal quality. Our work constitutes a proof-of-principle design which can promote a new class of reconfigurable nano-indenters and robotic-actuators. Importantly, it reveals the ramifications of non-Hermiticity in boosting the Purcell emissivity enhancement factor beyond its expected value, which can guide the design of metamaterials with enhanced emission that does not deteriorate signal quality for mechanical, acoustic, optical, and photonic applications. Unusual wave phenomena associated with phononic crystals and locally resonant metamaterials have been utilized for various engineering applications from tunable acoustic bandgaps Examples include a loss-induced transparency Many of these phenomena are reliant on the existence of EPDs. Their implementation requires judicious design of attenuation (and/or amplification) and impedance profiles that lead to enhanced wave-matter interactions. As opposed to many of these previous studies that emphasized the topology of the eigenfrequency surfaces in the parameter space near an EPD, here we exploit phenomena intimately related to the eigenvector coalescence at EPDs The Fermi's Golden Rule (FGR) Purcell effect has benefitted numerous technologies such as nano-optical spectroscopy, nanolasing, quantum information processing, energy harvesting, emission enhancement of sound and elastodynamic sources, etc To this end, we have designed a two-mode cavity made by a non-Hermitian elastodynamic metamaterial consisting of two coupled resonant elements with differential damping (or non-proportional damping) between them (Figure applied on the undamped resonator side of the metamaterial results in an actuation force-i.e., the force exerted by the damped resonator side of the metamaterial onto the dynamic force sensor-whose amplitude is controlled by the coupling strength between the two masses without any deterioration of force-signal quality. The input force is enhanced by 6.4 times at the proximity of an EPD compared to the 3.2 times enhancement produced by the same cavity-source system when the metamaterial does not support an EPD, see Figure To achieve differential damping between the two resonant elements of the metamaterial, we have designed and fabricated two types of springs: a compliant aluminum spring with specifically designed stiffness for the undamped component and a viscoelastic Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) for the damped component (Figure Also, the actuator and the force sensor in our setup are orders of magnitude stiffer than the materials and metamaterial we tested. Hence, any effect due to their deformation on the measurements is negligible. The measured storage and loss moduli were then fitted using power-law functions (see Figure Assuming E(t) is the relaxation modulus and (t) is the axial strain in PDMS, then σ(t) is given by the Boltzmann superposition integral as follows Above equations describes two coupled masses m 1 , m 2 with displacements x 1 (t), x 2 (t) respectively. The Hookean spring constant of the aluminum spring is k 1 , and x 0 (t) = U sin(ωt) is the displacement prescribed by the actuator, while F out = -σ(t)A is the force exerted on the mass m 2 with A(= 28.274 mm 2 ) and σ(t) being the cross-sectional area and the stress response of the PDMS specimen respectively. After taking the Fourier transform, Eqs. (1,2) in the frequency domain takes the form where σ(ω) is the dynamic stress amplitude which can be expressed as a function of frequency dependent storage (E ) and loss modulus (E ) as follows where (ω) = x 2 (ω)/h is the dynamic strain amplitude and h(= 1.948 mm) is the height of the PDMS specimen. Assuming k 2 (ω) = (A/h)[E (ω) + iE (ω)] is the effective dynamic stiffness, Eq. ( In our metamaterial design, the real part of the effective stiffness of the PDMS specimen (E (ω is approximately equal to the Hookean spring's stiffness (k 1 ) in the frequency range of our experiment, which makes the natural frequency of both damped and undamped oscillators (when they are not coupled together) roughly the same (zero detuning). The imaginary part (E (ω)(A/h)) behaves similarly to the real part because they are causally linked via the Kramers-Kronig relations due to their common origin-Fourier transform of a time-dependent relaxation modulus Eqs. (4,7) can be written in matrix form as follows where M, K, and C are the mass, stiffness, and damping matrices. Noteworthily, the damping matrix (C) doesn't commute with the stiffness (K) and mass (M) matrices, which suggests that our system exhibits non-proportional damping As the coupling stiffness κ is increased above κ EP the modes separate from one another, i.e. ω R -≡ Re (ω -) = Re (ω + ) ≡ ω R + , while their linewidths remain approximately the same, i.e. ω I -≡ Im(ω -) ≈ Im(ω + ) ≡ ω I + (see methods in SI). Our modeling is further validated by a direct comparison with the measured eigenvalues (see methods in SI), see Figure We further evaluate the mechanical power dissipated from mass m 2 , which takes the form (see methods in SI) where is the dissipated energy per cycle F 2 in m depends only on the equivalent input force from the actuator F in = k 1 U acting on the mass m 1 = m, and G 11 (ω) is the element of the Green's function that describes the system of Eqs. Further theoretical progress can be made by assuming that the storage and loss moduli take a constant value in the frequency range of our experiments which are E = k1h A = 4.675 M P a and E = 1.5235 M P a (see methods in SI). This approximation is justified by the slow frequency dependence that the PDMS exhibits, see Figure where ω 0 = k 1 /m. Because at the proximity of the EPD the two eigenfrequencies degenerate at ω R ± = ω EP ≈ ω 0 1 + Γ/ω 0 ≈ ω 0 (see methods in SI), one naturally expects that ξ(ω), and subsequently P d (ω), will also be modified. To better understand the consequence of EPD on them, we first evaluate ξ(ω) in the vicinity of ω ≈ ω EP . From Eq. ( corresponding to a square-Lorentzian-as opposed to the more traditional Lorentzian line-shape characterizing the LDoS away from an EPD. In the other limiting case of κ >> κ EP , the two resonant frequencies ω R -≈ ω 0 and ω R ≈ ω 2 0 + (2κ/m) (see methods in SI) are well separated from each other. In this case one can approximate Eq. ( which can be used as a reference for measuring the effects of EPD in the power emission. At this point, it is instructive to introduce the rescaled dissipated power P (ω e ) = P d (ω e ) /P ∞ and ω e = ω R ± is the frequency of the actuation force which is considered to be monochromatic and at resonant frequency. Substituting Eqs. = P (ω e ), which for κ EP and driving frequency ω e = ω EP is F(ω e = ω EP ) = 2. We point out that the force amplification factor F(ω e ) indicates an additional enhancement relative to the typical Purcell force enhancement occurring in the actuating force F ∞ out (ω R ± ) (see Figure We have tested the validity of the above predictions by direct measurements of the emitted actuation force amplitude (Figure The experimental data confirm the above theoretical predictions very well. In the same figure, we also report the force amplification factor calculated numerically from Eqs. In conclusion, we have demonstrated experimentally and analyzed theoretically an enhancement in the exerted actuation force and the emitted mechanical power by a non-Hermitian elastodynamic cavity-a metamaterial consisting of undamped and damped resonators. It occurs when the actuation source is coupled only to the undamped resonator (a "dark"mode) while the emission is measured on the viscoelastic element (the "bright"mode). The origin of this enhancement has been traced to the reorganization of the supermodes of the metamaterial in the proximity of an EPD. Our experiments pave the way for understanding the ramifications of non-Hermiticity and EPD engineering in the manipulation of the Purcell factor of narrowband emitters. Additionally, while coupled oscillators and periodic structures have been extensively studied in vibroacoustics under various scenarios, our work provides a unique metamaterial design pathway that utilizes differential damping as a design element to realize exceptional point degeneracies experimentally and demonstrates a novel phenomenon of enhanced emission at constant quality factor. Our work paves the way to an unexplored realm of physics in non-Hermitian systems and their potential in various applications, such as a new class of indenters for material hardness measurements 