Semiconducting transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) are desired as active materials in optoelectronic devices due to their strong excitonic effects. They can be exfoliated from their parent layered materials with low-cost and for mass production via a liquid exfoliation method. However, the device application of TMDs prepared by liquid phase exfoliation is limited by their poor photoluminescence quantum efficiencies (PLQE). It is crucial to understand the reason to low PLQE for their practical device development. Here we evaluate the quality of monolayer-enriched liquid phase exfoliated (LPE) WS2 dispersions by systematically investigating their optical and photophysical properties and contrasting with mechanically exfoliated (ME) WS2 monolayers. An indepth understanding of the exciton dynamics is gained with ultrafast pump-probe measurements. We reveal that the energy transfer between monolayer and few-layers in LPE WS2 dispersions is a substantial reason for their quenched PL. In addition, we show that LPE WS2 is promising to build high performance optoelectronic devices with excellent optical quality. The study of transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) has become a vibrant area in nanomaterial science. The LPE WS2 dispersion samples used in this study were prepared as shown in Figure Large monolayer WS2 samples (~ 200 μm) prepared on quartz substrates with mechanical exfoliation are identified by optical microscopy (Figure The optical absorption properties of LPE 5-10k g WS2/H2O, 10-30k g WS2/H2O, and 10-30k g WS2/IPA dispersions are characterized via UV-Vis extinction spectroscopy. The spectra depicted in Figure Figure dispersion, the WS2/IPA dispersion, the ME pristine WS2, and the Li-TFSI treated WS2 samples excited at around the A-exciton resonance 610 nm (2.033 eV) with 2.63 nJ/pulse are shown in Figure The normalized kinetics taken at the AML-exciton GSB and AFL-exciton GSB are shown in Figure In order to gain further insight into exciton dynamics of the WS2 samples, we also analyse the photon energy dependence and pump fluence dependence of the A-exciton GSB decay feature (Figure WS2 powder (99%, 2 μm, Sigma A), surfactant sodium cholate hydrate (SC, ≥ 99%), and bis(trifluuoromethane)sulfonimide lithium salt (Li-TFSI) are purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and used without purification. The bulk synthetic WS2 crystal is purchased from 2D Semiconductors. The mechanically-exfoliated monolayer WS2 is prepared according to the reported gold-mediated exfoliation method to ensure relatively large monolayers. The chemical treatment with Li-TFSI (0.02 M in Methanol) is carried out in ambient atmosphere. The chemical treatments are achieved by immersing the samples into concentrated solutions of the investigated chemicals for 40 mins, and blow dry with nitrogen gun afterwards. 1. Si/SiO2 substrates with 90 nm oxide layer were used for microscope steady-state photoluminescence (PL) and Raman spectroscopy. Quartz substrates were used for ultrafast pump-probe measurement. The samples were encapsulated for ultrafast pump-probe measurements, and other measurements are carried out on samples without encapsulation. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was performed using a FEI Tecnai F20 at 200kV accelerating voltage. 10-30k g WS2/H2O dispersion sample was transferred onto 200-mesh Cu grids (Agar AGS160). The optical microscopy was measured using Olympus BX60 optical microscope with 405 nm laser. Samples were placed on an X-Y piezo stage of the microscope and the signal is collected in refection mode with the 50× objective. The Raman spectroscopy was carried out on a Renishaw inVia Raman confocal microscope with a 532 nm excitation laser in air under ambient condition. The Raman emission was collected by a 20× long working distance objective lens in streamline mode and dispersed by a 1800 l/mm grating with 1% of the laser power (< 10 μW). The spectrometer was calibrated to a silicon reference sample prior to the measurement to correct for the instrument response. UV-Vis measurement was performed using a Shimadzu UV-3600 Plus spectrometer to measure the extinction spectra of the LPE WS2 dispersions in transmission mode in quartz cuvettes with 1 nm increments. Steady-state PL measurement were carried out using a temperature and current-controlled 405 nm laser diode (Thorlabs). The incident beam was attenuated as desired and focused onto the sample while PL from the sample was collected and focused into an Andor Kymera 328i Spectrometer and spectra recorded using a Si-CCd (Andor iDus 420). The microscope steady-state PL measurement was carried out using a WITec alpha 300 s setup as has been described previously. The ultrafast pump-probe setup has been described previously. The monolayer volume fraction (Vf) can be extracted from the extinction spectra of the dispersion according to the previously reported method. Where h represents the height, E0 the center and w the full width half maximum (FWHM). Differentiating twice with respect to E gives The obtained spectrum of the second derivative is then fitted to the sum of the second derivative of two Lorentzian functions giving E, w and h of the monolayer and few-layer WS2. The area under the monolayer (ML) A-exciton extinction peak should scale with the monolayer content in the dispersion. As the area under any Lorentzian is proportional to h × w, a metric SA which scales with the Vf can be calculated as the equation: Vf is then calculated as: 3 V f = (1.25 ± 0.08)S A (S4) b Second derivatives of the A-exciton obtained after smoothing the spectrum with the Lowess method. The spectra are fitted to the second derivative of two Lorentzians (solid lines). Figure sample is quite low (~ 15%). On the other hand, compared to the narrow linewidth of AML-exciton GSB for both LPE 10-30k g WS2/H2O and WS2/IPA, the 5-10k g sample shows wider linewidth and even peak splitting in the longer time delay stage. In addition, the AML-exciton GSB of the 5-10k g sample decays slower than that LPE 10-30k g WS2/H2O (Figure Table Sample A1 τ Normalized DT/T A ML -exciton GSB