Computational studies of electrochemical interfaces based on density-functional theory (DFT) play an increasingly important role in present research on electrochemical processes for energy conversion and storage. The homogeneous background method (HBM) offers a straightforward approach to charge the electrochemical system within DFT simulations, but it typically requires the specification of the "active" fraction of excess electrons based on a certain choice of the electrode-electrolyte boundary location, which can be difficult in presence of electrode-surface adsorbates or explicit solvent molecules. In this work, we present a methodological advancement of the HBM, both facilitating and extending its applicability. The advanced version neither requires energy corrections nor the specification of the "active" fraction of excess electrons, providing a versatile and readily available method for the simulation of charged interfaces also when adsorbates or explicit solvent molecules are present. Our computational DFT 1 by a general joint density-functional theory (JDFT) To model a charged interface within DFT-based simulations, the electron number of the simulation cell, which contains the electrode slab embedded in solvent, is changed with respect to the electron number of the neutral electrode slab. In order to preserve overall charge neutrality, a counter-charge distribution must be included that compensates the electronic excess charge and mimics the ionic charge of the electrolyte in the electrochemical double-layer. The homogeneous background method (HBM) As a computational validation, we compare the advanced HBM with the linearized Poisson-Boltzmann model (PBM) We begin with a brief review of the general thermodynamic equations for an electrochemical interface where A is the Helmholtz free energy, and N e and N i are the excess particle numbers of electrons and ions, respectively, which quantify the difference with respect to the uncharged interface. An aspect of central importance is the overall charge neutrality. The electronic excess charge at the electrode surface must, on average, be balanced by the ionic excess charge of the electrolyte to avoid energy divergence. Therefore, the electron and ion numbers N e and N i cannot vary independently, but they must fulfill the charge neutrality condition N e = i z i N i with the charge numbers z i of the ion species. Splitting the ion chemical potentials as μ i = μ 0 i + ez i φ elyte , where φ elyte is the inner electrostatic potential in the bulk electrolyte, we obtain the grand potential in the form where we used the charge neutrality condition. The electrode potential Φ can be defined as a "work function" in the electrolyte environ-ment where the electron chemical potential μ e is referenced to the electrostatic potential energy (-e) φ elyte in the bulk electrolyte. The (differential) interface capacitance relates changes in the interfacial charge q to changes in the electrode potential Φ. Since we consider fixed temperature T and volume V throughout the following, we omit the indication of the T, V -subscript. Due to the charge neutrality requirement discussed above, the electron and ion numbers cannot be varied independently. We therefore consider variations in electron number N e , and thus interfacial charge q, under fixed ion chemical potentials μ i . In this partial grand canonical setting where we used the relation q = -eN e for the interfacial charge, which holds in the PBM, but not in the HBM, as discussed below. From now on, we consider all partial derivatives under constant ion chemical potentials {μ i }, and, for simplicity, we omit the indication of the {μ i }-subscript. From the well-known relation we find where we used Eq. ( which is the well-known relation that the curvature of the grand potential as a function of the electrode potential is equal to the negative of the capacitance. The original HBM Since the homogeneous background extends across both the electrolyte region and the electrode slab, the HBM essentially combines two different models: First, the homogeneous background charge in the electrolyte region models the ionic counter charge of the electrochemical double-layer. And second, the homogeneous background charge in the electrode slab region can be considered as an entirely delocalized model for a dopant of the electrode material. Therefore, charging the electrode-electrolyte system with the HBM consists of both charging the electrochemical double-layer and changing the dopant concentration of the electrode at the same time. We will see below that, in fact, the latter dopant contribution to the grand potential is negligible for the case of metal electrodes, making the HBM an easy-to-use method for such systems. The chemical potential of the HBM counter-charge (i.e the uniform background) is given by its electrostatic interaction with the rest of the system as μ bg = e φ with the mean electrostatic potential φ of the simulation cell where we used the charge neutrality condition N bg = N e (note that N e only refers to the excess electron number with respect to the uncharged electrode). Because the global system is neutral, this expression does not depend on the choice of a certain potential reference. The definition of the electrode potential Φ according to Eq. (3) remains valid also within the HBM. The definition of the interface capacitance within HBM, however, is less straightforward. In principle, we still assume that we can define a "true" interface capacitance according to Eq. ( Because the homogeneous background charge extends across the bulk region of the metal electrode, a certain part N b of the excess electrons will screen the background charge therein and therefore not contribute to the electrode surface charging. Only the remaining part N s = N e -N b of the excess electrons results in a charging of the electrode-electrolyte interface. The interfacial charge q = -eN s in the definition of the interface capacitance according to Eq. ( Nevertheless, we can still define a capacitance analogous to Eq. ( where we have to keep in mind that this capacitance will not be equal to the "true" interface capacitance, as discussed above. Also, in analogy to Eq. ( where Ω refers to the HBM grand potential of Eq. ( We saw in the previous section that the capacitance definitions according to Eqs. (10) and ( Calculations were performed within the density-functional theory (DFT) framework, using the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) To compute the HBM grand potential according to Eq. ( and we obtain the same form as in Eq. ( despite the "unphysical" extension of the homogeneous background charge across the bulk of the electrode slab. This is a remarkable finding, because the definition of the HBM grand potential according to Eq. ( Thus, the grand potentials Ω(Φ) and the capacitances C 0 ΩΦ at the PZC, agree remarkably well between the HBM and PBM, despite their very different counter-charge distributions. Noting that, within the PBM, C ΩΦ is precisely equal to the interface capacitance of Eq. ( To explore the reason why the capacitance C 0 ΩΦ in the HBM provides a good description of the interface capacitance at the PZC, we investigate a simplified model where the HBM contributions within the bulk electrode and the electrolyte regions are treated separately. A schematic simulation cell of a periodic electrode-slab model is shown in Figure Here, t b denotes the total electrode slab thickness (b: bulk ) and t s corresponds to the width of the remaining interspace region (s: space or surface), which contains the implicit solvent/electrolyte. A sub-partitioning of t s into an actual solvent-region width t sol and twice a gap width t g will be treated later on. For now, we continue with the coarse partitioning into t b and t s . Accordingly, the total width of the simulation cell in the z-direction perpendicular to the slab surface is T = t b + t s , and the volume fractions of the bulk-electrode and interspace regions are α b = t b /T and α s = t s /T , respectively. Imagine that we could independently change the homogeneous background charge within both the bulk electrode and the electrolyte regions (while, at the same time, changing the electron number accordingly to preserve charge neutrality). We denote the respective excess electron numbers by N b and N s , and the Helmholtz free energy A(N b , N s ) becomes a function of both. We next perform a second-order expansion around the state with zero excess electrons, and we neglect higher-order terms, which do not contribute to the capacitance at the potential of zero charge, see Eq. (11). Here, and correspond to the chemical potential and chemical hardness, respectively, of the bulk (σ = b) and surface/interspace (σ = s) sub-systems, and the "0" superscript denotes the state with zero excess electrons. Because the derivatives are defined by charge-neutral variations in both electron number and homogeneous background (within the respective region), we note that the chemical potentials μ σ = μ e,σ + μ bg,σ are the sum of the electron and background chemical potentials, where μ bg,σ = e φσ is simply determined by the average value of the electrostatic potential φσ within each of the regions quantifies the interactions between the bulk/surface excess-electron and background charges. where we used N b = α b N e , N s = α s N e , and N e = N b + N s . In the last step, the bulk and surface chemical potentials were again expanded around the zero-excess state, μ b ≈ bs N b , respectively, which follows from Eqs. ( To define the electrode potential, we introduce a further approximation, restricting our model to high-dielectric-constant solvents with r 1, e.g. water with r ≈ 80. Then, the electrostatic potential in the electrolyte region assumes an approximately constant plateau value φ elyte , and the curvature due to the homogeneous background charge can be neglected, see Figure We now assess the capacitance definitions for the present model. Firstly, according to Eq. ( where q s = -eN s is the excess charge at the electrode surface, and we used Eqs. ( The capacitance C 0 ΩΦ , defined by Eq. ( where we used Eq. ( For metal electrodes, the delocalized electrons effectively screen the homogeneous background charge in the bulk electrode region, resulting in a large "bulk capacitance", or small bulk chemical hardness η 0 b in comparison to η 0 s of the surface, so η 0 b η 0 s . This is, for instance, verified for the Pt(111) slab, for which we obtain η 0 b = 0.052 eV η 0 s ≈ 2.1 eV. Under these conditions, the terms in square brackets in Eq. ( Our finding C 0 ΩΦ ≈ C 0 s enables an advancement of the HBM, both facilitating and extending the applicability of the method. The advanced version is simply represented by the calculation of the grand potential Ω according to Eqs. ( η 0 b , an independent HBM calculation of the corresponding Pt-bulk cell was performed, as described in the Computational Details section, and η 0 b was obtained from a second-order polynomial fit of the resulting A b (N b ) curve. The meaningfulness of the obtained Ω(Φ) curve is further demonstrated by the good agreement with the Ω(Φ) curve from PBM, shown in Figure The approximation C 0 ΩΦ ≈ C 0 s of Eq. ( without requiring any a priori specification of a boundary between the bulk electrode and interspace regions. In contrast, the original HBM approach First, the location of the center of the electrode-slab surface atoms can be used to define the boundary, yielding an interspace volume fraction α c s . Second, the atomic radius can be added to the center location of the surface atoms, resulting in α c+r s . And third, the interspace region can be defined simply as the implicit solvent region of VASPsol, leading to α sol s . As shown in Table Interestingly, the "intrinsic" estimate of α s provided by the advanced HBM according to Eq. ( Likewise, as shown in Figure To demonstrate this aspect, we performed HBM-DFT calculations for the Li(100) surface, where the first layer of ethylene carbonate (EC) solvent molecules was explicitly modelled, combined with implicit EC solvent in the remaining interspace region. To accommodate the explicit EC molecules, the simulation cell comprised a 2x2 surface cell of the Li(100) slab (with 9 atomic layers) and a 40 Å-wide interspace between the periodic slab images. For the Li(100) and Li(100)@EC systems without and with the explicit EC layer, respectively, Eq. ( We finally return to the question for the origin of the good agreement between the HBM and PBM grand potentials defined in Eqs. ( As discussed before, this is directly related to the agreement between the HBM and PBM capacitances C ΩΦ , presented in Table Therefore, the "true" interface capacitances of HBM and PBM seem to be approximately equal, which appears surprising given the very different counter-charge distributions in the electrolyte region for the two models. This behavior can be understood by taking into account the existence of a "gap" between the electrode surface and the beginning of the implicit solvent region In the present context, we consider the "gap" simply as a numerical aspect of the implicit solvent model, and we refer to other literature for a discussion of its relation to the Helmholtz capacitance of the physical system For the PBM, the overall interface capacitance C is given by the series of the gap capacitance C g and the Gouy-Chapman capacitance C GC = (2A)( 0 r,sol /λ D ) cosh ze∆φ sol 2k B T of the counter-charge layer in the solvent region For the HBM, the counter-charge in the implicit solvent (electrolyte) region is homogeneous, so its extension is directly controlled by the width t sol of the solvent region, indicated in Figure We thus find a direct correspondence between the Debye length λ D of the PBM and the quarter of the solvent-region width t sol /4 for the HBM, with good agreement between the corresponding capacitances. In particular, we note that for typically chosen computational parameters, i.e. λ D 5 Å for PBM and t sol 20 Å for HBM, both methods yield essentially equal results for the charging characteristics of the interface, which are dominated by the gap capacitance C g that is defined by the implicit solvent model, common to both methods. Also shown in Figure By including the homogeneous background contribution in the definition of the grand potential, we developed an advanced homogeneous background method (HBM) that can be applied without any energy corrections and without requiring knowledge of the "active" fraction of excess electrons. This strongly facilitates the practical use of the HBM and extends its range of application for systems where the precise definition of the electrode-electrolyte boundary is difficult, e.g. in presence of surface adsorbates or explicit solvent molecules. We found that the advanced HBM and the Poisson-Boltzmann model (PBM) provide essentially equal results as long as the gap between the electrode surface atoms and the boundary of the implicit solvent region dominates the interface capacitance. This is fulfilled for practically chosen computational parameters, i.e. implicit-solvent-region width t sol 20 Å and λ D 5 Å (for PBM), in high-dielectric-constant solvents, such as water or ethylene carbonate. For the HBM, the chemical hardness of the bulk electrode region must be negligible, restricting its applicability to metal electrode materials. Under these prerequisites, the HBM provides a practical method for DFT simulations of charged electrochemical interfaces that does not require any particular implementation of a counter-ion model within the electrolyte region. Electrostatic model for the interface capacitance within the homogeneous background method (HBM). In a complete description We emphasize that, in the present context, we understand the "true" interface capacitance as the one defined by Eq. (4) for the given model where q refers to the interfacial charge, only. The question whether the value of this "true" model interface capacitance agrees with the real interface capacitance of the real physical system is a different one and lies outside of the scope of the present work, where we exclusively focus on a comparison between the computational HBM and PBM methods. Here, η 0 s was computed from C 0 ΩΦ using the approximation C 0 s ≈ C 0 ΩΦ . For the bulk chemical hardness The solvent-region width was computed from t sol = α sol s T , where T is the total width of the simulation cell, see Figure2(a). The electrode slab thickness t b was computed and fixed as the distance between the Pt surface atoms (including atomic radius) of the two slab surfaces. The gap width was computed from 2t g = T -t b -t sol , yielding a fixed value of t g = 1.17 Å.