Co2-based Heusler compounds are the promising materials for the spintronics application due to their high Curie temperature, large spin-polarization, large magnetization density, and exotic transport properties. In the present manuscript, we report the anomalous Hall effect (AHE) in a polycrystalline Co2FeAl Heusler compound using combined experimental and theoretical studies. The Rietveld analysis of high-resolution synchrotron x-ray diffraction data reveals a large degree (∼ 50 %) of antisite disorder between Fe and Al atoms. The analysis of anomalous transport data provides the experimental anomalous Hall conductivity (AHC) about 227 S/cm at 2 K with an intrinsic contribution of 155 S/cm, which has nearly constant variation with temperature. The detailed scaling analysis of anomalous Hall resistivity suggests that the AHE in Co2FeAl is governed by the Berry phase driven intrinsic mechanism. Our theoretical calculations reveal that the disorder present in Co2FeAl compound enhances the Berry curvature induced intrinsic AHC. Hall effect is defined as the realization of transverse electric field when a magnetic field is applied to a currentcarrying conductor Berry curvature is highly sensitive to the electronic band structure of material and modulation in the band structure can influence the Berry curvature and hence intrinsic anomalous Hall conductivity (AHC) Co 2 -based full Heusler compounds got enormous attention for their half-metallic behaviour, and 100% spinpolarization around Fermi level, which are the most prominent properties useful in spintronics devices and other memory-based applications In the present manuscript, we studied AHE in a polycrystalline bulk Co 2 FeAl Heusler compound. Synchrotron x-ray diffraction (SXRD) data reveals a large degree of antisite disorder between Fe and Al atoms. The experimental value of AHC was found to be about 227 S/cm at 2 K and 219 S/cm at 300 K with an intrinsic contribution of 155 S/cm. This intrinsic value of AHC is an order of magnitude larger than the theoretically predicted AHC for an ordered L2 1 phase of Co 2 FeAl. Our theoretical calculations show that the antisite disorder present in Co 2 FeAl enhances the Berry curvature A polycrystalline Co 2 FeAl Heusler compound was synthesized using conventional arc melting technique using stoichiometric amount of its high pure constituent elements. The compound was melted four times to ensure the chemical homogeneity. A very small wight loss of 0.32% was noted after melting. Further, the ingot was sealed in quartz ampoule under Ar atmosphere and then annealed at 800 • C for 12 hours for the better homogeneity. The energy dispersive x-ray (EDX) analysis reveals the composition ratio of 2:1:1 within the standard deviation (3 to 5 %) of EDX measurement. A small piece was cut from the annealed ingot and crushed into powder for SXRD measurement. The SXRD measurement was performed at PETRA-III, DESY for structural analysis using wavelength of 0.207 A. Magnetic field-dependent magnetization measurements were carried out using the Magnetic Property Measurement Sys- tem (MPMS) from Quantum Design, U.S.A. A small polished rectangular piece was used for four-probe and fiveprobe magneto-transport measurements to obtain the longitudinal resistivity (ρ xx ) and the Hall resistivity (ρ H ), respectively. To obtain the actual ρ H , raw Hall resistivity data (ρ H raw ) was anti-symmetrized by averaging the difference of ρ H raw at the positive and negative magnetic fields. Electronic structure calculations were carried out using pseudo-potential based density-functional theory and plane-wave basis sets as implemented in Quantum ESPRESSO (QE) We carried out detailed magneto-transport measurements in a wide temperature range of 2 K-300 K to study the AHE in the Co 2 FeAl. The Hall resitivity (ρ H ) can be given by the equation, ρ H = R 0 H + R s M, where R 0 , R s are the normal and anomalous Hall coefficients respectively. ρ H versus H were measured at different temperatures upto field of 7 Tesla (T). From Fig. In order to elucidate the mechanism giving rise to AHE, we have plotted ρ AH versus ρ xx on a double logarithmic scale and fitting was employed to determine the exponent β using the relation ρ AH ∝ ρ xx β We have calculated the Hall conductivity using tensor conversion σ H = ρH (ρH 2 +ρxx 2 ) To separate the extrinsic and intrinsic part of AHE, we have plotted ρ AH versus ρ xx and fitted (FIG. After obtaining the experimental value of AHC, we have theoretically calculated AHC for Co 2 FeAl by setting the magnetization direction along [001]. For Co 2 -based Heusler alloys the ground state energy in other magnetization direction like where the indices α, β, and γ are the Cartesian coordinates. f (k) stands for the Fermi distribution function, Ω γ (k) denotes the γ component of the Berry curvature for the wave vector k and N is the number of electrons in the crystal. Further, the Berry curvature is related to the Berry connection (A n (k)) as where "n" is the band index and A n (k) in terms of cellperiodic Bloch states |u nk = e -ik.r |ψ nk is defined as By this method, we found the theoretical value of AHC (σ xy ) about ∼ 42 S/cm, which is in well agreement with literature In conclusion, we investigated the anomalous transport properties of polycrystalline Co 2 FeAl Heusler compound by experiment and theoretical calculations. SXRD data reveals a large degree of Fe-Al antisite disorder. Experimental values of AHC were found to be 227 S/cm at 2 K and 219 S/cm at 300 K with an intrinsic AHC of 155 S/cm. Our experimental analysis show that the AHE in Co 2 FeAl is dominated by intrinsic Berry phase mechanism. Our theoretical calculations suggest that the en-hanced Berry curvature induced intrinsic AHC is linked with the antisite disorder present in Co 2 FeAl Heusler compound.