We investigate ferromagnetic resonance (FMR) modulation in d-wave superconductor (SC)/ferromagnetic insulator (FI) bilayer systems theoretically. The modulation of the Gilbert damping in these systems reflects the existence of nodes in the d-wave SC and shows power-law decay characteristics within the low-temperature and low-frequency limit. Our results indicate the effectiveness of use of spin pumping as a probe technique to determine the symmetry of unconventional SCs with high sensitivity for nanoscale thin films. Spin pumping (SP) 1,2 is a versatile method that can be used to generate spin currents at magnetic junctions. While SP has been used for spin accumulation in various materials in the field of spintronics Recently, spin injection into s-wave superconductors (SCs) has been a subject of intensive study both theoretically In this work, we investigate SP theoretically in a bilayer magnetic junction composed of a d-wave SC and a ferromagnetic insulator (FI), as shown in Fig. Zeeman field due to the exchange coupling. In Sec. VI, we present our conclusion and future perspectives. The model Hamiltonian of the SC/FI bilayer system H is given by The first term H FI is the ferromagnetic Heisenberg model, which is given by where J > 0 is the exchange coupling constant, i, j represents summation over all the nearest-neighbor sites, S j is the localized spin at site j in the FI, γ is the gyromagnetic ratio, and h dc is the static magnetic field. The localized spin S j is described as shown using the bosonic operators b j and b † j of the Holstein-Primakoff transformation 42 where we require [b i , b † j ] = δ i,j to ensure that S + j , S - j , and S x j satisfy the commutation relation of angular momentum. The deviation of S x j from its maximum value S is quantified using the boson particle number. It is convenient to represent the bosonic operators in the reciprocal space as follows where N is the number of sites. The magnon operators with wave vector k Assuming that the deviation is small, i.e., that b † j b j /S 1, the ladder operators S ± j can be approximated as S + j ≈ (2S) 1/2 b j and S - j ≈ (2S) 1/2 b † j , which is called the spin-wave approximation. The Hamiltonian H FI is then written as where we assume a parabolic dispersion ω k = Dk 2 + γh dc with a spin stiffness constant D and the constant terms are omitted. The second term H dSC is the mean-field Hamiltonian for the two-dimensional d-wave SC, and is given by where c † kσ and c kσ denote the creation and annihilation operators, respectively, of the electrons with the wave vector k = (k x , k y ) and the x component of the spin σ =↑, ↓, and ξ k = 2 k 2 /2m -μ is the energy of conduction electrons measured from the chemical potential μ. We assume that the d-wave pair potential has the form ∆ k = ∆ cos 2φ k with the phenomenological temperature dependence where φ k = arctan(k y /k x ) denotes the azimuth angle of k. Using the Bogoliubov transformation given by where γ † kσ and γ kσ denote the creation and annihilation operators of the Bogoliubov quasiparticles, respectively, and u k and v k are given by with the quasiparticle energy k , the meanfield Hamiltonian can be diagonalized as The density of states of the d-wave SC is given by 43 where D n = Am/2π 2 is the density of states per spin of the normal state, A is the system area, and K(x) is the complete elliptic integral of the first kind in terms of the parameter x, where D(E) diverges at E/∆ = 1 and decreases linearly when E/∆ 1 because of the nodal structure of ∆ k . The density of states for an s-wave SC, in contrast, has a gap for |E| < ∆. This difference leads to distinct FMR modulation behaviors, as shown below. The third term H T describes the spin transfer between the SC and the FI at the interface where J q,k is the matrix element of the spin transfer processes, and σ ± q = (σ y q ± iσ z q )/2 and the Fourier components of the ladder operators and are given by Using the expressions above, H T can be written as The first (second) term describes a magnon emission (absorption) process accompanying an electron spin-flip from down to up (from up to down). A diagrammatic representation of the interface interactions is shown in Fig. In this work, we drop a diagonal exchange coupling at the interface, whose Hamiltonian is given as This term does not change the number of magnons in the FI and induces an effective Zeeman field on electrons in the two-dimensional d-wave SC. We expect that this term does not affect our main result because the coupling strength is expected to be much smaller than the superconducting gap and the microwave photon energy. We will discuss this effect in Sec. V briefly. The coupling between the localized spin and the microwave is given by where h ac is the amplitude of the transverse oscillating magnetic field with frequency ω. The microwave irradiation induces the precessional motion of the localized spin. The Gilbert damping constant can be read from the retarded magnon propagator defined by where θ(t) is a step function. Second-order perturbation calculation of the magnon propagator with respect to the interface interaction was performed and the expression of the self-energy was derived in the study of SP where α is the intrinsic Gilbert damping constant that was introduced phenomenologically Within the second-order perturbation, the self-energy is given by where χ R q (ω) represents the dynamic spin susceptibility of the d-wave SC defined by Substituting the ladder operators in terms of the Bogoliubov quasiparticle operators into the above expression and performing a straightforward calculation, we then obtain where f (E) = 1/(e E/kBT + 1) is the Fermi distribution function. In this paper, we focus on a rough interface modeled in terms of the mean J 1 and variance J 2 2 of the distribution of J q,k (see Appendix A for detail). The configurationally averaged coupling constant is given by In this case, δα is written as The first term represents the momentum-conserved spintransfer processes, which vanish as directly verified from Eq. ( The wave number summation can be replaced as Changing the integral variable from ξ to E and substituting Eq. ( Note that the coherence factor vanishes in the above expression by performing the angular integral. The enhanced Gilbert damping in the normal state is given by for the lowest order of ω. This expression means that δα is proportional to the product of the spin-up and spindown densities of states at the Fermi level Figure where the temperature dependence of ∆ is the same as that for the d-wave SC, given by Eq. ( When ω/k B T c = 0.1, δα shows a coherence peak just below the transition temperature T c . However, the coherence peak of the d-wave SC is smaller than that of the s-wave SC. Within the low temperature limit, δα in the d-wave SC shows power-law decay behavior described by δα ∝ T 2 . This is in contrast to δα in the s-wave SC, which shows exponential decay. The difference in the low temperature region originates from the densities of states in the d-wave and s-wave SCs, which have gapless and full gap structures, respectively. When the FMR frequency increases, the coherence peak is suppressed, and δα decays monotonically with decreasing temperature. δα has a kink structure at ω = 2∆, where the FMR frequency corresponds to the superconducting gap. Figure We discuss the modulation of the Gilbert damping in SCs with nodes other than the d-wave SC considered in this work. Other SCs with nodes are expected to exhibit the power-law decay behavior within the lowtemperature and low-frequency limit as the d-wave SCs. However, the exponent of the power can differ due to the difference of the quasiparticle density of states. Furthermore, in the p-wave states, two significant differences arise due to spin-triplet Cooper pairs. First, the uniform spin susceptibility χ R q=0 (ω) can be finite in the spintriplet SCs because the spin is not conserved. Second, the enhanced Gilbert damping exhibits anisotropy and the value changes by changing the relative angle between the Cooper pair spin and localized spin In our work, proximity effect between FIs and SCs was not taken into account because the FMR modulation was calculated by second-order perturbation based on the tunnel Hamiltonian. Reduction of superconduct- ing gap due to the proximity effect Physics of the FMR modulation for d-wave SC/ferromagnetic metal junctions is rather different from that for d-wave SC/FI junctions. For d-wave SC/ferromagnetic metal junctions, spin transport is described by electron hopping across a junction and the FMR modulation is determined by the product of the density of states of electrons for a d-wave SC and a ferromagnetic metal. (We note that the FMR modulation is determined by a spin susceptibility of d-wave SC, which in general includes different information from the density of states of electrons.) While the FMR modulation is expected to be reduced below a SC transition temperature due to opening an energy gap, its temperature dependence would be different from results obtained in our work. Finally, let us discuss effect of the diagonal exchange coupling given in Eq. (19) (see also the last part of Sec. II). This term causes an exchange bias, i.e., an effective Zeeman field on conduction electrons in the d-wave SC, which is derived as follows. First, the x-component of the localized spin is approximated as S x j ≈ S, which gives S x k ≈ S √ N δ k,0 . Next, the matrix element J q,k=0 is replaced by the configurationally averaged value J q,k=0 = J 1 δ q,0 . Consequently, the effective Zeeman field term is given by where we introduced a Zeeman energy as E Z = J 1 S √ N . This term induces spin splitting of conduction electrons in the d-wave SC and changes the spin susceptibility of the SC. The spin-splitting effect causes a spin excitation gap and modifies the frequency dependence in Fig. In this work, we have investigated Gilbert damping modulation in the d-wave SC/FI bilayer system. The enhanced Gilbert damping constant in this case is proportional to the imaginary part of the dynamic spin susceptibility of the d-wave SC. We found that the Gilbert damping modulation reflects the gapless excitation that is inherent in d-wave SCs. The coherence peak is suppressed in the d-wave SC when compared with that in the s-wave SC. In addition, the differences in the spectral functions for the d-wave and s-wave SCs with gapless and full-gap structures lead to power-law and exponential decays within the low-temperature limit, respectively. Within the low-temperature limit, δα in the d-wave SC increases with increasing ω, while δα in the s-wave SC remains almost zero as long as the excitation energy ω remains smaller than the superconducting gap 2∆. Our results illustrate the usefulness of measurement of the FMR modulation of unconventional SCs for determination of their symmetry through spin excitation. We hope that this fascinating feature will be verified experimentally in d-wave SC/FI junctions in the near future. To date, one interesting result of FMR modulation in d-wave SC/ferromagnetic metal structures has been reported Furthermore, our work provides the most fundamental basis for application to analysis of junctions with various anisotropic SCs. For example, some anisotropic SCs are topological and have an intrinsic gapless surface state. SP can be accessible and can control the spin excitation of the surface states because of its interface sensitivity. The extension of SP to anisotropic and topological superconductivity represents one of the most attractive directions for further development of superconducting spintronics. specular (J 1 2 χ R q=0 ) and diffuse (J 2 2 q χ R q ) limits. The uncorrelated roughness case introduced above is a simple linear interpolation of the two. Extensions to correlated roughness can be made straightforwardly.