We propose a non-perturbative ab initio approach to calculate the electrical conductivity of a liquid metal. Our approach is based on the Kubo formula and the theory of electron-phonon coupling (EPC), and unlike the conventional empirical approach based on the Kubo-Greenwood formula, fully takes into account the effect of coupling between electrons and moving ions. We show that the electrical conductivity at high temperature is determined by an EPC parameter λtr, which can be inferred, non-perturbatively, from the correlation of electron scattering matrices induced by ions. The latter can be evaluated in a molecular dynamics simulation. Based on the densityfunctional theory and pseudopotential methods, we implement the approach in an ab initio manner. We apply it to liquid sodium and obtain results in good agreement with experiments. This approach is efficient and based on a rigorous theory, suitable for applying to general metallic liquid systems. Liquid metals are an important class of materials vital for many applications because of their excellent electrical and thermal conductivities combined with flexible mechanic properties. They find applications in flexible electronics At present, the most successful approach for calculating the electrical conductivity of a liquid metal is to combine molecular dynamics (MD) or path-integral molecular dynamics (PIMD) simulations with the Kubo-Greenwood (KG) formula In this paper, we extend the applicability of the EPC theory of conductivity originally developed for solids and develop a non-perturbative ab initio approach appropriate for calculating the dc conductivity of a liquid. Instead of perturbatively determining the EPC scattering amplitudes, we reformulate the theory to relate the dc conductivity with the irreducible interaction mediated by EPC in the particle-hole channel. We show that the irreducible interaction can be inferred from the correlation of the T matrices of electron-ion scatterings, which can be evaluated in a MD or PIMD simulation. At high temperatures, the formula of electrical resistivity is reduced to the familiar form of the conventional EPC theory that is proportional to a single EPC parameter λ tr . We explicitly relate the parameter to the irreducible interaction. With these developments, we have a non-perturbative approach for determining electrical conductivity. We implement the approach by using the density-functional theory (DFT) and norm-conserving pseudopotential methods. Applying the implementation to liquid sodium, we find that the resistivity of sodium has an upward jump when transited from a solid to a liquid phase, and exhibits non-linear temperature-dependence at high temperatures. The results are in good agreement with available experiments, both qualitatively and quantitatively. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we develop the general formalism of the electrical conductivity in liquids. The relation between the conductivity and the irreducible interaction I mediated by EPC in the electron-hole channel is established. In Sec. III, we show how I can be inferred from a MD simulation by relating it to the correlation of T matrices of electron-ion scatterings. The approach is applied to liquid sodium. Implementation details and results are presented in Sec. IV. Finally, we summarize and discuss our results in Sec. V. Some details of the theoretical derivations and the tests of numerical convergence are presented in Appendices. In this section, we develop formalism for calculating the dc conductivity of a liquid. The derivation is based on the conventional EPC theory of conductivity originally developed for solids, see, e.g., Ref. 23. To have a theory appropriate for a liquid, we need to eliminate reliance on perturbatively defined quantities and the harmonic approximation in the original theory. From the Kubo formula where π ret (ω) is the retarded current-current correlation function. To determine π ret (ω), it is more convenient to first determine the imaginary-time-ordered correlation function and then perform an analytic continuation by substituting iω m with ω + iδ, where δ denotes an infinitesimal positive constant. Here τ ∈ [0, β) is the imaginary time, with β = 1/k B T being the inverse temperature. V is the total volume of the system. We have assumed that the system is isotropic. By substituting the current operator ĵq (τ ) = -(e/m) pσ p ψ † pσ (τ ) ψpσ (τ ) into the Kubo formula, we pp (-iν, iν), and Λ(|p|, ), respectively. obtain: where G (2) (p, p + q 0 ; p + q 0 , p ) = - is the two-particle Green's function, ψpσ ( ψ † pσ ) is the annihilation (creation) operator of an electron with the momentum p and spin σ, e and m are the charge and bare mass of the electron, respectively. For simplicity, we use the 4-dimensional momentum notation p ≡ (p, iν), and q 0 ≡ (0, iω m ), where ν ≡ (2n + 1)π/ β, n ∈ Z denotes a Fermion Matsubara frequency. The two-particle Green's function G (2) can in general be decomposed as where we ignore the inconsequential disconnected part of the Green's function, G p is the single-particle Green's function of the system, and Γ pp (q 0 ) is the scattering amplitude of an electron-hole pair scattered from (p, p + q 0 ) to (p , p + q 0 ). We note that G p is diagonal in the basis of plane waves because a liquid has the space and time translation symmetries. We define a vector vertex function Λ(p, q 0 ) = p + (1/ 2 β) p p G p G p +q0 Γ pp (q 0 ) [see Fig. (6) We then complete the summation of the Matsubara frequency ν, and preform the analytic continuation iω m → ω + iδ. After applying Ward identities for EPC systems where G ret p ( ) is the retarded Green's function. The details of the analytic continuation can be found in §8.4.2 of Ref. We further apply the approximation where Σ(|p|, + iδ) is the self-energy of the system, ̃ p ( ) = (|p| 2 /2m) + ReΣ(|p|, ) is the renormalized electron dispersion, and F is the Fermi energy. The approximation is valid when |ImΣ(|p|, + iδ)| F , which is true for most metallic systems. Finally, noting that the system is isotropic and the vertex function and the self-energy only weakly depend on |p| for |p| ∼ p F , we obtain the formula for determining the dc conductivity of a liquid where n 0 is the electron density, n F ( ) is the Fermi-Dirac distribution function, and p F is the Fermi momentum. Λ(p F ; -iδ, -iδ) is obtained from Λ(p F ; iν, iν + iω m ) by substituting iν → -iδ and iν + iω m → + iδ, and Z( ) = 1 + (m/p F )[∂ReΣ(p, + iδ)/∂p] p=p F is a factor due to the renormalization of the electron dispersion. While Eq. ( For the scattering amplitude Γ, we have the Bethe-Salpeter equation [Fig. Γ p,p+q (q 0 ) = I p,p+q (q 0 ) + 1 2 β q I p,p+q (q 0 ) × G p+q G p+q +q0 Γ p+q ,p+q (q 0 ), From the relation between the vertex functions and Γ [Fig. C. High temperature limit In most cases, the melting temperature of a material is much higher than its Debye temperature Θ D . As a result, it suffices to determine the conductivity at the high-temperature limit T Θ D . In this case, the conductivity is determined by a single EPC parameter λ tr . This is shown as follows. In the high temperature limit, Eq. ( where Λ(|p|; ) ≡ Λ(|p|; -iδ, + iδ) [Fig. p,p+q ( -iδ, + iδ) denotes I p,p+q (q 0 ) for the given set of the momenta and a zero frequency transfer [Fig. We then apply the approximation Eq. ( in the high temperature limit (see Appendix A). It is then straightforward to get the solution By inserting Eq. ( This is the final formula to be applied for determining the dc conductivity of a liquid. It has a form identical to that of the conventional theory. However, for liquids, the EPC parameter λ tr (0) cannot be determined in a perturbative way. According to Eq. ( p,p+q (-iδ, iδ). From the last section, we see that the irreducible electron-hole interaction I (0) p,p+q (-iδ, iδ) is the key for determining the electrical conductivity of a liquid. In this section, we develop an approach for determining it. By setting p = (p, iν), p + q 0 = (p, -iν) and q = (q, 0) in Eq. where Γ p,p+q (-iν, iν) denotes Γ p,p+q (q 0 ) for the given set of the momenta [Fig. The equation suggests an approach for determining the irreducible interaction: by determining Γ (0) p,p+q (-iν, iν) numerically, we can obtain I (0) p,p+q (-iν, iν) by solving Eq. for a properly chosen iν (see below). Quantities like Γ (0) p,p+q (-iν, iν), which is defined in the imaginary time, can in general be evaluated in a PIMD simulation. In the simulation, one maps quantum ion degrees of freedom into classical ring polymers with beads representing ions at different instances of the imaginary time where G[R(τ )] denotes the electron Green's function at a given ion configuration {R i (τ )}, and • • • C denotes an average over ion configurations. The scattering amplitude Γ pp (q 0 ) can be expressed as a correlation function. To see that, we apply the identity where T pp denotes the matrix element of the T matrix of electron scattering induced by an ionic field. Substitute Eq. ( We can show that the T -matrix has the symmetry where we denote p ≡ (p, -iν). To see this, we note that the Green's function can be determined by the matrix equation [G -1 ] pp = G -1 0 (p)δ pp -V pp (iν -iν ), where G 0 (p) is the Green's function in a free space, and V pp (iν -iν ) is the Fourier transform of the random ionic potential. Since the ionic potential is Hermitian and is a local function of the time, we have V * pp (iν -iν ) = V p p (iν -iν). In addition, we have [G 0 (p)] * = G 0 (p). By applying these relations, it is straightforward to show (G p,p+q ) * = G p+q, p. Besides, time reversal and inversion symmetries require that [G(p)] * = G(p). Combining the relations with Eq. ( Applying Eq. ( with q ≡ (q, 0). This is the formula to be applied for evaluating the scattering amplitude. For a PIMD simulation, to determine the T -matrix for a time-dependent ionic potential, one needs to solve the time-dependent equation of the Green's function where Ĥ(τ ) denotes the time-dependent Hamiltonian for a given ionic potential. This is expensive and infeasible in practice. Fortunately, we can apply the quasistatic approximation where Ĝ(iν + iω m , iν) denotes the Fourier transform of Ĝ(τ, τ ). The T -matrix can be obtained by applying Eq. ( In this section, we implement and apply our approach to liquid sodium. In our implementation, ab initio MD and PIMD simulations are performed using the Quantum Espresso package interfaced with i-PI With ionic configurations output by the MD or PIMD simulations, we determine the Green's function G[R(τ )] for each of the configurations. Corresponding T matrices are determined by applying Eq. To determine λ tr (0), we recast I p,p+q (-iν, iν) for p and p + q close to the Fermi surface as a function of q ≡ |q|. By interpolation, we can have a function I (0) (q) for arbitrary values of q. The EPC parameters can then be determined by where N ( F ) is the density of states of free electrons at the Fermi Surface. In Fig. By applying Eq. ( q / p F I n t e g r a n d s q / p F FIG. Finally, we show the temperature-dependence of the electrical resistivity of liquid sodium and compare our theoretical results with experimental measurements in Fig. In conclusion, we have developed a non-perturbative approach to calculate the electronic resistivity of a liquid. We show that the resistivity is determined by a single EPC parameter λ tr at high temperature. We further show that the EPC parameter can be related to the irreducible electron-hole interaction I, which can be inferred from the fluctuation of scattering T -matrices induced by the coupling to ions. The fluctuation of the T -matrices can be determined from a MD simulation. To verify the approach, we develop an ab initio implementation based on DFT and pseudopotential methods and apply it to liquid sodium. The theoretical results are in good agreement with experiments. Compared to the conventional approach based on the Kubo-Greenwood formula In this work, we use the plane-wave basis. Thus the energy cutoff for these plane waves should be tested. Fig. Finally, the ensemble average of the self-energy and effective electron-electron interaction is affected by the number of sampled nuclear configurations. Fig. 