We compare the upper critical field of bulk single-crystalline samples of the two intrinsic transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD) superconductors, 2H-NbSe2 and 2H-NbS2, in high magnetic fields where their layer structure is aligned strictly parallel and perpendicular to the field, using magnetic torque experiments and a high-precision piezo-rotary positioner. While both superconductors show that orbital effects still have a significant impact when the layer structure is aligned parallel to the field, the upper critical field of NbS2 rises above the Pauli limiting field and forms a Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin-Ovchinnikov (FFLO) state, while orbital effects suppress superconductivity in NbSe2 just below the Pauli limit. From the out-of-plane anisotropies, the coherence length perpendicular to the layers of 31 Å in NbSe2 is much larger than the interlayer distance, leading to a significant orbital effect suppressing superconductivity before the Pauli limit is reached, in contrast to the more 2D NbS2. Type-II spin-singlet superconductors have upper critical fields Bc2, usually dominated by the orbital limit for superconductivity Transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD) superconductors such as 2H-NbSe2, 2H-NbS2 and 2H-TaS2 are strongly anisotropic layered superconductors in which two-dimensional planes are weakly coupled by van der Waals forces. TMD materials can be exfoliated down to monolayer thickness and have been the focus of recent research due to their wide range of unique electronic properties with high potential for technological applications We recently reported the observation of an FFLO state in 2H-NbS2 bulk samples when we applied the magnetic field exactly parallel to its layer structure with an accuracy of one millidegree using a piezo rotary stage in combination with magnetic torque, specific heat and thermal expansion experiments In layered superconductors with strong 2D character, it is essential to achieve a strictly parallel field orientation to minimize the orbital effect and find the maximum critical field Bc2. We achieved this by first minimizing  at a fixed temperature and field (0.3 K, 4T) by rotating the sample stepwise through the parallel orientation In Fig. In contrast, Bc2 for NbS2 clearly exceeds the Pauli limit of 10 T. Above the Pauli limit, the Bc2 curve begins to deviate from the WHH model, indicating the sudden effect of the Pauli paramagnetic effect, before rising again. This upturn, together with the thermodynamic signature of an additional phase transition occurring near 10 T in the specific heat and magnetostriction, has been interpreted as consequence of the formation of the FFLO state Fig. Note that the NbSe2 Bc2 data deviate somewhat from the GL and WHH models at high temperatures, as the data exhibit some concave temperature dependence. This has been observed previously From the anisotropy of the Bc2 values at low temperatures, we can derive the perpendicular and parallel coherence lengths 0⊥= 31 Å and 0 = 71 Å for NbSe2 from Eq. 1 and 2, respectively. If we use the GL linear extrapolated orbital limit in parallel fields (Fig. Our comparison of the magnetic phase diagrams NbSe2 and NbS2 demonstrates that NbSe2 is much less 2D than NbS2 with a much weaker anisotropy 0 /0⊥ = 2.29 in contrast to the large value of NbS2 0 /0⊥ = 15. This explains why the 3D orbital effects in NbSe2 are very strong, as shown by the rapid suppression of the critical temperature in parallel magnetic fields driven by the orbital effect. The difference in the phase diagram for high magnetic fields is certainly related to the ratio of 0⊥ to the interlayer spacing, d A more rigorous theory of the competition between the orbital effects and the FFLO phase has been recently suggested in Ref. In conclusion, the two TMD superconductors 2H-NbSe2 and 2H-NbS2 are sister compounds with very similar superconducting characteristics. However, the larger Se ions in 2H-NbSe2 significantly reduce the out-of-plane anisotropy, so they exhibit different magnetic field vs. temperature phase diagrams in strictly parallel fields. In 2H-NbSe2, the weaker anisotropy enhances the coupling between the planes, allowing sufficiently strong Meissner shielding currents to flow between the layers so that the orbital effect becomes the leading mechanism for suppressing superconductivity near, but still below, the Pauli limit for superconductivity. In contrast, the smaller S ions in 2H-NbS2 suppress orbital effects sufficiently for the upper critical field Bc2 to reach the Pauli limit at ~4 K. At lower temperatures, the formation of an unusual FFLO state leads to a strong enhancement of Bc2. Most previous work on FFLO states has been performed on layered organic superconductors, which require very high magnetic fields on the order of 20 T to study, which are only available in large scale high magnetic field facilities. 2H-NbS2 allows the study of the FFLO state in a field and temperature range accessible in a standard cryogenic laboratory. The availability of two very similar TMD superconducting compounds provides a unique opportunity to determine the parameters required for an FFLO state and encourages experiments in which the interlayer coupling is varied by either ion substitution or high pressure. High quality single crystals of transition metal dichalcogenides were prepared by an evaporation method in a fused silica ampoule. To achieve supersaturation, the ampoule was subjected to a controlled temperature gradient of 100 -70 °C, with the hot side maintained at 850 -400 °C. Crystallization was initiated over a period of ~3 weeks by slowly cooling the multicomponent flux to reduce the solubility of the components. The chalcogenide feed was introduced into the hot part of the reaction vessel, where it dissolved in a growth medium in the form of an eutectic CsCl-KCl-NaCl salt melt mixture, from where it migrated to the cold side to crystallize. A detailed characterization of the process can be found in Ref. The magnetic torque  is a vector quantity directly related to the anisotropic DC magnetization: τ = M × B , where B is the applied magnetic field. It was measured using a capacitive cantilever technique 