Knowing the stress within a soft material is of fundamental interest to basic research and practical applications, such as soft matter devices, biomaterial engineering, and medical sciences. However, it is challenging to measure stress fields in situ in a non-invasive way. It becomes even more difficult if the mechanical properties of the material are unknown or altered by the stress. Here we present a robust non-destructive technique capable of measuring in situ stress and strain in elastically deformed thin films without the need to know their material properties. The technique is based on measuring elastic wave speeds, and then using a universal dispersion curve we derived for Lamb wave to predict the local stress and strain. Using optical coherence tomography, we experimentally verified the method for a rubber sheet, a cling film, and the leather skin of a musical instrument. Soft thin films hanging in the air or confined in fluids are ubiquitous in our daily lives as well as in natural and engineering systems. Examples include cling film packaging food, the eardrum and the diaphragm in our body, and various elastic sheets, membranes, vesicles and bands holding structures together. They are typically under external and internal stress, and it is often desirable to know the stress level to be able to understand the environment they are exposed to or interacting with, or to monitor the changes in and health of the materials. However, in situ non-invasive measurements of the stress are challenging. This is even more challenging if the mechanical properties of the material are unknown and, furthermore, if the original configuration of the material is unknown, which precludes straightforward measurement of strain Various techniques have been devised to measure in-plane stresses Here we describe a technique that allows the stress field to be determined in soft thin films even without a priori knowledge of the material properties or applied strain. The technique uses Lamb elastic waves propagating in the film Figure The local wave speed is affected not only by the stiffness of the material but also by the direction and magnitude of the local stress (Fig. Mathematically, σ 1 and σ 2 are obtained by diagonalising the stress tensor. To develop our algorithm, we consider a deformed element (Fig. , where u 0 is the amplitude vector, k is the wavenumber, s is the attenuation factor, t is time, and v i is the speed. The governing wave equation is Here A 0 p jqk is the Eulerian elasticity tensor, which contains the effect of the stress via the strain energy, and the second term p denotes the increment of the Lagrange multiplier p, due to the constraint of incompressibility, (x,y), (x,y) , and γ i = A 0 3i3i . The stress-free boundary condition (σ 3 = 0 at x 3 = ±h) of the thin film structure gives the complete dispersion equation of the Lamb waves (see Methods). The instantaneous elastic moduli, α i and γ i in elastically deformed materials are directly related to the principal stresses and stretches through the identities (see Methods) For isotropic materials, with up to third-order elasticity for the anti-symmetric (A) modes, and 4 η tanh (kh)/ tanh (ηkh) = (1 + η 2 ) 2 for the symmetric (S) modes, where η ≡ |α i -ρv 2 i |/γ i . The fundamental A0 mode is a flexural bending wave, and the fundamental S0 mode has a dilatational, out-of-plane displacement (u 3 ) profile (Fig. Our algorithm to determine the in-plane stress and strain is as follows. First, note that η is uniquely related to kh via the dispersion equation, so that η = η(kh). This relationship for the two modes is displayed in Fig. For insight, let us consider an intrinsically isotropic nonlinear material under uni-axial tension. Figure Although our algorithm does not require the knowledge of μ to measure stress, the knowledge of thickness 2h makes the algorithm more robust in determining the stretch and is needed to measure the elastic modulus of the material at the deformed state. The thickness information may be obtained by imaging. For most elastomers and biological tissues, ρ ≈ 0.9 -1.1 g/cm To validate the method, we devised an experimental setup (Supplementary Fig. The measured wave speeds v 1 and v 2 fit very well into the dispersion relation written in terms of η (Supplementary Fig. Next, we tested the technique for a stretched plastic wrap, a.k.a. cling film (Fig. , where E is the Young's modulus in the stretched condition. By curve fitting the measured dispersion curve (Fig. Conversely, if the skin is too loose, bodhrán players rub their palm on the outside of the skin to make it dry and tighten the skin to correct the pitch. The thickness of the skin was measured to be 360 ± 30 μm. We performed in situ measurements on the drumhead (Fig. The result reveals how much the humidification changed the stiffness and consequently the tension of the skin. Hydration alters the resonance frequencies or pitch of the instrument, which is proportional to σ 1 /ρ. The 65% reduction in tension (and an increase of density) predicts ∼ 46% decrease in resonance frequency. This is comparable to the actual 57% decrease of the resonance frequency. The discrepancy is probably due to spatially nonuniform hydration across the large drum head (18-inch diameter). The technique we present is nearly model-free in the sense that it is independent of and does not require the material's mechanical properties. Although our method assumes the material is incompressible, extending the method to accommodate compressibility adds a relative small error in the order of μ/λ , where λ is the first Lamé constant (Supplementary Note S2 and Fig. Although we have validated the technique for relatively uniform stress, it is easily applicable to more complex structures with spatially varying stress and strain fields by measuring local velocity profiles, as illustrated in Fig. The spatial resolution of the mapping is approximately in the order of one wavelength. When v = 10 m/s, for example, the resolution is ∼ 5 mm for f = 2-10 kHz. It is relatively straightforward to extend our method to thin structures in contact with fluids or gel-like matters either one side or both sides, such as dura mater of the brain after craniotomy We consider an elastic wave polarised in the x i -x 3 plane, propagating along the x i axis (i = 1 or 2), with attenuation along the x 3 axis: x j = ρ∂ 2 u j /∂t 2 and eliminating p with the incompressibility ∇ • u = 0, we get the secular equation where , and γ i = A 0 3i3i . With the stress-free boundary condition at x 3 = ±h, we arrive at the dispersion equation for the Lamb wave where the exponent is +1 for symmetric modes and -1 for anti-symmetric modes, and s 2 1 , s 2 2 are the roots of Eq. (3). To capture the acousto-elastic effect induced by a moderate strain, we consider the strain energy of isotropic incompressible third-order elasticity The basic idea of our acousto-elastic imaging technique is to deduce the stress and strain with α i and γ i from the exact formulas To show these formulas, it suffices to recall that, in general Making use of Eq. ( , which leads to Eq. ( Expanding (4) in the low frequency limit of f = 0 (or kh = 0), we get ρv 2 A0 = α 1 -γ 1 and ρv 2 S0 = α 1 + 3γ 1 for the A0 and S0 modes, respectively. On the other hand, in the high frequency limit of f → ∞ (or kh → ∞), we get ρv 2 R = α 1 -η 2 0 γ 1 for both A0 and S0 modes, where η 0 = 0.2956 is the real root of the cubic x 3 + x 2 + 3x -1 = 0 (Rayleigh surface wave limit). The three limits are shown in Fig. As a simple example, suppose an initially isotropic material is subject to a small stress. In the limit of small deformation (λ i ≈ 1), using Taylor expansion the three limits can be explicitly expressed as functions of the principal For thin structures, σ 3 ≈ 0. If two of these three limiting wave speeds are measured, the in-plane stresses (σ i ) can be calculated from this equation with σ 3 = 0. In practice, the kh → ∞ limit cannot be measured accurately because it corresponds to an extremely thick slab. Similarly it is difficult to express the S 0 mode for ultra-thin films; in that case, the first equation for the A 0 mode nonetheless gives access to σ 1 -σ 3 directly. Our experimental setup (Supplementary Fig. To measure the wavenumber k and thus the wave speed v i = 2π f /k for a given frequency, the surface displacement was Fourier-transformed from the spatial domain to the wavenumber domain. The wavenumber was obtained by identifying the peak that corresponds to the A0 mode (Supplementary Fig. For the experiments of the rubber sheet and cling film, the sample was clamped along its two short edges and one clamp was pulled horizontally by a cord connected to 1 to 6 weights (m =20 g each) to apply a uniaxial tension σ 1 with varying magnitudes. The Cauchy stress applied to the film is σ 1 = λ 1 Nm g/(2 h 0 W 0 ), where W 0 and h 0 are the initial width and half-thickness of the sample, respectively, g = 9.8 m/s 2 is the acceleration of gravity and N is the number of the weights. When changing the stress state, the results obtained during loading and unloading were averaged to minimise the effect of hysteresis. For each stress state, the current thickness 2h of the rubber film was measured from the OCT image. The uniaxial stretch ratio was then determined by λ 1 = λ -2 3 = (h 0 /h) 2 . The measured stretch ratio agreed well with that obtained by the deformation of the grids drew on the surface of the rubber film. The rubber sheet has mass density ρ 1,070 kg/m 3 and refractive index n 1.4. The initial dimension was 2h 0 0.5 mm, W 0 = 16 mm, and H 0 = 40 mm. The lateral size was large enough to avoid wave reflections at the edges. The rubber sample was prepared from Ecoflex TM 5 material (Smooth-On Inc) by mixing the Ecoflex 1A and 1B at 1:1 ratio by weight. The mixture was poured into a mold and cured at room temperature overnight. Then the material was post-cured in an oven at 80 • C for 2 hours. For mechanical testing, we cut out a small piece ( 0.5 × 5 × 18 mm 3 ) and performed a tensile test with a uniaxial tensile testing machine (eXpert 4000 Micro Tester, Admet, Norwood, USA). Figure We used a common home-use cling film (plastic wrap) made of 100% polyethylene with ρ 930 kg/m 3 . The typical thickness of cling films ranges from 8 to 13 μm. Here we used Brillouin microscopy 20 to measure the thickness of our film to be 11.7 ± 0.3μm. This is close to the axial resolution of the OCT system, and so we could not track h with the deformation. The bodhrán instrument was purchased from Hobgoblin Music, MN, USA. The OCT measurement was performed on the intact instrument. On separate direct measurements after removing the skin from the frame, we found h 0 = 360 ± 30 μm and ρ = 831 ± 65 kg/m 3 in the dry condition. After hydration, the density is expected to increase to ∼ 1000 kg/m 3 . To characterise the fundamental resonance frequencies of the instrument in the dry and damp conditions, the centre of the drumhead was beaten every 10 seconds while recording the sound with a cellphone 10 cm away from the drumhead, using the Google Science Journal App. First we assume there is an error only in measuring the wave speeds, expressed as ρδv Here we have assumed that δv 1 and δv 2 are random and uncorrelated, and used |δv 2 | to represent the maximum error in the squared velocities. This stress error is displayed in Fig. ) we obtain For third-order elasticity, we find γ 1 ≈ μ. Any error committed when calculating η 1 and η 2 result from the error in k 1 h and k 2 h. We can then write There are two possible ways to commit the errors δ(k 1 h) and δ(k 2 h). The first is in the miscalculation of the wavenumbers k 1 and k 2 . This results in δ(k 1 h) = hδk 1 and δ(k 2 h) = hδk 2 . Assuming the errors are uncorrelated, we obtain Note that typically μ > |σ 1 |. Therefore, the right hand-side is smaller than the relative error of the stress. The magnitude of the right hand-side term is plotted in Fig. The second way to commit the errors δ(k 1 h) and δ(k 2 h) is due to miscalculation of the half thickness h. This results in δ(hk 1 ) = k 1 δh and δ(hk 2 ) = k 2 δh, from which we obtain The magnitude of the right hand-side term is plotted in Fig. 