Chirality in inorganic nanoparticles and nanostructures has gained increasing scientific interest, because of the possibility to tune their ability to interact differently with left-and right-handed circularly polarized light. In some cases, the optical activity is hypothesized to originate from a chiral morphology of the nanomaterial. However, quantifying the degree of chirality in objects with sizes of tens of nanometers is far from straightforward. Electron tomography offers the possibility to faithfully retrieve the three-dimensional morphology of nanomaterials, but only a qualitative interpretation of the morphology of chiral nanoparticles has been possible so far. We introduce herein a methodology that enables us to quantify the helicity of complex chiral nanomaterials, based on the geometrical properties of a helix. We demonstrate that an analysis at the single particle level can provide significant insights into the origin of chiroptical properties. Chiral features in metal nanoparticles (NP) result in chiroptical properties, of interest to many applications, such as enantioselective catalysis or separation, chiral sensing, drug delivery, and the creation of circularly polarized light (CPL). An object is chiral when its mirror image cannot be translated or rotated to completely overlap with the original shape. With H total ∈ [-1,1] due to the normalization of the directionality (see SI for more details). Positive values indicate right-handed helicity, negative values indicate left-handed helicity, and values close to zero indicate no overall helicity (even though certain parts of a NP may show helicity, this can be compensated by other areas within the same NP). More details on the calculation of H(ρ, α) and H total are presented in section 2 of the SI, where the computational efficiency of the method is also discussed (Figure Au NRs. To illustrate the use of our method, we investigated 3D reconstructions of Au NRs synthesized by micelletemplated seeded growth on achiral Au NRs. Table A purely visual inspection of the NRs indicates that they contain both left-and right-handed features, regardless of their overall handedness. It is consequently useful to identify the helicity of subregions in the particle. We therefore created 3D helicity maps to identify which features contribute most to the overall helicity. To build these maps, we calculated the helicity measure for small windows around each voxel in the particle in cylindrical coordinates and then assigned the calculated total helicity H total to each voxel (Figure Orthoslices through these maps (Figure Complex helical nanostructures. Although our methodology has been specifically for the analysis of helical NRs, the limited number of assumptions allow us to apply the approach to other helical systems, as long as a well-defined helical axis can be identified. E.g., we analyzed the helicity of self-assembled Au NRs around amyloid fibrils (Figure Characterization of one such self-assembled Au NR doublehelical fibril by cryo-ET provided a 3D reconstruction that could be analyzed by the proposed method. Figure Our method, for which a Python package (HeliQ) was created, We introduced a method for the quantitative analysis of morphological helicity, which has been exemplarily to ET reconstructions of chiral Au nanorods. The approach is based on the geometrical properties of a helix and results in a two-dimensional helicity function H(ρ, α), which can be interpreted as the decomposition of a given shape into a combination of helices. The helicity function provides spatially resolved information about the presence of helical features, as well as their inclination angles. A numerical parameter, the total helicity H total obtained as the integral over the full helicity function, gives an overall indication of the helical degree of a given particle. Analyses of ET reconstructions of chiral Au NRs agree with previous observations, while additionally providing more quantitative parameters, such as the angle of inclination of helical features. This information may eventually help understand the effect of various synthesis parameters. The more general applicability of the approach was demonstrated through the analysis of a helical nanostructure composed of Au NRs clustered around a fibrillar protein template; a high degree of helicity throughout the entire super-helical nanostructure was confirmed, in agreement with previous experimental measurements.