External magnetic fields are known to attract and orient magnetically responsive colloidal particles. In the case of 2D microplatelets, rotating magnetic fields are typically used to orient them parallel to each other in a brick-and-mortar fashion. Thanks to this microstructure, the resulting composites achieve enhanced mechanical and functional properties. However, parts with complex geometry require their microstructure to be specifically tuned and controlled locally in 3D. Although the tunability of the microstructure along the vertical direction has already been demonstrated using magnetic orientation combined with sequential or continuous casting, controlling the particle orientation in the horizontal plane in a fast and effective fashion remains challenging. Here, we propose to use rotating magnetic arrays to control the in-plane orientation of ferromagnetic Nickel flakes distributed in uncured polymeric matrices. We experimentally studied the orientation of the flakes in response to magnets rotating at various frequencies and precessing angles. Then, we used COMSOL to model the magnetic field from rotating magnetic arrays and predicted the resulting in-plane orientations. To validate the approach, we created composites with locally oriented flakes. This work could initiate reverse-engineering methods to design the microstructure in composite materials with intricate geometrical shapes for structural or functional applications. Submitting colloidal particles to external magnetic fields is of interest for studying interparticle interactions, 1 colloidal assembly and patterning, Plate-like microparticles are defined in space by two angles Φ ! and θ ! (Figure Using rotating permanent magnets, translating solenoids, or solenoids set-ups with on and off periodic control, magnetically responsive flakes have been oriented horizontally and biaxially in so-called brick-and-mortar arrangements (Φ ! = cst and θ ! = 0° for all particles) as well as vertically and biaxially ( Φ ! = cst and θ ! = 90° for all particles) over large areas and in curable polymeric matrices. Realizing it would greatly enhance the geometric design capabilities of reinforced composites. Several methods have been explored to realize in-plane modulation of microplatelet's orientation in liquid matrices, such as acoustophoresis, In this paper, we explored the orientation control of ferromagnetic nickel flakes experimentally and carry out simple simulations to predict their orientations in selected patterns. The orientation of the Ni flakes was achieved in liquid polymeric matrices which could be turned into a composite after curing. First, we observed the response of the ferromagnetic flakes under vertically rotating magnetic fields. Then, we characterized their response under fields rotating at various precessing angles. Using theoretical and experimental results, we simulated the field lines around the magnets to predict the platelets orientations in the horizontal plane and verified our prediction with magnets of simple geometries. Finally, we built arrays of magnets to achieve unusual radial and circular in-plane orientations of vertical Ni flakes. The results presented show a simple and scalable approach to set the in-plane orientations of vertical ferromagnetic flakes in composites. Such in-plane local variation of the microstructure could enable more geometrical design capabilities. This could be used to create materials adapted to complex external loadings, or with complex deformations or functional response for smart applications. Nickel flakes (fine leafing) of diameter 15.8 ± 0.7 μm and thickness 0.58 ± 0.01 μm were obtained from Alfa Aesar, USA. These flakes have non-uniform shapes and an average aspect ratio length over thickness of 27 (Figure Nickel-epoxy composites were prepared by dispersing 1 vol% of nickel flakes into the epoxy mixture containing 53.5 wt% of the resin, 45.7 wt% of the hardener and 0.8 wt% of the catalyst. The mixture was mixed with an overhead stirrer until homogeneous and degassed under vacuum. The casting was done in a Teflon mould placed over a nonmagnetic hot plate set at 180 °C for 4 hours to cure the composite during the magnetic alignment. Nickel-PDMS composites were prepared by mixing the PDMS solution at a ratio resin to hardener of 10 to 1 and adding 0.01 vol% of Nickel flakes. A low concentration in Ni powder was used to retain the transparency of the composites after curing. The Ni-PDMS mixture was spread onto an aluminium block and placed under the magnetic setup and above a non-magnetic hot plate set at 120°C for 30 minutes to cure the matrix. For the Ni-PDMS composites used for the determination of the critical frequency, no temperature was applied to avoid curing and to maintain the viscosity constant. For the magnetically oriented epoxy specimens, the magnet used had dimensions of 5*5*1.5 cm 3 and was placed at around 10 cm from the top of the sample. This led to a magnetic field strength at the position of the sample of around 3 mT. A rotating magnetic field was achieved by attaching the magnet to a stirrer rotating at a frequency above 1 Hz. The magnetic field was maintained during the entire curing time of the samples. For the magnetically oriented PDMS specimens, the utilized magnets had dimensions of 0.5*0.5*0.5 cm 3 and were mounted onto other stirrers in similar configurations during the entire curing of the composite, at 1.5 cm to the surface of the sample. The magnetic field strength at the position of the sample was also of around 3 mT. Electron micrographs of the raw powder and of the cross-sections of epoxy composites were taken using a scanning electron microscope (Leo 1530, Zeiss, Germany), after sputtering with Pt. The epoxy composites were brittle and could be fractured for the direct observation of the cross-section. For observations in the plane, the samples were polished using sandpaper. The orientation angles of the flakes were measured using the Image J software (NIH, USA). The PDMS composites were observed by optical methods thanks to their transparency using a common digital camera. The critical alignment frequencies under magnets rotating with precessing angles were assessed by recording videos of the mixture under the alignment setup. When the flakes are rotating, a colour change could be seen at the surface of the sample, accompanied by waves (see Flakes rotating asynchronously with the rotating magnetic fields appear to be still in the sample's surface (see SI movie S2). The determination of the critical frequencies was done by increasing the frequency every 5 minutes until no more surface change was visible. Indeed, the expected time to have alignment of the nickel flakes under 3 mT was calculated to be of 3.3 s for the epoxy matrix and of 0.9 s for the PDMS using the following equation and the values in Table with μ % the magnetic susceptibility of vacuum, the Perrin friction factor, χ !4 the magnetic susceptibility of the particles. 36 Magnetic fields around permanent magnets were simulated using COMSOL Multiphysics, Version 4.4. The geometries of the magnets were drawn, and the neodymium material was added to the materials library using a relative permeability of 1.05. The material around the magnet was set as air (relative permeability of 1). The magnetic fields were computed using the AC/DC module with magnetic fields, no currents interface. The boundary conditions were set such as: -The magnetic field was tangential to the boundary on planes of symmetry. -The magnetic field was perpendicular to the boundary on planes of antisymmetry. The magnetic field at the surface of the magnet was set at a value of 199'000 kA/m = 2500 Oe, corresponding to the 250 mT measured at the surface of the magnets. The simulation yields the magnetic flux density vectors and streamlines as output, which were plotted in 3D around static permanent magnets. To obtain the projection of the field lines in sample located in a plane at a distance d to the magnet, a time-space transformation was applied (Figure The magnetic fields strength applied were low, below 3 mT, to avoid the formation of large magnetic gradients and the attraction of the Ni flakes to the magnet. Under static vertical magnetic fields (θ * ! = 90°), the Ni flakes align uniaxially (θ ! = 90°, variable with μ % the magnetic susceptibility of vacuum, the Perrin friction factor, χ !4 the magnetic susceptibility of the particles, and B % the magnetic field strength. With this approximation, a critical frequency of 0.23 Hz was determined for our epoxy matrix, and of 0.9 for PDMS. Applying a vertical magnetic field (θ * ! = 90°, Φ * ! = 90°) rotating above 1 Hz, vertical biaxial orientation of the flakes was also observed (θ ! = 90°, Φ ! = 90°) (Figure In addition to the orientation of the flakes under the vertical magnets, we inspected the flake orientations variation along the axis y, where y = 0 corresponds to the center of the rotating magnet (Figure To further study the response of the Ni flakes to rotating magnetic fields, a precessing angle α was added to the rotating magnet. The in-plane orientations of the flakes Φ ! in transparent PDMS composites were characterized optically (Figure Previous works on ellipsoid magnetic particles under precessing magnetic fields have reported that biaxial alignment could also be achieved, at a critical frequency that decreased with the precessing angle. where the frequency doubled only. The response of Ni flakes to vertical magnetic fields rotating with a precessing angle was thus vertical orientation and biaxial alignment ( θ ! = 90°, Φ ! = 90°) for all precessing angles except 90° (Figure Under rotating vertical magnetic fields, the ferromagnetic flakes align parallel to the plane of rotation described by the magnetic field. To obtain various orientations Φ !7 , with i each individual flake, within the (x-y) plane of the sample, it is therefore necessary to have rotating magnetic fields with locally oriented field lines. (θ B 0 = 90°, Φ B 0 = locally varying). To modulate the in-plane angle of the flakes while remaining vertical, we looked at their orientation away from the centre of the magnet, where the field lines are oriented along various directions. First, we selected a square and a spherical magnet and used COMSOL to obtain the magnetic streamlines around the magnets. Then, we applied a time-space transformation to mimic the rotating field and obtain the map of Φ * ! in the (x-y) plane of the sample (Figure A more refined model of the magnetic fields and of the flake response to it would push the approach proposed here to a next level. For this, modelling based on the constitutive equations of magnetic fields and with finite element modelling methods could be envisaged. In this paper, we presented a practical approach to modulate the in-plane orientation of vertically oriented ferromagnetic Nickel flakes in polymer composites. The approach consists on distributing the flakes in uncured viscous polymeric matrices and to rotate arrays of magnets above the mixture while it is curing. The time for magnetic orientation depends on the flakes magnetic properties, the magnetic field strength, and the viscosity of the matrix and is typically varies from a few seconds to a few minutes. This feature is key to further develop a reverse-engineering approach to design complex in-plane orientations in composites according to geometrical, structural, or functional demands. To achieve this, computational modelling using finite element could be used. Following the flake orientation, the local variation of the particle concentration could also be explored using the same approach. Gradients in magnetic fields indeed lead to magnetophoresis and particle concentration in specific areas. Magnetophoresis and local concentration can be emphasized using particles with strong magnetic susceptibility, or on the contrary, can be reduced with particles with weak magnetic responsiveness. For example, paramagnetic particles or diamagnetic particles with a paramagnetic coating would be less prone to move under magnetic gradients of less than 100 mT, such as those used here. Furthermore, homogeneous distributions of flakes without the chain formation could be achieve using paramagnetic particles too. Indeed, they would have weaker dipole-dipole interactions. In the literature , numerous particle-reinforced composites with magnetic orientation employ paramagnetic particles that do not form chains even at high concentrations and small interparticle distance. An illustrative application of this design capability could be for realizing bioinspired reinforced composites. Similarly to bone structures where the minerals are oriented and concentrated along the load-bearing directions, printing unless combined with magnetic fields. Currently, magnetic 3D printing is timeconsuming because each little voxel has to be oriented independently. Ni-PDMS composite under a rotating magnetic precessing at an angle of θ * ! = 45° and a frequency of 0.8 Hz, below the critical frequency for biaxial alignment. Ni-PDMS composite under a rotating magnetic precessing at an angle of θ * ! = 45° and a frequency of 3.2 Hz, above the critical frequency for biaxial alignment. The authors declare no competing financial interest. & & !