Controlling magnetism and electronic properties of two-dimensional (2D) materials by purely electrical means is crucial and highly sought for highefficiency spintronics devices since electric field can be easily applied locally compared with magnetic field. The recently discover 2D Janus crystals has provide a new platform for nanoscale electronics and spintronics due to their broken inversion symmetry nature. The intrinsic ferromagnetic Jauns monolayer, and hence the tunable physical properties, is therefore of great interest. Here, through comprehensive density functional theory calculations and Monte Carlo simulations, we unveil that single-layer MnSSe is an intrinsic ferromagnetic halfmetal with a direct band gap of 1.14 eV in spin-down channel and a Curie temperature of about 72 K. The exchange coupling can be significantly enhanced or quenched by hole and electron doping, respectively. In particular, a small amount of hole doping MnSSe can tune its magnetization easy axis in between outof-plane and in-plane directions, which is conducive to designing 2D spin fieldeffect transistor for spin-dependent transport. We also find a reversible longitudinal interlayer charge transfer between S and Se layers for the first time that is highly sensitive to the applied external electric field. Interestingly, the directions of charge flow and the applied field are the same. The behavior originates from the coexistence and/or the competition of external and built-in fields. These findings, together with the excellent stability and large in-plane stiffness, can greatly facilitate the development of nanoscale electronics and spintronics devices based on 2D MnSSe crystal. Spintronics or spin-based electronics devices formed based on spin and charge degrees of freedom of electrons have long held promise for developing high-efficiency information technology and fundamental physics With respect to spintronic applications, intrinsic ferromagnetism and its precisely and flexibly controlling are highly desirable. Recently, magnetic ordering was also predicated in Jauns monolayer TMXY (TM=Mn, V, or Cr; X/Y=S, Se, or Te; X≠Y) In this paper, we predict in Janus monolayer MnSSe a promising electrically tunable ferromagnetism, large magnetocrystalline anisotropy, and unique intralayer charge transfer. Previous work proposed that MnSSe possesses rigid ferromagnetic order Our calculations were performed using a plane-wave basis set and projector augmentedwave method Both the electron and hole doping were simulated by adding or removing electrons into the system, and a uniform background charge is adopted to maintain charge neutrality. Phonon dispersion was calculated on a 5×5×1 supercell by the finite displacement method Janus TMDCs monolayers, which are isostructural to the TMDCs, have been known as a family of newly 2D materials since 2014 For the fabrication of low-dimensional crystal-based electronics or spintronics devices, high in-plane stiffness is crucial to avoiding the curling or bulking of a 2D nanosheet. In-plane stiffness can be estimated by the 2D Young's modulus: where strain energy Es is the energy difference with reference to pristine MnSSe layer, ε denotes the in-plane uniaxial strain. l and l0 denote the strained and unstrained lattice constants, respectively. S0 is the unstrained surface area. Based on the optimized lattice constant 3.522 Å, we plotted Es versus ε in the range from -4% to 4% in Fig. where =2.57×10 -6 kg/m 2 is the density of the MnSSe monolayer, g is the gravitational acceleration (9.81 N/kg). For convenient comparison with the previous works Spin-polarized calculations show that ferromagnetic (FM) state is 80 meV and 2.8 eV ones lower in energy than antiferromagnetic (AFM) and non-magnetic (NM) per unit cell, respectively. The net magnetic moment is 3 μB for a cell suggests a large spin polarization in this intrinsic ferromagnetic material. The spin polarizations are mainly dominated by Mn atoms [Fig. From the projected density of state, the bands of the spin-up channel near the Fermi level are predominantly contributed by the Mn, S, and Se states [Fig. The magnetocrystalline anisotropy energy (MAE) is the energy needs to overcome the "barrier" when moving the direction of a magnetic moment from the easy axis to the hard one, which determines the type of magnetic order at low temperature. Magnetic 2D materials with easy-plane magnetic anisotropy possess quasi-long-range ordered phase at low temperature. Meanwhile, Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless (BKT) transition occurs at crucial temperature with a change of an exponential law spin-spin correlation function behavior above TBKT to a power law one below it. By contrast, 2D system with an easy-axis magnetic anisotropy exhibit the so-called Curie transition or ferromagnetically transition to a long-range ordered low-temperature phase, i.e., ferromagnetically ordered low-temperature phase To understand the temperature effect on the magnetism, we then performed the standard Monte Carlo Metropolis algorithm simulations based on the Ising Hamiltonian model, where Jij represents the nearest-neighboring exchange coupling constant. Mi and Mj are the spin magnetic moments of nearest-neighbor unit cell. J0 is defined as where Eex is the exchange energy, the energy difference E between AFM and FM configurations. z = 6 is the number of the nearest Mn neighbors. We obtain J0=0.74 meV and predict a Tc of about 72 K [(Fig. The microscopic origin of FM coupling in MnSSe can be understood by the competition of direct exchange interaction (Mn-Mn) and the super-exchange interaction (Mn-X-Mn, X= S or Se) mediated by the neighboring S and Se atoms, as shown in Fig. Recently, Jiang et al have experimentally demonstrated the controllability of the magnetic properties of both monolayer and bilayer CrI3 by electrostatic doping, and observed electron carrier doping induced AFM-FM transition E at various of carrier concentration is displayed in Fig. On the other hand, carrier doping not only changes strength of magnetic coupling, but also affect MAE. Plotted in Fig. where kB is the Boltzmann constant. J is the exchange parameter between adjacent spins, which can be evaluate from the E as J=E/8 As discussed above, an unusual finding of electrically switchable transition between a low-temperature quasi-long-range ordered phase and a long-range ferromagnetic ordered one is constructed, in clear contrast to the relatively small changes of magnetic coupling strength and MAE predicated in other systems The field-controllable spin-dependent transport is promising for spintronics. As to the applications, the doping-induced switch between the in-plane and out-of-plane directions of easy-axis can be used to design 2D magnetoelectric devices. As shown in Fig. One of the immediate consequences of injecting charge carrier in a crystal is to shifts the Fermi energy. We therefore track the evolution of the band structure in the whole range of doping. As expected, MnSSe shows a transition to a ferromagnetic metal with moderate hole doping n=1.4×10 14 cm -2 (0.5 holes per atom), see Fig. Since carrier doping is mainly implemented by the liquid (or solid ionic) gating technique in experiments Finally, we focus on the intra-layer charge transfer behavior of Janus MnSSe monolayer. The Bader charge analysis shows that both the electron number of S and Se [S (NS) and Se (NSe)] exhibit an approximately linear relation with external field in the range from E ⊥ =-3 to 3 V/Å, while that of Mn (NMn) keeps mostly unchangeable Due to the mirror asymmetry or electronegativity difference between S and Se atoms, NSe is 0.2 |e| less than NS when E ⊥ =0 V/Å, which may result in a built-in electric field, Ein. In support of this conjecture, we plot in Fig. In summary, we have reported a promising alternative for tunning the magnetic coupling and electric structure in the monolayer MnSSe. The intrinsic ferromagnetic half-metallicity with a Curie temperature around 72 K is predicated. We demonstrated that carrier doping can sensitively enhance or quench this ferromagnetic coupling. The magnetization easy axis can be easily tuned between out-of-plane and in-plane with a small amount of hole doping. These findings render MnSSe monolayer great potential for application in electrically controllable spintronic devices, such as spin-FET with giant magnetoresistance effect. We also found a pronounced intralayer charge density response towards external electric field for the first time, which is intriguing and could be considered as a new degree of freedom that will promotes the development of nanoscale electronics and spintronics devices on the basis of 2D materials with asymmetry structure. 