The process of phase separation in elastic solids and viscous fluids is of fundamental importance to the stability and function of soft materials. We explore the dynamics of phase separation and domain growth in a viscoelastic material such as a polymer gel. Using analytical theory and Monte Carlo simulations we report a new domain growth regime, in which the domain size increases algebraically with a ripening exponent α that depends on the viscoelastic properties of the material. For a prototypical Maxwell material, we obtain α = 1, which is markedly different from the well-known Ostwald ripening process with α = 1/3. We generalize our theory to systems with arbitrary powerlaw relaxation behavior and discuss our findings in the context of the long-term stability of materials as well as recent experimental results on phase separation in cross-linked networks and cytoskeleton. Phase separation is a universal phenomenon and a fundamental concept in physics, chemistry and materials science. Whereas its outcome is described by equilibrium thermodynamics, it is equally important to understand the dynamics of the separation process. This is particularly relevant in solid, soft and biological systems where large kinetic barriers or active processes often prevent the system from reaching its equilibrium state. Upon formation of a new phase, domains typically grow via coalescence or via surface-tension-driven dissolution and redeposition known as Ostwald ripening However, the situation is completely different in materials that exhibit viscoelastic relaxation or creep, which can irreversibly reduce elastic stress and thus enable further domain coarsening. Viscoelastic effects in phase separation have been extensively studied in spinodal decomposition This work was originally motivated by metal soap formation in oil paintings, an aging process believed to be driven by phase separation Here, we employ analytical theory and particle-based Monte Carlo simulations to investigate the process of phase separation and surface-tension-driven coarsening within a viscoelastic medium. Focusing on a prototypical system where a minority phase forms spherical nuclei or droplets within a viscoelastic majority phase, we attain a fundamental and quantitative understanding of the coarsening process on both short and long time scales. To set the stage for our investigation of viscoelasticity, we first briefly introduce elastic effects in phase separation and coarsening. We limit our analysis to the dilute regime, so that many-body elastic effects can be neglected and each droplet or precipitate can be considered an isolated spherical inclusion in an isotropic elastic To describe the elastic expansion of the cavity we use the Gent model for the elastic pressure of a spherical inclusion in a rubber-like nonlinear solid with λ ≡ R/r the expansion ratio and r the radius of the unstressed cavity (Fig. We note that when the size of inclusions is allowed to equilibrate through the exchange of mass via an evaporation-condensation process, the equilibrium size R can be calculated using classical nucleation theory augmented with an elastic energy term E el (λ). For a spherically symmetric system, this elastic energy equals the reversible pressure work performed by expanding the cavity from its unstressed radius r to R = λr, E el (λ) = 4π R r r 2 p el (r /r)dr . For the Gent model, the full analytical expression is provided in the Methods section [Eq. Having described the (reversible) elastic response we emphasize that understanding the phase separation process requires a model of irreversible deformations. The simplest description of a material that is elastic on short time scales but can flow on long time scales is a Maxwell material, which is characterized by a single relaxation time τ r . For example, supramolecular networks Coarsening processes are usually modeled using continuum mean-field theories For a Maxwell material at constant strain, the elastic stress σ decays exponentially, ∂σ/∂t = -σ/τ r , on a time scale τ r = η/E Y , with η the material viscosity. To avoid artifacts due to non-linear elasticity, we use a generalized form based on the reduction of the elastic energy E el , which in the linear elasticity regime corresponds exactly to the Maxwell model. Note that E el = E el (R, r) is a state function and its time dependence arises solely through variation of the dynamical variables R and r. Factorization E el [Eqs. ( The Maxwell model is valid for small strain rates, dr/dt r/τ r . Large strain rates require the upperconvected Maxwell model, which leads to additional shear thickening The interplay of condensation and viscoelastic relaxation leads to specific dynamics of domain coarsening and cluster growth (Fig. with R the mean cluster radius. Under sufficiently fast relaxation (τ r → 0), elasticity is irrelevant and the domain growth is expected to be determined by Ostwald ripening with a power-law exponent α = 1/3 in the largedomain limit The Landau-Slyozov-Wagner (LSW) theory of Ostwald ripening where c sat is the monomer concentration in phase B, γ the surface tension and the prefactor C = 8D/(27c 2 A k B T ), with D the diffusion coefficient and c A the monomer number density in the condensed phase A. The resulting power law-growth R ∼ t 1/3 , is accompanied by a scalefree size distribution h(R/ R) Elastic effects alter this coarsening process in two ways. Firstly, they change the phase equilibrium between the condensed phase (A) and the viscoelastic phase (B), which is captured by an elasticity-dependent c sat with the elasticity-free reference value c sat 0 = c sat (p el → 0), Secondly, the elastic energy alters the coarsening kinetics. We account for this effect using a first-order perturbation expansion of the LSW theory (see Methods section), leading to the coarsening rate The elastic pressure p el , the average domain radius R and the mean cavity radius r are all time dependent, while the prefactor C is determined by the diffusion constant D and the density of the condensed phase c A was observed in crosslinked gels To model viscoelastic relaxation, we couple the growth of the cavity [Eq. To directly compare the theory to the results of Fig. Whereas the perturbative solution resolves the cluster growth process across all time scales, an analytical theory would describe the viscoelastic ripening regime without the need for a numerical solution. Here we derive such a theory by assuming a small expansion ratio, λ ≈ 1. In this limit, the elastic term in Eq. ( , which we recognize as the radial stress at the cavity wall σ. Under elastic arrest, d R/dt ≈ 0, the stress is thus determined solely by the surface tension, We note that this approximation did not require linear elasticity assumptions. The same relation can be obtained by employing classical nucleation theory and assuming quasi-equilibrium conditions for a system of spherical clusters at constant total volume (see Sec. VI C). Combining Eq. ( This expression is valid for sufficiently large clusters, R > γ/ ẼY , such that strain rates are low and Maxwell model is appropriate. For small clusters R ≤ γ/ ẼY Eq. ( Viscoelastic ripening is limited to R < R c and will thus be prominent if Dτ r is large, with τ r the Maxwell relaxation time. In a single-component phase, these two factors are connected via the fluctuation-dissipation theorem. Employing the Stokes-Einstein relation and assuming a standard situation with a dense phase A, i.e., c A ∼ r -3 m with r m the molecular size of individual monomers, we find R c < r m , so that viscoelastic ripening does not exist To quantitatively delineate the different growth regimes, we consider that the viscoelastic growth, Eq. ( whereas the transition to Ostwald ripening occurs at crossover time scale τ c determined by Eqs. ( Thus, the distinct ripening regimes are characterized as: (i) initial growth and elastic arrest for t < τ ve ; (ii) viscoelastic ripening with growth exponent α ≈ 1 for τ ve < t < τ c ; and (iii) convergence to the LSW theory with α ≈ 1/3 for t > τ c . The accuracy of the analytical prediction shows that our approach can be generalized to any relaxation behavior with a strain rate that is a power-law function of both the stress σ = p el and time t, with A a materials-dependent prefactor. This general form captures power-law fluids as well as a variety of glassy materials and networks which agrees with the full numerical solution within the viscoelastic growth regime (Fig. Here r m is the individual particle size, which sets the length scale, and τ the dimensionless relaxation parameter that compares the diffusion rate D to the viscoelastic relaxation factor A. If the initial elastic expansion of cavities λ c is significant, λ c 1, viscoelastic growth is preceded by a purely elasticity-controlled regime bounded by r 0 < R < λ c r 0 , that does not depend on relaxation properties Having extensively analyzed viscoelastic relaxation, we note that the viscoelastic matrix could form a brittle crack if the elastic stress exceeds the fracture strength p frac = E Y Γ/R and R ≥ Γ/E Y , with Γ the fracture energy of the material We have addressed the problem of phase separation within a viscoelastic material, a question of fundamental importance to different classes of soft materials. Through a combination of analytical calculations and Monte Carlo simulation, we have demonstrated that such systems can exhibit a new type of domain ripening behavior that is distinct from the standard Ostwald ripening process. Our analytical results, supported by MC simulations, show that ripening of phase-separated domains typically exhibits three distinct regimes: (i) elasticity-controlled ripening and arrest on short time scales; (ii) viscoelastic ripening on intermediate time scales with a materialdependent ripening exponent α, e.g., α ∼ 1 for a Maxwell material; and (iii) Ostwald ripening with α = 1/3 in the long time limit. Quantitative experimental verification could be realized by inducing phase separation in a viscoelastic gel with a known constitutive relation and measuring the domain growth over multiple orders of magnitude [cf. Figs. Our findings provide insight into phase separation within a wide variety of viscoelastic materials, includ-ing dense polymer solutions, gels and biological networks like the cytoskeleton. Whereas covalently cross-linked gels or glassy plastics at room temperature exhibit only marginal viscoelastic relaxation, many materials exhibit creep flow and thus domain growth is possible on sufficiently long time scales of years or even centuries Interestingly, our results suggest that cells could regulate the domain size of membrane-less organelles Lastly, we note that the framework presented can be applied to both fluid and solid spheroidal inclusions, since the stress inside solid spheroidal inclusions is constant The Gent phenomenological model Any positive exponent γ will lead to a divergent pressure in the limit of large expansion ratios, and the value of the exponent determines the sharpness of the pressureexpansion relation. We choose the lowest even exponent, γ = 2, ensuring that the response is symmetric at λ = 1 and that above the cavitation pressure the cluster expansion is limited to . The elastic energy of a spherical cavity is equal to the reversible pressure work, In comparison, the elastic energy of a spherical cavity in an isotropic linearly elastic solid is In the limit λ → 1 Eq. ( Moreover, we assume that there is no pinning of clusters or droplets to the cavity walls, p(λ) = 0 for λ < 1 and, consequently, E el (λ) = 0 for λ < 1. The equilibrium cluster size can be calculated by starting with the classical nucleation theory (CNT), which assumes that the free energy F 1 of a single spherical cluster of radius R is composed of a surface term and a volume term. To account for elastic deformation energy, we add an elastic term E el (R, r), yielding the total free energy, where f v is the free-energy density of the condensed cluster that is determined by the chemical potential of individual particles that constitute the cluster. Using this expression we can compute the equilibrium cluster size R. Since the pressure depends only on the expansion ratio λ, the elastic energy Eq. ( The elastic energy decreases through increase of the cavity size r, Using Eqs. ( Equations ( B. Monte Carlo simulations The simulated system comprises N p = 25000 particles suspended in an implicit solvent and placed in a periodic cubic box of linear size L = 70d LJ . The pair interaction between particles of diameter d LJ and centerto-center distance d ij is modeled via a Lennard-Jones (LJ) potential U LJ (d ij ) with cut-off 2.5d LJ and interaction strength LJ . To preserve the appropriate diffusion dynamics of individual particles, we only use local MC moves, consisting of a random displacement of a single particle to a position within a sphere of radius d LJ /2, centered on the original position of the particle. The simulation time scale τ = d 2 LJ /40D is thus defined by the size of the particles and their diffusion constant D. This standard LJ system is coupled to a viscoelastic background medium with embedded spherical cavities. Every cluster containing two or more particles is considered to be in phase A and is subject to elastic stress, whereas isolated particles are considered to be in phase B and are not subject to elastic stress. When a dimer (a two-particle cluster) forms, a cavity with initial radius r 0 is created at r cav , the center of mass of the two particles. This position remains fixed as the cluster grows, unless the cluster fully dissolves into individual particles, at which point the memory of the cavity location disappears. The elastic energy of the cavity is determined by the mismatch between the radii of the cluster R and of the cavity r. Viscoelastic relaxation effects are modeled via dissipative expansion of cavities. The cavity growth rate ṙ is obtained from viscoelastic relaxation [Eq. ( To calculate the elastic energy we assume a dilute situation in which individual clusters k of particles do not interact through elastic deformations of the surrounding medium and the elastic energy of the system is given by the sum of individual cluster contributions E el,k . The total energy of the system is thus where the first sum is performed over all pairs of particles and the second sum over all clusters k. To compute the location and position of the clusters we use a neighborbased cluster identification algorithm. Two particles are considered neighbors (and thus belong to the same cluster) if their center-to-center distance is less than 1.5d LJ . Each cluster is characterized by its center-of-mass position r k and radius of gyration r g,k that is calculated from the positions of the individual particles in the cluster, where the first term on the right-hand side is the radius of gyration obtained from the centers of mass of all particles and the second term is the radius of gyration of an individual particle. Since isolated clusters attain a spherical shape with radius R k = r g,k 5/3, the coupling with the elastic medium depends only on r g,k and r k . The elastic energy due to cavity expansion E ex,k is obtained by integrating the elastic pressure from the unstressed cavity size r k to the expanded size , and E ex,k = 0 otherwise. To represent the displacement d k = |r kr cav,k | of the center of mass r k of the cluster with respect to the cavity position r cav,k , we add a linear elastic displacement term Since the aim is not to study coalescence but surfacetension-driven ripening of spherical clusters, we restrict MC moves to single-particle moves that do not lead to coalescence or breaking of existing clusters. Such coalescence events can occur in principle but are very rare and negligible at dilute conditions. Accurately incorporating coalescence would be difficult within our simulation setup, because at the point of coalescence the cluster shape is highly nonspherical and thus the elastic deformation of the surrounding medium is challenging to calculate. Therefore, we exclude the influence of possible coalescence events, by rejecting any MC move that involves the merging of two existing clusters or the breaking of a cluster into two disjoint parts where at least one of these parts is not a free, unbound particle. Our simulations thus always model surface-tension-driven ripening of isolated spherical clusters in the dilute limit where individual clusters do not interact directly. Phase equilibrium is determined by the LJ interaction parameter LJ and the density ρ = N p /L 3 , while the viscoelastic properties are determined by the modulus E Y , the coefficient E c and the viscoelastic relaxation time relative to the diffusion time scale τ r /τ . The calcu-lations are performed at temperature T = LJ /(1.8k B ), which is in a two-phase coexistence region of the LJ phase diagram (cf. Fig. The average cluster size n and radius R are calculated from all clusters with more than five particles, to avoid counting transient small aggregates. The mapping between simulation and theoretical parameters is obtained from equilibrium properties of the LJ fluid and the simulation time scale τ . We set γ = 3.06k B T d -2 LJ and c A = 1.14d -3 LJ , which are found by extrapolating LJ fluid parameters LJ is obtained directly from MC simulations. We consider viscoelastic effects in a first-order perturbative expansion of the LSW Ostwald ripening theory, Eq. ( The growth rate can also depend on the kinetic prefactors, such as the diffusion constant, which determine monomer transport. Here we assume that monomers can diffuse uninhibited through the viscoelastic medium, so that the kinetic prefactors are constant. Thus, the firstorder correction to LSW ripening due to viscoelastic effects is where Ṙ0 and f 0 are the growth rate and the driving force, respectively, in the reference (LSW) system. Within this first-order expansion the relative cluster size distribution h(R/ R) is time-independent and given by the LSW theory with λ the sole variable and δ(x) the Dirac delta function. To calculate the first-order correction we need to evaluate the total free energy F . The free energy of a single cluster F 1 is determined by the surface tension and elastic energy contributions [cf. Eq. ( ) and C ψ = R 3 / R3 are assumed timeindependent. Using these expressions in Eq. ( The assumption of a time-independent distribution does not apply in the case of elastic arrest, where h(R/ R) would gradually change to a uniform size distribution To obtain an analytical relation between stress and cluster size at small deformations (λ ∼ 1) we consider a closed system containing a total constant volume V of the condensed phase. Assuming that clusters can freely exchange material via exchange of individual particles, the equilibrium number of clusters N is determined by the minimization of the total free energy of the system, F = N C ψ F 1 (R, r) [cf. Eq. ( Solving this equation in the limit N → ∞ yields The elastic energy can generally be expressed as a polynomial expansion, E el = Aε 2 + Bε 3 + Cε 4 + . . ., around its zero value, E el (ε = 0) = 0, with the strain ε = R/r -1. Thus, the energy scales with its derivative as E el ∼ εr ∂E el ∂R , so that under small deformations, ε → 0, the last term in Eq. ( Interestingly, σ does not depend on the elastic properties of the material or on the cavity size r. A. small stress limit For small stresses T rr /G 1, the last term on the right hand side of (S6) can be neglected. Furthermore, at small stresses the velocity v r also vanishes, v r → 0 as T rr → 0, thus, the last term on the left hand side can also be neglected. Since T rr ∼ T θθ the same approximation applies to (S7) and the constitutive relation reduces to and These two equations are a spherically symmetric case of the Maxwell model given by Therefore, in the small stress limit, the upper-convected Maxwell model reduces to the Maxwell model. While we have focused on the spherically symmetric case, other geometries and approximations to upper-convected derivative are discussed in Ref. The upper-convected Maxwell model considers elasticity and relaxation due to the material viscosity of the polymers. To include effects of the solvent viscosity we need the Oldroyd B-model, where γ (2) is the second rate-of-strain tensor and λ 2 the retardation time that is determined by the solvent viscosity For the case of coarsening droplets, the observation of viscoelastic ripening requires the relaxation time λ 1 to be at least a few orders of magnitude larger than the retardation time λ 2 /λ 1 ∼ 0. In this case the Oldroyd B-model reduces to the upper-convected Maxwell model [(S1)]. Viscoelastic ripening exponent is determined in the small stress limit where all non-linear generalizations of the Oldroyd B-model, such as Giesekus model, the White-Metzner model or the Oldroyd 8-constant model, reduce to the Maxwell model. Thus, we expect the viscoelastic ripening exponent as calculated using the Maxwell model is general to any constitutive relation that reduces to the Maxwell model in the small stress-limit. 