In magnesium alloys with multiple substitutional elements, solute segregation at grain boundaries (GBs) has a strong impact on many important material characteristics, such as GB energy and mobility, and therefore, texture. Although it is well established that GB segregation is inhomogeneous, the variation of GB solute composition for random boundaries is still not understood. In the current study, atomic-scale experimental and simulation techniques were used to investigate the compositional inhomogeneity of six different GBs. Three-dimensional atom probe tomography results revealed that GB solute concentration of Nd in Mg varies between 2 to 5 at.%. This variation was not only seen for different GB orientations but also within the GB plane. Correlated atomistic simulations suggest that the inhomogeneous segregation behavior observed experimentally stems from local atomic rearrangements within the GBs and introduce the notion of potential excess free volume in the context of improving the prediction of per-site segregation energies. The drive towards energy saving and environmental protection is attracting significant interest from research laboratories worldwide to develop innovative and costeffective materials and processes for lightweight structural components. Owing to their high specific strength and stiffness, magnesium alloys are promising candidates to improve fuel economy and support a sustainable lower carbon vehicle technology Compared to steel or aluminum alloys, processing of magnesium alloys poses challenges related to limited strength, sharp crystallographic textures and plastic anisotropy Mg alloys containing small additions of rare earth (RE) elements demonstrate remarkable qualitative alterations of the sheet texture along with reduced mechanical anisotropy, and thereby, promoted formability Given the complexity and experimental limitations to study atomistic behaviors, it is prudent to utilize recent advancements in high performance computing to investigate computationally intensive problems. Atomistic simulations are a powerful complement to high-resolution experimental techniques targeting the atomic-scale behavior of GBs. For example, molecular dynamics (MD) and molecular statics (MS) have been used to compute the distribution of GB segregation energy in face-centered cubic polycrystals Despite previous extensive research on the effect of different solutes on recrystallization texture development, formal understanding of inhomogeneous GB segregation and resulting selective growth during recrystallization remains pending. In line with this issue, the present work combines advanced modeling and high-resolution characterization at the atomic-scale to shed light on the effect of GB structure on solute segregation. The studied material was an extruded Mg-1.0 wt.%Mn-1.0 wt.% Nd alloy (hereafter, MN11) Compared to the bulk concentration (0.2 ± 0.1 at.%), the GB concentration of Nd was ~15 times higher. To quantify the solubility of Nd atoms at the GB, the in-plane Nd concentrations in the middle of the GB (dashed line in 2D concentration map, Fig. were averaged for each of the six measured GBs. An overview of the averaged peak solute concentrations shown in Fig. The segregation behavior of Nd atoms is not only influenced by the macroscopic features of GBs but also the local structural arrangement of atoms in the GB plane. Fig. The atomistic configurations were relaxed using the conjugate gradient (with box relaxation in the z-direction) and the FIRE algorithms where E bulk is the energy of the Mg bulk, E bulk X the energy of the Mg bulk where one host atom is replaced by Nd solute, E GB the energy of the Mg system with a GB, and E GB X is the energy of the Mg system with Nd solute occupying a GB site. After each swap, an energy minimization using the FIRE algorithm was performed. The Open Visualization Tool OVITO was used to visualize the atomistic configurations, analyze the misfit dislocation networks and calculate the atomic displacement. The Open Visualization Tool OVITO The Dislocation Extraction Algorithm Fig. The maximum value of the per-site segregation energies of each bin is higher for the 11.3° LAGB than the 59.3° HAGB. For the 11.3° LAGB, the distributions of mean, median and third quartile segregation energies sharply increase when approaching the GB plane, and the deviation between mean and median in each bin is more significant than for the 59.3° HAGB. In contrast, the mean, median and third quartile segregation energies within 2.5 Å of the GB plane of the 59.3° HAGB stay at similar levels (cf. Fig. The local structural reorganization measured by the MSD acts as a generator of excess free volume. Thus, the MSD is a measure of the potential of excess free volume for a given stable GB configuration, in contrast to the effective excess free volume classically considered. In this work, the strong association between the distributions of per-site segregation energy and MSD demonstrates the impact of the potential excess free volume on per-site segregation energy. The microscopic structural features of a GB, such as GB dislocations, GB disconnections and GB triple junctions, which affect the local site environment, could thus have significant effects on the local segregation behavior. As a result, these features could favor inhomogeneous segregation within the GB, as seen in Fig. Such local structural rearrangement also indicates that the widely used linear elasticity model for the atomistic modelling of high symmetric GBs based on effective excess free volume In summary, the inhomogeneous segregation behavior of Nd solute atoms at several random grain boundaries in a deformed and subsequently annealed MN11 