Effects of three-point direct correlation on properties of the phase field crystal (PFC) modeling are examined, for the control of various ordered and disordered phases and their coexistence in both three-dimensional and two-dimensional systems. Such effects are manifested via the corresponding gradient nonlinearity in the PFC free energy functional that is derived from classical density functional theory. Their significant impacts on the stability regimes of ordered phases, phase diagrams, and elastic properties of the system, as compared to those of the original PFC model, are revealed through systematic analyses and simulations. The nontrivial contribution from three-point direct correlation leads to the variation of the critical point of order-disorder transition to which all the phase boundaries in the temperature-density phase diagram converge. It also enables the variation and control of system elastic constants over a substantial range as needed in modeling different types of materials with the same crystalline structure but different elastic properties. The capability of this PFC approach in modeling both solid and soft matter systems is further demonstrated through the effect of three-point correlation on controlling the vapor-liquid-solid coexistence and transitions for body-centered cubic (bcc) phase and on achieving the liquid-stripe or liquid-lamellar phase coexistence. All these provide a valuable and efficient method for the study of structural ordering and evolution in various types of material systems. The phase field crystal (PFC) method, an effective density-field approach for modeling atomistic details of material systems on diffusive time scales Despite these recent progresses, the influence of multipoint correlations in PFC and the corresponding properties are still not well understood. For example, it is unclear how the phase diagram and the relative stability and coexistence between different ordered and disordered phases would change with the incorporation of multi-point correlations. In this study, we systematically investigate the influence of three-point direct correlation on the single-component PFC phase diagram, particularly the conditions of stability and coexistence among various phases. Our results reveal that the ordered vs disordered stability regime and the relative stability between ordered phases can be controlled by the threepoint direct correlation (Sec. III B). In addition, contributions from the three-point correlation can notably impact the phase diagrams as compared to the original PFC model. When the effect of three-point correlation is incorporated, the critical point in the ǫ (temperature parameter) vs n (average density) phase diagram, at which all the phase boundaries intersect and the phase coexistence terminates, becomes variable (Sec. III C). The effect on system elastic properties is also revealed, showing as the ability to vary the elastic constants in the model over a considerably broad range for describing different materials of same crystalline symmetry (Sec. III D). Other examples showing the control capability of threepoint correlation include the vapor-liquid-solid transitions and coexistence for 3D body-centered cubic (bcc) phase (Sec. III E) and interestingly, the realization of liquid-stripe or liquid-lamellar coexistence (Sec. III F), both of which are verified by dynamical simulations of the full PFC model. These further demonstrate the applicability and efficiency of our PFC modeling for both solid and soft matter systems. The rescaled free energy functional in the original PFC model is written as where n(r, t) is an order parameter field representing atomic number density variation, g is a phenomenological model parameter, and ǫ is a temperature parameter with larger (smaller) ǫ value corresponding to lower (higher) temperature. In the associated phase diagram the critical point is located at ǫ = 0 for the transition between disordered (liquid) and ordered phases. This original PFC model can be derived from cDFT with two-point direct correlation, the effect of which yields the gradient terms of the PFC free energy functional in Eq. ( Generally, the free energy functional in cDFT is expanded by where ∆F = F -F 0 with F 0 the free energy at the reference-state density ρ 0 , the density variation field n = (ρρ 0 )/ρ 0 with ρ the atomic number density, and C (m) (r 1 , r 2 , ..., r m ) is the m-point direct correlation function at the reference state. C (m) is translationally invariant and can be rewritten as C (m) (r 1 , r 2 , ..., r m ) = C (m) (r 1r 2 , r 1r 3 , ..., r 1r m ) without loss of generality. Substituting its Fourier transform into Eq. ( where n(q) is the Fourier transform of n(r) and d is the system dimensionality. The Fourier component Ĉ(m) (q 1 , q 2 , ..., q m-1 ) can be expanded as a power series of wave vector q i , the tensor form of which is given by where components of a rank-K tensor T (K) . Both C (m) and Ĉ(m) are rotationally invariant, and thus T (K) should be a 2D or 3D isotropic Cartesian tensor which can be written as linear combinations of products of q i • q j and (q k × q l ) • q p , leading to Substituting it into Eq. ( where the C parameters (i.e., C 0 , C 2 , and C 4 ) are proportional to the expansion coefficient of two-point direct correlation Ĉ(2) in Fourier space, and the D and E terms represent the contributions from three-and four-point direct correlations, respectively, with the corresponding parameters dependent on the expansion coefficients of Ĉ(3) and Ĉ(4) given in Eq. ( , and E 0 = -6. Therefore, the first nontrivial contribution from three-point direct correlation is the nonlinear gradient term with coefficient D 11 , the effect of which is the focus of this study. In the following we use a reduced form of Eq. ( which has been shown in our recent work to well produce the vapor-liquid-solid coexistence and transitions for 2D triangular phase and some realistic temperature-and pressure-related material properties The dynamical evolution of the system is governed by the conserved PFC equation From the free energy functional in Eq. ( which is used for our full-mode PFC simulations. To conduct stability analysis, one-mode approximation is first used for the density variation field n(r) of periodic ordered phases, i.e., where n is the average density variation, A is the amplitude, q represents the basic wave vector of the periodic structure, and "c.c." refers to the complex conjugate. For a 2D stripe or 3D lamellar phase with q = q(1, 0, 0), from Eq. ( For 2D triangular or 3D rod phase with basic wave vectors q = q(1, 0, 0) and q(1/2, ± √ 3/2, 0), the free energy density is obtained as The inverse of triangular structure is honeycomb, which has the same basic wave vectors but with opposite sign of amplitude A. Thus, if changing A to -A in Eq. Note that the only difference between Eq. ( Again, Eqs. ( The free energy density of uniform or homogeneous phase, either liquid or vapor, is simply given by The vapor-liquid coexistence can be identified by applying the common tangent rule on f u (n) in Eq. From ∂ 2 f u /∂ n2 = 0 we can obtain the spinodal densities, i.e., B. Stability analysis: Effect of three-point direct correlation In order to examine how the D 11 term, which represents the effect of three-point direct correlation as described in Sec. II, affects the stability regime of ordered phases, we conduct a stability analysis with respect to the supercooled or supersaturated uniform phase. Interestingly, the free energy densities given in Eqs. ( where we have set C 6 = 0 for simplicity, since nonzero C 6 would not qualitatively change the results as has been discussed in detail in Ref. given the condition 12C 4 + E 1122 n2 < 0 for the convergence at large q as seen in Eq. When E 1122 = 0 as assumed in this subsection (so that we could focus on the effect of D 11 ), α 2 (n) in Eq. ( where ). We set n+ as the value of nsupercool when the "+" sign is taken in Eq. ( In the original PFC model with D 0 = D 11 = E 1122 = 0, q 2 = C 2 /(2C 4 ) according to Eq. ( )) > 0 based on Eq. ( When D 11 = 0, 3C 2 +2D 11 n < 0 is required for q 2 > 0. We define n0 as the solution of q 2 = 0 for n, as determined by Eq. ( 11 /(9C 4 ) < 0, and thus α 2 (n) < 0 occurs for n lying within (n ) is negative at every n value. The intersection between q 2 > 0 and α 2 (n) < 0 determines the stability regime of ordered phases. These linear stability results are shown in Fig. When In the above analysis and results, only the linear stability of ordered vs disordered phase is identified, but not the relative stability between different individual ordered phases. To distinguish the phase stability among all the phases, we need to consider nonlinear contributions from all the terms in the free energy density of each ordered phase, i.e., A 3 and A 4 terms in Eqs. ( The corresponding ǫ-n (temperature-density) phase diagrams are presented in Fig. It is interesting to note that there exists a special point in the phase diagram (marked as a red circle in Fig. and E 0 = -6, this critical point can be obtained analytically in the one-mode approximation, yielding with "+" for D 11 ≥ 0 and "-" for D 11 < 0, which well agree with the numerical results given in Fig. From the stability analysis given above in Sec. III B, the liquid-stripe or liquid-lamellar transition occurs at the supercooled point nsupercool with the coefficient of the A 2 term α 2 = 0. However, this is not the case for other ordered phases of which the free energy density contains an A 3 term [see Eqs. ( The existence of an A 3 term can make an ordered phase at nsupercool more stable than the liquid phase beyond the linear stability, since A 3 can take either positive or negative value to decrease the free energy density. To illustrate this, here we consider the case of a s = E 0 -2D 2 11 /(9C 4 ) < 0 as an example. In this case the linear stability regime of ordered phase is (n + , n-) as described above. In all the free energy densities given in Eqs. ( According to the above analysis, when α 3 becomes zero under some conditions of e.g., n and ǫ, the extra stabilization effect provided by the A 3 term no longer exists. Thus, to make the transition between all the ordered phases and the liquid phase occur at exactly the same point (i.e., controlled by nsupercool ), we need the coefficients of A 2 and A 3 terms being equal to zero simultaneously, giving the following conditions in one-mode approximation α 2 (q eq , n) = 0, α 3 (q eq , n) = 0, This special point determined by Eq. ( where f u is given by Eq. ( In addition to the critical point, introducing the D 11 term also changes the stability and coexistence regimes of different phases in the phase diagram. The phase diagram is symmetric about n = 0 when D 11 = 0 [Fig. We choose the 3D bcc system as an example to reveal the effect of three-point correlation on the system elastic property. As has been discussed in Ref. where V 0 the volume of the initial undeformed state and ξ ij is an effective finite strain tensor defined by with ε ij the infinitesimal or linear strain tensor. The strained-state free energy is of the form with A, q, n, and volume V all varying with the applied strain. It is worth emphasizing that the values of elastic constants depend on the choice of a non-negative rescaled reference-state density ρ0 used in the definition of rescaled PFC density variation field n. When the system is strained or deformed, the corresponding variation of the average density variation n is governed by the relation to satisfy the condition of constant total number of particles. The model parameters of original PFC (with D 11 = 0) have been matched to bcc Fe, giving ρ0 = 0.251, and the corresponding elastic constants C 0 ij (using Voigt notation) have been identified Here we further calculate the elastic constants of various bcc systems with varying D 11 and ρ0 which correpond to different types of materials, based on Eqs. ( The nunstrained for each D 11 determined by the mid point of the stable regime of bcc phase in the ǫ-n phase diagram at a given temperature parameter ǫ (e.g., ǫ = 0.1 as used in this work). The corresponding results are presented in Fig. Variations of the Poisson's ratio ν are also given in Fig. All these results show that in this PFC modeling the elastic property of a system can be varied effectively over a considerable range. This well demonstrates the efficiency and advantage of this model, which incorporates the important effects of three-point correlation, for describing different materials of the same crystalline symmetry but different elastic properties through an extended parameterization. For example, the elastic constants of bcc Fe (with ρ0 = 0.251) were underestimated in the original PFC model based only on two-point direct correlation Recently we used this PFC model to obtain the vaporliquid-solid transitions and coexistence for 2D triangular phase The accurate values of equilibrium free energy for bcc phase is obtained through numerically solving the full PFC dynamical Eq. We also compute the corresponding temperaturepressure (∆T vs P ) phase diagram based on the f -n curves obtained from the full PFC numerical calculations, as presented in Fig. To further verify the phase behavior described above, we have conducted a dynamical simulation of 3D vaporliquid-solid coexistence based on Eq. ( The multiphase modeling that is made available in this approach would be important for the study of some ma- terial growth and evolution processes, particularly those involving the coexistence and interplay between vapor, liquid, and solid phases. A typical example is the surfacemelting mediated crystal growth near the triple point In all the previous PFC models, the stripe or lamellar phase cannot, except for the one-dimensional case, coexist with the uniform phase, as seen in Fig. We base the following analysis on the one-mode free energy densities given in Eqs. ( To verify these analyses we conduct 2D numerical simulations of the full PFC Eq. ( We have studied the effects of three-point direct correlation on the properties of phase stability, coexistence, and system elastic response in the PFC modeling. Compared to the original PFC model containing only the contribution from two-point direct correlation, the stability regimes of ordered phases are significantly affected by the incorporation of the three-point correlation. From the instability analysis on the supercooled or supersaturated uniform state, much richer and broader conditions for the stability of ordered phase can be identified with the effect of the D 11 term, a contribution from the threepoint correlation. In the ǫ-n phase diagrams the stability regimes of bcc and triangular phases expand (or shrink) with negative (or positive) value of D 11 , while those of their inverse counterparts (i.e., mbcc and honeycomb) behave in the opposite way, leading to asymmetric phase diagrams. Of particular interest is the critical point in these phase diagrams, exhibiting as the merging point of all the phase boundaries, which becomes adjustable with varying nonzero D 11 values. In addition, the introduction of three-point correlation enables the modeling of different materials of the same crystalline structure but different elastic properties, through a viable control of system elastic constants that can better match various real materials. Our results also show that the vapor-liquid-solid tran- sitions and coexistence, which are important in the multiphase material growth and evolution processes, can be well realized in our PFC model incorporating effects of multi-point direct correlations, as demonstrated for 3D bcc phase in this work. The liquid-stripe or liquidlamellar coexistence, which is not accessible in the original or other PFC models but occurs in soft-matter ordering systems (e.g., isotropic-smectic coexistence and transition in colloidal liquid crystals or rods), can be achieved as well through parameter control. 3D and 2D PFC dynamical simulations have been conducted to verify these findings and further prove the effects of three-point direct correlation. In short, our study has demonstrated that contributions from three-point direct correlation can be used to control and adjust the phase stability regimes, the relative stability of different ordered phases, phase coexistence, elastic properties, and the transition sequence among vapor, liquid, and ordered phases in either solid or soft matter systems. This ability of phase and elasticproperty control makes our PFC approach a valuable tool for modeling a wide variety of real material systems. As stated in Sec. III B, the uniform or homogeneous phase is linearly unstable with respect to ordered phase when α 2 (n) < 0. Also, to enable the ordered phase q 2 > 0 is required. Hence α 2 (n) < 0 and q 2 > 0 are the two necessary but not sufficient conditions for stabilizing the ordered phases. For simplicity, C 4 < 0, E 0 < 0, and C 6 = E 1122 = 0 are set in the following analysis which can be classified into two cases of E 0 -2D 2 11 /(9C 4 ) < 0 and > 0 respectively. (i) Based on the formula of α 2 (n) given in Eq. ( First, suppose q 2 > 0 is satisfied for all the n values in the (n + , n-) interval. Obviously, if D 11 = 0 this is always true since q 2 is then equal to C 2 /2C 4 (when E 1122 = 0) with both C 2 and C 4 being negative. As also seen in Eq. ( and if defining the midpoint of n+ and n-as nm , respectively. Thus, Eqs. (A2), (A4), and (A5) need to be followed for the ordered-phase stability at values of n within the range of (n + , n-) in this case (i). Second, if q 2 > 0 is satisfied only for some n values in the (n + , n-) interval, we have instead of Eq. (A1), giving (A7) Since here E 0 -2D 2 11 /(9C 4 ) < 0, when -√ 9E 0 C 4 /2 < D 11 < 0, q 2 increases monotonically with n as seen from Eq. ( (ii) When E 0 -2D 2 11 /(9C 4 ) > 0, α(n) is a concave parabola as a function of n. Similar to case (i), when C 0 < C 2 2 /(4C 4 ) + b 2 s /(2a s ) so that b 2 s -4a s c s > 0 in Eq. ( If n0 < n-, since in this case (ii) E 0 -2D 2 11 /(9C 4 ) > 0, q 2 increases monotonically with n when D 11 < -√ 9E 0 C 4 /2. The n interval that satisfies both α(n) < 0 and q 2 > 0 for the stability of ordered phase is then (n 0 , n-) ∪ (n + , +∞). When D 11 > √ 9E 0 C 4 /2, q 2 decreases monotonically with the increase of n, and the corresponding stability interval is (-∞, n0 ). For both scenarios Eqs. (A1) and (A3) should be also satisfied, but resulting in different conditions of and To summarize, the stability regime of ordered phase is within the n range of (n 0 , n-) ∪ (n + , +∞) under the conditions of Eqs. (A8) and (A9), or the range of (-∞, n0 ) with the conditions of Eqs. (A8) and (A10). If n-< n0 < n+ , α(n) < 0 and q 2 > 0 can be satisfied for n within (n + , +∞) when D 11 < -√ 9E 0 C 4 /2, or in the interval of (-∞, n-) when D 11 > √ 9E 0 C 4 /2. In either case Eq. (A6) is also obeyed, giving (A11) If n0 > n+ , to satisfy the conditions of α(n) < 0 and q 2 > 0 for the stability of ordered phase, we can obtain the same Eq. (A8) from solving Eq. (A1), but for different allowed ranges of n when following the similar derivation steps. The solution of Eq. (A3) yields Eqs. (A8) and (A12) give the ordered-phase stability conditions for the n range within (n 0 , +∞), while Eqs. (A8) and (A13) correspond to the conditions for the range of (-∞, n-) ∪ (n + , n0 ). Finally, if b 2 s -4a s c s < 0 in Eq. ( Appendix B: Derivation of the critical point for the convergence of all the phase boundaries As described in Sec. III C, in the one-mode approximation Eq. ( D 11 n q 2 eq + C 4 q 4 eq = 0, (B1) D 0 -D 11 q 2 eq + E 0 n = 0, (B2) from α 2 = 0 and α 3 = 0 respectively, where we have assumed E 1122 = 0 for simplicity, and q eq is the equilibrium wave number of the bcc or mbcc phase obtained by solving ∂f bcc /∂q = 0 and ∂f bcc /∂A = 0. This leads to where On the other hand, Eq. (B2) gives The two solutions of q 2 eq in Eqs. (B3) and (B4) should be equivalent to each other. From this requirement and Eq. (B1) we can then derive the expression of n. For the parameter values used for the phase diagrams of Fig. with "-" for D 11 > 0 and "+" for D 11 ≤ 0. Following the similar process, we can also obtain the result of nhex for the hexagonal phase (i.e., triangular or honeycomb rods) satisfying the condition that the coefficients of A 2 and A 3 terms equal zero simultaneously. From Eq. ( 