The geometric phase (Berry phase) of an electronic wave function is the fundamental basis of the topological properties in solids. Modulating band structure provides a tuning knob for the Berry phase, and in the extreme case drives a topological phase transition. Despite the significant developments in topological materials study, it remains a challenge to tune between different topological phases while tracing the impact of the Berry phase on quantum charge transport, in the same material. Here we report both in a magnetotransport study of ZrTe 5 . By tuning the band structure with uniaxial strain, we directly map a weak-to strong-topological phase transition through a gapless Dirac semimetal phase via quantum oscillations. Moreover, we demonstrate the impact of the strain-tunable spin-dependent Berry phase on the Zeeman effect through the amplitude of the quantum oscillations. We show that such a spin-dependent Berry phase, largely neglected in solid-state systems, is critical in modeling quantum oscillations in Dirac bands in topological materials. Tuning the band structure of a topological material causes a continuous evolution of Berry phase along the Fermi surface and can ultimately drive a topological phase transition by closing and reopening the bulk band gap Despite the significant developments in topological materials study in recent years, it remains a challenge to tune between different topological phases, and correspondingly the Berry phase, in the same material. The transition metal pentatelluride ZrTe 5 is a promising material for such study. ZrTe 5 is a van der Waals layered material with layer planes extending along the aand c-lattice directions and stacking along the b direction. It hosts intriguing properties such as a resistance peak (Lifshitz transition) In this work, we study charge transport and SdH oscillations in ZrTe 5 under tunable uniaxial strain. In a magnetic field perpendicular to the a-c plane and the applied current, SdH oscillations and their evolution over strain The dependence of the SdH oscillation amplitude on the Fermi energy and Dirac mass gap, tunable through the strain, is analyzed and compared with the quantum oscillation theory. Our results reveal that the spin-dependent Berry phase intrinsic to the Dirac bands, which has been largely neglected in previous studies, is critical in modeling the SdH oscillations in such topological materials. The samples studied in this work are ZrTe 5 microcrystals mechanically exfoliated onto flexible Polyimide substrates (Fig. Next, we characterize the electrical resistance in mag-netic field perpendicular to the a-c crystal plane. At the base temperature of ≈ 4K, SdH oscillations are clearly visible on the magnetoresistance background and evolve with changing strain (Fig. Our analysis of the SdH oscillations focuses on mapping out the strain-dependent mass gap, Fermi level, and the spin-dependent Berry phase. We model ZrTe 5 with the anisotropic Dirac Hamiltonian (see Methods). In quantizing magnetic fields, the extremal cross-sectional area of the Fermi surface is Here μ is the Fermi energy, ∆ is the mass gap, and v (≈ 5 × 10 5 m/s single band contributes to the SdH oscillations: We note that the conventional (parabolic band) LK formula and its Dirac version is the amplitude reduction factor from disorder scattering, where T d is the Dingle temperature characterizing the level of disorder,and k B is the Boltzmann constant. R T = ξ/ sinh (ξ) is the amplitude reduction factor from temperature, where ξ = 2π 2 k B T μ/ eBv 2 . φ B is the Berry phase, and δ = ±π/4 in 3D materials. Now we consider the Zeeman effect, which splits a spindegenerate band into two, each with a different Fermi surface extremal cross-sectional area: S F ↑/↓ = S F ± αB, and Berry phase: φ B↑/↓ = φ B ±φ s eB + φ B + π + δ cos α e + φ s Interestingly S F and φ B , which are the common (spin-independent) part of the two spin bands before the Zeeman splitting, determines the period and phase offset of the quantum oscillations; while the difference between the two spin bands determines the amplitude. For systems with nontrivial Berry curvature, the Berry phase splitting φ s along the Fermi surface will be nonzero. In particular, for a Dirac electron system, we find (see Methods) Defining the Zeeman effect-induced SdH amplitude reduction factor: R s = cos α e + φ s , we derive for the Dirac band: Further, the coefficient α is computed from the g-factor tensor obtained from first principle calculations at given values of ∆ and μ F . Under large compressive and large tensile strains, we observed approximately single SdH oscillation frequencies and a monotonic decay of SdH oscillation amplitude over increasing 1/B, suggesting that SdH oscillations are dominated by single bands there. The linear dependence of the LL indices on 1/B (Fig. More generally, the SdH oscillations show a complex 1/B dependence which can be modeled considering contributions from two bands: ∆R = ∆R 1 + ∆R 2 . Here band 1 is a Dirac band with a common Berry phase of π for its two spins bands and hence a overall SdH phase which is much smaller than π (Fig. Next we focus on the impact of Zeeman effect on SdH oscillation amplitude (R s ). Experimentally we obtain R s at every strain by quantitative simulation of the SdH oscillations. We then compare the results with the theoretical expectation: R s = cos α e + φ s . Here α e , which is associated with the splitting of extremal cross-sectional area of the Fermi surface, follows (see Methods): (5) We adopt the g-factors for the s and p orbitals g p,z = 9.66, g s,z = -6.45, as computed from first-principle calculations (DFT-mBJ) The significant strain-tunability of the spin-dependent Berry phase φ s is shown in Fig. In conclusion, we have carried out a magnetotransport study on the evolution of band topology and nontrvial Berry phase over strain-tunable band parameters in ZrTe 5 . The strain-dependent SdH oscillations allow direct mapping of the closing and reopening of the Dirac band mass gap, which is consistent with a WTI-STI transition in ZrTe 5 . Moreover we observed the non-trivial Berry phase and its dependence on band parameters over the transition. Such a spin-dependent Berry phase is generic and intrinsic to Dirac band structure, and is a critical factor in modeling Zeeman effect in SdH oscillations in topological materials. The samples studied in this work are ZrTe 5 microcrystals mechanically exfoliated onto flexible Polyimide substrates (Fig. To avoid degradation of the material from ambient exposure, the crystals are exfoliated and press-contacted on predefined gold electrodes on 120μm-thick Polyimide substrates in Ar environment, and are encapsulated with poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) which both protects the crystals from degradation and facilitates the application of strain. A detailed description on the sample fabrication and on the contact/crystal interface can be found in reference To compute the effect of Zeeman coupling on quantum oscillations, we study the k•p Hamiltonian near Γ, which is an anisotropic gapped Dirac Hamiltonian in the basis |p, 1 2 , |p, -1 2 , |s, 1 2 , |s, -1 2 , where ± 1 2 refers to the z-component of spin. In Eq. ( where all bands are doubly-degenerate due to the combination of time-reversal and inversion symmetry. The eigenvectors are given by where u 1 = (1, 0) T , u 2 = (0, 1) T and we have defined the rescaled coordinates p i = v i k i /v. The Zeeman coupling for the four-band model is: where g s,p x,y,z are the matrix-valued g-factors for the s and p orbitals, which are anisotropic due to the crystal symmetry and which differ from their bare value due to coupling with all the other bands not in the four-band model. To compute the quantum oscillations, we must downfold this four-band model into the two bands at the Fermi level. We seek an effective g-factor for the two degenerate bands that make up the Fermi surface, such that when projected onto those bands, the Zeeman Hamiltonian takes the form: where μ B = e 2me is the Bohr magneton and m, m index the two bands at the Fermi surface. The effective g-factor has two contributions: where g 0 is the projection of g s and g p (defined by H Z 0 ) onto the two conduction bands at the Fermi level and g D is an extra orbital contribution that we will describe below. For a magnetic field in the z direction, using the expressions for the conduction band eigenstates from Eq. ( where the Pauli matrix σ z acts in the basis of the two bands at the Fermi level. Ultimately, we will only need the g-factor at the extremum of the Fermi surface, where p z = 0 and v 2 (p 2 x + p 2 y ) = μ 2 -∆ 2 . In this case, where γ = μ ∆ is a dimensionless constant. Returning to the second term in Eq. ( where ψ m,k are the eigenvectors of Eq. ( The first step to evaluate g D is to find the derivatives of the eigenstates: where we have dropped the subscript/superscript ± on E and ψ to reduce clutter. After some algebra, it follows that: which yields the matrix element The terms symmetric under the exchange of the i and j indices (i.e., the last two terms) will cancel in the sum in Eq. ( where g L ≡ mev 2 2 ∆ and γ ≡ E ∆ are dimensionless constants. We now simplify this result by taking B in the zdirection and restricting to the boundary of the extremal cross-section, where p z = 0 and v 2 (p 2 x + p 2 y ) = μ 2 -∆ 2 . Plugging this into Eq. ( The total effective g-factor at the extremal crosssection of the Fermi surface is found by combining Eqs. ( 