Electrical manipulation of spin textures inside antiferromagnets represents a new opportunity for developing spintronics with superior speed and high device density. Injecting spin currents into antiferromagnets and realizing efficient spin-orbit-torque-induced switching is however still challenging due to the complicated interactions from different sublattices. Meanwhile, because of the diminishing magnetic susceptibility, the nature and the magnitude of current-induced magnetic dynamics remain poorly characterized in antiferromagnets, whereas spurious effects further complicate experimental interpretations. In this work, by growing a thin film antiferromagnetic insulator, α-Fe2O3, along its non-basal plane orientation, we realize a configuration where an injected spin current can robustly rotate the Néel vector within the tilted easy plane, with an efficiency comparable to that of classical ferromagnets. The spin-orbit torque effect stands out among other competing mechanisms and leads to clear switching dynamics. Thanks to this new mechanism, in contrast to the usually employed orthogonal switching geometry, we achieve bipolar antiferromagnetic switching by applying positive and negative currents along the same channel, a geometry that is more practical for device applications. By enabling efficient spinorbit torque control on the antiferromagnetic ordering, the tilted easy plane geometry introduces a new platform for quantitatively understanding switching and oscillation dynamics in antiferromagnets. Spin-orbit torque (SOT) switching of antiferromagnets has been extensively pursued recently with both antiferromagnet single layers owning staggered spin torques Efficient control over the Néel vector can be potentially achieved if the injected spins form a finite angle with the magnetic easy plane. As shown in Fig. α-Fe2O3 is a well-studied antiferromagnetic insulator with high Néel point (955 K) and easy-plane anisotropy at room temperature To reduce the strain from the lattice mismatch between α-Fe2O3 and α-Al2O3 (~5.8%), we deposit 1 nm of α-Cr2O3 prior to α-Fe2O3 as the seeding layer, which has an intermediate lattice constant. From magnetometry and electrical measurement as discussed below, we found that the 1 nm α-Cr2O3 behaves inactively, making no observable contribution to magnetic dynamics. The crystal structure of the α-Fe2O3 film is examined using X-ray diffraction (XRD) [Fig. We characterize magnetic properties of the films using superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) magnetometer at 300 K. When a field is applied in the film plane along the cleavage edge of the sample, we see a typical -loop from canted antiferromagnetism [Fig. direction. This anomalous-Hall-like signal may originate from magnetic proximity or crystal Hall effect The equilibrium orientation of , hence under an applied can be determined by considering the magnetic free energy = + + + . Here, the Zeeman energy, exchange energy, energy due to DM interaction and anisotropy energy are written as where and are the vacuum permeability and the saturation magnetization of one sublattice, and are effective fields from the exchange and the DM interaction, and are the energy densities for easy-plane and easy-axis anisotropy. Because of the very strong easy-plane anisotropy, and are mostly confined within the C-plane in our experiment. As an approximation, we only consider their degrees of freedom within the C-plane, quantified by the two angles and δ defined in Fig. For a given , we can determine the equilibrium angle , through We quantify the SOT by detecting the current-induced Néel vector rotation. As shown in Fig. When ∆ is caused by an alternating current (a.c.), a change in with the same frequency appears, therefore a voltage at the second harmonic frequency appears ( ), which can be used to determine the SOT, as has been widely used in studies on ferromagnets To quantify the SOT, we model in an antiferromagnet. In general, can be expressed as = • ∆ ( ), where is directly derived from SMR's formula, and the tilting angle at peak current ∆ ( ) is determined through the balance condition between the SOT and the torque due to the magnetic free energy ( ) + ( ) = 0 . Under the approximation that the current-induced angle change is negligible due to the very strong exchange field, can be calculated as (Supplemental Information): where ( ) and ( ) are the damping-like and field-like effective fields on individual sublattices as in Fig. We further verify the SOT origin of the measured signal with control experiments by flipping the current and voltage terminals, i.e., applying current along and measuring voltage along as defined in Fig. While the harmonic measurement with a.c. provides a quantitative method to characterize the SOT, the rotation of can also be more intuitively captured through a direct current (d.c.) measurement. As illustrated in Fig. Using the tilted easy plane geometry, we also observe a current-induced switching. Fig. shows measured after applying positive and negative current pulses along the same channel. Under high current (| | ≥ 13 mA), finite differences in the remnant values develop after pulses with opposite polarities are applied. During this measurement, a constant close to the spin-flop field is applied along the -axis, to compensate the in-plane anisotropy field and assist the current-induced switching The bipolar switching in Fig. To conclude, we experimentally demonstrate current-induced magnetic rotation and switching in an antiferromagnetic insulator with a tilted easy plane. In our experiment, spins injected along an oblique angle with respect to the easy plane provide an efficient mechanism to reorient Néel vectors. Aside from this titled easy plane geometry, the finite angle can also be achieved by using SHE materials with reduced symmetry like WTe2, Mn3GaN and Mn3Ir, where an out-of-film-surface spin component can be generated from the non-conventional SHE 