We investigated the superconducting properties of the topological superconductor α-PdBi2 at ambient and external pressures up to 1.77 GPa using muon spin rotation (μSR) experiments. The ambient pressure measurements evince a fully gapped s-wave superconducting state in the bulk of the specimen. AC magnetic susceptibility and μSR measurements manifest a continuous suppression of Tc with increasing pressure. In parallel, we observed a significant decrease of superfluid density by ∼20% upon application of external pressure. Remarkably, the superfluid density follows linear relation with Tc which was found before in some unconventional topological superconductors and hole doped cuprates. This finding signals a possible crossover from BEC to BCS in α-PdBi2. Topological superconductors (TSCs) possess a full pairing gap in the bulk and gapless surface states protected by time-reversal symmetry (TRS) Recent ARPES results In this letter, we report the results of our detailed μSR experiments on α-PdBi 2 at ambient and under different hydrostatic pressures. Ambient pressure measurements substantiate single gap s-wave superconductivity with preserved TRS state in this compound. Furthermore, by performing AC-magnetic susceptibility and μSR experiments under different hydrostatic pressures, we explored the pressure-T c phase diagram which is noticeably different from the previous report by Zhou et al. Pieces consisting of many single crystals (not cleaved) of α-PdBi 2 obtained using melt growth technique Figure The temperature dependence of σ sc (T ) for α-PdBi 2 measured at an applied field of μ 0 H = 10 mT is presented in Fig. Furthermore, we also studied the field dependence of TF-relaxation rate σ sc (B). Figure Figure2(a) and (b) show the real (χ ) and imaginary (χ ) components of the magnetic ac-susceptibility (ACS) of α-PdBi 2 . The data in Fig. Remarkably, the ratio σsc(p,T =0) σsc(p=0,T =0) , which is a direct measure of relative change of the superfluid density, is decreased considerably by ∼20% at 1.77 GPa. Such a significant reduction in superfluid density clearly indicates unconventional superconductivity in α-PdBi 2 as in conventional BCS superconductors, the superfluid density either exhibits very weak pressure dependency or remains independent of pressure as highlighted by the horizontal dashed line in Fig. In unconventional superconductors one of the major factors determining T c is the superfluid density. Considering the linear dependency between T c and superfluid density, we speculate that the suppression of T c is a result of reduction of superfluid density in this compound. An- other possibility to observe negative pressure effect on T c , is related to any weakening of the anharmonic electronlattice interactions with increasing pressure The pressure effect on superconducting properties of α-PdBi 2 reported by Zhou et al. In summary, we have performed TF and ZF-μSR measurements on a topological superconductor candidate α-PdBi 2 . TF-μSR results reveal absence of any nodes in the superconducting gap structure of this compound and it can be best described by a fully gaped s-wave model. Observation of s-wave superconductivity in this system along with its unique band structure and Fermi surface topology, as demonstrated previously, endorse this compound as a promising candidate in search for Majorana zero modes. Further, our ZF-μSR study manifests that time reversal symmetry is preserved in the superconducting state of α-PdBi 2 . Interestingly, ACS and TF-μSR experiments under different hydrostatic pressures, reveal a negative pressure effect on T c which is suppressed at an rate of -0.10 k/GPa, upon application of pressure up to 1.77 GPa. Notably, the superconducting gap value and the superfluid density also decrease with increasing pressure up to 1.77 GPa. Most intriguing observation of the present study is the linear dependence between T c and superfluid density manifesting unconventional superconductivity in this compound. This also signals possible crossover from BEC to BCS in this compound. Further experimental and theoretical works under hydrostatic pressure condition are called for to fully comprehend the pressure dependent phase diagram of α-PdBi 2 . Our results on α-PdBi 2 indicating a substantial content of novel physics in this compound opens more prospects for studies on TSC and its potential application. In order to characterize the single crystals of α-PdBi 2 , we performed preliminary investigation using single crystal X-ray diffraction, electrical resistivity (ρ) and heat capacity (C) measurements. One small plate like piece (5 mm×6 mm×1 mm) consisting of many single crystals (not cleaved) was mounted on a silver holder for measurements at HAL-9500 (see Fig 