The underlying nonlinear mechanisms behind the operation of travelling-wave parametric amplifiers (TWPAs) are important in determining their performance in terms of added noise, maximum gain, and bandwidth. We describe a method of characterising the underlying nonlinearity of a superconducting material in terms of its dissipative-reactive ratio and the response time of the underlying microscopic processes. We describe and calculate the different behaviour arising from the equilibrium supercurrent nonlinearity, which has low dissipation and fast response time, and the non-equilibrium heating nonlinearity, which has high dissipation and slow response time. We have fabricated TWPAs based on Al and Ti, and characterised their nonlinearities using our analysis. For both Al and Ti, the measured dissipative-reactive ratios and response times are quantitatively similar to predictions for the non-equilibrium heating nonlinearity. We were able to obtain more than 20 dB of peak power gain, although only over a narrow bandwidth of a few kilohertz. Our method of characterising the underlying nonlinearities could also be useful in the understanding and design of other superconducting nonlinear devices such as parametric up-converters, kinetic inductance Fourier transform spectrometers, and resonator parametric amplifiers. Superconducting travelling-wave parametric amplifiers (TWPAs) are low-noise cryogenic amplifiers based on thin-film superconducting transmission lines where I * and I * ,4 are the scales of the quadratic and quartic orders of nonlinearity respectively It is important to understand the nonlinear mechanisms behind the amplification process for any specific combination of material and geometry. In particular, the dissipative aspect and the response time of a mechanism can have profound impact on the amplification performance of a device. Firstly, any increase in dissipation with applied power will decrease the power gain. Secondly, an increase in dissipated power may also cause heating of the device, thereby further degrading its performance. Thirdly, a dissipative nonlinearity is likely to alter the noise behaviour of the device, e.g. altering the thermal noise output by changing the level of dissipation, or by resulting in additional modulation of the noise. Understanding the magnitude of the dissipative nonlinearity is therefore important in determining if a particular TWPA can, in theory, achieve amplification and approach the quantum limit In this study, we present a theory and measurements to investigate the nonlinear mechanisms of Al and Ti TWPAs. We characterise these mechanisms in terms of dissipative-reactive ratios and response times. Measurements of both parameters can be performed using the same transmission line structure as the travelling-wave amplifier itself, as opposed to requiring a separate geometry such as a resonator. We calculate the expected values of dissipative-reactive ratios of both the equilibrium supercurrent nonlinearity as well as the non-equilibrium heating nonlinearity. We also present a response time model of the nonlinear inductance, and show that the model predicts characteristic features in the measured gain profiles, such as bandwidth limitations and postgain dips. The effects of reactive, dissipative, and ratelimited nonlinearity are also discussed extensively, in the context of resonator parametric amplifiers, in an upcoming paper In this work, we focus on two important effects of currents that have been widely observed in superconducting films In both the BCS theory of superconductivity and the Ginzburg-Landau (GL) theory, the presence of a supercurrent requires the Cooper pairs to have a non-zero superfluid velocity. The equilibrium supercurrent nonlinearity arises as a result of modifications to the superconducting properties in the presence of this superfluid velocity. This nonlinearity can be thought of as an equilibrium effect since the superconducting properties are equilibrium solutions of the BCS/GL theories in the presence of a superfluid velocity term. The supercurrent nonlinearity manifests itself in a variety of measurable properties, such as modified quasiparticle density of states Non-equilibrium heating nonlinearity is another nonlinear effect that emerges in the presence of a strong RF current. Measurements of superconducting resonators have shown that microwave readout power at sub-gap frequencies results in an increased quasiparticle population that contributes to noise and shortens quasiparticle lifetime While these two types of nonlinear phenomena have different origins, a superconductor that conducts a strong RF current will unavoidably display both effects with different magnitudes. It can be difficult to distinguish the two phenomena if one looks at the reactive nonlinearity only: in both theories, the kinetic inductance has the same functional form L k = L k,0 [1 + (I/I * ) 2 ], keeping the lowest order term on current. The sign of the quadratic term is the same for both effects since both nonlinearities increase the kinetic inductance. The two types of nonlinearities can, however, be distinguished by considering their effects on the ratio between the dissipative and reactive nonlinearities and the frequency profile of the wave-mixing processes. These important differences will be discussed in detail in the main body of this paper. The relative importance of the two phenomena at a particular readout power level is determined by their onset powers, which is the power required for each nonlinearity to result in the same change in the magnitude of the complex conductivity. For the equilibrium supercurrent nonlinearity, in the limit where the kinetic inductance ratio is close to unity, the onset power can be related straightforwardly to I * through the characteristic impedance Z 0 . For the non-equilibrium heating nonlinearity, the onset power can be calculated using the Rothwarf-Taylor equations or more detailed nonequilibrium modelling Whilst we have focused on understanding the nonlinearity of a superconductor conceptually in terms of two well-established models, there are other interesting models of nonlinearity published in recent decades A general observation in nature is that dissipative and reactive effects are often related, for example through causality The effect of the equilibrium nonlinearity on the dissipative-reactive ratio can be calculated using the analysis routine described in where θ is a complex variable dependent on energy E which parameterises the superconducting properties, N 0 is the single spin density of states at the Fermi surface, V is the interaction potential, ∆ is the superconducting order parameter, ω D is the Debye energy, T is the temperature of the superconducting film, D is the diffusivity constant, given by D = σ N /(N 0 e 2 ) Although not needed for this study, solutions of superconducting properties in term of Γ can be expressed in terms of supercurrent density j by: where q cp = 2e is the charge of a Cooper pair, v s is the superfluid velocity, and N N,cp is the number density of Cooper pairs. At absolute zero temperature, the critical current density is reached when Γ = ∆ 0 /4, where ∆ 0 is the density of states gap at absolute zero, given in the BCS theory by ∆ 0 = 1.764 k B T c , where k B is the Boltzmann constant. Thus the range of physically meaningful Γ/∆ 0 lies between 0 and 0.25 for this study. Numerically, the Usadel equations were used to calculate the effect of Γ on the densities of states cos θ and sin θ. Afterwards, the densities of states were integrated using Nam's equations The effect of non-equilibrium heating can be calculated by considering the change in σ 1 and σ 2 in response to a change in quasiparticle number density due to pairbreaking. This topic has been well studied in the context of kinetic inductance detectors and the results are as fol-lows where I 0 and K 0 are the modified Bessel functions of the first and second kind respectively, is the reduced Planck constant, ω is the angular frequency, and δn qp is the change in quasiparticle number density. Equation ( where α = 1.764. Figure The model of nonlinearity described by equation ( where L is the total inductance, L 0 is the unperturbed inductance in the absence of nonlinearity, L NL is the nonlinear contribution to inductance, and t is time. The mathematical form of equation ( Thus in the limit where the nonlinear mechanism is instantaneous, we recover the familiar form of inductance nonlinearity. Here L NL,0 (t) is the instantaneous nonlinear inductance. where ω is the angular frequency. Substituting equation (15) into equation ( where F (ω) can be interpreted as a frequency filter applied to the nonlinear inductance as a result of the response time of the underlying microscopic processes. It is important to note that the filter is applied to perturbations in inductance and not directly to current or voltage: it places limitations on the bandwidth of wave-mixing instead of the maximum frequency of transmission. Figure The filter F (ω) can be straightforwardly applied to coupled mode numerical analyses of wave-mixing in TW-PAs, such as the models presented in In general, current on a transmission line I can be decomposed into its modes of propagation I n such that where suffix n labels each propagating mode, ω n is the angular frequency, γ n is the complex propagation constant in the absence of inductive nonlinearity, and A n (z) is the position varying amplitude of the current mode. Here the exponential term contains the propagation behaviour of a linear transmission line, and the A n (z) term contains the effect of the nonlinearity. Equation ( The transmission line model of a TWPA can be analysed using the telegrapher's equations to give We shall refer to the first term as the linear propagation term, and the second term as the nonlinear mixing term. The above equation can be expressed in term of the propagating modes, giving The response time frequency filter can be applied by noting In summary, the coupled differential equations governing the evolution of the propagating modes are modified by applying the response time frequency filter multiplicatively to the nonlinear mixing term. At this stage, the system of equations can be simplified and solved using the usual routine Another characteristic feature demonstrated by figure 4 is the gain dip at f -f 0 ∼ 60 kHz. This effect can be attributed to the π phase flipping of F (ω) when the angular frequency crosses from ω ≪ -1/τ to ω ≫ 1/τ . The output signal consists of the original signal I s,0 and the signal generated by nonlinear inductance I s,NL . As the two contributions are added together, the phase flipping at signal frequencies higher than the pump frequency induces a destructive interference effect. This interference effect is hidden when I s,NL ≪ I s,0 or I s,NL ≫ I s,0 . It is obvious on the gain profile when I s,NL ∼ I s,0 . If, in simulations, a new filter is imposed such that F new (ω) = |F (ω)|, the dip in gain disappears. This confirms the gain dip is related to the phase-shift introduced by the filtering. The results in this section were obtained from measurements of superconducting Al and Ti TWPA devices at a temperature of 0.1 K. Al and Ti were chosen because calculations based on the BCS theory have shown that these materials have low onset power with respect to the equilibrium supercurrent nonlinearity Films were deposited onto 2-inch SEMI standard Si wafers by DC magnetron sputtering at a base pressure of 2 × 10 -10 Torr or below. Ti films were deposited at ambient temperature and Al films were deposited after substrate cooling to liquid nitrogen temperatures. The films were patterned via a lift-off process using an imagereversal mode photoresist. The samples were attached to the cold stage of an adiabatic demagnetization refrigerator and the temperature was monitored using a calibrated ruthenium oxide thermometer. The measure-ments of power transmission and phase shift were obtained using a vector network analyser (VNA). In this study, the power transmission T out is defined as the ratio between the power received at the VNA P out and the power delivered by the VNA into the cryogenic system P in . It includes both the effect of the TWPA under test and the attenuation due to coaxial cables in the cryostat, which was about 55 dB at 8.0 GHz. When all quantities are measured in units of dB, T out is given by T out = P out -P in . The dissipative-reactive ratio of a device can be inferred from measurements of its nonlinear power attenuation and nonlinear phase shift in response to increasing readout power. Nonlinear power attenuation T α is a function of the input power P in , and is defined as T α (P in ) = T out,0 -T out (P in ), where T out,0 is the power transmission ratio at very low input power below the onset of nonlinearity. The phase shift ∆Φ gives the phase difference between the output signal and the input signal. The nonlinear phase shift ∆Φ NL is given by ∆Φ NL (P in ) = ∆Φ 0 -∆Φ(P in ), where ∆Φ 0 is the phase shift at very low input power below the onset of nonlinearity. From transmission line theory, for small perturbations, it can be shown that where L is the length of the transmission line, δα is the change in attenuation constant, δβ is the change in phase constant. δα and δβ are related to the change in full propagation constant δγ by δα + iδβ = δγ. Further, for a small input power, it can be shown that where C geom is a constant of proportionality arising from device geometry. Thus κ for a particular device can be deduced by relating its nonlinear attenuation T α to its nonlinear phase shift ∆Φ NL . Figure Figure shows the least squares fit using the non-equilibrium heating model. The bath temperature was fixed at the experimentally measured value T = 0.15 K, leaving the transition temperature T c as the only fitting variable. We have assumed that Ti is a BCS superconductor and can be described by ∆ 0 = 1.764 k B T c . The best fit transition temperature is 0.44 K with a 90% confidence interval of 0.30 K to 0.66 K. The range of behaviour described by the 90% confidence interval is shown by the light blue region surrounding the best fit line. As seen in the figure, the magnitude and frequency trend of κ are similar to those predicted by non-equilibrium heating. Small deviations to the model may be the result of 1) on-chip heating due to measurements performed at high powers In this study, the power gain G of a device is defined as the ratio between the output signal power transmission in the presence of a strong pump current T out,P generated by a signal generator and the output signal power transmission in the absence of a strong pump current T out,0 . Since both T out,P and T out,0 are measured in units of dB, the power gain is given by G = T out,P -T out,0 . Figure Figure Figure We have described a method of characterising the underlying nonlinearity of a superconducting material by its dissipative-reactive ratio and the response time of its nonlinear mechanism. Both quantities are impor-tant in determining the performance of TWPAs, such as in terms of added noise, maximum gain, and bandwidth. We have discussed how different nonlinearities, for example the equilibrium supercurrent nonlinearity and the non-equilibrium heating nonlinearity, can manifest themselves very differently in terms of their dissipativereactive ratios and response times. These different characteristics provide a way of experimentally distinguishing the action of different nonlinear mechanisms. Experimentally, the dissipative-reactive ratio can be deduced from measurements of attenuation and phase shift as functions of input power level; whereas the response time of the underlying nonlinearity can be extracted from measurements of gain as a function of signal frequency. We have fabricated TWPAs based on Al and Ti, and characterised their nonlinearities using our analysis. Our results suggest that for both Al and Ti, the dominant underlying nonlinear mechanism differ significantly from the equilibrium supercurrent nonlinearity. Instead, the measured dissipative-reactive ratios and response times are quantitatively similar to predictions for the non-equilibrium heating nonlinearity. Currently in the literature, all TWPAs that have successfully reported broad-band amplification are based on alloy or amorphous superconductors such as NbTiN, NbN, TiN, and WSi Beyond the immediate context of TWPAs, our method of characterising nonlinearities can prove useful in the analysis of other superconducting nonlinear devices. Examples of these devices include parametric up-converters 