A novel design has been proposed for a facile and rapid build-up of highly tailorable nanostructured multishells on metal oxide particles (graphene/TiOx@TiO2) under a dry inert atmosphere to maximize the visible-light photocatalytic performance. We also thoroughly and systematically investigated the as-prepared nanostructured particle surface and the mechanisms of the extraordinary in-situ graphene growth on the TiOx@TiO2 nanoparticles achieved by a rapid-concomitant reaction in the metal oxide (TiO2)/polymer (polymethyl methacrylate) interface under microwave irradiation. The as-prepared composite materials are also found to perform a better photocatalytic activity in comparison to the traditional synthesis pathway for degradation of organic pollutants under visible light, associated with the synergetic effects of homo-/hetero-junction on TiO2. report that the extraordinary in-situ graphene growth on the TiOx@TiO2 nanoparticles results from a rapid concomitant reaction assisted by a MW electric field on the organic polymer (polymethyl methacrylate; PMMA) / metal oxide (TiO2) interface. Furthermore, the photocatalyst with homo-/hetero-junction shows significant enhancement by the synergetic effects on the photo-degradation of Rhodamine B (RhB) under visible light compared to TiO2/nanocarbon composites through a synthesis using resistive furnace heating. Furthermore, the difference in the formation mechanism between the two methods is discussed in depth. The representative morphology of the composite particles obtained by MW-assisted reaction is shown by HR-TEM image with SAED pattern in Fig. Examining the long-range structural order, neither TiO2 phase transitions nor impurity phases could be detected by XRD (Fig. The XPS spectra in Fig. Raman spectroscopy reveals notable differences between the structure of the graphene shell obtained by MW heating and conventional heating. Fig. The Ti2p spectra display a shoulder peak attesting a significant concentration of Ti 2+ . These O1s and Ti2p spectra are consistent with an effective carbon atom doping of TiO2. The plot of C-dopant concentration as a function of Ti 2+ species (calculated by XPS) shows that only those materials made using MW-500 deviate from the trend line (see Fig. Based on the results and discussion above, we propose the possible formation mechanisms of graphene-TiOx multi-nanoshell TiO2 via the MW-assisted reaction in four steps (Fig. Values of k determined from the slope of the linear curves in Fig. As conclusion, we propose a novel chemical reaction pathway for rapid build-up of the single-nano sized graphene/TiOx multi-shells on TiO2 by MW-assisted concomitant reaction on the metal oxide / polymer interface in inert atmosphere conditions. The concomitant reaction includes rapid polymer chain cleavage accompanying oxygen abstraction from the neighbouring oxide particle surface, resulting in faster growth of graphene shells with oxygen incorporation on the modified TiO2 following the direct formation of small molecules with C=C and aromatic rings and dissociative adsorption on the formed TiOx. This mechanism seems supported by the action of the MW electric field and provides a new insight for composite materials design using organic/ceramics interface, which is not taking place in resistive furnace heating. Furthermore, the visible-light photocatalytic performance of these TiO2 particles with homo-/ hetero-junction is enhanced by the synergetic effects between the following three factors; significant enhancement of the light absorption capacity, the adsorption capacity of organic molecular, and the efficiency of excited carriers spatial separation. 