The Ginzburg-Landau approach postulates an energy density, together with an interpretation for the supercurrent, and invokes Ohm's law. We consider quasi-one-dimensional nonuniform superconducting loops, either smooth or piecewise uniform, that enclose a magnetic flux, above the critical temperature. We evaluate the averages of the current and of the power per unit length delivered by the electric field due to thermal fluctuations. We consider three averages: canonical ensemble average, canonical ensemble in the reciprocal space, and time-average using a time-dependent model. All the evaluations imply that heat is imparted to part of the loop and removed in other part, despite the assumption that the loop is at uniform temperature. The second law of thermodynamics asserts that within a system at uniform temperature there is no heat flux on average, no matter what its Hamiltonian is. Here we examine the case of a non-uniform 1D superconducting loop that encloses a noninteger number of magnetic flux quanta, slightly above its critical temperature T c (a situation beyond the realms considered in Refs. The questions which we intend to answer will be spelled out in the following two Sections; in Sections IV-VI we develop and apply three different techniques for the evaluation of the quantities of interest, and in Section VII we summarize our results. If q 1 , ...q f are the coordinates of the phase space that describe the microstate of a system, F (q 1 , ...q f ) is the energy of this system, and every part of the system is in equilibrium with a heat bath at temperature T , then the average value of any quantity Q(q 1 , ...q f ) is predicted to be Q = Q(q 1 , ...q f )e -F/k B T dq 1 , ...dq f e -F/k B T dq 1 , ...dq f , where k B is Boltzmann's constant and the integrals extend over the entire phase space. The system we consider consists of the electrons that are able to flow around a superconducting loop. For the sake of definiteness, let us also describe its environment: we may regard it as composed of four parts, i.e. the lattice of ions that form the loop, the fluid in which the loop is immersed, and the black body electromagnetic fields within the loop and in the fluid. For a situation in which the temperature and the applied magnetic field are controlled, the static Ginzburg-Landau (GL) formalism invokes a complex field ψ, known as the "order parameter," and the magnetic potential A, which describe the microstate of a superconductor and play the role of the coordinates q 1 , ...q f in Sec. II A. GL attributes to superconductivity the free energy density The total free energy of the system is the sum of the integral of the superconducting free energy density over the superconducting sample, the integral of the magnetic energy density over the entire space, and a term that does not depend on ψ or A. Ignoring fluctuations, the equilibrium values of ψ and A are those that minimize the total free energy and are compatible with the constraints of the experimental setup The GL free energy can be obtained from microscopic theory as an expansion, assuming that the order parameter is small. GL is intended to be a minimal model that retains only those terms that are essential. If α < 0, then the quartic term β|ψ| 4 /2 has to be kept in order to obtain a free energy that is bounded from below. However, we will deal with a case in which α > 0 and therefore the quartic term will be dropped, except for Sec. VI D. We consider a superconducting loop of perimeter L, in which the linear dimensions of the cross section are much shorter than L and than the typical distances over which ψ and A vary; in this case the system becomes one dimensional and the position is described by the arc length Although we consider a situation above the critical temperature, the order parameter does not vanish because of thermal fluctuations. Neglecting terms of order O(|ψ| 4 ), the GL energy of the system can be written as where A is the tangential component of A and w(x) is the cross section of the superconducting wire. We will assume that the magnetic self-inductance of the loop is negligible, as could be the case of a wide thin ribbon that surrounds a region with flattened cross section. As a consequence, the total magnetic flux will be just the applied flux. Consistently, we will assume that the contribution of the current (and therefore of ψ and A) to the magnetic Gibbs free energy is negligible in comparison to F . The magnetic potential can be eliminated from (2) by defining where x 1 is arbitrary and x can be extended beyond the range 0 ≤ x ≤ L by identifying x + L with x. Using (3), (2) becomes It follows from (3) that ψ(x + L) = ψ(x) exp(2πiΦ/Φ 0 ), with Φ = A(x)dx, so that ψ is multivalued unless Φ/Φ 0 is integer. Although the microstates of the system are described by two fields, ψ and A, the accepted averaging procedure Let us now fix some of the parameters in the system to be considered. The length L of the loop, its electrical conductivity σ, its resistance R (regarding the loop as an open circuit) and the temperature T will be fixed. Unless explicitly stated, we will also fix α = 2 /2mL 2 , so that the coherence length (the length over which ψ changes significantly) will equal the perimeter of the loop. As mentioned above, the total flux will be the applied flux, which we will fix as Φ = Φ 0 /4, so that ψ(x + L) = i ψ(x). These values define a typical cross section w 0 and a dimensionless quantity γ: Several possibilities for the cross section w(x) will be considered. A smooth profile will be a family of discrete profiles will be described in the following section. We divide the loop into N segments of length L/N, centered at x = x k := (λ + k -1)L/N with 0 ≤ λ < 1 and k = 1, ...N. The cross section of segment k will be In the limit of large N, this profile becomes the smooth profile Let us now build a model for the energy of this system, motivated by the GL energy (4). Instead of the field ψ(x), we assign the value ψk to the entire segment k; the derivative d ψ/dx is replaced by the finite difference N( ψk+1 -ψk )/L and we define where w k + is some average between w k and w k+1 , and ψN+1 = exp(2πiΦ/Φ 0 ) ψ1 . We have studied two possibilities for w k + : We still require discretizations for ψ and A. We assign the magnetic potential A + k (respectively ) and define In terms of ψ and A, the energy is Although the systems described here approach the smooth loop only in the limit of large N, any of them, for any N, λ and {w k + }, can be regarded as a self-consistent model that should obey the laws of thermodynamics. Unlike "classical" equilibrium-thermodynamics, statistical mechanics can deal not only with state functions, but also with transport quantities such as the total current and heat transport. Expressions for these quantities will be obtained in this section. In the case of the smooth loop, the supercurrent density is given by [4] Although the expression for J S looks the same as the expected current density of a charged particle described by the Schroedinger equation, we should note that in the Schroedinger case this expression follows from charge conservation, whereas in the GL case it follows from variation of the energy functional with respect to A(x). Similarly, in the discrete case, in the half-segment where the magnetic potential is A ± k , the supercurrent density is given by , where the meaning of partial derivative is that the magnetic potential in the other regions of the loop, and also {ψ j }, are kept constant. Using We denote by I the total current around the loop. As usual, we assume electroneutrality, so that I does not depend on x. By Ohm's law, the electric field is E(x) = [I/w(x) -J S (x)]/σ in the smooth case and in the discrete case. Since the magnetic flux through the loop remains constant, the circulation of the electric field vanishes and the current is in the smooth case and, noting that N k=1 w -1 k = N/w 0 , in the discrete case. The power per unit length delivered by the electric field to the flowing charges is If this power is not taken somewhere else by the supercurrent, it has to be passed as heat to the environment. We note that, since I is uniform and E(x) is conservative, the total power delivered by the electric field is zero. For the sake of definiteness, let us focus our attention on a segment of the lattice of ions close to the position x. If a fraction κ 1 of the work performed by the electric field originates from this segment, and a fraction κ 2 of the heat released by the flowing charges is passed to this segment, then the internal energy of the segment per unit length and time will increase by (κ 2 -κ 1 )P . This energy cannot accumulate at the segment and, since the environment is at uniform temperature, implying that there will be no heat flow on the average, the average of (κ 2 -κ 1 )P has to vanish. κ 1 and κ 2 are not expected to equal one another, because they involve different mechanisms, e.g. the electric field at the segment is influenced by distant segments Since the expression (4) for the energy penalizes the gradient of ψ, at first glance one might think that this gradient vanishes on the average, leading to I = 0, but the gradient cannot vanish because generically ψ(x + L) = ψ(x). If the energy density in (4) were not weighed by w(x), then, by symmetry, the average of this gradient would have uniform size. This uniform situation was considered in The sets {ψ k } and { ψk } cover the same phase space, so that it makes no difference over which of them we average. For further simplification, we diagonalize (8) numerically, taking the form The passage from { ψk } to {φ k } is a rotation in the phase space, and any of them can be used for averaging. The electric field in = 0 in all the cases considered and the values of the average currents obtained in this way are shown in the first two rows of Table The average power per unit length, P ± k , is obtained from Eq. ( Representative results obtained for small values of N are shown in Fig. Table The pairs of numbers in the headings row stand for N and λ. Unless explicitly mentioned, α = 2 /2mL 2 and β = 0 in all figures and tables. . Red: N = 3, λ = 0; black: N = 3, λ = 0.5; blue: N = 4, λ = 0.25. γ is defined in Eq. ( k should vanish identically (as would be the case if I and E ± k were uncorrelated). Instead, we see in Fig. We would like to know whether this disagreement with thermodynamics is a feature of dis-cretization or a property of the GL approach. With this purpose, we investigate the behavior of P ± k as N increases and the smooth limit is approached. Judging by the N-dependence of I , we expect a faster convergence when {w k + } are taken as harmonic means. (The values of I for N = 100 and N = 120 coincide within seven significant figures.) The results are shown in Fig. The strong N-dependence of P (x) , that can even reverse its sign, is related to the coherence length. If we diminish the coherence length by a factor of 2, by setting α = 2 2 /mL 2 , then the crossover found in Fig. Figure In the case of a smooth profile we can write ψ as a modified Fourier series, This sum extends over all integers, but we will take |n| ≤ M, where M will be increased until acceptable convergence is obtained. green: λ = 0.5. The pink segments at x = 0, x = L/2 and x = L mark the limit N → ∞, obtained from extrapolation in Fig. From ( from ( and from ( We can now proceed as in Section IV. We diagonalize (21), so that it takes the form It follows that the only quadratic terms with nonzero average are c * j c j = k B T /f j , and the only quartic terms that contribute are those of the forms Finally, the average of the power per length in ( The values of the average current obtained in this way converge slowly for increasing M. This curve is not expected to coincide with the results obtained in Section IV, because the limits M, N → ∞ have not been reached. Nevertheless, this figure strongly suggests that all the results would coincide in this limit and rebuts the possibility that P (x) ≡ 0. The analysis of the smooth loop enables us to disentangle the influence of the coherence length from that of the segments' length found in Section IV. Figure The evidence of this and the previous section leads us to conclude that the GL approach does not comply with thermodynamics, neither for a discrete nor for a smooth nonuniform loop. We might think of several reservations to this conclusion: (i) Johnson noise has to be added to Eq. ( In this section we discretize time into steps ∆t, sufficiently small to justify regarding the changes of ψ and A during a step as infinitesimal. During a step ∆t, the Johnson noise adds to the electric field in Eq. ( and using (5), Eq. ( Equation ( and adjusting the constant of proportionality to the conductivity of the loop, we recover Eq. ( where Γ is a dimensionless material constant and both the real and the imaginary part of η ψ k are random variables with zero average, variance 1, and normal distribution. Using with TDGL is valid for gapless superconductivity. This is the situation that we are considering, since α > 0. At any rate, in this study we are concerned only with the question of compatibility of TDGL with thermodynamics, and not with other possible limitations. We point out that, since we are considering uniform temperature, we do not have to deal with heat diffusion, as in Eq. ( of We note that γ and ∆t enter (23) only through their ratio; likewise, Γ and ∆t enter (25) only through their product. Therefore, changing γ and Γ while keeping their product unchanged leads to the same evolution, although at a different rate. Anyway, in this study we are interested only in equilibrium values, which should not be affected by the choices of γ and Γ. Unlike the procedure in Sec. IV, which did not include the magnetic potential in the phase space, in TDGL the fields A and ψ stand on the same footing. We may decompose F N,λ in Equation ( The averages in this Section are not obtained from Eq. ( Comparison of the last two rows in Table Evaluation of I E and P required longer periods of time and was limited to small values of N. For N = 5, the evolution of ψ and A was followed during 1.6 × 10 11 steps of ∆t = 2 × 10 -3 γ /k B T and, for N = 8, during 10 11 steps of ∆t = 10 -3 γ /k B T . For every k, ∆F k + /∆t vanished within its statistical uncertainty, which was of the order of 10 -4 (k B T ) 2 /γ and therefore the energy supercurrent and the pair production energy had no significant influence on the transferred powers. Figure Figure When fluctuations are present, any coherent part of the system acquires energies of the order of k B T . The smaller w 0 , the smaller the volume of these parts and the larger the energy densities and the values that |ψ| has to reach. However, GL relies on the premise that the energy density can be expanded in powers of |ψ|. Therefore, the situation we are considering is such that w 0 is sufficiently small to permit a 1D treatment, but sufficiently large to permit invoking GL. In this Section we want to examine whether the nonzero powers that we have found are an artifact of the quadratic form of the energy density that we have kept, and will be wiped out if the quartic term is not neglected. Including this term is straightforward: all we have to do is replace α with α + β| ψ| 2 in Eqs. ( Table The results in Table α is in units of 2 /mL 2 , β is in units of 2 w 0 /mL and the power per length is in units of (k B T 0 ) 2 /γ L. The power per length was evaluated in the region -0. We conclude that, though a large quartic term diminishes the power transfers, it does not eliminate them. Based on the Ginzburg-Landau model for superconductivity, we have evaluated the average local power absorbed (or released) from the fluctuating electric field by the circulating current, in a family of systems that represent the flowing charges in a loop with nonuniform cross section threaded by a magnetic flux. The evaluation was performed following three apparently independent procedures. Our results are independent of the followed procedure, and violate the requirement that in a system in equilibrium with a heat bath at uniform temperature there should be no heat flow. The present study analyzes a gedanken experiment: we have dealt with a question of principle, and not with technical feasibility. Let us now estimate the performance that the Ginzburg-Landau approach predicts for an aluminium loop of perimeter L = 10 -6 m, mean cross section w 0 = 10 -14 m 2 and residual resistivity 10 -8 Ωm. We first check whether the requirements of small coefficients α and β are met. The value of α can in principle be chosen by controlling the temperature; the values of β, according to Table Conceivably, the disagreement of the GL approach with the experimental measurements k ∆ ψk ]