The 3D printing technology offers an innovative approach for developing energy storage devices to create facile and low-cost customized electrodes for modern electronics. Generating electric potential by moving a droplet of ionic solution over two-dimensional (2D) materials is a novel method for rain energy harvesting. This work demonstrated a liquid-solid contact electrification-based 3D printed nanogenerator where raindrop passes through the positively charged ultrathin Gadolinium Telluride (Gd2Te3) sheets. Experimental results showed that voltage as high as ~0.6 V could be generated by moving a droplet of ionic solution on the decorated 3D printed nanogenerator. The output efficiency of the nanogenerator is increased ~400% by enhancing the surface area of copious 3D printed porous structures. Density Functional Theory (DFT) calculations are done, revealing that the high electrical conductivity of (112) surface of Gd2Te3 is due to the p-type charge carriers. Additionally, we illustrate the enhancement of the output performance (~0.8V) by using a graphite rod and arbitrarily manipulating the surface charge. Therefore, this work can open up a new avenue to advance scientific research of Blue energy harvesting and tackle the energy crisis. The limited availability of fossil fuels and their negative environmental impacts has driven the research for sustainable technologies to meet current energy challenges Contactless methods have several advantages, such as loss of liquid mass, surface contamination, and manipulation of the desired precision of the liquid drop. They involve electrowetting, dielectrophoresis, and charge printing 2D Tellurides have attracted much attention in the past few decades due to their topological semimetal nature magnetic properties and superconducting behavior The present work reports the yet unexplored physical properties of 2D Gd2Te3 as energy harvesting materials. The ultrathin Gd2Te3 decorated 3D-printed structures act as a flexible device for energy harvesting by manipulating drops of ionic liquid on its active surface, as shown in Figure Figure The distinct Raman peaks were observed at 100 and 125 cm -1 . All the spectra had the same peak at 100 cm -1 . The significant difference observed was the emergence of a peak at 125 cm -1 as the thickness of the nanosheets was varied To study the performance of electricity generation from ultrathin Gd2Te3 using liquid drop motion, we have fabricated Gd2Te3 based nanogenerator on a 3D printed porous structure. For the fabrication of nanogenerator (Figure Copper metal contacts were placed on the positive and negative electrodes at each end of the material. In Figures Solid-liquid contact electrification of the 2D Gd2Te3 material was tested with different sodium chloride (NaCl) solution concentrations. The output voltage was observed at the end of each electrode connected to a digital oscilloscope. For a standard test, the optimized experimental parameters are volume of NaCl droplet is ~20 μL falling from a distance of 6 cm on the 3D printed nanogenerator, which is inclined at an angle of ~15°. The induced output voltage strongly depends on the concentration of the ions present in the droplets. To measure the dependence of output voltage on the ion concentration of brine solution, pure DI water, 0.5 M NaCl, and 1 M NaCl solutions were allowed to flow on the nanogenerator in a static position. The compared voltages are as shown in Figure The output voltage fluctuation is due to the non-uniform distribution of the triangular 2D Gd2Te3 with the 3D printed substrate. Figure To test the feasibility of as-developed setup as an energy harvesting device, multiple droplets of 1M NaCl solution were moved onto a ~15° titled cell, dropped from a height of 6 cm. Output voltages in the range of ~0.4 to ~0.6 V were recorded (Figure We can thus see that the setup works perfectly for a continuous flow of droplets without losing any efficiency. The inset of Figure As the sliding angle increases, the contact angle also increases (Figure , where e is the primary charge, NA is Avogadro constant, c is the concentration of ions in deionized water/solution, l is the thickness of the ion diffusion, A is the contact area between droplet and Gd2Te3. Therefore, the charge generation strongly depends on the effective contact surface area. To study the effect of contact specific surface area between the droplets and 3D printed structure, a series of 3D printed structures with different geometry were printed such as hexagonal, line, triangular, and random porosity, and their surface porosity are 33.09%, 39.62%, 16.53%, and 68.71%, respectively. The top and isometric views of these 3D printed structures are illustrated in Figure To get insight into the voltage generation on the Gd2Te3 surface, we performed firstprinciples calculations to obtain the electron density difference and conductivity. Bulk Gd2Te3 structure was taken from the Materials Project Database where ρ(Gd2Te3), ρ(Gd2), ρ(Te3) are the charge densities of an isolated system of Gd2Te3, Gd2, Te3, respectively. The charge accumulation-depletion plot (Figure Utilizing the electronic structure of the system, the electronic transport properties have been calculated by solving the semi-classical Boltzmn transport equation within constant scattering time approximation (CSTA), as implemented in Boltztrap code Considering the constant relaxation time approximation (CRTA), i.e, with aτ = 10 fs, the maximum conductivity for p-type charge carriers is 2000 S/m, which is reasonably high conductivity, implying the potential of 2D Gd2Te3 to generate electricity From electro-kinetic theory, it is known that when ionic solutions are brought in contact with solid surfaces, some of the ions adsorb onto the surface due to electrochemical interactions, forming a layer of either cations or anions depending on the surface charge of the material. To balance this out, the charge accumulates on the solid surface Here, ultrathin Gd2Te3 has huge positive surface charges, as found from theory and experimental results. Additionally, the layered nature of the material-coated 3D printed porous structure provides sufficient surface area for the ions from the solution to adsorb. Therefore, positively charged 2D material is adsorbed negative Cl -ions on the surface of the 3D printed cell. To balance this negatively charged layer of Cl -ions, positive charges accumulate near the solid-liquid interface as the electrons move to the opposite side of the 2D material, towards the Gd2Te3-polymer interface, and it suggests that charge transfer is crucial for the generation of overall output voltage. As mentioned earlier, the manipulation of output performance of the device using a graphite rod can be understood as follows. In the presence of a rubbing graphite rod, the graphene layer represents the steady and dynamic states of the NaCl droplet on the Gd2Te3 surface. Considering the different adsorption capacities of ions (Na + , Cl -) on Gd2Te3 and graphene layer, Cl -ions are adsorbing on Gd2Te3, while Na + ions are adsorbing on the graphene surface In summary, we have reported electricity generation using ultrathin 2D Gd2Te3 decorated 3D printed substrate as an active material. The electricity is generated directly during the movement of ionic liquid on 2D Gd2Te3 due to electrostatic charge transfer at the droplet boundary via contact electrification. We have also examined the output performance as a function of height, and it shows a linear increment with height. More importantly, the energy generation capability of Gd2Te3 decorated porous objects is further successfully enhanced with random porosity structures. The DFT calculations confirm the presence of predominant positive polarity over the surface of Gd2Te3 that interacts with a solution to generate electricity with a wide range of Seebeck coefficients. This is further supported by the calculated high electrical conductivity of 2-4x10 17 Ω -1 m -1 s -1 for p-type charge carriers. Additionally, the output voltage was manipulated using a graphite rod by charge accumulations. Therefore, coupling ultrathin 2D materials and 3D printing technology can be a good choice for various applications in energy-harvesting, biomedical sector, sensors, hydrodynamic sensors, etc. 4.1 Synthesis: Bulk Gd2Te3 was fabricated using the vacuum induction melting method. Metal samples of 99.99% purity of Gd and Te were used for preparing the compound containing 4.7 g of Gd and 5.3 g of Te. The alloys were prepared by melting the constituent element at a temperature of 1250°C in a quartz tube using vacuum induction melting in an argon atmosphere and allowed to cool naturally in Ar. 2D sheets of Gd2Te3 were synthesized using ultrasonication-assisted liquid phase exfoliation with 2-propanal (IPA) as solvent. 1.5 g of powdered Gd2Te3 was ultrasonicated at 30 kHz in 300 mL of IPA for 30 minutes. Using 2-Propanol (isopropyl alcohol or IPA) for exfoliation was primarily driven by its low toxicity compared to other solvents and its high volatility, which allows to deposit 2D sheets on surfaces. The 15 x 30 x 0.08 mm specification of structure were fabricated using polylactic acid filament of 1.75 mm (with tolerance ± 0.1) diameter via extrusion-based Flashforge adventure 3 printer. The porous structures printed at extruder temperature of 210°C and platform temperature of 50°C with print speed of 40 mm/s and travel speed of 70 mm/s. The infill density kept at 60% for hexagonal, triangular and line porosity whereas for random porosity it was kept at 100%. energy cut-off of 520 eV was used. All the structures were optimized using a conjugate gradient scheme until the energies and the components of forces reached 10 -6 eV and 0.001 eV Å -1 for bulk Gd2Te3 and 10 -5 and 0.01 eV Å-1 for (112) surface of Gd2Te3, respectively. A vacuum of 10 Å was added in the z-direction to prevent interactions between the periodic images. The Brillouin zone of bulk Gd2Te3 and (112) surface of Gd2Te3 were sampled with 7×7×7 Monkhorst-Pack and 3×3×1 Monkhorst-Pack, respectively. All the calculations were spinpolarized. Figures 