We report the detection of a gate-tunable kinetic inductance in a hybrid InAs/Al nanowire. For this purpose, we have embedded the nanowire into a quarter-wave coplanar waveguide resonator and measured the resonance frequency of the circuit. We find that the resonance frequency can be changed via the gate voltage that controls the electron density of the proximitized semiconductor and thus the nanowire inductance. Applying Mattis-Bardeen theory, we extract the gate dependence of the normal state conductivity of the nanowire, as well as its superconducting gap. Our measurements complement existing characterization methods for hybrid nanowires and provide a new and useful tool for gate-controlled superconducting electronics. Superconducting wires with high kinetic inductance [1-8] have found important applications as radiation detectors Typically, the kinetic inductance of a nanofabricated sample is determined by the material composition and by the device geometry and, thus, is not tunable in-situ. Yet, some applications rely critically on the ability to tune the inductor of a quantum circuit after fabrication, e.g. for superconducting amplifiers A more recent source of tunability comes from the advent of hybrid semiconducting-superconducting nanostructures, which allow the realization of gate-tunable Josephson junctions Here, we experimentally demonstrate a gate-tunable kinetic inductance using an InAs/Al nanowire shunting * L.J.Splitthoff@tudelft.nl a NbTiN coplanar waveguide resonator. This system offers an easy-to-fabricate and magnetic field-compatible We employ a quarter-wave coplanar waveguide resonator which is capacitively coupled to a feedline and shorted to ground by the proximitized nanowire, see Fig. To characterize the bare resonator properties, we use an identical reference resonator, in which the nanowire is replaced by a continuous 150 nm thick NbTiN film (App. E 2). Multiple nanowire and reference resonators are frequency multiplexed on the same chip and measured at 15 mK base temperature inside a dilution refrigerator. In the main , we focus on one nanowire (two-facet Al-InAs nanowire, (110 ± 5) nm diameter, 6 nm thick Al shell) and one reference resonator which exemplify trends observed in 12 different devices (App. E 1). The nanowire resonator system can be described by the circuit model in Fig. We observe a monotonic increase in resonance frequency as a function of gate voltage up to 8 V (Fig. The resonance frequency decreases linearly with the number of intra-resonator photons, n, as expected in the presence of a Kerr non-linearity arising from the inductance We use the measured frequency shifts to extract relevant physical properties of the hybrid nanowire. Assuming that the imaginary part of the nanowire impedance is purely inductive, (Z NW ) = 2πf NW L NW , which is justified given the electromagnetic field profile along the resonator in the limit Z NW Z 0 , a loaded transmission line resonator model (App. D) yields the nanowire inductance , where f NW is the resonance frequency of the loaded nanowire resonator and Z 0 and f 0 are the characteristic impedance and reso-nance frequency of the unloaded coplanar waveguide resonator. Using a conformal mapping technique At zero voltage, the nanowire inductance is L NW = (278 ± 17) pH with about 6 % constant systematic error stemming from the uncertainties on Z 0 and f 0 . L NW varies by 3.5 % over the range from -10 V to 7 V before superconductivity is suppressed by gate leakage. The geometric inductance associated with the nanowire segment can be estimated to be L NW,geo = 4.5 pH (App. E 3), thus we conclude that the shunt impedance is dominated by the kinetic inductance of the hybrid nanowire. Using the same method, we extract the temperature dependence of L NW , as shown in Fig. where ∆ 0 is the superconducting gap and σ n is the one-dimensional normal state conductivity of the hybrid nanowire. Note that the latter absorbs the cross-sectional electron density distribution and has physical dimensions of conductance times length. The increase of L NW with temperature can be used to extract ∆ 0 as a function of gate voltage. Increasing the gate voltage, the extracted superconducting gap decreases by 7 % from (270 ± 1) μeV to (251 ± 1) μeV (Fig. Having determined the gate dependence of ∆ 0 , we can use Eq. (1) to extract σ n using the values of L NW measured at the lowest temperature (Fig. We note that the Mattis-Bardeen theory is formulated for a simple BCS superconductor and thus it does not capture the fact that the induced gap in the semicon- ductor could be different from that in the Al shell This experiment complements existing characterization methods for hybrid nanowires, which have been primarily based on low-frequency transport techniques Besides the fundamental interest to characterize hybrid nanowires, the presented approach offers a promising path towards gate-controlled superconducting electronics. In particular, the low loss and finite Kerr non-linearity will allow for frequency tunable resonators, switches, microwave detectors and parametric amplifiers We fabricate the resonator circuit and the gate lines from a 35 nm-thick sputtered NbTiN film on low pressure chemical vapor deposition (LPCVD) SiN on Si. The kinetic sheet inductance of (5.31 ± 0.05) pH -1 has been measured using four reference resonators multiplexed to the same feedline, see Sec. E 2. We pattern the ground plane using e-beam lithography and SF 6 /O 2 based reactive ion etching. 30 nm-thick plasma enhanced chemical vapour deposition (PECVD) SiN serves as bottom gate dielectric. We transfer the two-facet InAs/Al nanowire on top of the SiN bottom gate with a nano-manipulator. The InAs nanowires were grown by vapor-liquid-solid (VLS) growth with a diameter of (110 ± 5) nm, and nominal thickness of the Al of 6 nm For the microwave spectroscopy, we use a RF transmission measurement setup installed in a dilution refrigerator operating at 15 mK base temperature, see Fig. where Q t is the total quality factor, Q c is the coupling quality factor and P in is the power at the input port of the sample. The intra-resonator photon number deviates from the true value by not more than a factor of 3.2 due to the uncertainty of the input attenuation. The 2x7 mm chip on which the measurements are performed is glued with silver paint onto a gold plated cop- per mount and electrically connected to a printed circuit board using aluminium wire-bonds. The output signal is amplified using a high electron mobility transistor amplifier at the 4 K stage. An isolator with 42 dB typical isolation prevents reflections. The directional coupler in the output line couples to an unused microwave line. The 10 GHz low pass filter at both input and output lines clean up the spectrum. DC blocks are placed at the breakout point of the fridge. A room temperature amplifier amplifies the signal before it enters the receiver port of the VNA. The electrostatic gates are controlled via DC lines using a QuTech IVVI rack. The DC lines are low pass filtered at the mixing chamber stage. We use a background corrected linear notch type resonator model where df = f /f r -1 is the frequency ratio, a is the asymmetry arising from the complex loading of the resonator, Q c is the coupling quality factor and Q i is the internal quality factor which we fit to the data. The background model includes a linear magnitude with offset m 0 and slope m 1 and a linear phase with offset φ and slope τ . We employ a loaded transmission line resonator model Here, Z 0 is the frequency-dependent characteristic impedance of the transmission line, α 0 is the absorption coefficient, and β is the frequency-dependent propagation coefficient. The use of Eq. ( where ω NW is the shifted resonant frequency of the nanowire resonator, and Γ is the full-width at half-maximum, the sum of a contribution due to the intrinsic losses along the transmission line and a contribution coming from the nanowire: The total internal quality factor of the nanowire resonator can therefore be given as: with Q 0 = ω 0 /Γ 0 and Q NW = ω 0 /Γ NW . Putting Eqs. (D3) and (D5) together, we obtain the nanowire impedance as a function of the measurable quantities ω 0 , ω NW , Q i , Q 0 : This number has positive real and imaginary part for Appendix E: Complementary measurements During the course of this work, we prepared 11 samples with 4 nanowire resonators and 4 reference resonators each. In Tab. I and Fig. We design the nanowire resonators starting from the CPW resonators with Z 0 Z NW by adjusting the geometry, in particular width w, spacing s and length l of the CPW transmission line. The resonator parameters are listed in Tab. I. For all nanowire resonator the coupling quality factor is Q c = 5.5 × 10 3 . Based on the kinetic sheet inductance of NbTiN, we calculate the nanowire inductance. We also summarize further key quantities to compare the different nanowires. In Fig. The 12 measured nanowires differ in their configuration: they comprise devices with different gate geometries, different nanowire growths, and measurement in different cooldowns. In particular, S04 N1 and S06 N2 use a 2 μm long nanowire segment with a nanowire diameter of (80 ± 5) nm, and a nominal thickness of the epitaxially grown Al of 6 nm. However, they all exhibit similar gate responses. From this observation, we conclude that the effect of gate-tunable kinetic inductance is The designed width w, spacing s and length l of the CPW resonator as well as the extracted kinetic sheet inductance per square of the NbTiN film L k , and the measured resonance frequency fr are given. In this paper we focus on the reference resonator denoted S11 R1. reproducible in hybrid superconducting semiconducting nanowires from Al and InAs and not unique to a specific nanowire batch or fabrication process. Fig. The reference resonator consists of a quarter-wave coplanar waveguide resonators capacitively coupled to a feedline and shorted to ground via a thick NbTiN patch instead of a proximitized nanowire as shown in Fig. For the experiment, we design CPW resonators with identical transmission line impedance as the nanowire resonator, but different length l. The resonator parameters are listed in Tab II. We extract the kinetic sheet inductance per square of the NbTiN film L k from the reference resonator by comparing the measured resonance frequencies with microwave simulations (AWR Microwave Office) of the full resonator design and numerical calculations based on a conformal mapping technique for CPW transmission lines We estimate the geometric inductance of the nanowire segment using a conformal mapping technique Superconducting resonators can exhibit nonlinear behaviour including bifurcation if driven with sufficiently large input power In Fig. In view of possible applications for frequency tunable resonators we study the frequency stability over time and the gate hysteresis. Fig. [1] R. Meservey and P. M. Tedrow, Measurements of the Kinetic Inductance of Superconducting Linear Structures, Journal of AppliedPhysics 40, 2028Physics 40, (1969)).