Laser excitation in silicon from femto-to pico-second time scales is studied. We assume the Three-Temperature Model (3TM) which describes the dynamics of the distinct quasi-temperatures for electrons, holes, and lattice. Numerical results for damage threshold reproduce the experimental results not only quantitatively, but qualitatively as well, showing dependence on laser pulse duration. Comparison with experimental data suggests that electron emission and thermal melting are both responsible for damage in silicon. We found that electron-phonon relaxation time has a significant effect on pulse duration dependence of electron emission. In the recent years, we have been able to use intense laser pulses of duration ranging from femto-to picosecond time scales to investigate laser-matter interaction. In particular, laser processing of semiconductors using ultrashort pulses attracts great interest, due to its application in nano-structuring Laser processing involves various aspects of physics such as optics, quantum mechanics, material science and thermodynamics, to name a few. Thus, numerical modeling is crucial in order to understand and optimize the process. Numerical modeling of laser excitation has seen considerable interest over the years When the laser pulse is shorter than the time-scale of phonon excitation, electronic excitation by photoabsorption is the dominant process. The non-equilibrium phase with hot electron-hole pairs and cool lattice relaxes into thermal equilibrium via electron-phonon interaction. In order to study non-equilibrium dynamics of electrons and lattice, we have to develop a numerical model including dynamics of electro-magnetic fields, electrons, lattice, and the interaction among them. The Two-Temperature Model (TTM) has been proposed by Anisimov et al. to describe the electron-lattice coupling in metals It has been observed that electron and hole relaxation in conduction and valence bands is faster than relaxation of the system as a whole In this work, we would like to propose a modified nTTM treating the evolution of quasi-temperatures in CB, VB and lattice (3TM). A similar study has been presented by Silaeva et al. The 3TM is modeled to consider three sub-systems, electrons, holes and lattice, and their temperatures are calculated separately. The carrier densities are also calculated distinctively for electrons and holes. We treat the dynamics of laser field employing the one-dimensional Maxwell's equations, which are solved using the Finite Difference Time Domain (FDTD) approach. In order to understand and define damage in silicon, we assume several processes that may be responsible for structural changes and compare their calculated thresholds with the experimental damage thresholds. The 3TM is similar to the previous nTTM formalisms The time-evolution of electron and hole densities, n e and n h is described as: where ω 0 is the laser frequency and α is the single photon absorption coefficient for transition from VB to CB The total dielectric function along with the effect of band structure re-normalization where n 0 is the density of valence electrons. It should be noted that n e and n h are nearly the same due to the effect of F and can be approximated at n e . L (ω) is the innate dielectric function, δE g represents the band renormalization by carrier density, and D is the complex dielectric function calculated from Drude model. The temperature dependent optical parameters of silicon are referred to from Ref. where m * e(h) is the effective mass and ν e and ν h are the collision frequencies, describing the electron-hole (e -h), electron-phonon (e -ph) and hole-phonon (h -ph) collisions. The e -ph and h -ph collisions are assumed to have the same frequency which is dependent on lattice temperature where λ is the laser wavelength. Since 3TM considers three sub-systems, viz. electron, hole and lattice, their temperatures also evolve sepa-rately. The temperature evolution is expressed as: The third and fourth terms in Eq. ( is the Fermi integral The propagation of the laser pulse is described by solving the Maxwell's equations using FDTD method. Mur's absorbing boundary condition is employed to prevent reflection from the boundary Here E 0 includes Gaussian envelope defining the shape of the pulse as exp[-(t -4T ) 2 /T 2 ], where T = t p /(4 √ ln 2), t p being the FWHM pulse duration. where I(x, t) is the laser intensity. Evaluation of charge current induced by the laser field is a crucial part of the module. We calculate the current with and without excitation i.e., for photo-absorption and dielectric response. For dielectric response, j 0 (x, t) is calculated as: where A(x, t) is the vector potential, P is the polarization and χ r is the real part of susceptibility (χ = ( -1)/4π). The Maxwell's equation thus, becomes where is the current associated with photo-absorption. The time evolution of 3TM is calculated using 4 th order Runge-Kutta method. Euler's method is used in the FDTD method to solve Maxwell's equations. In our study, the 3TM time step (dt) is of the order 10 -1 fs. For FDTD calculation, we define the another time step , dt m ∼ 10 -3 fs, because the time-scale of electromagnetic field dynamics is faster than that of electron dynamics. For spatial parameters, the simulation grid size is taken to be 150 Å and the silicon film thickness is 60.5 μm, which is thicker than the penetration depth, which is ∼10 μm for 775 nm laser. Figure The damage in a semiconductor is defined in different ways throughout the published literature One of the most prominent processes for damage is thermal melting. The carrier-phonon interactions lead to re-distribution of energy among the carriers and lattice, causing the lattice temperature to rise up to melting point, which can manifest as damage in the material Critical density has also been considered as a crucial parameter to study damage The first-principles calculation by the time-dependent density functional theory (TDDF) indicates that the ablation threshold of α-Quartz lies between melting and cohesive energy Emission of electrons from the surface into vacuum is also an important candidate for understanding damage. When the electron temperature is high, electron emission (e-emission) from the surface induces an impulsive force, Coulomb explosion being the extreme case Figure A possible explanation to the damage process is a coop-erative relationship between bond softening by excitation and Coulomb force due to electron emission. The melting threshold indicates Si-Si bond-softening, while electron emission indicates the presence of impulsive Coulomb force. Although the melting process takes time, the impulsive Coulomb force can enhance the lattice dynamics. On the other hand, Coulomb force may not be strong enough to break the cold Si-Si bonds. The thermal melting and e-emission thresholds cross at ∼ 1.4 ps, indicating that both these processes are together responsible for causing damage in silicon. The amorphization threshold of Bonse et al. coincides with the calculated threshold for breaking of bonds. The Izawa et al. results give a range of crystallization for amorphous silicon. As it can be seen in Fig. The e-emission is an important process in LPR and its corresponding threshold indicates a significant pulse duration dependence, as compared to thresholds related to melting. Since T e defines the e-emission threshold, it should depend on the e -ph relaxation time. Figure In this work, we studied the laser excitation and possible damage processes in silicon numerically using 3TM combined with Maxwell's equations. The model allowed us to study in detail the excitation dynamics and energy re-distribution in silicon for electrons, holes and the lattice. Pulse duration dependence of the damage threshold was also studied in detail. The 3TM simulations reproduced the experimental damage thresholds and the qualitative dependence on incident pulse duration. The comparison of experimental threshold alongside the calculated thresholds indicated that thermal melting and e-emission are both important processes, contributing to damage in silicon. However, critical density threshold is not an equitable criterion for damage. Also, variation in the e -ph relaxation time showed that e -ph interaction dynamics plays an important role in damage process with longer pulse duration.