Condensation of bosons in Bose-Einstein condensates or Cooper pairs in superconductors refers to a macroscopic occupation of a few single-or two-particle states. A condensate is called "fragmented" if not a single, but multiple states are macroscopically occupied. While fragmentation is known to occur in particular Bose-Einstein condensates, we propose that fragmentation naturally takes place in striped superconductors. To this end, we investigate the nature of the superconducting ground state realized in the two-dimensional t-t -J model. In the presence of charge density modulations, the condensate is shown to be fragmented and composed of partial condensates located on the stripes. The fragments of the condensates hybridize to form an extended macroscopic wave function across the system. The results are obtained from evaluating the singlet-pairing two-particle density matrix of the ground state on finite cylinders computed via the density matrix renormalization group (DMRG) method. Our results shed light on the intricate relation between stripe order and superconductivity in systems of strongly correlated electrons. Superconductivity constitutes one of the most fascinating ramifications of quantum mechanics in macroscopic condensed matter systems. A key role in our understanding of high-temperature superconductivity is attributed to the two-dimensional Hubbard model, or its strong coupling limit, the t-J model In this manuscript, we investigate the nature of the superconducting condensate in this model in further detail. We propose to study the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of a properly chosen two-particle density matrix, which describe the superconducting condensate fraction and the macroscopic condensate wave function. The method is applied to the superconducting ground state of the t-t -J model obtained from DMRG on cylinders of width W = 4 and W = 6. We discover, that in the presence of stripes, not just one global superconducting condensate but multiple condensates are formed. Each partial condensate is found to be associated with a single charge stripe. The occurrence of multiple condensates, corresponding to multiple dominant eigenvalues of the two-body density matrix is called fragmentation. Fragmentation is known to occur in specific instances of Bose-Einstein condensates The essential quantity to study condensation of Cooper pairs is the generic two-particle density matrix ρ 2 where σ i =↑, ↓ denotes the fermion spin and c † riσi and c riσi are fermion creation and annihilation operators at lattice positions r i . Since ρ 2 is Hermitian, it can be diagonalized with real eigenvalues ε n and eigenvectors χ n , In analogy to Bose-Einstein condensation, Cooper pair condensation takes place whenever one or more eigenvalues are of order N , where N is the number of lattice sites. If exactly one eigenvalue is of order N the condensate is referred to as simple. If more than one eigenvalue is of order N , the condensate is called fragmented While the above definitions are rather generic in scope, we focus on more specific quantities to investigate singletpairing in two-dimensional lattice models. First, we define the singlet-pairing density matrix ρ S as, where the singlet-pairing operators ∆ rirj is given by To focus on two-dimensional lattice geometries, we consider a nearest-neighbor singlet density matrix, where α (resp. β) denote the vectors connecting nearestneighbors on the lattice, e.g. α = x, ŷ in the case of a (a) square lattice. Again, this matrix can be decomposed into eigenvectors, The eigenvectors χ n (r i , α) are also referred to as macroscopic wave functions. They depend only on the position r i and the direction of the nearest-neighbor α. In order to exclude local contributions from density and spin correlations, we consider the non-local singlet density matrix, We note, that with this choice, ρS is not necessarily positive definite. Thus, eigenvalues of ρS can in general be positive or negative. We now investigate the properties of the condensate fractions ε n and macroscopic wave functions χ n (r i , α) of (non-)superconducting stripe states emerging in a simple model system of strongly interacting electrons. To this end, we study the two-dimensional t-t -J model, on a square lattice (c † iσ , c iσ = c † riσ , c riσ ). Here, S i = (S x i , S y i , S z i ) are the spin operators, and n i = σ c † iσ c iσ denotes the local density operator. The sums over i, j are over nearest-neighbor sites and i, j denotes a sum over next-nearest neighbors. The Hilbert space is constrained to prohibit doubly occupied configurations. In the following, we set t = 1 and J = 0.4 which is the same set of parameters chosen in Ref. We apply the DMRG method to study the system on cylindrical geometries with open boundary conditions along the long x-direction and periodic boundary conditions along the short y-direction. The length in the x-direction is denoted by L, and the width in the ydirection by W . Previous DMRG studies of Eq. ( We first focus on the case of width W = 4 cylinders and choose t = 0.2 with hole-dopings p = 1/16 and p = 1/8. A previous DMRG study of this model on the width W = 4 has established an approximate phase diagram We computed the singlet density matrix ρS (r i , α|r j , β) by measuring the respective pairing correlations of the ground state obtained via DMRG. The eigenvalues of the singlet density matrix are for cylinder lengths L = 8, 16, 24, 32 in Fig. Next, we show that the fragmentation of the condensate is not just a particular feature of the LE2 phase on the W = 4 cylinder but is more generic. We consider a different superconducting phase, which is stabilized on the W = 4 cylinder, the plaquette-pairing phase at t = 0 and p = 1/16 The physics of the width W = 6 cylinder is different from the W = 4 cylinder in certain aspects. As estab- lished in Refs. Fig. and the magnetic structure factor S m (q) at the antiferromagnetic ordering vector q = (π, π) using the METTS method with maximal bond dimension D = 2000 Our results suggest a simple physical picture of the interplay of stripe order and superconductivity. Individual superconducting condensates are formed on the stripes of the system and hole-pairs can tunnel through a barrier given by the maxima in the electron density. The superconducting stripes could thus be regarded as an emergent array of Josephson junctions. While we found the most dominant macroscopic wave function to be a uniform superposition of the condensate fragments, it is an important open question under which circumstances different modes, e.g. a π-phase shift Josephson junction, could be realized as the dominant contribution. Moreover, the smallest dominant eigenvectors shown in Fig. 