The rate of charge-parity switching in a full-shell superconductor-semiconductor nanowire qubit is measured by directly monitoring the dispersive shift of a readout resonator. At zero magnetic field, the measured switching time scale TP is on the order of 100 ms. Two-tone spectroscopy data post-selected on charge-parity is demonstrated. With increasing temperature or magnetic field, TP is at first constant, then exponentially suppressed, consistent with a model that includes both non-equilibrium and thermally activated quasiparticles. As TP is suppressed, qubit lifetime T1 also decreases. The long TP ∼ 0.1 s at zero field is promising for future development of qubits based on hybrid nanowires. The coherent manipulation of any transmon qubit is threatened by the presence of unpaired quasiparticles (QPs) in the superconductor, a problem referred to as quasiparticle poisoning (QPP). Understanding the nature and rate of QPP is therefore part of the challenge of using these superconducting circuits to construct complex quantum information processing devices. In a transmon qubit Hybrid superconductor-semiconductor nanowire (NW) variants of the transmon qubit In this Letter, the rate of QPP is measured in a fullshell superconductor-semiconductor hybrid NW qubit. It is found that QPP occurs on a timescale of T P ∼ 0.1 s, which is far from limiting the coherence time of the qubit. As either the temperature or magnetic field is increased, T P is first constant then exponentially suppressed, suggesting the existence of both a non-equilibrium and equilibrium population of QPs in the qubit. Additionally, while the qubit frequency recovers in the first Little-Parks lobe, T P remains below our detectable range (not sufficiently exceeding 30 μs) after the initial suppression. QPP in transmons was first measured directly by a Ramsey-type pulse sequences sensitive to the chargeparity state of the qubit QPP is measured as the rate of transitions between the two parity branches of the transmon. How QPP leads to dephasing (for non-vanishing charge dispersion) can be understood by considering the transmon Hamiltonian, Ĥ = 4E C (n -n g ) 2 -E J cos φ, where n is the number of Cooper pairs on the island, n g is the the effective offset charge and φ is the phase difference across the JJ. As indicated in Fig. We now describe the experimental set-up to realize a transmon using a NW. To fabricate the sample, a 35 nm thick NbN film was sputtered onto a Si substrate. The cQED architecture, consisting of a microwave feedline, readout resonators, qubit islands, gate lines, and ground plane, was patterned in the NbN film by reactive ion etching. The cQED circuit is shown in Fig. Measurement of the charge-parity switching rate was first performed at base temperature and zero magnetic field. In order for the dispersive QPP signal to be visible, the qubit frequency f 01 must be in the vicinity of the readout resonator frequency f RO = 5.4 GHz. Setting V C = -0.71 V gave f 01 = 4.1 GHz, detected by twotone spectroscopy. The transmission at the resonator frequency was monitored for 3.2 s, yielding time traces as shown in Fig. with poisoning time T P , amplitude A and background B as fit parameters. Experimental data along with the resulting fit are shown in Fig. Temperature dependence of QPP is shown in Fig. where ω is the superconducting spectral gap. Assuming that 1/T P = Cx QP where C is an unknown proportionality constant, and fitting to the logarithm of data points yields the fit in Fig. Next, we investigate qubit coherence and QPP as a function of axial magnetic field B relevant for potential applications in topological quantum computation. The full-shell NW exhibits destructive Little-Parks effect The f 01 data in Fig. Here ω(B) is also governed by the Little-Parks effect Although QPP imposes a limit on qubit coherence, the ground state switching measured in this work (|0e ↔ |0o ) does not itself relax the qubit, since it is a transition between different charge-parities of the qubit ground state. However, the rate of QP-induced transitions that contribute to relaxation (|0e ↔ |1o and |0o ↔ |1e ) are also related to the QP density, and the similar magnetic fields at which T P and T 1 start to decrease in Fig. In conclusion, we have examined the rate of charge-parity switching in a full-shell superconductingsemiconducting nanowire qubit. We found a long parity switching time T P ∼ 0.1 s at zero field, and exponential suppression of T P with field and temperature, in good qualitative agreement with our model. We interpret the exponential onset as associated with thermally activated QPs. Above 20 mT, this is observed as the rate of QPP rapidly increasing, coinciding with the collapse of the gap in the zeroth lobe of the Little-Parks effect. In the first lobe of reentrant superconductivity, T P does not recover along with ∆, consistent with previously observed supgap states in this regime. The large value of T P at zero magnetic field indicates that QPP is not a near-term barrier for the engineering of increased coherence times in this type of qubit. Figs. Data in Figs. Data in Fig. Here we describe the procedure for determining a rotation angle θ in the phase-quadrature-plane. For each measurement of T P in the main text, a series of plots were generated for several different θ, as shown in Fig. Here we describe how the two-tone spectroscopy data in Fig. Destructive Little-Parks effect Similar to Ref. in the winding number n at each B, where ξ is the superconducting coherence length at zero field, T C0 is the critical temperature at zero field, Φ is the applied magnetic flux, R is the radius of the superconducing shell, and t is the shell thickness. The pairing energy ∆ is then found by solving the implicit equation We assume that ∆ enters the transmon Hamiltonian as E J = (∆/4) η where η are the transmissions of the JJ channels. In terms of ∆, the spectral gap ω is given by ( We assume that ω enters into Eq. ( Transmission electron micrographs of NWs from the same growth batch as the NW used in the device described in the main text, are shown in Fig. 