Geometric phases are ubiquitous in physics; they act as memories of the transformation of a physical system. In optics, the most prominent examples are the Pancharatnam-Berry phase and the spin-redirection phase. Recent technological advances in phase and polarization structuring have led to the discovery of additional geometric phases of light. The underlying mechanism for all of these is provided by fibre bundle theory. In this colloquium, we review how fibre bundle theory does not only shed light on the origin of geometric phases of light, but also lays the foundations for the exploration of high dimensional state spaces, with implications for topological photonics and quantum communications. CONTENTS I. Introduction 1 II. Geometric versus dynamic phase in a nutshell 2 III. The Pancharatnam-Berry phase 2 A. Experimental realisation 2 B. Geometric interpretation 3 IV. The origin of geometric phases 3 A. Fibre bundle theory, a universal model 3 B. From Poincaré to Hopf 5 V. Exploring high dimensional state spaces 6 A. The spin-redirection phase 7 B. Geometric phases of spatial transverse modes 9 C. Geometric phases of general vectorial fields 10 VI. Summary and perspectives 11 VII. Phase is a curious protagonist in the land of physics, it bears no physical significance when a single wave is considered, yet becomes crucially important when several waves are involved, hereby causing spectacular effects such as interference. In 1984, Sir Michael Berry established that the wave function of a quantum system can gain a phase of geometric nature in addition to the dynamic phase naturally acquired over time A matrix-based formalism can be used to determine whether a system will acquire a geometric phase A plethora of geometric phases have been witnessed in optics In this colloquium, we illustrate how fibre bundle theory can bring about a deeper understanding of geometric phases. We do not expect the reader to have prior knowledge in the area of fibre bundle theory and will introduce a few key concepts. We show that the geometric phases recently observed in structured light beams are mostly based on two-dimensional sub-spaces of a much larger state space, and that fibre bundle theory could guide the exploration of the entire state space. Establishing a firmer link between geometric phases of light and fibre bundle theory could highlight interdisciplinary research opportunities and stimulate new discoveries. The experimental simplicity and versatility of optical systems could even allow us to test concepts of fiber bundle theory itself. Let us start our discussion by recalling how geometric phases differ from their dynamic counterparts using a simple interferometric construction. Interferometry is a precious tool for measuring the phase difference between two beams of light. In a Mach-Zehnder interferometer, the phase difference ∆φ between the two beams exiting the interferometer is null if the arms of the interferometer are of equal optical path length (see Fig. It is also possible to obtain a finite phase difference even if the arms are of equal optical path length, by imposing a series of state transformation to one of the beams (see Fig. The Pancharatnam-Berry (PB) phase is one of the most ubiquous geometric phases of light The PB phase is generated by changing the polarization state of a beam of light propagating along a fixed direction. In practice, a sequence of polarization transformations can be realized using several retarders, which would correspond to the optical elements in Fig. Realizing a sequence of (unitary) polarization transformation can be visualized as a path on the Poincaré sphere. The Poincaré sphere is the state space of purely polarized light, meaning that each point on the sphere represents a pure polarization state. By convention, the poles represent circularly polarized light, the equator linearly polarized light and the hemispheres right and left elliptically polarized light (see The path corresponding to the polarization transformation shown in Fig. In optics, it is common practice to calculate the PB phase, which we denote φ g , directly from the solid angle Ω PS enclosed by the path formed on the Poincaré sphere, shown in light blue (shaded area) in Fig. If the sequence of polarization transformations is associated with a vanishing solid angle, no PB phase will be generated. Eq. 1 provides a straightforward manner to calculate the PB phase, however, the relationship between phase and a path formed on the state space is far from obvious. Indeed, in physics, states are defined up to a phase factor, meaning that two state vectors |ψ and exp(iφ) |ψ , where φ ∈ [0, 2π[, are considered to be physically equivalent. A path traced on the Poincaré sphere thus does not directly provide information on the evolution of the phase of the system. An additional structure, capable of tracking this evolution is needed, and this is where fibre bundle theory comes into play. In what follows, we introduce some fundamentals of fibre bundle theory and show how geometric phases are interpreted in terms of fibre bundles. We then examine the PB phase from this new perspective. A. Fibre bundle theory, a universal model In the landscape of mathematics, fibre bundle theory sits at the crossroads of differential geometry, topology and connection theory. It was developed independently from physics in the first half of the 20th century We illustrate the basic idea of fibre bundles in Fig. For the cylinder this is true globally, making it a trivial fibre bundle. The topological and geometrical properties of the fibre bundle may however prevent us from a consistent global mapping. This is the case for the twisted Möbius strip, as indicated by the ant, which can move from one end of the line segment F to the other when traversing along the Möbius band. The fiber bundle is then said to be non-trivial To complete the definition of a fibre bundle, one may also specify the structure group G acting on the bundle. In the case of the Möbius strip, G = ±1 where the element -1 acts on the fibre by sending an element from the top to the bottom of the fibre Fibre bundles relevant in optics and quantum optics tend to operate in larger state spaces, e.g. with fibres keeping track of phase evolutions. While it is perfectly feasible to describe optics in terms of complex electromagnetic fields, and quantum optics in terms of quantum states, fibre bundle theory offers a supplementary geometric interpretation, transcendending specific applications and potentially allowing us to develop a more intiuitive understanding of the underlying phenomena. The concept of a fibre bundle linking a phase to a state transformation was introduced by Aharonov and Anandan Lifting a closed path in B will often result in an open path in E. If we assume that the beginning and end point of the path lie on the same fibre, they are linked by a simple phase factor exp(iφ) (a U(1) transformation), called the "holonomy of the connection on the fibre bundle" In the classical realm, holonomies can take the form of a rotation, such as the one allowing a cat falling from an upside-down position to land on its paws Aharonov and Anandan identified the connection A AA that yields the geometric phase exp(iφ) = exp(iφ g ) as its holonomy. To do so, they defined the geometric phase as the difference between the total phase and the dynamic phase where d is an exterior differential operator and | ψ is a basis vector field, also known as section or gauge (an explicit derivation can be found in Eq. 2 can be used if A AA is uniquely defined over the region of the state space covered by the path C. In practice, several A AA may coexist due to the geometry of the Hilbert space and of the projective Hilbert space (Urbantke, 1991). One may then prefer the following expression, obtained using Stokes theorem: where S is the surface in the state space enclosed by C, and V AA is the curvature of the connection. Unlike the connection A AA , the curvature V AA is well defined everywhere. It measures the dependence of the phase holonomy on the path formed in the projective Hilbert space. Geometric phases owe their name to this path dependence, and one may say that it is the curvature of the state space that gives birth to geometric phases It is possible to witness a phase holonomy even if the curvature vanishes, when the path C cannot be shrunk to a point. This typically happens if the path encloses a topological defect. The phase holonomy becomes a signature of the defect and is insensible to the shape of the path, and hence is called a "topological phase" A remarkable fact about the fibre bundle interpretation of geometric phases proposed by Aharonov and Anandan is that it remains valid regardless of the dimension of the state space. We will come back to this after providing a fibre bundle interpretation of the PB phase. In the case of the PB phase, the relevant state space is the Poincaré sphere. The sphere representation is specific to two-dimensional systems, and studying its construction reveals the associated fibre bundle. When fully polarized light propagates along a fixed direction, say z, it becomes analogous to a two-state (qubit) system: where |0 and |1 are the eigenstates of the Pauli spin operator σ z , and α and β are complex parameters with The state vector |ψ lives in the two-dimensional Hilbert space, denoted by H 2 . This space is our total space E, which can be pictured as a hypersphere S 3 embedded in R 4 , represented in orange (left shaded area) in Fig. In optics, a pure state |ψ can only be identified up to a phase factor exp(iφ), and in quantum theory the set of state vectors exp(iφ) |ψ describe the same physical state: the probability of a measurement of the system given by Born's rule for |ψ and exp(iφ) |ψ is one. To account for this, in the projective Hilbert space all states exp(iφ) |ψ , where φ ∈ [0, 2π[, represent the same quantum state. This set of equivalent state vectors form a fibre, which can be pictured as a circle S 1 parametrized by φ (C in Fig. The PB phase then corresponds to the holonomy of the connection A AA on a fibre bundle where the base space is CP 1 (the Poincaré sphere), a fibre is a set of equivalent states vectors, the group structure is U(1), and the total space is H 2 . This fibre bundle is known as the Hopf fibration, and it is capable of describing all two-state systems, not just polarization. As such, it is often encountered in physics, where it describes magnetic monopoles, two-dimensional harmonic oscillators, Taub-NUT space (relevant in the framework of general relativity) and twistors It is not possible to assign a single connection A AA over the whole Poincaré sphere. Indeed, if we introduce polar coordinates θ, φ, we may define a connection A using the basis | ψ (5) A is defined everywhere except at θ = 0 (north pole). To cover the entire sphere we may introduce another basis | ψ and a second connection A : 6) A is defined everywhere but at θ = π (south pole). The singular points θ = π and θ = 0 correspond to Dirac string singularities In this case, it is preferable to calculate the PB phase using Stokes theorem: where Ω S is the solid angle enclosed by the path C formed in clockwise fashion on the Poincaré sphere. We have recovered Eq. 1 using fibre bundle theory, and have detailed how the PB phase arises from a state transformation. Eq. 1 is only valid because the state space can be represented as a sphere, which is true for all two-state systems. Eq. 7 shows that the curvature on the Hopf fibration does not vanish, it confirms that the PB phase depends on the path traced in the state space, it is truly a "geometric" phase. PB phases are at the core of state-of-the-art wavefront shaping technologies In this section we have directed our attention to fully polarized light for didactic purposes. Note however, that geometric phases can also arise from the transformation of partially polarized light. In this case, the state space becomes the Poincaré ball to include points inside the sphere The state space of an n-state system where n > 2 can no longer be represented by an ordinary sphere The spin-redirection phase is a geometric phase that arises when polarized light is taken along a non-planar trajectory. It was first witnessed in inhomogeneous media where Ω k (C) is the solid angle subtended by the path formed on the sphere of directions k and where the helicity σ denotes the projection of the spin onto k, which takes values σ = 1 for left-handed and σ = -1 for righthanded circularly polarized light. Here, φ g,a is analogous to a well-known adiabatic phase, namely the Berry phase obtained from the evolution of a spin particle interacting with a time-varying magnetic field B(t) of constant amplitude, where the directions of the magnetic field, R(t) = B(t)/B are the parameters The geometric phase φ g,a produces a characteristic effect: when k recovers its initial orientation, the polarization axis of linearly and elliptically polarized light is rotated. This rotation can be understood in terms of circular birefringence: The left and right circularly polarized light components of the beam acquire opposite geometric phases It soon appeared that this rotation can also be observed when light is redirected by a sequence of mirrors shifts where Ω SR (C) is the familiar solid angle formed on the sphere representing the directions of the spin S of the photon in real space. Fig. When the propagation direction of a beam of light is varied, the electric field becomes a 3-component vector E = (E x , E y , E z ) in the laboratory frame. The normalized state vector |ψ representing the system then corresponds to a rotated 3-component spinor, reflecting the spin-1 nature of photons We are thus dealing with a 3-state system, of state space CP 2 , which is no longer an ordinary sphere. State spaces become difficult to visualize as their dimension increases, and so does picturing the evolution of the state in that space. Fortunately, Majorana provided an elegant way to circumvent this difficulty. Majorana was studying the behaviour of a spin system of arbitrary angular momentum j in the presence of a magnetic field when he realized that varying the direction and magnitude of the magnetic field amounts to rotating j Nonparaxial fields, for which the electric field component along the propagation direction is non-negligible, have attracted increasing attention in the past decades, in virtue of their capacity to mix the spin and orbital angular momentum content of the beam While picturing the state evolution is certainly helpful, we have shown in section IV that all we really need to calculate the geometric phase is the connection on the relevant fibre bundle. For a spin-1 system, the base space is the state space CP 2 , the total space is the Hilbert space H 3 and the fibre is U(1). A good description of this fibre bundle is provided in Hannay recognized that this expression is equivalent to the one found using the Majorana representation Turning paraxial light into a 3D field is relatively straightforward, one can use a high numerical aperture or rely on scattering Optical modes are characterized not only by their polarization but also by their spatial profile, determining both phase and intensity distribution across the beam A spatial transverse mode of order N = n + m = 2 p + | |, may be represented by a normalized vector |ψ which may refer to a coherent state as approximated by a classical light beam, or the wavefunction of a photon. The state vector then lives in a Hilbert space of dimension N + 1, and the state space is CP N For N = 1, |ψ is a two-state system, of the form of Eq. 4, where |0 and |1 correspond to any two linear dependent orthogonal modes, conveniently we can choose LG 1 0 and LG -1 0 modes or HG 0,1 and HG 1,0 modes. Like for all two-state systems, this state space can be pictured as an ordinary sphere, the so-called sphere of first order modes, shown in Fig. where Ω(C) is the solid angle enclosed by the path formed on the sphere, in analogy to the PB phase. This is not surprising since the underlying geometry is the same. The phase φ g,N=1 can be interpreted as the holonomy of the connection on the Hopf fibration, where the base space corresponds to the sphere of first order modes. This interpretation, to the best of our knowledge, has not yet been made explicit in the literature. For N > 1, the dimension of the state space |ψ grows. Second order modes, for example, need to be expressed in terms of not two, but three fundamental modes, where LG +2 0 , LG 0 1 and LG -2 0 form a complete basis; third order modes require four fundamental modes, where LG +3 0 , LG +1 1 , LG -1 1 and LG -3 0 form a complete basis, and so on. So far, geometric phases have been calculated on two-dimensional subspaces of these high dimensional state spaces, represented as spheres. In where Ω is the solid angle formed on the sphere describing the transformation. Interestingly, when a path is formed on a sphere on which all modes carry the same amount of orbital angular momentum, like the second sphere of second order modes, no geometric phase is generated Interpreting spatial transverse modes in terms of a fibre bundle would allow us to explore geometric phases over the entire state space, not just over two-dimensional sub-spaces. For a spatial transverse mode of order N, the relevant fibre bundle would be the so called tautological line bundle, with the same base space CP N , total space H N+1 and U(1) as the fibre. It would be interesting to determine, at least theoretically, whether transforma- tions over extended portions of the state space lead to the discovery of new geometric or topological phases, with possible applications for topological photonics and quantum communication. In tandem with such fundamental discussions we may develop experimental techniques that can realize general forms of mode transformations, hereby leading to the expansion of the spatial mode shaping toolbox. In reality, the exploration of high order spaces in optics has already begun. Indeed, a Majorana representation of structured Gaussian beams been introduced in 2020, revealing that geometric phases born from cyclic model transformation of generalised structured-Gaussian beams can be discrete Knotted beams, for which the locus of phase singularities form linked and knotted threats upon propagation So far, we have considered the spatial and polarization degree of freedom of light independently. We shall now study vector light fields where they become nonseparable, and discuss the implications with regard to their geometric phases. Combining the polarization and spatial degrees of freedom of light amounts to building a bipartite system, where the Hilbert space of the system corresponds to the tensor product of the individual spaces H pol ⊗ H spa . For simplicity, we shall only consider first order transverse modes, in which case we are dealing with a twoqubit system The total geometric phase is thus linked to the total angular momentum of the beam + σ. This was experimentally verified in Again, the space of pure states of a two-qubit system, CP 3 , is not an ordinary sphere. However, depending on the degree of separability of the states, the associated substate space may take a more recognizable form ( The phase associated with the cyclic evolution of a maximally entangled state is purely topological where Ω is the solid angle formed on the modified sphere under consideration. This phase was measured in Fibre bundle theory presents a rigorous treatment for the understanding of phases. It sheds light on the origin of the solid angle law linking a geometric phase to the path formed on a generalised Poincaré sphere representing the mode space when the mode is transformed. These spaces however often only represent two-dimensional subspaces of a high dimensional state space. They cannot be represented by a sphere and are difficult to visualize, they may however present geometric and topologic features giving birth to interesting geometric and topologic phases, undetectable in the two-dimensional sub-space descriptions. Majorana-based representations are slowly emerging, they are capable of providing an accurate expression for geometric phases born in high dimensional state spaces, while providing a clear visual interpretation. At a more fundamental level, tautological line bundles should be used to calculate these geometric phases, the only ingredient needed is the connection on these bundles. Research on general vectorial modes raises the question of how non-separability can be accounted using fibre bundles, and whether this causes measurable effects. With this colloquium we hope to encourage collaborations between the optics and the mathematics communities, as we believe that higher order structured Gaussian modes and vector modes may allow the exploration of new concepts.