Porous electrodes-made of hierarchically nanostructured materials-are omnipresent in various electrochemical energy technologies from batteries and supercapacitors to sensors and electrocatalysis. Modeling the system-level macroscopic transport and relaxation in such electrodes given their complex microscopic geometric structure is important to better understand the performance of the devices in which they are used. The discharge response of capacitive porous electrodes in particular do not necessarily follow the traditional exponential decay observed with flat electrodes, which is good enough for describing the general dynamics of processes in which the rate of a dynamic quantity (such as charge) is proportional to the quantity itself. Electric double-layer capacitors (EDLCs) and other similar systems exhibit instead power law-like discharge profiles that are best described with differential equations involving non-integer derivatives. Using the fractional-order integral in the Riemann-Liouville sense and superstatistics we present a treatment of the macroscopic response of such type of electrode systems starting from the mesoscopic behavior of sub-parts of it. The solutions can be in terms of the Mittag-Leffler (ML) function or a power law-like function depending on the underlying assumptions made on the physical parameters of initial charge and characteristic time response. The generalized threeparameter ML function is found to be the best suited to describe experimental results of a commercial EDLC at different time scales of discharge. The electrodes used in many applications such as electric double-layer and pseudocapacitive supercapacitors, capacitive deionization systems, rechargeable batteries, fuel cells, and electrochemical sensors are in general made of nanosized, multifunctional composite materials. Several architectures, type one-dimensional (e.g. nanowires, nanoribbons, nanotubes), two-dimensional (e.g. nanosheets, nanoplates), and three-dimensional materials, with doping and functionalizing additives have been designed and developed with the goal to facilitate electrolyte transport and ion diffusion and migration, and also maximizing the amount of available atomic sites per unit surface or volume of the electrode While porous electrodes are clearly becoming ubiquitous in most electrochemical systems with considerable practical interest, they also present some challenges that need to be understood and addressed The purpose of this study is to investigate the relationship between the part and the whole of a porous, blocking capacitive electrode. We are interested in the system-level electrode discharge dynamics resulting from the collective behavior of charge storage on infinitesimally small parts of it. In other words, how the effective discharge of a porous electrode vs. time is influenced by its microscopic geometric structure? For the reasons given above on the origins of inhomogeneities, we consider the two cases of (i) variable independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) initial charge accumulated on elemental surfaces of the electrode but with constant characteristic response time for each when it is being discharged, and then (ii) the case of variable initial charge and variable characteristic response time for each elemental surface. We employ analytical techniques based on time derivatives and integrals of non-integer order (fractional-order calculus) In Fig. The porous matrices, containing a complex system of internal surfaces and phase boundaries, are represented by the two-dimensional projection of the active material (in black) onto the background substrate (in blue). The active material can be composed for instance of a single type of electronic conductor or n-component mixtures including essentially electronic conductors and nonconducting additives such as binders We denote such a random variable by Y i = q 0 i /q t , where q a i is the effective amount of charge normalized with respect to q t which represents the case where the whole elemental surface is covered by active conducting material (i.e. maximum charge possible). The goal again is to derive expressions for the collective charge relaxation response of the electrode system based on the statistical heterogeneities of the microstructure. Consider an elemental surface from Fig. Here, the charge q 0 can be expressed as q 0 = N 0 e where N 0 is the number of active atomic sites with an elemental charge e, and the system function C, considered to be constant independent of time and frequency, maps voltage to charge. When the elemental capacitor is discharged into a parallel resistor of constant resistance R, we write using Kirchoff's voltage law the first-order ordinary differential equation for the time-dependent charge q(t) as: Here λ = τ -1 and τ = RC is the positive capacitive time constant of the system in units of seconds. Eq. 1 can also be written in terms of a number density normalized by a certain number N t and t * = λt. The solution to Eq. 1 with the initial condition q(t = 0) = q 0 is given by the well-known exponential decay function: which is a general feature of processes in which the rate of a dynamic quantity is proportional to the quantity itself. Note that if λ is a negative constant, Eqs. 1 and 2 would describe an exponential growth process instead. However, many electrochemical systems exhibit dynamics that do not follow closely enough the exponential decay of Eq. 2 as shown experimentally for instance by Drazer and Zanette This subdiffuse behavior can be attributed in our case of electrochemical devices to many reasons including (i) the porous nature of the electrodes and thus some sort of spatial restriction subjected onto the mobile ions, and also (ii) because of internal friction forces and continuous scattering of these ions while diffusing in the supporting electrolytes For the reasons outlined above on the prevalent nonexponential behavior in porous media, we extend the analysis using fractional-order calculus, which is most suited for describing anomalous transport. Integrating Eq. 1 gives where 0 D -1 t (= 0 I 1 t ) is the standard Riemann integral operator (antiderivative), which can be generalized to the fractional-order integral of an arbitrary order ν > 0 as defined by Riemann-Liouville (RL) as: where Γ(•) denotes the gamma function. The case of zero-order integral gives a D where the prefactor λ is replaced by λ ν in units of sec 1/ν to maintain proper dimensionality. Note that for comparison with Eq. 1, applying the RL differential operator 0 D ν t to Eq. 5 leads to: Fractional-order integro-differential equations are again commonly used to describe the behavior of porous electrodes, anomalous diffusion, and in systems exhibiting power-law dynamics The solution to this problem (Eq. 5) is obtained by first applying the Laplace transform (i.e. L{f (t); s} = ∞ 0 f (t)e -st dt) to both sides of the equation, which after rearranging gives: Using the result where (with (γ) k = Γ(γ +k)/Γ(γ), the Pochhammer symbol) is the three-parameter ML function The charge is now a single-parameter ML function (i.e. α = ν, β = 1 and γ = 1 in Eq. 9) instead of the exponential function (Eq. 2), which we readily recover as ν → 1 (i.e. E 1 (-z) = e -z ). The single-parameter ML function is actually an entire function, completely monotone (if and only if 0 < ν 1), providing a simple way of generalizing of the exponential function, and appears naturally in problems of fractional relaxation processes and anomalous transport Eq. 11 indicates a faster decay than the normal exponential decay at close to zero (derivative being -q 0 νλ ν t ν-1 /Γ(1 + ν) which tends to -∞ compared to -q 0 λ for e -λt ), whereas the trend is inverted at infinity (Eq. 12) making the ML function decaying slower than to the exponential function. Assume now the situation of having a number n of adjacent elemental surfaces of the capacitive electrode as depicted in Fig. We analyze first the situation where the prefactors λ ν i are the same for all subsystems and equal to a constant value λ ν , but different and independent initial charge q 0 i . A unique response time constant for all elemental surfaces indicate that the type of system under test, constituted of active materials in contact with the electrolytic phase, remains unchanged and independent of spacial location on the electrode. The justification for variable amounts of active sites holding charge is as explained above and illustrated in Fig. Rewriting the relations for the charges q i using q i = N i e, and knowing that the Laplace transform of the sum of independent variables is the product of the Laplace transforms We then apply the inverse Laplace transform (see Eq. 8) to obtain: where N0 = n i=1 N * 0 i in units of sec 1/(n-1) . The notation N t (t|λ ν ) indicates that the total number density is taken at a given connstant value for λ ν . The total charge is expressed under these assumptions in terms of a three-parameter ML function as: For the limiting case of ν = 1, we have q t (t|λ 1 ) = q0 t n-1 e -λ 1 t /Γ(n). We examine now the case where in addition to variable amount of initial charge on elemental surfaces, the prefactor λ ν is also taken as random. Fluctuating values of λ ν can be attributed to spacial inhomogeneities in the electrolyte and/or the constituting materials due for instance to local defects and different degrees of oxidation of the electrode material. The electrolyte, which can be viewed of as a moving boundary, may also affect the uniformity of time responses of elemental systems. These local differences may lead to distributed capacitive time constants across the electrode map. As an example of probability model for λ ν we consider a gamma-type distribution such that: which has a mean value of n/z for. While it is difficult to get a good estimate for the local variabilities of λ ν , the gamma distribution is taken here as a possible spreading function because it is defined for positive variables only which is close to physical systems (λ ν > 0). Furthermore, for n = 1, one retrieves the exponential distribution, but a number of other distributions can be obtained as special cases, such as the chi-square, Weibull, hydrograph, Rayleigh or the Maxwell molecular velocity distributions given by Eq. 18, provides the unconditional number N t (t) in closed form as The total charge accumulated on the electrode is then given by: The limiting cases for which t → 0 + and t → ∞ provide the asymptotic behaviors t n-1 and t n(ν+1)-1 , respectively. This framework in which the statistics of the statistics is estimated is derived from the work of Beck To evaluate the models given by Eq. 2 (exponential function), Eq. 10 (single-parameter ML function), Eq. 17 EDLCs can be found in refs. The time step for voltage and current measurements was fixed to 50 ms. In Fig. porous media, we first assumed the initial charges accumulated on elemental subsystems to be derived from a random distribution which led to a solution in terms of the three-parameter ML function. Such a model successfully captured with great fidelity the discharge behavior of the EDLC device for different values of the applied resistive load. When integrating furthermore a variable time constant of these subsystems (derived from a gamma PDF), the resulting power-law model did not perform well enough for fast discharging situations. We concluded that the three-parameter ML model, which is able to span the behavior of the stretched exponential function at small values of time as well as that of a negative power law as time grows, is more suited for describing the dynamics of porous electrodes at different time scales. In principle the same analysis can be adapted to similar systems (porous and heterogeneous) involving the transport or relaxation of some other physical quantities such as energy, momentum or mass. compared to 30.71 for the exponential decay when the discharging resistor R was set to 50 Ω, and 0.302, 0.067, 0.599 vs. 3.313 for R = 10 Ω. D ν t [q(t) -q 0 ] = -λ ν q(t)(6) A. S. Arico, P. Bruce, B. Scrosati, J.-M. Tarascon, and W. Van Schalkwijk, "Nanostructured materials for advanced energy conversion and storage devices," Materials for sustainable energy: a collection of peer-reviewed research and review articles from Nature Publishing Group , 148-159 (2011).