Quantum communication between remote superconducting systems is being studied intensively to increase the number of integrated superconducting qubits and to realize a distributed quantum computer. Since optical photons must be used for communication outside a dilution refrigerator, the direct conversion of microwave photons to optical photons has been widely investigated. However, the direct conversion approach suffers from added photon noise, heating due to a strong optical pump, and the requirement for large cooperativity. Instead, for quantum communication between superconducting qubits, we propose an entanglement distribution scheme using a solid-state spin quantum memory that works as an interface for both microwave and optical photons. The quantum memory enables quantum communication without significant heating inside the refrigerator, in contrast to schemes using high-power optical pumps. Moreover, introducing the quantum memory naturally makes it possible to herald entanglement and parallelization using multiple memories. A superconducting qubit is one of the most promising building blocks for a quantum computer To realize quantum communication between superconducting qubits in remote dilution refrigerators, an optical photon must be used for communication outside the dilution refrigerators. Thus, the direct conversion of microwave photons to optical photons has been intensively investigated in the last decade In this article, we introduce a scheme to generate entanglement between superconducting qubits in different refrigerators via a quantum memory. To analyze the scheme's performance, we consider a specific situation : generating entanglement between remote superconducting qubits using a quantum interface This section overviews the entanglement generation protocol between superconducting systems in remote dilution refrigerators using a quantum interface based on the solid-state spin quantum memory. Figure Figure Entanglement generation between remote color centers in diamonds has already been demonstrated using two-photon and single-photon protocols where the sign depends on whether the same detector (+) or different detector (-) is clicked in the two-photon emission rounds Then, we consider a practical limit of the entanglement generation rate between color centers separated by several meters. The entanglement generation rate between remote color centers, R e-e , is expressed as where η opt e is the detection efficiency of the optical photon emitted from a color center considering all losses during the transmission and r e-e is the entanglement generation attempt rate of the electron spins. The factor 2 in the denominator of eq.( For color centers separated by 10 m, the propagation time of an optical photon in an optical fiber is 25 ns from a color center to a photodetector placed at the midpoint of the refrigerators (5 m). Then, the ideal entanglement attempt rate will be 40 MHz. However, in such a case, the actual entanglement attempt rate is limited by the gate operation time for the emission of a coherent photon. In a two-photon protocol that used the NV -center, the typical operation time to generate a coherent photon was ∼ 10 μs In this section, we propose two protocols to generate entanglement between the superconducting qubit and the electron spin in diamond. We then consider the entanglement generation rate based on these protocols. In the following, we consider that |0 e is the spin ground state in the computational basis that is excited by the microwave time-bin qubit. Figure to the electron spin (NV -) in diamond Figure The initial state of the spin is prepared in The microwave time-bin qubit is transferred to the superconducting qubit via a waveguide coupled to the mi-crowave cavity. The superconducting qubit, which is prepared in |g sc , absorbs the microwave time-bin qubit, resulting in the entangled state, By measuring population in the second excited state, |f sc of the superconducting qubit, we can confirm whether the superconducting qubit successfully absorbs the microwave time-bin qubit or not, heralding the generation of entanglement A difference between these two protocols is whether the superconducting qubit or the spin is the emitter (receiver) of the microwave time-bin qubit. Efficient (> 90%) microwave time-bin qubit generation and absorption by the superconducting qubit have been demonstrated Another difference is that the first protocol uses the two-photon absorption process at the spin while the second protocol uses single-photon absorption at the superconducting qubit. In the first protocol, the frequencies of the superconducting qubit and the spin need not be in perfect resonance, since tuning the frequency of an optical driving laser can compensate the frequency difference between them. Besides, it is easier to detect a single optical photon than a single microwave photon. However, the use of an optical driving laser may cause heating inside the refrigerator without a high-quality photonic crystal cavity to enable the optical drive by a single optical photon. On the other hand, in the second protocol, an optical driving laser is not necessary, thus mitigating the possible heating due to the drive laser and simplifying the measurement system compared to the first protocol. We should note that measurement of the spin on ) basis directly converts a microwave time-bin qubit to an optical time-bin qubit in the first protocol. Here, however, we focus only on the protocol using the spin as a quantum memory. On the basis of both schemes, we estimate an actual entanglement generation rate between the superconducting qubit and the spin. For a superconducting qubit coupled to a cavity, the generation or absorption of a microwave time-bin qubit takes several hundreds of nanoseconds to a few microseconds qubit for the superconducting qubit. Similarly, for the electron spin, ∼1 μs is thought to be needed for the operation based on the simulation of the master equation (see Appendix C). Then, ignoring the propagation time in the waveguide between the superconducting qubit and the electron spin, it is possible to attempt entanglement generation at a rate of r sc-e ∼500 kHz, where r sc-e is the entanglement trial rate. Considering the success probability of microwave photon emission or absorption, the successful entanglement generation rate between the superconducting qubit and spin, R sc-e , can be expressed as where η mw sc (η mw e ) is the probability of successful microwave emission or absorption operation by the superconductor (spin). Here, we can confirm the generation of entanglement with the heralding techniques mentioned above. Figure After the successful entanglement generation between the superconducting qubit and the spin in nodes A and B, BSM is performed between the electron and nuclear spins in each node (Fig. ). The overall gate sequence of the entanglement generation is shown in Fig. Considering the success probability of entanglement generation between the remote spins and that between the superconducting qubit and the spin, the average entanglement generation rate between the superconducting qubits, R mem sc-sc , depends on R e-e and R sc-e as where τ init is the time to initialize the electron and the nuclear spins, τ SWAP n is the time to swap the state of the electron spin with that of the nuclear spin, τ sc-e is the average time to generate entanglement between the electron spin and the superconducting qubit, and τ BSM is the time to perform BSM for the electron and nuclear spins. τ sc-e can be calculated by and Ω Rabi n except in the case of A ∼ 1 MHz. We consider to use a π pulse to perform CeNOTn and CnNOTe like Ref. If we can use multiple quantum spin memories Quantum router BSM Preparation of entanglement between remote electron spins Fig. eliminated, resulting in the entanglement attempt rate of ∼40 kHz at maximum, which is limited by the speed of the BSM of the electron and nuclear spins. We estimate the entanglement generation rate between remote superconducting qubits using the quantum spin memory. Here, we compare the performance of the memory-based scheme to those of other protocols without memory. Direct conversion of a microwave to an optical photon is a straightforward approach transferring a quantum state of a superconducting qubit or microwave photon itself outside a dilution refrigerator. Direct conversion makes it possible to implement an entanglement generation protocol between remote superconducting qubits using the two-photon protocol. Here, though the singlephoton protocol can be used, we consider only the twophoton protocol, in which stabilization of the optical path is not necessary. Figure The microwave time-bin qubit is then converted to the photonic time-bin qubit at the transducer. The photonic Fig. time-bin qubits from nodes A and B interfere at a beamsplitter and are measured by a photodetector. Consequently, the superconducting qubits in different nodes are projected to the entangled state as where the sign depends on which detector is clicked. The same as in eq. ( where r sc-sc is the entanglement attempt rate corresponding to the speed with which the microwave time-bin qubit is generated at a superconducting qubit, η DC is the microwave-to-optical conversion efficiency, and η DC loss includes all losses during the propagation of the photon. For the calculation of R DC sc-sc , we assumed that the superconducting qubit coupled to the microwave cavity can generate a microwave time-bin qubit at a rate of r sc-sc =1 MHz To avoid the difficulties involved in the realization of a high-efficiency microwave-to-optical transducer, entangled-photon schemes have recently attracted attention for their ability to generate entanglement between a microwave photon inside a dilution refrigerator and an optical photon outside of it Microwave photon Photodetector Fig. detuned light, an entangled microwave-optical photon pair is generated in either node. The measurement of an optical photon using a beamsplitter and photodetectors heralds the generation of the entanglement between microwave photons in each node, where the sign depends on the side on which the detector is clicked. Since the number of microwave photons in each node entangles, the absorption of a microwave photon at the superconducting qubits, which initially at |g sc , generates the entanglement as In Ref. In the memory-based protocol, in-refrigerator heating mainly comes from the dissipation of the microwave drive pulse and laser light to control and read out the spin. To achieve an electron Rabi frequency of 10 MHz, a flux density of ∼ 3 G is needed, considering the gyromagnetic ratio of the electron, γ/2π ∼ 3 MHz/G. From Ampere's law, ∼1 mA current is needed to induce the required magnetic field at a color center whose distance from the electrode is ∼1 μm. Then, the input power at the mixing chamber plate should be 150 μW with 50 Ω termination outside the dilution refrigerator. The attenuation of the commercially available superconducting coaxial waveguide is ∼0.01 dB/m at a few GHz below 4 K The typical optical power needed to control and read out a color center is below 100 nW. Moreover, a readout of the spin state in a single-photon regime (0.001-0.1 average photon in a pulse) was demonstrated to be feasible by using a photonic crystal structure Although it is difficult to predict heat generation exactly at low temperatures, based on the above rough estimation, the total heat generation below the mixing chamber is two to three orders of magnitude smaller than that is generated in the entangled-photon scheme without memory. In addition, the entanglement generation rate of the memory-based scheme (several tens of kilohertz) is comparable to that of the entangled-photon scheme without memory. Namely, introducing the quantum memory interfacing microwave and optical photon can decrease heat generation, maintaining an entanglement generation rate in the tens of kilohertz at the cost of fabrication and control overhead. Though the memory-based entanglement generation scheme could be a promising option for operation in the 10 mK region, there are still several challenges to overcome. We must integrate all of the necessary functions (e.g., gate speed, memory time, strain sensitivity), which were demonstrated individually or at different color centers. Moreover, as mentioned above, the interaction be-tween a single electron spin and a microwave photon needs a proof-of-principle experiment. In contrast to the application to long-distance communication, gate speed to control the electron spin limits the whole entanglement generation rate. Thus, a quantum memory enabling fast initialization, control, and readout with a nuclear spin memory that has moderate memory time (∼ 10 ms) is desirable. It may be necessary to explore a color center that has suitable characteristics. Besides, considering the operation with a superconducting circuit, control of a color center under a zero-magnetic field We proposed a protocol for entanglement generation between remote superconducting qubits using solid-state spin quantum memories, which can be used as interfaces for both microwave and optical photons. Based on the current state-of-the-art technologies, we estimated the maximum entanglement generation rate to be 10-40 kHz. The proposed memory-based scheme's entanglement generation rate can exceed that of the direct conversion (DC) scheme as long as the microwave-to-optical conversion efficiency of DC is below 0.1. Moreover, the memorybased scheme can reduce the amount of heat generated below the mixing chamber compared to that generated by the entangled-photon scheme, which uses a strong optical pump to generate entangled-photon pairs. For quantum communication between remote superconducting qubits, the reduction of heat is a central issue considering that operation occurs inside a dilution refrigerator. This suggests the usefulness of introducing the quantum memory. Here we describe a protocol to generate entanglement between remote spins using a single photon. First, the color center spin in each node is prepared in the superposition state, (1/ √ 2)(|0 e + |1 e ). We assume a situation where |0 e can be optically excited and emit an optical photon while |1 e cannot (for experiments about the generation of a coherent photon using a color center, see Refs. . The state of the composite system (nodes A and B) is where |0 opt (|1 opt ) denotes the absence (presence) of an optical photon in the path from the spin to the detector. Then, the path information of the optical photon is erased using a beamsplitter before the detection of the photon at the photodetector. In a situation where only a single photon is detected, the state after the beamsplitter becomes Here, the events detecting zero or two photons are ignored since they do not contribute to the entanglement generation, which is the reason for factor 1/2 in eq. ( ), depending on the side on which the detectors is clicked. It is noteworthy that this formula applies only to a situation in which the difference in the optical path length between each node and the beamsplitter is zero. Practically, we should consider an additional phase depending on the difference in the optical path length. Just before the incidence to the beamsplitter, |0 ). To compensate this phase difference, the optical path length must be stabilized. If it is not, the phase of the resultant state becomes random, decreasing the fidelity of the entangled state. First, the two-photon protocol uses the same procedure as the single-photon protocol to generate the entangled state, with an additional phase as Since e iθA e iθ = e iθB , the additional phase in each term becomes the same, e iθB . Thus, using the two-photon protocol, at the cost of the time it takes to interfere with the optical photon twice, we can treat e iθ appearing in the single-photon protocol as a global phase, which we can ignore. The photon transmission efficiency from a color center to a detector, η opt e , can be defined as where is the optical coherent cooperativity Appendix C: Numerical simulation of the spin interacting with a microwave photon Here, we numerically calculate the absorption (emission) efficiency of a microwave time-bin photon by the electron spin following the formulation in Ref. where a mw (a † mw ) is the annihilation (creation) operator of the microwave photon at the microwave resonator, b m (b † m ) is the annihilation (creation) operator of the microwave phonon at the optomechanical cavity, and σ e (σ † e ) is the electron spin lowering (raising) operator. The resonance frequencies of the microwave resonator, the phononic resonator, and the electron spin are ω mw , ω m , and ω e , respectively. In the following, we consider the resonant condition, ω mw = ω m = ω e . We calculated the time evolution of the density matrix, ρ, of this system based on the master equation, where c i ∈ a mw , b m , σ † e σ e and γ ci ∈ {γ mw , γ m , γ e } corresponding to the decay (decoherence) rates of the respective excited states. For the microwave cavity and the optomechanical cavity, T 1 limits the experimentally feasible T 2 . Thus, T 1 processes are considered for the microwave cavity and the optomechanical cavity. On the other hand, T 2 relaxation is considered for the electron spin, since T 1 T 2 . To estimate the absorption efficiency of microwave photons by the spin, we performed a calculation based on eq. (C2) with an initial state in which a microwave photon is in the microwave cavity. Actually, the microwave photon comes from a waveguide coupled to the microwave cavity. For simplicity, we assumed that the coupling between the microwave cavity and the waveguide can be arbitrarily tuned. Once the microwave photon enters the microwave cavity, the coupling to the waveguide turns off and the waveguide can be ignored. Thus, we focus on only a system consisting of three qubits. We chose the following parameters for the calculation: the maximum population of the electron spin during the time evolution as a function of the mechanical-spin coupling and the quality factor of the microwave resonator, Q mw = ω mw /γ mw . If g e-m /2π ∼ 1 MHz, it is possible to realize η mw e > 0.1 with the quality factor of the microwave resonator of 10 3 -10 4 , which is easily achieved using a superconducting resonator. As mentioned in the main text, a superconducting qubit coupled to a cavity can emit a coherent microwave time-bin qubit, We consider a process whereby the electron spin in diamond absorbs this microwave time-bin qubit and generates entanglement with the superconducting qubit. For a case of a color center whose optically excited state has high strain sensitivity (e.g., NV -), the procedure is shown in is the optically excited state of |0 e (e.g., |E x for NV -). This kind of excitation using a red sideband was previously demonstrated in NV -using a classical strain field where Ω 0 is the Rabi frequency for the optical field and σ opt is the raising operator for the optical transition where n is the average number of phonons. Since we consider excitation of the spin by the single phonon, n = 1. Assuming that g m-e /2π can reach 1-10 MHz using a color center with high strain susceptibility (∼1 PHz/strain) with a phononic crystal cavity For a color center whose ground state has high strain sensitivity (e.g., NV 0 , SiV -), a procedure to absorb a microwave time-bin qubit is shown in Fig. Before explaining the detail of Fig. To generate entanglement between a superconducting qubit and the spin, |E mw virtually excites |0 e to |φ is optically excited with a laser pulse and emits |E opt . This procedure is repeated for |L mw , the same as in the case of NV -, generating the entanglement between the optical photon and the spin, (1/ √ 2)(|E opt |0 e + |L opt |1 e ). The rest the operation to generate entanglement between the superconducting qubit and the spin is the same as the protocol described in Appendix D 1 a. The process is the same for the typical two-photon (phonon) absorption in a three-level atom. Thus, the effective Rabi frequency between |0 e and |φ > 0.02, suggesting that this protocol can be applied to the entanglement generation protocol. It should be noted that in a high-strain regime, the phonon absorption rate decreases to 0.1-0.5 of the rate with zero strain Here, we describe a procedure to emit a microwave time-bin qubit from the spin. We take NV 0 as an example, as with the case shown in Appendix D 1 b. Different from the scheme discussed above, here we consider a moderate-to high-strain regime. Since an excitation to |φ mw e is forbidden using only a magnetic field, we consider operating NV 0 in the regime where the strain is not too strong so that 