Direct detection of superconductivity has long been a key strength of point-contact Andreev reflection. However, its applicability to atomic-scale imaging is limited by the mechanical contact of the Andreev probe. To this end, we present a new method to probe Andreev reflection in a tunnel junction, leveraging tunneling spectroscopy and junction tunability to achieve quantitative detection of Andreev scattering. This method enables unambiguous assignment of superconducting origins of current-carrying excitations as well as detection of higher order Andreev processes in atomic-scale junctions. We furthermore revealed distinct sensitivity of Andreev reflection to natural defects, such as step edges, even in classical superconductors. The methodology opens a new path to nanoand atomic-scale imaging of superconducting properties, including disordered superconductors and proximity to phase transitions. Andreev reflection (AR) occurs when electron traverses normal metal to superconductor interface, wherein a hole is retroreflected back into the metal and a Cooper pair is injected into the superconductor Scaling down Andreev measurements to nano-and even atomic-scales would provide a definitive methodology to directly probe microscopic properties of superconductivity, such as effects of disorder In this letter, we develop a non-contact Andreev re- tributes tunability of junction geometry and tunneling spectroscopy to the measurement of Andreev reflection. However, it does so at the expense of direct measurement of contact conductance, which is the fundamental observable in PCAR To reveal the properties of NCAR, we carried out detailed spectroscopy of normal metal -superconductor tunnel junction in well-understood Pb(110) as a model system [Fig. To detect Andreev reflection, dI/dV spectra were measured as a function of the distance between the tip and the sample [Fig. The change in κ was further quantified by calculating its dependence on bias from the log(dI/dV ) fitted by Gaussian process regression, and subsequently normalizing by the decay rate of normal tunneling κ 0 measured well outside the superconducting gap. This procedure should account for the variation of the decay rate in the normal tunneling regime, such as geometrical and chemical structure of the tunnel junction. The resulting normalized decay rate κ/κ 0 should now be primarily sensitive to the superconducting state. As seen in Fig. Theoretical modeling of NCAR was carried out with tight-binding simulations. From the theoretical point of view, we model our tunnel junction with the full Hamiltonian H = H tip + H sample + H tunneling , where we consider an effective one-dimensional transport geometry between the tip and the sample. We take a normal state tip H tip = t T n∈tip,s c † n,s c n+1,s + h.c. a superconducting substrate H sample = t S n∈sample,s d † n,s d n+1,s + ∆d † n,↑ d † n,↓ + h.c. and a height-dependent tunneling coupling between the tip and the sample H tunneling = V(z)d † 0 c 0 + h.c. . V(z) parametrizes the distance-dependent tunneling amplitude between tip and sample, that takes the form V(z) = v 0 e -λz with λ the decay constant [29]. In the tunneling regime, leading-order perturbation theory yields a conductance proportional to dI/dV ∝ V 2 for normal metal transport, and dI/dV ∝ V 4 for Andreev tunneling. The normalized decay rate is given by κ/κ 0 = κ ∆=∆ /κ ∆=0 where κ ∆=0 and κ ∆=∆ are the decay rates of the absence and presence of a superconducting gap, defined as κ = -1 λ dV dI dzdV evaluated at a bias V and distance to the sample z. We compute the dI/dV and κ factor using the non-perturbative S-matrix formalism implemented with finite temperature non-equilibrium Nambu Green's functions Our theoretical calculations shown in Fig. So far, our measurements and calculations point to a maximum value of κ/κ 0 of 2 in the tunneling limit We now elaborate on the physical interpretation of the normalized decay rate in near contact regime. From a perturbation theory point of view, the decay rate directly signals the order of the term in perturbation theory dominating the current. In the tunneling limit of the normal state the leading contribution comes from second order in the coupling constant, whereas in the tunneling limit of Andreev reflection it comes from fourth order in the coupling constant, leading to a normalized ratio κ/κ 0 = 2. For near contact regime, besides the lowest order terms in perturbation theory higher order terms lead to competing contributions in the current Furthermore, the enhancement of tunneling at the superconducting gap edge, which is marked by reduced Insets in (c) and (d) correspond to the maps at bias of 2.8 mV, -2.9 mV, respectively, both well outside the superconducting gap, where hardly any contrast in either observable is seen. κ/κ 0 < 1, is the signature of resonant tunneling to the superconducting gap edge Clearly, the compatibility of NCAR and NeCAR spectroscopies with STM junction enables microscopic measurements in both regimes down to atomic resolution. Intriguingly, NCAR revealed a new signatures of single atomic steps even on well-established Pb superconductor. Figure To summarize, we have put forward NCAR as a powerful method for characterizing superconducting properties on nanoscale. Our methodology detects Andreev reflection by via a connection between the decay rate of the tunneling current and the order of the term in perturbation theory describing the current mechanism. We showed that NCAR can unequivocally distinguish a superconducting gap from other types of single-particle gaps. Furthermore, at near contact our methodology detects next to leading order Andreev reflection processes, which is distinct from both contact and tunneling regimes. Even in conventional s-wave Pb superconductor, mapping NCAR signal exhibited enhancement of Andreev reflection at single atomic steps, providing a powerful method to image current carrying excitations at the atomic scale. In the future, this technique can be readily extended to the emerging families of unconventional and topological superconductors 