Photocurrent-voltage characteristic (PC-V) is a method of determining the critical parameter in X-ray and gammaray detector plates, i.e., the carrier mobilitylifetime product, ╬╝Žä. We show on the (Cd,Mn)Te samples that the measurement results depend strongly on the surface treatment and the charge space distribution. The PC-V characteristics obtained for ─¦’üĘ > E g and ─¦’üĘ ~ E g indicated that etching with 20% HCl caused an appearance of a significant concentration of very shallow surface traps at the (Cd,Mn)Te sample surface. These traps seriously changed the measurements of PC-V characteristics and PC kinetics. We also noticed a small contribution of holes to photoconductivity in the PC kinetics. The PC-V characteristics measurements for ─¦’üĘ > E g may test the detector plate surface quality. (Cd,Mn)Te is a wide bandgap semiconducting compound. We want to make it competitive with commonly used CdTe and (Cd,Zn)Te compounds for X-ray and gamma-ray detectors. The attained values of the resistivity, Žü ~ 10 10 ╬®cm, and the ╬╝Žä product, ╬╝Žä > 10 -3 cm 2 V -1 , make us hope for the commercial use of the material. A review of (Cd,Mn)Te studies as material for those detectors may be found in Ref. The Hecht-Many model assumes no space charge in the sample in stationary conditions. Therefore, the internal electric field is uniform, E = VL -1 , where E is the field, V is the applied voltage, and L is the sample thickness. The model also assumes that the parameters ╬╝ e and ’ü┤ e , are uniform in the sample volume. For (Cd,Zn)Te Cui et al. This study aimed to perform comparable measurements for (Cd,Mn)Te using the PC-V technique and different methods of preparing the sample surface. Similar experimental and theoretical studies were performed for (Cd,Zn)Te Below we present results of measurements of the PC-V characteristics. The results were compared with the measurements using the ╬│-rays (Am-241 59.6 keV). We show that the results of the PC-V investigation are significantly different for different methods of the sample surface preparation. Finally, we present the PC-V characteristics for the excitation by the light with energy above E g and slightly below E g . The crystals of Cd 0.95 Mn 0.05 Te:In ([In]Ōēł1├Ś10 17 cm -3 ) were prepared by the low-pressure Bridgman (LPB) method in the vertical configuration. To obtain semi-insulating materials with ’ü▓ ~ 10 10 ╬®cm the crystals were doped with indium. To obtain deep donors Te Cd 2+ Min Shen et al. Onto both types of surfaces thin contact layers Au/Pd or Pt/Pd with thicknesses ~ 30 nm were deposited using photolithography or the sputtering method. Palladium added to Au or Pt target increases adhesion. The monocrystalline samples had dimensions of 10├Ś10 mm 2 or 20├Ś20 mm 2 and thicknesses of 1-3 mm. In the center of the sample surface, the metal contact layers (anode and cathode) had diameters Žå = 5 mm for samples with dimensions 10├Ś10 mm 2 and Žå = 8 mm for samples with dimensions 20├Ś20 mm 2 . On the surfaces close to the sample edges, rings, whose role was to insulate the current between anode and cathode from the leakage current on the sidewalls of the sample, were deposited by sputtering or photolithography. For PC-V measurements, the central part of the cathode was illuminated through an aperture with Žå = 3 mm for samples with dimensions 10├Ś10 mm 2 and Žå = 5 mm for samples with dimensions 20├Ś20 mm 2 . The light sources were light-emitting diodes (LEDs), and the light passed through interference filters (IF) to reduce the width of a spectral range of the exciting radiation. The incident light power in ╬╝W, converted to eV/s and divided by the photon energy, enabled us to determine the number of incident photons. Each photon, reaching the sample surface through the metal contact, especially with the energy ─¦’üĘ > E g creates an electron-hole pair. For ─¦’üĘ much greater than E g the absorption coefficient in our samples is about 2├Ś10 4 cm -1 So, the current measured in the PC-V characteristic is an electron current. The PC-V characteristics were measured at a constant illumination of the middle part of the cathode by increasing the bias voltage. Kinetic of photocurrent was measured at a selected constant bias voltage by applying a nearly rectangular light pulse (pulse rise time ~ 0.5 ms). We excited the samples with photon energies ─¦’üĘ > E g and ─¦’üĘ ~ E g . The resistivity maps of all investigated samples were obtained by a contactless method -Time-Dependent Charge Measurement (TDCM) method with the use of EU-Žü-╬╝Žä-SCAN apparatus. The experiments were performed with the use of the following equipment: ’éĘ Two Keithley 6517B Electrometers were used to apply the bias voltage and to measure the current between cathode and anode and the current between rings on the cathode and anode sides. The rings, the cathode, and the anode were biased with the same voltage. ’éĘ Illuminating LEDs were powered by the Keithley 6220 Precision Current Source. ’éĘ The LED light passing through IF was uncovered and covered by the Thorlabs SC10 Shutter Controller. Radiation power was measured by the Thorlabs PM100D Optical Power Meter. ’éĘ PC kinetic was registered by the Tektronix MSO 54 Oscilloscope by using the pre-amplifier from the Keithley 6517B Electrometer. ’éĘ The PC-V and I-V characteristics were measured at a temperature of 306 K (33┬░C), higher than room temperature 294 K (21┬░C), using a slightly heated sample holder. In the first set of Cd 0.95 Mn 0.05 Te:In samples, the sample surfaces were etched with 10% or 15% HCl. The PC-V characteristic of one of the samples is shown in Figure where J 0 is the saturation photocurrent, ╬╝ e is the electron mobility, Žä e is the electron lifetime, E is the electric field intensity, and L is the sample thickness. The fitting parameters were ╬╝ e ’ü┤ e and J 0 . The value ╬╝ e ’ü┤ e obtained from the fit was about 0.81├Ś10 -3 cm 2 V -1 , and J 0 = 3.9├Ś10 -8 A. The energy of the illuminating LED light was slightly above the energy gap, ─¦’üĘ = 1.590 eV (E g + 15 meV). The absorption coefficient for this light energy is ╬▒ > 10 4 cm -1 , so the light is absorbed in a distance from the sample surface smaller than 1 ╬╝m. For the same sample, we measured the gamma-ray induced current using 59.6 keV gamma rays from an Am-241 source. The results fitted with the Hecht formula are shown in Figure Before the PC-V characteristics, resistivity maps of all investigated samples were obtained. A typical result is shown in Figure Therefore, we used rings close to the sample sides in measurements of PC-V and I-V characteristics. Semi-insulating samples, chosen for measurements of PC-V characteristics and PC kinetics, had resistivities with average values from 5├Ś10 9 ╬®cm to 2├Ś10 10 ╬®cm. As was mentioned in Chapter 2, the samples were cut out of the crystals parallel to the (111) plane. Contact layers, deposited onto polished and etched surfaces, had thicknesses ~ 30 nm. In the I-V measurements, we noticed that when the anode (+) was on the A (cadmium) side, the resistivity had a higher value than when the current was applied in the opposite direction, especially for the high voltage. A typical I-V characteristic is shown in Figure The right side of the plot shows the case when the anode is on the A (cadmium) side. This effect was checked on many samples with surfaces prepared by different methods. Experimentalists may pay attention to that. In Figure where s e is the surface recombination velocity. We measured the PC-V characteristics at different light intensities for the same sample. The results are shown in Figure where j represents the current density, ╬Ą 0 , ╬Ą r , V, I L , s e , and e are the vacuum and the relative permittivity, the applied bias voltage, the light intensity which reaches the sample passing the metal layer, surface recombination velocity, and the elementary charge, respectively. Parameter ╬Ė is defined as follows: where n is the free electron density, and n t is the trapped electron density. Usually n t >> n, so ╬Ė = n n t . In this model, the fitting parameters were ╬Ė and s e . I L value was determined from the saturation of photocurrent versus voltage The model considers surface effects and the non-uniform electric field distribution in the sample, especially in the vicinity of the cathode. Fits of the experimental data with the model from Ref. We can see that for the sample etched with 20% HCl, the photocurrent measured at different light intensities changes exponentially with applied bias voltage, with the exponent close to 3/2, which is shown in Figure , following the change of the capture cross-section proportional to E -3/2 . Such a relationship was obtained in Ref. [23] "for the decrease if the trapping cross-section as a function of electric field for germanium detectors". The results and their interpretation indicate quite deep traps. However, when the current is inversely proportional to the cross-section for Coulomb trapping, it should depend on the electric field like E 3/2 In order to explain the results presented in Figures 6, 8 Because of the presented results, we believe that we observe very shallow traps capturing electrons moving from the cathode, where they are generated by light. The increasing voltage causes de-trapping, and at the higher voltage the PC-V curve saturates. We suppose that the traps are very shallow, and their ionization at low voltage may be similar to the Poole-Frenkel effect. Moreover, for (Cd,Mn)Te crystals, the measurements of Pockels effect and Pockels Efield profiling where N e is the free electron concentration. Here we assume ╬╝ e = 800 cm 2 V -1 s -1 In Figure We are aware of the possible non-uniform electric field distribution, especially for high bias voltage and high light intensity. However, we try to estimate the ╬╝ e ’ü┤ e product from the relation: Then, L Ōēģ ╬╝ e Žä e E and ╬╝ e Žä e Ōēģ L 2 . We estimated the ╬╝ e ’ü┤ e value for the lowest light intensity as ~ 7├Ś10 -4 cm 2 V -1 . For the highest light intensity in Figure The kinetic of photocurrent was measured on the sample, the PC-V characteristics of which were presented in Figures Photocurrent was registered as a function of time. Then, a higher bias voltage was applied and the measurement was repeated. The same bias voltage was applied to the electrodes and to the rings at the sample edges for every run. The current was measured with the Keithley 6517B electrometer, displayed on the Tektronix MSO 54 Oscilloscope, and registered. The time base was 180 s. Using stable light with energy 1.608 eV, which is ~ 33 meV above the energy gap and which enters the sample at a distance smaller than 1 ╬╝m, we apply consecutively higher bias voltages to obtain the results shown in Figure First, we may estimate a possible influence of holes flowing back to the cathode on the kinetic of photocurrent. For photons with energy below E g , the PC kinetic is very fast, on the order of single seconds, and the hole contribution to the electric current is nearly negligible. However, at high bias voltages, V Ōēź 100 V, the signal after the first rapid rise (~1 s) increases slightly till about 100 s. This effect we attribute to the contribution of holes to the electric current. Second, we can see that the PC kinetic strongly depends on the surface states and surface charge. The PC-V characteristics at lower voltages and the PC kinetics for ─¦’üĘ > E g provide a method to check for the presence of traps and a non-uniform distribution of the electric field in the detector plate volume. At present, the photocurrent-voltage characteristics are increasingly used to determine the ╬╝ e Žä e , which is an essential parameter for X-ray and gamma-ray detectors. The present paper shows PC-V characteristics of semiinsulating (Cd,Mn)Te samples with differently prepared surfaces. We show that the different preparation of the surface leads to very different results, and in some cases, the Hecht-Many model cannot be applied. Furthermore, the PC-V characteristic features significantly changed with the concentration of HCl used after the polishing process. obtained from the analysis of the PC-V data for different light intensities according to the Ridzonova et al. model [13]: ╬Ė and s e are fitting parameters, N e was determined from the saturation current, and ╬╝ e Žä e was estimated for the lowest light intensity (see text).