The use of highly-active and robust catalysts is crucial for producing green hydrogen by water electrolysis as we strive to achieve global carbon neutrality. are currently used in industry for the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), but suffer from scarcity, high price and unsatisfied performance and stability at large current density, restricting their large-scale implementations. Here we report the synthesis of a new type of monolithic catalyst (MC) consisting of a metal disulfide (e.g., TaS2) catalyst vertically bonded to a conductive substrate of the same metal by strong covalent bonds. These features give the MC a mechanically-robust and electrically near-zero-resistance interface, leading to an outstanding HER performance including rapid charge transfer and excellent durability, together with a low overpotential of 398 mV to achieve a current density of 2,000 mA cm -2 as required by industry. The Ta-TaS2 MC has a negligible performance decay after 200 h operation at large current densities. In light of its unique interface and the various choice of metal elements giving the same structure, such monolithic materials may have broad uses besides catalysis. The excessive use of fossil fuel energy has caused serious environmental problems. Hydrogen (H2) is a clean energy carrier with zero-carbon emission and can be produced by water electrolysis driven by renewable energy, which is beneficial for future global carbon neutrality. Besides large current operation, in practice, stability is another key issue for hydrogen production electrodes, and is usually obtained by anchoring catalysts (such as alloying, clusters, or single-atoms Here we develop a monolithic catalyst (MC) to address these challenges. Specifically, a metallic transition metal dichalcogenide (m-TMDC) is vertically grown on a substrate of the same metal using an oriented-solid-phase synthesis (OSPS) method. Due to the nature of the monolith, charges can be directly transferred from the substrate to the catalyst without crossing van der Waals interfaces, providing highly efficient charge injection and an outstanding HER performance. This MC has almost zero interface resistance and therefore offers unimpeded electron transfer. Moreover, the catalyst is bonded to the substrate by covalent bonds, which gives excellent mechanical stability to withstand the large current densities needed for efficient hydrogen production. As an example, a tantalum-tantalum sulfide (Ta-TaS2) MC with a large area has been synthesized by the OSPS method and has shown superior hydrogen evolution activity, achieving 2,000 mA cm -2 with a small overpotential of 398 mV and continued working for more than 200 h under large current densities in a 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte without noticeable performance decay. To address the problems of catalyst peel-off and large interface resistance, our strategy is to build the catalyst from the substrate as illustrated in Fig. Consequently, such a structure fundamentally eliminates catalysts peel-off problem under high-current operations. More importantly, electrons do not have to tunnel over a van der Waals gap between adjacent TaS2 layers to reach active sites. Overall, the design provides an ultra-strong and highly electrically conductive interface for large current density water electrolysis. For HER, a metal substrate with abundant free electrons could inject electrons into the catalyst effectively for the subsequent reaction, and thus gives the catalyst a high reactivity. A cross-sectional lamella of the Ta-TaS2 MC is shown in Fig. The electrical conductivity of the Ta-TaS2 MC was examined to investigate its charge transfer ability in HER. As shown in Figs. We used the ∆η/∆log|j| ratios, which has recently been proposed to evaluate the performance of an electrocatalyst over a broad range of current density, The catalytic activity of the MC at a small current density was also measured to evaluate its thermodynamics. Fig. What more important, the Ta-TaS2 MC is also durable, with no decay even at 1,000 mA cm -2 after 200 h operations, as shown in Fig. 