In disordered transition-metal dichalcogenide (TMD) superconductor, both the strong spinorbit coupling (SOC) and disorder show remarkable effects on superconductivity. However, the features of SOC and disorder were rarely detected directly. Here we report the quantum transport behaviors arising from the interplay of SOC and disorder in the TMD superconductor 1T-NbSeTe. Before entering the superconducting state, the single crystal at low temperature shows a resistivity upturn, which is T 1/2 dependent and insensitive to the applied magnetic fields. The magnetoresistance (MR) at low temperatures shows a H 1/2 dependence at high magnetic fields. The characteristics are in good agreement with the electron-electron interaction (EEI) in a disordered conductor. In addition, the upturn changes and MR at low magnetic fields suggest the contribution of weak antilocalization (WAL) effect arising from the strong SOC in the material. Moreover, the quantitative analyses of the transport features in different samples imply anomalous disorder-enhanced superconductivity that needs to be further understood. The results reveal the disorder enhanced EEI and the strong SOC induced WAL effect in 1T-NbSeTe, which illustrate the resistivity minimum in the widely studied doped superconductors. The work also provides insights into the disorder effect on the superconductivity. Transition-metal dichalcogenides have become recently excellent platforms for investigations on various electronic orders due to their fruitful structural and electronic properties. The strong intrinsic SOC is one of the most intriguing properties of TMDs. The single crystals of 1T-NbSeTe were grown via the chemical vapor transport method using I2 as a transport agent as reported. The temperature dependent resistivity () of the single crystal 1T-NbSeTe is shown in Figure Thus, the resistivity upturn at high magnetic fields is insensitive to the magnetic fields, which is in agreement with the 3D EEI picture. The isotropic feature is also studied to further confirm the contribution from EEI. As shown in Figure It is worth noting that the MR deviates from the H 1/2 dependence at low magnetic fields. In addition, the resistively upturn at lower fields shows obvious changes. The results suggest other coexisting mechanism at low temperatures. As shown in inset of Figure In a system, the quantum interference behavior is crucially characterized by two times scales: [17,36] the dephasing time  and the spin-flip time SO. In the regime  SO, the spinorbit scattering is significant. We characterized the quantum interference effects and the EEI quantitatively using the phenomenological equation: where the first and second terms characterize the 3D EEI contribution. The third term is related to the scattering mechanism at relatively higher temperatures above the Tmin. Generally, the electron-phonon scattering at the higher temperatures would contribute to ~T3 or ~T5 term to the resistivity of a metallic system. However, as shown in the Figure The 3D WAL produces ∆ ∝ T -p/2 , where p is defined by the T dependence of the phase coherence time with p=3 for phonon scattering and p=2/3 for EE scattering. Nonmagnetic disorder was initially believed to show no effect on superconductivity ("Anderson theorem"), while the later Anderson localization theory reveals that disorder suppresses superconductivity and even leads to superconductor-to-insulator transition. The disorder-engineered enhancement of Tc in monolayer TaS2 was ascribed to the increment of carrier density In summary, the EEI and the WAL effect are demonstrated in the TMD superconductor 1T-NbSeTe. In the system, the resistivity upturn at low temperatures shows characteristics of EEI including the insensitivity to magnetic fields, isotropic nature and the obvious T 1/2 dependence. The MR dependence on H 1/2 also matches well with the EEI mechanism. In addition, the resistivity response to lower magnetic fields reveals the WAL effect due to the strong SOC in the material. Moreover, the quantitative analyses of different samples suggest an anomalous enhancement of superconductivity by disorder, which calls for further understanding. The strong electron correlations and SOC can produce rich phases of matter, e.g., spin liquid, ferromagnetism, Mott insulating, in TMD with 1T phase especially in the monolayer. 