The interplay between electron correlation and nuclear quantum effects makes our understanding of elemental hydrogen a formidable challenge. Here, we present the phase diagram of hydrogen and deuterium at low temperatures and high-pressure (P > 300 GPa) by accounting for highly accurate electronic and nuclear enthalpies. We evaluated internal electronic energies by diffusion quantum Monte Carlo, while nuclear quantum motion and anharmonicity have been included by the stochastic self-consistent harmonic approximation. Our results show that the long-sought atomic metallic hydrogen, predicted to host room-temperature superconductivity, forms at 577 In 1968, Ashcroft predicted that atomic metallic hydrogen is a room temperature superconductor To answer the aforementioned questions, we performed hydrogen phase-diagram calculations at a methodological cutting edge, by combining the highly accurate description of electron correlation, within diffusion quantum Monte Carlo (DMC), and the anharmonic lattice optimization accounting for nuclear quantum effects, within the stochastic self-consistent harmonic approximation (18-21) (SSCHA). DMC is a well-established framework that provides the most accurate internal energies of solid hydrogen We modeled phase III as the monoclinic C2/c-24 structure (27) Besides C2/c-24, we took into account the Cmca-12 crystalline symmetry (Fig. Finally, we simulated the atomic phase I4/amd-2, also named Cs-IV (22) (Fig. and 2(b), respectively. On the top of Figure Hydrogen transforms into the atomic metal at 577(15) GPa, much above the pressure predicted neglecting anharmonicity. The isotope shift of this transition is one of the biggest ever reported, as deuterium transits into its atomic metallic state at 640( Even though the anharmonic contributions significantly impact the energy difference between molecular and atomic phases, the latter turns out not to be as harmonic as suggested previously The anharmonicity increases the c/a ratio by about 0.12, independently of the pressure and the level of the electronic theory employed. A recent path integral molecular dynamics calculation also showed a nontrivial anharmonicity in the Cs-IV phase Before becoming an atomic metal, hydrogen undergoes another phase transition between two molecular phases (III→ VI). This transition occurs at 422 We find that the Cmca-12 structure does not transmit light in the IR around the transition pressure, in contrast with phase III (C2/c-24), as shown in Figure In Figure Reflectivity and electronic density of states are reported in SM (Figure In conclusion, the hydrogen phase diagram based on both highly accurate electronic internal energies computed by QMC and anharmonic nuclear quantum fluctuations provided by SSCHA, confirms that hydrogen undergoes a first-order phase transition from a conductive phase III (molecular C2/c-24) to metallic phase VI (molecular Cmca-12) at 422(40) GPa, in accordance with experiments indicate that the synthesis of atomic hydrogen has still to be fulfilled. Figure Details on the Phase Diagram calculation and the role of anharmonicity and electronic correlations In this Section, we describe in details how the phase diagram is computed, and discuss how it changes when we adopt a different electronic theory -density functional theory (DFT) versus diffusion quantum Monte Carlo (DMC) -with and without anharmonicity. We relaxed each structure by including quantum fluctuations and anharmonicity through the stochastic self-consistent harmonic approximation (SSCHA), optimizing the auxiliary force constants, centroid positions, and lattice vectors within the constraints of the symmetry group, at roughly every 100 GPa (from 250 GPa to 650 GPa). In the SSCHA calculations, we employed the DFT framework with the BLYP (26) exchange-correlation functional to account for electronic energy and determine the Born-Oppenheimer (BO) potential energy surface. BLYP is one of the most accurate DFT functionals for phase-diagram calculations of high-pressure hydrogen, outperforming more refined techniques such as hybrid DFT The static phase diagram simulated within DFT-BLYP is reported in Figure In particular, phase III becomes unstable at DFT-BLYP level after 310 GPa, when the free energy curvature becomes negative around an IR-active nuclear vibration at Γ. In Figure When more accurate DMC calculations are employed to evaluate its energy, this phase becomes unfavoured. Therefore, the instability of C2/c-24 towards P62/c is an artifact of the DFT-BLYP functional. The atomic phase In the atomic phase, the only free parameter is the c/a ratio of the primitive lattice vectors. In the following, we will then present its main properties as a function of the c/a value. The structure is stable at the static level, as it has a well-defined minimum. However, suppose we compute phonons at the harmonic level, and use the phonon dispersion to include the kinetic energy of ions due to the quantum zero-point motion. In that case, the total energy decreases with the c/a ratio until imaginary frequencies appear before the minimum is reached, and the system becomes unstable (see Fig. We computed the free energy Hessian at the SSCHA-relaxed c/a value, and it is stable by a significant amount, shifting the higher energy modes down only by about 250 cm -1 . Therefore, even if the structure itself is not so anharmonic, the stability of the structure is met only within a complete anharmonic calculation. It turns out that the c/a equilibrium value is strongly functional dependent. Nevertheless, by running a SSCHA simulation either with BLYP or with PBE, we verified that the effect of the SSCHA on the c/a parameter is additive on the functional used and, thus, the shift with respect to the static equilibrium value is rather functional independent. Interestingly, the atomic phase is in the proximity of a Lifshitz transition, signaled by a sudden jump of the DOS, which is indeed located very close to the Fermi level ( F ). This is reported in Figure - In the left panel, this is plotted as a function of c/a. On the right panel, the origin of the c/a axis is set to the equilibrium value of c/a for each volume and functional. The abscissa at which the curves cross the y = 0 line is the c/a value when the system undergoes the Lifshitz transition. This is neither volume nor functional universal. There is a strong linear correlation between the energy location of the Lifshitz transition and the c/a value, as revealed by plotting the distance of the Lifshitz transition energy from F as a function of c/a for all volumes and functionals taken into account (Figure Care must be taken in evaluating the distance of the Lifshitz transition energy from the Fermi level. Indeed, the Fermi level determination could be affected by the choice of the smearing parameter. In our analysis, we employed the so-called "cold" smearing (aka the Marzari-Vanderbilt scheme). We repeated the calculation for three volumes by using the Gaussian smearing and the Fermi-Dirac smearing, and compared their outcome for the Fermi energy determination. It turns out that the difference in the Fermi level is at most 20 meV. The data are reported in Table We report here additional information regarding the optical properties of phase III, phase VI and the atomic one. To complete the analysis presented in the main text about the comparison between phase III and VI, in Figure To compute the optical properties of phase III and VI, we used supercells containing 324 atoms, where phonons are accounted for as static disorder (adiabatic approximation). We evaluated the refractive index and the transmitted light through a 1.5 μm thick sample. This is the typical thickness of experimental samples at the target pressures. To avoid the systematic underestimation of the empty bands energy in the DFT calculation, we employed the modified Becke-Johnson meta-GGA exchange-correlation functional As far as the comparison between phase IV and the atomic phase is concerned, we complement the data reported in the main text by including the optical conductivity (real and imaginary part) computed for the Cmca-12 and Cs-IV between 460 GPa and 660 GPa in Figure As mentioned in the paper, our results on the optical properties are at variance with the ones of Ref. In ordinary materials like silicon, these effects contribute as a small perturbation. However, this is not the case of hydrogen, where the electron-phonon interaction shifts the bands by 2 eV. We carried out a thorough study of the convergence of the Cs-IV reflectivity with respect to the number of k-points, the smearing (Figure The reflectivity shown in the main text has been obtained by employing a 729 k-mesh with a smearing of 0.05 eV. The reflectivity depends weakly on the electronic temperature when its value is lower than the smearing. Thus, at 300 K, the temperature used in our analysis, the reflectivity is fully converged in its temperature dependence. The most important dependence introduced by the finite smearing is the drop of reflectivity at low frequency. This is due to the strong but trivial dependence of the Drude peak. In Figure then took supercells with volume V s = L x L y L z V , where L i are the number of unit-cell replica in the i-th direction. Accordingly, the twists have been taken as belonging to the where int is the integer function. The ground state energies have been extrapolated by using supercells as large as N = 768 for the molecular phases, while for atomic I4/amd-2 symmetry we used supercells as large as N = 1024. The final extrapo-lations have been performed by a linear fitting in 1/N , computed with Kwee-Zhang-Krakauer (KZK)-corrected energies We also investigated the role of the FNA in DMC, by exploiting the capabilities of Tur-boRVB for optimizing the Slater orbitals φ k i . Due to the increased cost of these simulations, we performed the nodal optimization by the variational Monte Carlo energy minimization at the special k-point only We have mentioned that the QMC corrections reported in Figure corrections are obtained from DMC energies computed within the fixed-node approximation (FNA) and with DFT-LDA nodes. In line with previous literature, we name phases with the symmetry group followed by the number of atoms in