Traditional CdS buffer layer in selenium-free Cu(In,Ga)S2 solar cells leads to reduced open-circuit voltage because of a negative conduction band offset at the Cu(In,Ga)S2/CdS interface. Reducing this loss necessitates the substitution of CdS by an alternative buffer layer. However, the substitute buffer layer may introduce electrical barriers in the device due to unfavorable band alignment at the other interfaces such as between buffer/ZnO i-layer. This study aims to reduce interface recombinations and eliminate electrical barriers in Cu(In,Ga)S2 solar cells using a combination of Zn1-xMgxO and Al-doped Zn1-xMgxO buffer and i-layer combination deposited using atomic layer deposition and magnetron sputtering, respectively. The devices prepared with these layers are characterized by current-voltage and photoluminescence measurements. Numerical simulations are performed to comprehend the influence of electrical barriers on the device characteristics. An optimal composition of Zn1-xMgxO x = 0.27 is identified for a suitable conduction band alignment with Cu(In,Ga)S2 with a bandgap of ~1.6 eV, suppressing interface recombination and avoiding barriers. Optimized buffer composition together with a suitable i-layer led to a device with 14 % efficiency and an open-circuit voltage of 943 mV. A comparison of optoelectronic measurements for devices prepared with ZnO and Al:(Zn,Mg)O shows the necessity to replace the ZnO i-layer with Al:(Zn,Mg)O i-layer for a high-efficiency device. Buffer and window layers are essential for p-n junction formation and charge carrier separation in heterojunction chalcopyrite solar cells. Traditionally, cadmium sulfide (CdS) buffer layer in combination with intrinsic zinc oxide (ZnO) and aluminum-doped zinc oxide (Al:ZnO) window layer is used as optimum partners for high-efficiency copper indium gallium sulfoselenide Cu(In,Ga)(S,Se)2 devices. We recently demonstrated a CIGSu device (EG ~ 1.57 eV) with a PCE of 15.2 % obtained by successfully substituting the CdS buffer layer with Zn(O,S) buffer layer deposited using chemical bath deposition. In this contribution, the replacement of the CdS/i-ZnO (buffer/i-layer) stack is explored by a (Zn,Mg)O /Al:(Zn,Mg)O stack using atomic layer deposition (ALD) and magnetron sputtering process that does not require an additional high temperature-annealing step. The impact of varying Absorber deposition: Cu-poor CIGSu absorbers were prepared on Mo coated soda-lime glass substrates via a 3-stage co-evaporation process at a temperature of ~ 570 o C with the final film thickness of ~2 μm. The detailed procedure is reported in Ref Buffer deposition: Prior to buffer deposition, all the absorbers were etched in 5% KCN solution for 30 seconds to remove any oxides, followed by rinsing and storing in de-ionized water. This was done to prevent the possible degradation of optoelectronic properties of chalcopyrite absorbers by air exposure, as observed previously. i-layer and transparent conductive oxide widow layer deposition: Both ALD and magnetron sputtering was used for i-layer deposition. The sputtering process for Al:(Zn,Mg)O is based on previous work on (Zn,Mg)O. The composition of deposited films was determined by EDS performed on films grown on Si substrate for ALD deposited (Zn,Mg)O and on molybdenum coated soda-lime glass for sputtered Al:(Zn,Mg)O. After i-layer deposition, a transparent conductive oxide (TCO) window layer (Al:ZnO) was sputtered onto the samples. For this, a 2 wt % Al-doped ZnO single target was sputtered at 140 W. Other growth conditions were the same as for Al:(Zn,Mg)O deposition. The Ni-Al grids were deposited on the samples using e-beam evaporation to complete the device fabrication process. On each sample, several devices of area ~0.5 cm 2 were realized by mechanical scribing. Characterization methods: EDS with an operating voltage of 20 kV was used to determine the stoichiometry of as-grown absorbers and buffer layers. For determining the thickness of the ALD deposited (Zn,Mg)O buffer layer, a Si wafer was placed alongside the CIGSu samples in each run. The thickness of (Zn,Mg)O film on Si wafer was then determined by ellipsometry using an effective medium approximation model. Photoluminescence (PL) measurements were carried out in a home-built system using a steady-state excitation via a CW diode laser of 405 nm wavelength as the excitation source. The raw PL data was acquired through two off-axis mirrors, then spectrally resolved and detected by a monochromator and Si-CCD, respectively. Spectral and intensity corrections are subsequently applied to the raw PL data. The spectral correction is performed with a commercial calibrated halogen lamp. The intensity correction entails the measurement of the laser beam diameter with a charged-couple device (CCD) camera and the laser power by a photodetector. The photon flux from the laser is calculated and adapted to the AM 1.5 solar spectrum photon flux above the bandgap. Thus, an illumination corresponding to '1 sun' for a bandgap of ~1.6 eV is used on the samples. The corrected spectrum is transformed into the energy domain and assessed using Planck's generalized law For measuring device J-V properties, a Xenon short-arc lamp AAA-Standard solar simulator was used together with an IV source-measure unit. The simulator was calibrated to air mass 1.5 global using a Si reference cell. For determining the external quantum efficiency (EQE) of devices, EQE setup consisting of halogen and xenon lamps, a grating monochromator, a chopper and calibrated reference diodes was used. The current was measured using a lock-in amplifier and the intensity of the light by calibrated reference diodes. Low-temperature J-V measurements were performed by mounting the samples in a closed-cycle cryostat chamber, where a base pressure below 4x10 -3 mbar is maintained. For measuring the J-V at one-sun illumination conditions, a cold mirror halogen lamp with an equivalent intensity of 100 mW/cm 2 was used. The lamp intensity was adjusted by setting the short-circuit current density (Jsc) of the sample equal to the value measured under the solar simulator, which was achieved by changing the height of the lamp from the sample. For precise measurement of the sample temperature, a Si-diode sensor glued onto an identical glass substrate was placed just beside the solar cell. Numerical simulation: Numerical simulations were done using the solar cell capacitance simulator (SCAPS-1D), which solves the one-dimensional Poisson and continuity equation for electrons and holes, using appropriate boundary conditions at the interfaces and the contacts. The software is developed at the Department of Electronics and Information Systems (ELIS) of the University of Gent, Belgium, under Marc Burgelman. We start by exploring the effect of different compositions of Zn1-xMgxO buffer layers on the CIGSu device performance. For this purpose, we used ALD deposited Zn1-xMgxO films with x = 0.27, 0.30 and 0.37, with a measured bandgap of 3.8 eV, 3.9 eV, and 4.6 eV, respectively. The composition was chosen based on the following argument: the CIGSu/CdS device has an activation energy value ~0.2 eV less than the bulk bandgap of CIGSu for the dominant recombination pathway, In the case of ZnO i-layer devices, the loss in FF is even higher than the Al:(Zn,Mg)O i-layer devices therefore the PCE is lower. The loss in FF is due to distortion in the J-V curve of the devices in the form of 'S shape' in the negative power quadrant and rollover in the positive power quadrant, as evident in the J-V curve of devices (Figure With the increasing Mg content in the buffer, the interface VOC deficit increases, particularly in the devices prepared with the ZnO i-layer. This indicates an increased qFLs loss in the device. The loss originates partially from the absorber degradation after buffer deposition, as the qFLs measurements display a drop in qFLs after (Zn,Mg)O buffer deposition (see Figure The above results suggest that the Zn1-xMgxO (x = 0. The J-V curves of the devices with x ≥ 0.3 in the Zn1-xMgxO buffer layer exhibit 'S shape' in the negative power quadrant and a rollover at a forward bias above their VOC (Figure The electrical barrier in the devices studied here likely originates from the increased CBM of the (Zn,Mg)O buffer films with increased Mg content, as observed earlier by Minemoto et al. From Figure 1. Device with a CBO of 0.2 eV at the absorber/buffer interface, -0.4 eV at the buffer/i-layer interface, and no CBO at the i-layer/TCO interface (the dash-dotted line Figure 2. Device with a CBO of 0.2 eV at the absorber/buffer interface, -0.2 eV at both buffer/i-layer and i-layer/TCO interfaces (the solid line Figure The CBM of the i-layer in the second device is 0.2 eV higher than the first device (based on observed 0.2 eV increase in the bandgap for Al:(Zn,Mg)O compared to ZnO see Figure By varying Mg concentration in buffer and i-layer, we vary either the CBM of the buffer or the CBM of the i-layer in the devices prepared in this study above. An increase in φ b ph and φ b in is expected with the increase in Mg concentration in the Zn1-xMgxO buffer layer and a decreases with an increase in the i-layer, as it is known to increase the CBM of the films. Below we discuss three scenarios: (i) varying CBO at the absorber/buffer interface with constant CBO at the buffer/i-layer, (ii) varying CBO at the buffer/i-layer interface with constant CBO at the absorber/buffer interface, and (iii) finally varying the CBM in the buffer, thus varying CBO at the absorber/buffer and the buffer/i-layer interface. The first two cases particularly help to distinguish the effect of the CBO at the absorber/buffer interface and the buffer/i-layer interface on the J-V curves of the device separately. The parameters used for these simulations are reported in table The equilibrium band diagram and the J-V characteristics are simulated and presented in Figure It must be noted that although such a device with high φ b ph as evident from Figure Next, let us look at the impact of scenario (ii) on the device J-V characteristics with no CBO at the CIGSu/buffer interface. The CIGSu device is simulated with different CBO at the buffer/i-layer interface, maintaining flat CBO at the CIGSu/buffer interface. The barrier φ b in was varied by varying the CBM of the i-layer and keeping the CBM of the buffer layer fixed at a value equal to the CBM of the absorber (i.e. with equal electron affinity). Such a device can be envisioned The FF of the simulated devices deteriorates as the CBO at the buffer/i-layer interface decreases below -0.25 eV. Moreover, even the VOC starts deteriorating for CBO values below < -0.50 eV. The drop in FF is a direct consequence of an 'S shape' in the form of a strong rollover in the positive power quadrant, which suggests blocking on injected carriers or conventional diode current in forward bias. The rollover is observed because the φ b in increases with increasing negative CBO at the buffer/i-layer interface (see Figure It must be noted that when compared to the device with a high CBO at the absorber/buffer interface, i.e. case (i), the drop in FF is not that substantial in these devices (see Figure eV and 4.6 eV, respectively for Al:Zn1-xMgxO and ZnO i-layers). The simulated J-V curves display 'S shape' in the negative power quadrant and rollover in the positive power quadrant as the CBM of buffer and consequently the CBO at the CIGSu/buffer interface increases beyond a specific value, which is different for both structures. For the Al:(Zn,Mg)O i-layer device, a significant distortion in the J-V curve is observable for CBO values above 0.35 eV, whereas, for the ZnO i-layer device, the S-shape and rollover are observable even for CBO values above 0.20 eV (see Figure where increasing Mg content in the (Zn,Mg)O buffer resulted in lower FF and VOC independent of the i-layer. Therefore, the electrical barriers in the device can explain successfully the 'S shape' and rollover and, consequently, the loss in FF and VOC observed in experiments. To summarize, a high positive CBO at the absorber/buffer interface limits the photocurrent due to a high φ b ph , thus leading to 'S shape' in the negative power quadrant. A high negative CBO at the buffer/i-layer on the other hand reduces the diode current in the device due to a higher φ b in . Consequently, this leads to an increased series resistance in the device, and in some cases to a 'S shape' in the positive power quadrant. In both scenarios, the FF of the device decreases due to electrical barriers. Numerical simulations show that a high conduction band offset at the absorber/buffer interface alone leads to photocurrent blocking and therefore 'S shape' in the negative power quadrant. Also, a high conduction band offset at the buffer/i-layer interface leads to diode current blocking and, therefore, a rollover in the positive power quadrant. When present together, they lead to 'S shape' in the negative power quadrant and rollover in the positive power quadrant and, consequently, reduce the FF of the device. In addition, a high negative CBO at the buffer/i-layer interface results in a drop in electron Fermi-level at the interface, causing interface VOC deficit in the devices. In general, not only the CBO at the absorber/buffer but also the buffer/i-layer interface has a significant impact on solar cell characteristics. For the CIGSu device, the alternative buffer layers and i-layers must be chosen such that they have minimum CBO at the absorber/buffer and buffer/i-layer interface. Also, a low-temperature deposition process must be chosen for buffer and i-layer to preserve the qFLs and enhance the VOC and, consequently, the power conversion efficiency of the device. . Exemplary calibrated PL spectra of one of the absorbers used to fabricate device. The qFLs is obtained by transforming these PL spectra using Planck's generalized law as explained in Ref Figure 2b interface increases. The Al:(Zn,Mg)O i-layer outperforms the traditional ZnO i-layer in terms of PCE as it causes improvement in FF and the interface VOC deficit. The gain is associated with a higher CBM and, therefore, lower CBO at the buffer/i-layer interface. Thus we confirm Al:(Zn,Mg)O as a good substitute for traditional ZnO i-layer in CIGSu solar cells.