The present work represents a review for the numerical calculation of the density of states (DoS) for two-dimensional tight-binding models with first neighbors in its normal state and for two superconducting order parameters. One is a singlet scalar state and the other is a triplet vector state. At the beginning an emphasis is given to the general expressions commonly used to the calculation of the density of states as the number of partial and total number of states, the degrees of freedom and the ab-initio methods most commonly used to its calculation. Then, the transition happening to the DoS normal states by varying the Fermi energy and the hopping parameter is investigated. After that, the numerical calculation of the superconducting density of states using the zero-temperature scattering cross-section is performed for the two order parameters. Finally, the residual density of states depending on disorder and the scattering potential strength using the Larkin equation are calculated for the two order parameter symmetries different in nature. The density of states (DoS) is a quantum mechanical concept derived from the total number of quantum states (Φ) with an energy less than the value of E in a microscopic system, where Φ provides the total number of states and increases in energy with the DoS defined as ρ(E) = dΦ(E)/dE. Also, the DoS can be derived within a small interval of energies δE as function of a reduced number of microscopic states (Ώ) with the DoS being the proportionality coefficient in the relationship Ώ(E) = ρ(E)δE, where Ώ is constant in energy Additionally, the DoS can be function of external parameters such as those of extensive type defined in statistical thermodynamics In general, the DoS it is a measure of how many microscopic states are available to a system in a particular range of values of the energy. If the ground state energy for a physical system with N particles is given by E0 = fNε0, the energy difference from of an excited state from the ground state is represented by a general expression linking several parameters. Thus, E -E0 = fN(〈ε〉 -ε0), where the notation indicates that 〈ε〉 is the mean quantum energy per particle, ε0 is the ground state energy of each particle, N is the number of particles, E and E0 are the total energy and ground state energy of the N particles, and f are the degrees of freedom. This mean that the total number of states Φ(E -E0) ~ Φ(〈ε -ε0〉) N ~ (〈ε〉 -ε0) N is a big number even for only one kind (f = 1) of degrees of freedom. _____________________________________________________________________ *Corresponding author e-mail: pcontreras@ula.ve Canadian Journal of Pure and Applied Sciences 5660 In solid state physics, the DoS is expressed in terms of the system ́s energy. As some authors point out Thus, a DoS equation with equal number of spin up and down particles can be written as: 1) the sum of infinite delta functions; 2) as the derivative of the total number of states; 3) as a proportionality coefficient of the partial number of states, i.e. The last two expressions relate the DoS and the number of total or partial states. An instructive interpretation of the DoS from a geometrical perspective is given in The sum inside the delta function in momentum space is adequate for the normal state DoS since disorder only changes the DoS value by a constant quantity. But in the other cases such as unconventional superconductors, it is easy to replace the sum by a weighting factor into an energy integral, which is easier to deal with. Summarizing, the DoS is extensively used in applications to Statistical Mechanics, Solid State Physics, and Quantum Chemistry. Ab-initio routines include the calculation of the DoS, and more important is that the DoS can be calculated not only for systems with N particles but also for: 1) single molecules at the Hartree-Fock HF/6-311G* level The structure of this work is as follows: In the following section, some details of the computational approach are outlined. In the third section, a detailed DoS calculation of the normal state with a tight binding model is performed. In the fourth section, the calculation of the superconducting DoS is performed for singlet and a triplet order parameters (OP). In the final section, the behavior of the residual density of states is addressed for both models using the formalism following the Larkin equation For the numerical calculation of the DoS in the normal state, we make use an approximation of the Delta function using a 2D sum for momentum dependency with a δfunction approximated by where Σkx,kyδ(E -ξi,k) is approximated by a Lorentzian 2D function. For the calculation of equation ( where R means the real part of the function g(͠ ω). The Fermi level DoS is NF and the function containing the impurity effects is and has a zero superconducting energy gap parameter dependence. The function g(͠ ω) has the Fermi average <...>FS. This part requires a calculation that implies uncommon numerical routines to find from the zero selfconsistent elastic scattering cross-section, the real and imaginary parts. The study of the zero-temperature elastic scattering cross-section was firstly proposed in Additionally, extended studies of the zero elastic scattering cross-section were recently performed in In Finally, the quasi-nodal model was contrasted with the linear OP behavior by fixing the Fermi energy and the zero-temperature superconducting gap in other to see the interplay between different kind of quasiparticles If we are dealing with more than one Fermi surface sheet, the DoS is calculated according to equations such as which is suitable for strontium ruthenate in a non-selfconsistent way using a TB parametrization aiming at fitting experimental low-temperature data such as ultrasound attenuation in the superconducting state (T) The equation used to calculate the DoS in dirty superconductors when taking into account the reduced phase space is the following one where R(͠ ω) and I(͠ ω) are the coordinates in the reduced phase space, and the other symbols are The tight-binding Fermi averages replacing the sum "Σkx,ky(...)" are performed using a weight in energy instead of the sum, i.e. where E is the energy of the normal state, the Fermi velocity is given by the gradient , the surface k-space element is expressed as dSF = (dkx 2 + dky 2 ) 1/2 , and the normal state density of states at the Fermi level is calculated by In this section, we demonstrate how the evolution of the density of states (DoS) can be numerically modeled by varying the Fermi energy parameter in equation ( For the values of the parameters listed in Table The drop to zero of the normal DoS can be understood in terms of a number of partial available quantum states constant as it has been explained in the introduction. Therefore, the DoS being a coefficient of the partial number of states Ω (see the introduction of this work) becomes negligible and probably other degrees of freedom start to play a more important role at those energies where N(E) drops to a zero value, meaning a constant number of partial states Ω. In the superconducting state, we can compare two OP models. The 2D TB line nodes used to model the strontium doped lanthanum copper oxide superconductor with a Tc  44.35 K for a polycrystalline sample The triplet case is represented in this section for the 2D γsheet Miyake Narikiyo quasi-point nodes model We would like to point out the intriguing 2D electronic nature of this material as is pointed out in In addition, to take into account the nonmagnetic disorder effects in both order parameter models inside the superconducting DoS and the residual DoS, we use:  The Born limit given by l kF >> 1 or l a -1 >> 1, where l is the mean free path, a is the lattice parameter, and kF is the Fermi momentum.  The intermediate scattering regime with l kF ~ l a -1 > 1.  The unitary limit where holds that l kF ~ l a -1 ~ 1. We use the parameter c which is inverse to the scattering strength U0 to describe the dispersion limits for both OP numerical models. During the 1970s and the 1980s, the formalism and some phenomenology of the physics for nonmagnetic impurity scattering in normal metals and alloys were described in Figure The next calculation is performed for the γ sheet of the triplet superconductor strontium ruthenate with an OP that belongs to the irrep E2u of the D4h point group. Figure Figure For the parameter value of ζ = 0.01, we observe still an intermedia well-formed BCS gap from frequencies in the interval (0.4, 0.83) meV and with a small quantity of quantum states at low frequencies due to strong scattering that happens in the unitary regime when the reduced phase space is activated with a nonzero imaginary part of the cross-section, and the mean free path l is comparable to the magnitude of the inverse Fermi length |kF| -1 , or to the value of the lattice parameter a. To illustrate what happens numerically we show in the insert on the upper left side of Figure For the impurity value of ζ = 0.05, it agrees with an inhomogeneous phase that is the Miyake-Narikiyo tiny gap inside of which there are not fermionic quantum levels. Henceforth, the tiny Miyake-Narikiyo tiny gap predicted and used to explain microscopically the behavior of triplet pairing superconductors such as strontium ruthenate Therefore, for the disorder parameter values of ζ = 0.10, 0.15, 0.20, there are normal state DoS levels available, and the peak at ω = 1.4 meV considerable reduces with a tendency where N(ω) ~ NF above Tc. Therefore, in the superconducting triplet model, we observe two phases, one tiny phase (the MN gap) without electronic levels (BCS type) and another with normal-state dressed quantum levels, contrasting with the strontium substitute lanthanum cuprate calculation, where dressed fermionic levels are found. The residual equation for the density of states is theoretically obtained by setting up the real frequency as an imaginary number, i.e. ω = iα in equation ( where equation ( There is the functional dependence Tc/Tc0 = f(N(0)/NF), where Tc0 indicates the transition temperature without disorder and Tc is the transition temperature including disorder in the Larkin equation In equation ( The analytical expressions for the calculation of the relationship Tc/Tc0 = f(N(0)/NF) for the cases plotted in this section can be obtained after some long algebraic manipulations using equations ( Theoretically it is known that nonmagnetic impurities destroy superconductivity in unconventional superconductors In Figure Fig. This work was aimed at revisiting the calculation of the density of states (DoS) and the residual DoS with frequency values taken from a self-consistent calculation of the real and imaginary parts of the elastic scattering cross-section with a tight binding framework and for two order parameter models. The strontium-substituted lanthanum cuprate line nodes case It was concisely reviewed main concepts and the importance of the DoS in ab-initio calculations for novel materials and also outlined the details of the computational approach. Also, a detailed DoS calculation of the normal state with a tight binding model was performed and interpreted in the terms of the degrees of freedom. In addition, the calculation of the superconducting DoS was self-consistently performed for singlet and a triplet OP using the zero-temperature elastic cross-section for three scattering regimes. Finally, the behavior of the residual DoS was addressed for both models using the formalism following the Larkin equation It is recommended to use the tight-binding and other abinitio frameworks to the study of numerical simulations as the density of states and other physical properties in doped unconventional superconductors as recently it has been done in the following work Concerning the approach developed in this work to obtain the imaginary part of the self-energy used to calculate the DoS, it is worthy to mention that several interesting pioneer studies about the decay of single-particle excitations in weak-coupling superconductors and the calculation of the conductivity scattering rate were conducted in the following work 