The discovery of giant tunnel electroresistance (TER) in Ferroelectric Tunnel Junction (FTJ) paves a futuristic possibility of utilizing the FTJ as a bi-stable resistive device with an enormously high ON/OFF ratio. In the last 20 years numerous studies have reported that the formation of multi-domain in ferroelectric material is an inevitable process to minimize the total system energy. Recent studies based on phase field simulations have demonstrated that domain nucleation/motion substantially alters the electrostatics of a ferroelectric material. However, the impact of domain dynamics on quantum transport in FTJ remains elusive. This paper presents a comprehensive study of multi-domain dynamics in a ferroelectric tunnel junction. The analysis of this article is twofold; firstly, we study the impact of domain dynamics on electrostatics in an FTJ. Subsequently, the obtained electrostatics is used to study the variations in tunneling current, and TER originated from multi-domain dynamics. We show that ON/OFF current density and TER vary locally in the ferroelectric region. Furthermore, due to the periodic domain texture, device's electrostatics and quantum transport exhibit an oscillatory nature. The ON/OFF current density shows a sine/cosine distribution in ferroelectric, and approximately one-decade local variations in current density are observed. These local fluctuations in current density cause the oscillations in the device's ON/OFF ratio (TER). The optimization techniques to achieve a uniform and maximum TER are also discussed. On top of that, a 2-D analytical and explicit model is derived by solving coupled 2-D Poisson's equation and Landau-Ginzburg equation. The switching and nucleation of domains are incorporated in the model by minimizing net ferroelectric energy (depolarization energy density+free energy density+gradient energy density). Furthermore, the impact of the bottom insulator layer on ferroelectric's gradient energy is also studied. A ferroelectric tunnel junction (FTJ) utilizes the mechanism of quantum tunneling to switch between bistable states . To explore the microscopic physics of quantum tunneling in FTJ, first principle-based atomistic/numerical simulations were performed Even though plenty of studies is being reported on FTJs, the domain dynamics of FTJs are still not precise yet. Therefore, a comprehensive literature review is divided into four parts to understand the domain dynamics in ferroelectric materiel. The phenomenal paper by Bratkovsky et al. was the fundamental work that studied the impact of the insulator layer on the domain formation in a ferroelectric dielectric stack Additionally, numerous researches also studied the domain dynamics in ferroelectric material by analyzing the domain wall velocity. The motion of domain wall by an applied electric field is classically defined by Merz law In recent years phase field models have been used for the ferroelectric-dielectric layer to study the nucleation and domain wall motion in ferroelectric with applied voltage. The phase-field model was formulated by solving the time-dependent Ginzburg-Landau (TDGL) equation with the combination of Chensky-Tarasenko (C-T) formalism Another phase field modeling class focuses on studying polycrystalline grains/domains in the ferroelectric material. Effect of grain boundary and its orientation on domain switching is studied by Choudhury et al. An analytical model based on Tsu-Esaki's current equation reveals that the TER of an FTJ can achieve an enormous value near zero bias by the polarization switching and direct tunneling through the FE barrier 77 . Theoretical calculations of polarization reversal and restive switching in an FTJ were performed by Kohlstedt et al. As discussed in the introduction section, in the last few years, there have been a massive number of studies are centered around FTJs. Nevertheless, only a mono-domain state in FE is considered in most research. The Preisach hysteresis model is used by Huang et al. to model multi-domains in FTJ. But, to capture the motion and nucleation of the domain wall, the total ferroelectric energy should be minimized by comprising both Landau-Ginzburg and Poisson's equation Hence, up to the author's knowledge, no study has analyzed the impact of multi-domain on electrostatics and transport characteristics of an FTJ. Fig. x The 2-D solutions of the above equation are given in supplementary material. Green's function approach is generally used to obtain the electrostatic of a 2-D region bounded by Dirichlet and Neumann boundary conditions Non-equilibrium Electrostatics of domains Fig. On the other hand, when applied bias is shifted along the negative direction, an expansion in the downward domain period is observed (see Fig. From Fig. Due to multi-domains, the spatial variations in T(E) will introduce local fluctuations in current density. The absolute magnitude of ON and OFF current densities are shown in Fig. The domain wall starts to move with the enhancement in applied bias at that moment the switching mechanism starts to kick in (see Fig. The next step is to analyze the spatial variations in the ON/OFF ratio of the device. TER is defined as a modulation in conductivity due to the polarization reversal. Here, TER is defined as the ON/OFF current density ratio. Fig. Device optimization for maximum TER Spatial variations in TER are originated due to the periodicity in upward and downward domains (see Fig. Impact of bottom layer dielectric thickness (tox 2 ) Fig. More domains are nucleated to compensate for increased energy density due to the higher E Dy decreasing the depolarization energy to obtain the minima of total system energy. But, increment in domain density decreases the domain wall width, which leads to enhancement in a gradient along the x-direction. Therefore, the enhancement in x-directional gradient energy will dominate at a certain level, and further nucleation of domains will not help minimize the total system energy. Thus, the interplay between gradient (both x and y directional), depolarization, and free energy density is crucial in determining the optimum texture of domains in the FE region. Incorporating the bottom dead layer increases the oscillations in the polarization profile (number of domain rises). Therefore, the frequency of oscillations in potential will also go up. Hence, the variations in TER and current density will follow a similar trend as observed in electrostatics. A comprehensive study of domain dynamics in a ferroelectric tunnel junction is presented. Spatial periodicity in polarization charges induces the oscillations in device electrostatics. Since transport characteristics of devices such as tunnel electroresistance (TER), transmission probability (T(E)), and tunneling current originate from electrostatic potential, therefore, electronic transport also exhibits spatial variations. The ON and OFF current density varies ≈ 12 times in the transient region from the upward domain to downward domain. Due to these significant variations in current density along x-direction (horizontal-direction), the device's ON/OFF ratio (TER) also exhibits an oscillatory nature along the x-direction. The TER of the device attains its peak value only for a narrow range of x-positions and is periodically distributed throughout the ferroelectric region. To make TER maximum and uniformly along the x-direction, an optimization in domain texture is required, which can be achieved by altering the DE/FE thicknesses. Furthermore, it is demonstrated that incorporating the bottom DE layer enhances the gradient energy (y-directional). Hence, domain texture becomes denser to compensate for increased energy density. However, the denser domain pattern will enhance the oscillatory nature of the device's electrostatics and its transport characteristics. Additionally, a 2-D compact model of FTJ with multidomains is formulated. The developed model can capture both phenomena domain wall motion and nucleation of a new domain. The coupled solutions of 2-D Poisson's equation (with the gradient in x-y polarization charges) and Landau-Ginzburg equation is obtained explicitly. Furthermore, the model is thoroughly validated against experimental results. Fig. Eq (1)-(3) are a system 2-D partial differential equations (PDE) that possess Dirichlet and Neumann boundary conditions at the interfaces. Here, we use Green's function approach to obtain accurate and analytical solutions of potential functions for ferroelectric (FE) and dielectric (DE) regions. The first step is to derive Green's functions for various FE/DE regions. Subsequently, these functions are plugged in Green's theorem to obtain the expression of potential distribution 1 . Due to the uniqueness in boundary conditions (Dirichlet and Neumann), the generic solutions of a 2-D PDE system are obtained in the form of Fourier series associated with respective series indices. Green's functions and Fourier series indices for the FE and DE regions are derived in the Appendix section. In 1987 Lin et al. proposed a new method to solve 2-D Poisson's equation analytically using Green's function technique Our recent article derived an analytical model for metal-ferroelectric-insulator-semiconductor (MFIS) negative capacitance FET. The model provides coupled solutions of 2-D Poisson's equation with the Landau-Ginzburg equation Ferroelectric region Bottom Insulator layer All the necessary series constants and coefficients are given in the Appendix. The potential equation in the FE region (5) comprises six different Fourier series terms. The methodology to derive each term and significance of the same is as follows. Physics and dynamics of multi-domain are primarily incorporated by the φ MD (x, y) and φ n=0 (x) terms. The gradient in the polarization charges is responsible for the φ MD (x, y) expression, which is evaluated by plugging Green's function of the ferroelectric region into the following equation. Above identity leads to the following potential expression. Eq. 8 contains two indices: n and j. The polarization distribution of multi-domains is expressed in the Fourier series (see section 1.2), which is responsible for summation over j in (8). Another series over n is arising due to Green's function of the FE region. At the limit of n → 0, sinh(kx) can be approximate as kx. Hence, Green's function for the n = 0 term is evaluated (given in Appendix) and the corresponding potential function is derived. The term φ L,R (x, y) is originated due to the left (x = 0) and right (x = L) boundaries and calculated as. The interfaces along top-insulator/FE (x, t ox 1 ) and FE/Bottom-insulator (x, t ox 1 + t f e ) contribute to the φ T,B (x, y) term in Eq. 5. D 1 and D 2 are the Fourier series coefficients and are calculated by the potential continuity conditions. The expression of D 1 and D 2 is obtained as follows. Interface Fourier series coefficients (D 1 and D 2 ) are defined in a fashion such that electric displacement field continuity at FE/DE interface is satisfied. Thus, the developed model satisfies both 2-D potential continuity and 2-D electric displacement field continuity at the FE/DE interfaces. The remaining two potential terms in (5): φ m=0 (x) and φ G x (x, y) are evaluated from m = 0 and G x (x, y; x , y ), respectively. All the necessary Fourier series constants are given in Appendix. Polarization in the FE region is assumed to follow a sinusoidal wave with a period of T D and expressed in the form of the Fourier series. where, a 0 is an average of Fourier wave and A j , B j are Fourier series coefficients of polarization wave. The horizontal direction polarization follows a sinusoidal nature with the upward domain period x 1 and downward domain period x 2 . Fig. Parabolic constants a, b and c are given in Appendix. Fig. Impact of f (y) over the multi-domain polarization profile is shown in Fig. The following equation defines the net energy density of a ferroelectric material where, f f ree , f dep , and f grad represent the free energy density, depolarization energy density, and gradient energy density, respectively. The free energy density of a ferroelectric material can be expressed in the power series of polarization with associated Taylor series coefficients where, α, β , and γ are the material-dependent parameters evaluated or taken from the experimental data used to validate/calibrate the developed model The first term in (22) shows the energy density due to spatial stray fields, and the second term signifies the contribution due to depolarizing fields in the FE region. The 2-D local electric fields are evaluated by differentiating potential function. Domain polarization exhibits gradients in both x and y directions Both upward and downward domains exhibit an equal period at the zero applied voltage (V 1 = V 2 = 0), Fig. where, F net is the net ferroelectric energy and f net is calculated from (20). For the given, physical and material parameters such as t ox 1 , t ox 2 , t f e , L, ε x , ε y , ε ox 1 , ε ox 2 α, β , and γ, the only remaining unknown in ( 3 Algorithm to calculate the domain period for non zero applied bias Fig. Note that, total domain period evaluated by (29) is the same as calculated by (28). However, due to a non-zero applied bias, an asymmetry in the upward and downward domains is observed. (x 1 = x 2 ). The minimization of net ferroelectric energy calculates the shift in domain wall (∆x). The above equation is solved for each applied bias, and calculated ∆x is plugged in (5) to derive the 2-D ferroelectric potential distribution incorporating multi-domains effect. The flow chart of the developed algorithm is shown in Fig. The phase-field simulations demonstrate that as ferroelectric thickness increases, the domain wall gradually shifts from soft wall to hard wall. These secondary effects can be incorporated into the model by molding the polarization wave. A generic expression of polarization profile is derived as follows. Fig. The transmission probability of the charge carriers is evaluated by the Wentzel-Kramers-Brillouin (WKB) approximation. I j,n 1 = cos(k j x) - I j,n 2 = sin(k j x) -sin(k j L)sinh k II n x sinh (k II n L) (41) A j = 1 -cos ((k 1 + k j ) x 1 ) A linear potential profile is assumed across the x = 0, and, x = L boundaries, which is an accurate approximation for the oxide/ferroelectric gaps φ ox 1 (0, y) = a 1 y + a 2 (61) φ f e (0, y) = b 1 y + b 2 (62) φ ox 2 (0, y) = c 1 y + c 2 (63) where, a 1 , b 1 and c 1 are the constants calculated by the continuity condition in the electric potential and electric displacement vector as. φ ox 1 (0,t ox 1 ) = φ f e (0,t ox 1 ) φ f e (0,t ox 1 + t f e ) = φ ox 2 (0,t ox 1 + t f e ) φ ox 2 (0,t ox 1 + t f e + t ox 2 ) = V 2 (67) -ε y b 1 + P(0,t ox 1 ) = -ε ox 1 a 1 (68) ε y b 1 + P(0,t ox 1 + t f e ) = -ε ox 2 c 1 (69) * (-qφ (x s , y) -E)dy