We numerically study the density of topological defects for a two-dimensional assembly of particles driven over quenched disorder as a function of quench rate through the nonequilibrium phase transition from a plastic disordered flowing state to a moving anisotropic crystal. A dynamical ordering transition of this type occurs for vortices in type-II superconductors, colloids, and other particle-like systems in the presence of random disorder. We find that on the ordered side of the transition, the density of topological defects ρ d scales as a power law, ρ d ∝ 1/t β q , where tq is the time duration of the quench across the transition. This type of scaling is predicted in the Kibble-Zurek mechanism for varied quench rates across a continuous phase transition. We show that scaling with the same exponent holds for varied strengths of quenched disorder. The value of the exponent can be connected to the directed percolation universality class. Our results suggest that the Kibble-Zurek mechanism can be applied to general nonequilibrium phase transitions. In systems that exhibit second-order phase transitions, a disordered phase on one side of the transition, such as a liquid or glass state, can be characterized by the presence of topological defects, while on the other side of the transition, there is an ordered or defect-free state such as a crystal. The defect-free ordered phase arises when the parameter controlling the transition is changed very slowly, so that the system remains in the adiabatic limit. If the rate of change through the transition increases, a portion of the topological defects do not have time to annihilate, and persist on the ordered side of the transition. A scenario for understanding the behavior for varied quench rates across a continuous phase transition is the Kibble-Zurek (KZ) mechanism, which predicts a universal power law for the defect density ρ d ∝ t -β q , where t q is the time duration of the quench through the transition, so that slower quenches produce fewer defects The KZ scenario has generally been applied to systems that have equilibrium phase transitions; however, there have been recent proposals to use the KZ scenario to address transitions between different nonequilibrium steady states One of the best examples of a system that shows evidence for a continuous nonequilibrium phase transition as a function of a continuously changing driving parameter from a disordered fluctuating state with a high density of topological defects to a dynamically ordered nonfluctuating state in which topological defects are scarce or absent is superconducting vortices driven over quenched disorder The critical drive amplitude at which the ordering transition occurs is a function of vortex density and disorder strength Here, we numerically examine the density of defects in driven vortex and colloidal systems at T = 0 for varied driving sweep rates through the dynamical ordering transition. We find that the defect density obeys ρ d ∝ τ β q , where t q is the time required to go through the transition, consistent with the KZ scenario. The same behavior appears for various values of the quenched disorder and for both vortices and colloids moving over a random substrate. The exponent we find in both systems is β ≈ 0.39, which is consistent with an underlying transition that falls in a directed percolation (DP) universality class, which often describes nonequilibrium phase transitions from fluctuating states to non-fluctuating states We use a well-established simulation model for superconducting vortices driven over random disorder. The vortices are represented as repulsively interacting point particles which undergo a dynamical ordering transition from a disordered plastic flow phase to a moving ordered crystal or smectic state where the damping constant η = 1.0. The vortex-vortex interaction force 0 /2πμ 0 λ 3 , μ 0 is the permeability of free space, and φ 0 = h/2e is the elementary flux quantum. The modified Bessel function K 1 falls off exponentially for R ij /λ > 1.0. The vortices are confined to the x, y plane and the magnetic field is applied in the z-direction. The quenched disorder is modeled by N p randomly placed harmonically attractive pinning sites of radius r p with k is the location of pinning site k, and R(p The pinning density is n p = N p /L 2 . The driving force F d is applied uniformly to all the vortices, and corresponds experimentally to a Lorentz force where J is the applied current. The initial vortex configurations are obtained using simulated annealing. We increase the magnitude of the dimensionless driving force from F D = 0 to a final maximum value over a total time of t q in increments of ∆F D = 0.002. Time is reported in dimensionless units achieved by scaling time by τ = η/f 0 . We characterize the system by measuring the average velocity per vortex in the driving direction, x and the fraction of sixfold coordinated vortices , where z i is the coordination number of vortex i obtained from a Voronoi construction. We also compute the fraction of topological defects P D = 1 -P 6 . Figure The plots of P D versus t q in Fig 3 In addition to superconducting vortices, we have also considered colloidal particles driven over quenched disorder. Here we use the same type of overdamped simulations but replace the particle-particle interactions by the Yukawa or screened Coulomb potential U (r ij ) = A exp(-κr ij )/r ij We can ask whether the scaling exponent we obtain can be related to possible universality classes of the dynamical transition. In the KZ scenario, the scaling exponent obeys β = (D -d)ν/(1 + zν), where ν and z are critical exponents associated with the universality class of the underlying phase transition, D is the spatial dimension of the system, and d is the dimension of the defect. For a 2D Ising model with D = 2, β = 2/3, which is not what we observe; however, since the defects in our sample are all aligned in the driving direction, our system is closer to coupled 1D channels, which would give β = 1/3. Recent simulations of certain quenched 2D spin ice models give β = 0.31 In the KZ scenario, the lag time between the nonequilibrium and equilibrium value is given by the freeze-out time t ∝ t zν q /(1 + zν) To better understand why the dynamics is 1+1 dimensional, in Fig. In conclusion, we have investigated the evolution of the density of defects across a dynamical disorder to order nonequilibrium phase transition for driven particles moving over quenched disorder as we vary the quench rate. We find that the defect density scales as a power law with quench rate, in agreement with the predictions of the Kibble-Zurek scenario. For both superconducting vortices and colloidal assemblies, we find a scaling exponent of β ≈ -0.39, which is consistent with an underlying transition that falls in the 1+ 1 directed percolation universality class since the ordered system forms a moving smectic state in which the defects are aligned in 1D chains. Experimentally, our predictions could be tested in superconducting vortex systems using various imaging and transport measures that have previously been shown to be correlated with the number of defects in the vortex lattice 