Recently, the use of deflecting covering meta-domes for increasing the scanning range of a phased array has been proposed. Although promising, this solution still presents some inherent limitations such as the significant reduction of the broadside gain compared to the original array, as well as the complexity of the implementation due to the need for a continuous phase profile. This work aims at proposing some technical solutions for maximizing the meta-dome performance and reducing the gain-loss at broadside. By properly discretizing and engineering the phase profile along the dome and by taking into account the different angles of incidence onto the meta-cells, we show how it is possible designing realistic meta-domes with reduced insertion loss at broadside, improved steering capabilities, and a reduced profile. eam-scanning antennas play a crucial role in many applications such as radar, satellite, and point-to-point communication and are expected to be even more important for beyond 5G and 6G wireless systems To overcome these issues, several techniques have been discussed in the last years based, for instance, on the use of wide-beam More recently, a new approach based on the deflection of the beam emitted by the array for a given pointing angle through a local gradient of the transmission phase has been discussed In this work, we propose the design of a realistic phasegradient metasurface-dome with reduced gain loss at broadside and improved deflecting performance. Through a careful analysis of the array near-field distribution and of the discretization strategy of the phase insertion, we show that a quadratic profile allows significantly reducing the broadside insertion loss of the dome and increasing its steering capabilities. Some very preliminary results in this direction have been discussed in our recent conference paper Fig. The array is covered by a dome with maximum height equal to h. The dome consists of discrete Huygens meta-cells able to introduce a different phase-gradient to the beam radiated by the array. The aim of the dome is to improve the grating-lobe free scan range of the array by steering toward the horizon the beam radiated by the array for its maximum pointing angle θin. To better explain this point, in Fig. The scanning performance of the array can be improved using a deflecting meta-dome placed on the top of the array, as shown in Fig. where x is the geometrical coordinate, k is the wavenumber, z = g(x) is the function describing the geometrical shape of the meta-dome, θout is the desired output angle from the meta-dome, Φ0 is an arbitrary phase value assumed as reference, and γi,o are the angles that the input and output wavevectors form with the normal direction. Please note that phase insertion Φ(x) is an even function and, therefore, the dome introduces the same beam steering for positive and negative values of θin. Indeed, the phase insertion Φ(x) is a continuous function that needs to be discretized in a finite number 2N of samples for practical implementation. To better understand the effect of the phase discretization, let's consider a simple semi-circular meta-dome where the geometrical profile of the dome can be thus written as being R the radius of the meta-dome. We assume that the center of the meta-dome coincides with the center of the array, i.e., z0 = 0, that the radius of the meta-dome is R = 2λ0, and thus h = 2λ0. Moreover, we set the input and output angles such that the desired additional steering introduced by the meta-dome is equal to max 15 In Fig. being L the semi-length of the meta-dome. As can be observed in Fig. The two domes exhibiting the phase profile shown in Fig. The get a better understanding of the advantages of the quadratic phase profile over the uniform, it is interesting to observe the distribution of the electric field onto the semicircular meta-dome. As reported in Fig. Remarkably, also the steering performances of the quadratic meta-dome are improved compared to the one obtained in the uniform scenario. In particular, as shown in Fig. We remark here that, by changing the exponent in ( Although a meta-dome with a quadratic phase profile has a lower IL compared to a uniform-one, its height h affects significantly its performance. As a preliminary consideration, we observe that, once fixed the maximum pointing angle of the array θin, there exists a minimum value for the height dome h that ensures its proper working. According with Fig. This analysis confirms that the choice of the dome height holds particular importance, even when a quadratic phase profile is considered. Depending on the specific applications, it is possible to choose either a low-profile dome to minimize broadside IL as much as possible or thicker structures if the primary scope is to improve the directivity for extreme elevation angles. The use of a meta-dome with a curved profile necessarily implies that the cells implementing the dome are excited in offnormal conditions. Therefore, to implement the required phase profile, we need to account for the different angles of incidence of the beam emitted by the array onto the discrete cells. The reference scenario is shown in Fig. where xi is the coordinate of the center of each discrete cell (which depends on the chosen discretization profile) and g(x) is the analytical function describing the dome shape. Once the incidence angles are known, we can design each discrete cell able to exhibit the required phase insertion ( ) Z ) separated by three identical dielectric layers of thickness d and relative permittivity εr. This geometry ensures the co-excitation of electric and magnetic dipoles and, therefore, allows achieving high transmission values and wide phase coverages From a modelling point of view, the responses of the individual cells can be calculated using conventional microwave matrices WITH REDUCED HEIGHT In the previous Sections, we have discussed several design strategies for improving the overall performance of a deflecting metasurface-dome aimed at increasing the scanning range of a planar array without compromising the gain value at broadside. To validate our insights, we consider here a case of practical interest, where all the discussed design fundamentals have been applied for maximizing the system performance. At first, an ideal meta-dome composed by unit-cells exhibiting the analytically designed values of surface reactance is presented. Then, a realistic structure considering the practical realization of the cells is reported. With the aim of minimizing the degrading effect of the metadome on the broadside radiation of the array and, at the same time, improving its steering capability, an ideal meta-dome with a deflecting angle of 10°, R = 2.5 λ0, z0 = 1.4 λ0, and h = λ0 has been considered. The unit-cells of the meta-dome have been designed for implementing a quadratic phase profile and by considering the different angles of incidence depending on the scanning angle of the array, as well as the presence of a radome for structural stability and protection from environmental effects has been introduced. A sketch of the structure is shown in Fig. The final performances of the selected cells are summarized in Table The effects of the dome on the scanning performance of the array are shown in Fig. For the physical implementation of the ideal Huygens cells, we have exploited a two-step optimization procedure. First, the surface impedance values obtained in Section III-A have been used to design each individual layer, according with the available homogenization formulas and retrieval procedure (see, for instance, The stack-up of the square cells considered is reported in Fig. Fig. It is observed that, in general, the magnitude of the transmission coefficient of all the real cells is lower than the one of the ideal cells (average value around 0.7). This is mostly due to two limiting points: the reduced number of samples exploited in the optimization procedure w.r.t. the one considered in the analytical design; the minimum dimensions of dc and wc that have been settled to be compliant with fabrication constrains. The final structure of the quadratic-gradient meta-dome implemented through the realistic cells is reported in Fig. The final performance of the designed meta-dome is reported in Fig. Compared to the performance of the ideal meta-dome configuration in Fig. We have discussed several advanced design strategies for metasurface-based dome aimed at enhancing the beam steering capability of dual-pol phased arrays. Compared to earlier works, the metadevices proposed here are characterized by low gain loss at the broadside, improved steering performances, minimum height, and a fabrication-ready design. Indeed, the meta-domes discussed in this paper have been fully implemented through curved multi-layered metasurfaces made of Huygens cells able to return the phase transmission needed to deflect the beam radiated by the array towards the horizon regardless its polarization. These results validate and further emphasize, the potentialities of meta-dome devices to improve the scanning capabilities of phased arrays, reducing the scan loss for extreme angles, without severely compromising the performance at the broadside. The proposed device can be particularly useful for 5G and beyond 5G applications, in view of array systems characterized by wide-angle beam steering able to overcome the scanning limitations of conventional phased arrays. This work is licensed under a Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ that the surface reactance values , j si This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TAP.2022.3222716 This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/