We propose a new type of magnetoelectric memory device that stores magnetic easy-axis information or pseudo-magnetization, rather than a definite magnetization direction, in magnetoelectrically (ME) coupled heterostructures. Theoretically, we show how a piezoelectric/ferromagnetic (PE/FM) combination can lead to non-volatility in pseudo-magnetization exhibiting overall ferroelectric-like behavior. The pseudo-magnetization can be manipulated by extremely low voltages especially when the FM is a low-barrier nanomagnet. Using a circuit model benchmarked against experiments, we determine the switching energy, delay, switching probability and retention time of the envisioned 1T/1C memory device in terms of magnetic and circuit parameters and discuss its thermal stability in terms of a key parameter called back-voltage vm which is an electrical measure of the strain-induced magnetic field. Taking advantage of ferromagnetic resonance (FMR) measurements, we experimentally extract values for vm in CoFeB films and circular nano-magnets deposited on Pb(Mg1/3Nb2/3)0.7Ti0.3O3 (PMN-PT) which agree well with the theoretical values. Our experimental findings indeed indicate the feasibility of the proposed novel device and confirm the assumed parameters in our modeling effort. Charge-to-spin conversion is an important topic in novel spintronics applications since it allows conventional circuit currents and voltages to be translated into magnetization information As an application of the proposed ME structure in Ref A key parameter that determines the performance of the proposed memory architecture is the so-called back-voltage constant vm that characterizes the coupling strength between the PE and FM layers. Experimentally, we have verified the WRITE operation in the above device concept and characterized vm values using Ferromagnetic Resonance (FMR) measurements in CoFeB/(011)-cut PMN-PT heterostructures as discussed below. By applying a DC voltage across the PMN-PT substrate, an anisotropic in-plane strain is induced, which transfers to the magnetic material. When the strain is large enough, the magnetic easy axis of the CoFeB layer rotates by ±90 degrees, which is the magnetic WRITE operation Last, since it is understood that the actual device design will involve patterned disk-like structures, we have also studied the FMR response in circular nano-magnet arrays. Both quantities, i.e. HS and vm, were found to be very similar to the ones obtained from CoFeB films. This finding is particularly relevant in that it i) highlights the validity of our modified Kittel formula irrespective of boundary conditions introduced by means of patterning (at least down to features of 200nm) and ii) that a sufficiently large response of the coupled PE/FM system is achievable for the desired device design of the 1T/1C memory cell. The easy-axis information (or pseudo-magnetization) itself can be a state variable that can be switched between two deterministic states (WRITE) and it can be read out through the inverse effect (READ) where μ is the pseudo-magnetization that defines the easy-axis for the magnet μ = m x 2m y 2 (Fig. The fundamental operation principle can be understood from the energy equation. For a given VIN, charge is formed on the capacitor which creates a mutual energy 'Qvm', which in turn induces a preferred easy axis in the magnet (x-axis or y-axis) with the magnetization lying in that axis, without a preference for a direction. Since electronic charge dynamics is typically much faster than magnetization dynamics The key parameter that defines the performance of this type of devices is a stress-induced modification to the effective field of the magnet. We define this effective magnetic field as Hs, which is controlled by the magnetoelectric back-voltage vm Next, we will describe a prototypical 1T/1C memory cell that encodes pseudo-magnetization and show its READ and WRITE operation through an equivalent circuit model Additionally, we estimate switching energies and the time associated with the write operation. The results are shown in Fig. Our proposed memory device is inspired by the recent demonstrations of electrical read-out of the magnetoelectric effect where H D is the demagnetizing field for the thin film and γ 2π is the gyromagnetic ratio, the magnetic anisotropy H k was extracted to be 0.006T along both the [100] and [01-1] directions. As discussed above, when DC voltages are applied, the magnetic anisotropy of CoFeB film is modulated by the strain induced in the PMN-PT film and the resonance frequency of FMR changes accordingly. The inset of Fig. where H D is the demagnetization field, H S = 2Qv m M S Vol. is defined as the strain-induced magnetic field, Q is the charge on the PE capacitor, which is proportional with VDC, and v m is the magnetoelectric coefficient. By minimizing the free energy with respect to H res , when H res > -H K -2H S , m x → 1; whenH res < -H K -2H S , m x → -H res 2H S +H K . The positive and negative signs mean the direction of H S is along the x and y axis, respectively. H S → -∞ describes a stress field that is infinite along the y-axis. Under this limit, m x → 0, and the magnetization rotates from x axis to the y axis. When the external magnetic field is applied along the easy axis -[100] direction, the resonance frequency can be derived from the free energy of ferromagnets, and a modified Kittel Equation is obtained as: More details on the derivations and comparison between Kittel and the modified Kittel equations are discussed in the Supplementary Information. The solid lines in Fig. The corresponding effective stability (Δ) of μ for these two cases -CoFeB film with and without Ta interlayer along with the one reported in Ref Furthermore, we also fabricated CoFeB nano-magnets on PMN-PT substrates with a structure similar to the one proposed in Fig. Also, when VDC = 0V, HS = 0. By fitting the experimental results when VDC = 0V with Eq.( Our results indicate that even after patterning and having an interlayer between the CoFeB/PMN-PT stack, the heterostructure was able to retain large enough vm to facilitate READ-WRITE operation for our envisioned memory device. In conclusion, we have proposed a novel magnetoelectric memory device based on a pseudo-magnetization in a PE/FM heterostructure. The use of low-barrier nano-magnets as the FM layer and read-out through the magnetoelectric back-voltage can potentially enable the device to operate with an energy-delay of hundreds of aJ to ps, combining attractive features of magnetic and ferroelectric memory technologies, such as highdensity and non-volatility. The emergent ferroelectricity from an FM/PE heterostructure will lead to interesting new physics. The experimental results indicate that FMR is an effective way to characterize the magnetic WRITE operation. To quantify the strain induced magnetic field, we have derived a modified Kittel formula by including a magnetoelastic energy in the magnetic free energy. According to our analysis, the magnetoelastic coefficient vm between CoFeB and PMN-PT is in the tens of mV range which is significant for proper device operation, since it is the output voltage and has to be above the noise level. We believe that vm >20mV is a desirable target, since stable states can be achieved with the use of capacitors in the hundreds of aF range, consistent with typical capacitance values in modern 14nm transistors. Furthermore, according to our results, the presence of an interlayer between the PE and FM layer does not degrade the vm value too much and pattering also did not degrade vm. The theoretical and experimental work presented here indicates that the proposed novel ME memory device is feasible and relevant for the development of future energy efficient spintronics devices. CoFeB nano-magnets were fabricated on one side of the poled (011)-cut PMN-PT substrate using e-beam lithography, metal deposition and a conventional lift-off process. Both CoFeB nano-magnets and CoFeB films were deposited in a multisource magnetron sputtering system with a base pressure of 3*10 -8 Torr followed by a 5nm Ta deposition in the same system. Ti/Au layers were deposited in an e-beam evaporation system. Ferromagnetic resonance measurements were performed using a NanOsc CryoFMR probe in a Quantum Design DynaCool PPMS. It is a coplanar waveguide type of broadband FMR spectrometer. Magnetization hysteresis loop measurements were performed in a Quantum Design MPMS-3 SQUID magnetometer. Supplementary Information: Derivation of the modified Kittel Equation used in text. 