We study the Cooper instability in jellium model in the controlled regime of small to intermediate values of the Coulomb parameter rs ≤ 2. We confirm that superconductivity naturally emerges from purely repulsive interactions described by the Kukkonen-Overhauser vertex function. By employing the implicit renormalization approach and the discrete Lehmann representation we reveal that even in the small-rs limit, the dominant mechanism behind Cooper instability is based on dynamic screening of the Coulomb interaction-accurately captured by the random phase approximation, whereas the Kohn-Luttinger contribution is negligibly small and, thus, not relevant. Introduction.-Conventional BCS theory predicts Cooper instability at low temperature in a Fermi liquid with weak short range attractive coupling between the low-energy electrons, typically originating from the electron-phonon interaction (EPI). With the discovery of unconventional superconducting systems, such as d-wave cuprate superconductors In 1965, Kohn and Luttinger argued that for any weak short-range repulsive interaction, the two-particle effective interaction induced by many-body effects always becomes attractive at large enough orbital momenta 1, and could lead to Cooper instability It has been known for decades that dynamic screening of the Coulomb interaction could also induce the paring instability in jellium. Early work by Tolmachev To determine which mechanism is dominant and under what conditions, we study the Cooper instability in the controlled regime of small to intermediate values of r s ≤ 2. The particle-particle irreducible four-point vertex is approximated with the Kukkonen-Overhauser (KO) ansatz Within the first protocol we find the KL mechanism contribution remains extremely small, and therefore irrelevant, for any value of r s when the transition temperatures exceed 10 -10 6 . The second protocol reveals that the Cooper instability in jellium takes place at all values of r s tested. More importantly, the dominant channel c increases much slower than the critical channel of the KL mechanism, KL , as r s decreases, indicating that in the high-density limit superconductivity is induced by the dynamic screening effects accurately captured by the random phase approximation, well before the KL mechanism could have any impact. Model.-Jellium model is defined by the Hamiltonian with a † kσ the creation operator of an electron with momentum k and spin σ =↑, ↓, dispersion k = k 2 2meμ, and Coulomb potentail V q = 4πe 2 q 2 . The dimensionless coupling parameter (the Wigner-Seitz radius) is given by , where n is the number density, and a 0 is the Bohr radius. The gap function equation reads: (2) Here Γ is the particle-particle irreducible four-point vertex, G is the single particle Green's function, ∆ is the gap function, and λ is its eigenvalue. The key approximation used in this work is the Kukkonen-Overhauser ansatz with It is defined in terms of the polarization function Π 0 (based on the convolution of bare Green's functions) and local field factors G ± (q). When G ± (q) are set to zero, the KO interaction reduces to the random phase approximation (RPA). The local field factors encode the many-body exchange and correlation effects beyond RPA. For direct comparison with previous work by Takada we adopt the same ansatz for G ± (q) This is justified by the smallness of the critical temperature. The gap equation is decomposed into different orbital channels, , which are solved independently. The critical temperature T c in each channel corresponds to the point where the largest eigenvalue λ(T ) equals unity. For every choice of the vertex function considered in this work the single particle self-energy was computed within the G 0 W 0 approximation as in FIG. Kohn-Luttinger mechanism.-Cooper instability in the KL theory is induced by the logarithmic singularity in the static effective interaction at q = 2k F where χ = cos θ, with θ the angle between momenta k and p, and P (χ) are Legendre polynomials, Kohn and Luttinger found that in the large-limit, W (k F , k F , ω = 0) decays as -4 and oscillates between the odd and even values of . The attractive effective coupling at large enough odd could then give rise to Cooper instability. The KL treatment silently ignores the dynamic nature of screening despite the fact that at any finite frequency the Coulomb potential cannot be screened at small momenta q ω/v F . Moreover, singular nature of the Coulomb potential at small q calls for proper resummation of diagrams shown in Fig. Resummation of diagrams shown in Fig. 2 + u 2 → (1z) 2 + u 2 + (z) with (z) = 0 e -4(z-1) 2 . This modification is limited to the vicinity of the 2k F singularity and ensures that changes in λ are attributed to the KL mechanism. The value of 0 = 0.001 was chosen by establishing when W (k F , k F , ω = 0) for the regularized KO interaction has its odd-even channel oscillations suppressed, see Fig. Results.-In the Fig. Our conclusions do not change with temperature as evidenced by simulation results shown in Fig. Academically speaking, i.e. regardless of how small T c is in the r s → 0 limit, the KL mechanism is not ruled out by results presented above because we cannot de-termine whether η +1η ultimately saturate to small values that decrease with r s . However, recall that the KL mechanism is attractive only at ≥ KL , where KL (r s ) is the first channel with W (k F , k F , ω = 0) < 0. It has to be compared with the IR solution for the dominant superconducting channel, c (r s ), for dynamic KO vertex function (this can be done for 1/3 ≤ r s ≤ 2). The comparison presented in Fig. We solve the fundamental problem of Cooper instability in jellium in the high-density limit, and revise a popular, yet incorrect, belief that the q = 2k F singularity is the key reason. Our approach offers a systematic way for studies of the Cooper instability in other correlated electronic systems. To properly resum the singular behavior at momentum transfer q = 2k F that ultimately leads to the Kohn-Luttinger mechanism, one needs to consider geometric series for the bubble and exchange diagrams on equal footing. Now, apart from the bare potential, the series are built on the vertex I which contains all diagrams irreducible in the particle-hole channel. Since the relevant part of all particle-hole irreducible diagrams has the same sigularity, the assumption is that the relevant diagrams have the same functional form as in RPA. Thus, instead of computing the full particle-hole irreducible vertex I an approximation is used where I contains the bare potential and the G ± terms originating from exchange diagrams, while its functional form is that of an effective potential: This scheme accounts for all relevant singular contributions as long as the G ± functions are chosen appropriately. Equation (1) leads to the standard expression for the KO vertex, and provides an opportunity to take full advantage of the well-studied ansatz for local field factors. In our simulations we employ the same ansatz as in Ref. Since our goal is compact, accurate, and efficient processing of the frequency space, we omit momentum variables here for brevity. The eigenvalue problem to solve is given by Eq.( with Substituting these expressions in Eq.( The modified eigenvalue problem is formulated as The problem is that sharp cutoffs in ∆ (L) and ∆ (H) cannot not be represented by the compact DLR. However, the right hand sides of these equations is compatible with DLR. Thus instead of ∆ (L) and ∆ (H) we store "complete versions" ∆ (1) and ∆ (2) , and solve λ∆ (1) with F = P F (1) +(1-P )F (2) calculated from the anomalous propagators based on ∆ (1) and ∆ (2) . The main computational cost now looks as: -T Again, with predetermined coefficients describing sums over Matsubara frequencies we only need to handle compact sums. For the low-energy part these sums are done numerically; the high-energy part is obtained by subtracting the low-energy part from the analytic expressions ( 