The emergence of a topological superconducting state in van der Waals heterostructures provides a new platform for exploring novel strategies to control topological superconductors. In particular, impurities in van der Waals heterostructures, generically featuring a moire pattern, can potentially lead to the unique interplay between atomic and moire length scales, a feature absent in generic topological superconductors. Here we address the impact of non-magnetic impurities on a topological moire superconductor, both in the weak and strong regime, considering both periodic arrays and single impurities in otherwise pristine infinite moire systems. We demonstrate a fine interplay between impurity induced modes and the moire length, leading to radically different spectral and topological properties depending on the relative impurity location and moire lengths. Our results highlight the key role of impurities in van der Waals heterostructures featuring moire patterns, revealing the key interplay between length and energies scales in artificial moire systems. The design of artificial topological superconductors is one of the most active areas in designer quantum materials Artificial van der Waals topological superconductors, and moire heterostructures in general, display two length scales, the original lattice constant and the emergent moire length In this manuscript, we address the impact of nonmagnetic impurities on artificial moire topological superconductors. We show that interplay between the moire pattern and local impurities gives rise to radically different impacts of the defects depending on the specific location. Our manuscript is organized as follows. First, in section II we introduce the model for a moire topological superconductor. In Sec. III we address the impact of strong impurities in the topological state. In Sec. IV we address the impact of weak impurities in the moire su-perconductor. In Sec. V we study the interplay between the amplitude of the moire pattern and the location of the impurity. In Sec. VI we address the emergence of ingap modes for single impurities in otherwise pristine systems. In Sec. VII we examine the emergence of topological moire edge modes in the defective and pristine topological moire superconductor. Finally, in Sec. VIII we summarize our conclusions. Here we will consider a generic topological superconductor realized in a van der Waals heterostructure, as realized in a CrBr 3 /NbSe 2 heterostructure With the previous platforms in mind, we now turn to address a minimal effective model for the previous heterostructures. While the specific parameters of the model for each material combination should be estimated using first-principles calculations with where c † n,s ( c n,s ) denotes the creation (annihilation) fermionic operator with spin s in site n. t is the hopping parameter and i, j runs over nearest neighbors, and μ is the chemical potential. The term is the exchange coupling induced by the underlying ferromagnet, obtained by integrating out the degrees of freedom of the magnetic monolayer. The term is the Rashba spin-orbit coupling arising due to the broken mirror symmetry at the NbSe 2 /CrBr 3 interface, σ are the spin Pauli matrices, λ controls the spin-orbit coupling constant and d ij = r i -r j . The term is the s-wave superconducting order. J(r) and ∆(r) parameterize the exchange coupling and induced s-wave superconductivity. Local non-magnetic impurities are included adding a potential scattering term of the form where H imp defines the impurity Hamiltonian at site n with an on-site potential w. The full Hamiltonian of the defective system takes the form As noted above, the moire profile in our effective model arises from the combination of modulated exchange coupling and s-wave superconductivity where q is the moire superlattice wave vector, and R n is the rotation matrix which conserve C 3 symmetry and c 0 , c 1 are chosen so that f (r) ∈ (0, 1). The spatial profiles J(r) and ∆(r) are written in terms of the previous spatial dependence as J 0 and ∆ 0 controls the average magnitude of the modulated exchange and superconducting profiles, whereas δ J and δ ∆ control the amplitude of the moire modulation, respectively. We introduce χ ∈ (0, 1) as a parameter which allows us to adiabatically switch between a uniform or moire system, and here it is taken to be 1. As noted above, the relative signs of f (r) in J(r) and ∆(r) are taken so that when the exchange is maximum, the local superconducting order is minimum. We now elaborate on the mechanism that yields those two parameters as the dominating modulations. The stacking heavily influences the value of the exchange, and ultimately it can also impact its sign We now briefly elaborate in the procedure to solve the previous Hamiltonian.We take as starting point the effective Hamiltonian for a periodic moire supercell, that takes the form ) where c † i,α,s denotes the creation operator at unit cell i, site α and spin s and Γ α,β i,j,s,s contains the hopping, spin-orbit coupling and exchange proximity effects. The previous Hamiltonian, periodic in the supercell, can be diagonalized by defining the Bloch's operators leading to the Hamiltonian in momentum space ) where Γ α,β s,s (k) is the Fourier transform in the unit cell indexes i, j of the matrices Γ α,β i,j,s,s . To diagonalize the previous Hamiltonian, we define a new fermionic operators ). The Hamiltonian in this basis can be written as where the Bogoliubov de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian H BdG is diagonalized in terms of the new operators, leading to a diagonal form where k,α are the BdG eigenvalues and Ψ † k,α the BdG eigenstates. In practice, the calculation of the electronic structure for a moire supercell requires diagonalizing a 4n × 4n matrix, with n the number of sites per supercell. To compute the electronic structure in a ribbon geometry, an analogous procedure as the one outline above is carried out for the supercell of the nanoribbon, that contains several moire unit cells. Finally, to compute surface spectral functions, the embedding formalism described later in the manuscript is directly applied to the matrices defined by the BdG Hamiltonian. It is instructive to first look at the electronic structure and topological character of the uniform system of Eq. 1 when moire potential is switched off. For the Hamiltonian parameters we choose the following setup: J 0 =2∆ 0 , λ =2∆ 0 , and the chemical potential set to μ = 3t. In the uniform limit, for a supercell of size 9 × 9 as shown in Fig. Keeping the same average values of the exchange, superconductivity, Rashba spin-orbit coupling and chemical potential, we now move on to the moire system, switching on the exchange and superconducting modulation δ J and δ ∆ , which are set to δ J = 2J 0 , δ ∆ =1.4∆ 0 . The electronic structure of the modulated system is shown in Fig. We now examine in detail the case of a strong impurity potential. Strong impurities in the effective model are associated to chemical impurities 41,77-79 and vacancies It is worth noting that, since the scattering potential induced by the previous impurities is non-magnetic, the emergence of in-gap modes stems from the non-trivial nature of the superconducting gap in the moire system The previous phenomenology highlights that the location of the non-magnetic impurity in the moire pattern has a critical impact on the superconducting gap of the system. Such strong spatial dependence is fully absent both in non-topological moire superconductors due to Anderson's theorem It is interesting noting that in a moire superconductor there is a large mismatch between the length scales of the Bloch states and the impurity, in comparison with a uniform superconductor. While there is certainly a mismatch of length scales, our results show that the effect of impurities is comparable both in the absence and presence of a moire. From the low energy point of view, a local impurity in real space can be considered like a delta function potential, which creates scattering between all wavevectors in reciprocal space. In the presence of a moire, the minibands span a small portion of the original Brillouin zone of the material. Nonetheless, due to the mixing between all wavevectors driven by a local impurity, its effect in the minibands is comparable. In this section, we examine the electronic structure of the moire modulated model when a periodic array of weak impurities is distributed in the unit cell, with a single impurity per moire unit cell. In particular, we examine the evolution of the gap as a function of the impurity location, which highlights the fine interplay between the moire length and atomic defect. It is worth noting that examining the gap for weak impurities allows tracking small changes in the gap as a function of the impurity location, guaranteeing that the system remains in a topological phase. As noted above, weak impurities would correspond to chalcogen substitution, such as S in NbSe 2 , leading to a local potential smaller than the bandwidth of the low energy states. We first look at the map of the spectral gap as a function of impurity location. We take a moire unit cell with the size of 9 × 9, as shown in Fig 3a . It is observed that similar to the strong impurity regime of Sec. III, the gap remains maximal close to the maximum of the exchange profile, becoming smaller in the other locations of the moire unit cell. In comparison with the strong impurity limit, the weak impurity allows keeping a sizable topological gap even for the most detrimental locations away from the exchange maxima. The previous phenomenology can also be observed by examining the electronic structure for different locations of the impurity, shown in Figs. 3bcd. In particular, it is observed that the electronic structure remains similar for the three impurity locations, apart from small rearrangements that account for the reduced topological gap. The previous spatial dependence for different impurity locations can be analyzed as a function of the moire length. The gap for a single impurity per moire unit cell, computed for different moire lengths is shown in Fig. In this section, we have focused on addressing the fine interplay between a periodic array of impurities and the moire pattern. In particular, it is observed a dramatic dependence of the spectral gap on the location of the impurity, directly correlated with the underlying moire pattern. In contrast with the strong impurity case, weak impurities will keep the topological gap unchanged, and in particular, all the defective superconducting states of this section show the pristine Chern number C = 2. In a moire superconductor, the moire pattern is characterized by the amplitude of the modulation and its average value. In this section, we analyze in detail the effect of moire amplitude, allowing us to interpolate from the uniform to the modulated limit. In particular, in the uniform limit, the location of the impurity in the unit cell must lead to identical gaps. In contrast, as the moire pattern is switched on, the gap in the presence of an impurity will develop a strong dependence on its location. To track the evolution with the moire pattern, we keep the average values of the exchange and superconductivity constant, as well as keeping constant ratios of their modulated amplitude and vary the χ parameter, defined in Eq. 9, between 0 and 1 ,which allows interpolating between the uniform and moire limit. The topological gap for different locations of the impurity and moire unit cells as a function of the moire amplitude is shown in Fig. where G is the gap of the system. The ratio Ξ(χ) allows to directly observe the dependence on the location of the impurity for different moire modulations. We now focus on the three locations of the impurities shown in Fig. is finally interesting to note that, for a strong impurity, the location in the moire unit cell leads to substantially bigger changes in the gap than a weak impurity. This phenomenology is consistent with the results observed in Fig. The previous findings highlight that, in the presence of a moire modulation, the location of an impurity leads to different gaps, especially in the strong coupling limit. Beyond the cases shown in Fig. We finally comment on what would be the impact if disorder is included in every single site. In such limit, as the strength of the disorder increases, the value of the topological gap will decrease. For weak disorder, the gap will remain finite, yet smaller than the non-disordered case. However, for strong enough uniform disorder, the system will effectively become gapless due to pair breaking effect of the impurities. This phenomenology is analogous to other unconventional non-swave superconductor, where non-magnetic disorder quenches the underly-ing topological superconducting gap. In the sections above, we have focused on considering a periodic array of impurities in the moire system. Here we will focus on a complimentary limit, namely the case of a single impurity on an otherwise pristine moire system. In this case, the moire system with a single impurity will lack any type of translational symmetry, and therefore an electronic bandstructure associated with a moire Bloch's theorem can not be computed. In order to study the single impurity limit, we will use Green's function embedding method, which allows to compute exactly single defects in otherwise infinite pristine systems The embedding method relies on writing down the Dyson equation for the defective system, that takes the form where G V (ω) is the Green's function of the defective model, H V the Hamiltonian of the defective unit cell, and Σ(ω) the selfenergy induced by the rest of the pristine system. Solving the previous equation requires deriving the selfenergy of the pristine system Σ(ω). The selfenergy Σ(ω) can be obtained by writing down the Dyson equation for the pristine model with H 0 the Hamiltonian of the pristine unit cell. We can now take Bloch's representation of the pristine unit cell Green's function where H k is the Bloch's Hamiltonian. By obtaining G 0 from Eq. 18, the selfenergy Σ(ω) can be obtained from Eq. 17, which in turn allows to obtain the Green's function of the defective unit cell from Eq. 16. Using the previous methodology, we can extract both the total and local density of states for a single defect in the moire topological superconductor. The local density of states ρ(x, ω) and full density of states A(ω) are obtained as and where s runs over spin and τ over electron-hole sector. With the previous methodology, we now compute the density of states with a single impurity for the topological superconductor without moire pattern (Fig. It is first instructive to consider the impurity in the uniform topological superconductor, shown in Figs. 6ae. In particular, it is observed that the existence of a strong non-magnetic impurity (w = 2t) gives rise to an in-gap state (Fig. We now move on to consider the case with a finite moire pattern and single impurity, whose density of states is shown in Figs. 6bcd and the local density of states is shown in Figs. 6fgh, for different location of the impurity with respect to the center of the moire pattern, shown by the insets in fgh. In particular, we consider three different locations of the impurities. As shown in Fig. The previous results highlight that impurities in the moire pattern give rise to in-gap states whose wavefunctions can potentially span over several unit cells, and lead to strong interference effects with the moire modulation. The previous phenomenology accounts for the strong dependence of the topological gap as a function of the impurity location observed in Sec. IV and Sec. III. Finally, we analyze the emergence of edge states associated with the moire topological superconducting state in a ribbon with the structure, inset in Fig. In particular, we will consider both pristine and defective cases, and show that in both instances, the edge modes reflect the underlying moire pattern. We first take a pristine system displaying the moire topological superconducting state, as shown in Figs. 7abcd. The electronic structure of a ribbon, infinite in the xdirection, is shown in Fig. where G(k, ω) is computed with a renormalization algorithm We now move on to consider the defective system. In particular, we focus on a moire superconductor with a single strong impurity per moire unit cell. We emphasize that, depending on the location of the impurity and the moire length, the topological phase can remain the same, become gapless, or a topological phase transition can take place. For the sake of concreteness, here we take a location of an impurity that strongly disrupts the original topological state, giving rise to a topological phase transition to a phase with Chern number C = -1. The electronic structure of the defective ribbon is shown in Fig. The defective case considered above focuses on a periodic array of strong impurities. In real experiments, impurities can appear either randomly distributed or can be engineered in arrays using atomic manipulation. The first case would correspond to chemical impurities intrinsically appearing during synthesis of the material. In this situation, depending on the density of impurities and their respective location, the original moire topological phase will be disrupted, either by decreasing its topological gap or ultimately by leading to a gapless state due to the proliferation of in-gap modes. In the situation in which a periodic array of impurities is engi-neered by means of atomic manipulation We finally note that this analysis focuses on a minimal model that accounts for the physics of van der Waals ferromagnet/superconductor heterostructures To summarize, here we addressed the interplay between local impurities and moire effects in topological moire superconductors, as those realized in CrBr 3 /NbSe 2 heterostructures. In particular, our results highlight that, in contrast with conventional artificial topological superconductors, the impact of impurities on a moire tem can give rise to radically different properties depending on their location in the moire pattern. For strong impurities, we observed that solely depending on the location of the impurity in the moire pattern, the electronic structure can show as similar topological gap as in the pristine limit, a nearly gapless state or a topological phase transition to a topologically different state. For weak impurities, we showed that the topological superconducting gap shows a dependence both on the location of the impurity and the moire length, yet maintaining its topological nature for all locations. Furthermore, using an embedding formalism we addressed the impact of single non-magnetic impurities in otherwise infinite pristine moire systems. In particular, the absence of interference between impurities allows to clearly identify that the moire modulation drastically impacts the spatial profile of the in-gap mode created by the non-magnetic scatterer. Ultimately, we showed that the moire modulation further emerges in the topological edge modes of the topological superconductor, both in the pristine moire limit and the defective limit. Our results highlight the rich interplay between local impurities and topological moire superconductors, and put forward engineered atomic impurities as a powerful and versatile strategy to engineer artificial van der Waals moire topological superconductors.