In this paper, we present the dynamics and modeling of multi-domains in the ferroelectric FET (FeFET). Due to the periodic texture of domains, the electrostatics of the FeFET exhibit an oscillatory conduction band profile. To capture such oscillations, we solve coupled 2-D Poisson's equation with the net ferroelectric energy density (gradient energy + free energy + depolarization energy) equation. Multi-domain dynamics are captured by minimizing the net ferroelectric energy leading to a thermodynamically stable state. Furthermore, we show that the motion of domain walls originates local bound charge density in the ferroelectric region, which induces the negative capacitance (NC) effect. The strength of domain wall-induced NC is determined by the gradient energy of the ferroelectric material. FeFET exhibits variability in the drain current with domain period due to the inherent NC effect. Additionally, the impact of domain wall transition (soft hard) on the device's electrostatic/transport is also analyzed. The model also accurately captures both nucleations of a new domain and the motion of the domain wall. Furthermore, the model is thoroughly validated against experimental results and phase-field simulations. F ERROELECTRICITY discovery in the Hafnium oxide- based material led to the enormous research interest in the CMOS compatible ferroelectric FET (FeFET), which possesses the profound possibility to utilize it as an efficient non-volatile memory (NVM) It is well established that the interaction between various energy components determines the state and density of domains in a ferroelectric material The electrostatic model of multi-domain FeFET is mainly divided into four subsections. In the first part, the mathematical formulation of the polarization profile is obtained. We assume that polarization of multi-domain in the ferroelectric region is periodic with upward and domain period of x a and x b , respectively, and transition from upward to downward domain occurs in the finite domain wall width (d w ). The periodic texture of domains and finite domain wall width are valid approximations observed in experiments and numerical phase-field simulations where, T D is the total domain period (x a + x b ), d w is the domain wall width, P s is the spontaneous polarization and all other Fourier series coefficients are given in the Appendix section. The y-directional function f (y) is included in (1) to incorporate the vertical directional gradient in domain polarization. Due to the gradient in polarization along the y-direction, we formulate the function f (y) such that: it is maximum at the FE/metal interface (y = 0), and it is minimum at the FE/DE interface (y = t f e ). Therefore, the polarization of a domain is maximum at the metal/FE interface and approaches zero at the FE/DE interface (also observed in phase-field simulations, 2. Insulator region (t f e < y < t f e + t ox ) 3. Channel region (t f e + t ox < y < t f e + t ox + t si ) This work aims to model the conduction band barrier's oscillations in a FeFET, which are only significant in the weak inversion region. Therefore, we assume the depletion approximation in the channel On the other hand, the lateral gradient in the polarization contributes to domain wall energy density. We will show that various ferroelectric energy components interplay determines a thermodynamically stable domain state in the FE region. Eq. ( Here, for the first time, we report an analytical and explicit model for multi-domain FeFET with x-y gradients in the polarization Potential components φ Gx (x, y), and φ Gy (x, y) are obtained by following Green's identity. Gradients of polarization wave ∂P (x, y)/∂x, and ∂P (x, y)/∂y are evaluated by The 2-D potential equations of oxide and channel regions are obtained by using Green's functions of respective regions into the Green's identity The mathematical expressions of φ ox (x, y) and approach to calculating lateral Fourier series D m,n sf , and D m,n sb coefficients are given in the Appendix. The equilibrium (applied bias = 0 V) and non-equilibrium (applied bias = 0 V) configuration of the domains are determined by minimizing net ferroelectric energy leading to a thermodynamically stable state. The net energy density of the ferroelectric material is given as where, f f ree is free energy density and expressed in the Taylor series of ferroelectric polarization Depolarizing energy density is evaluated by the local distributions of polarization texture and local electric fields Contributions of local stray fields and polarization in f dep are incorporated by the first and second terms of E f e y (x, y) = - Domain polarization of ferroelectric material exhibits gradients along the spatial x and y directions where, the material-dependent ferroelectric coefficients are taken from Firstly, we evaluate the equilibrium domain period (x e ) for the zero applied voltages. At zero bias, upward and downward domain, periods will be identical The equilibrium domain period is evaluated by minimizing net ferroelectric energy (F net ). where, W is the width of device. Typical value of domain wall width is ≈ 0.5 nm-1 nm For a given set of physical parameters such as: t f e , t ox , L, t si , and ferroelectric material parameters (α, β, γ etc.) the above equation is an only function of x e which is solved analytically. The final task is to evaluate the domain period for non-zero applied voltages (non-equilibrium state). Non-zero applied bias triggers the domain wall motion However, due to the non-equilibrium condition, x a = x b , and the amount of shift is given by δx, which is calculated by the minimization of net ferroelectric energy. ζ j,n (x), and ξ j,n (x) are function of x with two series indices n, and j. ζ m (y), and ξ m (y) are function of y with m series indices Domain dynamics is captured by plugging δx (For each applied voltages) in To check the robustness and accuracy of the model, we consider both types of validations: numerical simulations and experimental results. Fig. The lateral gradient of polarization (∂P/∂x) profile in (3) induces the bound charge density along the lateral direction. also demonstrated the presence of NC by domain dynamics in a ferroelectric capacitor Fig. The drain to source current is calculated by the Quasi-Fermi potential of the channel Fig. The phase-field simulations demonstrated that scaling in the FE layer triggers a domain wall transition from hard to soft type An increase in d w reduces ∂P /∂x ratio (see Fig. A larger permittivity value with the d w states that the electric field vector is more sensitive than the polarization vector for spatial variations (∆ (∂E/∂x) > ∆ (∂P /∂x)). An alternative explanation for increased permittivity with d w can be understood by observing the conduction band profile, as shown in Fig. An analytical physics-based model of multi-domain FeFET is developed by solving 2-D Poisson's equation with the ferroelectric energy dynamics state equation. The process of domain wall nucleation and motion occurs to minimize the net system energy. The dynamics of multi-domains (nucleation of a new domain and domain wall motion) are captured by minimizing net system energy. Ferroelectric energy directly depends on physical parameters such as t f e and t ox . Hence, the domain period can be engineered by the alterations in the FE physical parameters. The motion of domain wall 