Quantum spin liquid states, in which spins are quantum-mechanically delocalized in direction, have been so far studied for charge-localized Mott insulators arising from strong repulsive interaction Correlated electrons in solids harbor a range of emergent phenomena stemming from the competition between localization and delocalization. The particle-like charge localization is induced by mutual interactions as best manifested in the Mott insulator or Wigner crystal, however, which is delocalized into extended waves by reducing the interactions, or partially removing or adding electrons The material investigated here is the layered organic conductor, -(ET)4Hg2.89Br8 (-HgBr hereafter), comprised of conducting ET layers and insulating Hg2.89Br8 layers (Fig. According to previous studies, -HgBr is a non-Fermi liquid metal with spin susceptibility nearly perfectly scaled to that of the QSL candidate, -Cu2(CN)3, and thus is a doped QSL candidate We simultaneously compress and deform the triangular lattice of -HgBr by hydrostatic and uniaxial pressures combined in a controllable manner. A single crystal of -HgBr is placed in a conventional piston cylinder cell filled with Demnum oil s-20, a liquid pressure medium, which solidifies on cooling (for more details, see methods). Thus, pressure applied by pressing the piston is hydrostatic when the oil remains liquid (blue region in Fig. The application of hydrostatic pressure to -HgBr inevitably causes deformation as well as compression of the triangular lattice and likewise the uniaxial pressure induces compression as well. Thus, it is required to relate the pressure values (Ph, Pu) to the parameters (U/W, t'/t) based on the structure and band calculation. Because of difficulty in experimentally determining the exact atomic configurations in the present pressure conditions, we made the following assumptions on the molecular arrangements under pressure. Firstly, we determined the lattice constants of -HgBr with using the reported compressibility values of -(ET)2Cu(NCS)2 under hydrostatic pressure and the strain values separately measured with strain gauge under uniaxial pressure. Then, we determined the molecular arrangements, assuming that ET molecules are so rigid as not to deform, the relative coordinates of the molecular centers are invariant and the orientation of ET changes by the same angle as the arctan(b/c), where b and c are the lattice constants of the b-and c-axes. Using the molecular arrangements thus determined, we calculated the transfer integrals between the molecular orbitals by the extended Hückel plus tight binding method, which gave the values of U, W, t, and t' of the dimer model. Thus, we could locate the pressure sequences #1-4 in the U/W-t'/t plane as shown in Fig. We compare the temperature variation of in-plane resistivity  under different pressure conditions, (Ph, Pu), prepared by the pressurization sequences for generating uniaxial strains parallel to b-axis (#1) and c-axis (#2-4) (Fig. First, we examine the directional dependence of the uniaxial strain effect on . GPa on sequence #1), the metallic behavior is further enhanced with the increase of Pu. However, under c-axis strain (Pu c = 0.2, 0.5, 0.8, 1.1 and 1.3 GPa with Ph = 1.1 GPa on sequence #2), non-metallic behaviour appears at high temperatures in a high-Pu range, (Fig. The appearance of non-metallic behavior under c-axis strain was totally unexpected. Thus, we further examined the c-axis strain effect with lower values of Ph = 0.5 GPa (Pu c = 0.5, 0.7, 1.0, 1.3, 1.6 and 2.0 GPa with Ph =0.5 GPa on sequence #3) and Ph = 0.2 GPa (Pu c = 0.9, 1.1, 1.4 and 1.7 GPa with Ph =0.2 GPa on sequence #4); namely, the triangular lattice is distorted under more strongly interacting conditions. The results are shown in Fig. To situate the low-temperature electronic states in the U/W-t'/t plane, we made a contour plot of the  values at 10 K in this plane (Fig. It is evident that the insulating state emerging at low t'/t crosses over to a non-Fermi liquid and then to a Fermi liquid as t'/t increases; namely, a non-Fermi liquid on the triangular lattice transitions to an insulator when the lattice is distorted towards a square lattice, but to a Fermi liquid when it is oppositely distorted toward the quasi-one-dimensional coupled chains. Thus, the degree of frustration makes enormous influence on the localization/itinerancy nature of charge in the doped Mott insulator. Finally, we discuss the origin of the emergence of the insulating state in the low-t'/t region, where the spin frustration is released. In -ET compounds with half-filled bands, a spin liquid insulator is predicted to change to an antiferromagnetic insulator as t'/t decreases Since the discovery of high temperature superconductors, carrier doping to Mott insulators has provided a wide variety of electronic states, which arise from the complex quantum mechanical entanglement exhibited by the charge and spin degrees of freedom. The present study shows that the spin frustration controlled by lattice geometry play a decisive role in the behavior of charge carriers. Further studies with controlled lattice deformation would unravel further complex entanglement between charge and spin, leading to the discovery of novel phases of quantum many-body systems. A single crystal of -(ET)4Hg2.89Br8 (-HgBr), which is grown by the conventional electrochemical methods, is placed in a dual structured clamp-type cell formed by BeCu and NiCrAl cylinders with Demnum oil s-20 as the pressure medium. The relationship between the shape of the sample and the crystal axis was investigated by either X-ray diffraction or angle dependence of electron spin resonance. To evaluate the quality of applied pressure, we put strain gauges (KFLB-2-120-C1-11, Kyowa Electronic Instruments) in the pressure medium together with the sample. In pressure sequences #1 and #2, the pressure is applied at room temperature exceeding the solidification pressure of the pressure medium. The solidification pressure at room temperature is confirmed by the pressure dependence of the resistance of the strain gauges (Supplementary Fig. Because the solidification temperature can be seen in the temperature dependence of the in-plane resistivity of -HgBr (Supplementary Fig. 