We analytically study the localized running waves in the discrete Josephson transmission lines (JTL), constructed from Josephson junctions (JJ) and capacitors. The quasi-continuum approximation reduces calculation of the running wave properties to the problem of equilibrium of an elastic rod in the potential field. Making additional approximation, we reduce the problem to the motion of the fictitious Newtonian particle in the potential well. We show that there exist running waves in the form of supersonic kinks and solitons and calculate their velocities and profiles. We show that the nonstationary smooth waves which are small perturbations on the homogeneous non-zero background are described by Korteweg-de Vries equation, and those on zero background -by modified Korteweg-de Vries equation. We also study the effect of dissipation on the running waves in JTL and find that in the presence of the resistors, shunting the JJ and/or in series with the ground capacitors, the only possible stationary running waves are the shock waves, whose profiles are also found. Finally in the framework of Stocks expansion we study the nonlinear dispersion and modulation stability in the discrete JTL. The concept that in a nonlinear wave propagation system the various parts of the wave travel with different velocities, and that wave fronts (or tails) can sharpen into shock waves, is deeply imbedded in the classical theory of fluid dynamics Interesting and potentially important examples of nonlinear transmission lines are circuits containing Josephson junctions (JJ) Transmission lines formed by JJ connected in series were studied beginning from 1990s, though much less than transmission lines formed by JJ connected in parallel The interest in studies of discrete nonlinear electrical transmission lines, in particular of lossy nonlinear transmission lines, has started some time ago In our previous publication Consider the model of JTL constructed from identical JJ and capacitors, which is shown on Fig. where C is the capacitance, and I c is the critical current of the JJ. Differentiating Eq. (1a) with respect to t and substituting dq n /dt from Eq. (1b), we obtain closed equation for φ n where we have introduced the dimensionless time τ = t/ √ L J C, and L J = /(2eI c ). It is interesting to compare Eq. ( and a discrete sine-Gordon equation for lattice wave field 43 where h and D are some constants. Comparing Eqs. ( Let us return to Eq. ( Summing up (1a) from far to the left of the kink up to far to the right of the kink we obtain 2e Further on in this paper, instead of the index n will use a continuous variables z = nΛ and will be mostly interested in the running wave solutions of the form φ(z, t) = φ(x) , q(z, t) = q(x) , (7) where x = U t -z, and U is the running wave velocity. The boundary conditions become lim From the running wave ansatz follows To deal with the r.h.s. of ( is enough. From (10) and the running wave ansatz follows Substituting ( In this paper, for any velocity V , V ≡ V √ L J C/Λ. The reason, why we have chosen subscript sh for the velocity in (12), will become clear in Section VI. To find the profile of the running wave we have to approximate the finite difference in the r.h.s. of (1a) everywhere, including the regions where the variables change fast. We can write down (at least formally) the infinite Taylor expansion For the running waves, substituting into the r.h.s. of (13) the derivative of q with respect to z from (1b) and then substituting the result into (1a), we obtain the ordinary differential equation Integrating with respect to x we obtain where F is the constant of integration. Substituting ( Solving (16) relative to U 2 and F we recover (12) and also obtain Now we make the assumption, by keeping in Eq. ( We will call (18) the quasi-continuum approximation. We have seen above that the terms with the derivatives higher than the second are necessary to obtain a physically meaningful results. On the other hand, the term with the 6th derivative is necessary so the Eq. ( would be non-singular at small wavelengths. Introducing the notation y = sin φ, we write down Eq. (15) after the truncation as We recognize the equation of equilibrium of bent and compressed rods for the case of small deflections 48 , Λ 4 /360 playing the role of the bending modulus and Λ 2 /12 playing the role of the compressing force. The rod is placed in the external force field, described alternatively by the potential energy Π(y) given by (27). One important feature of the solutions of (20) can be seen without solving the equation: the localized solutions at the infinite line with the boundary conditions (8) and the finite energy exist only if If φ 2 = -φ 1 we can talk about the kinks, if φ 2 = φ 1about the solitons. In fact, we know that the solutions of (20) may be obtained from the variational principle The variational principle being formulated, we immediately understand the necessity of the relation Otherwise, by shifting the kink or the soliton we can change the functional linearly with respect to the shift. Combining (23) with (16) we obtain (21). Let us simplify Eq. ( We will call (24) the reduced quasi-continuum approximation and will see later that in certain limiting cases it can be rigorously justified. After the simplification, Eq. ( We can consider x as time and sin φ as the coordinate of the fictitious particle, visualizing (25) as Newtonian equation. Thus the problem of finding the profile of the kink is reduced to studying the motion of the particle which starts from an equilibrium position, and ends in an equilibrium position. Multiplying Eq. ( where and E is another constant of integration. Using the expertise we acquired in mechanics classes, we come to the conclusion that the initial position corresponds to maxima of the "potential energy" Π(sin φ), and so does the final position. Note that from the energy conservation law we recover (23) and, hence, (21). One should compare the kink velocity with the velocity u(φ) of propagation along the JTL of small amplitude smooth disturbances of phase on a homogeneous background φ 46 u 2 (φ) = cos φ (28) (in this paper we consider only the solutions which lie completely in the sector (-π/2, π/2).) From the fact that there is a maximum of the "potential energy" at the points φ 1,2 , follows that Calculating the derivatives we obtain that is the running wave is supersonic. Adding the energy conservation law to ( and, after the substitution into (27), (and E = 0). The "potential energy" ( The "potential energy" (32) (above) and the kink profile calculated with this energy according to Eq. ( We have chosen φ1 = .5. For the case of the soliton, the two maxima of the potential energy mentioned after Eq. ( (and E = 0). Note that while derivation of the formula for the kink velocity demands approximation of the wave behavior only far away from the kink, derivation of the formula for the soliton velocity demands approximation of the wave behaviour in the region of the soliton. The "potential energy" (34b) is graphically presented on Fig. Consider specifically the limiting case of weak kinks (|φ 1 | 1). Expanding the "potential energy" with respect to φ and φ 1 and keeping only the lowest order terms we obtain the approximation to Eq. ( The solution of Eq. ( Equations ( In the limiting case of weak solitons (∆φ tan φ 1 1, φ 1 ∼ 1, where ∆φ ≡ φ 1 -φ 0 ), it is convenient to make the change of variable ψ ≡ φ -φ 1 , after which Eq. ( The solution of Eq. ( Velocity of the soliton in this approximation is Looking at Eqs. ( However, for the running waves in the discrete JTL these approximations are not independent. Parametrically, the length scale of the waves is of the order of the lattice spacing Λ, so, naively, the quasi-continuum approximation can not be justified. What we have shown above, is that for the weak kinks the length scale is Λ/|φ 1 |, and for the weak solitons the length scale is Λ/ |∆φ| , thus justifying the reduced quasicontinuum approximation in both cases. Consider JTL with the capacitor and resistor shunting the JJ and another resistor in series with the ground capacitor, shown on Fig. where R is the ohmic resistor in series with the ground capacitor, and C J and R J are the capacitor and the ohmic resistor shunting the JJ. Considering again the running wave solutions we obtain the generalization of Eq. ( where Z J ≡ L J /C is the characteristic impedance of the JTL, and we discarded the terms with the derivatives higher than of the forth order. FIG. We impose the boundary conditions ( We emphasise that the velocity of the shock wave does not depend upon the dissipation, similar to the case of KdV equation On the other hand, the resistors, by introducing the effective "friction force", break the "energy" conservation law, which means that the stationary kinks and the solitons we considered previously are no longer possible, however weak the dissipation is. However in the lossy JTL the solutions with |φ 2 | = |φ 1 | (the shocks) are possible. We saw in Section IV that if Eq. ( In this case the first term in the l.h.s. of ( In the latter case the discrete nature of the JTL doesn't manifest itself -the continuum approximation is valid In each of these cases, the fictitious particle motion describing the shock connects the "potential energy" maximum at φ = φ 1 with the "potential energy" minimum at φ = φ 2 . For qualitative analysis of (42) when the first two terms in the l.h.s. of the equation are comparable, it is better to present it as a system of two first order differential equations Now, one important feature of shocks can be understood immediately. We are talking about the direction of shock propagation. Linearising Eq. ( where The eigenvalues of the matrix in (46) are Thus negative N i corresponds to a stable fixed point, and positive N i -to a semi-stable fixed point. From the fact that φ 1 is a semi-stable fixed point, and φ 2 is a stable fixed point we obtain The inequalities (49) allow only one direction of shock propagation -from smaller cos φ to larger cos φ. Taking into account (28), we can present (49) as thus establishing the connection with the well known in the nonlinear waves theory fact: the shock velocity is higher than the sound velocity in the region before the shock but lower than the sound velocity in the region behind the shock 1 . Let us write down inequalities (49) explicitly We will combine the case we studied up to now, when φ 1 was the phase before the shock and φ 2 -behind the shock, with the opposite case, which corresponds to indices 1 and 2 in (51) being interchanged. The points in the phase space of the shock boundary conditions (φ 1 , φ 2 ), for which neither (51), nor its interchanged version are satisfied, and hence the shock is forbidden, can be visualized by the fact that the secant of the curve sin φ between the points crosses the curve, like it is shown on Fig. When the asymptotic phases on the two sides of the JTL belong to the shaded region, probably the forbidden shock is split into two allowed ones: between φ 1 and some intermediate φ in , and between φ 2 and φ in . Say, when φ 2 = -φ 1 , the system may chose the intermediate value φ in = 0. In this hypothetical case, the shocks move in the opposite directions, and the central part with the phase φ in = 0 expands with the velocity 2U k (φ 1 , 0). However, the case of multiple shocks, being simultaneously present in the system, demands further studies. Equation ( 1, it can be ignored.) After the simplification The region, which corresponds to the forbidden shock boundary conditions, is shaded. and substitution of the results for U and F from ( Note that for weak shocks (|φ 1 -φ 2 | |φ 1 |), the r.h.s. of Eq. ( The result of the numerical integration of ( Dissipation is always present in real experiments. And yet we can observe solitary waves (though they are nonstationary, but practically identical to the corresponding stationary solitons at any given moment of time) in case if dissipation is weak enough. Thus, weak dissipation does not completely kill solitary waves, it just makes them nonstationary/attenuating. Such solitary waves are observed in numerical calculations and in experiments, as was the case with granular chains Fig. Though the main subject of the present paper is the running waves, it is worth to have a look at what happens, when we discard the running wave ansatz. To obtain tangible results, let us modify the quasi-continuum approximation (18) in the following way After we apply the modified quasi-continuum approximation to the r.h.s. of Eq. (1a) and combine thus obtained equation with (1b), Eq. ( This modification opens the way for the simple wave approximation, that is decoupling of the wave equation into two separate equations for the right-and left-going waves. Such decoupling can be easily done for the linear wave equations, as it is shown in Appendix A. Following the pattern, let us decouple (55) into 2 equations for |φ| 1 by brute force as Taking substituting ( which are modified Korteweg-de Vries (mKdV) equations. When φ = ψ + φ 1 (|ψ| 1, φ 1 ∼ 1), we present sin φ (ignoring the constant term) as substitute into (55), extract the square root, taking into account that as and keep only the leading terms to obtain which is Korteweg-de Vries (KdV) equation. Equations ( and From the boundary conditions (8) for the kink, and from the boundary condition (8) and the energy conservation law (33) for the soliton, we obtain F = 0 and and which coincides (for the approximation used) with (37) and (40). Integrating ( If we return to Eq. ( Extracting root square from both parts of (66) we obtain the generalization of ( and the generalization of ( which is KdV equation with dissipation 1 . Let us return to Eqs. ( where θ = ωt -kn. Taking into account that the sine functions can be expanded into infinite series, we can construct perturbative expansion of the solution of Eq. (2) starting from (69) We will see that the amplitude a (more exactly a 2 ) will serve as the expansion parameter. Substituting (70) into (2) and equating the coefficients before the cosines we obtain . . . From (71) we obtain (up to the relative order of a 2 ) Alternatively, the nonlinear dispersion law can be obtained from Eq. ( In this case, to the expansion (70) we should add the similar expansion for q n q n = A sin θ + B sin 3θ + D sin 5θ + . . . . Substituting ( . . . Substituting (70) and ( . . . Combining (75) and (76) we can obtain the generalization of Eq. ( Still another way to obtained the nonlinear dispersion law is based on the averaged Lagrangian 1 . The lagrangian of the discrete JTL is 46 We substitute into (77) the expansions (70) and ( . . . Substituting (79) into (80) we recover (75), and substituting into (81) -(76). The obtained nonlinear dispersion law allows us to study modulation stability of a plane wave. The slowenvelope wave we can describe, following Whitham 1 , by the equations where a is the amplitude of the envelope, and k is the z-derivative of its phase. Consider modulation of the plane wave with the wavevector k 0 and the amplitude a 0 In a frame of reference moving at the group velocity ω (k 0 ; a 2 0 ) and after linearizition with respect to k 1 and a 1 , Eq. (82) becomes We now assume that the perturbations have the form of sinusoidal modulations with wavenumber K and frequency Ω: Substituting relations (85) into (84) we obtain a set of two homogeneous equations Equation ( Notice that (87) is valid for any value of k 0 , but K is limited by the condition K 1. In our case ω 2 (k 0 )ω (k 0 ; a 2 0 ) > 0 (see Eq. (72a)), and the plane wave is stable. If the opposite equality ω 2 ω < 0 were correct, small perturbations would have grown in time, and in this sense the plane wave would have been unstable. We were not able to find in 1 the full scale derivation of (82), nor were we able to produce it, so we decided at least to compare (82b) with the equation following from the nonlinear Schrodinger equation (NLS), which can be written as With this, Eq. (89) becomes very close to (82b). Recently, quantum mechanical description of JTL in general and parametric amplification in such lines in particular started to be developed, based on quantisation techniques in terms of discrete mode operators Finally, we would like to express our hope that the results obtained in the paper are applicable to kinetic inductance based traveling wave parametric amplifiers based on a coplanar waveguide architecture. Onset of shock-waves in such amplifiers is an undesirable phenomenon. Therefore, shock waves in various JTL should be further studied, which was one of motivations of the present work. where Ai is the Airy function where A = 2 5/2 /3 ≈ 1.9. In this Appendix we are looking for some way to approximate the finite difference in the r.h.s. of Eq. (1a) alternative to Taylor expansion (13). We were not able to advance far on the road we have taken here (if at all). However, some equations obtained in the process look quite amusing to us, and we decided to present them to general attention. Treating φ and q as functions of the continuous variable z (which we measure in Λ), let us approximate the finite difference in the r.h.s. of Eq. (1a) as where g(z) is a non-singular function, which is positive, even and has the following zero and second moments Looking for the running wave (7) solution of (1), we obtain the integro-differential equation for the function φ(x) Imposing the boundary conditions ( (B4) we get the counterpart of Eq. ( Now let us consider Eq. (B5) per se, forgetting the properties of φ(x) which were postulated to derive it. We realise that if φ(x) goes to some limits when x → +∞ and x → -∞, each of these limits is either φ 1 , or φ 2 . This is unfortunately all we can say about the solution. Previously we have seen that Eq. ( (B6) The only thing we can prove about the solution of Eq. (B6) is that, for any x, (for the sake of definiteness we consider φ 1 to be positive). In fact, let sin φ(x) reaches maximum value at some point x 0 , and sin φ(x 0 ) > sin φ 1 . Then (in the last step we took into account that sin φ/φ decreases when sin φ increases for positive φ). So we came to a contradiction. Similar for the minimum value of sin φ. where Π(sin φ) is given by Eq. ( And now the final addition. Let us return to Eq. ( 2 = (φ 1 -φ) 2 (φ -φ 0 )(φ 0 + 2φ 1 + φ) . (C4)