Magnetic tunnel junctions (MTJs) have attracted strong research interest within the last decades due to their potential use as nonvolatile memory such as magnetoresistive random access memory as well as for magnetic logic applications. Half-metallic magnets (HMMs) have been suggested as ideal electrode materials for MTJs to achieve an extremely large tunnel-magnetoresistance (TMR) effect. Despite their high TMR ratios, MTJs based on HMMs do not exhibit current rectification, i.e., a diode effect, which was achieved in a magnetic tunnel junction concept [ACS Appl. Electron. Mater. 1, 1552-9 (2019)] based on HMMs and type-II spin-gapless semiconductors (SGSs). The proposed concept has recently been experimentally demonstrated using Heusler compounds. In the present work, we investigate from first-principles MTJs based on type-II SGS and HMM quaternary Heusler compounds FeVTaAl, FeVTiSi, MnVTiAl, and CoVTiSb. Our ab initio quantum transport calculations based on a nonequilibrium Green's function method have demonstrated that the MTJs under consideration exhibit current rectification with relatively high on:off ratios. We show that, in contrast to conventional semiconductor diodes, the rectification bias voltage window (or breakdown voltage) of the MTJs is limited by the spin gap of the HMM and SGS Heusler compounds. A unique feature of the present MTJs is that the diode effect can be configured dynamically, i.e., depending on the relative orientation of the magnetization of the electrodes, the MTJ allows the electrical current to pass either in one or the other direction, which leads to an inverse TMR effect. The combination of nonvolatility, reconfigurable diode functionality, tunable rectification voltage window, and high Curie temperature of the electrode materials makes the proposed MTJs very promising for roomtemperature spintronic applications and opens ways to magnetic memory and logic concepts as well as logic-in-memory computing. The current computing technology is based on the von Neumann architecture In conventional magnetic tunnel junctions (MTJs), a nonmagnetic insulator of a few nanometer thickness is sandwiched between two ferromagnetic electrodes MTJs played a significant role in spintronics development as they are suitable for several applications ranging from read-head sensors to nonvolatile memory devices such as STT MRAM and SOT MRAM and from nonvolatile logic concepts to logic-in-memory comput- ing In the first category, the logic gates are built from MTJs, which are arranged in a bridge-type configuration and the logic inputs are provided by external wires, which creates a magnetic field that switches the magnetization direction of one electrode in the MTJ. In this way, all logic gates can be realized with few MTJs In contrast to MTJ-based logic proposals, in the first and second category as well as other concepts like spinorbit torque logic The aim of the present paper is a computational design of MTJs based on HMM and SGS quaternary Heusler compounds for room-temperature device applications. Heusler compounds offer a unique platform to realize MTJs as these materials possess very high Curie temperatures (above room-temperature) as well as HMM and SGS behavior within the same family In Fig. The operation principle of the reconfigurable MTJ is extensively discussed in Ref. The I-V characteristics of the SGS/I/HMM junction illustrated in Figs. where ρ σ SGS (E) and ρ σ HMM (E + eV ) denote the density of states of the SGS and HMM electrodes with spin σ, f (E) is the Fermi distribution function and T (V ) is the transmission probability, which is proportional to e -d √ φ-V , where d is the thickness of the tunnel barrier and φ is the barrier height. As shown in Fig. The presence of the reconfigurable diode effect in MTJs based on SGSs and HMMs leads to an inverse TMR effect rather than a normal TMR effect as in most of the conventional MTJs. The voltage dependence of the TMR presented in Fig. Up to now, the discussion of the I-V curves and voltage dependence of the TMR effect in SGS/I/HHM MTJs was based on the schematic energy-band diagram at zero temperature and perfect SGS behavior of the electrode This reduces the on:off and TMR ratios. Nevertheless, such processes can be significantly reduced by increasing the band gap of the SGS and HMM materials as the Fermi-Dirac distribution function decays exponentially with increasing energy. Besides thermally excited non-spin-flip electrons, spin-flip processes stemming from spin-orbit coupling and electron-magnon interaction can also reduce the on:off ratio as well as the TMR effect Our ab initio study of the SGS/MgO/HMM MTJs is based on spin polarized density functional theory (DFT) using the QuantumATK software package (version S-2021.06) where f L (E, V ) and f R (E, V ) represent the Fermi-Dirac distributions of the left and right electrodes, respectively. Furthermore, the transmission coefficient T σ (E, V ) depends on the spin σ of the electrons, the applied bias voltage V , and the energy E. For the calculation of T σ (E, V ), we choose a dense 100 × 100 k-point mesh. Moreover, the self-consistent I-V calculations are compared with a zero-bias linear response approach. It is worth noting that for the linear response approach, the transmission spectrum is treated as bias independent, and thus this approximation is not valid for large biases and therefore just allows for a qualitative description of the I-V characteristics. In Section II, we qualitatively discussed the I-V characteristics of the MTJs based on SGSs and HMMs using the spin dependent energy-band diagram and a simple tunnel barrier model. However, quantum tunneling is a very sophisticated process in real materials as it depends on the symmetry of the wave functions in the electrodes, their decay rate, and their matching at the interface. The decay rate is determined by the thickness and barrier height as well as the complex energy bands of the insulating material For both MTJs, the thickness of the MgO tunnel barrier varies between three and six monolayers (0.6 -1.4 nm) and the SGS and HMM electrodes are constructed by repeating the minimal tetragonal unit cell 5 times along the [001] direction. Depending on the number of MgO layers, the length of the device (screening region) lies between 60 and 66 Å. The device is periodic in the xy plane and the z direction is the transport direction. We adjust the alignment of the magnetic moments to the z axis. The direction and magnitude of the atomic magnetic moments of the electrode materials in the MTJ are respectively represented by the red arrows and their size in Fig. Next, we discuss the electronic properties of the FeVTaAl/MgO/MnVTiAl junction at zero bias, i.e., in equilibrium. Thus, we present the bulk band structures of both junction materials in Fig. The I-V characteristics of the MTJs under consider-ation are calculated by using two different approaches: (i) the finite-bias NEGF method and (ii) a linear response approach. The latter is computationally much cheaper, while, however, significant differences may appear in the calculated I-V curves when compared to the self-consistent NEGF calculations, as will be discussed below. In the middle panels of Fig. Switching the magnetization direction of the electrodes from the parallel to the antiparallel configuration results in switching the I-V characteristics of the MTJ (see Fig. In Fig. We would now like to comment on the off state leakage currents of both MTJs. In principle, at zero temperature, one would obtain a zero off state current for a perfect SGS electrode. However, in our MTJs both SGS electrodes, FeVTaAl and FeVTiSi, possess a sizeable band overlap between the valence and conduction bands of opposite spin channels around E F as schematically illustrated in Figs. In contrast to conventional semiconductor diodes (p-n diode, Schottky diode, Zener diode), in which the rectification bias voltage window (or reverse bias breakdown voltage of the diode) varies between 3 -200 V, in the present MTJs, this voltage window is limited by the spin gap of the HMM and SGS Heusler compounds. In analogy to conventional semiconductor diodes, we can express the breakdown voltage for the parallel and antiparallel configurations as , where (SG SGS , E A F ) and (SG HMM , E B F ) stand for the spin gaps of the SGS and HMM electrodes above and below the Fermi energy, respectively. Using the spin gap values of the SGSs and HMMs from Ref. 61, one gets breakdown voltages V P B (V AP B ) of 0.31 and -0.34 V (0.33 and -0.30 V) for the parallel (antiparallel) configurations of the FeVTaAl/MgO/MnVTiAl and FeVTiSi/MgO/CoFeVSb MTJs, respectively. Since the estimation of the breakdown voltage is based on the DOS picture of the materials, the calculated V P B (V AP B ) values can differ substantially since, as mentioned before, in tunneling processes the bands along the transport direction, their symmetry character, and their matching across the interface play a decisive role. Indeed, the actual calculated V P B values in Fig. Finally, we discuss the TMR effect in the MTJs under study. As mentioned above, the reconfigurable diode effect gives rise to an inverse TMR effect in this type of MTJ. The voltage dependence of the TMR ratio for both MTJs is presented in Fig. MTJs based on Fe, Co, and CoFeB, as well as HMM Heusler compounds, have been extensively studied in spintronics for magnetic memory and magnetic logic applications. Despite their high TMR ratios, especially the MTJs based on HMMs, conventional MTJs do not exhibit current rectification, i.e., a diode effect. A MTJ concept has been proposed in Ref. The current nonvolatile magnetic memory technology (STT MRAM and beyond) and several magnetic logic proposals utilize conventional MTJs that have limited functionality. The MTJs based on HMMs and SGSs studied in the present paper provide major advantages over conventional MTJs and open ways to magnetic memory and logic concepts. For instance, these MTJs might be of particular interest for high-density 3D cross-point STT MRAM applications as they eliminate the need for an additional selection device such as a MOSFET transistor or a p-n diode. Apart from memory applications, the MTJs constitute the basic building blocks of the three-terminal magnetic tunnel transistors with unique properties as discussed in Ref. Finally, we present and discuss the charge accumulation across the FeVTaAl/MgO/MnVTiAl junctuion under zero bias and an applied bias voltage of ±0.3 V. To get more insight into electronic transport calculations within the ballistic limit, the k-resolved transmission coefficients can be approximated as Here t L and t R are the interface transmission functions of the left and right interface, representing the spin σ, the symmetry character ν of the wavefunction Various scenarios can occur. In the optimal case, left and right leads offer many states (n 1) close to E F with identical or compatible symmetry characters and match with barrier states, again with compatible symmetry. In the best case, the latter states have very small decay rates (κ → 0). If all of these arguments hold, the current flow through the tunnel junction will be large, almost metallic. On the other hand, if the symmetry characters of states on the left and right lead do not match, the current will vanish, even though the decay rate might be small. If the symmetry of the states match, but the decay rates are rather large, a small current will pass the device; presumably larger than in the before mentioned non-matching case, but noticeably smaller than in the first optimal case. We will use these approximations to qualitatively affirm the results of our ab initio calculations in the main manuscript. As shown in Fig. We start the discussion for the junctions in parallel configuration. In the case of the FeVTiSi/MgO/CoFeVSb junction (Fig. For the FeVTaAl/MgO/MnTiVAl junction ((Fig. For the anti-parallel configuration, the simplified discussion focusing on states around Γ fails. It is evident that for no combination of minority→majority or majority→minority carrier states are simultaneously available in both channels close to E F . We therefor extend our qualitative analysis to a more profound picture involving states off the Γ-point. By analyzing the band structure in Fig. In the previous paragraphs, we discussed the symmetry character of the band structure of both MTJs and would like to comment now on the charge accumulation at the interfaces in the FeVTaAl/MgO/MnVTiAl junction. In magnetic tunnel junctions, two different charge accumulations occur. One in the electrode materials and another in the dielectric material, which arises from the capacitance of the MTJ. The latter charge accumulation does not have an effect on the transport properties of the electrodes. In the electrode materials, charge accumulation occurs due to the tunneling current and might influence their transport properties. A similar charge accumulation can occur in the electrode materials due to a work function difference, which does not depend on a voltage or a current flowing through the device and also has an impact on the transport properties. In the FeVTaAl/MgO/MnVTiAl junction, the work functions of the electrode materials differ by 200 meV, and thus just a small amount of charge is transferred from the half-metallic magnet to the spin-gapless semiconductor. As one can see from Fig. When a positive or negative bias voltage is applied to the device in the parallel orientation of the magnetization directions of the electrodes, the electron difference density at the FeVTaAl/MgO interface stays unchanged compared to zero bias (see Figs. 9 (a) and 10 (a)), while in both cases the charge at the MnVTiAl/MgO interface decreases and increases within the tunnel barrier. In the anti-parallel orientation of the magnetization direction of the electrodes, under forward bias (+0.3 V), the behavior is similar to the parallel orientation, while under reverse bias (-0.3 V), the largest changes occur. Here, the charge at the FeVTaAl/MgO interface and within the tunnel barrier decreases while it increases slightly at the MnVTiAl/MgO interface as well as a few layers away from the interface (see Figs. 9 (b) and 10 (b)).