Understanding impacts of phase transition, phase coexistence, and surface magnetism on the longitudinal spin Seebeck effect (LSSE) in a magnetic system is essential to manipulate the spin to charge current conversion efficiency for spincaloritronic applications. We aim to elucidate these effects by performing a comprehensive study of the temperature dependence of LSSE in biphase iron oxide (BPIO = -Fe2O3 + Fe3O4) thin films grown on Si (100) and Al2O3 (111) substrates. A combination of temperature-dependent anomalous Nernst effect (ANE) and electrical resistivity measurements show that the contribution of ANE from the BPIO layer is negligible compared to the intrinsic LSSE in the Si/BPIO/Pt heterostructure even at room temperature. Below the Verwey transition of the Fe3O4 phase, the total signal across BPIO/Pt is dominated by the LSSE. Noticeable changes in the intrinsic LSSE signal for both Si/BPIO/Pt and Al2O3/BPIO/Pt heterostructures around the Verwey transition of the Fe3O4 phase and the antiferromagnetic (AFM) Morin transition of the -Fe2O3 phase are observed. The LSSE signal for Si/BPIO/Pt is found to be almost two times greater than that for Al2O3/BPIO/Pt, an opposite trend is observed for the saturation magnetization though. Magnetic force microscopy reveals the higher density of surface magnetic moments of the Si/BPIO film compared to the Al2O3/BPIO film, which underscores a dominant role of interfacial magnetism on the LSSE signal and thereby explains the larger LSSE for Si/BPIO/Pt. The past few years have witnessed a rapid growth in the field of generation and manipulation of pure spin currents for cutting edge spintronic applications. The longitudinal spin Seebeck effect (LSSE) refers to the generation of a magnon spin current in a MI parallel to the direction of the applied temperature gradient. In this context, we have chosen a biphase iron oxide (BPIO = -Fe2O3 + Fe3O4) film as a model system for probing effects of the phase transition and phase coexistence on the LSSE over a wide temperature range of 10 -300 K. For studying the effect of surface magnetization, we measured LSSE in iron oxide thin films grown on two different substrates, Si (100) and Al2O3 (111), using molecular beam epitaxy. A combination of temperature-dependent ANE and electrical resistivity measurements on the BPIO layer shows the negligible contribution of the ANE from the BPIO layer as compared to the intrinsic LSSE signal in the Si/BPIO/Pt heterostructure even at room temperature. Below the Verwey transition, the total signal across BPIO/Pt is dominated by the LSSE. The Si/BPIO/Pt and Al2O3/BPIO/Pt heterostructures show noticeable changes in the LSSE signal around the Verwey transition of the Fe3O4 phase and the AFM Morin transition The LSSE signal for Si/BPIO/Pt is found to be almost two times higher than that for Al2O3/BPIO/Pt, due to the higher density of surface magnetic moments of the Si/BPIO film compared to the Al2O3/BPIO film. These findings underscore the dominating role of interfacial magnetism of the FM layer on the LSSE signal in FM/HM bilayers. Figure The Raman spectra of both the iron oxide films also show characteristic peaks for both Fe3O4 and α-Fe2O3 phases (Figure These results indicate that both Si/Fe3O4 and Al2O3/Fe3O4 films are not single phase but consist of two different phases of iron oxide. We designate the "Si/Fe3O4" and "Al2O3/Fe3O4" films as "Si/BPIO" and "Al2O3/BPIO" films, respectively throughout the manuscript, where BPIO represents a combination of Fe3O4 and -Fe3O4 phases. Figure According to the bulk magnon theory, the concurrent presence of a temperature gradient (∇T ⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗ ) and an in-plane dc magnetic field develops a spatial gradient of magnon accumulation in the magnetic layer (BPIO, for our case). where, e, ħ, R y , L y , λ Pt , and t Pt are the electronic charge, the reduced Planck's constant, the resistance between the contact probes on the Pt layer, the distance between the contact leads, the spin diffusion length, and the thickness of the Pt layer, respectively. Since Fe3O4 is a half-metallic ferromagnet with a high Curie temperature (TC ~ 850 K), it has high spin polarization of conduction electrons at room temperature. So, in presence of the outof-plane temperature gradient and in-plane magnetic field, a transverse spin-polarized current is generated in the BPIO layer by the ANE; this gives rise to an extra voltage contribution (V FM ANE ) to the total signal measured across the top Pt layer of the Si/BPIO/Pt heterostructure. where, E ANE ⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗ is the electric field generated by ANE and Q ANE is the anomalous Nernst coefficient. Moreover, there is an additional voltage contribution (V Prox ANE ) due to the magnetic proximityinduced ANE in the non-magnetic Pt layer. V FM ANE and V Prox ANE are strongly suppressed due to the placement of the 5 nm thick top Pt layer. To correlate the temperature profile of thermo-spin transport in Si/BPIO/Pt heterostructure with magnetic properties of the BPIO layer, we investigated the temperature dependence of magnetization M(T) of Si/BPIO in zero-field cooled (ZFC) and field-cooled (FC) mode (see Figure Thus, the dominating contribution of the intrinsic LSSE for our Si/BPIO/Pt heterostructure below the Verwey transition is consistent with both the magnetization and electrical transport results. Most importantly, the LSSE voltage has contributions from both the Fe3O4 and α-Fe2O3 phases, which highlights the effect of phase coexistence on the LSSE signal. We have also performed LSSE measurements for different thermal gradient intervals, T. for Si/BPIO/Pt is nearly 2 times higher than that for Al2O3/BPIO/Pt throughout the measured temperature range. To correlate the temperature profile of thermo-spin transport in Al2O3/BPIO/Pt heterostructure with magnetic properties of the BPIO layer, we have also investigated ZFC and FC M(T) for the Al2O3/BPIO measured under the application of an in-plane magnetic field 0H = 0.1 T (see Figure To elucidate this, we have studied the surface magnetic domain structures of the Fe3O4 films grown on Si and Al2O3 substrates, using the AFM/MFM technique. Figure As shown before, the ISHE-induced charge current in the Pt layer depends on the crossproduct (J S ⃗⃗⃗ × σ ⃗⃗⃗ ). The spin polarization vector σ ⃗⃗⃗ is proportional to the projection of the in-plane surface magnetization, M Surf IP ⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗ . where H eff ⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗ is the effective magnetic field consisting of H DC ⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗ and anisotropy field, h ⃗ ⃗ is the noise field which accounts for the thermal fluctuations;  and  are the gyromagnetic ratio and the Gilbert's damping constant, respectively. As discussed before, the magnon spin current pumping from the magnetic layer (BPIO) into the Pt layer depends on the magnon accumulation close to the BPIO/Pt interface. We have systematically investigated the temperature dependence of LSSE in biphase iron oxide thin films grown on Si (100) and Al2O3 (111) substrates. We have demonstrated that the contribution of ANE from the BPIO layer is negligible compared to the intrinsic LSSE signal in the Si/BPIO/Pt heterostructure. Below the Verwey transition, the total signal across BPIO/Pt is dominated by the LSSE. We have observed the noticeable changes in the LSSE signal for both Si/BPIO/Pt and Al2O3/BPIO/Pt heterostructures around the Verwey transition of the Fe3O4 phase and the AFM Morin transition of the α-Fe2O3 phase. Owing to the higher density of surface magnetic moments of the Si/BPIO film compared to the Al2O3/BPIO film, the LSSE signal for the Si/BPIO/Pt heterostructure is almost two times higher than that for Al2O3/BPIO/Pt, despite that the saturation magnetization is ~2 times higher in the latter than in the former. These findings underscore the significant effects of phase transition, phase coexistence and surface magnetism on the LSSE signal in FM/HM bilayers. Biphase iron oxide (BPIO) films of thickness ~ 80 nm were grown on Si (100) and Al2O3 (111) substrates of dimensions 5 x 5 x 0.5 mm 3 using molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) (VG Semicon, Inc.) technique. The substrates were initially cleaned with methanol before being loaded into the vacuum chamber. After pre-heating at 600°C or 30 min in ultra-high vacuum (UHV), the substrates were cooled down to 400°C, and maintained at that temperature during the growth. Fe was evaporated from an effusion cell with the evaporation rate of 0.2 Å/s under oxygen pressure of 8.2 × 10 -6 Torr. A thin Platinum (Pt) layer of thickness ~ 5 nm was deposited on the BPIO films using DC sputtering. The crystal phase characterization of the BPIO thin films was performed using Bruker AXS powder X-ray diffractometer (XRD) with Cu-Kα radiation at room temperature. A Horiba LabRAM HR Evolution Raman system equipped with a 532 nm diodelaser with 0.15 mW power was used for the Raman spectrum acquisition. Field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) was also carried out to observe microstructural variation in the films. The film thickness was measured by cross-sectional FESEM measurements. The in-plane (IP) static magnetic characterization of the samples was performed using a vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM) attached to the physical property measurement system (PPMS) (Quantum Design, Inc., USA). Electrical resistivity measurements of the films were performed using the DC transport option of the PPMS. Both atomic force microscopy (AFM) and magnetic force microscopy (MFM) images were obtained using a scanning probe microscopy (SPM) system (OmegaScope-R, AIST-NT), in tapping mode for sample surface topography and lift mode for magnetic domain observation. A MikcroMasch Co-Cr coated Si magnetic probe (225 x 27.5 x 3 mm 3 , with tip radius < 60 nm) was used for the measurements. The force constant and the resonant frequency of the tip were ≈ 2.8 Nm -1 and 75 kHz, respectively. The AFM/MFM images are of ~300 px x 300 px and scanning rate was 0.5 Hz. The LSSE and ANE on the films were measured within the temperature range 75 K ≤ T ≤ 295 K and magnetic fields up to 0H = 0.3 T using a custom designed set up by making use of a universal sample puck for the PPMS. Both these measurements were performed using the longitudinal configuration. The heterostructures were sandwiched between two copper plates (hot and cold). The bare surface of each of the copper plates was covered with a thin layer of Kapton tape to electrically isolate the sample from the copper plates. To maintain a constant temperature difference between these two plates, temperatures of both these plates were controlled by the PID control technique using two temperature controllers. The cold (top) plate was thermally anchored to the PPMS puck base (heat bath) via Molybdenum screws and the hot (bottom) plate was thermally separated from the PPMS puck base by a thick Teflon block to maintain a temperature difference of ~ 10 K between the PPMS puck base and the hot plate. A temperature gradient was applied along the +z-direction using two Pt 100 RTD sensors (used as resistive heaters) attached to both these plates that generates a temperature difference of T = 10 ±0.005 K between these two plates. A calibrated Si-diode sensor was attached to each of these plates which were used as thermometers that precisely recorded the temperatures T hot and T cold corresponding to temperatures of the hot and cold plates, respectively. The sample temperature was estimated as the average temperature, T sample = T hot +T cold . Cryogenic N-grease was applied to both the surfaces of the hot and cold plates to maintain good thermal connectivity with the sample surface. To maintain the same thermal contact conditions, the same amount of N-grease between the sample and the hot/cold plates was applied for all the samples. The ISHE voltage (Vy) across the Pt layer of the Si/BPIO/Pt and Al2O3/BPIO/Pt heterostructures was measured along the y direction using a Keithley 2182A nanovoltmeter, while sweeping a DC magnetic field applied along the x direction by the superconducting magnet of the PPMS. After setting the PPMS base temperature and the temperatures of the hot and cold plates to the desired values, temperature difference between these two plates were monitored using the LabVIEW and the magnetic field dependent LSSE/ANE measurements were started only when a stable temperature difference was attained. Our 