Despite the youthfulness of hybrid halide perovskite solar cells, their efficiencies are currently comparable to commercial silicon and have surpassed quantum-dots solar cells. Yet, the scalability of these devices is a challenge due to their low reproducibility and stability under environmental conditions. However, the methods reported to date to tackle such issues recurrently involve the use of solvent methods that would further complicate their transfer to industry. Herein we present a reliable alternative relaying in the implementation of an ultrathin plasma polymer as passivation interface between the electron transport material and the hybrid perovskite layer. Such nanoengineering interface provides solar devices with increased longterm stability under ambient conditions. Thus, without consideringr any additional encapsulation step, the cells retain more than 80 % of their efficiency after being exposed to the ambient atmosphere for more than 1000 h. Moreover, this plasma polymer passivation strategy significantly improves the coverage of the mesoporous scaffold by the perovskite layer, providing the solar cells with enhanced performance as well as improved reproducibility. Under the scenario of the climate crisis caused by human actions, Applying this method, adamantane-based ultrathin plasma polymers were deposited at room temperature on the mesoporous titanium oxide (m-TiO2/ADA) without any required pretreatment. Their microstructural characteristics have been observed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The plasma polymer resulting from this process is highly conformal, homogenous, compact, and chemically inert, as we have already shown in our previous works. A set of adamantane plasma polymer layers with different thicknesses has been tested as a passivation layer at m-TiO2/perovskite interface for conventional n-i-p PSCs. These ADA films were deposited on top of the mesoporous TiO2 layer using the RPAVD reported in previous work. Figure Cross-sectional SEM images of each of the studied cell configurations are shown in Figure We found that the mesoporous particles of TiO2 were less visible in the case of ADA film was incorporated into the architecture. In other words, the presence of the ADA interlayer induces a better coating of the mesoporous scaffold by the perovskite material. In particular, the greatest overlapping at the m-TiO2/perovskite interface came from ADA-5nm sample. This indicates that the polymeric interface is beneficial for improving the contact between the ETL and the perovskite. This key feature would lead to higher charge injection and transport, and hence to a better performance of the whole device. In addition, the ADA polymer acts as a passivation interlayer that impacts on the hysteresis of J-V curves as well (Figure To cast some light on this effect, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (IS) measurements at open-circuit voltage were carried out, as shown in Figure Well-defined arcs were observed in the HF region determined from the Nyquist plots from all samples as is typically the case for PSC (Figure IS plots were fitted by means of a simplified Voigt circuit (shown in Fig. Where Jrec is the recombination current, V is the photovoltage, R00 is the resistance at zero potential, β is the recombination parameter, kB is the Boltzman constant and T is the absolute temperature. Figure ) shows the photoluminescence (PL) spectra of perovskite deposited on m-TiO2 layer passivated with ADA polymers (reference ADA-0nm is also added). For a better comparison of intensity peak, PL data has been normalized to the maximum absorbance (Figure Therefore, a better electron transfer across the m-TiO2/perovskite interface is obtained when ADA was incorporated into the structure, indicating that the ADA interlayer has a kinetic rather than a thermodynamic effect on PSCs. In previous work, ADA films have been used as encapsulation material (with a significantly higher thickness) for solar cells to increase cell stability and resistance to moisture and water. The ultrathin adamantane plasma-polymeric films at m-TiO2/perovskite interface of solar cells devices have been shown to improve significantly the reproducibility of the photovoltaic parameters. The presence of this polymeric passivation layer improves also most of the PV parameters, where it can be highlighted the increase of the fill factor. The beneficial effect on FF seems to come from the drop of series resistance observed by IS and the improvement of electronic injection found in the PL measurements. This could be due to the improved coverage of the mesoporous titanium particles by the perovskite observed in the SEM analysis of the devices. Besides that, the IS analysis of DSSC based on m-TiO2/ADA electrodes proves that the ADA treatment did not alter the electronic properties of the TiO2 electrodes. From the analysis of our results, we can establish an optimum plasma-polymer thickness of 5 nm to maximize the performance. Finally, the ADA-5nm samples show a significant stability increase under environmental conditions in comparison with the reference devices. ADA-5nm samples, measured without encapsulation at ambient conditions, retained 80 % of their initial efficiency in 1000 h. Our results demonstrate the reliability of the plasma technique for interlayer passivation. The polymer fabrication is carried out by a solvent-free process that can be applied to large areas and/or simultaneous deposition of multiple electrodes and can be easily scaled up to industrial fabrication which could help to bring the perovskite solar cells one step closer to industry. Fabrication of dye sensitized solar cells 18 Table Table Table Figure Figure Glass coated of fluorine-doped tin oxide TEC 15 (FTO, Pilkington, resistance 15/square, 82-84.5 % transmittance) was used as the front electrode. Before use, FTOs were brushed with Hellmanex solution in water (2:98 vol %) and rinsed with deionized water. After that, the glasses were sequentially cleaned with Hellmanex solution, deionized water, isopropanol, and acetone using an ultrasonic bath for 15 min. The acetone was dried with a nitrogen flow. Then the substrates were treated with UV/O3 for 15 min using an Ossila Ozone Cleaner. Once FTOs were clean, 30 nm of TiO2 blocking layer was deposited on top by spray pyrolysis. For that, a precursor solution was prepared by addition of 1 mL of titanium diisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate) solution (75% in 2-propanol, Sigma-Aldrich) in 14 mL of absolute ethanol. The solution was immediately sprayed on annealed glasses (450 oC) using oxygen as carrier gas. The substrates were kept at 450 oC for 30 min and then they were left to cool down to room temperature. This compact layer (c-TiO2) was treated with UV/O3 for 15 min before mesoporous TiO2 deposition (m-TiO2). The mesoporous solution was prepared by adding 1 mL absolute ethanol to 150 mg of a commercial TiO2 paste (Sigma-Aldrich, 18NRT). The mesoporous dispersion was left under stirring overnight. After that, 100 μL were deposited on c-TiO2 samples by spin-coating at 4000 rpm for 10 s. After spinning, the samples were immediately placed on a hot plate at 100 oC for 10 min. The m-TiO2 layer was then sintered following a temperature programmer described by Saliba et. al. 200 μL of clorobenzene was added as antisolvent in the second step 15 s after the beginning. After that, the samples were immediately placed on a hot plate at 100 oC for 60 min. The adamantane plasma polymer thin film on top of m-TiO2 samples was carried out in a microwave plasma reactor at base pressure of 10 -6 torr as reported in previous works. Variable angle spectroscopic ellipsometry (VASE) was acquired in a Woollam V-VASE ellipsometer. The optical constants were modeling by fitting the spectra to the Cauchy model. Steady-state photoluminescence measurements were carried out using a Hitachi, F-7000. Steady state luminescence spectra were recorded in a Jobin Yvon Fluorolog-3 spectrofluorometer. X-Ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) characterization were performed in a Phoibos 100 DLD X-ray spectrometer from SPECS. The spectra were collected in the pass energy constant mode at a value of 50 eV using a Mg Kα source. Ti 2p3/2 signal at 458.5 eV was utilized for calibration of the binding energy in the spectra. Current density-voltages (J-V) curves were recorded under a solar simulator (ABET-Sunlite) with AM 1.5G filter at 100 mW•cm -2 . these curves were measured with a black mask of 0.14 cm 2 to define the active area. For the case of ANOVA, the J-V curves were recorded at 50 mV s -1 in reverse scan (from 1.2 V to -0.1 V) while for HI analysis the curves were measured at 60 mV s -1 . HI was calculated according to HI = (J 0.8 V ) reverse -(J 0.8 V ) forward (J 0.8 V ) reverse . Static wetting contact angles were determinated by Youth method with a Data Physics Instruments using small droplets of 1 μL of pure-deionized water (Milli-Q) and the reported values are the average of seven measurements. Impedance spectroscopy analysis (IS) was carried out using an analyzer module (PGSTAT302N/FRA2, Autolab) following our previously described methodology. Table 