Through comprehensive density functional calculations, we predict the stability of a rheniumbased ferrite, ReFe 2 O 4 , in a distorted spinel-based structure. In ReFe 2 O 4 , all Re and half of the Fe ions occupy the octahedral sites while the remaining Fe ions occupy the tetrahedral sites. All Re ions are predicted to be at a +4 oxidation state with a low spin configuration (S = 3/2), while all Fe ions are predicted to be at a +2 oxidation state with a high spin state configuration (S = 2). Magnetically, ReFe 2 O 4 adopts an unconventional ferrimagnetic state in which the magnetic moment of Re opposes the magnetic moments of both tetrahedral and octahedral Fe ions. The spin-orbit coupling is found to cause a slight spin canting of ∼ 1.5 • . The predicted magnetic ground state is unlike the magnetic alignment usually observed in ferrites, where the tetrahedral cations oppose the spin of the octahedral cations. Given that the density of states analysis predicts a half-metallic character driven by the presence of Re t2g states at the Fermi level, this compound shows promise towards potential spintronics applications. Searching for and investigating exotic magnetic phases deepens our fundamental knowledge of complex functional materials and opens new horizons for novel applications Typically, in complex materials containing multiple magnetic cations, the magnetic ground state is stabilised through competing ferromagnetic and antiferromagnetic superexchange interactions, resulting in frustrated systems with multiple magnetic phase transitions. In ferrites with only fourth row 3d TM ions, these competitions simply stabilise the ferrimagnetic state where the cations on the octahedral site align antiparallel to the cations on the tetrahedral sites With all these exciting developments in perovskite magnetism, one wonders if there are any similar counterparts in ferrites. The idea of harnessing heavier 4d and 5d TM ion ferrites to control anisotropy and magnetostriction in ferrite was proposed by Hansen and Krishnan in 1977 Spin-polarised collinear and noncollinear density functional calculations were performed with VASP code To simulate the ReFe 2 O 4 structure, as shown in Fig. Two cation types based on coordination exist in the spinel ferrite structure: one that is tetrahedrally coordinated and another that is octahedrally coordinated with oxygen ions. The first type represents one-third, while the second represents two-thirds of the total cations in the crystal. We examined three possible rhenium placements to identify the most stable position of the Re ions in ReFe 2 O 4 . First, both Re ions were placed at the tetrahedral sites while all Fe ions were left at the octahedral site, which is the typical cationic distribution in spinels. Secondly, one Re ion was placed at the tetrahedral site, and the other Re ion was placed at the octahedral site, a configuration usually referred to as an intermediate spinel. Lastly, both Fe ions were placed at tetrahedral sites, while the octahedral sites were equally occupied with Re and Fe, which is referred to as an inverse spinel. We investigated all these cationic distributions by calculating the total energy for two possible ferrimagnetic and ferromagnetic spin alignments. In the ferromagnetic structure, all cations' spin was set parallel, while in the ferrimagnetic structure, the tetrahedral cations' spin was set antiparallel to the spin of the octahedral cations. As shown in Fig. When Re ions are located at octahedral sites (Fig. To unambiguously confirm the stability of configuration (h), we further calculated the total energy of configuration (i), which is quite similar to configuration (h) except that the spins of the two Re ions were set antiparallel to examine the strength of the magnetic coupling among Re ions. We also examined configuration (j), which is antiferromagnetic; that is, every cation has an antiparallel spin to the one adjacent. Both configurations (i) and (j) had total energies higher than that of configuration (h) by more than 1 eV/u.c. The stability of configuration (h) relative to configurations (i) and (j) demonstrates that pairs of Re Oct , Fe Oct and Fe Tet ions have a strong tendency towards parallel spin alignment among themselves. For the most stable placement of Re which can be expressed as Fe Tet (ReFe) Oct O 4 , configuration (h), which represents the magnetic ground state, is remarkably stable as flipping to even the second most stable spin configuration (e) has an energy cost of 0.4446 eV/u.c. This level of stability is likely to correspond to an ambient Curie temperature in ReFe 2 O 4 . This prediction is based on a comparison with CoFe 2 O 4 's stability margin. A spin-flip from ferrimagnetic to ferromagnetic order in CoFe 2 O 4 costs 0.536 eV/u.c. in which k B is the Boltzmann constant and J ij is the pair exchange coupling parameter between sites i and j. Assuming the nearest neighbour interaction between Re and Fe to be the most significant, Equation 1 yields T C = 734.9 K, which is close to the comparison made earlier. Given that Re is a relatively heavier sixth-row transition element, we anticipate that the role of spin-orbit coupling (SOC) is potentially significant in ReFe 2 O 4 The density of states (DOS) in ReFe 2 O 4 , calculated considering SOC, are presented in Fig. As shown in Fig. As shown in Fig. We examined the optimised ReFe 2 O 4 primitive cell's symmetry to investigate the magnetic exchange among all cations. A triclinic symmetry was detected through the FINDSYM symmetry detection algorithm (2) Here, E t is the density functional total energy. ∆H metallic ) Using density functional calculations, considering spinorbit coupling, we predict that a Re-based ferrite ReFe 2 O 4 is stable in a distorted spinel structure with reduced triclinic symmetry (P 1), and adopts an unconventional magnetic ordering in where Re spin opposes the spin of both Fe Tet and Fe Oct , while Fe Tet and Fe Oct have parallel spin alignment among themselves. The net magnetic moment of this compound is evaluated at 6.090 μ B /f.u. which is about 1.5 times greater than that of magnetite. The magnetic ground state is remarkably stable as flipping any spin incurs an energetic cost of at least 0.2223 eV/f.u., which is likely to correspond to an ambient Curie temperature. The compound is predicted to be half-metallic, which implies that this compound may be useful towards applications in spintronics where the spin polarisation of conduction electrons is desired. )