Chain-like structured superconductive materials (such as A2Cr3As3, with A = K, Rb, Cs) exhibit the multiband electronic structure of single-particle states, where coexisting quasi-one-dimensional (Q1D) and conventional higher-dimensional energy bands take part in the creation of the aggregate superconducting condensate. When the chemical potential approaches the edge of a Q1D band in a single-band superconductor, the corresponding mean-field critical temperature increases significantly but the superconductivity is quenched by fluctuations. However, recent investigation has revealed that when a Q1D band is coupled to a higher dimensional one by the interband Cooper-pair transfer, the thermal superconductive fluctuations can be suppressed so that the resulting critical temperature can be close to its mean-field value. In the present work, we calculate the mean-field Tc0 and fluctuation-shifted Tc critical temperatures for a two-band superconductor where a Q1D band coexists with a higher-dimensional band, and investigate how the thermal fluctuations are sensitive to the system parameters. We find that Tc is close to Tc0 in a wide range of microscopic parameters, and even the dimensionality of the higher-dimensional band does not play an essential role. Thus, the screening mechanism for suppressing fluctuations via the pair-exchange coupling between the bands is indeed relevant for a large class of Q1D multiband superconducting materials, encouraging further experiments aimed at reaching larger critical temperatures in such multiband superconductors. Experimental detection of two superconductive gaps in MgB 2 1-4 sparked a plethora of theoretical studies of the multiband or multi-gap models of superconductivity, see e.g. Refs. 5-10. The core of the difference between the multi-and single-band materials lies in the interference of multiple contributing condensates, which makes their properties to deviate from those of the singlecondensate systems. The interference can, among other things, suppress superconducting order-parameter fluctuations, which is here referred to as the multiband fluctuations screening mechanism The study in Ref. 12 has also demonstrated that the fluctuation screening can have a significant effect even in the case of a shallow Q1D band coupled to a conventional deep 3D band (shallow and deep refers to a position of the chemical potential, close or far from the band edge, respectively). The superconducting condensate in such a case is a coherent mixture of the standard BCS state in the 3D deep band and nearly BEC state in the Q1D shallow band -the so-called multiband BCS-BEC crossover regime, characterized by a much higher mean-field critical temperature. The physical reason for this amplification of the superconducting temperature is a Feshbach-like resonance, see e.g. Refs. 16-20, 22, and 23. It appears when the chemical potential approaches the Q1D-band edge, which results in much higher density of single-particle states (DOS) due to the van Hove singularity. The fluctuations of the superconducting order parameter in Q1D band tend to quench the superconductivity Motivated by recent theoretical works reporting this fluctuation suppression mechanism This work complements the earlier study The latter become stronger when e.g. the energy depth or the dimensionality of the reservoir band decrease. It is thus necessary to go beyond a simplified model considered in the previous study The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II we consider the two-band generalization of the BCS model and the equation for the mean-field critical temperature. Then, we derive the effective Ginzburg-Landau (GL) free energy functional that controls the superconducting order-parameter fluctuation corrections to the critical temperature. Details of the computing the Q1D coefficients in the GL functional are given in Appendix A. In Sec. III we discuss relevant parameters of the two-band system and calculate the mean-field critical temperature T c0 and its fluctuation-renormalized value T c . Section IV summarizes our results. In this section, we outline the formalism necessary to calculate the mean-field T c0 and fluctuationrenormalized T c critical temperatures of a two-band superconductor. We assume that one of the bands is quasi-one-dimensional (Q1D) and it is close to the Feshbach-like resonance associated with the Lifshitz transition We consider the two-band system with the s-wave pairing in both bands, using the standard generalization of the BCS model where ψνσ (r) are the operators for carriers with spin σ in band ν, T ν (r) is the single-particle Hamiltonian, and ∆ ν (r) is the gap function in the respective band. Here we use the vector notation ∆ = (∆ 1 , ∆ 2 ) T , with the scalar product ., . , and denote by γ = g-1 the inverse of the coupling matrix g with elements g νν . The mean-field solution for the condensate is obtained by diagonalizing the Hamiltonian self-consistently, together with the self-consistency gap equation where R ν (r) = ψ ν↑ (r)ψ ν↓ (r) are the anomalous averages. For the single-particle Hamiltonian T ν (r) we adopt the effective mass approximation 12 so that the single-particle energy is approximated as where k = {k x , k y , k z }, and index α assumes values {x, y} for the Q2D band and {x, y, z} for the 3D one; m ν is the carrier effective mass for band ν, ε 0 is the energy shift between the bands, and μ is the chemical potential of the system, measured with respect to the edge of the Q1D band. Notice that the energy dispersion of the Q1D (Q2D) band is degenerate in the remaining {y, z} (z) directions. The respective summation over k α in these directions, which is needed in the calculations of the band density of states (DOS), is estimated by simply introducing multiplicative factors n y and n z related to the Brillouin zone sizes in the corresponding directions. The energies and the chemical potential are taken relative to the edge of the Q1D band. The edge of the higherdimensional band is located below the edge of the Q1D band, so that ε 0 < 0. A schematic energy diagram of the bands is shown in Fig. The mean field critical temperature T c0 is obtained by solving the linearized gap equation where δ νν is the Kronecker symbol, and A ν are given by (see Appendix A) where the quantities marked by a tilde are normalized by the cut-off energy, the DOS N 1 for the higherdimensional band is given by N Q2D = n z m 1 /2 2 for the Q2D case and N 3D 1 = m 1 k F /2π 2 2 for the 3D case, with the Fermi momentum k F = 2m 1 (μ + |ε 0 |). For the Q1D band N 2 = n y n z m 2 /32π 2 3 ω c , which is the Q1D DOS at the cut-off energy ω c (the divergent part of the energy-dependent Q1D DOS is kept inside the integral). The energy-dependent DOSs for bands 1 and 2 are sketched in Figs. 1. For simplicity and without loss of generality, we assume that the factor n z is the same for both bands. The critical temperature T c0 is found from Eq. ( where G = g 11 g 22 -g 2 12 . Since A ν ∝ N ν , the solution depends on the dimensionless coupling constants Of the two possible solutions to Eq. ( The mean-field results of the previous section can be strongly modified by thermal superconducting fluctuations. To investigate the impact of those fluctuations by calculating the related corrections to the critical temperature in the vicinity of the Lifshitz transition μ 0, we evaluate the corrections by using the Gibbs distribution e -F/T with the free energy F given by where f ν in the vicinity of T c0 can be expanded in powers of ∆ ν and its gradients, which yields [see Appendix A] For the higher-dimensional band the coefficients are given by the standard expressions. In particular, a 1 and b 1 are the same for the Q2D and 3D variants with τ = 1 -T /T c0 . The remaining coefficient is given by with α = {x, y, z} for the 3D band and with α = {x, y} for the Q2D band. For the Fermi velocity in these expressions we have For the shallow Q1D band (for |μ| < ω c ) the expressions for the coefficients can only be represented in the form of the integrals written as where Tc0 and μ are defined in Eq. ( The free energy in Eq. ( where (S ≥ 0 for the s-wave pairing). Using the representation where ψ(r) and φ(r) are the modes associated with η + and η -, the free energy functional can be rearranged as where f ψ and f φ have the same structure as Eq. ( are changed as and with α = {x, y, z}. Finally, f ψφ in Eq. ( φ /a φ of the mode φ is generally finite near T c0 , which is a consequence of the fact that the two contributing condensates are coupled by the Josephsonlike pair transfer between the band condensates. Consequently, ψ is the only critical mode with the divergent characteristic length ξ ψ /a ψ at T → T c0 . The pair fluctuations, controlled by the mode φ, produce noncritical corrections, which can be safely neglected close to T c0 . Thus, the analysis of the pair fluctuations can consider only the critical mode, i.e. F is well approximated by the single-component GL functional where the presence of the two bands is reflected only the coefficients a ψ , b ψ , and K (α) ψ that are averages over the contributing bands, see Eq. (18). From the definition of η + in Eq. ( 1 . Also, Eq. ( In the opposite limit S → 0, the higher-dimensional band does not contribute. In this case, Eq. ( 2 . Now Eq. ( Before proceeding further, it is important to discuss Eq. ( In more detail, the fluctuations are controlled by the superfluid stiffness coefficient K ψ , defined by Eq. ( The impact of the thermal fluctuations on the critical temperature is determined by the Ginzburg number (also known as the Ginzburg-Levanyuk parameter) Gi = 1 -T Gi /T c0 , where T Gi is defined as the temperature at which the heat capacity given by the mean-field theory is equal to the fluctuation-driven heat capacity where a ψ = da ψ /dT . Notice that n z appears in Eq. ( ψ whereas n z is not only included in these coefficients (through N ν ) but also appears explicitly in Eq. (21). As b ψ ∝ n z , a ψ ∝ n z , and K (α) ν ∝ n z , one can see that n z does not eventually contribute to Gi 2D . Then, one can rewrite the right-hand side of Eq. ( where the Ginzburg number of band 1 is given by where a ν = da ν /dT and Eqs. ( Similarly, for the Q1D+3D case there are three nonzero stiffness coefficients in the GL functional of the two-band system, the number of the effective dimensions of the GL functional (20) is 3, and the Ginzburg number is expressed in the form Utilizing Eq. ( where the Ginzburg number of band 1 with the 3D dispersion is given by which can be rewritten as see Eqs. (10) and (11). It is instructive to examine the limiting cases S → 0 and S → ∞. As is mentioned above, when S → ∞, band 2 does not contribute [see Eq. ( → 0 for the 1D+2D system in Eq. ( The Ginzburg number Gi gives a good estimate for the temperature range in the vicinity of the critical temperature where thermal fluctuations are large. However, the fluctuation suppress the superconductivity and reduce the critical temperature itself. As the thermal fluctuations of the two-band system are controlled by the effective single-component GL free-energy functional, we can utilize standard expressions connecting the Ginzburg number with the fluctuation-driven shift of the critical temperature in single-band superconductors, see details in Ref. 12. For the case of the GL functional with the two effective dimensions (Q1D+Q2D), one can use where T c is the Berezinski-Kosterlitz-Thouless (BKT) transition temperature One can also apply the renormalization group result which is the result of the 3D renormalization group analysis Now we investigate how the critical temperature T c depends on the system parameters, including the dimensionality and the depth of the higher-dimensional band, as well as on the interaction strength and effective carrier masses of the both contributing bands. The analysis is done in two steps: first, we calculate the mean-field critical temperature T c0 and then the critical temperature T c , renormalized due to the pair thermal fluctuations. The mean-field critical temperature T c0 is determined by the three dimensionless coupling constants λ 11 , λ 22 , λ 12 and the chemical potential μ. Within the adopted model, μ ∼ 0 determines the proximity to the Lifshitz transition point (the Feshbach-like resonance) and is used as a variable in our calculations. We avoid the trivial regime of a dominant higher-dimensional band λ 11 λ 22 at which the system characteristics are close to those of a conventional BCS superconductor. Notice that similar situation occurs for large pair-exchange couplings λ 12 λ 22 because intensive Cooper-pair transfer between the contributing bands washes out the Q1D effects. Thus, the most physically interesting is the case of λ 11 , λ 12 λ 22 , where the Q1D physics is still important. Below we choose λ 22 = 0.2, which is in the range of the values typical for the dimensionless couplings of conventional superconductors To calculate the critical temperature renormalized by the thermal pair fluctuations, one needs to know the Ginzburg number of the two-band system in addition to T c0 . The former depends on the Ginzburg number of the higher-dimensional band Gi 1 , the band occupation parameter S, as well as on the ratios N 2 /N 1 and v 2 /v 1 . As follows from Eq. ( that there is no need to specify the cut-off energy ω c as the latter simply determines the energy scale of the model. The ratio of the band DOSs N 2 /N 1 is close to 1 in most of two-band superconductors, see Ref. 11, and for simplicity we choose N 2 /N 1 = 1. Finally, we consider different values of ε 0 and m 2 /m 1 , to investigate how the depth of band 1 impacts T c and how this impact is sensitive to the band mass ratio m 2 /m 1 . In multiband superconductors the effective band masses can significantly deviate from that of free electrons Figure We now consider impact of the thermal pair fluctuations and calculate the critical temperature T c renormalized by the fluctuations. Figure Figure The critical temperature Tc renormalized by the pair fluctuations versus μ, calculated for λ12 = 2 • 10 -3 (panel a) and λ12 = 5 • 10 -3 (panel b). The depth of the higherdimensional band is chosen as |ε0| = 300 ωc and the mass ratio is set to m2/m1 = 1. Results for the Q1D+Q2D and Q1D+3D models are given by blue and red lines, respectively. The dotted lines correspond to λ11 = 0 whereas the solid lines represent the case of λ11 = 0.24. Black lines give the meanfield critical temperature, for comparison. As is well known, the role of fluctuations increases in low dimensional samples The most important result is that T c rapidly ap-proaches T c0 when the interband coupling increases above λ 12 10 -3 [Fig. The results in Fig. Our results demonstrate that T c increases with |ε 0 |, asymptotically approaching T c0 (saturation) for very large values of |ε 0 |. Notice, that T c0 is only weakly dependent on λ 11 and λ 12 , as shown in Figs. For relatively small values of |ε 0 | one finds that T c deviates notably from T c0 . In this case the coherence length of band 1 decreases, which leads to an increase of Gi 1 and so, to an enhancement of the pair fluctuations in the reservoir band, see Ref. 39. This, in turn, results in a rise of Gi and δT c , see Eqs. ( As the latter appears in the denominators of Eqs. ( One can see that the suppression of the fluctuations is more effective in the Q1D+3D system but again, we do not observe an order of magnitude difference between the critical temperatures in the Q1D+Q2D and Q1D+3D models even at small |ε 0 |. Notice that only the results for T c > 0.05 are shown in Fig. The effective band masses can significantly deviate from the free electron mass in multiband superconductors Although the mean-field critical temperature of a single-band Q1D superconductor can be very large when approaching the van Hove singularity, the thermal pair fluctuations suppress or even eliminate altogether the superconductivity, reducing the critical temperature to very low values or to zero. However, the situation changes dramatically when a Q1D band is coupled to the reservoir condensate of a higher-dimensional band due to the pair transfer between the bands. This pair-exchange coupling can effectively suppress the detrimental Q1D pair thermal fluctuations This work studies details of how thermal superconducting fluctuations are quenched in a two-band system comprising a Q1D and Q2D/3D bands, and the critical temperature T c approaches its mean-field value T c0 . The focus of the study is to clarify how the screening of the pair thermal fluctuations in such a two-band system depends on the microscopic parameters specifying the single-particle bands and the intra-and interband pairing interactions. Although the two-band system is controlled by a fairly large number of different parameters, our calculations demonstrate that the fluctuation suppression effect is a general phenomenon, taking place in a wide parametric domain. This domain for the Q1D+Q2D model is very close to that of the Q1D+3D model. Furthermore, we find that the fluctuation suppression occurs even if the reservoir band alone does not develop the superconducting state and also when the reservoir band is nearly shallow, having a relatively small band Fermi energy in comparison to that of the conventional metallic superconductors. Notice that the case of unusually small Fermi energies in superconducting compounds is not a theoretical assumption or oversimplification, it is relevant, e.g., for FeSe, where multiple overlapping bands crossing the Fermi level have similar small depths The present results have both academic and practical importance. Our work uncovers an important aspect of the physics of multiband superconductors exhibiting a BCS-BEC crossover (see experimental results in Refs. 42, 44-47 and theoretical studies in Refs. 16-23). It is commonly expected that thermal superconducting fluctuations proliferate when a system approaches the BCS-BEC crossover and then goes into the BEC regime. In contrast, our study and investigations of the previous works From the practical point of view, our results are encouraging to merit engineering and further detailed investigations of the Q1D multiband superconductors, such as recent materials A 2 Cr 3 As 3 , with A = K, Rb, Cs We turn now to the calculation of I a2 . It can be rewritten as where z i is the Cartesian component of z (i = x, y, z). The integral in the right-hand side of this expression is rearranged to get i,j=1,2,3 with k i the Cartesian component of k. As the Q1D dispersion does not depend on k y and k z , Eq. (A20) is reduced to The summation over the Matsubara frequencies yields ω 1 T sinh ξ k2 /T -ξ k2 8ξ 3 k2 T 2 × sech 2 (ξ k2 /2T ). (A22) Changing the integration variable to the single-particle energy and keeping only the leading-order term in the τ expansion, one obtains with which gives K (x) 2 in Eq. ( Finally, we calculate the nonlinear term I b2 in Eq. (A1). It is represented in the form This expression is evaluated by taking the sum over the Matsubara frequencies, see Eq. (A14) and changing the integration variables as previously. Finally, applying the τ expansion and keeping the leading contribution in τ , we get where For μ ≤ 1, this expression for b 2 coincides with Eq. ( Notice, that the functional derivative of the free energy given by Eq. ( 