We report on a microscopic study of the noncentrosymmetric superconductor W 3 Al 2 C (with T c = 7.6 K), mostly by means of 27 Al-and 13 C nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR). Since in this material the density of states at the Fermi level is dominated by the tungsten's 5d orbitals, we expect a sizeable spin-orbit coupling (SOC) effect. The normal-state electronic properties of W 3 Al 2 C resemble those of a standard metal, but with a Korringa product 1/(T 1 T ) significantly smaller than that of metallic Al, reflecting the marginal role played by s-electrons. In the superconducting state, we observe a reduction of the Knight shift and an exponential decrease of the NMR relaxation rate 1/T 1 , typical of s-wave superconductivity. This is further supported by the observation of a small but distinct coherence peak just below T c in the 13 C NMR relaxation-rate, in agreement with the fully-gapped superconducting state inferred from the electronic specificheat data well below T c . The above features are compared to those of members of the same family, in particular, Mo 3 Al 2 C, often claimed to exhibit unconventional superconductivity. We discuss why, despite the enhanced SOC, W 3 Al 2 C does not show spin-triplet features in its superconducting state and consider the broader consequences of our results for noncentrosymmetric superconductors in general. Noncentrosymmetric superconductors (NCSCs) belong to a class of materials that miss a key symmetry, such as parity A particular NCSC family, which exhibits unconventional superconducting properties, is that of M 3 X 2 Y compounds. For the definition of "unconventional" superconductor (basically one that does not conform to s-wave pairing), we follow the definition put forward in ref. Here, M = Mo, Pd, W, Pt; X = Li, Al; and Y = B, C, N. Five members of this family have already been studied and, in ascending order of atomic number Z of the metal atom M , they are: Rh 2 Mo 3 N, Mo 3 Al 2 C, Li 2 Pt 3 B, W 3 Al 2 C, and Li 2 Pd 3 B. From general principles, it is expected that as Z increases, the ASOC strength increases as well. Consequently, a superconductor of an unconventional type is more likely to appear in metals with a higher atomic number. Indeed, from the existing literature, it is known that, while Li 2 Pd 3 B is a conventional superconductor In this paper, we explore the electronic properties of W 3 Al 2 C, in both the normal-and the superconducting states. Our results indicate that this system is only weakly correlated. Most importantly, based on our NMR experiments, we provide evidence of BCS-type s-wave pairing in the noncentrosymmetric W 3 Al 2 C superconductor. It is surprising that unconventional superconductivity is not observed, even though W has a higher atomic number than Mo (and, hence, a larger ASOC). We argue why, despite the presence of the heavier element, W 3 Al 2 C exhibits only conventional SC behaviour. Polycrystalline samples of W 3 Al 2 C were prepared via high-temperature, high-pressure solid-state reaction. To achieve a homogeneous mixture, high-purity W, Al, and C powders in a quasi-stoichiometric ratio 3:1.8:0.8 were ballmilled for two days in a glove box under Ar atmosphere. The mixture was then pressed into a pellet and placed in an h-BN capsule, where the sample was heated up to 2173 K under 5 GPa for 24 hours. Room-temperature x-ray powder diffraction (XRD) measurements were performed in a Bruker D8 diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation. Rietveld refinements via the FULLPROF suite confirm the cubic structure of W 3 Al 2 C, with a space group P4 1 32 (No. 213) The 27 Al NMR measurements, including lineshapes and spin-lattice relaxation times, were performed on W 3 Al 2 C in powder form in different applied magnetic fields (4-7 T). To cover the 1.8 to 300 K temperature range we used a continuous-flow CF-1200 cryostat by Oxford Instruments, with temperatures below 4.2 K being achieved under pumped 4 He conditions. Preliminary resonance detuning experiments confirmed a T c of 7.6 K at 0 T (5.3 K at 5 T). The 27 Al NMR signal was detected by means of a standard spin-echo sequence, consisting of π/2 and π pulses of 3 and 6 μs, with recycling delays ranging from 1 to 60 s, in the 1.8-300 K temperature range. Despite an echo delay of 100 μs, 2 to 32 scans were sufficient to acquire a good-quality signal. The lineshapes were obtained via fast Fourier transform (FFT) of the echo signal. Spin-lattice relaxation times T 1 were measured via the inversion recovery method, using a π-π/2-π pulse sequence. Subsequently, the T 1 values for the central transition of the spin-5 /2 27 Al nucleus were obtained by using the relevant formula for the relaxation of quadrupole nuclei 3.1. 27 Al NMR in the normal-and superconducting phases NMR is a powerful local technique for investigating the electronic properties of materials, in particular, their electronic correlations, magnetic order, and superconductivity Here M 0 z is the magnetization value at thermal equilibrium, while f reflects the efficiency of population inversion (ideally 2). In general, the experimental NMR data -shifts and relaxation rates -clearly reflect the two phases of W 3 Al 2 C: a normal metallic phase above T c and a BCS-type superconducting phase below it. In the normal phase, we observe an almost ideal metallic behaviour for all the applied magnetic fields (see figures 1(a) and 2(b)). For instance, the relaxationrate data in figure In the superconducting phase, the electronic properties of the system can be described by the standard BCS Considering its key role in the experimental confirmation of the BCS theory, the observation of a Hebel-Slichter peak is recognized as a clear indication of BCS-type s-wave superconductivity. However, its absence does not necessarily rule out the possibility of a standard s-wave pairing. This seems to be also the case for W 3 Al 2 C where, as illustrated in figure One possibility, relevant to type-II superconductors, was suggested by Goldberg and Weger Yet another possibility is that, for quadrupolar nuclei such as the spin-5 /2 27 Al, also the quadrupole interaction contributes to the spin-lattice relaxation, tending to smear out the HS peak To model the feature near T c , we begin with the usual expression for the HS peak Here, R s and R n are the relaxation rates in the superconducting and the normal state, respectively, M s (E) = N 0 ∆/ E 2 -∆ 2 is the anomalous density of states (DOS) due to the coherence factor In our case, two modifications were made. Firstly, we chose to convolute M s (E) and N s (E) with a triangular broadening function B(E), characterized by a width 2δ and a height 1/δ, with δ = 0.2∆. Secondly, we model the degree of coherence by the parameter c, by making the substitution ∆ → c∆. The conventional BCS theory The fit results are shown in figure From the 13 C NMR relaxation rates in the superconducting state and the above analysis we infer with some confidence that W 3 Al 2 C indeed exhibits s-wave superconductivity, as evidenced by the observation of an (albeit reduced) HS peak. Yet, it appears that there are some decoherence effects, both at and below T c , most likely due to a strong electron-phonon coupling in this material (see ref. To get further insight into the superconducting state of W 3 Al 2 C, the temperature dependence of its electronic specific heat was evaluated and analyzed using different models. After subtracting the phonon contribution from the measured specific heat (see inset in figure where γ n is the normal-state electronic specific-heat coefficient, is the excitation energy of quasiparticles, with ε the electron energies measured relative to the chemical potential (Fermi energy) The superconducting properties of the M 3 X 2 Y family of NCSCs are summarized in table 1. The data are somewhat challenging to interpret, because of the lack of a clear trend when arranged in order of increasing atomic number Z(M ). Most likely this reflects the fact that the superconducting behaviour of the M 3 X 2 Y compounds is highly dependent on the details of their band structure, which differs widely between members of the same family. Despite this difficulty, we can still draw some conclusions. First, we note that the SC gap values 2∆/k B T c seem to differ, depending on whether they were determined by means of NMR, μSR, or C p measurements. In general, the gaps estimated via NMR and μSR, which are both local-probe techniques, tend to be in good agreement. Conversely, the SC gaps determined from C p data tend to be higher than those calculated from NMR and μSR data, and systematically indicate a strong electron-phonon coupling across the entire family of M 3 X 2 Y compounds. Secondly, we note that the (T 1 T ) -1 values of W 3 Al 2 C are consistent with those of the analog compound Mo 3 -Al 2 C obtained by Bauer et al we expect the N (E F ) of Mo 3 Al 2 C and W 3 Al 2 C to be of a similar magnitude and, consequently, their (T 1 T ) -1 values to be comparable. Considering that the N (E F ) of Mo 3 Al 2 C is twice as large as that of W 3 Al 2 C (5.48 vs 2.37, see table 1), this results in an approximately fourfold increase in relaxation rate [(T 1 T ) -1 = 0.075 vs 0.017 (sK) -1 , see table Thirdly, our results in table 1 support the observation made by Bauer et al [1] that, in case of phonon-mediated superconductors, although a noncentrosymmetric crystalline structure is required for the occurrence of unconventional superconductivity, it does not necessarily imply it. Another remarkable example of this is Mo 3 P [50] which, as W 3 Al 2 C reported here, is a normal BCS-type superconductor, despite being an NCSC. Further, even within the same family, isostructural compounds can display a different superconducting behavior. For instance, CePt 3 Si and LaPt 3 Si are isostructural (P4mm space group) and both display a large SOC. However, while CePt 3 Si exhibits unconventional superconductivity Extensive NMR-and specific-heat measurements in the noncentrosymmetric W 3 Al 2 C superconductor, provide ample evidence about its weak electron correlation, yet with a strong electron-phonon coupling. Most importantly, we establish that W 3 Al 2 C shows a conventional BCS-type s-wave superconductivity. This, apparently unnoteworthy result, is surprising in view of the enhanced SOC of W atoms, whose 5d orbitals dominate the density of states at the Fermi level. This is all the more remarkable, if one considers that the analogous Mo 3 Al 2 C compound, hosting the much lighter Mo atoms, is claimed to be an unconventional superconductor. Such a counterintuitive outcome may be explained with the subtle role played by spin-orbit coupling, as well as by its competition with the electron bandwidth in the M 3 X 2 Y family. Finally, by considering the similar case of Mo 3 P, we show that W 3 Al 2 C represents yet another example of a noncentrosymmetric material with conventional normalstate-and superconducting properties, thus emphasizing the role of a noncentrosymmetric structure as a beneficial (but not sufficient) condition in achieving unconventional superconductivity.