Polarized X-ray source is an important probe for many fields such as fluorescence imaging, magnetic microscopy, and nuclear physics research. All-optical inverse Compton scattering source (AOCS) based on laser wakefield accelerator (LWFA) has drawn great attention in recent years due to its compact scale and high performance, especially its potential to generate polarized Xrays. Here, polarization-tunable X-rays are generated by a plasma-mirror-based AOCS scheme. The linearly and circularly polarized AOCS pulses are achieved with the mean photon energy of 60(±5)/64(±3) keV and the single-shot photon yield of ∼1.1/1.3×10 7 . A Compton polarimeter is designed to diagnose the photon polarization states, demonstrating AOCS's polarization-tunable property, and indicating the average polarization degree of the linearly polarized AOCS is 75(±3)%. Polarized X-ray source has important applications in widespread fields, particularly in fluorescence imaging, magnetic microscopy, and nuclear physics research. For example, the utilization of a linearly polarized X-ray source in fluorescence imaging can significantly improve the image quality since the Compton scattering photon background can be greatly suppressed in the X-ray polarization direction Polarized X-ray sources can be usually generated by synchrotron radiation, X-ray FEL, bremsstrahlung radiation, and inverse Compton scattering (ICS). Among these mechanisms, synchrotron radiation ICS based on LWFA, termed all-optical inverse Compton scattering source (AOCS) In this paper, the generation of polarization-tunable Xrays is demonstrated using a plasma-mirror-based AOCS scheme The experiment is performed on the 10 TW laser system in Tsinghua University A tape system equipped with 100-μm-thick polyethylene terephthalate (PET) film is placed right behind the gas jet, thus a plasma mirror is formed when the drive laser hits the PET film. The residual drive laser then collides with the LWFA electron beam after being reflected by the plasma mirror. Since the laser pulse will conserve its polarization state during both the LWFA process and the ∼180-degree reflection, X-rays with the same polarization state as the scattering laser will be generated by the ICS process. Therefore, polarization-tunable X-rays are achieved by straightforwardly adjusting the polarization state of the drive laser pulses. The generated AOCS X-rays are detected by a calibrated CsI(Tl) scintillation screen (Hamamatsu J8734) imaged onto an EMCCD (ANDOR DU888E), as shown in FIG. To diagnose the polarization states of AOCS pulses, a Compton polarimeter is designed according to our X-ray parameters where r e is the classical electron radius, E 0 , and E are the photon energy of the incident X-rays and the secondary Compton X-rays, θ is the forward scattering angle, φ is the azimuthal scattering angle, and a is related to the polarization state of incident X-rays (a = 0 or a → ∞ for linear polarization, a = 1 for circular polarization). Eq. ( In the experiment, continuous 600 shots linearly and circularly polarized AOCS pulses are performed in each measurement, and the corresponding two-dimensional azimuthal distributions of the secondary Compton photons on the IP are shown in FIG. To further check the polarization degree measured above, another two Monte Carlo simulations about the AOCS generation are performed by CAIN code In this paper, the generation of ∼60-keV polarizationtunable X-rays using the plasma-mirror-based AOCS scheme is demonstrated, and the polarization states of linearly and circularly polarized X-rays are diagnosed by a Compton polarimeter to verify the polarization-tunable property of this source. The polarization degree of the linearly polarized X-rays is measured to be ∼75%, consistent with the Monte Carlo simulation. The polarization state of our AOCS source can be easily adjusted by tuning the drive laser polarization using a quarterwave plate, which is especially efficient and convenient for practical application. Polarization of AOCS X-rays is closely related to the emittance of electron beams 