Lanthanide hydrogen-rich materials have long been considered as one of the candidates with hightemperature superconducting properties in condensed matter physics, and have been a popular topic of research. Attempts to investigate the effects of different compositions of lanthanide hydrogenrich materials are ongoing, with predictions and experimental studies in recent years showing that substances such as LaH10, CeH9, and LaH16 exhibit extremely high superconducting temperatures between 150-250 GPa. In particular, researchers have noted that, in those materials, a rise in the f orbit character at the Fermi level combined with the presence of hydrogen vibration modes at the same low energy scale will lead to an increase in the superconducting transition temperature. Here, we further elaborate on the effect of the ratios of lanthanide to hydrogen in these substances with the aim of bringing more clarity to the study of superhydrides in these extreme cases by comparing a variety of lanthanide hydrogen-rich materials with different ratios using the dynamical mean-field theory (DMFT) method, and provide ideas for later structural predictions and material property studies. Recently, hydrogen-rich materials have attracted great attention as potential candidates for high-temperature superconductivity, which is referred to as the holy grail of condensed matter physics. Since hydride causes highfrequency vibrations of hydrogen atoms at high pressure, it leads to stronger electron-phonon coupling, making it a potential high-temperature superconducting material Furthermore, some common metal elements have been found to form hydrogen-rich materials with superconducting properties, which include CaH 6 In addition to the hydrogen-rich superconducting materials containing metallic elements, hydrogen-rich materials with nonmetals have also attracted much attention. In recent research, Ranga P. Dias reported the superconductivity of a C-S-H system with a maximal superconducting transition temperature of 287.7 ± 1.2 K (approximately 15 degrees Celsius) at 267 ± 10 GPa It has been found that LaH 10 with face-centered cubic structure is a good metal, forming high electron-density energy bands at the Fermi level. The finite occupancy of the La-4f orbitals, which are successively pushed at the Fermi level as the external pressure increases Therefore, in order to more accurately describe the properties and physical laws of hydrogen-rich hightemperature superconductors at high pressures, the quantitative theoretical calculations were used in our research. The interaction between the localized electrons and the strong lattice vibrations of the hydrogen atoms facilitates superconductivity in these materials. A thorough description of the electrical properties is required for a precise analysis of this interaction, which brings notorious difficulties for f -systems correlation, as it requires that both mobile and localized electrons are treated on the same basis Here, we present a study of the superconducting properties of two members of lanthanum hydrates family LaH 10 and LaH 18 in order to learn the effect of the hydrogen content on T c and to find out if the many-body corrections to the DFT results are equally important for lanthanides with different hydrogen content. We employ a practical first-principles computationally consistent platform that uses a many-body correction of electron spectral weights and then feeds back into T c 's estimate. In the present work, we limit ourselves to the DMFT corrections of the electronic spectrum only. This paper proves that many-body correction in forbital systems may lead to changes occurring in spectral weights on the order of an eV. Our research presents an assessment of the physical properties of two La-H systems for different quantities of hydrogen atoms, paying particular attention to the influence of related factors on the spectral properties. It was found that LaH 10 and LaH 18 have stable crystal structures at pressures up to 400 GPa, while LaH 18 is unstable at lower pressure; hence, we focus this investigation on modeling the materials at 400 GPa, as our aim is to compare the correction validity for different hydrogen compositions. Electron-phonon interactions are thought to be the origin of superconductivity in lanthanide hydrides. According to the Migdal-Eliashberg theory, there are four factors to define T c : the characteristic phonon frequency ω log , the electron-phonon coupling strength λ, the density of states at the Fermi level N ( F ), and the Coulomb pseudopotential, μ . Density functional theory (DFT), which uses standard pseudo-potentials and exchange correlation functionals, e.g., PBE, to explain lattice dynamics, is universally considered to be correct. It is generally acknowledged that DFT struggles to describe systems possessing strong electronic correlations with strongly localized d and f shells, and the use of many-body corrections are necessary. In the following analysis, we used DFT combined with DMFT. In order to capture the local paramagnetic moment in lanthanide elements, one has to correct for local charge and spin fluctuations captured by DMFT. Changes in the orbital character at the Fermi surface produced by spectral weight transfer linked to Hubbard f band splitting are accounted for using DMFT. In accordance to the Allen-Dynes formalism, this affects lowenergy electron-electron scattering processes via transfer of phonon momentum, which will be indicated in the following section. We compared the effect of different DMFT electronic charge self-consistency schemes. A comparison is shown in Figure We noted that for the higher composition of hydrogen, LaH 18 , the correction to the critical temperature is less significant compared to the lower hydrogen composition case. Figure As shown in Figure According to our results, f orbitals seem to be particularly significant for the superconducting characteristics of rare-earth hydrates. However, the impact of the quantity of the atoms for hydrogen in hydrate with the same f -element is unknown. Hence, in addition to LaH 10 , we also studied stable LaH 18 structures at 400 GPa with the aim to distinguish any notable tendencies. A comparison between Figure This leads to similar results for the superconducting temperature of LaH 18 within DFT, one-shot DFT+DMFT, and DFT+DMFT+CSC approaches. By looking at Figures Our theoretical approach is sketched in Figure Structural predictions. Crystal structure investigation by particle swarm optimization (CALYPSO) Ab initio calculations. Structural optimization and computations of enthalpy were performed using VASP code Methods. We combined the use of QE and CASTEP Norm-conserving pseudopotentials by OPIUM were adopted for describing the core electrons and their effects on the valence orbitals Post-processing. For estimating the superconducting transition temperature, T c we used the Allen-Dynes modified McMillan equation where μ * is the Coulomb pseudopotential. Formulas for the electron-phonon coupling strength λ and ω log were taken from Ref. . (2) where N ( F ) is the DOS at Fermi level, ω qν is the phonon spectrum of a branch ν at momentum q = k 2 -k 1 , k1 and k2 are electronic band energies, referred to the Fermi level, while M k1,k2 are the electron-phonon coupling matrix elements. When many-body corrections are taken into account, there is a shift of the spectral character at the Fermi level. Furthermore, the electronic correlations lead to a mass enhancement and induce a finite lifetime, due to incoherence. Following onto the DMFT scissors, the DFT bands are supplied with the renormal- Core libraries are employed to provide the many-body corrections, via quantum embedding, which, in turn, provides corrected forces and energies. In post-processing, we used the DMFT+a2F approach to obtain values for the Eliashberg function and superconducting temperature Tc. Finally, data is archived for future usage using HDF5. ized DMFT spectral density: where A tot is the total and A(k) is the k-momentum resolved spectral weight at the Fermi level. This method is indicated as DMFT+a2F in the model diagram. We would like to point out that, unlike the Allen-Dynes method using DFT eigenvalues, which suffers from the double-broadening issue, within our approach, the broadening is given by the finite lifetime from the many-body Green's function and, therefore, our approach is free from the double broadening issue. The DFT Kohn-Sham Eigenstates are employed in the derivation of the DMFT Green's function in the DFT+DMFT quantum embedding approach We used many-body adjustments to predict the superconducting temperature in lanthanide hydrides and explored the significance of this model under different compositions with the same elements. To reestablish a consistent theoretical framework, the DMFT charge selfconsistency method was utilized, including many-body corrections to the local charge density in first-principles calculations. Our methodology is free, flexible, and simple to implement, providing interaction of first-principles software with modular foundation. The software includes QE, CASTEP, and CASTEP+DMFT. We found that an increase in the spectral weight of the f states at the Fermi level led to an increase in the estimated superconducting temperature. In this research, within the DFT+DMFT+CSC method, T c was changed by 18% for LaH 10 and by 3% for LaH 18 at 400 GPa pressure. Furthermore, we discovered that the adjustment of the superconducting temperature of lanthanide materials within DFT+DMFT+CSC is more significant in symmetric structures and when the fraction of hydrogen elements is not excessively large.