ear dependence of thermal conductivity on porosity frequently used in literature becomes incorrect. The effects of the consolidation coefficient and size distribution on effective heat transfer in powders are discussed. The obtained dependencies of the effective thermal conductivity on porosity and the consolidation coefficient could be used in additive manufacturing applications. in size and space coordinates has been developed. Numerical simulation of temperature distributions in stainless steel AISI 316L and Al-12Si powders in vacuum, air and argon has been performed to analyze unsteady heat transfer in a porous medium. The numerical model demonstrates a large effect of heat transfer through the gas phase in case of powders with low thermal conductivities like stainless steels. At the porosity level of 65% and above, the mechanism of heat transfer drastically changes and a lin- Transport of heat through a porous medium is of great interest in relation with its morphological properties since in many technological processes effective thermal properties control the dynamics of heat conduction, melting and solidification Due to surface pre-melting of particles during laser treatment, the neighboring particles start to form necks between them which significantly improves heat exchange in a porous medium cessing parameters, one can account for the abovementioned effect by introduction of a consolidation coefficient which influences the effective thermal conductivity k ef f The existing approaches in modelling of heat transfer in powder beds can be reduced to two major cases: (i) discrete particles modelling where the powder bed is described as a domain filled with the separate particles The objective of this paper is to study the effect of powder bed morphology, porosity and particle consolidation on the effective thermal conductivity of commercial Al-12Si and stainless steel SLM powders during the initial and intermediate stages of heating or melting/sintering. The numerical study of heat transfer is carried out for randomly generated powder beds filled with spherical particles of different sizes at different consolidation levels in vacuum, air and argon. We shall consider this process as solid-state consolidation, though in general the dynamics of powder compaction involves also solid-liquid phase transitions and motion dynamics of phase interfaces In this section, a mathematical model of heat transfer in the partially-melted (consolidated) metallic powder beds is formulated. The powder bed is generated using random stochastic deposition of particles in the representative volume element (RVE) with up to 10 3 metallic particles. Using direct simulations of heat transfer in such layer, one can find the dynamics of heat propagation in a metallic powder processed in gas atmosphere or in vacuum for the given porosity ε, particle size distribution and particle contact spot diameter d C . The model allows one to choose the consolidation coefficient of particles and the bed porosity as input parameters during generation of powder filling. For macroscopic simulations of transport phenomena in discontinuous or two-phase systems the microscopic governing equations are averaged using the coarse-graining procedure (i) Local thermal equilibrium. The classic approach where V = V gas + V metal is the total volume of a discrete element, the superscripts "gas" and "metal" belong to the designate phases, and T is local temperature. (ii) Representativity of discrete volumes. First, the effective thermal conductivity of a discrete volume should be independent on the size of this volume. This criterion allows one to find a size of the representative volume element (RVE) and the upper limit of the mesh size for discretization of the powder bed. Typically, RVE contains no less than 5 3 ..7 3 particles HT-21-1102, Ankudinov Gas thermal conductivity, The typical temperature difference attained during SLM processing is as follows ∆T L ∼ 500..600 K. ( Therefore, to consider media in the RVE in the continuous approximation the temperature criterion Eq. ( (iv) Time discretization. For time discretization, the condition Eq. ( This time and length scales must be satisfied for the system at local thermal equilibrium, requiring the heat fluxes to be small enough to calculate the thermal conduction equation. If the size of discrete elements is l = 1 μm, then the time step δt in calculations should be of the order of δt ∼ 10 -8 s or HT-21-1102, Ankudinov lower to meet the conditions Eqs. ( where d i , d j are the sizes of the particles i and j, d is the mean diameter of two particles, l ij is the distance between their centers, see Fig. The specified porosity was achieved by removal of random particles from the bed till the target average porosity ε = V gas /V is attained. Here V is the domain volume and V gas is the volume of the gaseous phase only. Due to the HCP packing limit, generation of powder beds at low porosities ε < 0.26 was performed by random allocation of the gas voids between particles which reproduces a powder briquette or a partially consolidated high-density powder bed. The porosity obtained for dry powder beds experimentally varies between ε = 0.41 and 0.46 for loose-packed stainless steel The transient problem of heat conduction in a two-phase "gas-metal" domain was formulated. The effect of heat transfer by radiation between particles was neglected due to its small contribution to the overall energy balance. The convective mechanism of heat exchange through the gaseous phase was also eliminated for the specific case at the considered time scales τ = 10 -8 -10 -5 s because viscosity of the gas phase significantly reduces convection in small pores where C p is the specific heat capacity, ρ is the density, k is the thermal conductivity of each phase (see correspondent values in Table At the interfaces between gas and metal, continuity of the heat fluxes and temperature was defined T gas = T metal at inner boundaries. Ambient temperature T amb was equal 0.7 × T m as far as this value corresponds to the start temperature of the process of solid state consolidation according to The direct problem Eqs. ( The inverse problem of heat conduction = α ef f ∇ 2 T, which leads to the solution ( The one-dimensional problem is solved in the semiinfinite approximation admitting that the numerical solution is received in a relatively long in the zdirection domain. The three-dimensional formulation of Eqs. ( Heat transfer comprises the diffusive, convective and radiative contributions. The effect of radiation on heating of metal powder has been estimated theoretically. According to the Stefan-Boltzmann law, the total emissive power q radiative of a surface is where ǫ is the emissivity (ǫ = 0.3 for Al-12Si and ǫ = 0.7 for stainless steel), is the Stefan-Boltzmann constant, T surf 1,2 are the surface absolute temperatures of two neighbour particles in a powder bed. The heat flux given by conduction between the contacting particles is defined by Fourier's law as where G is an estimate of the temperature gradient in the powder bed with the effective conductiv- is assumed for solid-to-solid conductance. The convective flux Eq. ( ity k ef f . The conductive heat flux between the particles and gaseous atmosphere follows from a balance of heat exchange between the solid and viscous medium where h is the surface heat transfer coefficient and ∆T is the temperature difference between the particle surface and gas temperature As follows from the result of simulation, the radiative heat flux is by 4 orders of magnitude smaller for Al-12Si and by 3 orders smaller for the stainless steel than the conductive flux between particles. The obtained conclusions differs with the results in literature Considering a weak dependence of the effective heat conductivity on convective and radiative transfer mechanisms (see Sec. This curves were interpolated based on 30 runs with 3 different random-generated particle configurations for each porosity value. The numerically calculated points were smoothed by splines. The dotted lines represent the linear model. cused on the geometrical conductance of the powder. During consolidation of particles in presence of high temperatures, metallic powders reduce their porosity via continuous shrinking. Then the contact spot diameter increases. Therefore, assessment for powder layers with different contacts areas in a wide range of porosities ε is highly demanded. At the moderate values of ε, the generated powder morphology corresponds to industrial powders (see Sec. 2.2). The porosity ε is upper-bounded by ε < 0.26 which corresponds to dense packing where drastical improvement of the contact surface between particles is expected. There is also a bottom bound at ε > 0.7 which corresponds to the percolation limit i.e. to a break of continuous heat transfer through the metallic phase. The dependence of the effective thermal conductivity of Al-12Si powder on the porosity ε for different contact spot diameters d C calculated in air is presented in Fig. In general, the dependence of k ef f on ε has almost linear behaviour for porosities smaller than the percolation threshold. Due to random distribution of particles in the bed, heat conduction is reduced to only gas-phase conduction earlier than the percolation limit is achieved. In case of highly consolidated powder (see dashed curve d C = 3.0 μm in Fig. Heat conduction in partially consolidated powder for d C 0.4μ (d C / d > 0.08) which correspond to high-density packed powder (briquette) at ε < 0.3 is close to the geometrical limit of heat conductivity (Fig. The effect of different gaseous atmospheres is presented in Fig. Thus the following conclusions can be drawn. Influence of gas atmosphere on thermal conductivity cannot be neglected for k metal /k gas < 1000. This outcome corresponds to the previous studies 0.8 The effect of random distribution of particles on effective thermal conductivity of Al-12Si powder with the average particle size d = 4.9 μm in presented in Fig. Influence of the contact area between particles with a contact spot diameter d C on an effective ther- mal conductivity is analyzed in Figure In laboratory experiments Comparison of our numerical simulations with different analytical models is provided in Fig. The Lykov model also known in literature as the Maxwell upper bound model for thermal conductivity of two-phase media The models of Zehnder-Schl ünder The Hadley model suggested in where f 0 is an empirical constant, which is selected as f 0 = 0.9 in all our cases. This model allows one to describe both partially melted and dry-powders in a single coherent approach. At α H = 0.01, the media is loose-packed and the curve plotted in Fig. The results of present calculations in a case of partially-melted particles conform well to the Hadley model at intermediate and large α H 0.03. Further, in consolidated powders with good thermal contact between particles the dependence of the effective thermal conductivity k ef f on the contact spot diameter d C is sufficiently small (see Fig. where A is pre-exponential factor and d 0 is a drypowder shift. In Figure The smooth rise of k ef f in Fig. One can conclude that good agreement with the Hadley model has been received in our simulations for consolidated powders. In the dry-powder limit, correspondence is worse. Therefore, we think that the numerical model has better accuracy in the account of local morphology and the presented approximation of the consolidation coefficient will lead to more robust analysis in wide interval of parameters of partially consolidated powders. The effective thermal conductivity k ef f as a function of porosity ε for Al-12Si and stainless steel powders was calculated in a series of computer simulation runs. The obtained results account for the effects of consolidation which can drastically change heat conductivity of powders in SLS/SLM processing. The obtained effective heat conductivities for commercial powders are suitable for rapid modeling of powder consolidation and optimization of selective laser sintering/melting. The temperature dependence of k ef f can be introduced by multiplication of the normalized k ef f /k metal function on the bulk heat conduction coefficient which is dependent on temperature. It was found that the function k ef f (ε) is a nonlinear curve which has three distinctive intervals. At porosity ε < 0.26, the powder layer has dense packing (briquette) where the contact spots between particles are developed and drastically improvement of heat conductivity is observed. The calculated k ef f (ε) curves have quasi-linear behavior k ef f ∼ k 0 (1 -ε), Fig. The effect of gas atmosphere is as follows. The thermal conductivity of stainless steel powder is affected by heat transfer through the gas phase. At the same time, Al-12Si powder is less sensitive to heat conduction through gas. In the paper, the criterion for accounting of the heat conductance in gas has been suggested as k metal /k gas < 10 3 . There is no substantial difference in k ef f between the powders processed in argon and air. The effective heat conductivity of partially consolidated particles steeply increases if the dimensionless diameter of thermal contacts becomes d C / d > 0.2, Fig. Based on the performed analysis, we suggested a new analytical fitting Eq. ( Suggested coefficients k ef f were derived to use in the approximation of continuous media. Thus, it is valid only under the conditions of local thermal equilibrium. For SLS/SLM processes, the characteristic scale of applicability of k ef f is limited by L > 200 μm for macroscopic models due to high temperature gradients observed in the powder layer. In summary, the suggested numerical model broadens the description of transport characteristics of partially melted powders. It substantially extends the interval of applicability of the analytical models from dry-powders to fully-consolidated powders. This allows to evaluate more precisely heat transfer in the powder layer during its compaction in SLM processing. Also the thermal conductivity of preheated sintered powder can be assessed. HT-21-1102, Ankudinov