Nanocomposite metal oxide thin films exhibit assuring qualities in the field of gas sensors because of the collective opportunities provided by the heterointerface formation. In this work, we present the synthesis of nitrogen doped mesoporous In2O3-ZnO nano-composite thin films by simple wet chemical method using urea as the nitrogen precursor. SEM investigation suggests formation of mesoporous nano-composite thin films, where the uniformity of surface pore distribution depends on the relative proportion of In2O3 and ZnO in the composites. HRTEM investigation suggest formation of sharp interfaces between N-In2O3 and N-ZnO grains in the nano-composite thin films. The nano-composite thin films have been tested for their ethanol sensing performance over an extensive range of temperature, ethanol vapor concentration and relative humidity. Nitrogen doped nanocomposite thin film with equal proportion of In2O3 and ZnO exhibits excellent ethanol sensing performance at a reasonable operating temperature (~94 % at 200 °C for 50 ppm of ethanol), fast response time (~two seconds), stability over time, enhanced resilience against humidity and selectivity to ethanol over various other volatile organic compounds. Ethanol is a volatile organic compound (VOC) commonly used in industrial as well as domestic applications Additionally, the complex nanostructures often suffer from temporal and thermal instabilities. In this context thin film-based sensors are considered as suitable alternative to overcome the shortcomings of nanostructures 20 . In contrast, doping induces changes in electronic structure, chemical bonding and oxygen vacancy concentration which leads to selective adsorption of gas molecules Urea (Alpha-aeser, >99 %), Zinc acetate dihydrate (Merk, >99%) and Indium acetate (Alfa-aeser, >99%) were used as precursor for nitrogen, zinc and indium respectively for the thin film synthesis. At first, the sol has been synthesised, for which a solution of zinc acetate and indium acetate was prepared in 10 ml of ethanol (99.9 %) as shown in table Thereafter, these two solutions were mixed together and it was stirred at 60 °C for 4 hours till a stable reddish-orange solution was obtained Panalytical Empyrion X-ray diffraction (XRD) Machine with a Cu K-α radiation source (1.54 Å) was used to determine the crystal structure of the synthesised thin films. Field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM Zeiss Gemini, Germany) was used to analyse the surface microstructure and cross-section of the samples. The transmission electron microscopy analysis was performed using FEI TECNAI G2 F20 X-TWIN. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (model PHI 5000 Versa Probe II, INC, Japan) with A1 K-α x-ray source (1486.6 eV) was used to study the surface chemical composition. Gold was used as the electrodes for ethanol sensing characteristics. An interdigitated electrode with 2 mm width and 1.5 mm electrode separation was sputtered on to the thin films. An inhouse built quasi-static gas sensing setup was used to carry out the VOC sensing measurement. A load resistance (RL), which has a similar resistance of the sensing film is connected in series and a continuous ~5 V DC is supplied over the sensor. A data collecting arrangement based on a microcontroller (Atmel ATMEGA 32) is employed to measure the net output voltage across RL. For additional evaluation and data storage, the whole setup is connected to a desktop computer via the RS232 interface. The detailed measurement process could be found in our previous work Where Rg and Ra are the equilibrium resistances measured in the presence of test gas and air, respectively. The response (τres) and recovery (τrec) time were estimated as the time taken to raise base resistance to 90% of the maximum resistance and the time taken for resistance to fall 90% of the equilibrium resistance in the air. Scanning electron microscopy has been carried out to investigate the surface microstructure of composite thin films. Figure While the IZON 50 thin film possesses an average pore diameter of ~24 nm, the IZO 50 film has larger pores with average diameter of ~ 52 nm. IZON 25 thin film has been found to possess pore size (~26 nm) similart to that of IZON 50, but with larger agglomerated grains. On the other hand, IZON 75 formed larger pores (~41 nm) and agglomerated particles. Large amount of In2O3 in IZON 75 and ZnO in IZON 25 leads to an agglomerated structure and reduces surface pore disribution on the the film Figure Ethanol sensing response of IZON 50 has been examined over an extended period. As shown in figure In order to understand the improved ethanol sensing performance of IZON50, at first the ethanol sensing mechanism is considered. The sensing mechanism of composite thin films has been schematically represensted in figure This releases the electrons back to the conduction band of the oxides, which reduces the depletion layer width and thus the sensor resistance. As we had reported earlier, nitrogen doping increases the Vo cocentration in the chosen oxides that leads to an improvement in the dissociative adsorption of atmospheric oxygen on its surface The band gaps of N-ZnO and N-In2O3 thin films have been estimate as 3.12 eV and 2.79 eV (figure In summary, a robust, highly sensitive, selective, fast and reproducible ethanol sensor has been fabricated by wet chemical synthesis of nitrogen doped In2O3/ZnO nanocomposite mesoporous thin films on SiO2/Si substrates. XPS investigation of the nano-composite thin films indicates nitrogen doping at the interstitial sites of In2O3 and substitutional sites of ZnO. TEM investigations confirm sharp interface between the In2O3 and ZnO grains indicating successful formation of n-n heterojunction. The uniqueness of the mesoporous nitrogen doped nanocomposite sensor with equal concentration of the oxide components is the availability of uniform pore distribution on the surface of the sensor and n-n heterojunctions with higher electron concentration compared to undoped nano-composite sensor. This leads to significantly higher ethanol sensing response (∼94 %) and a fast response time (∼ 2 s) at a moderate operating temperature of ∼200 °C. The sensor exhibits excellent stability over a long duration and resilient to relative humidity conditions as high as 80%. Further, the sensor is highly selective to ethanol compared to various other volatile organic compounds. The experimental results suggest that incorporation of nitrogen in In2O3/ZnO nano-composite thin film is an effective route to improve the adsorption efficiency of ethanol molecules and facilitating the propagation of charge carriers across its surface. The present work presents a strategy to develop efficient ethanol sensor for utilization in law enforcement and biomedical applications both in terms of cost effectiveness and performance.