The spin-orbit coupling (SOC) is a key to understand the magnetically driven superconductivity in iron-based superconductors, where both local and itinerant electrons are present and the orbital angular momentum is not completely quenched. Here, we report a neutron scattering study on the bilayer compound CaK(Fe0.96Ni0.04)4As4 with superconductivity coexisting with a non-collinear spin-vortex crystal magnetic order that preserves the tetragonal symmetry of Fe-Fe plane. In the superconducting state, two spin resonance modes with odd and even L symmetries due to the bilayer coupling are found similar to the undoped compound CaKFe4As4 but at lower energies. Polarization analysis reveals that the odd mode is c-axis polarized, and the low-energy spin anisotropy can persist to the paramagnetic phase at high temperature, which closely resembles other systems with in-plane collinear and c-axis biaxial magnetic orders. These results provide the missing piece of the puzzle on the SOC effect in iron-pnictide superconductors, and also establish a common picture of c-axis preferred magnetic excitations below Tc regardless of the details of magnetic pattern or lattice symmetry. The iron-based superconductivity emerges from a magnetic Hund's metal with strong interplay between the itinerant charge carriers on the Fermi surfaces and the local spins on Fe atoms where M 1,2 are two magnetic order parameters associated with two orthogonal wavevectors Q 1,2 [e.g., Q 1 = (π, 0) and Q 2 = (0, π) ] All the three magnetic phases are proximate to each other in the mean-field phase diagram within the Ginzburg-Landau framework [Fig. Here in this Letter, we address the issue of spin anisotropies in the bilayer iron-based superconductor CaK(Fe 1-x Ni x ) 4 As 4 with coexisting superconductivity and SVC magnetic order. Our unpolarized inelastic neutron scattering measurements reveal two spin resonance modes at about 7 and 15 meV with odd and even L symmetries, respectively. Polarization analysis suggests that the odd mode is highly anisotropic, manifested by a strong c-axis component and two weakly anisotropic in-plane components (M c M b > M a ). The c-axis preferred spin excitations already show up in the SVC phase and even continue to the paramagnetic phase until the spin anisotropy finally disappears at about T = 100 K, which probably is a consequence from the SOC associated with the spontaneously broken electronic symmetries in SVC and its vestigial states. These results suggest a common feature of c-axis preferred spin excitations below T c regardless of their magnetic patterns or lattice symmetries in iron pnictide superconductors. The CaK(Fe 1-x Ni x ) 4 As 4 system belongs to 1144type iron-based superconductor, where the stoichiometric compound CaKFe 4 As 4 already shows a superconductivity below T c = 35 K without any magnetic order x , σ SF y , and σ SF z , which is only sensitive to the magnetic excitations/moments that are perpendicular to Q We first present the elastic neutron scattering results to confirm the SVC order. The SVC phase is antiferromagnetically ordered along c-axis with magnetic peaks at Q = (1, 0, L) (L = 0, ±1, ±2, ±3, ±4...), where the peaks at odd Ls are much stronger than those at even Ls The inelastic neutron scattering results with unpolarized beam are presented in Fig. Having established the L-dependence of spin excitations at different temperatures, we then perform polarization analysis on the anisotropy of low-energy excitations in spin space. The raw data of the energy and temperature dependence of σ SF x , σ SF y , and σ SF z are presented in the Supplementary Materials The confirmation of c-axis dominated spin excitations in this work establishes a universal feature in iron pnictides that the pairing of itinerant electrons prefers to be assisted by c-axis spin fluctuations, no matter the magnetic pattern is in-plane collinear SSDW, c-axis biaxial CSDW or coplanar SVC. This could naturally explain the positive correlation between the maximum energies of SOC induced spin anisotropy and T c In summary, we have revealed the L-dependence and anisotropy of the low-energy spin excitations in the 1144type CaK(Fe 0.96 Ni 0.04 ) 4 As 4 with superconductivity below T c = 20.1 K and a SVC order below T N = 48.1 K under the tetragonal lattice symmetry. The bilayer coupling induced odd and even L modulations of the spin resonance are observed around 7 and 15 meV, respectively. The odd mode is highly anisotropic with c-axis preferred magnetic excitations, and the low-energy spin anisotropy persists up to a high temperature about T = 100 K, much similar to those cases with in-plane collinear or c-axis biaxial magnetic order. These results suggest that the c-axis magnetic excitations are universally preferred by the presumably orbital-selective superconducting pairing. Meanwhile, the form of magnetic order depends on material-specific symmetry characteristics in addition to SOC, leading to a rich variety of interplay between superconductivity and magnetism in the Fe-based superconductors.. The raw data are available in Ref. We prepared high quality single crystals of CaK(Fe 0.96 Ni 0.04 ) 4 As 4 using self-flux method as our previous reports Unpolarized neutron scattering experiments were carried out using thermal triple-axis spectrometer Taipan at Australian Centre for Neutron Scattering, ANSTO, Australia. The final energy was fixed as E f = 14.87 meV, with a pyrolytic graphite filter, a double focusing monochromator and a vertical focusing analyzer. The scattering plane is [H, 0, 0] × [0, 0, L] defined using the magnetic unit cell: a M = b M = 5.398 Å, c = 12.616 Å, in which the wave vector Q at (q x , q y , q z ) by (H, K, L) = (q x a M /2π, q y b M /2π, q z c/2π) reciprocal lattice units (r.l.u.). The energy dependence of spin excitations were measured at Q = (1, 0, 2) and (1, 0, 3) (Fig. , where E = ω. The differences of the corresponding dynamic spin susceptibilities ∆χ (Q, ω) between 2 K and 25 K are shown in Fig. We carried out polarized neutron scattering experiments using the CryoPAD capability of the CEA-CRG IN22 thermal triple-axis spectrometer at the Institut Laue-Langevin, Grenoble, France. The CryoPAD system provides a strictly zero magnetic field environment for the measured sample, thus ensures the accuracy of the polarization analysis in the superconducting state The effect of harmonic neutrons in the incident beam should be considered for the analysis of intensities measured in constant-Q, E f -fixed mode with low energy in which k i is the incident energy of the first-order neutron. The coefficients for unpolarized neutron at IN22 spectrometer are listed below: H 1 = 853(84), H 2 = 255 x , σ SF y , and σ SF z (so called xx, yy, zz channels). Because neutron SF scattering is only sensitive to the magnetic excitations/moments that are perpendicular to Q and the neutron spin-polarization directions Here, the spin flipping ratio R represents the quality of the neutron spin polarization, defined by the leakage of nuclear Bragg peaks(should be non-spin-flip: NSF) into the SF channel: R = σ NSF nuclear /σ SF nuclear , which is about 13.84 in our experiments. Then the magnitudes of magnetic excitation along the y and z directions M y , M z and the background BG can be written as We can determine the spin-fluctuation components M β (β = a, b, c) along the lattice axes a M , b M and c via comparing M γ (γ = y, z) at two unparallel but equivalent wave vectors Q 1 = (1, 0, 1.1) and Q 2 = (1, 0, 3.3) in which θ is the angle between the wavevector Q and the [H, 0, 0] direction. We have θ 1 = 25.2 • and θ 2 = 54.7 • , respectively. Because the out of the scatting plane component M z is perpendicular to both Q and ordered moments, it should be the same for Q 1,2 after considering those effects from the magnetic form factor (or structural factor) of Fe 2+ and instrument resolutions To understand the orbital contributions of the electronic band and Fermi surfaces, we have performed systematic electronic structure calculations using Density-Functional-Theory (DFT) based first principles method for both the undoped CaKFe 4 As 4 and Ni-doped CaK(Fe 0.96 Ni 0.04 ) 4 As 4 compounds. We used plane wave pseudo potential method as implemented in the QUANTUM ESPRESSO package Min Max (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) Γ Μ Γ Μ Γ Μ Γ Μ Γ Μ Μ Μ Μ Μ Γ