Topological phononics offers numerous opportunities in manipulating elastic waves that can propagate in solids without being backscattered. Due to the lack of nanoscale imaging tools that aid the system design, however, acoustic topological metamaterials have been mostly demonstrated in macroscale systems operating at low (kilohertz to megahertz) frequencies. Here, we report the realization of gigahertz topological valley Hall effect in nanoelectromechanical AlN membranes. Propagation of elastic wave through phononic crystals is directly visualized by microwave microscopy with unprecedented sensitivity and spatial resolution. The valley Hall edge states, protected by band topology, are vividly seen in both real-and momentum-space. The robust valley-polarized transport is evident from the wave transmission across local disorder and around sharp corners, as well as the power distribution into multiple edge channels. Our work paves the way to exploit topological physics in integrated acousto-electronic systems for classical and quantum information processing in the microwave regime. The hallmark of topological phases of matter is the existence of nontrivial boundary states, which are protected by the global property of bulk energy bands and thus robust against local perturbations The realization of a topological phase of matter requires coordinated efforts in theoretical calculation, experimental implementation, and systematic characterization. In electronic materials, this is achieved through first-principles calculations, material synthesis, macroscopic transport, momentum-space (k-space) mapping, and microscopic imaging 2 . The same design principle also applies to acoustic metamaterials In this work, we report the realization of gigahertz topological valley Hall insulators and the observation of robust valley-polarized edge states in suspended AlN phononic crystals. Using a newly developed technique of transmission-mode microwave impedance microscopy (TMIM) The interdigital transducers (IDTs) used to excite acoustic waves in the film are formed by depositing 45-nm-thick Al on the piezoelectric AlN. Visualization of the GHz acoustic waves is performed by TMIM on an atomic-force microscope (AFM) platform The resemblance between the two images confirms that the TMIM indeed measures the piezoelectric surface potential, which is proportional to the acoustic displacement field on the AlN membrane. Having confirmed the symmetry-induced gap opening in our metamaterial design, we now move on to study the VHE edge states. Fig. Since the difference in the topological charge between the two domains is quantized, i.e., |CK| = 1, a chiral valley-Hall edge mode must exist at the boundary due to the bulk-edge correspondence Fig. The high-resolution FFT maps allow us to quantitatively compare the experimental data and the calculated band structure. In the real space, the VHE edge state is a gapless mode localized at the interface and travels along opposite directions near K and K valleys because of the opposite group velocity, manifesting the momentum-valley locking of the chiral edge states. The group velocity is characterized by the band dispersion as d/dk. In Fig. 3b-3h. The dispersion of both the bulk and topological edge states is clearly seen as we track the position of FFT peak intensity. This is in excellent agreement with the simulated curves in Fig. 2 ) remains unchanged after crossing the local disorder. In other words, the scattering center modifies the phase but not the amplitude of the elastic wave propagating along the topological interface. Similarly, the topological protection of valley transport is also validated by transmission with negligible loss through sharp corners of a zigzag interface The attenuation after two bending corners is so significant that little energy is transmitted to the output port. The topological protection is thus crucial for guiding elastic waves with minimal loss in nanoelectromechanical systems. Finally, we demonstrate the realization of a VHE-based topological beam splitter Interestingly, a careful examination of the crystal design (lower right inset of Fig. ), which is proportional to the acoustic power, for all four segments. The lower branch receives less (~ 40%) acoustic energy than the upper branch (~ 60%) from the incident wave, which is consistent with the uneven beam splitting inherent in the metamaterial design. The GHz topological VHE demonstrated in this work may be exploited for integrated phononic circuits in the UHF/SHF regime. The acoustic beam splitter in Fig. In this "acoustic graphene", both K and K ′ valley-polarized states can propagate in all directions allowed by the crystal symmetry. One can then construct a topological VHE region (similar to Fig. In summary, we have designed and fabricated GHz nanoelectromechanical phononic crystals with topologically nontrivial structures. Using microwave impedance microscopy, we successfully visualize the elastic wave on patterned piezoelectric AlN membranes with unprecedented displacement sensitivity and spatial resolution. The topologically protected edge states between two gapped structures with opposite valley Chern numbers are demonstrated in both real-space imaging and momentum-space analysis. The valley Hall effect protected against backscattering is evident from the negligible loss through local disorders and sharp corners, as well as the power splitting into multiple edge channels. Our work provides an excellent framework to exploit integrated topological phononics for classical and quantum information processing in the microwave regime. Device fabrication: We fabricated the phononic structures on 800 nm thick c-axis polycrystalline AlN films grown by magnetron sputtering on Si wafers. The phononic crystal was formed by electron beam lithography (EBL) and plasma etching of AlN using 660-nm-thick SiNx hard mask. Interdigital transducers (IDTs) were used to emit and receive phonons. The IDT fingers have an aperture width of 80 μm. The IDTs were fabricated by EBL and lift-off of 45-nm-thick aluminum. Finally, the AlN film was released from the Si substrate by a XeF2 etcher. The band structures and potential profiles are calculated using finite element methods in COMSOL Multiphysics 5.4. We compute the 2D and 1D band structures along with potential profiles in the corresponding geometries with periodic boundary conditions. The "piezoelectric effect Multiphysics" is applied which couples the solid mechanics module and electrostatics module. The material properties used are slightly modified from reported AlN membrane properties 