Topological insulators enable non-reciprocal light propagation that is insensitive to disorder and imperfections. Yet, despite considerable attention from the photonics community and beyond, the very feature that has inspired numerous proposals for applications of topological transport also turns out to be one of the main stumbling blocks for practical implementations: Accessing topologically protected states is generally assumed to require their protection to be lifted. We overcome this limitation by topology-entailed trivial (TET) states that arise from the hybridization of counter-propagating interface states. We demonstrate selective injection and extraction of light into topological states as well as long-range coherent light exchange between spatially separated topological channels. Our results highlight the potential of TET states as protection-preserving paradigm to manipulate the flow of light in topological platforms. The topological origin of chiral edge states is at the root of their extreme robustness As we will show in the following, TET states naturally serve to overcome these limitations by enabling selective local interactions with topological states. In this vein, they can readily facilitate both injection into and extraction from the topological channel without compromising its protection. TET states are bi-directional entities that arise due to the hybridization of two conventional counter-propagating topological states at the interface between two topologically identical domains that nevertheless are distinguishable by some other parameter (Fig. As well-known example of photonic topological structure, we base our study on an anomalous Floquet Insulator with honeycomb geometry, the so-called Kitagawa model Here, 1 T i (t) and b i are the indicator function and the respective coupling direction of the ith time step. According to Floquet theory for time-periodic Hamiltonians, this introduces a 2π/T -periodicity to the quasi-energies of the system. As a consequence, a quasi-energy Brillouin zone can be identified ∈ [-π/T, π/T ] here consisting in two non-degenerate bands and two bandgaps, one at the center (around = 0, henceforth referred to as "0 gap") and one at the edge of the quasi-energy Brillouin zone (at = ±π/T , accordingly termed "π gap"). The topological properties of this system are described by the (2+1)D winding number W, which can be calculated for different values of the so-called coupling phase θ c = C•T /3. For π/3 < θ c < 2π/3 the system is in the anomalous Floquet topological insulating (A-FTI) phase Let us now consider two adjacent domains adhering to same model and place them in contact with an inter-system coupling strength C s . If the two subsystems are identical and C s = C, the counter-propagating topological modes residing on either side of the contact interface perfectly cancel each other out We experimentally explore the behavior of TET states in detuned pairs of Kitagawa lattices formed by femtosecond laser-written waveguides In order to obtain more quantitative insights into the phenomenology of these unusual states, we devised a setting in which TET states can mediate interactions between topological edge states on opposite sides of a composite lattice (Fig. In this work, we introduced topology-entailed trivial states as novel paradigm for manipulating, interrogating and populating topologically protected currents without locally disrupting topology or resorting to higher-dimensional workarounds. The concept of TET states is general, as they can emerge at interfaces between topologically uniform domains that systematically differ by some conventional quantity, e.g. any non-zero offset between the otherwise homogeneous on-site energies of the two lattices. As such, these unusual hybrid entities are by definition topologically trivial, yet inherit important aspects of their topological origins, such as an increased robustness to disorder compared to conventional trivial states. Our experiments in photonic Kitagawa-type anomalous topological insulator lattices clearly demonstrate the capability of TET states to locally interact with protected topological states of the outer perimeter in a bidirectional fashion, enabling both the deliberate extraction and injection of light from well-defined locations within the lattice. In a similar vein, we showed that TET states can act as long-range interconnects between spatially distinct topological channels that would otherwise be entirely isolated from one another. By providing a readily tunable transport velocity, this topological tunneling also serves as flexible means to implement slow light on topological platforms. Numerical simulations are performed with tight binding calculations run in MATLAB. The (2+1)D winding number of the time-evolution operator is defined from the k-space time-evolution operator as in Where the operator U is piecewise defined as follows: is the time evolution operator, T is the time-ordering operator and H eff = i/T log(U ) is the effective Floquet Hamiltonian. The branch cut for the logarithm of U allows to discriminate between 0 and π quasi-energy for the calculation of W . Our photonic implementation of TET states was based on laser-written lattices of evanescently coupled waveguides The authors would like to thank C. Otto for preparing the high-quality fused silica samples employed in this work. AS received partial funding from European Research Council (grant EPIQUS), Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (grants SCHE 612/6-1, SZ 276/12-1, BL 574/13-1, SZ 276/15-1 and SZ 276/20-1) and the Alfried Krupp von Bohlen and Halbach foundation. FSP acknowledges fundings from Deutscher Akademischer Austauschdienst (grant 57507869 and 57381332). IC and FSP acknowledge financial support from the European Union H2020-FETFLAG-2018-2020 project "PhoQuS" (n.820392) and from the Provincia Autonoma di Trento, partly through the Q@TN initiative. 6 Author contributions FSP, NS and ME fabricated the photonic waveguide systems. FSP, MK, ME, LJM and MH conducted the measurements and evaluated the data. FSP, MK and IC developed the theoretical description. FSP and MK conducted the numerical simulations. IC and AS supervised the work of their respective groups. All authors interpreted the results and co-wrote the manuscript. Populating and probing protected edge states through topology-entailed trivial states Supplementary Informations In this section we discuss the derivation of the analytical model developed to support the observation of the transmission plateau discussed in figure The time dependent k-space Hamiltonian of an Anomalous Floquet Honeycomb lattice, as already discussed in the main text, can be written as: In order to build an easily interpretable analytic model in the following we will restrict to θ c = CT /3 = π/2. In this condition the hopping between two coupled sites is complete and the bulk bands of the Kitagawa model are flat. Topological edge states extend across the entire Energy Brillouin zone and the system is an Anomalous Floquet insulator with all bulk states fully localized. Our specific choice of θ c does not limit the observed physics but implies the comfortable condition of the interface states being completely localized in the edge lattice sites and not leaking with their exponential tails into the bulk of their confining lattices (fig S1 The ladder rails are tuned directional couplers with complete hopping supporting unidirectional states that propagate with opposite directions (because of the way we alternate the couplings in time), while the rungs of the ladder are de-tuned directional couplers with a given reflection (diagonal terms in the matrix) and transmission (off-diagonal terms) coefficients. In the whole ladder we can identify 3 different couplers, with their correspondent color codes as in figure where z is the length of the coupler, α(z, δ, σ) = cos(σz) + i δ σ sin σz, β(z, δ, σ) = -i C σ sin σz, σ = δ2 + C 2 and δ = δC 3π , where δ is the global energy offset between the two subsystem discussed in the main manuscript. The transmission matrix relates the light intensity present in the two waveguides as a function of the directional coupler length and the injected light: Since the length of the directional coupler is fixed by our experimental implementation in order to realize complete hopping in the tuned case, we fix z = l c = π/(2C). We can now rewrite the transmission matrix of the detuned directional coupler with fixed length l c as: If we consider light initialy localized on the left waveguide of a detuned directional coupler, after an entire modulation period, composed by the sequence of one detuned coupler and two balanced couplers, the light intensity will be in part transported one unit cell down, via the left rail topological mode, and the remaining part will be transported one unit cell upwards via the right rail topological mode (fig. Let's consider a finite interface of length d, where d is the number of de-tuned directional couplers present in the interface (as in fig. Of course it exists only one path of this kind, and it contributes to an output that is delayed of T = d modulation periods after injecting light on the upper-left waveguide of the interface. As this is the quickest possible path, we define as δT = 0 the time delay caused by the direct path. We here note that such transmission coefficient decays exponentially to zero for d → ∞. This means that higher order paths must contribute to the "tunneled output". n = 1: Let's now consider all the paths that cross the interface once from left to right (and thus once from right to left). The first crossing (left to right) can happen at any given point c 1 ∈ [1, d -1], while the second crossing (right to left) at any given point c 1 ∈ [0, c 1 -1]. The amplitudes of such paths are given by Where R 1 = β 2 e -iδ is the transmission term for a "loop" that is a double transmission from left to right and from right to left, while P 1 = |α| 2 e -iδ is the transmission term for a propagation of 1 unit cell in the right side of the interface (and a corresponding propagation of 1 unit cell on the left side). To account for the contribution of all such paths it is necessary to sum over all values of c 1 and c 1 : As a crossing of the interface takes one modulation period, plus two modulation periods for every propagation step on the right side of the interface (one on the right side and one on the left side) the time delay of these paths can be calculated as ∆T (A 1 (c 1 , c 1 )) = 2(c 1c 1 ). Moreover we note that all the paths arriving at the same time sum up coherently as the phase depends only on (c 1c 1 ). n = 2: In general, a particular second order path will be characterized by four crossings happening at four points c 1 c 1 c 2 c 2 , where, as before c 1 ∈ [1, d -1] and c 1 ∈ [0, c 1 -1]. The third and fourth crossings can happen in . The amplitude of any particular second order path is given by: Therefore the sum of all the contributions given by second-order paths can be found by summing over all coefficients: As for the previous case, the arrival times of such paths can be written as ∆T (A Repeating the reasoning allows to retrieve the general expression of the output for the n-th order path, involving a summation over 2n indexes c, c = {c i , c i } i=1:n : Since different paths contribute to the output at different times, in general the tunneled output will be highly dispersed. The transmission is given by the ratio between the total output intensity and the injected intensity. Assuming we inject a unitary intensity, the transmission will be the sum of the intensities at the output of the interface at every time instant: The instantaneous output O(∆T ) denotes the light intensity, taking into account all order paths, leaking in the bottom topological mode at each time instant ∆T following the quickest path (the 0-th order). We can write this term as a coherent sum of contributions from all orders: We now denote ∆T i the delay caused by the i-th crossing of a generic path. As an order-n path implies exactly n crossings {∆T i } i=1:n partitions ∆T in exactly n parts ( is even, also ∆T = 2t * has to be even. We can rewrite O n (∆T ) as: Where, 1 We observe that the instantaneous output has contribution only for even time-delays ∆T = 2t * and if expanded at the n-th order is exact for time delays ∆T ≤ 2n. The solution of the problem has a strictly combinatorial nature relying in finding a closed form for the (integer) path number N on each order and time-delay ∆T . We can indeed re-write the previous as: Where N (d, n, t * ) encapsulates a sum over 2n -1 coefficients (c 1 ..c n and T 1 ..T n-1 ) subject to the aforementioned bounds. Symbolic calculations show that N (d, n, t * ) always diverge for d → ∞. However calculating the coherent sum between two consecutive-order contributions with the same time delay one gets: Therefore the relative strength of successive order contributes is at the basis of the non-diverging behaviour of T (d) for d → ∞. This implies that truncating the analytical model to a finite order causes an increasingly big error for the instantaneous output corresponding to longer interfaces. On the bright side, we note that the nth order path contributes to the instantaneous output only for t * ≥ n, therefore the instantaneous output is exact for ∆T < 2n and by truncating both the expansion order and the maximum propagation time we are able to obtain physically meaningful results well-agreeing with the experimental observations and that approaches the numerical simulation for increasing order expansion. In the main text we claim that the transmission decay observed in the experimental results and predicted by numerical simulation results from the reduced group velocity of TET states in systems characterized by a small detuning. Indeed the results presented in figure The analytical model shows that when the interface depth d grows, the dominant contributions to the output are the higher order ones, which inherently arrive at a later time because of the delay caused by crossing the interface multiple times. As a matter of fact, truncating the propagation after few modulation steps will inevitably cause a decay of the output intensity for longer interface lengths d, and such decay will be more evident for smaller detunings δ. This effect is illustrated in figure In the main manuscript we argue that TET states are fundamentally different from conventional trivial states that may be found e.g. at the interface between two trivial insulators. A conceptual reason for that is that TET states are obtained by a superposition between counterpropagating topological states, therefore whatever mechanism (to which topology is unaltered) that may destroy such superposition would immediately restore topological propagation in the affected region. As topological propagation is insensitive to localization such defect, as for instance missing or heavily detuned interface sites, or even randomly distributed noise across the whole interface, would not be able to localize light flowing in TET states. In this section we provide a topological argument that links the existence of interface TET states to a topological invariant of the bulk AFTIs therefore allowing to predict TET states via the bulk-edge correspondence principle. To this purpose we study the parametric 1D Floquet operator U ky (k x ) derived from the full 2D Floquet operator U(k x , k y ) by fixing the value of k y (aligned to the direction of the topologically homogeneous interface). We then demonstrate that, for specific values k y = 0 and k y = π/2, the 1D interface between dimensionally reduced Floquet operators U ky (k x ) with "interchanged bandgaps" (δ = π/T ) supports 0D interface states protected by the chiral symmetry of U ky (k x ). Even though the provided treatment is valid only for the interchanged bandgap case, in which the relative detuning between the two systems is δ = π/T only and it does not yet explain how to connect the protected 0D interface states to the 1D TET states, still it does provide an interesting insight on how the the appearance of TET states might be rooted in the subsystems non-trivial topology. The lattice is described by a piecewise constant Hamiltonian H that can be divided into three subsequent matrices H i corresponding to the three modulation steps. In Bloch invariant form and choosing a unit cell that has the same symmetry of a zigzag edge (an analogous construction can be carried out for the bearded and armchair edge, but we restrain our analysis to that specific geometry) the k-space Hamiltonians take the following form: Where σ i are Pauli matrices and q x = 3k x /2, q y = √ 3k y /2, with q x ∈ [-π; π] and k y ∈ [-π/2; π/2], parametrize the whole Brillouin zone. The Fourier-transformed Floquet operator U(q x , q y ) is defined as U(q x , q y ) = U (T, 0) = T e -i T 0 H(qx,qy,t)dt , being U (t 2 , t 1 ) the time evolution operator from time t 1 to t 2 , T the time-ordering operator and T the whole driving period. Let's here note that it is possible to define a whole class class of operators U τ (q x , q y ) defined as U τ (q x , q y ) = U (T + τ, τ ) = T e -i T +τ τ H(qx,qy,t)dt , which differs among each other only accordingly to the starting time τ of the driving. Since the driving is periodic, such operators are related to U by a similarity transformation U -1 (τ, 0)U τ U (τ, 0) = U hence they share the same eigenvalues. This means that, as long as the bandstructure is concerned, the Floquet operator can be arbitrarily defined by choosing any time instant as the starting point for the time-unit cell. However in general the properties of U might depend on a specific choice of τ . First, we take into account the family of 1D Floquet Operators U τ,qy (q x ), obtained from U τ (q x , q y ) by fixing a specific value for q y . Then we study the topological properties of such operators in terms of Winding Numbers. In particular, following the treatment in A qy (q x ) = α(q x ) β(q x ) γ(q x ) δ(q x ) With α, β, γ, δ complex function of a single variable q x , parametrized in q y . If U is gapped both at = 0 and = ±π (Anomalous Floquet Topological phase), the winding number of α(q x ) corresponds to the number of 0D edge states at = 0 and specific q y while the winding number of β(q x ) corresponds to the 0D edge states at = π and specific q y . Among all possible choices for the time-unit cell, the most practical one is using τ = T 6 , hence considering the middle of the first modulation step as the initial time instant. The corresponding Floquet operator takes the following form Using the matrix representations of the Hamiltonians and the definition of U (t 2 , t 1 ) we get: U T 6 ,qy (q x ) = e -iθ/2(cos(qx+qy)σ1+sin(qx+qy)σ2) e -iθ(cos(2qy)σ1+sin(2qy)σ2) e -iθσ1 e -iθ/2(cos(qx+qy)σ1+sin(qx+qy)σ2) , where θ = CT /3 is the coupling angle for a single modulation step. U T 6 ,qy (q x ) is conveniently symmetric with respect to σ 3 for both the parameter values q y = 0 and q y = π/2, which implies that the chirality relation 17 between A qy (q x ) and B qy (q x ) is satisfied with Γ = σ 3 . When writing the unitary evolution operator for the two symmetry points k y = 0, π/2 we obtain the following forms: U T 6 ,0 (q x ) = e -iθ/2(cos(qx)σ1+sin(qx)σ2) e -iθσ1 e -iθσ1 e -iθ/2(cos(qx)σ1+sin(qx)σ2) (20 that can be decomposed in U T 6 ,0 (q x ) = B 0 (q x )A 0 (q x ), with A 0 (q x ) = cos θ 2 cos(θ)e iqx sin θ 2 sin(θ) -ie -iqx cos(θ) sin θ 2 + cos θ 2 sin(θ)) -ie iqx cos(θ) sin θ 2cos θ 2 sin(θ)) cos θ 2 cos(θ)e -iqx sin θ 2 sin(θ) ; ( = e -iθ/2(cos(qx)σ2-sin(qx)σ1) e -iθ/2(cos(qx)σ2-sin(qx)σ1) That can be decomposed in U T 6 , π 2 (q x ) = B π 2 (q x )A π 2 (q x ), with The corresponding B qy (q x ) operators can be retrieved from thechirality transformation 17 By evaluating, for the two symmetry points, the winding numbers W [f ] = i 2π BZ dq x f -1 df dqx of the diagonal and off diagonal terms for θ ∈]π/3, 2π/3[ corresponding to the targeted anomalous Floquet topological phase, we obtain the values reported in the first two columns of the following table I. As discussed in the main text, the effect of a diagonal detuning is to rigidly shift the quasi-energy spectrum by a quantity ∆ = δ. A detuning of δ = π/T shifts a quasienergy = 0 to = π/T and viceversa therefore the topological invariant for the detuned system can be directly obtained from the tuned one. If the interface between gap-exchanged regions is considered, then the topological index Table 