Metamaterials are structures engineered at a small scale with respect to the wavelength of the excitations they interact with. These structures behave as artificial materials whose properties can be chosen by design, mocking and even outperforming natural materials and making them the quintessential tool for manipulation of wave systems. In this Letter we show how the acoustic properties of a silicon nitride membrane can be affected by nanopatterning. The degree of asymmetry in the pattern geometry induces an artificial anisotropic elasticity, resulting in the splitting of otherwise degenerate mechanical modes. The artificial material we introduce has a maximum Ledbetter-Migliori anisotropy of 1.568, favorably comparing to most bulk natural crystals. With an additional freedom in defining arbitrary asymmetry axes by pattern rotation, our approach can be useful for fundamental investigation of material properties as well as for devising improved sensors of light, mass or acceleration based on micromechanical resonators. Modern strategies for the manipulation of electronic, photonic or acoustic waves rely on the concept of creating artificial materials by deterministic patterning. The fine structure of geometrical elements with a size smaller than the system wavelength cannot be resolved, yet it can manifest in macroscopic effects resulting in the creation of effective artificial materials with properties chosen by design. Recently, the concept of artificial material has entered into the mechanical realm, focusing on frequencies around and exceeding the audible spectrum; both acoustic metamaterials Along with micro-and nano-structuration, the miniaturization of whole mechanical resonators has been pushed to the micrometric scale; among the others, a wide investigation has interested nanometer-thick, micrometer-wide membranes In this Letter we report on square silicon nitride (Si 3 N 4 ) membranes periodically patterned with holes which defined phononic metasurfaces. We realized devices with a different degree of asymmetry in the pattern geometry, resulting in degeneracy breaking for selected mechanical modes, which we characterized through self-mixing interferometry. The asymmetric pattern made the metasurface equivalent to an artificial homogeneous orthotropic shell where the axis anisotropy can be controlled with the geometrical asymmetry. Furthermore, our design allowed to arbitrarily define the orthotropic axes which could be oriented in any direction on the membrane plane, obtaining devices whose realization would be challenging employing natural anisotropic materials. The metasurface consists of a 300-nm-thick Si 3 N 4 slab perforated with holes, arranged in a square pattern with lattice constant a = 2 μm (see Fig. Using an AR-P 6200 resist mask, several periodic patterns with different asymmetry parameter α were defined via electron beam lithography on one side of the wafer, each one containing an array of 60x60 holes. The exposed Si 3 N 4 was removed through reactive ion etching. Afterwards, the wafer was immersed in a hot (80 • C) 30% in weight KOH solution, so that the membranes were completely suspended upon etching of the Si underneath. The final membrane side was of 128 μm. Finally, 15 nm of gold were thermally evaporated on the membranes in order to enhance their optical reflectivity. Realization of membranes with α < 0.5 was discarded after several attempts, as it resulted in a strong decrease of the fabrication yield due to the pattern-induced high stress on the membrane upon release. A cross sectional sketch of a membrane device is reported in Fig. The characterization of the membrane mechanical modes was realized through self-mixing interferometry where L is the membrane size and v the sound velocity. Using the results of Fig. The experimentally observed membrane mechanical modes were simulated employing the FEM solver (COMSOL Multiphysics). The whole membrane, including the patterned holes, was reproduced in the simulations using a full threedimensional domain with fixed boundary conditions. The actual sizes of the patterned features, corresponding to effective asymmetry parameter α e f f , were employed to have a precise match with the experimental membrane. The material properties were embedded in Hooke's law for linear, elastic materi-als: where σ and ε are the stress and strain tensor, respectively. σ ex is an extra contribution possibly given by initial strain, as in the case of strongly pre-stressed materials such as Si 3 N 4 In the metasurface approximation, the subwavelength membrane pattern mocks an effective medium, which in our case is an orthotropic mechanical material. This assumption can be validated by performing mechanical simulations of a homogeneous square membrane with the same lateral size as the investigated devices. The pattern effect can be introduced as a modification of the compliance S and initial stress σ ex . In an isotropic material, the 6x6 compliance tensor S depends only on a set of two parameters; reduced symmetries require more independent parameters. For example, orthotropic materials, having symmetric properties about two or three mutually perpendicular planes, can be described by 9 independent pa-rameters, namely the three components of E, ν and the shear modulus G, respectively. S can be written in a compact matrix form using engineering notation: (3) In our specific case we assumed that the nanostructuration mainly affects the properties of one axis (i.e. ŷ), as can be hinted from the results of Fig. The last ingredient needed for the simulation of the effective medium is the inclusion of √ α h in the ŷ-component of the initial stress σ ex . The simulated eigenfrequencies of a single 300-nm-thick layer as a function of α h are reported in Fig. The power of our approach relies in the possibility to design arbitrary, in-plane asymmetry axes, without specific restrictions to the directions parallel to the membrane sides, as in the case investigated so far. This favorably compares with other mechanical systems where symmetry breaking has been achieved by boundary modification (i.e. going from square to rectangular membranes In this Letter we have introduced artificial degrees of anisotropy by micro-patterning a homogeneous Si 3 N 4 layer. By controlling the pattern shape asymmetry, we can modify the sound velocity along a specific crystallographic orientation. Holding a maximum Ledbetter-Migliori anisotropy of 1.568, our artificial layer can be used to control the symmetrybreaking mode splitting in square membranes, allowing tuning of the resonances to address particular device parameters. Additionally, the artificial anisotropy can be realized in arbitrary directions on the membrane plane, with a further tuning knob for membrane design. Our approach flexibility makes it useful for the implementation of multi-mode devices for mass, force and acceleration sensing as well as for the realization of optimized systems for opto-and electro-mechanics, where mechanical resonators can interact with electromagnetic waves, for example in membrane-in-the-middle configurations. Here, mode control can be useful for enhancing or suppressing the interaction of mechanical modes with electromagnetic cavity modes of certain symmetries. See Supplementary Material for the calculation of the effective asymmetry parameter α e f f and for the estimation of the out-of-plane displacements.