Characterizing and manipulating the circular polarization of light is central to numerous emerging technologies, including spintronics and quantum computing. Separately, monolayer tungsten disulfide (WS2) is a versatile material that has demonstrated promise in a variety of applications, including single photon emitters and valleytronics. Here, we demonstrate a method to tune the photoluminescence (PL) intensity (factor of x161), peak position (38.4meV range), circular polarization (39.4% range), and valley polarization of a Bi2Se3-WS2 2D heterostructure using a low-power laser (0.762μW) in ambient. Changes are spatially confined to the laser spot, enabling submicron (814nm) features, and are long-term stable (>334 days). PL and valley polarization changes can be controllably reversed through laser exposure in vacuum, allowing the material to be erased and reused. Atmospheric experiments and firstprinciples calculations indicate oxygen diffusion modulates the exciton radiative vs. nonradiative recombination pathways, where oxygen absorption leads to brightening, and desorption to darkening. Circularly polarized light (CPL) interacts differently with materials than linearly polarized light, providing a separate avenue to probe and manipulate materials. This property has facilitated a variety of existing and emerging technologies, including bioinspired navigation, 1 spintronics, 2 quantum computing, Recent advances in nanophotonics, Two-dimensional (2D) transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) -notably MoSe2, MoS2, WSe2, and WS2 -have demonstrated considerable promise for CPL applications. Additionally, the materials can be grown on an economical scale using chemical vapor deposition (CVD), providing a facile route toward application. Using CVD, we first grow monolayer WS2 and then few-layer Bi2Se3 on top. We use Bi2Se3 as a medium to manipulate the optical, exciton, and valley properties of WS2. Monolayer WS2 is a direct band gap semiconductor with s + and stransitions at the K and K' valleys, respectively, due to time-reversal symmetry and a strong spin-orbit coupling. Phonon-assisted scattering Additionally, the photoluminescence (PL) intensity and peak position can be tuned with high precision across a factor of x161, and 38.4meV range, respectively. The changes are locally confined, enabling features as small as 814nm, and are long-term stable (>334 days). Applying a laser in vacuum controllably reverses changes to the PL and DoCP. The PL and DoCP can be reliably manipulated within a range, allowing the material to be erased and reused. Atmospheric measurements, Fick's 2 nd Law of Diffusion fitting, and first-principles calculations indicate oxygen absorption and desorption, facilitated by the few-layer Bi2Se3, is responsible for the large modulation of the exciton radiative vs. non-radiative recombination pathways. We propose a framework to understand the changes in PL and valley polarization due to oxygen absorption and desorption. Our work demonstrates precision tuning of spatially-selective submicron pixels furthering numerous technologies, including multistate multidimensional optical data storage, valleytronics, and quantum information sciences. Monolayer WS2 is grown on an Si/SiO2 substrate, and then 1-3 quintuple layers of Bi2Se3 are grown on top of the WS2. Both growths use chemical vapor deposition (CVD), suggesting the method is economically scalable, providing a route to application. Figure Figure Figure Figure The well-formed peaks suggest both Bi2Se3 and WS2 are crystalline, in agreement with TEM diffraction measurements (Figure The PL intensity and peak position data were extracted from each spectrum by fitting with a Lorentzian function and linear background. A robust fitting algorithm written in Python Spyder software ensured the global minimum was found with low uncertainty. The backscattered peak increases faster than the silicon peak, suggesting the reflection increases. Together, this data offers a possible explanation why the WS2 Raman peaks increase with laser exposure (Figure Figure All measurements were done in ambient at room temperature, and changes can be reversed and reliably manipulated within a range (discussed later), making the technology attractive for applications. To the best of our knowledge, we demonstrate one of the largest ranges of in situ, spatially-selective, and tunable DoCP at room temperature, where changes can be reversed allowing the material to be erased and reused. Error bars are calculated by finding the 2-sigma (95.4% confidence) value around the chi-squared minima for the applicable variables, and propagating the error as appropriate. Figure When the environment is switched back to vacuum (2 nd round), the PL intensity decreases 86.5% and the peak position shifts 9.4meV upward. When the environment is switched back to air (2 nd round), the PL intensity increases a factor ́11.1 and the peak position decreases 10.4meV. The fluorescence and optical images shown in Figure The optical images show the characteristic color change appears after the first laser exposure in air, but does not reverse through laser exposure in vacuum. Similarly, changes to the Raman spectra are not readily reversed (Figure As shown in Figure Notably, the first laser-oxygen exposure evolves slower and contains numerous non-linear features that are not present in subsequent exposures. For example, the peak position increases before decreasing, and the intensity curve plateaus before increasing again. This behavior is repeated across numerous samples (Figure To elucidate the mechanism behind the 2 nd vacuum and 2 nd air curves, we fit the data with Fick's 2 nd Law of Diffusion (Figure The close fit of the 2 nd vacuum and 2 nd air curves suggests that diffusion is central to the mechanism (Figure Further work is needed to elucidate changes to the diffusion rate as a function of atmosphere, temperature, and number of cycles. The curves are smooth, deterministic, and low noise, suggesting multiple states are accessible, and that each pixel can store numerous bits of information for superdense multistate multidimensional data storage. The changes are long-term stable in a N2 atmosphere at room temperature for over 334 days (Figure Figure Figure Figure To overcome this, the measurement system was switched between s-+ and s--after the curves plateaued. Qualitatively a change in DoCP can be observed when examining the relative intensities of the s-+ and s--curves. Each data point is extracted from robust fitting to a spectrum. Over 500 spectra were collected to produce the curves in Figure The valence band maximum (VBM) of the heterostructure is a pure WS2 state while the conduction band minimum (CBM) is hybridized with predominantly Bi2Se3 character and approximately 20% WS2 character (Figure If laser exposure in an O2 environment leads to the intercalation of O2 between WS2 and Bi2Se3, this would increase dSe-S, which would decrease the magnitude of the spatial overlap between the pz orbitals of S and Se. Indeed, when we optimize the atomic coordinates of the heterostructure with two O2 molecules intercalated within the van-der-Waals interface of Bi2Se3-WS2, we find dSe-S increases by 0.59 Å. In Figure Our calculations and proposed mechanism of O2 intercalation imply the following. One process that is capable of causing changes in PL intensity is a nonradiative relaxation of photoexcited carriers from K. Prior to O2 being intercalated, the hybridized CB state at G is a nonradiative pathway that photoexcited electrons at K can relax in to. If the contribution of WS2 states to the CBM at G decreases, as we show can occur with intercalation, the probability for a nonradiative transition from a WS2 derived state at K to G decreases. This would manifest in an increase in PL intensity. As O2 de-intercalates, the interlayer separation decreases, the contribution of WS2 to the CBM at G increases and the PL intensity decreases again. This is consistent with what we observe experimentally in Figure Understanding the origins of the tunable DoCP is difficult. The combination of spin-orbit coupling and broken inversion symmetry in monolayer WS2 leads to spin-valley locking at the K and K' valleys. The band extrema at K and K' can be independently accessed using CPL, enabling information processing schemes and other valleytronics applications. The excitons are able to steadily scatter to the opposite valley, which reduces the material's valley and circular polarization. Numerous intervalley scattering mechanisms have been proposed, which are discussed further in Section S7. Phonon-assisted scattering We propose two ideas by which oxygen absorption and desorption in Bi2Se3 shifts the WS2 DoCP. First, higher exciton lifetime correlates to lower DoCP. We observe a PL peak position shift due to laser-air exposure, that is reversed through laservacuum exposure. After the 1 st laser-oxygen exposure, both the PL intensity and peak position evolution follow Fick's 2 nd Law of Diffusion, suggesting they are influenced by the same underlying mechanism. Monolayer TMDs are highly sensitive to their environment, and numerous factors affect the PL peak position, We demonstrate a method to tune the PL intensity, peak position, circular polarization, and valley polarization with high spatial selectivity using a laser in ambient on a Bi2Se3-WS2 2D heterostructure. The PL and DoCP can be reliably manipulated within a range, allowing the material to be erased and reused. Experiment and first-principles calculations suggest oxygen diffusion modulates the excitonic recombination pathways, where intercalation (deintercalation), increases (decreases) the probability of radiative recombination. The close fit to Fick's 2 nd law of Diffusion suggests the system is deterministic, enabling high predictability and greater tunability. We demonstrate the possibility for high-resolution and precise tuning of submicron pixels for a variety of technologies, including multistate multidimensional optical data storage, valleytronics, and quantum communications. Material Growth: Monolayer WS2 is synthesized at ambient pressure in 2-inch diameter quartz tube furnaces on SiO2/Si substrates (275 nm thickness of SiO2). Prior to use, all SiO2/Si substrates are cleaned in acetone, IPA, and Piranha etch (H2SO4+H2O2) then thoroughly rinsed in DI water. At the center of the furnace is positioned a quartz boat containing ~1g of WO3 powder. Two SiO2/Si wafers are positioned face-down, directly above the oxide precursor. A separate quartz boat containing sulfur powder is placed upstream, outside the furnace-heating zone, for the synthesis of WS2. The upstream SiO2/Si wafer contains perylene-3,4,9,10-tetracarboxylic acid tetrapotassium salt (PTAS) seeding molecules, while the downstream substrate is untreated. The hexagonal PTAS molecules are carried downstream to the untreated substrate and promote lateral growth of the monolayer WS2. Pure argon (65 sccm) is used as the furnace heats to the target temperature. Upon reaching the target temperature of 825 °C, 10 sccm H2 is added to the Ar flow and maintained throughout the 10-minute soak and subsequent cooling to room temperature. Bi2Se3 was grown on top of the monolayer WS2 using chemical vapor deposition (CVD) in a twozone furnace with a 2" quartz tube. High-purity Bi2Se3 flakes are ground using a mortar and pestle into a fine dust. The powdered Bi2Se3 is placed in a ceramic boat and inserted into the furnace's quartz tube, and pushed into the center of the furnace's first zone. The monolayer TMD, which is on an SiO2 substrate, is placed downstream of the Bi2Se3 into the center of the furnace's second zone. The furnace is pumped down to ~20mTorr. An argon (Ar) carrier gas is flown into the furnace at 80sccm. The Bi2Se3 is heated to 520°C, and the WS2 are heated to 210°C. The ramp rate is ~55°C/min, and the total growth is 27 min. Bi2Se3-WS2 2D heterostructures were transferred onto a holey amorphous SiNx TEM grid using the water-assisted-pick-up transfer method. Atmospheric measurements: Atmospheric measurements were conducted inside a Janis ST-500 with vacuum, air, N2 and O2 connections. Figure All code as written in Python using the Spyder integrated development environment (IDE). Spyder belongs to the MIT License and is distributed through the Anaconda environment. Each spectrum is time stamped, and our algorithm extracted this info. The curve_fit() function with a variety of initial values and boundary conditions were used to verify fit robustness. The 1-s uncertainty (error) was obtained from the curve_fit() function around the chi-squared minima for the applicable variables, and the error was propagated as appropriate to produce the 2-sigma (95.4% confidence) value shown. Laser exposure recipes in ambient: Figure The s++ and s+spectra are collected at a significantly diminished laser intensity (0.899μW) s+ circular polarized 588nm laser for 10s each using a 100x objective (0.083μW/μm 2 ). The very low laser power at 588nm laser does not appear to modify the sample. The laser intensity is then increased ́15 to 13.5μW for ~125s to controllably modify the 2D heterostructure. Such a recipe ensures that acquired s++ and s+-spectra accurately describe the system, and that the 2D heterostructure is not modified during data collection. To collect the different circular polarization configurations, the system rotates quarter and half wave plates, which have different transmission profiles, leading to error. To correct for intensity error, we collected numerous spectra of a GaAs sample in all circular polarization configurations (i.e., ++, +-, --, and -+). We made the ansatz that there should be no circular polarization in GaAs, and define the error as the computed the difference. To correct for peak position error, we collected numerous spectra of an as-grown WS2 sample. We made the ansatz that the WS2 peak position between -and -+ should be the same, and define the error as the computed the difference. More work is need to determine whether the difference in peak positions between s--and s-+ is real or due to error. We do not imply that any difference between the s--and s-+ peaks is necessarily physically significant. Density Functional Theory Calculations: Our first-principles calculations are based on density functional theory within the projector-augmented wave method AFM Scans (Section S1); Visual Demonstration of Robust Fit Quality (Section S2); Evolution of PL and Raman under laser exposure in different atmospheres (Section S3); Long Term Stability (Section S4); Control Experiments with monolayer WS2 (Section S5); Demonstrating Reversibility of DoCP and valley polarization (Section S6); Amplifying Information on possible origin of tunable DoCP (Section S7). Figure 