The remarkable universality of the cuprate Tc dome suggests a very fundamental unifying principle. Moreover, the superconducting gap is known to persist above Tc in the pseudogap phase of all cuprates. So, contrary to BCS, the gap cannot be the order parameter of the transition. In this work, we show that both the Tc-dome and the pseudogap line T * (p) arise from a unique and identifiable principle : the interaction of localized 'pairons' on an antiferromagnetic square lattice. The topological constraints on such preformed pairons give rise to both the Tc dome and the pairing energy simultaneously. It also provides a natural explanation for the critical doping points of the phase diagram. The model matches perfectly both the T * and Tc experimental lines, with only one adjustable parameter. Despite more than thirty years of intense research and many advances, a general understanding of the physics of cuprates is still lacking. Indeed, most of the key questions remain to be answered or clarified : i) What is the pairing mechanism ? ii) What is the nature of the SC condensation ? iii) What is the nature of the pseudogap phase and its connection with the SC state ? iv) What is the physical origin of the critical doping points ? Superconductivity emerges in cuprates from doping an antiferromagnetic (AF) Mott insulator, leading to a complex phase diagram as shown in Fig. Despite the very large variety of compounds belonging to the cuprate family, there is a striking universality in the phase diagram. In addition, as already noted by Tahir et al. Contrary to conventional superconductors which are mostly 'good' metals, parent compounds of SC cuprates are antiferromagnetic Mott insulators, characterized by the temperature of long-range magnetic ordering T Néel (p). Electron or hole doping strongly modifies the electronic and magnetic properties. First, the Néel temperature decreases rapidly with doping and finally vanishes for a small value p ≈0.015 Measurements of the magnetic susceptibility χ(T ) arXiv:2202.12952v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 25 Feb 2022 [ where J is the magnetic exchange energy. The critical doping value p c =0.2, where T max vanishes, corresponds to the compact simplon lattice (Fig. In conventional superconductors, a bound state of electrons can form in the electron sea as a result of phonon exchange. Cooper pairs We proposed in Ref. Electrons within the AF coherence length contribute to the pairing energy of the two holes. As the doping increases, the AF coherence length decreases as ∼ 1/ √ p. A pairon can exist provided two adjacent holes are surrounded by at least a ring of six electrons. The pairons thus occupy a minimum of 8 sites (2 holes plus six electrons) on the square lattice in the local AF environnement. This topological constraint imposes a maximum doping value corresponding to the compact pairon lattice (see Fig. As previously mentioned, the distance between pairons is of the order of the spin correlation length ξ AF . The hypothesis that only sites within the correlation length contribute to the pairon binding energy implies that the binding energy, or equivalently the temperature of pairon formation T * , varies linearly as a function of doping ( This linear law is accurately confirmed by ARPES Both the T max (p) and T * (p) lines are thus given by similar topological arguments based on two fundamental quantum objects, simplons and pairons. In conventional superconductors, the gap ∆(T ) is the order parameter The situation must be different in cuprates since, as well demonstrated unequivocally by tunneling spectroscopy In several articles Therefore, in our model, the total energy E SC of the superconducting state (per pair) is unconventional and reads where ∆ p is the zero-temperature binding energy and β c is the condensation energy responsible for long range order. The latter can be precisely extracted from the experimental quasiparticle spectra We now show that this condensation energy β c , i.e. the energy difference between the non SC pseudogap state E P G = -∆ p and the SC state E SC , results from quantifying the amount of pairon disorder. In this view, the characteristic disorder in the PG state is uniquely determined by the topological constraints of the 2d square lattice. To proceed, akin to a lattice gas approach, let us consider pairons on an equivalent square lattice of density p : p =1 corresponds to the compact pairon lattice (p =0.27 on the Cu0 square lattice) and p =0 to the onset doping at which the average distance between pairons is small enough (d < d 0 ) so that they interact (p =.05 on the Cu0 square lattice). Pairons are then randomly distributed on this lattice (Fig. As expected for a problem depending only on the success p or failure 1 -p to find a pairon on a given site, we obtain for N i a binomial distribution. As a result, N i follows a straight line as a function of p , with some jitter, while the variance σ 2 = N 0 p (1 -p ) displays a dome shape. In fact, for a fixed N 0 and a random distribution, σ 2 characterizes the maximum disorder of the localized pairons on the square lattice. The condensation energy can be understood using the Following gendanken experiment. When the interaction between pairons is switched off, we obtain the incoherent PG state, the 'pairon glass', of energy E P G , where there is by definition no correlation between pairons. In this state, no long-range SC order exists and the disorder is described by the above binomial distribution. When the interaction is turned back on (provided their typical distance d is smaller than d 0 ), all pairons are in the ordered SC ground state, with energy E P G -β c . In this zero temperature transformation, the virtual work W needed to disorder the system is β c : Since the disorder is characterised by the variance of the distribution, one should have W ∝ σ 2 . Thus, we obtain In this view, the condensation is a new type of disorder to order transition, independent of the other degrees of freedom. In spite of the complex excitations, Bose excitations and quasiparticle fermionic excitations, and magnetic degrees of freedom, the underlying topological constraints define the fundamental mechanism. We now focus on the interplay between the pseudogap and the superconducting phase in cuprate. The pseudogap line is given by T * ∝ (1 -4p), which translates to ∼ (1-p ) in the pairon sublattice, and that the condensation energy is β c ∼ p (1-p ). Furthermore, the statistical calculation described above leads the two relations : where λ has the dimension of temperature. The true doping value is given by the linear tranformation p = p min + (p max -p min ) × p . To proceed, we now compare in Fig. The binomial law provides a simple explanation for the maximum T c obtainable, which occurs at half-filling, p = 1/2. Indeed, at this concentration the fluctuation amplitude, measured by σ 2 , is a maximum. At this optimum concentration, we see the topological constraint that T * is exactly twice T c . These fundamental relations illustrate that the pseudogap and superconductivity are completely linked and arise from the same physical phenomenon, for the entire doping range. The geometry of the dome and the tangent line are not arbitrary but determined by the statistics of pairons randomly distributed on a square lattice. A direct consequence is that both T * and T c are proportional to the same energy scale, which we identify as the magnetic exchange energy J. In this article, we propose that key aspects of the phase diagram of cuprates are governed by the topological properties of the doped antiferromagnetic insulator on a square lattice. Bound pairs of holes are formed due to the local antiferromagnetic environnement and condense in the superconducting state in a disorder to order transition. The condensation is driven by a new mechanism and is directly related to the amount of disorder in the non SC pseudogap state. Thus the simple binomial pairon distribution explains the T c -dome as well as the pseudogap line. We show that the cuprate SC state, a spatially correlated quantum state of pairons, is intimately connected to the disordered pseudogap state -in our view they appear as indissociable phenomena.