We demonstrate direct probing of strong magnon-photon coupling using Brillouin light scattering spectroscopy in a planar geometry. The magnonic hybrid system comprises a split-ring resonator loaded with epitaxial yttrium iron garnet thin films of 200 nm and 2.46 μm thickness. The Brillouin light scattering measurements are combined with microwave spectroscopy measurements where both biasing magnetic field and microwave excitation frequency are varied. The cooperativity for the 200 nm-thick YIG films is 4.5, and larger cooperativity of 137.4 is found for the 2.46 μm-thick YIG film. We show that Brillouin light scattering is advantageous for probing the magnonic character of magnon-photon polaritons, while microwave absorption is more sensitive to the photonic character of the hybrid excitation. A miniaturized, planar device design is imperative for the potential integration of magnonic hybrid systems in future coherent information technologies, and our results are a first stepping stone in this regard. Furthermore, successfully detecting the magnonic hybrid excitation by Brillouin light scattering is an essential step for the up-conversion of quantum signals from the optical to the microwave regime in hybrid quantum systems. The emergent properties of hybrid systems are promising for a wide range of quantum information applications. In particular, light-matter interaction has been at the forefront of contemporary studies on hybrid quantum systems. To this end, hybrid magnonic systems based on the coupling of magnons, the elementary excitations of magnetic media, and photons have gained increased attention A critical requirement for coherent information transfer based on magnons is a high cooperativity, which means that the coupling between the two disparate types of excitations, i.e., the photonic and the magnonic subsystems, exceeds the loss rates of either subsystem. This is known as the strong coupling regime in the language of quantum information. In this strong coupling regime, information can be efficiently exchanged, potentially enabling efficient transduction applications. Another prerequisite for large scale quantum information processing and transfer applications is the conversion between optical and microwave frequencies. Previous microwave-tooptical transduction studies based on ferromagnets either employed Brillouin scattering of optical whispering gallery modes by magnetostatic modes Here, we demonstrate coherent microwave-to-optical up-conversion using strong magnon-photon coupling in a split-ring resonator/YIG thin film hybrid circuit. We directly probe the coupling in YIG films of 200 nm and 2.46 μm thickness by conventional and microfocused Brillouin light scattering (BLS) spectroscopy and compare these optical results to microwave absorption measurements. Clear avoided level crossings are observed evidencing the hybridization of the magnon and microwave photon modes in the strong coupling regime. In addition, we identify contributions of higher order magneto-static surface spin waves. The cooperativity for the 200 nmthick YIG films is 4.5 and 137.4 for the 2.46 μm-thick YIG film. On the one hand, we find that BLS is advantageous for probing the magnonic character of magnonphoton polaritons, while microwave absorption is found to be more sensitive to the photonic character. On the other hand, detecting the magnonic hybrid excitation by Brillouin light scattering demonstrates a coherent conversion of microwave to optical photons. The coherent microwave-to-optical up-conversion process based on the strong magnon-photon coupling is illustrated in Fig. The up-conversion process is realized by two separate sets of measurements: in-plane magnetic field dependent microwave (MW) absorption measurements and BLS (both microfocused and conventional) of RF driven magnetization dynamics. A typical BLS spectrum is shown in Fig. We designed and optimized the SRR via ANSYS HFSS to exhibit a resonance (f 0 ) at 5.1 GHz, which agrees with the experimentally observed result (4.9 GHz) as shown in Fig. We model the photon-magnon hybridization using a coupled two harmonic oscillator model with f ± representing the hybridized mode frequencies: (1) where g eff is the coupling strength, f SRR is the uncoupled SRR resonance, f FMR is the ferromagnetic resonance of YIG that increases as the field is increased and is given by the Kittel formula where γ is the gyromagnetic ratio and M eff is the effective magnetization (see SM). The systematic deviations of the BLS data from the FMR fitting are discussed in the SM. The microwave absorption measurement result of the 2.46 μm-thick YIG film shows a clear avoided crossing which centers at 96 mT, Fig. Using a similar field/frequency sweep range as in the microwave absorption measurements, we probe the magnon-photon hybridized state by microfocused BLS [Fig. BLS's successful detection of the strongly coupled magnon-photon state demonstrates a coherent microwave-to-optical up-conversion based on the scheme shown in Fig. By fitting the experimental data to Eq. ( We compare the microfocused BLS experiments to conventional BLS measurements as is shown in Fig. where d is the thickness of the sample, k = nπ/2l is the spin-wave wavevector, l is the length of the square-shaped sample and n is the mode number with n = 0 being the uniform Kittel mode. γ/2π = 28.2 GHzT -1 and μ 0 M eff = 183.5 mT both of which are obtained from the fitting of the lowest lying mode, Eq. ( While most recent works on strong-magnon photon coupling utilized micrometer-thick-YIG or YIG spheres 