Biconical-type antennas featuring high directivity have been designed, created, and tested in anechoic chamber. Results in the range between 1 and 5 GHz are presented in this article. In particular, two different configurations have been tested, with and without dielectric lenses, both involving rapid prototyping tools (3D printing) for the dielectric and the antenna support. A very high directivity is nowadays demanded by efficient and sustainable point-to-point communications or energy transfer protocols, to avoid releasing energy in neighboring areas and preserve data transfer security. As demonstrated here, special biconical type antennas featuring a 3D printed polylactic acid (PLA) dielectric lens can achieve a good directivity, with a corresponding emission lobe centered around 8.4 degrees, featuring a FWHM of 6.4 degrees. Dielectric lens-free antennas, featuring an unconventional shape, can also achieve a good directivity, with a corresponding emission lobe centered around 10.0 degrees, featuring a FWHM of 14.2 degrees. The preliminary results shown here explore some of the aspects of the vast configuration space (which include fabrication techniques, dielectric materials, conductive supports, etc.) and open the route for further optimization studies. The aim would be to adjust the various degrees of freedom in order to achieve what can be defined as "infinite" directivity. Highly directive antennas are an important tool in all applications where pointto-point communications need to be established. There are several reasons to justify their development, as for example to guarantee secure transmissions, to reduce the impact of electromagnetic fields on neighbouring areas or the interference between spatially distributed components, to increase the sustainability and therefore damp transmission losses in particular when a high power is radiated Biconical antennas have been used ever since in the transmission range between 30 and 200 MHz and their theory is known since the 1950s The results reported in the present paper come from the practical realization of the device proposed and designed in The antenna device is made of two conductive cones, having an angle of π/2 at the vertex, separated by a little gap. These conductors are supplied by an RF signal via a coaxial cable passing through one of the cones. The assembly is embedded in a volume occupied by a linear homogeneous medium, featuring a relative permittivity coefficient ε r > 1, whereas the magnetic permeability coefficient is μ 0 . The shape of the dielectric is designed in order to fulfill specific refraction properties as explained in The dielectric lens-equipped antennas that have been tested, feature a core made by an ensemble of two copper cones and the whole structure embedded in a dielectric, namely polylactic acid (PLA), shaped by a 3D printing process by means of a fused deposition modelling (FDM) machine. We recall that the electric relative permittivity coefficient for PLA is about r ≈ 3.5 A conic reflector (see Figs. The entire biconical antenna is rotated horizontally about the vertex of the reflecting cone as shown in Fig. Figure Figure We are not aware of the impedance properties of the transmitting antennas, therefore we are unable to judge the efficiency of our devices. We believe that this is irrelevant at this stage, since here the primary concern is the direction of propagation of the signal. We have relatively good directivity when, for a given frequency, the patterns tend to be concentrated towards the small angles. For example, both antennas show scarce directivity below 1.5 GHz or above 2.5 GHz, while the intermediate frequency range looks much better. For frequencies above 2.5 GHz a secondary lobe appears. We will provide more explanations of these results in the concluding section 6. A more practical visualization is represented by the polar charts of Fig. Theoretically, the adoption of a dielectric shape where the value ε r > 3.5 (we recall that 3.5 is the relative permittivity of PLA) is overestimated as in Fig. The same results are displayed in the polar plane in Fig. The optimal directivity for the antenna of Type A was found for a frequency of about 4 GHz. The corresponding lobe is centered around 8.4 • , featuring a FWHM of 6.4 • . Concerning the Type B antenna, the best performances are obtained for a frequency of about 3.66 GHz. The corresponding lobe is centered around 11.3 • , featuring a FWHM of 9.9 • . A first explanation of the better performances at higher frequencies is that both the emitting devices are relatively small. The qualitative difference of the outcomes of figures 8 and 10 in the range of frequencies at the intersection (i.e.: 1 GHz to 3 GHz) can be justified by the type of antenna used as a receiver. In particular, the log-periodic antenna is much bulkier than the horn antenna. This affects experiments, since, theoretically, the received should be placed at infinite distance in order to probe high directivity emission patterns. More insight on these issues will be given in section 6. Another set of biconical antennas was tested, using open air instead of the dielectric lens. The copper cones were replaced by two conductors having a complicated shape, so skipping the construction of the dielectric medium. 3D printed antennas were fabricated using insulating materials (antenna of Type C, made of PLA, with a base of 9 cm diameter and a height of 5.2 cm, see Fig. The shapes of these devices were obtained through heuristic arguments, with the help some theoretical considerations that we do not report here. In order to be able to reproduce our experiments we provide the explicit expression of the radius r as a function of z, describing the curved profiles of the two devices. For 0 ≤ z ≤ , we have: where is a scaling parameter and γ = 1.9. Measurements have been done in the same anechoic chamber of the tests of the previous section using the log-periodic receiver and a frequency range between 1.5 GHz and 3 GHz. Figure The signals produced by the new of antennas here presented are well described in cylindrical coordinates (r, φ, z) by the expression: where c is the speed of light, E and B are the electric and magnetic fields respectively, and the function f is (almost) arbitrary. In particular, we can assign f in such a way it is globally continuous and zero outside a prescribed domain. Like in Fig. The wave described in ( Here f could be allowed to be only different from zero in the circular annulus determined by 0 < θ min < θ max < π/2. When θ min and θ max are small, we get a conical wave with a very reduced aperture. We remark that very few of the above examples are included in the solutions space of Maxwell's equation in vacuum. Indeed, note that in general we have divE = 0. For example, in (1) we can only have divE = 0 when f (r) = 1/r. This last situation is compatible with a wave traveling in a coaxial cable in conditions of perfect conductivity. It is however necessary to drop the equation divE = 0 if we want to simulate a similar behavior in free space. This a consequence of the vanishing boundary conditions to be imposed to the transverse electric field along the transition zone between the wave itself and the open space (i.e. outside the cylinder of Fig. A quick check of these statements can be done in the case of a scalar wave eqwuation in Cartesian coordinates. We look for a solution of the type u(x, y, z, t) = f (x, y)g(ct ± z), which is traveling along the z-axis. Here g is arbitrary and modulates the signal in the direction of propagation. We have: Therefore f turns out to be harmonic as a function of the variables x and y. Since f is required to vanish outside a bounded 2-D domain, then the only possibility is that f ≡ 0 (in fact, we have an elliptic problem with zero righthand side and zero boundary conditions). Note also that the equation E = 0 is obtained under the assumption that divE = 0. Indeed, we have: Let us observe instead that it is always possible to arrange the distribution of the fields in such a way that divB = 0. We just saw above that the solutions of the wave equation are very few. Hence, a spectrum of possible solutions is brought by admitting the possibility that divE = 0 in suitable regions of space. As a final remark, we may observe that the set of Maxwell's equations in vacuum amounts to eight equations (two vector equations plus two scalar ones) with six unknowns (the components of the electric and magnetic fields), so that an incompatibility is expected. The possibility that divE = 0 may sound unphysical, since there is not presence of charges in vacuum. By the way is very useful from the technical viewpoint, and has been a source of ideas in the development of the device described in this paper. We deduce that the electromagnetic signals measured in the tests performed so far have no representation in the usual context (see Fig. Since the pioneering paper We just mention the version of that model that deals with the so called free-waves, being a complete discussion outside the scopes of the present paper. This reads as follows: where V is a suitable velocity field associated to the flow of energy of an electromagnetic wave. The system admits solutions where the vectors E, B, V form orthogonal triplets. In this way, V is lined up with the Poynting's vector given by E × B. The expression in ( The last observations imply that the revised set of equation is perfectly compatible with the rules of geometrical optics. As a matter of fact, when V is the gradient of a potential Ψ and its intensity is constantly equal to c, we obtain |V| = |∇Ψ| = c, which is the stationary eikonal equation (see We collected here a series of experiments aimed at showing that antennas of extremely high directivity can be actually built. The electromagnetic waves so produced have the property of preserving the topology of the magnetic field during the entire process that goes from the transmission of the signal inside the supplying coax cable up to the emission in open space. Our experiments actually confirm the existence of such waves. Conical type waves are similar to that shown in Fig. The tests we made were based on two different strands. There are in fact experiments where the resonator is composed by opposite cones and the system of the two is embedded in a suitable dielectric lens. As we checked, performances are influenced by the shape of the dielectric medium. There are also documented experiments where the dielectric is absent, and the resonators feature a peculiar shape (see Figure There is in addition a third pathway, which consists of exploring other reflector types. Here we used a conical reflector due to its simplicity of construction. Nevertheless, a parabolic type reflector could work as well (see Fig. We mention some negative effects that should be better investigated. One of them is the design of the area involved in the signal input. The gap between the cones must be as tiny as possible. In the geometries we tested here, the cones were too small to neglect this factor. This choice also forced us to work at higher frequencies, with the consequence of being more exposed to the various imperfections of the prototypes. In addition, the solid printing of the dielectric in PLA, in the case of Type B, took many hours. Therefore, devices of larger size come at a nontrivial cost. When the input frequency is not high enough, the antenna does not resonate in the proper manner. The signal can escape from the edges at the base of the cones, generating unwanted effects. This could be an explanation of the appearance of secondary lobes at lower frequency (the spurious wave is directly radiated, without passing through the dielectric and the reflector). Such a fact is certainly true for the devices of Type C and D, where at certain angles the gap between the conductors is directly visible at naked eye, which implies that there are emitted rays that do not encounter the reflector. Notwithstanding the roughness of our first tests, we are proud to claim that the results are not bad at all. Of course, we may elaborate more complicated situations were all the degrees of freedom (i.e., the shapes of the resonator, the dielectric and the reflector) are taken into consideration. These are the reasons why we are convinced that, one day, antenna devices displaying infinite directivity will become a reality. Pointto-point communications without dispersion can be then set up by using two antennas of the same kind both for transmission and reception.