The iron-based superconductors had a significant impact on condensed matter physics. They have a common structural motif of a two-dimensional square iron lattice and exhibit fruitful physical properties as a strongly correlated electron system. During the extensive investigations, quasi-one-dimensional ironbased spin-ladder compounds attracted much attention as a platform for studying the interplay between magnetic and orbital ordering. In these compounds, BaFe2S3 and BaFe2Se3 were found to exhibit superconductivity under high pressure, having a different crystal and magnetic structure at low temperature. We report a brief review of the iron-based spin-ladder compound and recent studies for BaFe2+δ(S1-xSex)3. BaFe2(S0.75 Se0.25)3 is in the vicinity of the boundary of two different magnetic phases and it is intriguing to perform high pressure experiments for studying superconductivity, since effects of large magnetic fluctuations on superconductivity are expected. The effect of iron stoichiometry on the interplay between magnetism and superconductivity is also studied by changing the iron concentration in BaFe2+δSe3. The iron-based superconductor had a significant impact on condensed matter physics as a strongly correlated electron system based on the two-dimensional square iron lattice and exhibits characteristic magnetic phases next to the superconducting phase. These compounds triggered the extensive studies in the interplay between magnetism, orbital ordering, and superconductivity as a new material platform for further exploration of high-TC superconductors Figure The crystal structure under high pressure of BaFe2S3 was obtained by X-ray diffraction measurements BaFe2Se3 shows the crystal structure of non-centrosymmetric orthorhombic Pmn21 symmetry below 400 K, which means this phase loses spatial inversion symmetry. This phase exhibits a multiferroic property, which was confirmed by second-harmonic generation experiments 1.4. Spin-Ladder Compound BaFe2(S1-xSex)3 In the previous section, we indicate that BaFe2S3 and BaFe2Se3 exhibit pressure-induced superconductivity with a different electronic and magnetic state since these compounds show a different crystal and magnetic structure. BaFe2(S1-xSex)3 is regarded as a bandwidth-control system We study a BaFe2(S1-xSex)3 system to elucidate the interplay between magnetic and orbital ordering, and superconductivity under high pressure, and focus on the x ~ 0.23 composition close to the magnetic phase boundary. At the magnetic phase boundary where the TN is already decreased at the ambient pressure, the appearance of superconductivity is expected because novel superconductivity is often observed at a quantum critical point in the strongly correlated electron systems. In BaFe2S3, TN of stripe-type magnetic ordering shows a significant dependence on the synthesis condition, in which the TN values of 119-124 K was obtained. Moreover, Tc changes with similar trend to the value of TN. We therefore study the δ dependence of Tc and TN in BaFe2+δSe3 to examine the effect of the stoichiometry on the pressure-induced superconductivity. We examine the existence or absence of pressure-induced superconductivity in BaFe2+δSe3 above 30 GPa, based on the theoretical calculation. Single crystals of BaFe2(S1-xSex)3 (x = 0.25) and BaFe2+δSe3 (δ = 0, 0.1, and 0.2) were synthesized by the slow cooling method The sample chamber was filled with powdered NaCl as the pressure-transmitting medium, using a rhenium gasket. Thin (10 μm thick) platinum ribbons were used as leads for the standard dc four-probe analysis. Each rectangular sample was 0.1 × 0.1 mm and 0.03 mm thick. A thin BN layer acted as electric insulation between the leads and the rhenium gasket and finely ground ruby powder scattered in the sample chamber was used to determine the pressure by the standard ruby fluorescence method. As shown in Figure We performed electrical resistance measurements under high pressure for three BaFe2Se3 samples. Figure Figure In this study, we have performed electrical resistivity measurements for single crystalline iron-based spin-ladder compounds BaFe2(S0.75Se0.25)3 and BaFe2+δSe3 (δ = 0, 0.1, and 0.2). We studied the superconductivity for the composition in the vicinity of the phase boundary between stripe-type and block-type magnetic ordering in BaFe2(S1-xSex)3. The superconductivity can be detected as a small decrease of resistance at ~10 K in the pressure range of 10-12 GPa. However, the Tc of ~ 10 K is slightly smaller than BaFe2S3 and BaFe2Se3, and the superconductivity appears in the limited pressure range of 10-12 GPa. This is likely because some amount of stripe-type magnetic ordering remains under the pressure where the superconductivity is observed. We confirmed the superconductivity of BaFe2Se3 at 11 K and 11.5 GPa as with the preceding report 