(Dated: 14 February 2022) We present a hybrid microwave SQUID multiplexer that combines two frequency-division multiplexing techniques to allow multiplexing a given number of cryogenic detectors with only a fraction of frequency encoding resonators. Similar to conventional microwave SQUID multiplexing, our multiplexer relies on inductively coupling non-hysteretic, unshunted rf-SQUIDs to superconducting microwave resonators as well as applying flux ramp modulation for output signal linearization. However, instead of utilizing one resonator per SQUID, we couple multiple SQUIDs to a common readout resonator and encode the SQUID input signals in sidebands of the microwave carrier by varying the flux ramp modulation frequency for each SQUID. We prove the suitability of our approach using a prototype device and argue by means of fundamental information theory that our approach is particularly suited for reading out large cryogenic bolometer arrays. Cryogenic detectors such as superconducting transition edge sensors 1,2 (TESs) or magnetic microcalorimeters Existing SQUID multiplexers rely on time-division The channel capacity of the transmission line ultimately limits the number of detectors than can be simultaneously read out using a single μMUX For conventional μMUXs (see Fig. In contrast, our hybrid microwave SQUID multiplexer (HμMUX, see Fig. For proving the suitability of our approach, we designed, fabricated and characterized a non-optimized HμMUX prototype that is based on lumped-element microwave resonators, each being formed by a meandershaped inductor L, an interdigital capacitor C as well as a load inductor L T connected in series (see Fig. Each rf-SQUID forms a gradiometer to minimize the influence of external disturbances emerging from background magnetic fields and is coupled to in total three coils, i.e. the load inductor L T for coupling the SQUID to the resonator, the input coil L in to couple the signal into the SQUID loop, and the common flux ramp modulation coil L mod . For varying the mutual inductances M mod among the SQUIDs that are coupled to the same microwave resonator, we connect locally superconducting inductances L par,i in parallel to the modulation coil (see Fig. We mounted the fabricated prototype multiplexer on a custom-made sample holder, connected the chip electrically to a custom printed circuit board using ultrasonic wedge bonds and immersed the setup into a liquid helium transport dewar. Due to space constraints within the measuring dipstick, we couldn't use a cryogenic HEMT amplifier for boosting the multiplexer output signal. We used instead two room-temperature microwave amplifiers. For basic device characterization, we used a vector network analyzer in combination with an arbitrary waveform generator injecting a static flux or flux ramp signal into the modulation line. For multiplexing demonstration, we used our custom SDR based readout electronics Fig. The signal bandwidth per readout channel, the multiplexing factor, i.e. the number of readout channels that can be simultaneously read out using a single transmission line, as well as the achievable noise level are three key figures of merit that benchmark any cryogenic multiplexer. To check for these benchmarks, we consider a single readout resonator to which N non-hysteretic rf-SQUIDs are coupled. To minimize crosstalk, we must ensure that different carrier frequencies aren't multiples of each other. Since the ramp repetition rate f ramp is identical for all SQUIDs, the modulation frequency f mod,i = A mod,i f ramp can only be varied by changing the modulation amplitude A mod,i according to with A mod,i ∈ N. For simplicity, we assume that each ramp segment is fully used for phase reconstruction, i.e. we neglect that in real applications the data stream is typically truncated to remove transients etc The signal bandwidth is limited by the modulation frequency of the SQUID with the largest modulation amplitude for which we yield according to the previous discussion the relation f max mod = f mod,N = (2N -1) f ramp . We usually want to maximize f ramp to yield a high sampling rate of the signal. We therefore fix f max mod = f lim ∝ ∆f BW . Here, ∆f BW denotes the bandwidth of the readout resonator. We introduce the density of SQUIDs in frequency space ρ SQ = N SQ /∆f tot = N/ (∆n opt ∆f BW ), where ∆f tot is the full bandwidth available that is usually limited by cryogenic amplifiers used to boost the tiny multiplexer output signals. Moreover, N SQ is the total number of SQUIDs of all multiplexer channels that can be read out using a single feedline and ∆n opt denotes a guard factor ensuring that the spacing between neighboring resonators is sufficiently large to minimize interchannel crosstalk. This yields the result from which we immediately conclude: We aim for maximizing the product f ramp ρ SQ to yield a large density of SQUIDs as well as a high signal sampling rate. From Eq. ( In addition to the bandwidth penalty, hybrid microwave SQUID multiplexing possesses another disadvantage with respect to noise caused by the cryogenic amplifier chain. The flux-to-voltage transfer coefficient determines the effective flux noise in the i-th SQUID that is caused by the cryogenic amplifier chain. Here, ∆f max,i res denotes the maximum resonance frequency shift caused by the i-th SQUID and P exc is the power of the resonator probing signal. Flux ramp modulation works best if the resonator bandwidth ∆f BW equals the total resonance frequency modulation amplitude ∆f max,tot res = ∆f max,i res . Assuming that all SQUIDs have the same modulation amplitude ∆f max,i res , we hence yield For applications requiring a large number of readout channels, the total readout power P exc,tot = N res P exc is limited by the saturation power of the HEMT amplifier rather than the optimal readout power for each channel. With hybrid SQUID multiplexing, the number of resonators N res required to read out a fixed number of SQUIDs is decreased by a factor of N . If the overall readout power P exc,tot is kept constant, this allows increasing the readout power per channel P exc accordingly. For this reason, the total penalty to the flux noise per channel caused by the HEMT is given by S Φ,HEMT,i = N SΦ,HEMT Here, if SΦ,HEMT is apparent HEMT related flux noise of a single readout channel of a conventional microwave SQUID multiplexer with the corresponding set of deviceand readout parameters. Our simple discussion predicts a penalty in both, the maximum readout channel density as well as the apparent flux noise of a single readout channel of a hybrid SQUID multiplexer as compared to a conventional microwave SQUID multiplexer. We would hence have to doubt whether hybrid microwave SQUID multiplexing is a useful technique for the readout of cryogenic detector arrays. However, there are strong benefits regarding the fabrication of actual devices. If a microwave SQUID multiplexer is used to read out detectors with a small signal bandwidth, e.g. for bolometric applications, the channel capacity of the feedline allows for the simultaneous readout of a tremendous number of detectors In conclusion, we have presented a hybrid microwave SQUID multiplexer combining two frequency-division multiplexing techniques to allow multiplexing a given number of cryogenic detectors or other low-impedance signal sources with only a fraction of readout resonators used for frequency encoding. It relies on the combination of conventional microwave SQUID multiplexing and flux ramp modulation based cryogenic SQUID multiplexing and provides a rather easy way to more efficiently use the channel capacity of a microwave transmission line. However, due to inherent penalties with respect to the maximum readout channel density as well as the apparent flux noise of a single readout channel, our approach turns out to most useful when fabrication accuracy becomes the limiting factor for increasing the channel count within a microwave SQUID multiplexer. For this reason, our approach is particularly suited for bolometric applications requiring a huge number of small-bandwidth cryogenic detectors.