Color-center defects in silicon carbide promise opto-electronic quantum applications in several fields, such as computing, sensing and communication. In order to scale down and combine these functionalities with the existing silicon device platforms, it is crucial to consider SiC integrated optics. In recent years many examples of SiC photonic platforms have been shown, like photonic crystal cavities, film-on-insulator waveguides and micro-ring resonators. However, all these examples rely on separating thin films of SiC from substrate wafers. This introduces significant surface roughness, strain and defects in the material, which greatly affects the homogeneity of the optical properties of color centers. Here we present and test a method for fabricating monolithic single-crystal integrated-photonic devices in SiC: tuning optical properties via charge carrier concentration. We fabricated monolithic SiC n-i-n and p-i-n junctions where the intrinsic layer acts as waveguide core, and demonstrate the waveguide functionality for these samples. The propagation losses are below 14 dB/cm. These waveguide types allow for addressing color-centers over a broad wavelength range with low strain-induced inhomogeneity of the optical-transition frequencies. Furthermore, we expect that our findings open the road to fabricating waveguides and devices based on p-i-n junctions, which will allow for integrated electrostatic and radio frequency (RF) control together with high-intensity optical control of defects in silicon carbide. In recent years silicon carbide has gained interest for quantum technology applications in fields like communication Though many examples exist of amorphous SiC waveguides Inspired by recent studies on color-center defects in silicon carbide, showing combined electrical and optical control of color-center defects in silicon carbide for quantum technologies in p-i-n junctions In this work we show how junctions from layers with alternating doping concentration can be engineered into single-mode optical waveguides. We fabricated n-i-n and p-i-n junction planar structures in 4H-SiC as a proof of concept. These devices can be engineered to confine any preferred number of waveguide modes. Notably, the number of allowed modes, as well as their field distribution, is independent of wavelength for a very wide range, as long as the associated optical frequency is above the plasma frequency. We demonstrate these broadband properties (for 700 to 1290 nm light) of the n-i-n singlemode waveguides with a core thickness of 4 μm and cladding doping concentration up to 10 19 cm -3 , and we present consistent results for p-i-n waveguides. Our findings indicate that it is possible to have electrostatic and RF control for SiC color centers in the core layer of n-i-n and p-i-n structures by the (AC) Stark effect According to the Drude model, a plasma of free charge carriers reduces the refractive index where N is the concentration of free charge carriers with effective mass m * , e is the elementary charge, ε 0 is the vacuum permittivity, c the speed of light in vacuum, n 0 the refractive index of the undoped host material and λ 0 the vacuum wavelength for which we evaluate the refractive index. Increasing the free-carrier concentration N will thus decrease the refractive index for 4H-SiC The n-i-n planar waveguide samples used in this research are grown on an n ++ 4H-SiC substrate (8 × 10 18 cm -3 ). Using epitaxial chemical vapor deposition growth in which the nitrogen concentration for n-type doping could be controlled, first a 4 μm layer of minimally doped (10 14 cm -3 ) SiC is grown as the waveguide core. Next, a highly doped layer (10 19 cm -3 ) of 2 μm is deposited on top to serve as cladding. The material was then cleaved along the [1 100] direction and its orthogonal to yield several samples of 3.2 and 6.9 mm length with very smooth facets. The p-i-n planar waveguides were produced in a similar way, where aluminum is used for the highly p-doped layer. A minimally doped layer (5×10 14 cm -3 ) of 4.1 μm thickness is deposited on top of a highly n-doped 4H-SiC substrate (5 × 10 18 cm -3 ), after which a layer with a highly p-doped layer (2 × 10 19 cm -3 ) of 2 μm thickness is deposited on top of the intrinsic layer. Also this sample was cleaved along the [1 100] direction and its orthogonal, yielding samples of 2.8 and 5 mm length. Facets with rough edges were polished to improve the surface quality. According to Eq. (1) the step in index of refraction between the core and cladding is ∆n ≈ 3 × 10 -3 for 800 nm TE polarized light, where it is assumed that each n-dopant donates one electron to the conduction band or donates one hole to the valence band in the case of the p ++ doped cladding layer. With this knowledge we can predict the electric field distribution for the optical modes. The expected field distributions for TE and TM modes in the n-i-n junction are shown in Fig. To investigate the waveguide functionality, we evaluate the transmission and confinement of a single-mode laser beam through the sample. For this purpose we used a 700-1000 nm tunable CW Ti:Sapphire laser, and tunable diode lasers for use around 1100 and 1300 nm. For initial testing we focused an 800 nm beam to a diameter of 4 μm and aligned it to the waveguide layer using a stepper-motor controlled six-axis stage. Figure We further study the mode matching and coupling efficiency by measuring the transmission versus focusinglens position (for the focal point near the input facet). fiber attached to a six-axis stage feeds a wavelengthtunable laser to the setup. On the stage the laser beam with 1.2 mm diameter is polarized and focused by an aspheric lens with 4.5 mm focal length. By scanning the position of the stage, the focal point of the laser can be scanned along the input facet of sample. The transmission is captured by a photodetector and a camera focused at the end facet of the sample. We repeat these scans for several wavelengths in order to study the wavelength dependence of the mode matching. Figure Figure with E b the complex electric field of the laser beam and E m the electric field for the waveguide mode. These electric-field terms were determined based on the experimental-setup parameters and the predicted waveguide mode from Fig. We obtained a rough indication for the propagation losses by comparing the transmission at optimal coupling for n-i-n and p-i-n samples of varied lengths (3.2 and 6.9 mm, and 2.8 and 5 mm respectively). We found that for both TE and TM polarization the propagation losses must be below 14 dB/cm in the 700 -1000 nm wavelength range. We expect that a part of these losses is due to free-carrier (intraband) absorption in the highly doped layers around the core, where around 25% of the electric field is present. Other mechanisms are surface scattering and losses due to imperfections in the setup, such incomplete collection of the light due to beam divergence inside the planar waveguide. To what extent each of these mechanisms contribute will be tested better in future work where these materials are processed into elongated one-dimensional waveguides. In this research we have studied the feasibility of using strong doping of 4H-SiC for realizing cladding layers around a (near) intrinsic 4H-SiC optical waveguide core. This provides a path to waveguides in single-crystal highpurity 4H-SiC material. We fabricated monolithic planar waveguides that allow for broadband single-mode operation. We found as a rough upper bound for the propagation losses 14 dB/cm, which is low enough for on-chip applications. At a typical on-chip length scale of 100 μm less than 3.2% of the optical intensity will then be dissipated. As follow-up we propose to process and test actual one-dimensional photonic channels from these materials, and to engineer n-i-n or p-i-n junction waveguide with color-center defects in the waveguide core (such as divacancies or vanadium impurities See the supplementary material for video data that supports Fig. Reflection angle θ m The reflection angle θ m for the mode m (where m = 0 is the lowest order mode) can be found using the mentioned self-consistency condition where the wave should reproduce itself every second reflection. For a dielectric waveguide, this condition is where λ 0 is the vacuum wavelength, n core the refractive index for the waveguide core, d the thickness of the core, and φ clad(sub) is the phase that is accumulated upon reflection from the cladding (substrate) interface. The latter be found by solving the boundary value problem for the electromagnetic field at the core-cladding and coresubstrate interfaces. For TE polarization it becomes with θ c,clad(sub) the critical angle for total internal reflection on the cladding (substrate). Figure In fact, for the doping concentrations mentioned in the main text, this will be a single-mode waveguide for all wavelengths 32 . This is because the complement of the critical angle θc scales linearly with wavelength in the small-angle approximation for θc and binomial approximation for ∆n. The critical angle becomes cos θc = n core + ∆n n core , Therefore, the slower phase accumulation (Eq. (A14)) at larger wavelengths is near-perfectly compensated by an increased θc . 