First principles calculations through density functional theory (DFT)+U method were performed to assess the effect of Li interstitial doping on the optoelectronic properties of NiO and of cubic, hexagonal, and monoclinic WO 3 . The implications on the structural and electronic properties and their relationship with the optical properties, such as dielectric response and absorption coefficient in the context of electrochromism, are discussed. Li interstitial doping (i.e., electron doping) turns these materials metallic-like even for low Li concentration (x < 0.083). In metallic-like materials, optical properties are largely influenced by intraband transitions. Compared to NiO, Li-doped NiO shows larger absorption in the visible region while, with respect to WO 3 , Li-doped WO 3 exhibits an increment in absorption in the whole spectrum, particularly, in the infrared region. These results help to understand the changes in optical properties observed in electrochromic devices based on these materials. Electrochromic materials change their optical properties by insertion/extraction of charges. These changes can be used to develop electrochromic devices (ECD) with diverse applications such as touch screens, sunglasses, smart windows, among others The electrochromic layers can be composed of viologens, conducting polymers, metal coordination complexes, or transition metal oxides (TMO) The improvements in the development of ECD have been mainly based on heuristic methodologies and a myriad of clever ideas On the other hand, NiO is a typical strongly correlated material that has been extensively studied in the literature both theoretically and experimentally To fill these theoretical gaps we perform ab-initio calculations based on DFT for monoclinic WO 3 and NiO with and without Li insertion and compare our results with the cubic and hexagonal phases of WO 3 . Both the density of states and band structure are computed in the context of the DFT+U approximation. To assess the influence of Li insertion on the optical properties of these systems, the dielectric function and absorption coefficient are reckoned. We found that Li insertion not only expands the unit cells but also transforms the materials from a semiconductor to a metallic-like material. Absorption of the undoped systems is enhanced in the infrared and visible regions by Li insertion due to intraband transitions. We think that the findings of this research are valuable for a better understanding of electrochromism that can be helpful for the design of ECD. For the purpose of this research, the article is organized as follows. In section 2, the outline of the theoretical methodology is given. Section 3 describes the results of the electronic structure through the spin-polarized density of states and band structure, and discusses the optical properties; paying special attention to the dielectric tensor and the absorption coefficient. In section 4 we give our conclusions. NiO can crystallize in rhombohedral, monoclinic, and cubic structures Intercalation of alkali metals in TMO leads to complicated structural transitions that largely depend on the dopant concentration x. For instance, during Li insertion in WO 3 , the cell expands, while, during Li extraction, the cell contracts. It has been reported that for x > 0.1, Li x WO 3 undergoes a sequence of structural transitions, namely: monoclinic→tetragonal→cubic Calculations are carried out within the context of DFT using the full-potential linearized augmented plane wave plus localized orbitals (FP-LAPW+lo) method as implemented in wien2k code For the expansion of the basis set, we set the product Table The larger cavities for the cubic and monoclinic phases of WO 3 are found at the center of the cell and at the center of the six faces. The hexagonal structure can host large metal atoms in hexagonal and trigonal cavities. For the sake of analysis, we carry out the calculations placing the Li atom in only one of the several large cavities for each system (note that the values reported are those after optimization). In the case of LiNiO, the Li atom is placed at (0, 0, 0.0975) in the rhombohedral cell. For the cubic phase of LiWO 3 the atom is incorporated at the center of one of the supercell units at (0.2499, 1/4, 1/2). For the hexagonal phase of LiWO 3 we used a trigonal cavity in the plane of the apical oxygen atoms at (0.3321, 0.6679, 1/2). In the case of the monoclinic phase of LiWO 3 , the dopant is located at the center of the cell (see Figure The understanding of the optical properties is vital for the development of absorbing and reflective electrochromic devices. We have used the electronic structure calculations to compute the complex dielectric tensor ε ij and the absorption coefficient α, using the program optic implemented in the wien2k code. The theory departs from the Linhard dielectric function in the random phase approxi-mation where Φ(q) = 4πe 2 q 2 is the Coulomb interaction, q is the wavenumber vector, ω is the angular frequency, Ω c the unit cell volume, f l the Fermi distribution function, k the single particle energy and is the reduced Planck constant. The 2 comes from the summation over spins. The dielectric function in the lattice space becomes a complex symmetric tensor ε ij (ω) with contributions from both intraband and interband transitions (It is stressed that in this theory only direct transitions are taken into account). From the imaginary part [ε 2 (ω)] the corresponding real part [ε 1 (ω)] can be obtained by the Kramers-Kronig relations where P indicates the principal part of the integral. With this information one can compute all other optical properties. The reflectivity at normal incidence is given by with n and k being the real and imaginary part of the complex refractive index (ñ=n+ik) whose components are the refractive index and extinction coefficient given by: The absorption coefficient is related to the extinction coefficient by the following relation: This parameter plays a key role in understanding the relationship between the electronic structure and the optical properties as we discuss below. Lastly, the effective number of electrons per atom N ef f partaking in the absorption process as a function of energy can be determined from the following sum rule: To check structure stability, the formation energies per atom for the doped systems are reckoned. The results for LiNiO, cubic, hexagonal, and monoclinic LiWO 3 are: -13.255 eV, -9.375 eV, -3.733 eV, and -5.398 eV, respectively. These findings indicate that all structures are stable. We stress that small variations in position of the dopant atom do not affect significantly the energy of formation. Table The electrochromic properties in ECD are determined by the transport and optical properties of the electrochromic material NiO is considered a classical Mott insulator with localized 3d electrons causing strong correlation effects. It can be hole doped for instance through substitutional doping or Ni deficiency and it can be electron doped by interstitial doping usually with an alkali metal. Figure The band structure of both NiO and LiNiO for majority (up) and minority (dn) spin channels is shown in Figure In Figure Upon Li insertion all systems display a metallic character, the spectrum changes drastically shifting the Fermi level to the CB and slightly reducing the size of the band gap: an effect known as Burstein-Moss shift. This effect is typical of degenerate n-type semiconductors when the doping level is high such that the semiconductor turns into a metal. Incidentally, there is no symmetry breaking between spin up and spin down channels. At this point it is worth making a crucial clarification that will be useful for our future discussion. In semiconductors the denotations VB and CB are well understood but in metals this terminology is not appropriate since the Fermi level is in the CB which has become a partially filled band. Following the work of Xu et al. The band structure for WO 3 and LiWO 3 is presented in Figure Insertion of Li modifies the band distribution and a considerable amount of new states emerge around the Fermi level. The B -1 is flat and the band gaps slightly narrow. Similar to the case of LiNiO, this is due to the fact that the 2s level of atomic lithium is higher in energy than the 5d level of atomic tungsten. The optical response of materials to electromagnetic radiation is embedded in the dielectric tensor ε ij (ω) which contains contributions from inter and intraband transitions. This tensor is symmetric with 6 independent components; the number of independent components depends on the symmetry under consideration. Cubic structures are highly symmetric and isotropic and only one component is independent. For the hexagonal symmetry only diagonal components appear; and for the monoclinic one the non-diagonal components can also be present Figure Having analyzed the dielectric function we now discuss its relationship with the absorption coefficient. According to section 2.2 the dielectric function is related to the absorption coefficient through Equation ( The absorption coefficient and the band gap are related by the well known Tauc's relation where A is an energy independent constant, E the photon energy and η is a power factor of the transition mode whose possible values are 1 2 , 2, 3 2 , and 3 for direct allowed, indirect allowed, direct forbidden, and indirect forbidden transition, respectively. According to the band structure calculations, the value of η is 1/2 for monoclinic WO 3 and 2 for the other systems. Indirect transitions require the participation of phonons, so, it is expected that direct transitions dominate the absorption process. For the doped systems the situation is quite different. According to the DOS of LiWO 3 , interband transitions are likely to occur from the B -1 to the PFCB and from the PFCB to the B 1 . In all cases, due to the Burstein-Moss shift, these transitions can only occur for photon energies larger than 2 eV. Figure For LiNiO the intricate nature of the band structure makes the absorption analysis more complicated due to the asymmetry in the band structure for both spin channels. Each spin channel makes asymmetric contributions to the absorption from both intra and interband transitions that makes difficult an accurate quantification. However, general trends can be drawn. In Figure Lastly, Figure We have explored from first principles calculations using the DFT+U method the electronic and optical properties of Li-doped NiO and Li-doped WO 3 ; the latter for three symmetries: cubic, hexagonal and monoclinic. The results showed that the CB for the corresponding pure systems is mainly dominated by Ni 3d and W 5d states whereas the VB has O 2p character. When Li is incorporated the Fermi level shifts to higher energies turning NiO a half-metallic semimetal and WO 3 a metal for the three symmetries. It is concluded that Li interstitial doping injects electrons to the system, driving the material to a metallic character, even for low concentrations of less than 8.3%. It is found that monoclinic WO 3 exhibits a direct band gap, while the rest of the systems an indirect one. The nature of this gap in monoclinic WO 3 is still controversial and more detail experimental data are required keeping in mind not only its polymorphism at room temperature but also its anisotropic nature. Regarding the dielectric response, the onset of the imaginary part of the ε yy component for the pristine structures is first present for the hexagonal, then cubic, monoclinic and lastly for NiO in association with the magnitude of their band gap, an indication that interband transitions have the major contribution in the visible and ultraviolet regions. The hexagonal phase of pure WO 3 gives the maximum absorption in most of the energy interval, followed by cubic, monoclinic and NiO. It is demonstrated that, compared to the undoped systems, doping WO 3 with Li has the effect of increasing the absorption in the far-and mid-infrared regions while for LiNiO the effect is in the near-infrared and visible regions. LiNiO presents low absorption in the infrared region and a broad feature in the visible region attributed to intraband transitions. These findings shed light on the changes of the optical properties of both WO 3 and NiO with Li intercalation and can be of great interest for the designed of optimized ECD. Israel Perez: Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Validation, Visualization, Writing -original draft, Project Administration, Supervision, Funding Acquisition. Juan Carlos Martínez Faudoa: Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Software. Juan Ruben Abenuz Acuña: Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Software. Jose Trinidad Elizalde Galindo: Supervision, Project Administration, Funding Acquisition.