The development of green, biodegradable electronics that degrade soon after their function is accomplished is a significant contribution to healthcare where edible electronics can be used for diagnosis. An important component of such systems is a resonator. Here we present the design and development of inductor-capacitor (LC) circuits based on a form of sugar called isomalt. Using its low roughness and mechanical properties, we demonstrate resonators that use capacitors, planar inductors, helical inductors and inductors with an edible core, all fabricated from isomalt. The recent years have seen an increase in the development of electronics on flexible and non-planar substrates One sector of application of flexible electronics has been in the space of healthcare With these possibilities in mind, in this work we discuss the development of electronics on isomalt substrates, which is a form of sugar. More specifically, we discuss the design of inductors, capacitors and passive resonators with the goal of developing oscillators and communication circuits. The toxicity limit of all materials used is well below thresholds for a child. From the materials perspective, there exist several environmentally friendly options for use as a substrate for electronic devices, e.g. cellulose, collagen, chitin etc. In this work we explore the use of two forms of sugar called isomalt and sugarin both of which are commonly used for baking. Isomalt is a sugar substitute that is commonly available as an odorless, white, crystalline powder with reasonably low hygroscopicity. At high temperatures, isomalt becomes viscoelastic and can be molded. Although widely used in sugar art and as an artificial sweetener, its scientific application was explored by the development of monolithic multilayer micro fluidics via sacrificial molding of 3D printed isomalt for the preparation of isomalt substrates is shown in Fig. Both isomalt and isomalt-sugarin substrates were vacuum compatible with low outgassing rate up to 10 -5 mbar and suitable for metallization via dc magnetron sputtering. Patterning was achieved by the use of stainless steel shadow masks that achieved a spatial resolution of 100 m. The surface roughness after 150 nm thick silver metallization on isomalt-sugarin substrates via dc magnetron sputtering was found to be 10 nm to 20 nm (Fig. Flexural strength measurements of isomalt substrates (2 cm diameter and 1mm thickness) at room temperature are shown in Fig. of isomalt substrates, showed 70% transmittance for a 500 m thick sample at a wavelength of 550 nm (Fig. Inductors on Isomalt-Sugarin substrates were constructed using three techniquesfirst as an in-plane 2dimensional (2-D) coil on the isomalt-sugarin substrate, second by metal deposition on a sculpted 3-D isomalt spiral and third as a spiral metal deposition on an iron embedded isomalt core. The first architecture for inductors was planar (2-D) Ag square coil with 6 turn, 1000 m width and gap, 1 inch outer diameter (Fig. Taking advantage of the mechanics of isomalt, 3-D sculpted coil inductors were constructed by drawing isomalt from a melt using capillary forces. The melt was spooled into a helical wire onto a glass rod that was simultaneously rotated and translated. After cooling to room temperature the spool was coated with sugarin followed by Ag metallization (Fig. Core. The ferrite core used in Fig. Parallel plate capacitors were designed with 100 nm Ag as top and bottom electrode and spin-coated sugarin as dielectric (relative dielectric constant 1.6). Typical dielectric thickness (± 20\% error) as a function of spin coating speed is shown in Fig. LC circuits with resonant frequency close to 13.5 MHz using isomalt and sugarin were demonstrated. The fabrication of isomalt-sugarin substrates, inductors, capacitors and their integration was discussed.