Two recent experiments in lightly doped strontium titanate have shown that the superconducting critical temperature remains constant in a range of carrier concentrations covering almost three orders of magnitude. The importance of this phenomenon, hereby dubbed a superconducting plateau, is comparable to the celebrated superconducting dome. The dramatic empirical evidence impose severe constraints on any proposal for a superconducting mechanism at low doping. We analyze the experimental results to see what type of theoretical models can be suitable in this regime. We show that the low critical current, absence of diamagnetic screening and the high critical field are all related to the small momentum of the carriers, which is expected at low densities. We quantify the dependency of the critical temperature on density by introducing the "density exponent". We discuss the role of a quantum critical point in the formation of a plateau and comment on the need for more experimental data. Superconductivity in low doping systems, and in particular strontium titanate(STO), is a standing mystery for more than half a century A widely celebrated feature arising from the dependency T c on the level of doping is the superconducting dome. The superconducting plateau shares some of the properties that made the dome such a prolific phenomenon for physics research. First, it is a distinct qualitative feature. While the numeric value of T c or the particular level of doping where it starts/ends might vary, the marked shape can be easily recognized. Second, it sets a heavy burden on theoretical models. The conflict with the excepted behavior, based on conventional theories, together with irrefutable experimental evidence that cannot be tuned or misinterpreted, imply numerical calculations would not suffice here and a new paradigm must rise. It might also be interesting to note that STO was (one of) the first material where a superconducting dome was observed. One can wonder whether more plateaus might appear if experimentalists would actively search for them. In recent years, the long lasting discussion regarding the superconducting mechanism in STO, has shifted focus. Following early work on the quantum nature of its paraelectric phase A major challenge in the context of low doping superconductivity is the invalidity of the so-called adiabatic approximation, where E F is the Fermi Eenergy and ω c is the typical frequency of the phonons. The challenge is multifaceted with issues concerning technical, physical and phenomenological aspects of the problem. The technical side manifests in the introduction of ω c as a natural cutoff that considerably simplify the derivation. Since it is rather hard to make any analytical progress without this simplification, many authors introduce a cutoff even when there is no clear justification. The physical picture of superconductivity relies often on retardation, where an electron is attracted to the positively charged wake left by another fast electron due to the slow moving ions. In the case of Eq. ( In slow electrons. The model led to bold predictions: at vanishing levels of doping, close to a FE QCP, the critical temperature is independent of the chemical potential, i.e. the superconducting plateau that was observed in Fig. At the higher density side, the plateau ends at the start of the dome, roughly around n 2 * 10 19 cm -3 . It is not clear how long it can stretch into lower densities. One possible boundary is the intersection of E F and T c as beyond this point the carriers do not form a degenerate Fermi Gas. In Let us now comment the relevance of percolation, weaklink, or disorder driven transition to the superconducting dome. In We look now more closely at the results of these experiments and their implications. The first takeaway from the plateau is that one has to abandon the Fermi surface paradigm, or more informally stated, it is not longer true that everything happens on the Fermi surface. Indeed, in elemental metal like iron with E F 10 5 K, it is likely only the electrons closest to the Fermi surface participate in most relevant processes. However, already when we lose the adiabatic approximation (1) we lose justification to neglect electrons from the bottom of the band. Nonetheless, quantities such as the Fermi velocity, Fermi momenta, k F or the density of states at the Fermi surface, play a prominent role in many derivations that refer to non adiabatic scenarios. The vast superconducting plateau aggravate the issue as those quantities vary over orders of magnitude while the critical temperature remain constant. We can demonstrate this point by looking on the estimation of the critical current density j c . In where e is the elementary charge. The derivation of Eq. ( Taking into account 1 2 mv 2 < ∆ (and neglecting p • v) we obtain another estimate which yield the correct order of magnitude. Note that we do not attempt to get a precise quantitative agreement with the measured results. For example, setting in Eq. ( The superconducting dome is often associated with a QCP and in Introducing charge carriers complicates the picture. In a conductor one cannot directly measure the dielectric constant, whose divergence is the most distinct feature of a FE transition. In fact certain definitions of FE do not apply to conducting materials and often in the literature people refer to it as "ferroelectric-like" (FEL). The possible coexistence of superconductivity and FEL was shown in In Fig. According to the model in We attempt to gain further insight into this issue by looking on the dependency of T c on y for different n, as shown in Fig. We have analyzed the recent experimental observation of a superconducting plateau in STO. This remarkable phenomenon opens a new research avenue where theoretical models can be tested experimentally. The experimental observation is a strong support for the model and the assumptions that led to the prediction of the plateau in The general idea is that even above T c there are already superconducting regions and the transition occur when they are sufficiently connected to transfer charge across the sample. From the start we see that the superconducting plateau is in contrast to the usual percolation scenario, which is typically tuned by density, or characteristic length, and not by temperature. Nonetheless, one can still imagine that somehow the connectivity of the regions is controlled by the temperature and not so much by the density of carriers. For this to be the case, we need three conditions to occur: (a) The onset of superconductivity inside the regions at temperature higher than the measured Tc all across the plateau. (b) The properties of the regions, such as size or density, to be largely independent of doping. (c) A strong temperature driven effect that connects the regions at T c . To obtain (a) we should consider T intra c (n), the onset temperature of superconductivity inside the regions. T intra c (n) is unobserved since the regions are unconnected above T c . We still require T intra c (n = 4 * 10 16 cm -3 ) > 60mK since sample with this density become superconducting at this temperate. Now the question is T intra c (n = 10 19 cm -3 ) =?. The usual exponential dependency might give us room temperature. Even the "strong coupling" sub linear dependency T c ∝ E F ∝ n 2/3 would yield a sizable temperature. Alternatively one might argue that carrier density inside the regions is constant due to some clustering in the doping procedure. This is at odds with the experimental observation of a homogeneous Fermi gas. In any case the density of such clusters would vary strongly and it seems unlikely this will have no effect on the measured Tc. It is hard to infer the implication of (b) without a particular model for the appearance of these regions. One would assume they could be described by quantities such as coherence length, penetration depth etc., which typically depend on the density. For example, if one would consider clusters of doping sites, it is hard to imagine that neither the density inside the cluster, nor the density of clusters would be affected by the overall density. To obtain (c) one might postulate a variety of phases or microscopic effects. It is not possible to completely rule out some drastic change in the material, unrelated to the presence of carriers, occurring at T c and connecting the isolated regions. However it seems unlikely that such transformation can only be observed via the onset of superconductivity. Unless the additional effect can be seen independently, we should apply Occam razor and discard it.