The ultrafast dynamics of electrons and collective modes in systems out of equilibrium is crucially governed by the energy transfer from electronic degrees of freedom, where the energy of the pump source is usually absorbed, to lattice degrees of freedom. In conventional metals such process leads to an overall heating of the lattice, usually described by an effective lattice temperature T ph , until final equilibrium with all the degrees of freedom is reached. In specific materials, however, few lattice modes provide a preferential channel for the energy transfer, leading to a non-thermal distribution of vibrations and to the onset of hot phonons, i.e., lattice modes with a much higher population than the other modes. Hot phonons are usually encountered in semiconductors or semimetal compounds, like graphene, where the preferential channel towards hot modes is dictated by the reduced electronic phase space. Following a different path, the possibility of obtaining hot-phonon physics also in metals has been however also recently prompted in literature, as a result of a strong anisotropy of the electron-phonon (el-ph) coupling. In the present paper, taking MgB 2 as a representative example, we review the physical conditions that allow a hot-phonon scenario in metals with anisotropic el-ph coupling, and we discuss the observable fingerprints of hot phonons. Novel perspectives towards the prediction and experimental observation of hot phonons in other metallic compounds are also discussed. After years of steady formidable improvements and refinements, timeresolved spectroscopy, nowadays scaled down to femtosecond resolution, has become one of the major tools for investigating the physical properties and underlying mechanisms of condensed matter Among other degrees of freedom present in a real material, collective lattice vibrations (phonons) play a pivotal role in ultrafast pump-probe dynamics. The energy initially induced into the electronic states by laser pumping is typically transferred to the lattice within few picoseconds, mostly in the form of excitation of phonon modes For many years, the investigation of hot phonons has been focused on semiconductors and semimetals Metals appear at a first glance at odds with such scenario. Large Fermi surfaces can trigger laser-induced particle-hole excitations in a vast part of the Brillouin zone. Electron-phonon scattering, in conventional metals, is also weakly q-momentum dependent, so that a plethora of lattice modes with different momenta q can be effectively excited (Fig. Midway between insulators and metals there are the so-called "bad metals", characterized by finite but poor metallic properties. A particular mention among them goes to high-T c superconducting cuprates, layered materials that display strong anisotropy between the in-plane and out-of-plane features. Even restricting only to the in-plane physics, which is responsible for the Cooper pairing, the metallic character is highly non-trivial, having a very complex phase diagram, including an antiferromagnetic Mott insulator phase at extremely low doping up to a half-filling, a pseudogap phase in the underdoping region, where dynamical/short-range correlations appear in the coupled magnetic-electronic-lattice response, and a more conventional metallic phase in the overdoped regime. Such a rich phase diagram is thought to stem out from the underlying presence of one (or two) critical points associated with magnetic and/or lattice instabilities. Although the electron-phonon coupling was initially disregarded as a relevant source of scattering fingerprint of the key role of these modes Merging together the advantages of a good metallic character with suitable conditions for hot phonons, a novel path for sustaining hot-phonon physics in metals has been recently pointed out, as a result of a strong anisotropy of the electron-phonon coupling The investigation of possible ways of detecting hot-phonon modes and of the physical consequences of such scenario in MgB 2 and similar compounds is just in its early stages and the full potential is still to be explored. Furthermore, the physical conditions supporting hot-phonon physics in MgB 2 are not unique of this compound but they are expected to be realized in many other metals and/or charge-doped semiconductors. Aim of the present review article is to encompass a useful overview of the state-of-art knowledge and to provide a solid basis and guideline for future development in this field. The review is structured as follow: in Sec. 2 we summarize the physical mechanisms governing timeresolved dynamics in pump-probe setups, with a specific focus on the energytransfer paths from electrons to lattice degrees of freedom, and on the conditions for sustaining hot-phonon physics; various state-of-the-art studies discussing hot-phonon physics along with the corresponding experimental techniques are reviewed in Sec. 3; in Sec. 4 we discuss the specific properties of MgB 2 , governed by a strong anisotropy of the electron-phonon coupling; the consequences of such anisotropy of the electron-phonon coupling with respect to the onset and observation of hot-phonon physics in MgB 2 will be examined in Sec. 5, while in Sec. 6 we discuss how a similar scenario can be generalized in other materials. Condensed-matter physics is in principle a formidably complex topic where many degrees of freedom (electrons and ions) are coupled together through different sources of interactions. In spite of such complexity, we rely on a robust understanding of most of the physical properties of solids in terms of simplified but valid modelings. The Drude model for instance, as well as the Fermi-liquid theory at a more sophisticate level, provides a sufficient description of many conventional metals in terms of non-interacting (or weakly interacting) particles with few effective parameters, notwithstanding a large Coulomb-driven electron-electron interaction. The complex interaction between electron and ions can be also simplified thanks to the Born-Oppenheimer principle that permits a useful decoupling of the quantum nature of electrons and ions. The further quantum interaction between electrons and lattice vibrations (phonons) beyond the adiabatic Born-Oppenheimer approximation can be conveniently treated, thanks to Migdal's theory, by means of an effective mean-field-like approach, the Eliashberg theory Fundamental aim of pump-probe experiments is to perturb such initial thermodynamical state by bringing the systems under non-equilibrium conditions, and to investigate in real time the physical properties during the relaxation processes until the system reaches a new final equilibrium. Typical pumping lasers (or synchrotron light) are set at energies much higher than phonons or other collective modes, so that the incoming pump light mainly induces particle-hole excitations in the electronic degrees of freedom. Interesting refinements of the pump-probe setup also exploit laser light in a non-linear regime, as for instance when an impinging photon can trigger more complex excitations that a single particle-hole one In a schematic way, the relevant system at equilibrium before (and in the absence of) pumping can be described by the standard Hamiltonian: where μ is the electron chemical potential, ĉ † k,σ,α creates an electron with momentum k and spin σ in the band α with energy k,α , â † q,ν creates a phonon with momentum q in the branch ν with frequency ω q,ν , g ν kα,k+qβ is the matrix element of linear electron-phonon coupling scattering an electron from the state (k, β) into the state (k + q, α) with a phonon emission (adsorption) with momentum q (-q) in the branch ν. N k is the number of momenta sampling the Brillouin zone. The third line in Eq. ( For a generic interacting system, one can define an electron distribution function [120] f k,α = ĉ † k,α ĉk,α as well as phonon distribution function b q,ν = â † q,ν âq,ν . At thermodynamical equilibrium, both electron and phonon degrees of freedom are ruled by a thermal population described respectively by the Fermi-Dirac and Bose-Einstein distributions. In the non-interacting case, for (a) Electronic system at t < 0 before the pump excitation. Electrons and holes obey a thermal distribution, here assumed to be ruled by a low temperature T ≈ 0. (b) Pump laser photons induce at t = 0 particle-hole excitations, leading to a highly nonthermal distribution. (c) In a short time characterized by a time-scale τee, due to the electronelectron interaction, electrons and holes reach a thermal distribution characterized by a large electronic temperature Tee. (d) On a time scale τep governed by the electron-phonon coupling, electrons (and holes) further reduce their effective temperature by transferring energy to the lattice modes through emission of hot phonons (red wavy lines) and to a minor extent of cold phonons (green wavy lines). For simplicity we depict here the case of a typical semiconductor where, in the absence of recombination which occurs on longer times, electrons and holes obey separate distributions. For metal the scheme is similar where electrons and holes excitations stem out from a unique distribution function. instance, we have for the electrons f and for the phonons b , and k B is the Boltzmann constant. In the interacting case, the energies k,α , ω q,ν at a first qualitative approximation can be replaced by effective (renormalized) quantities ̃ k,α , ωq,ν . Under the assumption of a linear coupling between the pump photon with energy hν with particle-hole excitations, in a ideal case of a δ-function pump profile in real time, we could describe at t = 0 the electronic system with a highly non-thermal distribution function as sketched in Fig. The fundamental information in time-resolved physics concerns the different time scales within the system under such initial non-equilibrium state reaches a new final steady state at equilibrium with the all the degrees of freedom, and the channels employed to reach the new final equilibrium. In this regard, it is clear that the time dynamics is crucially based on many-body processes, and its investigation reveals the role of the different scattering sources. From a generic point of view, neglecting particle-hole recombination, which occurs on much larger time scales than the range of interest here, all the theoretical approaches describing the time evolution of the coupled electron/phonon system, are fundamentally based on the equations of motion taking into account the collisional processes among and between the electronic and lattice degrees of freedom: Here I k (t) accounts for the perturbation induced by the pump pulse, the terms labeled "ee" represent scattering processes mediated by the Coulomb electronelectron scattering, the terms labeled "ep" describe electron-phonon mediated scattering, while the term labeled as "pp" accounts for phonon-phonon scattering processes driven by phonon anharmonicity. The arguments in curly brackets in the electron and phonon distribution functions, f k,α ({f, b}), b q,ν ({f, b}) reminds that these quantities have a mutual functional dependence. Considering, as an illustrative example, collision processes at the lowest order in a perturbation theory More complex equations can be written down when the many-body interactions are treated at a higher order, using some kind of approximation, as for instance in a self-consistent Born scheme or using random-phase approximation (RPA). Similar coupled equations can be also equivalently derived within the framework of ab-initio approach where N s = 2 is the electron spin degeneracy. The time evolution of the energies E e , E p can be thus obtained by integrating Eqs. ( where and S(t) = N s k,α k,α I k (t) accounts for rate of the energy pumping in the system One of the widest scheme employed to this aim is the two-temperature (2T) model. Within this approach, electron and lattice degrees of freedom are assumed to obey a thermal distribution, f k,α [T e ] and b q,ν [T p ], ruled by two district effective temperatures, an electron T e and a phonon one T p , respectively. Neglecting particle-hole recombination processes, which occur on a longer time scale, for metals the effective temperature T e governs a normal thermal distribution about the Fermi sea, whereas in semiconductors/semimetals T e governs two separate thermal distributions for electrons in the conduction band and for holes in the valence band, respectively. Within the framework of the 2T model, the electronic and lattice total energies can be parametrized in terms of the electronic and phonon temperature T e , T p , respectively. In particular, Eqs. ( where we introduced the specific heat capacity of electrons and phonons, and the effective electron-phonon coupling constant G, defined by: The dynamics of the electron and phonon temperatures is schematically illustrated in the top panel of Fig. The description in terms of a thermal electronic distributions further relies on the assumption that electrons reach a their thermal distribution in a time scale τ ee that is much faster than the characteristic time scales of electron-phonon scattering (Fig. The reliability of the two-temperature model relies on the assumption that besides electrons also phonons have reached a thermal distribution before the energy transfer between electron and lattice degrees of freedom, as described by Eqs. ( Quite different can be the scenario for semiconductors and semimetals characterized by a valley degree of freedom, namely a band gap (ideally a zero or negative band gap, for semimetals) with degenerate band edges. Under such circumstances, the pump-driven excitations can be concentrated in a few regions nearby band valleys. A paradigmatic example of this scenario with a strong topical interest is graphene (see for instance Fig. In order to describe the time dynamics of a coupled electron-phonon system under hot-phonon conditions, a useful three-temperature (3T) model is often employed optical E 2g modes in graphene) displaying similar energies (ω hot ) and a similar phonon population b hot . The phonon population b hot can be hence conveniently expressed in terms of an effective temperature T hot for the hot modes: Within the validity of the three-temperature model, Eqs. ( where C hot , C cold account for the specific heat capacities of the hot and cold modes, respectively. In similar way G hot , G cold describe the electron-phonon relaxation rates related to hot and cold modes. In Eqs. ( The concept of hot phonon refers to a scenario in which one (or few) vibrational modes of the lattice are characterized by a population b q,ν significantly larger than the majority of other modes. These latter (cold) modes obey a standard thermal distribution ruled by a background temperature T cold . In spite of such compelling definition, an active role of hot phonons in a material is often not probed directly and their presence is inferred in indirect ways. One of the first experimental evidences of the presence of hot phonons was prompted by the analysis of the electric-field dependence of transport properties in lowcarrier-density doped semiconductors where the scattering terms df k ({f, b})/dt| ee , df k ({f, b})/dt| ep have been discussed in the previous Section. The net result can be regarded as an effective displacement of the Fermi volume along the direction of E q,ν (hence with a thermal profile), such assumption holds true only in the linear regime, valid for small electric fields and for not too low temperatures where phonon drag effects can occur. In real systems (as well as in a variety of more refined theoretical modeling), the coupling between the electron and lattice degrees of freedom gives rise to a phonon distribution function b q,ν ({f, b}) which may differ significantly from the thermal unperturbed one b (0) q,ν , affecting as well the resulting steady electronic function f k ({f, b}). The role of a non-thermal b q,ν ({f, b}), initially regarded as "phonon disturbance" have been experimentally detected and theoretically investigated for a long time, especially in high electric-field regime, and it becomes more evident under hot-phonon conditions, where only few lattice modes are excited by the coupling with the electrons It has also been shown that hot phonons and non-equilibrium phonons play a crucial role in tailoring the interband properties in narrow gap semiconductors, with respect to impact ionization processes and quantum laser cascades The presence and an active role of hot phonons is also commonly revealed in the analysis of the time dependence of electronic properties upon nonequilibrium conditions. Given the plethora of ultrafast pump-probe experiments nowadays accessible, the physical properties under investigation can vary in a wide range, from optical probes (transmission Similarly, hot-phonon effects have been traced down in electron properties and in time-resolved Raman spectroscopy by means of theoretical simulations Core of these analyses is the evidence of multiple relaxation time scales in the ultrafast dynamics, which can be roughly rationalized in terms of two different channels with different characteristic time scales (biexponential decay) as depicted in Fig. where O e is a generic physical observable ruled by the electronic degrees of freedom. A deeper quantitative insight can be gained if one is able to translate the time dependence of the electronic probe O e in the time dependence of a corresponding effective electronic temperature T e . The multiple time-scale dependence of T e can be compared and fitted with the predictions of a three-temperature model as described in Eqs. ( It is worth to pointing out that the above described ways of detecting hot phonons in a material rely on the analysis of hot-phonon effects on electronic properties. On the other hand, since a hot phonon is an object defined by its bosonic population which is a property logically independent of the electronphonon coupling, it looks more natural devising and employing, when possible, techniques that are based on the analysis of purely lattice features. Along this perspective, considered that hot phonons are usually located at high-symmetry points of the Brillouin zone, and in particularly at the zone-center, a popular tool is the analysis, when feasible, of the relative intensity of the Stokes and anti-Stokes peaks in Raman spectroscopy The population n(ω ν ) can be thus simply estimated from the relation where ω ν,S , ω ν,aS are the frequencies of the Stokes and anti-Stokes resonances, respectively, and where the last relation holds true under standard conditions (ω ν,S -ω ν,aS )/(ω ν,S + ω ν,aS ) 1, n(ω ν 1. An effective temperature for this mode can be also promptly estimated from The comparison between the time evolution of the effective temperature T ν of a candidate hot mode ν with the electronic temperature T e assessed by other means can thus provide a robust evidence of a hot-phonon scenario. Such evidence can be furthermore corroborated if the time evolution of another Ramanactive mode, belonging to the cold-mode sector, can be experimentally resolved, providing a direct check of the different time dynamics of the two ( hot and cold) lattice mode sectors. While the Raman spectroscopy can inspect in a direct experimental way the population of few (Raman-active) modes at the zone-center of the Brillouin zone, from a theoretical perspective the snapshot at given time t of the distribution of phonon population b q,ν for each branch ν and momentum q can be obtained by the direct solution of Eqs. ( Furthermore, direct information about the time evolution of the lattice dynamics under non-equilibrium conditions can be conveniently addressed by means of ultrafast diffraction measurements where Q denotes the wave-vector in the crystallographic reciprocal space, I(Q, 0) is the intensity before the pump excitation and where W i (Q) is the well-known Debye-Waller factor for a given atom i in the unit cell A sudden increase of the Debye-Waller factor portends a sudden energy transfer from the electron to the lattice mode sector. Since the Debye-Waller factor results from the contribution of all the phonons in the Brillouin zone, it cannot reveal in a direct way the onset of hot-phonon physics. Hot modes and, in general, a non-thermal phonon distribution can however be inferred in an indirect way from the possible anisotropy of the estimated mean-square lattice displacements and from the observation of two-component decay rate Non-thermal phonon populations can be efficiently investigated by means of ultrafast electron diffuse scattering (UEDS), which provides a versatile diagnostic tool for detecting and investigating the emergence of hot phonons in condensed matter The first term here accounts for Bragg (elastic) scattering, which can be expressed in the present formalism as: where τ i are the coordinates of the i-th atom in the unit cell, W i the corresponding Debye-Waller factor, and f i is the atomic scattering amplitude. Further interesting information about the lattice properties are conveyed in the one-phonon term which can be expressed as: where e i,ν is the phonon eigenvectors for the phonon branch ν, and M i is the atom mass for atom i. The linear dependence of I 1 on the phonon number n Qν provides a rationale for the relating transient changes in the scattered UEDS intensity [namely, ∆I(Q, t) ≡ I(Q, t) -I(Q, 0)] to underlying changes in the phonon populations, and it provides thus a suitable experimental framework to explore the emergence of hot phonons UEDS is particularly well suited to detect momentum anisotropies established in the phonon population following photo-excitations The crystal structure of MgB 2 is rather simple, with hexagonal graphene-like planes of B atoms spaced vertically by Mg atoms located in the center of the hexagons (Fig. Like many metals, MgB 2 is not the only compound showing multiple different Fermi sheets. However, it can be considered without doubt, along with pnictides, the most evident superconducting material showing multiple different superconducting gaps, as assessed by a variety of experimental and theoretical checks Although MgB 2 has two σ-bands and two π-bands at the Fermi level, it is a common practice to compact such electronic space in an unique σ-block and a unique π-block. In such reduced 2 × 2 analysis, the total electron-phonon coupling described by the Eliashberg function α 2 F (ω) can be split in four components α 2 F ij (ω) (i, j = σ, π). One can as well compute the dimensionless electron-phonon coupling λ ij = 2 dωα 2 F ij (ω)/ω constant that expresses in a compact way the intraband and interband terms. The corresponding electronphonon matrix presents a strongly anisotropic structure peaked in the σ-σ sector The spectral analysis of the Eliashberg functions α 2 F ij (ω) shows that the predominance of the intraband σ-σ coupling is associated with the appearance of a remarkable peak in the energy window [550 : 650] cm -1 A deeper insight can be gained by investigating the momentum distribution of the electron-phonon coupling along the different branches of the phonon dispersion. A representative plot is shown in Fig. The key role of the strongly-coupled zone-center E 2g modes in governing the electron-phonon interaction, and hence the superconducting properties of MgB 2 , has been extensively discussed in literature. The most striking feature soon after the discovery of superconductivity in MgB 2 was the huge broadening of the E 2g peak observed in Raman spectroscopy, ∆Ω E2g ≈ 25 meV, that can be compared with ∆Ω E2g ≈ 5 meV in AlB 2 (Fig. meV (anharmonic calculation The strong anisotropic multiband character of the electron-phonon coupling in MgB 2 has been widely discussed and assessed since long time, both from the experimental as from the theoretical points of view. It was however not recognized until recently that this scenario could naturally lead in MgB 2 also to hot-phonon physics Although prompting the seminal suggestion of hot phonons in MgB 2 that stem from the anisotropic electron-phonon coupling, the evidence in support of this scenario was in Ref. A full microscopical proof of a key role of hot phonons in MgB 2 was provided in Ref. Equipped with all these theoretical inputs, the time dynamics of the each single electronic and lattice degree of freedom can be in principle numerically computed, as discussed in Sec. 2. As also discussed there, however, in MgB 2 as well as in other metals, due to large Fermi surfaces, this approach is not computationally affordable. The key advantage of MgB 2 is that the strong multiband character and the strong anisotropy of the electron-phonon coupling, provides a very efficient and compelling way for simplifying the system, namely for splitting in an unambiguous way the lattice degrees of freedom (q, ν) in two subsectors, the "hot" and "cold" modes. As evident from the previous discussion, only the E 2g phonon branch, corresponding to in-plane out-of-phase lattice displacements of the two B atoms, is strongly coupled. More delicate is the criterion how to identify the q vectors belonging to the hot-phonon sector. In this regard, we are advantaged by the remarkable Kohn anomaly visible in the phonon spectrum, that provides a fingerprint of the strong electronphonon scattering with these modes. Such scenario was indeed analyzed in a quantitative way in Ref. Following this observation, the total Eliashberg function was divided in Ref. The main relevant parameters ruling Eqs. ( The onset of hot-phonon physics, as captured for instance by the threetemperature model shown in Fig. One of the most direct fingerprints of hot phonons can be provided by the analysis of the Raman features Peculiar effects of the hot-phonon scenario can be traced not only by studying frequency-integrated quantities, as the Raman intensity, but also via spectral Raman properties. Theoretically, these features can be conveniently analyzed by computing the many-body phonon self-energy Π(ω; {T }) of the E 2g mode at q ≈ 0 where ω E2g = 67 meV is the harmonic adiabatic phonon frequency. For many conventional systems, the phonon self-energy can be reasonably computed by using non-interacting Green's functions, with the additional inclusion of a phenomenological electronic damping. Such level of approximation is however insufficient in the case of MgB 2 where the electronic damping is crucially governed by the electron-phonon coupling itself The spectral properties of the E 2g phonon mode are shown in Figs. 11c and 11d as a function of the time delay, for two representative values of the pump fluence. The peculiar features of these spectra can be parametrized in terms of few quantities, namely the renormalized phonon frequency Ω 2 E2g = ω 2 E2g + 2ω E2g Π(Ω E2g ; {T }), and the many-body phonon linewidth Γ E2g = -2ImΠ(Ω E2g ; {T }). The time behavior of these representative parameters is also shown in Figs. where The parameters λ(ω; {T }), γ(ω; {T }) play here the same role as the effective mass function m * (ω) and the optical scattering rate Γ opt (ω) = τ -1 opt (ω) in the extended Drude model and a microscopic derivation can be provided in a similar way. A careful analysis has shown that γ(ω; {T }) can be written as a sum of three independent contributions depending separately on each temperature T e , T hot , T cold where Note that, from this analysis, employing Kramers-Kronig transformations, the function λ(ω; {T }) depends only on the quantity γ e (ω; T e ), and thus only on the electronic temperature, i.e., λ(ω; {T }) = λ e (ω; T e ). As intuitive, an increase of the effective temperatures, expecially T hot , leads to an increase of the damping term γ(Ω E2g ; {T }). What is less intuitive, but easily understandable on the base of Eq. ( As a consequence, easily noticeable in Eq. As just discussed above, Raman spectroscopy is a powerful tool for studying the properties of the lattice dynamics, particularly suited for the q = 0 modes. For instance, an accurate determination of the intensity of the anti-Stokes peaks can access directly the population of the Raman mode under investigation. Despite these strengths, employing Raman spectroscopy in pump-probe experiments to completely disentangle the "hotness" of electron and lattice degrees of freedom can be challenging. In its core, Raman spectroscopy is a two-photon process which involves virtual electronic states, so that electron and lattice degrees of freedom are unavoidably mixed together. A direct detection of the hot-phonon properties that probes only the lattice dynamics not entangled with the electron degrees of freedom can provide thus a compelling smoking gun. Along this perspective, an alternative and efficient way for detecting the E 2g hot phonons in MgB 2 has been recently theoretically proposed in Ref. The experimental assessment of the correlated interatomic motion in MgB 2 was demonstrated in Ref. where rij is the unit vector connecting atoms i and j. It is also convenient to introduce the dimensionless correlation factor ρ ij defined by the implicit relation where Positive values of correlation factor ρ ij > 0 describe a situation where the couple of atoms i, j move in phase, so that the resulting value of σ 2 ij is smaller than for the uncorrelated case. On the other hand, a predominance of counter-phase atomic vibrations is expected to result in a negative correlation factor ρ ij < 0. Microscopically, the correlation factor ρ ij results from the contribution of all the phonons of the Brillouin zone, weighted with the appropriate projection factor. For systems at thermal equilibrium, ρ ij is usually slightly positive, reflecting a slight dominance of the acoustic (inphase) modes in contributing to the lattice dynamics. A key role in detecting hot phonons in MgB 2 is played by the nearest neighbor in-plane boron-boron lattice dynamics. The E 2g modes, characterized by out-of-phase motion (Fig. It is worth mentioning that the real-space approach here described for MgB 2 for detecting hot phonons relies basically on the crucial properties that hot phonons have a well specific lattice displacement pattern dictated by the selection rules of the electron-phonon coupling and by the fact of laying at highsymmetry points. Hot phonons occurs naturally, because of the phase space considerations, at high-symmetry points of the Brillouin zone, with well-defined and well-known symmetry and atomic contents. Such analysis does not apply thus only to MgB 2 but it is quite general and it can be extended to a wide range of materials (semiconductors, metals or semimetals). Hot phonons occur because of a preferential transfer of energy from the electronic degrees of freedom to few selected lattice modes, through the available electron-phonon coupling. Hot phonons are thus a result of the many-body electron-phonon interaction, and fingerprints of a hot-phonon regime have been since long time detected also in electronic properties, as discussed in Sec. 3. As a matter of fact, the first experimental report of hot phonons in MgB 2 was deduced from the analysis of time-resolved optical properties heating, bandstructure renormalization due to the non-linear coupling with the ultrashort laser pulse) would predict as well a redshift The increase of the in-plane plasma frequency ω p,a (and of the out-of-plane one ω p,c after a finite delay) has been rationalized as a result of the onset of E 2g hot modes in the presence of the strong particle-hole asymmetry of the σ bands which, as discussed in Sec. 4, are characterized by a Fermi level very close to the top edge, and hence with a very low carrier density. The many-body electron-phonon coupling is known in this situation to be responsible not only for the usual finite electronic damping term Γ(k, ω) = -ImΣ(k, ω), resulting from the imaginary part of the electronic self-energy, but also for a finite bandshift, related to the finite real part of the self-energy, χ(k, ω) = ReΣ(k, ω) The role of hot phonons in this context can be captured in a simple modeling where only the dominant electron-phonon coupling in the σ bands is taken into account, described in a very good approximation by two-dimensional parabolic bands, while the π bands act as a charge reservoir where m is the effective mass of the parabolic σ bands k F the Fermi momentum for the non-interacting system, and ñ the many-body renormalized carrier density A key role is thus played by the bandshift which, assuming different temperatures for the electrons and the hot-phonon modes, can be computed in a perturbation approach as [240]: where and where λ hot is the dimensionless electron-phonon coupling for the hot phonons, E T/B represents the band top/bottom edge, respectively, estimated with respect to the Fermi level, f Te (x), b T hot (x) are the Fermi and Bose distributions ruled by the electronic and hot-phonon temperatures respectively, and ω n = πT e (2n + 1) are fermionic Matsubara frequencies also governed by T e . χ 0 is a temperature-independent contribution, and it is identical at equilibrium or under non-equilibrium conditions, whereas χ el (T e ), χ ph (T hot ) scale to zero with the corresponding temperatures. It is crucial to note here that, as discussed in Ref. One can notice that the present scenario depends strongly on the intraband character of the electron-phonon coupling with the hot phonons. A similar situation might be encountered in iron-based pnictides or similar materials, where spin-fluctuations play the role of the exchanged hot bosons. In those compounds however spin-fluctuations mediate interband exchange between band with different particle/hole character. In such context the situation can be reversed and hot-phonon driven bandshift might result in a net redshift of the plasma frequency As widely discussed above, good metals are usually characterized by large Fermi surfaces. As a consequence, electron-phonon scattering is spread over a wide phonon momentum space, and no hot phonons are sustained. At odds with this scenario, MgB 2 provides a bright example that a different path for achieving hot phonons is possible. The key element for this alternative context to semiconductors and semimetals is a strong anisotropy of the electron-phonon coupling, where a sizable amount of the electron-phonon coupling is concentrated in a few phonon modes, along with a weak residual electron-phonon interaction widely spread over all the other modes. Such framework leads to an effective separation of the energy transfer from electrons to lattice into two parallel channels, where the small specific heat capacity of the strongly-coupled modes leads to a fast and large increase of the quantum population of the corresponding phonon states that get easily hot. While the above mechanism is fulfilled in the most striking way in MgB 2 , which represents a benchmark example, the physical conditions for this scenario are quite general and provide a guideline for predicting hot phonons in other metallic compounds. A promising candidate along this direction is hole-doped diamond, which was discovered to become superconductor with T c ≈ 4 K upon 2.8% of boron doping Such prediction can be sustained at a quantitative level by the analysis of the momentum-resolved electron-phonon coupling λ q,ν shown in Fig. Figure range of frequencies, with no correspondence in α 2 F (ω), characterizes the cold modes. The very weak coupling associated with the cold modes makes borondoped diamond an extreme case of anisotropic electron-phonon system where the linear coupling of electrons with the cold lattice sector is almost negligible. This situation might be even more favourable than MgB 2 for detecting hot phonons since hot phonons are expected to show longer decay rate to the cold modes. At the same time, these conditions appear appealing also from the electronic point of view, since the reduced coupling with the remnant lattice modes would imply a slower heating of the sample, which is usually harmful for optoelectronics. Possible candidates for hot phonons appear also among related compounds, like hole-doped Si and Ge, where for small doping the amount of stronglycoupled modes is a few percentage The closeness to a charge-density-wave phase is a promising path for tailoring the onset of hot phonons in metals which is not restricted to TiSe 2 , but is just a representative example. Other systems close to a charge-density-wave instability can be investigated as possible candidates, not only in the family of layered transition-metal dichalcogenides M X 2 (M =Nb, Ta; X =S, Se), but also in three-dimensional compounds, as A15 (Nb 3 Sn, V 3 Si or barium-bismuthate perovskites A further promising development is suggested by the possibility of exciting hot-phonon physics in surface phonons. This scenario bares additional interest in MgB 2 due to the topological character of phonons, which is particularly revealed at the surfaces A last mention should be devoted in this framework to iron-based pnictides, superconducting materials with bulk critical temperatures up to T c ≈ 55 K In this paper we have reviewed the recent progresses regarding a novel path for observing hot phonons in metals as a consequence of a strong anisotropic electron-phonon coupling. Based on a summary of the fundamental physics involved in pump-probe out-of-equilibrium experiments, we have discussed the physical conditions that allow sustaining non-thermal populations of few selected modes in metals. A special focus has been devoted to MgB 2 that represents maybe the best prototype of metallic compounds fulfilling such conditions. Physical observables of the hot-phonon scenario in MgB 2 have been discussed, both on the experimental and theoretical grounds. Besides MgB 2 , other materials have been outlined as promising candidates for realization of hot phonons. Among them, low-carrier doped semiconductors, as for instance boron-doped diamond, and compounds with soft modes at the verge of a structural transition. The feasibility of controlling the onset and the properties of hot phonons, not only in semiconductors but also in metals, opens the way to the possibility of including metal components in ideal optoelectronic devices where a hot-phonon bottleneck could be desirable for controlling the electronic relaxation decay rates and the effective lattice heating. The possibility of exciting hot phonons with a chiral character might open also new interesting perspectives in the field of quantum information where a basic quantum bit could be engraved in the chiral state of a long-lived chiral phonon. The continuous and fast development of refined experimental techniques and theoretical tools provides a promising scenario where hot-phonon physics in metals could be a common tool on the advanced research workbench.