We present a (nongyrotropic) metasurface magnetless specular isolator. This device reflects as a mirror a wave incident under a specified angle in one direction and absorbs it in the opposite direction. The metasurface is synthesized in terms of bianisotropic susceptibility tensors, whose nonreciprocity resides in normal components and exhibits a hybrid electric, magneto-electric nature. The metaparticle is implemented in the form of a U-shaped conducting structure loaded by a transistor. The operation principle of the specular isolator is demonstrated by both full-wave simulation and experiment, with isolation levels reaching 41 and 38 dB respectively. This system represents the first realization of a metasurface involving nonreciprocal normal susceptibilities and features a previously unreported type of nonreciprocity. Magnetless nonreciprocity has recently arisen as a solution for breaking Lorentz reciprocity without the drawbacks of the dominant magnetized ferrite or terbium gallium garnet (TGGs) technologies Metasurfaces, which have already led to myriad of novel electromagnetic applications This paper reports a transistor-loaded magnetless nonreciprocal metasurface providing specular isolation, i.e. reflecting the wave incident from one direction as a mirror and absorbing the wave incident from the opposite direction. The related asymmetric reflection coefficient is realized by leveraging nonreciprocal normal metasurface susceptibilities , where θ 0 is the operation angle, is specularly reflected, while a wave incident at the angle θ i = -θ 0 is absorbed by the metasurface. This operation implies the following three conditions on the metasurface. First, the specular nature of the reflection (θ r = θ i ) requires that the metasurface has no phase gradient, which implies that it must be uniform. Second, the fact that there is only one scattered wave, and hence no diffraction orders, implies, assuming a periodic metasurface structure of period d, that d < |λ/(sin θ i ± 1)|. Third, the spatial asymmetry of the reflection implies breaking Lorentz reciprocity, which means that the metasurface must be nonreciprocal. In addition, we assume that the metasurface is nongyrotropic, i.e., that it does not rotate the polarization of the incident wave upon reflection. Moreover, we shall consider only the p-polarized problem with incidence in the xz-plane, whose nonzero electromagnetic field components are E x , E z and H y , the s-polarized problem being solvable in an analog fashion. Given its deeply subwavelength thickness, a metasurface can be conveniently modeled by the so-called Generalized Sheet Transition Conditions (GSTCs) ẑ where the ∆ symbol represents the difference of the fields on both sides of the metasurface, and where P and M are the induced electric and magnetic surface polarization densities, which may be expressed as where the "av" subscript represents the difference of the field on both sides of the metasurface and χ ee , χ em , χ me and χ mm are the bianisotropic surface susceptibility tensors characterizing the metasurface where Φ denotes either the electric or magnetic field. In general, each of the susceptibility tensors in (2) includes 3 × 3 = 9 components, which leads to a total of 4 × 9 = 36 independent parameters. In the case of the proposed specular isolator, these components should be independent on x and y to satisfy the metasurface uniformity condition. Moreover, the required nonreciprocity implies the global condition Finally, the nongyrotropy and p-polarized incidence assumptions eliminate 24 out of the 36 susceptibility components, simplifying the bianisotropic susceptibility tensors to which include overall 9 parameters, where the nonreciprocity condition (4) translate into The corresponding metasurface for the s-polarization would involve the dual susceptibility components χ where ∂ x denotes the spatial derivative versus x. Assuming plane wave incidence, which allows the substitution ∂ x → -jk x , where k x = k sin θ, reduces then which are the final GSTC equations for the problem at hand. In these relations, the field differences and averages are found from (3) in terms of the reflection and transmission coefficients, R and T . Assuming incidence in the +z direction, theses quantities read where k z = k cos θ. Substituting ( where Realizing the specular isolation operation (see Fig. Inspecting which correspond to the first and third relations in The specular isolator metasurface may be designed in the following three steps: i) define the fields related to the desired wave transformations; ii) insert these fields into (3) to determine the appropriate field differences and averages; iii) insert these last quantities into (8), and solve the resulting equations for the susceptibility components. According to the analysis performed in Sec. , the susceptibility components obtained by this procedure should automatically respect the condition E 1,r =cos θ 0 e jφ e -jkxx xsin θ 0 e jφ e -jkxx ẑ, H 1,r = (e jφ e -jkxx /η)ŷ, (13b where φ is the reflection phase induced by the metasurface. The second transformation is the absorption of the wave incident at the angle -θ 0 [Fig. The related fields are Successively substituting both ( and to the 2 constraint relations χ yy mm = -2j cos θ 0 + kχ zz ee sin 2 θ 0 + e jφ k sin θ 0 (χ zx ee cos θ 0 + χ zz ee sin θ 0 ) (1 + e jφ )k , (15c) between the remaining 5 susceptibilities. The metaparticle structure satisfying the condition (12) (nonreciprocity along the x-direction for p-polarization) and the relations (15) (reflection and absorption at ±θ 0 ) may be devised as follows. Let us start by enforcing the first nonreciprocity condition in Figure x y 0 → χ zx ee = 0). On the right, the z-directed incident electric field induces a current in the z-directed strip. This induces a current only in one of the x-directed strips, given the orientation of the transistor, which implies that the electric response along x to the electric field along z is nonzero (p xz ee = 0 → χ xz ee = 0). Thus, the metaparticle corresponds to a specific set of solutions of (15c) and (15d) that is characterized by χ zx ee = 0, which simplifies these constraint equations to and Equation (16b) reveals that the metaparticle must also satisfy the second nonreciprocity condition in Figure The transistor-loaded unit cell in Fig. We reported a metasurface magnetless specular isolator. We derived, under the assumption of nongyrotropy, the corresponding bianisotropic susceptibility tensors, which include unusual, normal components, and which represent a novel type of nonreciprocity. We designed a metaparticle realizing these susceptibility tensors under the form of a U-shaped conducting structure loaded by a transistor, and demonstrated the overall metasurface by fullwave simulation and experimental results in the microwave regime. Potential applications of this device include nonreciprocal reflectors, nonreciprocal waveguide walls, nonreciprocal quantum state mediation, advanced analog processing, as well as more sophisticated nonreciprocal electromagnetic wave transformations. mm = χ zx mm , χ yx em = -χ xy me or χ yz em = -χ zy me . Inserting (