Attractively interacting two-component mixtures of fermionic particles confined in a one-dimensional harmonic trap are investigated. Properties of balanced and imbalanced systems are systematically explored with the exact diagonalization approach, focusing on the finite-temperature effects. Using single-and two-particle density distributions, specific non-classical pairing correlations are analyzed in terms of the noise correlations -quantity directly accessible in state-of-the-art experiments with ultra-cold atoms. It is shown that along with increasing temperature, any imbalanced system hosting Fulde-Ferrel-Larkin-Ovchinnikov pairs crossovers to a standard Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer one characterized by zero net momentum of resulting pairs. By performing calculations for systems with different imbalances, the approximate boundary between the two phases on a phase diagram is determined. The appearance of non-classical correlations collectively induced by attractive interactions between fermions is one of the most spectacular macroscopic manifestations of quantum mechanics. As justified by Bardeen, Cooper, and Schrieffer in We consider an effectively one-dimensional mixture of two fermionic components σ ∈ {↑, ↓} consisting of N ↑ and N ↓ particles of the same mass m, and trapped in an external harmonic oscillator potential of frequency ω. We assume that on a time scale of considered experiments there are no relevant physical channels causing spin flips, thus the numbers N ↑ and N ↓ are independently conserved quantities. In the case of experiments with ultra-cold alkaline atoms, this assumption is well-justified. In the second-quantization formalism the Hamiltonian of the system reads: where the fermionic field operator Ψσ (x) annihilates a particle from a component σ at position x. It obeys standard anti-commutation relations { Ψσ (x), Ψ † σ ′ (x ′ )} = δ σ σ ′ δ (xx ′ ) and { Ψσ (x), Ψσ ′ (x ′ )} = 0. The dimensionless parameter g is related to the one-dimensional interaction strength. In the effective one-dimensional model studied, it can be obtained from the three-dimensional counterpart, by assuming that transverse motion is completely frozen (for example by very strong confinement) and thus it can be integrated out. Note, that the Hamiltonian (1) is fully symmetric under exchange of components. It means that systems with opposite global polarisations (P and -P) have exactly the same properties provided that labels ↑ and ↓ are adequately exchanged. Therefore, without losing generality, we can limit ourselves to cases with P ≥ 0. To get a better understanding of the properties of the system at finite temperature, let us first discuss spectral properties of the many-body Hamiltonian (1) on the attractive branch of interactions. In contrast to the repulsive The energy gaps between the many-body ground state and excited states for systems with N = 8 particles and different particle imbalances ∆N (polarization P = 0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, respectively). Independently on the case, two of the lowest excited states are always degenerate at g = 0 and the degeneracy is lifted for finite attraction. Note, however, that the lift strongly depends on the polarization. (b) the Boltzmann probabilities P i as functions of rescaled temperature for two extreme imbalances (P = 0 and P = 0.75, respectively) and interaction strength g = -3. Note that for sufficiently low but finite temperatures (due to the finite gap in the spectrum) the system is robust and rather remains in its many-body ground state. All energies and temperatures are expressed in natural units of the problem, i.e., ħω and ħω/k B , respectively. one, In the following, we assume that the system studied is prepared in a stationary state of a given absolute temperature T . We do not settle whether thermalization occurred as a result of interactions with an external thermostat or as a consequence of self-thermalization. The latter may be challenging due to the intrinsic properties of the system -its lowered dimensionality and mesoscopic character. Nevertheless, we anticipate that the state of the system can be well-described with a density matrix of the Boltzmann form: where P i = Z -1 e -E i /k B T are the Boltzmann distribution probabilities and Z = ∑ i e -E i /k B T is the corresponding partition function (k B is the Boltzmann's constant). Of course, in the limit of vanishing temperature, T → 0, the state of the system is represented by its many-body ground state |0⟩. However, even for finite temperatures, due to the mentioned finite gaps to the excited states, the system is quite robust and may remain in the ground state. This property is clearly visible when partitions P i are plotted as functions of temperature (Fig. There are many ambiguities in translating concepts suitable for many-body description into the few-body regime. Mostly, they originate from the fact that in a large number of particles limit one does not care much about their precise counting and therefore performs analysis in the grand canonical ensemble approach. This gives a rise to define mean-field order parameters (pairing fields) as expectation values of appropriately defined annihilation operators. where we use a short notation ⟨•⟩ T ≡ Tr [ ρT • ] for averaging over the many-body mixed state ρT of the system of given temperature T . Let us point here, that in the case of ground-state properties, the noise correlation concept has been extremely useful to study two-body correlations in general, Let us start the analysis from the simplest case of balanced system (polarization P = 0) containing in total N particles. In Fig. where the function F (p) has a gaussian form We checked that the final results do not depend on the particular shape of the filter function F , nor on its width κ that should be of reasonable value compared to the resolution of the noise correlation and size of the system. In our calculations we set κ = 0.04 √ ħmω. In Fig. The situation is more interesting when imbalanced mixtures are considered. In these cases, although inter-component attractions force the system to form correlated pairs, their center-of-mass momentum is not vanishing. In the limit of vanishing temperature (T → 0) the situation was studied already with all details in. In the following, we aim to generalize these findings for finite temperatures. The analysis starts by displaying noise correlations for different imbalances and temperatures. In Fig. To quantify the mutual relation between the FFLO pairing and the BCS pairing in the system at a given temperature, we introduce the simplest possible measure related to the difference of corresponding maxima We checked that this simple definition gives qualitatively the same predictions as some more sophisticated ones introduced recently. From our numerical results, it follows that the characteristic temperature T C slightly increases with attractions g. What is more, for a fixed interaction strength g we found that increasing the imbalance ∆N makes the tail of ξ (T )/ξ (0) thicker. The reason is simply that the correlations in the system are much more complex than just one of the two types BCS or FFLO, and thus they are beyond noise correlation analysis. Therefore, for sufficiently large imbalances the function ξ (T )/ξ (0) does not drop exactly to zero anymore and after reaching its minimal value starts to grow. However, since the ground state of any imbalanced system is always FFLO-like correlated at T = 0, our definition of characteristic temperature T C captures appropriately the physics of the crossover even if pure BCS-like correlation at large temperatures cannot be reached for a given interaction g. Having all previous results and observations in hand we can repeat all the reasoning for different numbers of particles and different imbalances. In this way, we are able to form a provisional bridge between few-body systems and the many-body counterparts. We assume that in the limit of large systems appropriate description of the system is served by intensive properties which are independent of the size of the system. In the system studied the polarization (2) plays such a role. Therefore, we suspect that for large enough systems we should approach the many-body limit if properties of the system are presented as functions of polarization P and temperature T . It is worth noting that sometimes different many-body properties might saturate unexpectedly quickly (see for example experiments reported in To make the first view on this problem, in Fig. The phase diagram obtained is surprisingly very similar to the phase diagram obtained earlier with Monte Carlo calculations for many fermions in a one-dimensional optical lattice. In this work, using the exact diagonalization approach, we have examined how finite-temperature effects impact two-body correlations in two-component fermionic systems containing few particles with attractive interactions. We focused on correlations encoded in the so-called noise correlation -the quantity which in principle is directly accessible in experiments. We have shown that as the temperature increases, the correlations are initially insensitive (due to the energy gap) and from a certain moment they vanish very quickly. Importantly, for imbalanced systems hosting the FFLO pairing in their many-body ground state, before pairing correlations are lost, we have observed the transition from the FFLO-like to the BCS-like phase. This transition has features of a crossover rather than a rapid phase transition and can be well characterized by the characteristic temperature T C interpreted as a temperature when the FFLO-like phase loses its stability. By systematic studies of systems having different numbers of particles, we determine the approximate border in the phase diagram between the two phases. Our predictions qualitatively agree with previous results obtained for larger systems confined in periodic potentials and in harmonic traps. As a side result, we showed that polaronic systems containing a single particle in one of the components have typically substantially different properties and should be studied separately. Our numerical method is based on a numerically exact diagonalization of the many-body Hamiltonian (1) with applied energetic cut-off of the many-body basis. where H k (x) is k-th Hermite polynomial and is a normalization constant. Corresponding eigenergies are equal E k = ħω(k + 1/2). Having these solutions in hand, for a fixed number of particles N ↑ and N ↓ we consider all possible Fock states of the form where α = (i 1 , . . . , i N ↑ ; j 1 , . . . , j N ↑ ) is a set of (sorted in descending order) indices of occupied single-particle orbitals (10) while fermionic operators âi ( bi ) annihilate ↑-particle (↓-particle) in corresponding states φ i (x). A non-interacting energy of a Fock state |F α ⟩ is simply a sum of single-particle energies of occupied orbitals By decomposing field operators in the basis of these annihilation operators one can easily represent the many-body Hamiltonian (1) as a matrix in the basis of Fock states {|F α ⟩}. Corresponding matrix elements can be calculated straightforwardly as where interaction integrals are expressed as These integrals can be calculated numerically on a dense spatial grid or analytically by using specific properties of Hermite polynomials. A detailed numerical algorithm for quick generation of the Fock basis in this form (also for other confinements) was presented recently. With this decomposition, one can easily calculate the expectation value of any many-body operator expressed in terms of the field operators Ψσ (x) by decomposing them according to (13).