Non-fullerene acceptors (NFAs) are excellent light harvesters, yet the origin of such high optical extinction is not well understood. In this work, we investigate the absorption strength of NFAs by building a database of time-dependent density functional theory (TDDFT) calculations of ~500 -conjugated molecules. The calculations are first validated by comparison with experimental measurements on liquid and solid state using common fullerene and nonfullerene acceptors. We find that the molar extinction coefficient (ε d,max ) shows reasonable agreement between calculation in vacuum and experiment for molecules in solution, highlighting the effectiveness of TDDFT for predicting optical properties of organic conjugated molecules. We then perform a statistical analysis based on molecular descriptors to identify which features are important in defining the absorption strength. This allows us to identify structural features that are correlated with high absorption strength in NFAs and could be used to guide molecular design: highly absorbing NFAs should possess a planar, linear, and fully conjugated molecular backbone with highly polarisable heteroatoms. We then exploit a random decision forest to draw predictions for ε d,max using a computational framework based on extended tight-binding Hamiltonians, which shows reasonable predicting accuracy with lower computational cost than TDDFT. This work provides a general understanding of the relationship between molecular structure and absorption strength in -conjugated organic molecules, including NFAs, while introducing predictive machine-learning models of low computational cost. The synthetic versatility of organic -conjugated semiconductors converts them onto the ideal candidates for rational molecular design based on high-throughput screening techniques. Significant advances had been made by trial and error with new but increasingly diverse moieties and materials, primarily using non-fullerene acceptors (NFAs). These have raised the efficiency of organic photovoltaics (OPVs) above 19% in single junctions, to a large extent owing to their high absorption strength. However, the reasons for that remain elusive, thus preventing the molecular tailoring of NFAs with further enhanced light harvesting capabilities that enable breakthrough OPV efficiencies in the years to come. Here we exploit timedependent density functional theory (TDDFT) calculations performed on NFA molecules and -conjugated oligomers to investigate what drives their absorption strength higher. The statistical analysis of thousands of molecular descriptors reveals that molecular linearity, planarity, polarizability, and number of -conjugated carbon atoms correlate strongly with the absorption strength, hence forming a structure-absorption strength relationship that is further exploited to introduce design rules for highly absorbing NFAs. We identify frequent moieties (i.e. molecular fragments) and combinations thereof to drive absorption strength higher in novel NFAs. To speed up the screening of NFA molecular candidates at lower computational cost, we propose exploiting a state-of-the-art machine-learning (ML) model in combination with extended tight-binding Hamiltonians to predict the absorption strength of -conjugated organic molecules. This work contributes to an improved understanding of the absorption strength of -conjugated organic molecules while helping the OPV community to design highly absorbing NFAs that maximize the light harvesting capabilities in the green energy market. Organic photovoltaic (OPV) energy conversion is a promising option among next generation renewable and sustainable energy technologies for a low-carbon energy future. shows a maximum extinction coefficient ( κ max ) over 1.5 in the visible part of the electromagnetic spectrum, as compared to less than 0.75 for fullerene derivatives (PC61BM and PC71BM). High extinction coefficient increases the chance of high quantum efficiency and photogenerated current density, and makes it possible to fabricate highly absorbing OPV films with just a few tens of nanometre-thick photoactive layers. In comparison with workhorse fullerene acceptors, OPV devices based on highly absorbing NFAs could be made comparably thinner than the former, which exponentially raises the output power per weight (i.e. the specific weight in W g -1 ) of OPV devices Excited state calculations based on quantum chemistry methods, such as time-dependent density functional theory (TDDFT), The emergence of artificial intelligence (AI) has made it possible to study quantitative structure-property relationships (QSPRs) in molecules with massively improved computational efficiency. As the most popular branch of AI, machine-learning (ML) has attracted much attention in materials science over the last decade, and has been widely applied for material property prediction and material discovery. Here, we present an experimental, TDDFT, QSPR, statistical and ML study of the absorption strength of NFAs to identify the key chemical and structural features that lead to high optical absorption in state-of-the-art NFAs. We exploit a database of nearly 500 unique organic molecules (or 3500 calculations) generated using DFT and TDDFT over several years. We obtain good quantitative agreement between TDDFT calculations of absorption strength and experimental values for state-of-the-art NFAs and fullerenes, which supports the use of TDDFT results for further statistical and QSPR modelling. Accordingly, we extract molecular information from the DFT-optimized geometries by computing nearly 6000 molecular descriptors and first looking for correlations with the absorption strength. The strongest correlations are found between experimentally measured maximum molar extinction coefficient (ε d,max ) and two main molecular descriptors from calculations: 1,p and C2SP2, which describe the size of the molecule in the direction of maximal atomic polarizability, and the number of sp 2 hybridized carbon atoms that are bound to two other carbons (C2), respectively. These quantities can be related to a few key material features leading to high absorption strength: linearity, planarity, and extension of the -conjugation in the form of fused and closed-ring moieties, in good agreement with previous ML reports on fluorophores and dyes. Quantifying how well the TDDFT derived excited state properties agree with the experimental measurements in terms of absorption strength is of utmost importance to validate our theoretical calculations and support further conclusions extracted thereof. Accordingly, we first evaluate the agreement between TDDFT calculations and experimental data in terms of the absorption strength. We compare the absorption strength of a broad catalogue (~10 molecules) of NFA molecules and widely-studied fullerene derivatives (PC61BM and PC71BM, with their molecular structures shown in Figure As a metric for absorption strength, we initially consider several candidates such as the oscillator strength (f osc ), the absorption coefficient (α) or the imaginary part of the dielectric function (ε 2 ). In this work, we eventually focus on the maximum molar extinction coefficient (ε d,max , M -1 cm -1 ) of NFAs as it shows the best agreement between experimental and theoretical data, as we demonstrate below. ε d,max constitutes a typical experimental measurement in solution that can also be accessed from myriad literature references. Note that the usual calculations based on single molecules using TDDFT cannot account for solid state effects as they are performed for isolated molecules in vacuum or surrounded by an isotropic medium (such as a solvent using the polarizable-continuum-solvent-model, PCM, Figure Where N A is the Avogadro constant, e the elementary charge, ħ the reduced Planck constant, ε 0 the vacuum permittivity, m 0 the electron mas, n r is the refractive index in solution (assumed to be 1.3 of a common organic solvent throughout this study), and c the speed of light. f osc,max is the oscillator strength of the strongest transition among the calculated states within the visible-IR part of the spectrum, and E max is the energy of that transition. The brightest transition is very often the lowest-energy transition in commonly used -conjugated molecules. , where σ is the gaussian width and assumed to be 0.1 eV for a common organic pi-conjugated molecule. The experimental ε d,max from solution can be obtained using the optical density (OD) measurements performed using UV-visible spectroscopy, via where OD max is the maximum optical density, ρ is the molar concentration (M), and d the light path length of the cuvette (cm). Similarly, the experimental ε d,max from film can be estimated assuming a mass concentration ρ M in the film of 1000 g L -1 (as a typical value for conjugated polymers and small molecules), 31 either from the maximum absorption coefficient α cm,max (cm -1 ) or extinction coefficient (κ max ) (Figure where M w is the molecular weight in g mol and solution (r = 0.66, Figure The experimental validation of the TDDFT calculations in NFAs supports the use of such results to build an extended database of optimized molecular geometries and excited state properties. The dataset is built by collecting thousands of molecular geometries generated over the last years in our group, making up a total of 3515 calculations on small molecules and oligomers. The distribution of number of atoms in a molecule is shown in Figure In the simplest statistical analysis of our TDDFT database, we look for correlations of the absorption strength with respect to a catalogue of molecular descriptors. First, as described in Supplementary Note 2, we filter the pristine TDDFT database by identifying duplicate molecules (in terms of molecular weight) and selecting the lowest energy conformer (i.e., optimized geometries in the ground state) among them. As a result, the curated TDDFT database employed in this work consists of 479 -conjugated small molecules and oligomers with a distribution of moieties shown in Figure Then, we introduce several target features related with absorption strength, starting from the maximum oscillator strength of any calculated transition (f max ); the maximum oscillator strength of any transition in the visible electromagnetic window (herein constrained between 300-1200 nm or 1-4 eV for its relevance in solar energy harvesting applications) (f max,vis ); and the sum of oscillator strengths of all transitions in the visible window, f sum,vis . These three features are also evaluated per n π for the molecule, i.e., f max /n π , f max,vis /n π and f sum,vis /n π . We then consider the maximum absorption coefficient (α max ) obtained using Eq. ( ( After running the clusterization of descriptors on all target features, we identify strong correlations with molecular descriptors for f max , f sum,vis and ε d,max (i.e., implicitly f max,vis ). For the remaining target variables (f overlap , α max , ε 2,max , f max /n π , f max,vis /n π and f sum,vis / n π ), we do not identify molecular descriptors with  above the threshold value (0.7) and they are generally below 0.6 units, see Figure , (Equation where s jk is the weighted covariance between the jth and kth atomic coordinates; A is the total number of atoms; p i is the (tabulated) polarizability of the ith atom; q ij and q ik represent the jth and kth coordinate of the ith atom (j, k = x, y, z), respectively; and q ̅ is their average value. To further interpret these two magnitudes (1,p and C2SP2) as the main correlated descriptors with ε d,max and f sum,vis , we inspect the DFT-optimized geometries of archetypal NFAs (Figure The energy of the first optical transition (E 1 ) is also of practical importance in light harvesters such as NFAs as the lower energy part of the solar spectrum, down to ~1 eV, contains a higher photon flux density. Our results show the number of heteroatoms in the molecule as the most correlated feature with E 1 ( = -0.72, Figure Beyond molecular descriptors, we investigate the relationship between the choice of moieties and absorption strength to provide further material design rules for highly absorbing conjugated small molecules. Our objective is to identify overrepresented moieties in the subset of highabsorbing molecules (which we arbitrarily define as those having f osc,max > 2.5, thus setting a population of size p ) with respect to the entire molecular dataset (population of size P ). Accordingly, we identify the molecular motifs present in the molecules by comparing their structures (as derived from SMILES notation) with those of a previously built database of moieties (also SMILES-based). This database of moieties was partly inherited from a previous work with respect to the molecules of the entire molecular subset. As per the network shown in Besides providing useful chemical insights from a material design perspective, molecular descriptors can be exploited to feed regression models and draw predictions on certain target features, forming the so-called quantitative structure-property relationship (QSPR) and quantitative structure-activity relationship (QSAR) models. Therefore, further molecular candidates beyond the pristine dataset could be geometrically optimized using solely xTB Hamiltonians and their absorption strength predicted using such ML model. This approach effectively bypasses the use of TDDFT calculations when screening the absorption strength of novel molecules, which results in less demanding computations and higher throughput. The present ML workflow will open the possibility to accelerate the screening of high-performing molecular candidates with low-to-moderate computational requirements (further discussed in Supplementary Note 5). From the analysis of descriptors shown in Section 2.2.1, we identified two main feature clusters represented by 1,p and C2SP2. We tentatively consider these two descriptors as independent variables in baseline models (such as 1-nearest neighbour and linear regression) targeted to Accordingly, we deploy a state-of-the-art ML method, namely a RF, to aid in both aspects: feature selection and building of ε d,max models of higher accuracy. RFs constitute one of the simplest and most widely applied ML methods in molecular screening and data mining studies. Table xTB Hamiltonians have recently emerged as semi-empirical and low computational cost quantum chemistry methods. Nevertheless, the dissimilarity between xTB-and DFT-optimized molecular geometries might have a direct impact on the value of the (three-dimensional) molecular descriptors, and hence on the final accuracy of the interpolated ML model if some of those are included. Accordingly, we have first quantitatively compared both sets of molecular (non-electronic) descriptors by computing r in all of them and found that the median of their distributions is very close to unity in all cases (Figure Our first model takes as inputs the three molecular descriptors found previously to be the most important features in the RF model together with their corresponding (64-bit) Morgan fingerprints. The scoring of the LOOCV in this preliminary model (R 2 = 0.53, r = 0.74) is limited due to the existence of a mismatch between the absolute energy levels retrieved by either DFT (B3LYP) or GFN2-xTB methods (Figure We have demonstrated that TDDFT calculations agree reasonably well with the experimental maximum molar extinction coefficient (ε d,max ) in solution state by exploiting a database of TDDFT-optimized small molecular acceptors (NFAs) and donor oligomers collected over the years. This finding supports further analysis of the molecular dataset to identify structureabsorption relationships by means of statistical and machine-learning (ML) methods. Through the exploration of molecular descriptors, we identify two features that are strongly correlated with ε d,max , namely the linearity and planarity of the molecule in the direction of maximum atomic polarizability variance; and the number of sp 2 -hybridized carbon atoms bonded to two other carbons included in the molecule. These further suggest design rules that a highly absorbing NFA should possess a fully conjugated, planar and linear molecular backbone with more polarisable heteroatoms. We further identify that moieties such as thieno [3,2-b]thiophene and indaceno [1,2-b:5,6-b′]dithiophene (IDT) appear more frequently in molecules with the highest absorption strength. Finally, we demonstrate the feasibility of random decision forests (RFs) trained with a few (3) molecular descriptors and 64-bit Morgan fingerprint vectors to predict ε d,max in molecular geometries optimized by a computationally less demanding method such as extended tightbinding (xTB). This approach shows the ability to bypass thorough TDDFT calculations, thus facilitating high-throughput screening of absorption strength in conjugated molecules in combination with generative molecular models. where I is light intensity, determined by the energy density of an electromagnetic wave via where n is the refractive index, ε 0 vacuum permittivity, c the speed of light, and E 0 the amplitude of the electric field. For an electromagnetic wave, the rate of intensity attenuation Where M w is the molecular weight, g mol (5Z,5'Z) -5,5'-(((6,6,12,12-tetraoctyl-6,12-dihydroindeno[1,2-b] (thieno[3,2b]thieno [2''',3''':4'',5'']pyrrolo [2'',3'':4',5']thieno [2',3':4,5]thieno [2,3-d]pyrrole,4,9-dihydro-4,9di-1-octylnonyl-2,7-diyl)bis(methanylylidene))bis ((5,6-difluoro-3-oxo-2,3 - 6,6,12,12-tetrakis(4-hexylphenyl)-6,12-dihydrodithieno[2,3-d ITIC-C2C6: 2,2'-[ [6,6,12,12-tetrakis(2-ethylhexyl)-6,12-dihydrodithieno[2,3-d:2',3'-d']-sindaceno [1,2-b:5,6-b']dithiophene-2,8-diyl]bis[methylidyne(3-oxo-1H-indene-2,1(3H)- ITIC-C8: 2,2'-[ [6,6,12,12-tetrakis(n-octyl)-6,12-dihydrodithieno[2,3-d:2',3'-d']-sindaceno [1,2-b:5,6-b'] was collected from literature. where p is the number of variables and n the sample size. Thus, R adj 2 adds penalties if the model uses too many variables, which is a useful metric when studying feature selection procedures. Test sets comprise 30% of the available data and all models are 10-fold holdout cross-validated (unless otherwise stated, using a randomized 70%-30% splitting for the train and test sets, respectively). P. Cheng, G. Li, X. Zhan and Y. Yang, Nat.Photonics, 2018, 12, 131-142. Y. Wang, J. Lee, X. Hou, C. Labanti, J. Yan, E. Mazzolini, A. Parhar, J. Nelson, J. Kim (exp, film) r = 0.60