The creation of white and multicoloured 3D-printed objects with high colour fidelity via powder sintering processes is currently limited by discolouration from thermal sensitizers used in the printing process. Here we circumvent this problem by using switchable, photochromic tungsten oxide nanoparticles, which are colourless even at high concentrations. Upon ultraviolet illumination, the tungsten oxide nanoparticles can be reversibly activated making them highly absorbing in the infrared. Their strong infrared absorption upon activation renders them efficient photothermal sensitizers that can act as fusing agents for polymer powders in sintering-based 3D printing. The WO3 nanoparticles show fast activation times, and when mixed with polyamide powders they exhibit a heating-to-colour-change ratio greatly exceeding other sensitizers in the literature. Upon mixing with coloured inks, powders containing WO3 display identical colouration to a pristine powder. This demonstrates the potential of WO3, and photochromic nanoparticles in general as a new class of material for advanced manufacturing. In recent years a new generation of composite materials with advanced functionalities has arisen, opening up dynamic new frontiers in both conventional and advanced manufacturing by exploiting the unique properties of nanomaterials. The earliest example of this for 3D printed materials was the creation of nanocomposites through blending polymers with ceramic nanoparticles (NPs) such as alumina Another area in which nanomaterials have shown potential to disrupt current additive manufacturing (AM) technologies is in control over the aesthetic properties of the objects. Traditional 3D prints are printed in a monochrome and must be painted or dyed afterwards. There has been some experimentation with grading powders of different colour to produce a 'two tone' effect In order to reach high color purity in 3D prints, we posited that instead of using permanent absorbers to generate heat, the use of switchable absorbers would allow us to print objects with very high color purity and whiteness. This is important as a strongly coloured powder will limit the colour gamut available for a print, which can impact negatively on both the aesthetics and applications such as barcoding of prints One of the most promising of these materials is tungsten (VI) oxide, WO3, which has a strong absorption in the NIR that can be efficiently switched on and off using electricity (electrochromic) To achieve this we synthesized WO3 uncoated nanoparticles and mixed them with commercial AM powders to create a photochromic nanocomposite powder. We characterized the photochromic properties of these particles in ways not before applied to WO3 NPs, and their behavior is found to agree with the general model of excitation seen in previous studies. We demonstrate the strong, rapid photochromic response of the WO3 particles, and compare the photothermal heating and colouration of the powders to equivalent composite powders made with the industry standard carbon black (CB) as well as recently reported plasmonic nano-heaters based on GNRs. We demonstrate the sintering of these powders via a low powder laser (a 1 W diode laser, compared to the ~40 W CO2 lasers in traditional SLS machines The photochromic effect of Tungsten oxide is due to the formation and decay of a hydrogen tungsten bronze (HWO3) created by photo-induced interactions with the surrounding environment In all cases environmental factors play an important role in determining the strength and speed of the photochromic response. There are two distinct peaks present at 640 nm and 974 nm. Several previous studies have observed this double peak feature and have attributed the long wavelength peak to a plasmonic resonance in the nanoparticle, and the shorter wavelength peak to polaron hopping, although the exact position of peaks has been found to be highly dependent on the size and composition of the nanoparticles The origin of photochromism in WO3 as described earlier is associated to its crystal structure and chemical composition being altered upon UV illumination in the presence of a hydrogen donor. We therefore performed Raman and X-ray Photoelectron spectroscopy to verify the mechanism at play in our NPs. Raman analysis in Fig. In Fig. Powders with concentrations of GNRs greater than 0.02 %wt were found to have a pinkish tinge, especially notable when sintered, as seen in Fig. The aesthetic impact of the photothermal sensitizers is also key for printing fully coloured objects, as the colour of the powder will obviously affect the colour of the finished prints. It is important to be able to print the full gamut of colours, as well as just in monochrome. This is investigated in Fig. Evidently, there is very little difference between the colouration of the inks on WO3 and pristine powders. This is reflected in the ΔCol vs. ink concentration plots (See Fig. In conclusion we have demonstrated that the use of photochromic tungsten oxide nanoparticles as a photothermal sensitizer has the potential to revolutionize high color quality 3D printing. WO3 particles are easy and cheap to manufacture, show fast activation times, and demonstrate a heatingto-colour-change ratio far superior to other available sensitizers. When added to coloured inks, WO3 reproduces even very pale shades perfectly in comparison to pristine powders. This work opens the door to a whole new class of nanomaterials for advanced manufacturing. Gold nanorods were synthesized in-house via the seed-mediated method of Nikoobackht & El-Sayed The NPs were diluted in ethanol then mixed with pristine PA12 powder from Advanc3Dmaterials at differing wt % concentrations then dried in an oven at 60 C overnight. After drying powders were sieved prior to printing. For measuring the effects of the NPs on the colour of powders, various concentrations of commercially available inks were drop-cast onto the powders and the colouration measured with a colorimeter. To perform the comparative tests between the different sensitizers, the powder, small samples of powder in a shallow aluminium holder were illuminated by a 100W 810 nm or 100W 940 nm LED array from Shenzhen Hanhua Opto Co. The temperature of all samples was measured using a FLIR ax5 thermal camera, and the colour tests were performed using a PCE instruments PCE-CSM 4 colorimeter. To sinter the printed shapes in Fig. 