We derive a boundary condition for the Nambu Keldysh Green's function in diffusive normal metal / unconventional superconductor junctions applicable for mixed parity pairing. Applying this theory to a 1d model of s + p-wave superconductor, we calculate LDOS in DN and charge conductance of DN / s + p-wave superconductor junctions. When the s-wave component of the pair potential is dominant, LDOS has a gap like structure at zero energy and the dominant pairing in DN is even-frequency spin-singlet s-wave. On the other hand, when the p-wave component is dominant, the resulting LDOS has a zero energy peak and the dominant pairing in DN is oddfrequency spin-triplet s-wave. We show the robustness of the quantization of the conductance when the magnitude of p-wave component of the pair potential is larger than that of s-wave one. These results show the robustness of the anomalous proximity effect specific to spin-triplet superconductor junctions. Superconducting proximity effect is one of the most fundamental problems in the physics of superconductivity, where a Cooper pair penetrates into normal metal attached to superconductor This problem has been discussed by quasiclassical Green's function method with the Usadel equation In order to extend charge transport theory available for unconventional superconductor junctions, one of the authors Y.T. et al. have developed a theory for a boundary condition (TN boundary condition) of Nambu Keldysh Green's function In order to understand the physical origin of the anomalous proximity effect, the symmetry of Cooper pair has been elucidated Near the interface, it has been shown that spin-triplet s-wave pairing is generated due to the breakdown of the translational invariance Although the anomalous proximity effect has originated from the TN boundary condition [eq. On the other hand, to clarify the pairing symmetry and superconducting property of non-centrosymmetric (NCS) superconductor has become a hot topic in this two decades The present difference has been understood by the topological phase transition. If the pwave component of the pair potential ∆ p is larger than the s-wave one ∆ s , s + p-wave superconductor is in the topological phase with SABS. On the other hand, if ∆ s > ∆ p is satisfied, it is in the non-topological phase without SABS Similar feature has been predicted for LDOS in DN of DN/NCS superconductor junction In this paper, we revisit the boundary condition of the Nambu-Keldysh Green's function in DN/unconventional superconductor junctions derived in ref. In this section, we revisit the outline of the derivation of the boundary condition of the Nambu-Keldysh Green's function in diffusive normal metal / unconventional superconductor junctions. We show a more compact expression of the boundary condition of retarded and Keldysh part of the Green's function. Nazarov has derived a boundary condition of Nambu-Keldysh Green's function at the interface in order to study charge transport in mesoscopic superconductor junctions This theory reproduces the BTK theory when the resistance in the diffusive normal metal can be ignored. First, we explain the outline of the theory by Nazarov where the length of DN L is much larger than mean free path l = v F τ imp with impurity scattering time τ imp . In DN, thermal diffusion length ξ 1 = D/2πT is chosen much larger than l. Here, v F is the Fermi velocity and D is the diffusion constant in the normal metal. As a model of the interface, δ-function potential is used at x = 0, where the transparency at the interface is given by σ N = cos 2 θ/(cos 2 θ + Z 2 ) with barrier parameter Z and an injection angle θ. To make a boundary condition of the Green's function, we assume that the interface zone -L 1 < x < L 1 is composed of diffusive region -L 1 < x < -L 2 and ballistic one with -L 2 < x < L 1 . Here, L 1 and L 2 satisfy L 1 , L 2 ≪ ξ 1 , We denote the envelope function of Green's function of N side (S side) at the interface by ḡ1 (ḡ 2 ). Here ḡ1 and ḡ2 are Nambu-Keldysh Green's function with directional space distinguishing quasiparticle with positive and negative group velocity. By using the interface matrix M , ḡ2 and ḡ1 are related each In general, Ǐ denotes a 8 × 8 unit matrix in particle-hole, Keldysh and spin space. Here, M is defined for each injection channel and t and r express the coefficients of transmission and reflection with Nazarov has shown that ḡ2 is given by for a spin-singlet s-wave superconductor junction with Here, Ǧ(x) is a Nambu-Keldysh Green's function and Ǧ1 denotes When the decomposition of the Green's function into an each spin sector is possible, Ǧ1 , Ǧ2 and unit matrix Ǐ become 4 × 4 matricies. The boundary condition of the Green's function where < Ǐ (θ) > denotes the angular averaged current given by Here, Tr denotes the summation of channels with various injection angles. In the actual calculation of Ǐ(θ), it is convenient to choose the basis where Q becomes a diagonalized matrix. In this basis, Σz is also transformed. Q, Σz are given by Here, we denote the channel index n corresponding to the injection angle θ. Using the eigenvalue q n , the transmissivity at the interface σ N is also expressed by As a result, ḡ2 becomes Finally, Ǐ(θ) = Ǐn is given by Next, let us consider unconventional superconductor junctions. One of the authors Y.T. has extended Nazarov's theory which is available for unconventional superconductor junctions Here, Ǧ2+ and Ǧ2are Green's function for bulk state with different trajectory and they satisfy normalization condition Owing to the presence of two kinds of Nambu-Keldysh Green's function Ǧ2+ and Ǧ2-, surface Andreev bound states (SABS) can be naturally taken into account. It has been shown that ḡ2 is given by (II.13) The relations are satisfied. By using this relation, the matrix current (II.8) has been calculated. The details of the derivation are shown in Appendix A. Ǐn is given by It is noted that Eq. (II.15) can be expressed more compactly. First, we simplify B in eq. (II.16) we derive Then, the denominator of B is transformed into On the other hand, the numerator of B becomes As a result, B is expressed as If we define from eq. (II.13), Č satisfies the following normalization condition The generation of SABS is naturally taken into account in Č. In the case of spin-singlet s-wave superconductor, is satisfied and Č is reduced to be Ǧ2 . Owing to the normalization condition of Č, B can be transformed as By plugging this equation into eq. (II.15), we obtain Here, the following relation is used . This means that Ǧ2 in eq.(II. It is noted that eq. (II.25) is greatly simplified as compared to the original equation in Ref. [16] and is useful for the application to more complicated pair potentials. In the above, Ȟ+ , Ȟ-, Č are expressed as R+ , R-, ĈR and ÎR are retarded parts, K+ , K-ĈK and ÎK are Keldysh ones, and Â+ , Â-, ĈA and ÎA are advanced ones. On the other hand, the Green's function in DN Ǧ1 (x) is expressed by with retarded part R1 (x), Keldysh part K1 (x) and advanced one Â1 (x). We denote R1 (x = 0 -) = R1 , K1 (x = 0 -) = K1 , and Â1 (x = 0 -) = Â1 . Then, the retarded part ÎR is expressed by with unit matrix Î. Here, ĈR is the retarded part of Č and is expressed by which satisfies Ĉ2 R = Î owing to the relation of R+ and R-. In the following, we consider the situation where the decomposition of the Green's function into each spin sector is possible. Both ĈR and R1 are linear combinations of τ1 , τ2 and τ3 and ĈR R1 + R1 ĈR is proportional to Î since it is an anticommutator of 2 × 2 matricies. As a result, the denominator of ÎR is proportional to Î. Then, ÎR is given by First, let us discuss the boundary condition of the retarded part at x = 0. In general, R1 (x) can be decomposed into Since we are considering the charge transport in normal electrode / DN/superconductor junction, it is natural to assume ∂ψ ∂x = 0. The retarded part of the boundary condition in eq.(II.6) is given by The angular average by an injection angle θ is given in eq. (II.7). By plugging ∂ψ ∂x = 0 into (II.36), the left side of eq. (II.36) is transformed into Next, we calculate the Keldysh part of the matrix current Ǐ(θ) given by The relation between the retarded and the advanced part of the Green's function is given by The Keldysh component of ÎK is given by with K1 in eq. (II.41) and ĈK given by with distribution function f 3N (x), f 0N (x) and f S (x). By using above relations, ÎK becomes The explicit form of Λ1 and Λ2 are given by eqs. (VIII.4) and (VIII.5) in Appendix C. To obtain the charge current, we focus on the boundary condition given by eq. (II.6). From eq. (II.6), the τ3 component of the boundary condition of the Keldysh component is given by By using eq. (VIII.6) in Appendix C, following relation is satisfied with the imaginary part of ζ denoted by ζ im . Then, the boundary condition is expressed by From eqs.(II.43), (II.44), (II.45), (VIII.11), and (VIII.12), Trace[ ÎK τ3 ] becomes Eqs.(II.31) and (II.50) are available for general cases of pair potentials. In the following section, we will use these equations for the specific model of unconventional superconductor junctions. In this section, we revisit the case of superconductors with spatial inversion symmetry where the pairing symmetry of superconductor is spin-singlet even-parity or spin-triplet oddparity with time reversal symmetry. We consider spin-triplet paring where z component of the spin momentum of Cooper pair is S z = 0. In that case, we calculate Nambu Keldysh Green's function and derive the charge conductance of the junctions in a more compact way as compared to previous papers and We denote ĈR as where c 1 , c 2 and c 3 are expressed by g ± = g ± (θ), and f ± = f ± (θ) are given by for spin-singlet even-parity superconductors and for spin-triplet odd-parity superconductors for spin-singlet even-parity superconductor and for spin-triplet odd-parity superconductor. From Eq. (II.38), we can determine the relation between s 1 and s 2 written by We decompose the denominator of eq. (III.8) by the summation of d e (θ) and d o (θ) with For spin-singlet even-parity case, using eq. (III.6) d e (θ) and d o (θ) are given by Then, From this relation, we obtain s 1 = 0 On the other hand, for spin-triplet odd-parity pairing case, using eq. (III.7), d e (θ) and d odd (θ) are given by From this relation, we obtain s 2 = 0 This means cos ψ = 0 for spin-singlet even-parity pairing and sin ψ = 0 for spin-triplet odd-parity pairing, respectively. To summarise R1 (x) becomes for a spin-singlet superconductor and for a spin-triplet one consistent with previous results Here, let us discuss about this physical meaning of the symmetry of a Cooper pair. In the DN, only s-wave pairing is possible due to the impurity scattering. Since there is no spin flip scattering at the interface, the symmetry of spin structure in DN is equivalent to that in the superconductor. It is noted that for the spin-singlet superconductor case, R1 (x) is expressed by τ2 and τ3 similar to bulk superconductor. This means that the symmetry of the Cooper pair in the DN is equivalent to that of the bulk, where the pairing symmetry is spin-singlet even-parity. On the other hand, for the spin-triplet superconductor case, R1 is expressed by τ1 and τ3 , different from R2± . This implies that the different symmetry of Cooper pair, i.e., an odd-frequency spin-triplet s-wave pair, is generated in the DN The boundary condition of ζ(x) is given by ) , the angular average is expressed by Here g S , and f S are Next, let us calculate Trace( ÎK τ3 ) by using ζ(x = 0 -), and The details of the calculation are shown in Appendix D. Trace( ÎK τ3 ) is given by If we define I K as the total resistance of the junction R is given by , (III.22) (III.23) Here, fS is given by Using Γ ± defined by g S , f S , fS are given by Then, I K is given by (III.30) for a spin-singlet superconductor and (III.32) Since we get a more compact expression of the matrix current Ǐ(θ) as shown in eqs. (II.31) and (II.50) as compared to the previous one Here, ∆ + and ∆ -are given by for up-spin sector and these are given by for down-spin one. If we denote quasiclassical Green's function for up and down spin sector as g ±↑(↓) and f ±↑(↓) are given by We define ĈR↑(↓) for up(down) spin sector as By using coefficients defined in eq. (III.3), we derive In DN side, we write Green's function of Usadel equation as and Due to the absence of a supercurrent, ψ ↑(↓) is independent of x. The relation of the τ3 component of the boundary condition of eq. (III.8), is greatly simplified in 1d model case with Then, we obtain If we define α ↑(↓) as follows α ↑ and α ↓ are given by In the following, we denote R1↑(↓) and Then, we obtain (IV.17) Here, s 1 and s 2 express the spin-triplet pair amplitude and the spin-singlet one, respectively. Since only s-wave pairing is possible in DN, s 1 and s 2 correspond to the odd-frequency and even-frequency pair amplitude, respectively. Here, we show calculated results of normalized local density of states by its value in the normal state ρ(ε) and pair amplitudes s 1 and s 2 , where ρ(ε) is given by Here, we focus on s 1 , s 2 and ρ(ε) at DN/S interface x = 0. We choose E T h = 0.02∆ 0 , R d /R b = 0.5, and Z = 0.75 in the following calculations. ∆ s and ∆ p are set to be ∆ s + ∆ p = ∆ 0 and changing their ratio. In Fig. We can show that c 1 and c 3 in eqs. (IV.11) and (IV.12) are proportional to 1/ε around ε = 0 and satisfy c 1 = ic 3 . Then, ζ is analytically obtained as independent of the magnitude of ∆ s . The peak width of ρ(ε) becomes narrower only in the regime where ∆ s becomes the same order to that of ∆ p (curve (c) in Fig. In Fig. Next, we look at the case for ∆ s > ∆ p . In Fig. In Fig. Next, we discuss the charge conductance. From eqs. (IV. In the following, using these relations, we calculate the Keldysh component of the Green's function. We denote ÎK for each spin sector as ÎK↑(↓) . Trace( ÎK↑(↓) τ3 ) is expressed as The details of the calcuation of S 1↑(↓) , S 2↑(↓) , S 3↑(↓) , S 4↑(↓) , S 5↑(↓) , and S 6↑(↓) in eq.(IV.21) is shown in Appendix E. Summing up the contribution from both up and down spin sectors, we obtain the following relation The boundary condition of the up spin sector of the Keldysh component at The left side of this boundary condition becomes The corresponding boundary condition for down spin sector is The left side of this boundary condition becomes Since s 1↑ = s 1↓ = s 1 and s 2↑ = -s 2↓ = s 2 are satisfied, we obtain using eqs. (IV.24) and with (IV.28) The resulting boundary condition is given by with ζ im = Imagζ and ψ im = Imagψ. Since we are considering 1d case, I K is simply given by From the Keldysh part of the Usadel equation in the present case, we obtain From this equation, we obtain (IV.31) The electric current from both spin up and down components are given by with From eq. (IV.31), the following relation is satisfied we obtain From eqs. (IV.31), (IV.32), (IV.34), and (IV. Here, we have used units with k B = 1. At sufficiently low temperatures, total resistance of the junction is given by The corresponding resistance becomes The normalized conductance of the junction by its value in the normal state is given by . (IV. using Γ ± as defined in eq. (III.26). In Figs. In Fig. Then, we get By using ζ calculated in eq.(IV. in eq. (IV.38) with Then, we obtain This perfect resonance at zero voltage has been shown for the spin-triplet p-wave superconductor junction In Fig. In this paper, we have revisited the boundary condition of the Nambu Keldysh Green's function in DN/unconventional superconductor junctions. We have derived a more compact expression of the boundary condition of the Nambu-Keldysh Green's function and shown that it is consistent with the formal boundary condition of Green's function derived by Zaitsev In this paper, in order to understand the essence of the crossover of the proximity effect from anomalous one due to the odd-frequency pairing to conventional one by the evenfrequency pairing, we have used a one-dimensional model. Extension to two-dimensional model of s + p x -wave superconductor is an important forthcoming work. As a p-wave pair potential, it is a challenging issue to choose chiral p-wave and helical p-wave pairing. Up to now, charge transport has been calculated in s + chiral p-wave and s + helical p-wave superconductor junction in the ballistic limit Here, we explain the derivation of Ǐn in Using the basis which diagonalizes Q, ḡ2 is obtained as shown in (II.12) The matrix current Ǐn Ǐn ≡ Tr Σz ḡ2 is obtained as By using the following relations between Ȟand Ȟ+ , Ǐn is transformed as Applying the normalization condition of Ǧ1 given by Ǧ2 1 = Ǐ, we obtain Since q n is expressed by σ N , the relations are satisfied. By using these relations, Ǐn is given by Here, by using is satisfied and Ǐn is expressed using σ 1N as follows. If we define Ǎc and Ǎa as Ǐn is expressed by In this section, we show that our obtained boundary condition is consistent with Zaitsev's one and both left and right sides. By using these functions, ǧ+ s and ǧs are defined at the interface as ǧa (1 -σ N ) ǧ+ by using the transmissivity at the interface σ N . In the following,it is shown that our obtained boundary condition of Nambu-Keldysh Green's function is consistent with Zaitsev's one. For this purpose, we must start from so called interface matrix ḡ2 defined in eq.(II.12). It is written as The matrix current is defined by Ǐn = Trace Σz ḡ2 . As shown in eq. (II.25), Ǐn is expressed by Following the same procedure used in the calculation of Trace Then, let us look at ḡ1 . It can be calculated similar to ḡ1 and is given by Trace[ḡ 1 ] and Trace[ḡ 1 Σ z ] can be calculated in the similar way. Trace Let us discuss about the Zaitsev's condition. The following relations are useful. Then, we can express ǧs 1 , ǧs 2 , ǧa 1 , and ǧa 2 as Then, g + s and g - s are obtained as Since Č2 = Ǐ and Ǧ2 1 = Ǐ are satisfied, we obtain following relations. ( Based on these results, we can verify Zaitsev's condition as After some transformation, Λ1 and Λ2 are given by To obtain the charge current, we focus on the boundary condition given by eq. (II.6). The Keldysh part of the left side of this equation is proportional to In order to obtain the charge conductance, the following calculation is needed. From eq. Using these relations in eq. (II.50) immediatly results in eq. (III.21). In this Appendix, we calculate S 1↑(↓) , S 2↑(↓) , S 3↑(↓) , S 4↑(↓) , S 5↑(↓) and S 6↑(↓) which appear in eq. (IV.21). in the following calculations. By using eqs. (X.1) to (X.6) and (X. Substituting the above equations into eq. (IV.21), one obtains eq. (IV.22). [1] P. G. de Gennes, Superconductivity of Metals and Alloys (Benjamin, New York, 1969).