The Z2 topological metals RV3Sb5 (R = K, Rb, Cs) with a layered kagome structure provide a unique opportunity to investigate the interplay between charge order, superconductivity and topology. Here, we report muon-spin relaxation/rotation (μSR) measurements performed on CsV3Sb5 across a broad temperature range, in order to uncover the nature of the charge-density wave order and superconductivity in this material. From zero-field μSR, we find that spontaneous magnetic fields appear below 50 K which is well below the charge-density wave transition (T * ∼ 93 K). We show that these spontaneous fields are dynamic in nature making it difficult to associate them with a hidden static order. The superconducting state of CsV3Sb5 is found to preserve time-reversal symmetry and the transverse-field μSR results are consistent with a superconducting state that has two fully open gaps. Kagome lattice compounds have served as ideal platforms for exploring both unusual magnetic phenomena, such as geometric frustration and quantum spin-liquids Given the unconventional properties of the CDW state, together with various theoretical proposals including chiral flux phases, star of David and inverse star of David configurations Here we report muon-spin relaxation/rotation measurements of CsV 3 Sb 5 in zero-, longitudinal, and transverse magnetic fields. We observe an increase in the μSR relaxation rate upon cooling in zero-field, which is significantly enhanced below around 50 K, well below T * ∼ 93 K. This enhancement persists in a 50 G longitudinal field, pointing to the dynamic nature of these spontaneous fields. Measurements in the superconducting state indicate the lack of additional spontaneous fields appearing below the superconducting transition, and the superfluid density derived from transverse field results is consistent with the previously observed multiband superconductivity. Polycrystalline samples of CsV 3 Sb 5 were prepared by a solid-state reaction method. Stoichiometric amounts of Cs (liquid, Alfa 99.98%), V (powder, Sigma 99.9%), and Sb (shot, Alfa 99.999%) were mixed thoroughly in a glove box filled with Ar gas. The mixture was subsequently loaded in an alumina crucible that was then jacketed in a tantalum tube. The tantalum tube was thereafter sealed in an evacuated quartz ampoule and heated up to 600 • C, held at this temperature for three days, before being furnace cooled to room temperature. The single phase of the as-grown samples was checked by powder x-ray diffraction on a PANalytical X-ray diffractometer with monochromatic Cu-Kα 1 radiation. μSR measurements were performed on powdered CsV 3 Sb 5 samples at the ISIS facility at elevated temperatures between 5 and 180 K using the EMU spectrometer in a 4 He-cryostat, and at low temperatures down to 0.1 K in a dilution refrigerator using the MuSR spectrometer. For zerofield (ZF) and longitudinal-field (LF) measurements, the asymmetry A(t) between the number of positrons detected at the forward (N F ) and backward (N B ) positions was analyzed via where α is a calibration constant. For transverse-field (TF) measurements, the time-dependent histograms corresponding to 16 groups of detectors were simultaneously analyzed using the musrfit software package A. Zero-and longitudinal-field μSR at elevated temperatures Figure where A and A BG correspond to the initial asymmetries for muons stopping in the sample and silver sample show the results from fitting using Eq. 2. The inset shows the data at 10 K, where the solid line shows the results of fitting using Eq. 2 with Λ = 0. It can be seen that in the inset there is considerable deviation of the fitting from the data, showing the necessity of considering an exponential relaxation channel. The temperature dependence of the fitted values of (b) the exponential relaxation rate Λ, and (c) the Kubo-Toyabe relaxation rate ∆. The values of Λ are shown for the cases both when ∆ is fitted as a free parameter, as well as when ∆ was fixed to the value obtained at 120 K. The symbols filled with a cross correspond to points which were measured in ZF after a LF had been applied, as described in the text. holder, respectively, which were fixed to the fitted values at 120 K, while ∆ and Λ are the Gaussian-Kubo-Toyabe and exponential relaxation rates. Note that if a purely Gaussian relaxation is considered (Λ = 0), the low temperature spectra cannot be well fitted, as can be seen in the inset of Fig. The temperature dependence of the fitted values of ∆ and Λ between 5 and 180 K are displayed in Figs. Since the analysis of the ZF-μSR data in the normal state of CsV 3 Sb 5 using Eq. 2 implies that both the Gaussian and Lorenzian relaxation channels are present, we complement this analysis by a recently introduced unbiased Principle Component analysis (PCA) technique We show the results of PCA in Fig. where P C [n] (t j ) is a value of n-th PC at time t j . Assuming that errors coming from different time windows are not correlated, we obtain the PC score standard deviation to be where E(T i , t j ) indicates experimental error of asymmetry function A(T i , t j ) and we also assume that error coming from the variation of P C [n] (t j ) is negligible. We note from the variations of the PC scores as a function of temperature shown in Fig. where A BG was fixed to the same value as the ZF analysis. The temperature dependence of Λ L in the 50 G LF is displayed in Fig. where Λ is the value in zero-field. Using the 5 K values of Λ = 0.04825 μs -1 , and Λ L = 0.01875 μs -1 for the 50 G LF, we estimate ν = 3.39 μs -1 , corresponding to a correlation time τ c = 0.29 μs. The magnitude of the local fields B loc can be related to Λ via Λ = 2(γ μ B loc ) 2 /ν, yielding B loc ≈ 3 G. These are similar local fields and correlation times inferred for the dynamic part of the μSR spectra of PrOs 4 Sb 12 In order to search for the appearance of spontaneous magnetic fields in the superconducting state, indicative of a TRS breaking pairing state To determine the temperature dependence of the superfluid density, muon-spin rotation measurements were performed in a transverse field of 300 G, as shown for two temperatures in Fig. where the first and second terms correspond to muons stopping the sample and sample holder, respectively, and φ is a common phase. Here the ratio A s /A bg was fixed to the fitted value obtained from fitting at the lowest measured temperature. The superconducting contribution to the relaxation σ sc was calculated using σ sc = σ 2 -σ 2 n , using a normal state contribution σ n = 0.210 μs -1 estimated from the normal state data. The temperature dependence of σ sc , which is proportional to the superfluid density, is displayed in Fig. The multigap superconductivity with TRS preserved found in CsV 3 Sb 5 constrains the forms of possible superconducting instabilities in conjunction with other measurements which indicate isotropic full gap behavior In summary, we performed ZF, LF, and TF μSR measurements on the kagome lattice superconductor CsV 3 Sb 5 . Upon lowering the temperature, a significant increase in the relaxation rate corresponding to the exponential relaxation channel of the ZF asymmetry is observed, which onsets below around 50 K, well below the charge ordering temperature T * = 93 K. Upon measuring in a LF of 50 G, a sizable relaxation is still observed, which also shows a similar low temperature increase, indicating the dynamic nature of these small fields. Meanwhile ZF measurements at lower temperatures show no detectable change upon entering the superconducting state, indicating that the superconducting order parameter does not break TRS, while the TF μSR analysis is consistent with the previous findings of two-gap s-wave superconductivity. While it is still an open question as to whether the additional internal fields onsetting well below T * are related to changes in the charge ordered state, the dynamic nature of these fields inferred from our study suggests that they cannot be straightforwardly interpreted in terms of static spontaneous fields arising from the unusual charge ordered state.