Using our previously published algorithm, we analyze the eigenvectors of the generalized Laplacian for two metric graphs occurring in practical applications. As expected, localization of an eigenvector is rare and the network should be tuned to observe exactly localized eigenvectors. We derive the resonance conditions to obtain localized eigenvectors for various geometric configurations and their combinations to form more complicated resonant structures. These localized eigenvectors suggest a new localization indicator based on the L2 norm. They also can be excited, even with leaky boundary conditions, as shown by the numerical solution of the time-dependent wave equation on the metric graph. Finally, the study suggests practical ways to make resonating systems based on metric graphs. Partial differential equations (PDEs) on networks arise in many physical applications such as gas and water networks The underlying mathematical model consists of a metric graph: a finite set of vertices connected by arcs (oriented edges) on which a metric is assigned. Different coupling conditions can be implemented at the vertices. The simplest assumes continuity of the field and zero total gradient at the vertices (Kirchhoff's law). The standard one-dimensional Laplacian together with these boundary conditions results in a generalized Laplacian and associated Helmholtz eigenvalue problem. It can be shown that with these coupling conditions (continuity and Kirchhoff's law) the operator is self-adjoint Combinatorial or discrete graphs bear some similarities to metric graphs. For these graphs, edges only describe connections between vertices. For undirected graphs, both the adjacency matrix and the graph Laplacian are symmetricthey have real eigenvalues, and the eigenvectors can be chosen orthogonal. Some eigenvectors have non zero components on just a few vertices, they are localized and this localization affects transport properties In contrast, the localization of eigenvectors on arcs of random metric quantum graphs has only been studied in a handful of articles and many of these assume non standard interface conditions at the vertices. For the standard conditions, Schanz and Kottos To study these practical network problems, we introduced recently a systematic procedure to compute eigenvalues and eigenvectors of arbitrary order for general metric graphs We first recall the spectral theory formalism for completeness. We will then illustrate it on two examples from engineering applications. Consider a finite metric graph with n vertices connected by m arcs (oriented edges) of length l j , j = 1 : m. Each edge is parameterized by its length x from the origin vertex x = 0 to the terminal vertex x = l j . We recall the definition of the degree of a vertex: the number of edges connected to it. On this graph, we define the vector component wave equation where U ≡ (u 1 , u 2 , . . . , u m ) T . Each component satisfies the one-dimensional wave equation inside the respective arc, In addition, the solution should be continuous at the vertices and also satisfy the Kirchhoff flux conditions at each vertex of degree where u j x represent the outgoing fluxes for arc j emanating from the vertex. Consider equation and where ∆ is the generalized Laplacian, i.e. the standard Laplacian on the arcs together with the coupling conditions at the vertices. Note that we exclude all degree two vertices since due to continuity and the Kirchhoff condition, two edges sharing such a vertex can be merged into a single edge-see The generalized eigenvalue problem (4) admits an inner product obtained from the standard inner product on L 2 space-see A solution in terms of Fourier harmonics on each branch j of length l j is Writing down the coupling conditions at each vertex, one obtains a homogeneous linear system whose k-dependent matrix is singular at the eigenvalues. Using solution (6) on each arc with unknown coefficients A j and B j , the coupling conditions at each vertex yield the homogeneous system M (k)X = 0, The matrix M (k) is singular at the eigenvalues -k 2 . We call these k-values resonant frequencies. A practical and robust computational algorithm for the computation of these eigenvalues and eigenvectors was proposed and studied in For each resonant frequency k q , the eigenvectors V q span the null space of the matrix M (k q ). They can then be written as They can be normalized using the scalar product defined above. We have where and V q j , V q j is the standard scalar product on L 2 ([0, l j ]) . This defines a broken L 2 norm or graph norm. The scalar product V q j , V q j can be computed explicitly It has been shown that, for the standard coupling conditions used here (continuity and Kirchhoff's condition), the eigenvectors V i form a complete orthogonal basis of the Cartesian product Once the eigenvalue problem is solved, one can proceed with the spectral solution of the time-dependent problem, exactly as for the one-dimensional wave equation on an interval. For that, expand the solution of the wave equation on the graph (1) using the eigenvectors, and obtain a simplified description of the dynamics in terms of the amplitudes a q . Like the eigenvectors of the discrete Laplacian, eigenvectors of the generalized Laplacian on a network can be localized in the following sense. Definition 2.1 (Localized eigenvector) An eigenvector V i of the generalized Laplacian operator with the standard coupling conditions is localized if its components V i j (see Such a localized eigenvector plays an important role in the dynamics of the wave equation. We consider two graphs with no symmetries and arbitrary edges to illustrate how frequently localized eigenvectors appear. To identify these eigenvectors, we compute the L 2 norm ratio for each edge j = 1, 2, . . . , m. We introduce the 14 edge graph-see Fig. Fig. The values of k q are presented in Table The second example we present comes from a study by Gaio et al Figure The corresponding values of k q are shown in Table The results of this section illustrate that for arbitrary metric graphs, approximately localized eigenvectors occur, in particular we observed them for large k. However, this localization is not exact. This is a known result, see the statement "there are no perfect scars for generic graphs" by Schanz and Kotos For exactly localized eigenvectors to exist, we need a precise arrangement of the lengths of the arcs involved. We give these resonance conditions in the next section. We examine configurations that lead to exactly localized eigenvectors following the definition (2.1). In the rest of this section we drop the adjective exactly. We find that localized eigenvectors exist on two connected leaves, as a 1-2 state in a pumpkin, as a triangle 1-2-3 and a quadrilateral 1-2-3-4-see Table We show the computations in detail for the 1-2-3 triangle. Calculations for the other examples are given in the appendix. Consider the configuration of Fig. ) 2 and the eigenvector is V = sin kx(1, (-1) n1 , -1) T Proof. On each edge j, we have V j = A j sin kx + B j sin kx. To have a localized eigenvector, we need that at each vertex V = 0 and to balance the fluxes. These conditions are where n 1 , n 2 , n 3 are integers and c 1 = cos kl 1 , . . . . Using the last relation, we get the condition (-1) n1+n2 = (-1) n3 , ( so that n 1 + n 2 + n 3 is even. To summarize, we have a triangle eigenvector if there exists four integers n 0 , n 1 , n 2 , n 3 such that The eigenvector is V = sin kx(1, (-1) n1 , -1) T Fig. We present here a localized eigenvector that is new to the best of our knowledge. It is a 1-2 or more resonance in a pumpkin subgraph. Pumpkin graphs were studied in detail by Berkolaiko Theorem 3.3 A localized eigenvector exists on a pumpkin subgraph of a metric graph with at least two edges l 1 , l 2 if there are two integers n 1 , n 2 of same parity such that Proof. As for the triangle, we want V to be zero at the vertices and to balance the flux, then This yields the system of equations We then obtain sin kl 1 = 0, sin kl 2 = 0, so that where n 1 , n 2 are integers. Then cos kl 1 = (-1) n1 , cos kl 2 = (-1) n2 . A nontrivial solution A 1 , A 2 exists only if cos kl 1 = cos kl 2 so that n 1 and n 2 have the same parity. The condition on the lengths is then where n 1 , n 2 are integers of same parity. To illustrate this localized eigenvector, consider the graph shown in Fig. where n 1 , n 2 and n 3 are integers of the same parity. Note that the eigenspace has dimension 2. To conclude this section, Table Table Two elementary graphs corresponding to localized eigenvectors for the same eigenvalue can be connected to yield a composite graph for the same eigenvalue. We have the following. Theorem 3.4 Consider two elementary graphs G 1 , G 2 corresponding to localized eigenvectors of the generalized Laplacian for the same eigenvalue. Then, the composite graph obtained by joining a vertex from G 1 to a vertex from G 2 has the same eigenvalue. The proof is elementary. The eigenvector components V 1 j , V 2 k are zero at each vertex of G 1 and G 2 respectively so that the zero condition is satisfied for both subgraphs. Since the fluxes are balanced separately for G 1 and G 2 , they will be balanced for the composite graph. This shows that the union of the eigenvectors V 1 , V 2 is a localized eigenvector for the composite graph. A consequence of this result is that the composite graph can be a subgraph of a large graph and have the same eigenvalue as long as there are no "external" edges i.e. not belonging to G 1 and G 2 . The methodology given above also allows us to rule out geometric situations where no localized eigenvector exists. As an example, consider a single arc. Proof. To show this, consider Fig. This yields A = B = 0 so that a localized eigenvector cannot exist. This is a known result The histograms of the energy components V q j , V q j of the localized eigenvectors show differences despite the fact that the A coefficients are the same. This imbalance is due to the different lengths of the arcs j because V q j , V q j scales like l j -see To correct the imbalance, we use equation ( where where we use the graph norm The calculations of the previous section for the two leaf, the triangle and the quadrilateral localized eigenvectors can be used to exactly compute L q . The results are shown in Table The quantity E q j is the energy density of edge j. When applied to arbitrary metric graphs such as the G14, it indicates the regions of the graph that are most active. In contrast, the standard localization criterion used for example by Gaio two leaf triangle quadrilateral Table An important practical issue is how to excite these localized eigenvectors. For the random fiber laser, the authors of Then the boundary condition there becomes which is easily satisfied if V j x = V j = 0. This simple argument shows that localized eigenvectors inside the graph will be preserved when the boundaries of the network are coupled to a dissipation source. We illustrate this numerically on the G14 metric graph, using the finite difference code studied in the article Vertex 6 has a transparent boundary condition (21) (ǫ = 1). The other external vertices have Neuman boundary conditions. We solve the generalized wave equation using the numerical procedure detailed in In this article we applied our algorithm to study the eigenvectors of two metric graphs arising in the modeling of the electrical grid and in a model of a random laser. We find that localized eigenvectors occur rarely and that the network needs to be tuned specifically for this. We describe precise resonance conditions on the lengths of the arcs to obtain exactly localized eigenvectors. Some of these results were known, new results are the 1-2 arc cycle eigenvector in a pumpkin and the connection of localized eigenvectors to form a larger localized eigenvector. We define a new localization criterion based on the L 2 norm which gives the number of active edges in an eigenvector, this quantity cannot be obtained from the standard IPR criterion. An important question is how to excite these localized eigenvectors? To answer this we showed, using the time dependent wave equation with a leaky boundary, that a localized eigenvector gets naturally excited in the long term from a broadband initial condition. For the electrical grid application, even approximately localized eigenvectors can damage equipment so it should be reinforced in the regions of maximal amplitude of these localized eigenvectors. For a laser, a random arrangement of wave guides graph will not in general lead to a lasing phenomenon. A laser should be built by associating structures corresponding to localized eigenvectors, not random links. In the future, we plan to extend this study to nonlinear effects and examine the stability of the resonance to perturbations (quality factor). We will also examine non-Kirchhoff coupling conditions. Exactly localized eigenvectors also exist when there are three or more leaves. We sketch the situation for three leaves and give the result for L leaves. Assume there are three leaves. The conditions are then B 1 = B 2 = B 3 = 0, A 1 + A 2 + A 3 = 0, cos kl 1 = cos kl 2 = cos kl 3 = 0. From this system we obtain the constraints on the lengths (2p 1 + 1)l 1 -(2q 1 + 1)l 2 = 0, (2p 2 + 1)l 1 -(2q 2 + 1)l 3 = 0, (2p 3 + 1)l 2 -(2q 3 + 1)l 3 = 0, where p 1 , p 2 , p 3 , q 1 , q 2 , q 3 are integers. Note that the eigenspace has dimension 2. For L connected leaves, we would get an eigenspace of dimension L -1 and C 2 L constraints defining k. A leaf is an arc such that its end vertex has degree 1, see Fig. The determinant of the submatrix obtained by taking out the first line is equal to 1, so that the whole matrix has rank greater of equal to 6. Then there is no other solution than