The unique properties of the emerging photonic materials, conducting nitrides and oxides, especially their tailorability, large damage thresholds, and, importantly, the so-called epsilonnear-zero (ENZ) behavior, have enabled novel photonic phenomena spanning optical circuitry, tunable metasurfaces, and nonlinear optical devices. This work explores direct control of the optical properties of polycrystalline titanium nitride (TiN) and aluminum-doped zinc oxide (AZO) by tailoring the film thickness, and their potential for ENZ-enhanced photonic applications. We demonstrate that TiN-AZO bilayers act as Ferrell-Berreman metasurfaces with thickness-tailorable epsilon-near-zero resonances in the AZO films operating in the telecom wavelengths spanning from 1470 to 1750 nm. The bilayer stacks also act as strong light absorbers in the ultraviolet regime employing the radiative ENZ modes and the Fabry-Perot modes in the constituent TiN films. The studied Berreman metasurfaces exhibit opticallyinduced reflectance modulation of 15% with picosecond response-time. Together with the optical response tailorability of conducting oxides and nitrides, utilizing the field-enhancement near the tunable ENZ regime could enable a wide range of nonlinear optical phenomena, including all-optical switching, time refraction, and high-harmonic generation. In optical device design, tailoring the optical response of constituent materials is important for achieving the desired functionalities. This makes it important to develop methods of controlling the optical properties of technologically-relevant materials. Titanium nitride is a promising material for nanophotonic applications because of its good plasmonic properties For these technologically relevant materials, the optical properties can be controlled during growth by varying deposition conditions. For example, the properties of titanium nitride can be tailored by fine-tuning the temperature, gas ratio, and even post-deposition annealing Building upon the demonstrated adjustability of the TiN and AZO properties, we demonstrate AZO/TiN bilayers where the AZO film is grown on the reflective TiN. Such structures form tailorable, so-called Ferrell-Berreman metasurfaces with the absorption wavelength that can be varied by controlling the AZO thickness. The proposed metasurfaces can operate in a wavelength range from 1470 to 1750 nm, covering the technologically important telecommunication wavelength range. We show that TiN also exhibits both Fabry-Pérot type reflectance dips that vary with the layer thickness and Ferrell-Berreman dips near its ENZ point. As a proof of concept of a dynamic, tunable device, we demonstrate all-optical switching of the metasurface using an interband pump, showing picosecond relaxation times. Understanding the thickness-dependent optical properties of robust, tailorable conducting films will establish a design framework for optimized optical devices To investigate the effect of thickness on the optical response of polycrystalline TiN films, we grew TiN films of several thicknesses on silicon by DC reactive magnetron sputtering at elevated temperatures. This method was utilized to produce optical grade TiN by other groups [51-53] . Alternative techniques of growing TiN include pulsed laser deposition We measured the optical properties of the TiN films with spectroscopic ellipsometry, and fitted them with a Drude-Lorentz model where ω is the angular frequency, ħ is the reduced Planck constant, ε∞ is the background permittivity. A0 [eV 2 ] is the square of the plasma frequency and B0 [eV] is the Drude damping coefficient. The Drude term is summed up with two Lorentz terms with n th oscillator strength An [eV] 2 , broadening Bn [eV], and resonance position En [eV]. Supporting Information S1 contains the measurement details and the model parameters. In the telecommunication range, the contribution of free-electrons, represented by the Drude term, strongly governs the optical response. Then, the real and the imaginary parts of the permittivity can be written separately as, where εb denotes the net contribution of the Lorentz oscillators with background permittivity ε∞. The dielectric function of TiN films with different thicknesses are plotted in Figure At first, as the thickness increases up to 25 nm, the slope of the real part of the TiN dielectric function becomes steeper, implying increased metallicity (see Fig. To understand the change in the optical response with the thickness, we investigate the crystalline structure of the TiN and its permittivity model. The plasma frequency increases for thicknesses up to 25 nm then starts decreasing (Fig. . The plasma frequency of polycrystalline films is lower than that of epitaxial titanium nitride films reported in previous studies We deposited aluminum-doped zinc oxide on optically thick TiN films using pulsed laser deposition (PLD) with a 2% AZO target at a temperature of 120 o C. We grew film thicknesses spanning from 27 to 63 nanometers. The 27-43 nm films are grown on 60 nm TiN, and the 57 and 63 nm films are grown on 130 nm TiN. The TEM image of the 43 nm AZO film is given in the Supporting Info S3. For the dielectric functions of AZO, we used a Drude-Lorentz model with a single Lorentz oscillator. Supporting Information S3 contains the model parameters. Figure We utilize the thickness-tailorable ENZ points of the conducting films to develop wavelengthselective absorbers. In the epsilon-near-zero regime, materials have diminishingly small electric permittivity that causes various singularities in their optical responses A FB metasurface comprises two parts -a robust back-reflector, and an ENZ thin film. The resonance wavelength of the FB metasurface depends on the optical properties of the ENZ film. The TiN-AZO bilayer stacks form a double-resonant FB metasurface, with two dips near the ENZ regions of TiN and AZO for p-polarized light at an angle of incidence of 50 degrees (Fig. For a proof-of-concept demonstration of the as-grown films in photonic time-varying applications, we investigated the reflectance modulation of the 63-nm-thick AZO FB absorber with an interband pumpnear-infrared (NIR) probe configuration. The pump at 325 nm wavelength is generated by passing a 70 fs, 800 nm pump laser through an OPA. The probe is generated by passing the pump through a sapphire crystal to generate a NIR supercontinuum probe. The pump is at normal incidence, while the probe is at an angle of incidence of 50degrees (Fig. In this work, we investigate the thickness-dependent optical response of conducting nitrides and oxides, namely, plasmonic titanium nitride and aluminum-doped zinc oxide as a tailorable, industry-compatible, low-loss platform for passive and dynamic photonics. Specifically, we study the properties of low-loss, optical grade titanium nitride grown on the technologically relevant silicon substrate. The studied films exhibit plasmonic properties that are better than any previously reported work of TiN on silicon, and in some instances, even better than epitaxial titanium nitride grown at lower temperatures. For both TiN and AZO, we demonstrate that by controlling the thickness, the optical properties of the conducting films can be adjusted. For photonic device demonstrations, we grow aluminum-doped zinc oxide on titanium nitride films with the lowest reported losses in the epsilon near zero regions. Furthermore, we show that the spectral window of the ENZ regime of the studied AZO films can be varied by almost 400 nm by changing the film thickness by ~40 nm, resulting in tailorable Ferrell-Berreman modes spanning the telecommunication wavelength range. Subsequently, we demonstrate strong absorbers utilizing the proposed AZO/TiN bilayers that employ dual Ferrell-Berreman modes, one near the ENZ point of TiN and the other near that of the AZO film. To explore the feasibility of the materials for dynamic photonics, we demonstrate reflectance modulation in the studied AZO/TiN bilayers with pump-probe spectroscopy and show that the absorbance can be tuned at picosecond timescales in the near-infrared range. Since the FB mode only occurs for p-polarized light switching, this can enable active polarization control of the reflected light. The thickness-dependent optical properties of low-loss conducting films can be employed to develop efficient, tailorable photonic devices including lithography-free light absorbers in the near-infrared to the mid-infrared regime, all-optical switches as well as nonlinear structures for high-harmonic generation. Table As a result, we excluded the roughness from the fitting. The crystalline structures of the film also change with the thickness which can be used to explain the change in the optical parameters. AZO is grown on 60 nm TiN films by pulsed laser deposition (PVD-Products). The substrate is heated at a temperature of 40 C. A 2% AZO target is irradiated with a 5 Hz 266 nm Excimer laser with a fluence of 1 J/cm 2 /pulse. To verify the thicknesses, we first grow a ~400 nm thick film of AZO on silicon and measure the thickness through cross-sectional SEM. The growth rate is estimated from the thickness divided by time. The deposition rate is 6 nm/min. Different thicknesses of films were then grown by adjusting the deposition time. Spectroscopic ellipsometry is done on the AZO samples at angles of 50 and 70 degrees and fitted with a Drude-Lorentz model. The thickness for AZO was added as a fitting parameter in the JA W_VASE software, and the extracted thickness was verified by tunneling electron microscopy. Fig. 