We theoretically study the effect of orbital-dependent exchange field in the formation of second order topological superconductors. We demonstrate that changing the orbital difference can induce topological transition and the Majorana corner modes therein can be manipulated. We further propose to detect the corner modes via a normal probe terminal. The conductance quantization is found to be robust to changes of the relevant system parameters. Introduction.-The topological insulator (TI) is a new phase of matter featuring non-trivial gapped band structure in the bulk and metallic states on the boundary Very recently, a new class of topological superconductors coined "second-order topological superconductors" (SOTS) is proposed and attracts much attention. SOTS is a 2-dimensional superconducting system with topologically nontrivial 0-dimensional Majorana corner modes (MCMs). Such corner states emerge at domain walls due to the induced superconducting or magnetic gap along adjacent boundaries and have been actively sought after in proximity-modified 2D TI systems, e.g., a 2D TI in proximity to high temperature superconductors It is noted that there are some subtle issues in TI-based SOTS by either magnetic field or magnetic doping. In previous studies In this context, we study the effect of orbitaldependent exchange field in a magnetic TI coupled to superconductors. It is found that the different weight of exchange field can drive the topological phase transition from SOTSs to topological trivial superconductors. Moreover, we propose to use a metallic tip brought in contact with the corner of TI to measure the tunneling spectroscopy. A robust quantized conductance is found and can be served as a way to identify MCMs. Model.-We consider second order topological superconductors in a 2D magnetic TI by introducing superconductivity via proximity effect. The Hamiltonian of the system is k↑ , ψ b,k↑ , ψ a,k↓ , ψ b,k↓ , ψ † a,-k↑ , ψ † b,-k↑ , ψ † a,-k↓ , ψ † b,-k↓ ) T and ψ σ,s the field operators of σ-orbital and s-spin. H 0 describes the normal 2D TI or quantum spin Hall insulator where σ, ŝ and τ are Pauli matrices in the orbital, spin and Numbu space, respectively. H k,s(d) describes the induced superconducting pairing on TI. We assume m = m 0 -2t < 0 for topological insulator state. Here, we consider conventional s-wave and unconventional d-wave pairings as follows: with ∆ s and ∆ d being the amplitude of s-wave and dwave pairing potential in the bulk, respectively. H k,M is the exchange interaction from either the doped magnetic impurities or external in-plane magnetic field: where α describes the difference between exchange fields of the two orbitals. For α = 0, the exchange fields of two orbitals has the same weight while α = 1 means that the anti-ferromagnetic order emerges. The value of α runs from 0 to 1. (m x , m y ) = M 0 (cos θ, sin θ) describe the in-plane magnetic field with M 0 and θ being the magnitude and direction, respectively. Unlike in-plane field, the out-of-plane magnetic field does not break the mirror symmetry and thus is irrelevant of producing mass term The effective Hamiltonian H = H0 + Hs(d) + HM on edge l ∈ (I,II,III,IV) can be obtained in the standard way Hs,l = -∆s ŝy τy , Hd,l = (-1) l-1 ∆d ŝy τy , HM,l = αm x ξ l ŝx τz + αm y ξ l ŝy with ξ l = (1, 0, 1, 0), ζ l = (0, 1, 0, 1), and for I,II,III and IV edges, respectively. ∆s ( ∆d ) is the effective edge pair potential for s-wave (dwave) pairing and is given by ∆s = ∆ s ( ∆d = m∆ d /t). It can be seen that apart from α = 0 and 1, all edges have non-zero magnetic mass term. To study the MCMs in real space, we can transform the Hamiltonian H under Fourier transformation Ψ k = N -1/2 (i,j) e ikx (i,j) Ψ i,j and obtain the H = 1 2 ( Ĥ0 + Ĥs(d) + ĤM ) in the real space as follows We define Ĥ as H = 1 2 i,j Ψ † i Ĥi,j Ψ j where i = (i, j) denotes the lattice site. The Green's function can be obtained as The local density of states (LDOS) at energy ε on site i can be solved from ĝr (ε): For comparison, we can define the normalized LDOS ρi Figure Topological analysis.-Let us investigate the condition for MCMs based on effective Hamiltonian on edges. We choose two specific adjacent edges: I and IV. Making a unitary transformation we find that the I edge can be described by the following Hamiltonian HI = U HI U † = h I,1 ⊕ h I,2 , with According to the Jackiw-Rebbi theory It is noted that angle θ does not plays a role in Eq. 22, thus the topological condition only depends on the magnitude of magnetization M and effective pair potential ∆s . The phase diagram is shown in Fig. For d-wave pair potential, it can be verified that pairs of MCMs can be found under the condition d 1 < 0 and d 2 < 0 where d 1 and d 2 are given by When d 1 and d 2 satisfy d 1 d 2 < 0, a single MCM exists. For d-wave pairings, the pair potential undergoes a sign Experimental signatures.-To explore the experimental signatures of the MCMs, we propose to use a normal probe terminal, such as an STM tip, coupled to the corner of the SOTS. Specifically, the semi-infinite normal probe on the x-axis is placed at the corner between I and IV edges. We set the origin at the corner and the Hamiltonian H N of the probe is where m, μ N and U are the effective mass, chemical potential and the barrier parameter between the probe and the 2D TI, respectively. For simplicity, we only consider x-axis magnetization. Using the similar method The parameter Z = 2 mU/k (k: the Fermi wave vector) describes the barrier strength, while the real and dimensionless number χ represents the different microscopic details between the probe and 2D TI, such as the hopping integrals in the underlying lattice model. The scattering wave function for the normal probe is solved as for an incident electron with spin σ =↑ (↓) and wave function Φ ↑ = (1, 0, 0, 0) T e iqx [Φ ↓ = (0, 1, 0, 0) T e iqx ]. Under the wide band approximation, the wave vector is k = √ 2m N μ N and the spinors are B↑ = (1, 0, 0, 0) T , B↓ = (0, 1, 0, 0) T , Â↑ = (0, 0, 1, 0) T , and Â↓ = (0, 0, 0, 1) T . The normal (Andreev) reflection amplitudes are b σ σ (a σ σ ) for an incoming electron of spin σ scattered as an electron (hole) of spin σ . We focus on zero energy solution and thus the wave functions of edge I and IV are with Φ 1(2) (κ) = (±ν, ∓1, ν, 1) T , Φ 3(4) (κ) = (ν, 1, ∓ν, ±1) T and ν = iκ/ |κ|. For s-wave pair potential, we have λp 1(2) = m x -αm x ∓ ∆s , λp 3(4) = αm x ± ∆s and they are λp 1(2) = m x -αm x ∓ ∆d , λp 3(4) = αm x ∓ ∆d for d-wave case. The differential conductance G at zero temperature is calculated using the formula Here, a σσ and b σσ are reflection amplitudes at zero bias. For the numerical calculations we choose k N / m ≈ 1.57 × 10 6 m/s, μ N ≈ 7.0 eV corresponding to copper, |λ| ≈ 5.5 × 10 5 m/s and χ = 1. We note that the feature of zero-bias conductance is not material dependent. First, we display the result of zero bias conductance for s-wave pairing state. For a fixed α, the phase boundary clearly appears in the conductance dependence on the magnetization m x in Fig. We now turn to the d-wave case. At zero magnetization, it has been known that there are pairs of MCMs. Our conductance result shows a 4e 2 /h conductance peak as the presence of pairs of MCMs even in a weak exchange field |m x | < m 1 in Fig. Conclusions.-We have studied the orbital-dependent exchange field effect on the formation of second order topological superconductors based on two-dimensional topological insulators. We have considered both s-wave and d-wave pairing states. The Majorana corner modes are shown to be dependent on the orbital difference. For experimental realizations, we expect 2D topological insulator materials such as HgTe quantum wells. When proximate to superconductors, a proximity-induced superconducting gap can be induced 