The impact of the environment on graphene's properties such as strain, charge density, and dielectric environment can be evaluated by Raman spectroscopy. These environmental interactions are not trivial to determine, since they affect the spectra in overlapping ways. Data preprocessing such as background subtraction and peak fitting is typically used. Moreover, collected spectroscopic data vary due to different experimental setups and environments. Such variations, artifacts, and environmental differences pose a challenge in accurate spectral analysis. In this work, we developed a deep learning model to overcome the effects of such variations and classify graphene Raman spectra according to different charge densities and dielectric environments. We consider two approaches: deep learning models and machine learning algorithms to classify spectra with slightly different charge density or dielectric environment. These two approaches show similar success rates for high Signal-to-Noise data. However, deep learning models are less sensitive to noise. To improve the accuracy and generalization of all models, we use data augmentation through additive noise and peak shifting. We demonstrated the spectra classification with 99% accuracy using a convolutional neural net (CNN) model. The CNN model is able to classify Raman spectra of graphene with different charge doping levels and even subtle variation in the spectra between graphene on SiO2 and graphene on silanized SiO2. Our approach has the potential for fast and reliable estimation of graphene doping levels and dielectric environments. The proposed model paves the way for achieving efficient analytical tools to evaluate the properties of graphene. Raman spectroscopy is a versatile tool using vibration information of atoms to reveal the fingerprint of materials In recent years, the development of machine learning and powerful deep learning models have offered exciting tools in material science, especially spectral data analysis Deep learning, a class of machine learning algorithms, uses artificial neural networks to progressively learn and extract features from input data. These networks then use the high-level extracted features to classify or process the input data, which offers a better generalization comparing to processing data using machine learning algorithms. Deep learning offers unprecedented opportunities in feature extraction when it comes to datasets such as Raman spectra. They are capable of efficiently handling large amounts of data and detecting complex nonlinear relationships Graphene has applications in sensors, displays, and flexible devices due to its superior transport properties, e.g. giant intrinsic mobility and distinctive electronic structure In this work, we analyze Raman data collected from several large areas (spatial Raman maps) from graphene in varying environments. In addition, we explicitly consider experimental flaws e.g., drift in the focal positions for a long acquisition time, or from low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), where noise is added to low noise spectra (Figure Two datasets are used in this work, the graphene charge variation dataset (charge dataset) and the graphene dielectric variation dataset (dielectric dataset). Graphene samples with different charge densities are prepared by exfoliating graphene on silane-treated and untreated SiO2 surfaces. Different charge doping levels are controlled by the surface roughness of the silane layer (Octadecyltrimethoxysilane, OTMS). The charge dataset is collected by performing Raman spatial mapping on each graphene sample with different charge doping levels. Even though treating substrates with OTMS yields a big difference in graphene charge density as measured by transport data The collected Raman spectra are cropped into the same range (1450 to 3152.4 cm -1 ) to display the G and 2D bands. The input data, one by 728 one-dimensional vector, are fed into machine learning or deep learning models. The output of these models is a 4 by 1 vector, corresponding to four different accidental doping levels, or four different dielectric environments. Detailed information about Raman measurement, deep network architectures, and machine learning algorithms are shown in Methods. The Raman spectra of each class in the graphene charge variation dataset (charge dataset, total 2112 Raman spectra) are color-grouped and plotted in Figure We implement 5 commonly used machine learning algorithms and record their performance on both datasets. The implemented machine learning algorithms include Support vector machine (SVM), Random Forest (RF), K-nearest neighbors (KNN), Decision Tree (DT), and Naïve Bayes (NB). The parameters of each of these algorithms are tuned to achieve the highest classification accuracy using the dielectric dataset, shown in Figure However, Naïve Bayes shows poor performance in both datasets with an accuracy of 46 % and 76 %, respectively. This means the feature-independent assumption in Naïve Bayes does not ring true in the collected Raman data Signal to noise ratio plays an important role in Raman spectra analysis. To explore this, we artificially generate different noise, add them to our collected graphene Raman spectra, and fit the spectra with Voigt profile to analyze its peak information. Details about generating noise and how noise can impact the analytical results are shown in SI. Here, we define noise level as the noise fluctuation range over the maximum intensity of the Graphene Raman 2D peak. The results show that the extracted parameters are highly dependent on noise; high noise levels lead to larger parameter fluctuations. To study the effect of noise on the machine learning algorithms, we trained and tested all models at various noise levels. At each noise level, the machine learning models were run 100 times and their statistical results (average and standard deviation) are shown in Figure2b and d. As expected, increasing the noise level inherently increases the complexity of the data and reduce the predicting accuracy of all the machine learning models. In Figure It is important to note that most of machine learning algorithms suffer from three things: high computational complexity, large memory utilization, and limited generalizability. The poor generalizability of machine learning algorithms makes it difficult for real application since most of the collected Raman spectra data may has a certain noise level, leading to low prediction accuracies. Thus, to find the optimal machine learning tool for graphene-based Raman spectra data analysis, we looked into deep learning approaches. We implemented 4 different deep architectures: Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), Fully Convolutional Neural Network (FullCNN), Fully Connected Neural Network (FC), and MultiHead Convolutional Neural Network (MHCNN). We then compare the performance of these models on both datasets. The parameters of each architecture are tuned to achieve the highest classification accuracy within each dataset. Detailed model architectures and training processes are described in Methods and SI. Briefly, a block of the normal CNN, in our models includes a convolutional layer, a ReLU activation layer, a batch-normalization layer, and a pooling layer. The FullCNN is constructed using only convolutional layers. The FC is built using densely connected layers. The MHCNN consists of three different CNN blocks in parallel. To compare the performance of these deep learning models with previous machine learning algorithms, we carried out the same noise experiment discussed above. Figure Figure As shown by the experimental results, all our proposed deep models perform much better than the commonly used machine learning algorithms which are more sensitive to noise, causing the classification accuracy to decrease rapidly with increasing levels of noise. This is important since collected Raman spectra usually have various SNRs. On the other hand, our best performing CNN achieves a high accuracy of over 99% and maintains an accuracy of over 90% up to a noise level of 30 %. This means that our model has wide applications in graphene Raman spectra analysis. For collected Raman spectra data with high SNR (or noise level < 1%), you can use both deep learning models or machine learning algorithms. It is much more desirable to use deep learning models if the collected data has a low SNR since the machine learning algorithms do not generalize well and their performance degrades heavily with noise. Due to the inherent randomness present in deep learning such as random initializations, shuffling, and stochastic optimization steps, our models may converge to slightly different classification accuracies every time we train them. In this section, we next investigate if we can improve the stability and reproducibility of our proposed deep learning models using data augmentation, including peak shifting and additive noise. Peak shifting is done by randomly shifting the Raman spectra within ± 30 cm -1 , and the augmentation through noise is described in Methods. As an example, we set the noise level to 5%. The SNR of the raw data is 0.8 -0.9 %. For each model, more than 400 experiments are run and the data is reshuffled between training and testing each time. Figure We have tested machine learning models and deep learning CNN models to characterize the charge density and dielectric environment of graphene from Raman spectra. The CNN models perform better than the ML models, especially for lower signal to noise data. Four different deep architectures (CNN, FullCNN, FC, MHCNN) are implemented and tested. The CNN model shows excellent performance with an accuracy 95 -99 % on the graphene charge variation dataset and graphene dielectric variation dataset. This CNN model is able to classify Raman spectra of graphene with different charge doping levels and even subtle variation in the spectra between graphene on SiO2 and graphene on silanized SiO2. Data augmentation, including adding noise and shifting Raman peaks, strengthens the performance of all models on both datasets. We also compare the deep models with commonly used machine learning algorithms (SVM, RF, KNN, DT, NB) on the datasets, with and without augmentation. The results show that the CNN has excellent performance and is less sensitive to noise than the tested machine learning algorithms. Both deep learning models and machine learning algorithms can be adopted for Raman spectra classification if the collected Raman spectra has high SNR. However, deep learning models are favorable for Raman spectra with low SNR since machine learning algorithm is not generalized, and the performance is highly affected by noise levels. For specific datasets and real applications, the proposed CNN model requires some tweak to optimize the performance. With development of deep learning libraries and frameworks, setting up such models for Raman spectra analysis becomes much easier and faster. By combining Raman spectroscopy with deep learning, our approach can quickly and reliably classify graphene Raman spectra and estimate graphene doping levels and dielectric environments. Sample preparation: 1. The graphene charge variation dataset (charge dataset) is collected by performing Raman spatial mapping on each graphene sample with different charge doping levels. Graphene samples with different charge densities are prepared by exfoliating graphene on OTMS-treated and untreated SiO2 surfaces. Different charge doping levels are controlled by the surface roughness of the OTMS layer. The doping level of each sample is evaluated by transport measurement, shown Talbe1 in supplementary information (SI). C1 has doping range: 24 to 43 × 10 11 cm -2 , C2 has doping range: 16.7 to 28.1 × 10 11 cm -2 , C3 has doping range: 3.7 to 18.1 × 10 11 cm -2 , and C4 has doping range: 1.4 to 4.8 × 10 11 cm -2 . 2. The graphene dielectric variation dataset (dielectric dataset) is collected by using the same Raman spatial mapping method. Graphene samples are prepared by exfoliation and the different dielectric environments are fabricated through the dry transfer method Data acquisition: All the spectra are collected using Renishaw Raman spectroscopy with a 532nm laser using the same illumination power of 300 μW and a grating of 1200 groves/mm. The ×100 (0.7 NA) objective lens generates a diffraction-limited spot size of 0.45 μm in diameter. The Raman spatial mappings are taken with a 1 μm step size to avoid overlap between spectra. The collected spectral ranges between 662.05 and 3152.4 cm -1 . All the spectra data are cropped into a smaller range (1450 to 3152.4 cm -1 ) to eliminate the effect of the Boron nitride Raman peak during the training process. The charge dataset consists of 4 different classes with the following counts: Gr/OTMS1 (484), Gr/OTMS2 (633), Gr/OTMS3 (753), and Gr/SiO2 (242). The dielectric dataset also consists of 4 different classes with the following counts: Gr/SiO2 (1355), Gr/OTMS/SiO2 (1386), BN/Gr/OTMS (727), and BN/Gr/BN (951). Raman spectral plots of each class are shown in Figure The cosmic rays are removed through MATLAB before any further processing. All the spectra are first rescaled between 0 and 1 to speed up the convergence in the training process. The data augmentation process is designed to mimic and capture the expected variations in Raman signals that may happen during different experimental setups and environments. Data augmentation includes adding different noise levels (up to 50 %) and shifting the Raman peaks (up to ± 30 wavenumber). This can easily happen during different experimental conditions such as different power, misalignment, and different focus plane in the experimental setup. This, as shown previously, improves the generalization of the models on the data sets. An illustration of data augmentation is shown in Figure Flowchart of experimental design: Before feeding into any models, all the raw data is rescaled and the cosmic rays are removed. In the data augmentation step, we applied peak shifting to better capture all expected variations in the collected spectra. Each model is studied with different noise levels. 5 different machine learning models (SVM, RF, KNN, DT, NB) and 4 different deep learning models (CNN, FullCNN, FC, and MHCNN) are implemented, shown in Figure To study graphene with different charge densities, we fabricated a graphene field-effect transistor (GFET) on a 90 nm SiO2 substrate. The charge neutrality point (CNP), average accidental doping (n 0 ), charge fluctuation (∆n), mobility, and charge range are shown in Table Throughout this project, we experimented with four different deep network architectures CNN, FullCNN, MultiHead CNN, and Fully Connected neural network, all of which are detailed below. This network is by far the simplest of the four architectures. It is 7 back-to-back linear layers. Each of the layers is followed by a relu activation and an appropriately sized batchnorm layer. The final output is then passed through a softmax function. This model uses 5 one dimensional convolutions after each other. The output is then flattened and passed to 2 fully connected layers. The exact details of the layers can be seen in the figure below. It is important to note that each of the 1D Conv layers is followed by a relu activation, batchnorm of the appropriate size, and then a 1D average pooling of size 2. Similarly, the first fully connected layer is also followed by a relu activation and a batchnorm. Finally, the last fully connected layer is followed by a relu activation and a softmax. This model is very closely related to the CNN model described above. It also starts with 5 1D convolution layers exactly as detailed before. However, after the fifth convolution, the output is then passed to a 1x1 convolution layer with a filter count of four. The output is this layer is then averaged across each filter yielding a single number for each filter, this is known as global average pooling. Once again, each convolution is followed by a relu activation, a batchnorm, and a 1d average pooling of size 2, and the last layer is also followed by a softmax function. This model is another variant of the CNN architecture. It passes the input into 3 different paths simultaneously, each of which containing its own, differently shaped, pair of 1d convolutional layers. All three outputs are then flattened and concatenated before being passed into the final fully connected layer. Each convolutional layer is followed by a relu activation, a batch normalization, and 1d max-pooling of size 2. The final layer is also followed by a softmax. 