We report the use of an electrostatic MEMS-based device to produce high quality electron vortex beams with more than 1000 quanta of orbital angular momentum (OAM). Diffraction and offaxis electron holography experiments are used to show that the diameter of the vortex in the diffraction plane increases linearly with OAM, thereby allowing the angular momentum content of the vortex to be calibrated. The realization of electron vortex beams with even larger values of OAM is currently limited by the breakdown voltage of the device. Potential solutions to overcome this problem are discussed. Scientific breakthroughs often happen simultaneously. In 2010 and 2011, papers from several groups described electron vortex beams Electron vortex beams are characterised by swirling phase distributions in the azimuthal direction. They are eigenstates of the OAM operator projected onto the electron propagation direction. The number of complete phase turns, l, is an integer that defines the OAM eigenstate. The expectation of the OAM on these states is <L> = lħ, where ħ is the reduced Planck constant. Unfortunately, the combination of lenses and multipoles that is available in a modern electron microscope is only sufficient to generate an approximate electron vortex beam, in part because of the requirement for an abrupt potential discontinuity Based on analogies with light optics, research initially focused on the use of synthetic holograms, i.e., spatially patterned membranes that act on the amplitude and/or phase of the electron beam to produce a desired waveform MEMS devices that have relatively simple architectures can be used to create tuneable vortex beams. One such device, which is referred to as a "chopsticks" device, takes the form of two parallel electrodes that are separated by a narrow gap and have electrical bias voltages applied to them Here, we report the experimental realization of very large electron vortex beams, which are (to the best of our knowledge) the largest isolated electron vortex beams (without the additional diffraction orders that are produced by synthetic holograms) that have been created to date. Interest in the generation of such beams has been discussed in a recent paper that demonstrated an l = 1000 beam. Here, a large-OAM vortex beam is realised by using an electrostatic device that introduces no absorption or parasitic intensity loss. Furthermore, loss of coherence is limited to the small region where the electrodes are placed and is therefore minor or negligible A scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the MEMS-based device, which is referred to here as "MINEON" (MINiaturised Electron Optics for Nanobeams), is shown in Fig. The MEMS device is inserted into the microscope in a sample holder or an aperture holder that has 8 electrical contacts The boundary conditions, which will be described in detail in a separate paper, are optimised for small OAM applications. In the present work, the boundary electrodes are grounded. The effect of grounding these electrodes is small here, since a 10 μm aperture is used to limit the field of view, as shown in Fig. For realisation of the experiment, the MEMS device was placed in the sample plane in a Thermo Fisher Titan transmission electron microscope operated at 300 kV. Large field of view off-axis electron holograms and "low magnification" diffraction patterns were then recorded with the objective lens off. Under these conditions, the objective aperture lies nearly in the same plane as the device and can be used as a limiting aperture. For off-axis electron holography, a Gatan K2 camera was used. Unfortunately, a vacuum reference wave could not be obtained from a field-free area. Instead, a minimally-perturbed vacuum reference wave was obtained from the region in front of the chopsticks, close to the grounded boundary. Simulation indicate that this still does not alter significantly the overall phase difference at the two sides of the "chopstics" and therefore the evaluation of <l>. Figure In order to infer the OAM values for larger quanta, when off-axis electron holography could not be used, it was confirmed that the apparent vortex size in focus is linearly proportional to the chopsticks bias. This behaviour was previously shown The maximum OAM value that could be reached in the present experiments was l ≈1067 ħ at a 16 V bias voltage . An attempt to use a higher bias voltage of 18 V unfortunately caused device failure as a result of the electrostatic pull between the two electrodes of the chopsticks shorting the circuit and leading to electrode melting. The maximum voltage that can be applied to the chopsticks depends on the elasticity of the material and on the mutual capacitance of the device. Negative feedback beyond a threshold value of deformation and enhanced attraction between the electrodes ultimately makes collapse of the structure inevitable. The formula for the critical voltage is where d 0 is the initial separation of the electrodes, ε 0 is the vacuum permittivity and A eff is the shared area between the electrodes, including a correction that depends on the details of the fields. In Eq. 1, the effective elastic constant is where E is the Young's modulus of the material and the other geometrical parameters are described in Fig. It should be noted that the linear dependence between vortex size and OAM can be explained using stationary geometrical ray tracing as a result of the location of the chopsticks in the probe forming aperture. The aperture transfer function can be written in the form A(ρ̅ ) = Π(ρ)exp (ilθ ρ ), where ρ̅ = ρ, θ ρ are coordinates in the aperture plane and Π R (ρ) is a top hat function, which takes a value of 1 for ρ < ρ max and 0 otherwise. The presence of the top hat function means that the generated wavefunction is necessarily bandwidth-limited. Considering geometrical propagation from each point P in the diffraction plane, each point in the aperture plane is mapped uniquely onto a point in the probe plane r̅ = λf ∇ ρ ̅ ̅̅̅ φ| , where λ, f are the wavelength and focal distance, respectively. In the probe plane, the vortex beam is a circle. As it is bandwidth-limited, the azimuthal phase gradient is limited according to the expression = l. Therefore, the size of the vortex increases linearly with l. This dependence can be regarded as a limitation, as the most important parameter in the search for spin non-paraxial effects is the ratio between transverse and longitudinal momentum |p|, which is fixed. An increase in the non-paraxial effects with l can only be obtained if the size of the vortex is constant, independent of l. This situation can be realised more closely if the chopsticks are positioned in a different plane from that of the limiting aperture and as close as possible to the probe plane, so that the additional momentum cannot produce too large an effect on propagation. This idea will be tested in a future study. In conclusion, a new MEMS-based device has been used to generate very large tuneable electron vortex beams in a transmission electron microscope with more than 1000 quanta of orbital angular momentum without the presence of additional beams. The generation of even larger values of orbital angular momentum is currently limited by breakdown of the device due to electrostatic forces. A strategy for increasing non-paraxial effects that can be used for studies of fundamental effects in microscopy has been presented. 