High refractive index dielectric nanostructures offer a versatile platform to control light-matter interaction at the nanoscale as they can easily support electric and magnetic modes with low losses. An additional property that makes them extraordinary is that they can support low radiative modes, so-called anapole modes. In this work, we propose a spectrally tunable anapole nanoheater based on the use of a dielectric anapole resonator able to amplify ten-fold the thermal response of a plasmonic nanoheater. This would allow the use of lower light intensities to achieve striking heating effects. As proof of concept, we perform a detailed study of the thermoplasmonic response of a gold nanoring used as heating source and a silicon disk, designed to support anapole modes, located in its center acting as anapolar resonator. Furthermore, we utilize the anapole excitation to easily shift the thermal response of these structures from SWIR to the NIR range. Thermoplasmonics, anapole, nanoheater, thermal conductivity, anapole nanoheater. All-dielectric nanostructures based on high refractive index (HRI) materials offer the possibility to efficiently confine and manipulate light at the nanoscale. We have used COMSOL Multiphysics to perform all the calculations in combination with numerical FDTD (Finite Difference Time Domain). The heat transport calculations were performed in two steps In summary, we have demonstrated that anapole excitation can serve as an easy mechanism to boost the heating effect in ring-shaped gold structures. Additionally, their thermal response can be tuned to the NIR, where they are not able to resonate a priori. Its thermal performance was analyzed by placing them on different thermal conductivity substrates (alumina, silica and PDMD), obtaining temperature increments ten-fold that of single gold rings. We believe that the reliable implementation of our proof of concept can motive the development of novel strategies to reach efficient nanoheating structures and temperaturecontrolled platforms that will be of general interest to the thermoplasmonic community. Supporting Information. Additional computational details, materials, descriptions, including the optimization of the proposed anopole nanoheater. In Figure 