Designing microwave absorbers with customized spectrums is an attractive topic in both scientific and engineering communities. However, due to the massive number of design parameters involved, the design process is typically time-consuming and computationally expensive. To address this challenge, machine learning has emerged as a powerful tool for optimizing design parameters. In this work, we present an analytical model for an absorber composed of a multi-layered metasurface and propose a novel inverse design method based on a constrained tandem neural network. The network can provide structural and material parameters optimized for a given absorption spectrum, without requiring professional knowledge. Furthermore, additional physical attributes, such as absorber thickness, can be optimized when soft constraints are applied. As an illustrative example, we use the neural network to design broadband microwave absorbers with a thickness close to the causality limit imposed by the Kramers-Kronig relation. Our approach provides new insights into the reverse engineering of physical devices. Electromagnetic absorbers have widespread use in various fields, including industrial sensors Subsequent advancements, such as the Jaumann absorber In recent years, machine learning has found applications in many areas. With the ability to learn from data, the machine learning system can find the hidden characteristics of the data and establish the relationship between the data sets. It has been used successfully in many fields, such as computer vision In this work, we demonstrate the potential of ANN in realizing the inverse design of a broadband microwave absorber based on metasurfaces. Using the training data generated from an analytical model of a microwave absorber composed of a multilayered metasurface, we establish and train a forward network that maps the design parameters of the absorber to its frequency response(in our case, it is the reflection spectrum). To overcome the significant challenge of one-to-many mapping in the inverse design We will first introduce the fundamental structure of the microwave absorbers that we aim to design. Metamaterial/metasurfaces, composed of a periodic array of subwavelength resonant elements, can manipulate the electric and magnetic response. By carefully tuning the resonant elements, good absorption can be achieved where Γ(λ) is the reflection coefficient as a function of the wavelength λ. This expression suggests that a highperforming absorber, capable of effectively absorbing a wide range of wavelengths, typically requires a considerable minimum thickness. Therefore, designing a broadband absorber with a small thickness is challenging. Our objective is to design a structure that possesses excellent absorption properties across a wide frequency range, while maintaining a thickness that approaches the minimum limit dictated by causality. We consider a stacked multilayered structure as depicted in Fig. Although simulation software packages such as COM-SOL can be used to obtain the absorption spectrum of arbitrary metamaterial structures numerically, the fullwave simulation of 3D problems is time-consuming, particularly when generating absorption spectra of multiple absorbers with varying parameters. Therefore, for this design, we utilized the simple structure shown in Fig. The capacitive circuit absorber approach uses the lowpass RC circuits instead of the conventional resonant RLC circuits to model the resistive patches with large square length (w/a > 0.7) where Y 0 is the admittance of the free space, and c is the light of speed. ε ri = (ε di + ε ci )/2 is the averaged relative permittivity of the spacers and the substrates in which the patch is embedded where g = aw represents the gap between patches, A = 1 -(a/λ) 2 -1/2 -1 and α = sin(πg/2a).Therefore, the admittance of the ith series RC circuit is[67] . ( The dielectric substrates and spacers can be repre-sented by transmission line sections with lengths t i and d i , respectively. According to the transmission line theory where and The spacer of the first layer is backed by PEC and can be regarded as a short-circuited transmission line with the input admittance Therefore, for the transmission line circuit in Fig. where Y in represents the input admittance of the absorber and is equal to the input impedance of the fourth layer Y in = Y 4 . Using Eq.( In this part, we will introduce how to use the constrained tandem neural network to realize the inverse design of metasurface microwave absorbers that operates within a specified frequency range. To represent the design parameters of the microwave absorber, we utilize an array D = {D 1 , D 2 , ..., D N }, and we refer to the array R = {R 1 , R 2 , ..., R M } as the response vector, which represents the reflection at discretely sampled frequency points within the specific range. In this way, our objective can be reinterpreted as creating the inverse mapping from the response vector R to the design parameter vector D, which is commonly referred to as an inverse problem. It is natural to use an ANN to form this mapping directly, in view of the ability of such a network to fit highly-nonlinear functions To overcome this issue, the tandem neural network(TNN) method is proposed To train the TNN, one should first train the forward network, enabling it to form the mapping from the D vector to the response. After the training, the forward network should be frozen, which means that the weights and the bias of the forward network are kept unchanged in the subsequent steps. The TNN will then be trained to minimize the difference between the input of the inverse network and the output of the forward network. In this process, only the weights and the bias of the inverse network will be changed. As such, the loss function can be expressed as: Here, R real means the ground truth corresponding to the design, while R pred means the predicted response given by the network. Since the output R is unique, there will be no conflict arising from competing objectives. When the training of TNN is completed, the inverse mapping from R to D has been established. However, there are also some drawbacks to this method. While the output R of the TNN is unique, there are multiple possible choices for the intermediate output D. As the network is unbiased towards different D, the design parameters provided by the TNN have a significant degree of randomness. Therefore, it may provide us with design parameters that are undesirable, such as those with an excessively large thickness. To impose additional control over the intermediate output design parameters, we proposed the constrained tandem neural network (CTNN). Different from the ordinary TNN, we introduce a soft constraint term into the loss function, In this way, the arbitrariness of the design parameter vector D is removed. Additionally, since the soft constraint term can be chosen as desired, it enables control over other design parameters, making it possible to meet various design requirements. For example, by introducing a constraint related to the sheet resistance Rs, we can realize a design with smaller resistance values if we choose to do so, ensuring that the material parameters can be constrained to a prespecified range. We also note that this method can be generalized to the inverse design for other systems since the physical meaning of the latent vector and the constraint can be defined according to the real occasion. In the training process of CTNN, the steps are the same as those in TNN. The only change is the customized loss function incorporating constraint. Therefore, the training time is almost the same as TNN. After the training, the end-to-end application is enabled and no more training is needed. Considering the fabrication feasibility, we simplify the design by requiring the parameters of the dielectric substrate of different layers to be the same value ε ci = ε C , t i = T C , and fixing the dielectric constant of the spacer as ε di = ε d = 1.2, which can be realized by using porous PVC substrates. The lattice constant a i = 6.8 mm, 6.8 mm, 3.4 mm, 1.7 mm for i = 1, 2, 3, 4, respectively. These structural parameters have been used previously to design absorbers The parameters used for inverse design are the length of the partches(w 1,2,3,4 ), sheet resistance (Rs 1,2,3,4 ), thickness( And the total thickness of the absorber is The forward network D-R has 4 hidden layers with 80, 320, 320, and 320 neurons for different layers respectively to avoid sudden zooming, and the activation function leaky ReLU(k = 0.01) is adopted. The input and output layer contains 14 and 320 units respectively, to match the data. We take α = 0.01 in the constraint term. The inverse network R -D also contains 4 hidden layers with 320, 320, 320, and 80 neurons respectively, and the Adam optimizer is adopted with a learning rate of 10 -4 . Within a pre-specified range of parameters(specified in the 2nd column in Table Based on the trained neural network, we can now design the EM wave absorber according to a given absorption spectrum. Here we show a specific example in Fig. Here we set Notice that we provide the desired spectrum using reflection coefficients. We input the desired spectrum into the trained tandem network. The intermediate layer output gives the design parameters, as shown in the 4th column of Table . I. In Fig. In conclusion, we demonstrated a CTNN-assisted approach to design a custom microwave absorber that meets a pre-described frequency response requirement. This approach utilizes the tandem network to solve one-to-many problems with great effectiveness and efficiency. Furthermore, we added a soft constraint on the loss function Compared to the traditional TNN (with a thickness 5.3% thicker than the causality limit), the improved CTNN (with thickness 1.7% thicker than the causality limit) exhibits better performance. to enable the network to achieve biased convergence towards a specific target, namely minimal thickness in this case. We construct the relation between absorber design vector D and its absorption response vector R by training the forward and the tandem network, respectively. After the training, our network can conduct the inverse design and give corresponding design parameters based on input-customized absorption responses. We use the network to design a broadband absorber, and the thickness is very close to the causality limit. We note that data from numerical simulations or experiments can also replace the training data for the network if such information is available. The approach can be easily applied to the inverse design of optical, acoustic, and other devices. Constrained tandem neural network assisted inverse design of metasurfaces for microwave absorption: supplemental document Fig. 