We present results for the steady-state nonlinear response of a d x 2 -y 2 superconducting film connected to normal-metal reservoirs under voltage bias, allowing for a subdominant s-wave component appearing near the interfaces. Our investigation is based on a current-conserving theory that selfconsistently includes the non-equilibrium distribution functions, charge imbalance, and the voltagedependencies of order parameters and scalar impurity self-energies. For a pure d-wave superconductor with [110] orientation of the interfaces to the contacts, the conductance contains a zero-bias peak reflecting the large density of zero-energy interface Andreev bound states. Including a subdominant s-wave pairing channel, it is in equilibrium energetically favorable for an s-wave order parameter component ∆s to appear near the interfaces in the time-reversal symmetry breaking combination d + is. The Andreev states then shift to finite energies in the density of states. Under voltage bias, we find that the non-equilibrium distribution in the contact area causes a rapid suppression of the s-wave component to zero as the voltage eV → ∆s. The resulting spectral rearrangements and voltage-dependent scattering amplitudes lead to a pronounced non-thermally broadened split of the zero-bias conductance peak that is not seen in a non-selfconsistent Landauer-Büttiker scattering approach. Tunneling spectroscopy was one of the early experimental methods to extract information about the energy gap as predicted by the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer theory of superconductivity For the high-temperature superconductors with d x 2 -y 2 symmetry of the order parameter, tunneling and Andreev reflection spectroscopy typically show a large zero-bias conductance peak (ZBCP) In this paper we return to the problem of tunneling and Andreev reflection spectroscopy of d-wave superconducting surfaces including the possibility of a relatively large subdominant s-wave component preventing the formation of the phase crystal. We consider the case when the normal metal probe is sufficiently invasive that the nonequilibrium distribution function in the superconductor imposed by the voltage bias has to be computed selfconsistently with the order parameter to guarantee current conservation. The voltage dependence of the order parameter, in particular the subdominant component, FIG. has a large effect on the spectral properties as well as the transport processes (normal and Andreev reflection amplitudes). Surprisingly, the resulting split of the ZBCP in the presence of the s-wave component can be greatly enhanced, as we illustrate in Fig. The paper is organized as follows. In section II we outline the model assumptions we make for calculating the stationary conductance-voltage characteristics including current-conservation. The details of the quasiclassical theory that we use have been summarized in Appendix A. In the following section III we go, step by step, through results for the current-conserving theory for first the pure d x 2 -y 2 case for two orientations of the order parameter relative to the tunnel barrier normal. In section III A for zero misorientation (the [100] orientation) there are no zero-energy Andreev bound states. In this case we discuss the effect of charge imbalance in a d-wave superconductor as compared to the more well studied conventional s-wave case A sketch of the setup that we are considering is given in Fig. but we assume that the contributions to the total current from these edges are small compared to the large translationally invariant flow in the interior. In fact, the restriction on system size is weaker since for the thin film of thickness t < λ the pearl length λ p = λ 2 /t λ guarantees homogeneous flow in the transverse y-direction as long as ξ 0 W λ p . We utilize the non-equilibrium quasiclassical theory of superconductivity. An overview over the relevant equations is given in Appendix A, see also Refs. The singlet d-wave order parameter is written as where the orbital basis function ] depends on φ F , which is the angle between the Fermi momentum p F and the x-axis, and the angle α giving the orientation of the d-wave clover with respect to the x-axis, see Fig. Through a local gauge transformation, one may transform the order parameter to be real, and thereby obtain the superfluid momentum p s = 2 ∇χ which signals the presence of superflow. The superconductor is connected to the normal-metal reservoirs via insulating barriers, which are assumed to be symmetric, D L = D R = D. In this paper, we include a tunnel cone such that the interface transparency D depends on the momentum angle φ F . Explicitly, we use Here, D 0 is the transparency for perpendicular incidence on the surface, and the parameter β determines the narrowness of the tunnel cone. Throughout this paper, we use β = 1 corresponding to a wide tunnel cone. The impurity self-energies for a dilute concentration n imp of impurities is computed using a self-consistent tmatrix approximation, including multiple scattering off individual impurities but neglecting crossing diagrams. As seen in Eqs. (A14)-(A15), the model contains two parameters, the impurity concentration Γ u = n imp /πN F and the scattering phase shift, δ 0 = arctan(πN F u 0 ), assuming an isotropic impurity potential u 0 . We consider here two limits for the potential strength. In the Born limit, u 0 is small such that only the first diagram in the t-matrix series is kept. In the second unitary limit, u 0 is considered very large and the t-matrix equation is summed to infinite order for multiple scattering off a single impurity. In both cases a single parameter Γ = Γ u sin 2 δ 0 , related to the normal state mean free path = v F /2Γ = (π/Γ)ξ 0 , characterizes the impurities. In the Born limit we assume u 0 small, but n imp large, keeping Γ constant, while in the unitary limit u 0 is large such that δ 0 → π/2. This homogeneous scattering model has been widely studied in unconventional, in particular d-wave, superconductors The φ(x)-potential, see Eq. (A28), quantifies charge imbalance, i.e., the difference in chemical potential locally at x between the condensate and the quasiparticle states. This potential is determined through the assumption of local charge neutrality In Fig. 4. The energy-like mode f1, see Eq. (A21), averaged over the full Fermi surface, f1(pF, x, ε) FS , and over half the Fermi-surface with positive momenta f1(pF, x, ε) + and negative momenta f1(pF, x, ε) -with respect to the x-axis, see also Eq. (A33). In (a) at the N-S interface (x = 0), in (b) at the center of the superconductor (x = L/2), the grey shaded area in both figures indicates the voltage window of width eV = 1.5kBTc0. In (c), we show the energy-resolved spatial evolution of f1(ε, x) FS from the surface to the center of the system. In all cases, we have D0 = 1, β = 1, α = 0, Born limit impurities with = 100ξ0, and T = 0.1Tc. the system for all voltages |V | > 0, characterized by a potential φ(x), see Fig. In Fig. ), [red dotted line in Fig. Let us next consider strong impurity scattering. In the case of unitary-limit scattering, there is an impurity band formed around the Fermi energy of width ∼ π∆ d Γ/2 The moving condensate of the superconductor is associated with a superconducting phase gradient. An alternative view is to use a gauge where the order parameter is real, in which case there is a spatially dependent superfluid momentum p s (x) = 2 ∂ x χ(x). As a result, a phase difference ∆χ = χ(L) -χ(0) is established across the structure, see the right-most column of Fig. To further quantify the disequilibrium throughout the superconductor we consider the local density of states (LDOS) under voltage bias, see Fig. At a surface of a d-wave superconductor, with the surface normal misaligned with the crystal main axes (α = 0), Andreev bound states at zero energy, the so-called midgap states, are formed In Fig. The effect of superflow for α = 0 considered above is best understood in terms of Doppler shifts ε → ε-v F •p s of continuum quasiparticles propagating along trajectories characterized by a distinct v F . For surface Andreev states this is not the case when the superflow is along the surface normal p s x as in our case, since the Andreev bound states are a superposition of partial waves with both positive and negative projections of the Fermi momentum (and Fermi velocity) with respect to the x-axis, see inset in tum projections on the x-axis, and there is no resulting Doppler shift. Instead, the finite superflow only changes the spectral weight of these states. For an illustration of this physics, we assume a clean d-wave superconductor with a perfectly reflective interface at x = 0 and neglect the suppression of the order parameter close to the surface. For a Fermi velocity with angle φ F ∈ (-π/2, π/2), specular scattering at the interface connects the two velocities The order parameter with α = π/4 has opposite signs along those two direciton, see Eq. ( where and z = ε + i0 + is the energy with an infinitesimal positive imaginary part. In the absence of p s , it is straightforward to show that Eq. ( Thus, we see that the two components of p s have very different influence on the Andreev bound state. The component normal to the interface, p x s , reduces the spectral weight of the Andreev state. This is compensated for by an enhanced spectral weight of the continuum. In contrast, the component parallel to the surface, p y s , shifts the state in energy according to ε → ε + v y F p y s . As a result, the zero-energy states shift to positive (negative) energy for trajectories with positive (negative) projection on the y-axis, and the single peak in the density of states splits into two separate peaks. This is indeed the case in the presence of an external magnetic field along the c-axis direction perpendicular to the superconducting film, where the induced screening currents Doppler shift and split the ZBCP as found experimentally In Fig. where the dependencies of all quantities within the brackets on energy ε and trajectory angle φ F is understood, while the voltage dependence is emphasized. Here, x 1 (x 2 ) is the distribution incoming from the left (right) side of the interface, . . . + is the average over all momenta where v x F ≡ v F cos φ F > 0. The remaining four terms are the physical probabilities for normal reflection (R ee ) and Andreev reflection (R he ) for electrons incoming from the left normal metal reservoir, and similarly normal transmission ( Tee ) and branch-conversion transmission ( The ) for electron-like quasiparticles incoming from the superconducting device side. Eq. ( The incoming distribution from the superconducting side, x 2 , as well as the four scattering probabilities in Eq. ( In the normal state it reduces to , where R N is the normal state interface resistance. We call in the following such an approach the Landauer-Büttiker scattering approach, denoted with the superscript LB. We are now ready to compare our self-consistent stationary non-equilibrium results, blue circles in Fig. Even in the absence of an external magnetic field a splitting of the ZBCP has been observed in several experiments at very low temperatures. One mechanism proposed and extensively discussed in the literature As seen in Fig. shown in the figure), but it is much weaker than our nonequilibrium result at T = 0.1T c0 (blue curve). Note that the self-consistent LB approach and our non-equilibrium results coincide at V = 0 where the linear response approximation holds and all quantities except the voltage perturbation of x 1 in Eq. ( The main new ingredients in our fully selfconsistent calculation are that also the right-side distribution x 2 , as well as all scattering probabilities, depend on the applied voltage. In contrast to the case without subdominant component considered above (Fig. In summary we have presented a comprehensive study of the stationary non-equilibrium response of a d-wave superconductor coupled to two normal-metal reservoirs under a voltage bias, taking into account different orientations of the order parameter relative to the interfaces to the reservoirs, formation of interface zero-energy Andreev bound states, scalar impurity scattering, and a possible s-wave subdominant component of the order parameter. In all cases we ensure current conservation by computing all self-energies selfconsistently taking into account the non-equilibrium distribution functions. For the case of a pure d-wave order parameter, we have found that charge imbalance extends into the bulk of the superconductor due to the presence of the nodes of the d-wave order parameter and the pair breaking effects of scalar impurities. Charge imbalance is enhanced for orientations where zero-energy interface Andreev bound states are formed and it is also enhanced for unitary limit impurity scattering which induce a low-energy band of quasiparticles states. The non-equilibrium distribution function induced in the superconductor suppresses the dwave order parameter and superconductivity disappears for voltages approaching the gap voltage. Nevertheless, despite the induced non-equilibrium state, the resulting conductance-voltage dependencies for the case of pure d x 2 -y 2 superconducting order resembles the results of a non-selfconsistent Landauer-Büttiker approach, if the original approach When we allow for a subdominant component with s-wave symmetry, forming the time-reversal symmetry breaking combination d x 2 -y 2 + is near the interfaces, the effects of the non-equilibrium distribution is much more severe. In this case, the zero-bias conductance peak split is dramatically enhanced compared with the nonselfconsistent Landauer-Büttiker approach. This effect is due to the suppression of the subdominant s-wave order parameter when the voltage is applied. This leads to spectral rearrangements and corrections to the scattering amplitudes. As a result, a non-thermally broadened split of the zero-bias conductance peak appears. The Landauer-Büttiker approach holds for pointcontact geometries, where the contact radius is smaller than the coherence length ξ 0 . Since ξ 0 is small in hightemperature superconductors such contacts are challenging to fabricate. Our approach is applicable to the complementary geometry with very wide and transparent contacts where the induced non-equilibrium distribution is important. Such contacts to superconducting films are experimentally feasible where h le is given by The splitting introduced in Eq. (A29) directly translate to an analogous splitting of the function x by using Eq. (A25), and for the two modes f 1 and f 3 by using Eq. (A21). As a consequence observables such as the charge current can be similarly split, j(R) = j le (R) + j a (R). Since h le , and hence f le 1,3 , are independent of p F , Eq. (A27) shows that the local-equilibrium current j le can only be non-zero if there is an asymmetry in the angleresolved spectrum N (p F , R, ε). In our case, this asymmetry is created by the self-consistently determined superflow p s in the superconductor. The anomalous current j a , due to the distribution h a , then contains all current flow due to differences in occupation of left-moving and right-moving quasiparticles. A measure of this difference in occupation are the right-mover (left-mover) quasipotential φ + (φ -), defined as where X a is obtained by using x a in Eq. (A6). In Eq. (A32), the . . . ± denotes a partial Fermi-surface average where the Heaviside step function Θ(± cos φ F ) gives unity if v x F , as defined in Eq. ( 