has boosted the field of large-area flexible and printed electronics. These advances have enabled a plethora of applications such as organic light-emitting diodes, low-dimensional carbon nanostructures that show exceptional (opto-)electronic properties, such as graphene, fullerenes, and carbon nanotubes. Herein, we provide proof that transistors can be based on solution-processed polycrystalline cumulenic thin films, with charge carrier mobilities close to that of a:Si and promising stability in dark-conditions. In particular, we present OFETs based on thin films of [3]Ph deposited from solution via a scalable, large-area wire-bar coating technique, and we analyze the impact of the deposition temperature on morphological, optical, structural and electrical properties of the films by means of extensive structural and electrical characterization. The optimized deposition temperature for [3]Ph (i.e., 80 °C) provides a higher degree of crystallinity, as well as fewer defects. The resulting devices show field-effect mobility values exceeding 0.1 cm 2 V -1 s -1 , in both the linear and saturation regime, marking an improvement of two orders of magnitude relatively to previous studies on sparse microcrystalline networks. To investigate the potential of cumulenes toward large-area printed electronics, we began by optimizing the deposition of thin films of [3]Ph from solution (10 g L -1 in 1,2-dichlorobenzene) employing wire-bar coating, which is a scalable barassisted meniscus-shearing technique (Figure To assess aggregation in thin films, we compared the UV-vis absorption spectra of [3]Ph in a dilute solution (Figure From a morphological point of view, the films of [3]Ph are polycrystalline and display a clear variation in the crystalline grain dimensions depending on the deposition temperature, which can be appreciated by the polarized optical microscopy (POM) images of films deposited at 50, 80, and 110 °C (Figure The films deposited at 80 °C appear more homogeneous and feature few micrometer-scale 2D crystalline grains and no needle-like crystals (Figure To investigate the structural arrangement of the [3]Ph molecules in thin films, we performed grazing-incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) measurements on films obtained at the various deposition temperatures (Figure DFT/TD-DFT calculations on a single molecule and on molecular dimers were performed to correlate the excited-state properties with the molecular packing and to provide insight into the optical absorption changes upon film deposition (Figure The low-energy absorption band observed for [3]Ph in dilute solution (2.92 eV) is thus assigned to the single molecule transition. On the other hand, the low-energy band observed in solid-state thin films (2.73 eV) corresponds to the D3-and D4-like dimers (i.e., J-type) and the high-energy band (2.97 eV) to D1-like dimers (i.e., H-type). With two types of aggregates oriented in different crystallographic directions, the low-energy band is polarized along D3 and D4, i.e., in the ab-plane, while the high-energy band is polarized along D1, i.e., the b-axis (Figure Based on a molecular dimer approach, we computed the charge transfer integrals (V ij ) at the DFT level for a hole transport mechanism, and this correlates well with experimentally observed results for OFETs of [3]Ph (see Section 2.3; details in the Experimental Section). V ij is a measure of the electronic coupling (e.g., overlap) between the charge-carrier wavefunction of nearest neighbor sites (i and j). To elucidate the importance of the sp-conjugated backbone in contributing to charge transport, the HOMO and LUMO isosurfaces for [3]Ph are reported in Figure Top-gate bottom-contact FETs were fabricated to investigate the electrical transport properties and ultimately evaluate the charge mobility in solution-processed [3]Ph polycrystalline thin films (Figure The characteristic transfer curves in the linear (V ds = -5 V, black curve) and saturation (V ds = -40 V, blue curve) regimes of a representative, optimized device measured in nitrogen atmosphere are shown in Figure We evaluated the contact resistance per unit width (R c W) by the transmission-line method (TLM), High contact resistance may explain the high threshold voltage values (on average, -8.6 V and -6.1 V in linear and saturation regime, respectively). Since the reactivity of the sp-carbon chain represents a major concern for the application of cumulenes in electronic devices, we addressed the shelf-life stability of the [3]Ph-based OFETs. Previous differential scanning calorimetry analysis demonstrated that [3]Ph crystals are stable up to about 250 °C. This work clearly demonstrates that solution-processed thin films formed from molecules based on sp-hybridized carbon atoms can be adopted for large-area electronics. In particular, field-effect transistors based on polycrystalline thin films of a short cumulene, [3]Ph, show ideal p-type field-effect behavior and reliable hole mobility exceeding 0.1 cm 2 V -1 s -1 for optimized conditions. Furthermore, the active layer of these FETs is deposited via a simple large-area coating technique. Remarkably, non-encapsulated transistors display promising stability under dark conditions, suggesting the potential for other future applications of these molecules. We expect that the mobility values achieved in this study could be further improved. On the one hand, enhanced performance using [3]Ph is expected by considering the large anisotropy of the electronic couplings within crystals as computed by DFT/TD-DFT, the random azimuthal orientation of the crystalline grains, and the presence of grain boundaries. Enlarged crystalline grains would be beneficial due to the concurrent reduction of grain boundaries, while directional control of the crystal growth would remedy the anisotropic charge transport. On the other hand, we open the path to exploiting a vast library of cumulenic molecules, characterized by, for example, a longer conjugated backbone and tunable molecular bandgap. As well, synthetic modulation of the endcapping groups presents an exquisite opportunity to optimize crystalline packing and, thus, opto-electronic properties. The exploration of carbon atom wires in large-area organic electronics has just begun. [3]Ph: Tetraphenylbutatriene ([3]Ph) has been synthesized as previously reported Deposition of Thin Films of [3]Ph: Pure [3]Ph in powder form was dissolved in 1,2-dichlorobenzene (Sigma Aldrich) at a concentration of 10 g L -1 , stirred at 50 °C for at least 1 h, and this solution used for deposition of [3]Ph by wire-bar coating in air. Glass substrates (low alkali 1737F Corning glasses, purchased from Präzisions Glas & Optik GmbH) were cut to a size of 2 × 2 cm, cleaned by sonication with fresh acetone and isopropyl alcohol (both purchased from Sigma Aldrich) for 10 min, and then dried under a flow of nitrogen. Subsequently, the substrates surface was cleaned and activated by an oxygen-plasma treatment for 5 min (Diener Electronic Femto Plasma, chamber pressure 40 mbar, power 100 W). The thin films of [3]Ph were deposited under a chemical fume hood by wire-bar coating using a TQC Sheen Automatic Film Applicator AB4400, which has been equipped with a homemade system to control the gap between the substrate and the wire-bar and with a nitrogen blow system to reduce the film drying time. The employed wire-bar applicator had a wire-wound rod diameter of 6 μm. The coating speed was set to 30 mm s -1 , and the deposition temperature was controlled in the range 50-110 °C with the integrated heated bed. Optical Characterization: Polarized optical microscopy images were recorded in reflection mode with a Zeiss Axio Scope A1 equipped with a single polarizer (EpiPol mode). Absorption spectra were obtained by measuring transmission spectra on a PerkinElmer Lambda 1050 UV/Vis/NIR spectrometer. Local Polarized Absorption Spectra: The UV-vis spectra in Figure Light-Induced UV-vis Evolution: UV-vis spectra in Figure Films Topography and Thickness: The surface topography of the films was imaged with a Keysight 5600LS atomic force microscope operated in tapping mode. Gwyddion software Grazing-Incidence Wide-Angle Scattering (GIWAXS): GIWAXS measurements were performed at the non-crystalline diffraction beamline (BL11-NCD-Sweet) at ALBA Synchrotron Radiation Facility in Barcelona (Spain). A detector (Rayonix, WAXS LX255-HS) with a resolution of 1920 × 5760 pixels was used to collect the scattering signals. Sample holder position was calibrated with chromium oxide (Cr 2 O 3 ) standard. The incident energy was 12.4 eV, and the sampleto-detector distance was set at 216.5 mm. The angle of incidence α i was 0.11° and the exposure time was 1 s. 2D-GIWAXS patterns were corrected as a function of the components of the scattering vector with a MATLAB script developed by Aurora Nogales and Edgar Gutiérrez. Miller indexing and simulation of the lattice unit were performed with the MATLAB-SIIRkit package, designed and coded by Savikhin et al.; OFETs Fabrication: [3]Ph-based OFETs were fabricated with a bottomcontact top-gate architecture. Bottom source and drain interdigitated electrodes were defined by standard photolithography onto the glass substrates and deposited by thermal evaporation of 30 nm-thick Au with a 3 nm-thick Cr adhesion layer. The [3]Ph active layer was deposited by wire-bar coating according to the procedure described above. About 500 nm-thick dielectric layer of poly(chloro-p-xylene)-C (Parylene-C, dimer purchased from Specialty Coating Systems) was deposited by CVD with a SCS Labcoater 2-PDS2010 system. PEDOT:PSS (Clevios PJ700 formulation, purchased from Heraeus) gate contacts were inkjet-Adv. Mater. 2022, 2110468 www.advmat.de www.advancedsciencenews.com © 2022 The Authors. Advanced Materials published by Wiley-VCH GmbH Adv. Mater. 2022, 2110468 © 2022 The Authors. Advanced Materials published by Wiley-VCH GmbH