Designing directional optical antennas without compromising the field enhancement requires specially designed optical cavities. Herein, we report on the experimental observations of directional photoluminescence emission from a monolayer Tungsten Disulfide using a bentplasmonic nanowire on a mirror cavity. The geometry provides field enhancement and directivity to photoluminescence by sandwiching the monolayer between an extended cavity formed by dropcasting bent silver nanowire and a gold mirror. We image the photoluminescence emission wavevectors by using Fourier plane imaging technique. The cavity out-couples the emission in a narrow range of wavevectors with a radial and azimuthal spreading of only 11.0° and 25.1°, respectively. Furthermore, we performed three dimensional finite difference time domain based numerical calculations to corroborate and understand the experimental results. We envisage that the results presented here will be readily harnessed for on-chip coupling applications and in designing inelastic optical antennas. Controlling and manipulating spontaneous emission is a principal indispensable task in nanophotonics To this end, various structures have been utilized for harnessing the field such as nanoparticle Recently two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) have emerged as new quantum emitters with high exciton binding energy, which lead to well pronounced optical transitions Motivated by this, we study a bent plasmonic nanowire on a mirror cavity with a monolayer of WS2 sandwiched in the cavity. We show that the cavity can direct the WS2 photoluminescence (PL) emission to a very narrow range of wavevectors when the emission is collected from the kink region, upon excitation of the nanowire end. Using Fourier plane imaging A monolayer of WS2 is grown and transferred onto the top of a gold mirror. A bent-silver nanowire was dropcasted on a gold mirror thus forming a bent-nanowire on a mirror (B-NWoM) cavity with the monolayer in the cavity. One end of the nanowire was excited using a high numerical aperture objective lens and the emission from kink region was spatially filtered for spectroscopy and Fourier plane imaging. The emission from the kink is directional in nature and covers a very narrow range of angles. Figure A detailed optical setup and imaging of the geometry is shown in figure Silver nanowires (AgNWs) of average diameter 350 nm were synthesized using polyol process shows the schematic to visualize the directionality of the emission. The emission from the sample plane was collected using the objective lens, which forms the Fourier plane at the back aperture of the objective lens. To image the Fourier plane, it was recreated on the camera, using the combination of tube lens and Bertrand lens. Pin hole in the path was placed to selectively collect the emission from the kink part of the B-NWoM cavity using spatial filtering. Figure To further study the WS2 PL emission spectrum from the kink portion of B-NWoM cavity, we performed Fourier plane imaging on the WS2 PL emission collected only from the kink portion. Figure To conclude we show how a bent silver nanowire placed on a gold mirror can direct monolayer WS2 PL which is otherwise isotropic in nature. The emission is confined to a narrow range of angles with a full width at half maxima in radial and azimuthal angles of 11.0° and 25.1° respectively. In addition to confining the emission wavevectors, the cavity broadens the PL spectrum by decoupling the exciton and trion contribution. Furthermore, using finite difference time domain based numerical calculations we understood the effect of dipole orientation of the two dimensional monolayer on the radiation pattern of PL emission. We believe that the results presented here will be extrapolated to route enhanced Raman signal and to design on-chip directional optical sources using various other class of two dimensional materials.