The Fabry-Pérot resonator is one of the most widely used optical devices, enabling scientific and technological breakthroughs in diverse fields including cavity QED, optical clocks, precision length metrology and spectroscopy. Though resonator designs vary widely, all high-end applications benefit from mirrors with the lowest loss and highest finesse possible. Fabrication of the highest finesse mirrors relies on centuries-old mechanical polishing techniques, which offer losses at the part-per-million (ppm) level. However, no existing fabrication techniques are able to produce high finesse resonators with the large range of mirror geometries needed for scalable quantum devices and next-generation compact atomic clocks. In this paper, we introduce a new and scalable approach to fabricate mirrors with ultrahigh finesse (≥ 10 6 ) and user-defined radius of curvature spanning four orders of magnitude (10 -4 -10 0 m). We employ photoresist reflow and reactive ion etching to shape and transfer mirror templates onto a substrate while maintaining sub-Angstrom roughness. This substrate is coated with a dielectric stack and used to create arrays of compact Fabry-Pérot resonators with finesse values as high as 1.3 million and measured excess loss < 1 ppm. Optical ringdown measurements of 43 devices across 5 substrates reveal that the fabricated cavity mirrors-with both small and large radii of curvature-produce an average coating-limited finesse of 1.05 million. This versatile new approach opens the door to scalable fabrication of high-finesse miniaturized Fabry-Pérot cavities needed for emerging quantum optics and frequency metrology technologies. Among optical resonators, high-finesse Fabry-Pérot cavities produce unrivaled frequency stability, quality factors, and power handling, enabling scientific and technological breakthroughs in a broad range of applications To maximize finesse (F ), it is necessary to minimize all sources of optical loss within the cavity. This is seen from the definition, F = π/(T + A + S ), where T , A , and S represent the fractional energy loss (per mirror) resulting from transmission, absorption, and scattering, respectively. Thus, an ultrahigh-finesse resonator (F > 10 6 ) requires T + A + S to be at the few ppm level. Using ionbeam sputtering deposition techniques, highly uniform dielectric coatings with absorptive losses (A ) of ∼ 1 ppm are available Specialized chemical-mechanical polishing techniques, sometimes referred to as super-polishing In this paper, we demonstrate a wafer-scale fabrication technique that produces ultrahigh-finesse (≥ 10 6 ) mirrors with a user-defined R spanning from 100 microns to 1 meter, necessary to satisfy the demanding needs of applications ranging from quantum optics to low-noise laser oscillators. Arrays of microfabricated mirrors are formed on a single substrate using a solvent-vapor based resist reflow process. Through this process, photoresist defines mirror shapes that are transferred into a substrate using an optimized dry etch, maintaining sub-Angstrom surface roughness. Multilayer mirror coatings are then deposited, creating arrays of compact Fabry-Pérot resonators whose performance is evaluated using optical ring-down measurements. Measurements of 43 devices across 5 substrates (with both small and large R) reveal that the fabricated cavity mirrors produce a mean (maximum) coatinglimited finesse of 1.05 million (1.3 million), which, to the best of our knowledge, sets a record among micro-fabricated mirrors (and R < 10mm mirrors in general). This new method thus enables the scalable production of compact Fabry-Pérot cavities with the state-of-the-art performance required by emerging technologies. Through this fabrication approach, we use reflow techniques to create a resist profile that defines the shape of the mirror. Photoresist patterns are first created on a super-polished substrate (e.g. fused silica) using UV lithography. The single-and multi-level photoresist patterns, seen in Fig. The fabrication process begins with a single (a) or multi-layer (f) photoresist pattern. After a timed solvent vapor reflow, a large (b) or small(g) concave photoresist pattern is formed. A reactive ion etch transfers this into the substrate (c,d,h,i), before final application of mirror coating (e,j). Exemplary measured profiles (black) of reflowed structures with R from 1 m to 100 μm are shown in (k-n). Illustrations of the approximate photoresist shape before reflow are shown in blue. a smooth parabolic surface is formed in the center of the resist pattern, as illustrated in Fig. Roughness induced scattering losses are perhaps the most significant barrier to realizing a finesse of greater than 1 million. One can show that the scattering loss associated with an RMS surface roughness, σ rms , is given by S rough = (4πσ/λ) 2 , where λ is the wavelength of light Ringdown measurements were performed on 43 cavities created using 5 different patterned micromirror substrates, with results summarized in Fig. While the finesse permits us to quantify the total mirror loss (T +A +S ), it is also instructive to separate the different loss contributions. Since both mirrors of all tested microcavities were simultaneously coated, receiving an identical multilayer coating, it is reasonable to assume that the transmission coefficients (T ) are identical for both mirrors. With this assumption, we can extract (A +S ) from the relative transmitted and reflected powers on resonance Conversely, the small-ROC mirrors can yield small mode-volumes necessary to produce enhanced coupling rates with atoms, ions, and defect centers for quantum applications To harness these and other performance advantages, one could envision integrating such high finesse resonators with planar photonic circuits using vertical-emission grating couplers Device fabrication was carried out with support from the Yale SEAS Cleanroom and Yale West Campus Cleanroom. We thank Yong Sun, Sean Rinehart, Kelly Woods, Min Li, Lei Wang, Yubo Wang and Hong X. Tang for their assistance in device fabrication. We thank Lindsay Sonderhouse and Jules Stuart for helpful comments on the manuscript, and Ramin Lalezari of FiveNine Optics for assistance in characterizing mirror surface quality. This work was supported by NIST, the DARPA A-Phi under Award FA9453-19-C0029, and U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Division of Materials Sciences and Engineering under Award DE-SC0019406. This work is a contribution of an agency of the U.S. government and not subject to copyright in the USA. Identification of commercial vendors is for scientific clarity only and does not represent endorsement by NIST. Mirror fabrication Shipley S18 series photoresist is patterned on a super-polished glass substrate provided by Coastline Optics. After priming the substrate with Hexamethyldisilazane (HMDS) Mirror characterization Micromirror profiles are characterized using a Zygo Nexview. These profiles are used as input for simulation tools based on numerical beam propagation and an eigenmode solver to estimate scattering loss (S in main text). In finesse measurements, cavity arrays are formed by pairing micromirrors with flat mirrors coated simultaneously. Their optical lifetimes are determined through ring-down measurements, where the decay of transmitted light is recorded after switching off a resonant excitation laser. Cavity free-spectral ranges are either measured by scanning a tunable laser or inferred from cavity length. In addition to finesse, following Ref Because the desired shape of the reflowed photoresist is an intermediate state, precise control of the reflow is required to consistently obtain mirror surfaces with the desired R. To meet this requirement, we built a dedicated chamber to perform reflow under well-controlled vapor pressure and temperature. Fig. For large-R mirrors, we begin with a single-level photoresist disk (Fig. As shown in Fig. The above fabrication process, using single-level photoresist patterns, can already offer a wide range of R values and in principle reach R even smaller than 5 mm. For applications targeting ultra-small mode volumes, further shrinking the diameter of single-level resist disks may still be a viable approach to achieving small mirror R. For instance, a single-level, 60 μm-diameter resist disk can yield a mirror with R = 750 μm, but the optical mode size must remain below 6 μm to achieve ultrahigh finesse at λ =1550 nm. Effectively, this maximum spot size w, along with R, sets an upper bound for the cavity length L. If we want to exceed this cavity length limit, it is necessary to have more control over the resist shape, as discussed further below. In order to extend our technique towards smaller-R mirrors, we modify the photoresist patterning described above. Knowing that the target shape of the reflowed resist has a central recess, we pattern a hole with diameter d in and depth h in the center of the initial resist disk as a zeroth-order approximation of the final shape, as shown in Fig. When targeting a certain R, the size of usable mirror aperture should go into design consideration to avoid clipping losses. This results in an important requirement on the mirror depth. We consider a plano-concave cavity configuration, as illustrated in Fig. where λ is the wavelength of light. We can estimate the clipping loss of a finite-sized curved mirror by assuming the energy in the Gaussian tail outside the aperture is totally lost, which yields , where d eff is the effective aperture diameter of the mirror, as defined in Fig. For our nearly parabolic mirror profiles, this diameter can be linked to the mirror recess depth, h eff , as illustrated in Fig. Thus, we can translate our minimum aperture requirement (Eq. S2) into a condition linking the mirror depth and the achievable waist, or equivalently the maximum length for a given R by Note in this expression, the bound is totally determined by h eff /λ, where λ is the wavelength of light, and it is relaxed when h eff goes up. For reference, we typically have h eff = 0.3 μm for reflowed singlelevel resist disks, which allows L/R < 3.7% at λ = 1.55 μm, and increasing the depth to h eff = 0.5 μm with the two-level patterning technique enables L/R < 9.5%. With thicker resist films or tweaks on etch selectivity, h eff λ = 1.55 μm should be within reach, which covers the design space up to the confocal configuration, i.e. L/R 50%. From the above analysis, we see that in the cavity design phase, when we are given a set of cavity parameters, (e.g. L and R or target mode parameters), it is wise to first calculate h eff to minimize the clipping loss. After settling the geometric parameters R and h eff , or equivalently d eff and h eff through Eq. S3, for a certain cavity mirror, we can implement the strategy presented in Sec. II C with d in d eff and h s • h eff to design the initial resist shape, as illustrated in Fig. Our micro-fabricated mirrors begin with super-polished flat substrates with sub-Angstrom surface roughness, and it is crucial that our fabrication does not significantly worsen this surface figure. The reflow process inherently generates a smoothed mirror template, eliminating unwanted high-frequency surface texture. Therefore, we mainly need to ensure that the surface quality is not degraded by the reactive ion etch or by unwanted defects in the substrates and photoresist. To achieve smooth transfer of the reflowed pattern, we develop an RIE recipe that preserves the surface quality of both the photoresist and substrates. Reactive ion etching of quartz/fused silica has been studied extensively. In particular, it has been shown in During the etch, defects on and inside the substrates could be exposed and further magnified by the plasma, which typically result in pits of few to tens of nanometer depth on the mirror surface. Such defects could come from surface and subsurface damage introduced by polishing processes and ion impurities in manufacture processes, and a simple way to test their presence is to etch a witness substrate without patterning. Photoresist quality is also an important factor, and we find careful handling and storage conditions to be important in avoiding defects. Finally, we note that our fabrication flow can in principle be applied to other common materials, for example silicon When targeting ultrahigh finesse, it is important to consider any possible sources of loss caused by the fabrication technique. In particular, scattering from surface defects and clipping losses due to mirror shape errors are of concern. To guide our development process and lend confidence in the mirror template quality prior to optical coating, we employ numerical simulation techniques to predict mirror losses. Our tools build on several previously established techniques. First, one can utilize Fourier optics to simulate a beam undergoing repeated rounds of propagation, and monitor the rate at which energy decays (due to propagation outside the finite mirror). Alternatively, one can employ an eigenmode analysis technique, in which a round trip of cavity propagation is encoded in a scattering matrix, whose complex eigenvalues can be calculated to find mode frequencies and loss rates. In a separate work Finesse values were obtained from optical ringdowns, in which a laser is brought on resonance, then switched off abruptly. The decay of the transmitted light can be fit to an exponential to extract the cavity lifetime. Depending on the length of the cavity, the ringdown times varied from 400 ns to 10s of μs. For longer (shorter) ringdowns, the laser was switched off by switching off the RF drive to an acousto-optic modulator (electro-optic modulator), thus cutting off the laser carrier (sideband). The RF switch was triggered by a pulse, generated when the transmission reached a certain threshold voltage, indicating that the laser was on resonance. For the faster decay times, it is important to confirm that the response time of the whole system (the pulse generator, RF switch, optical modulator, photodetector, and any amplifiers) is sufficiently fast to measure the intended signal without distortion. To test this, we used a separate optical resonator with a much faster decay (≈5 ns), as illustrated in the calibration curve of Fig. 