Studies on the iron-based superconductors and related strongly correlated systems have focused attention on bad-metal normal state in proximity to antiferromagnetic order. An orbital-selective Mott phase (OSMP) has been extensively discussed as anchoring the orbital-selective correlation phenomena in this regime. Motivated by recent experiments, we advance the notion that an OSMP is synonymous to correlation-driven dehybridization. This idea is developed in terms of a competition between inter-orbital hopping and dynamical spatial spin correlations. Within effective models that arise from extended dynamical mean-field theory (EDMFT), and using a combination of continuous-time quantum Monte Carlo and analytical methods, we show how the OSMP emerges as a stable dehybridization fixed point. Concomitantly, the stability of the OSMP is demonstrated. Connections of this mechanism with partial localization-delocalization transition in other strongly correlated metals are discussed. Introduction. Iron-based superconductors An OSMP is usually seen in models with the different 3d orbitals that do not kinetically couple to each other In this Letter, we develops this notion by identifying the OSMP with a dehybridizing fixed point. We interpret the slave-spin-based results Model and method. We consider a two-orbital Hubbard model on a square lattice with the following Hamiltonian Here, d † i,a,σ creates an electron at site i in orbital a with spin σ, t ij,ab denotes a hopping matrix containing both intra-orbital and inter-orbital hopping parameters, and μ is the chemical potential. In addition, h i describes local interactions with both the Hubbard interaction of strength U and Hund's coupling of strength J H . We consider both the Ising-anisotropic and SU(2)-symmetric cases (see Supplementary Materials). The hopping matrix has the following form: | so that, for the same interaction parameters of the two orbitals, orbital 1 will be more strongly correlated. In addition, t 12 is the nearest-neighbor inter-orbital hopping between two orbitals. The two orbitals are taken to be two different representations of the C 4 rotation, which implies the absence of any onsite inter-orbital hybridization. OSMP from the slave-spin approach. The slave-spin method has been used in a variety of contexts. In other words, OSMP in this two-orbital Hubbard model is stable against inter-orbital hopping in the slave-spin approach in consistency with the results for other multi-orbital models Dynamical spatial spin correlations and EDMFT. To incorporate the effect of dynamical spatial spin correlations, we treat the multi-orbital Hubbard model in terms of EDMFT. In this approach, one generalizes the Hamiltonian to H = H moh + H J by introducing the following explicit intersite spin-spin interactions where S x,y,z i,a = d † i,a σ x,y,z d i,a /2 are the spin operators of orbital a and σ x,y,z are three Pauli matrices. J μ 1 , J μ 2 represent intra-orbital spin-spin interactions of two orbitals, and J μ 12 denotes inter-orbital spin-spin interaction. We have J μ 1,2,12 = J 1,2,12 for the SU (2)-symmetric model and J μ 1,2,12 = J 1,2,12 δ μ,z for the Ising-anisotropic model. We expect that spin fluctuations have a larger contribution from the more correlated orbital 1, but the Hund's coupling would imply significant contributions from orbital 2 as well. After diagonalizing the matrix J q,ab , we can rewrite Eq. 3 via its eigenvalues and eigenvectors It's adequate to consider the most negative eigenvalues and the corresponding eigenvectors: where tan(θ) = 2J 12 /(J 1 -J 2 ). We now treat the model H with EDMFT by mapping the lattice model to an effective two-orbital Bose-Fermi Anderson model (BFA model) In the BFA model, two orbitals are coupled to fermionic baths denoted by ∆(iω) and bosonic baths denoted by χ μ 0 (iΩ). The two baths capture the effect of single-particle dynamics and dynamical spatial spin correslations, respectively The bath functions ∆(iω) and χ μ,-1 Here, G loc (iω), χ μ loc (iΩ) are single-particle Green's function of two orbitals and spin-spin correlation functions of S -respectively. Σ(iω), M (iΩ) are the corresponding self-energy We turn next to analyzing the stability of OSMP via the above equations. In OMSP, the self-energy of the more correlated orbital showing that ∆ 1 is always gapless whenever the inter-orbital hopping is non-zero and the orbital 2 is metallic The Ising-anisotropic model. Inspired by the previous analytical argument, we now solve the Ising-anisotropic BFA model via a continuous-time quantum Monte Carlo method Here, θ(x) is the step function, Γ a is the hybridization strength between the orbital a and fermionic bath a, g is the coupling strength between S z -and bosonic bath, and D, Λ are the bandwidths of the fermionic and bosonic baths respectively. Since, we let two fermionic baths to have the same bandwidth but different hybridization strengths, i.e. Γ 1 = Γ 2 . Finally, s is the exponent that characterizes bosonic bath. In the calculation, we set U = 0.04, J H = 0.2U, D = Λ = 1, Γ 1 = 1 4 Γ 2 = 0.1, and s = 0.8. In addition, we pick tan(θ/2) = 1 5 and , such that the spin dynamics are dominant by orbital 1. We use g as the tuning parameter. To detect the quantum phase transition, we track the evolution of a binder cumulant defined as where m a = 1 β β 0 S z a (τ )dτ . In Fig. To understand the nature of the two observed phases, we examine the single-particle density of states at zero energy ρ a (E = 0). However, this requires the knowledge of real-time dynamics and the analytical continuation of the imaginary-time data is challenging. Instead, we consider the commonly used approximation: . A a is related to the density of states of orbital a, ρ a ( ), via At zero temperature, β → ∞, the kernel becomes a delta function and A a is exactly the zero-energy density of states, ρ aa ( = 0) and can be used to detect the delocalizationlocalization transition. In Fig. M a measures the size of local moment formed by orbital a. For the Mott localized orbital, a large M a develops and its value saturates to the maximum value 1 2 when deep inside the localized phase. As illustrated in Fig. The SU (2)-symmetric model. We next turn to the twoorbital BFA model with SU (2) symmetry. Here, we are able to analyze the model analytically at the saddle-point level. We first take the slave-spin approach d † a,σ = S+ a f † a,σ , where S+ a is the U(1) slave-spin field and f a,σ is the slavefermion field. We then introduce z . The model can be solved at a saddle-point level and we find the following OSMP solution As in the standard slave-particle method, z 1 = 0 and z 2 = 0 corresponds to an OSMP phase with Mott-localized orbital 1 and itinerant orbital 2. Thus, we again realize an OSMP phase as a dehybridization fixed point in the SU (2)symmetric model. Discussion. Our analysis has shown that dynamical spatial spin correlations impede the inter-orbital hopping and allow for a dehybridization fixed point, which is tantamount to an OSMP phase. This finding provides a new lens to view prior works on the effect of the inter-orbital hopping. We have already discussed that the U(1) slave-spin approach is able to access the OSMP fixed point. Such an OSMP phase may be considered as the U(1)-slave-spin analogue of the Z 2slave-spin-derived "orthogonal metal" We have addressed the issue of whether OSMP robustly develops within multi-orbital Hubbard models that contains inter-orbital hopping. An affirmative answer has been provided and, in the process, the notion has been advanced that the OSMP is associated with a dehybridization fixed point. We have done so by analyzing the competition between the hybridization and spatial correlations in the multi-orbital models. In particular, we carried out numerical and analytical analyses of effective models that arise from the EDMFT formulation of the models. Our results directly connect with recent ARPES results on the role of hybridization in the evolution of the iron chalcogenides towards an OSMP phase. More generally, our work reveals new connections between the 3d-electron-based bad metals in proximity to an OSMP with other categories of strongly correlated metals in near a (partial) localization-delocalization transition. The Hamiltonian of the SU (2)-symmetric two-orbital Hubbard model that we study via the slave-spin method is taken to be where n i,a,σ = d † i,a,σ d i,a,σ is the density operator of orbital a and spin σ at site i. U is the Hubbard interactions, J H the Hund's coupling and U = U -2J H . The interaction term can be written in a more compact form where we have separate interactions into formally a density-density interaction (the first term), an orbital-orbital interaction (the second term), a spin-spin interaction (the third term), a pair hopping term (the fourth term), a chemical-potential shift (the fifth term) and a constant. In practice, we shift the chemical potential , such that we have half-filling at μ = 0. In the Ising-anisotropic case, we drop the spin-flipping and pairing hopping terms and have The t-U -J H -J model we study via EDMFT has additional spin-spin interaction terms Here, h 0 is h i at a given site i = 0, describing the Hubbard and Hund's interactions of the two orbitals. H c (H φ ) contains the kinetic energy of the fermionic (bosonic) bath and the coupling between the baths and the two orbitals of h 0 . We have g μ = gδ μ,z for the Ising-anisotropic model and g μ = g for the SU (2)-symmetric model. By integrating out fermionic baths c k,a,σ and bosonic baths φ μ q , we reach the action shown in the main text with SUPPLEMENTARY DATA In Fig. The bosonic bath χ -1 0 dynamically generates an effective ferromagnetic spin-spin interaction term between the two orbitals, so we drop the corresponding part in h 0 . In addition, we also ignore the pair hopping term that is not important to the OSMP physics, and only keep the local interactions in the formally density and orbital channels. Finally, we take the same bath functions as the Ising-anisotropic model, which has been given in the main text. We use the U (1) slave-spin representation to treat the model. Here, we take a spin-1 slave-spin in order to fully decouple the charge and spin degrees of freedom where are the empty, singly-occupied and doubly-occupied states of the electron/slave-fermion operators. In addition, | -1, 0, 1 S are the eigenstates of the slave-spin operator, Sz . The corresponding local constraints are Sz a + 1 = σ f † a,σ f a,σ . In the slave-spin representation, we rewrite the action as Here, S Berry is the Berry phase contribution of the slave spin; λ a is the Lagrange multiplier that enforces the constraint; g 1 = cos(θ/2) and g 2 = sin(θ/2); and σ x,y,z are the three Pauli matrices. We then insert the following identities to the partition functions . We then have Note that in the final line, we keep the term that survives in the large N limit when we generalize SU (2) to SU (N ). As demonstrated in Ref. . We set λ a (τ ) = μ = 0 to stay at half-filling and integrate out the slave-spin and η fields where C is approximately the charge gap in the atomic limit. Since we treat the z a as a static field at the saddle-point level, the dynamical part of the z a field has been dropped. In addition, we only keep the bilinear term and ignore the high-order contributions [such as (z † z) 2 ]. Due to the fact that z a = S+ and the U (1) gauge redundancy in the slave spin representation, we can treat z a as a real field. Furthermore, at the saddle point, we take static z fields [z a (τ ) = z a ] and let i Σab (τ ) = Σ ab (τ ). This gives the following saddle-point equations Equivalent to the standard slave-spin method satisfies the self-consistent equations Hund's coupling and goes to zero at the saddle point. Now, we prove Eq. 25 indeed satisfy the saddle point equations. From Eq. 25 and the third line of Eq. 24, Σ 11 (iω) ∼ (iω) (1+s)/2 Σ 22 (iω) ∼ (iω) 1+s Σ 12 (iω) = Σ 21 (iω) = 0 Taking the dominant-order contribution (note that 0 ≤ s ≤ 1) and transforming to the imaginary-time domain, we have which are consistent with Eq. 25. As for the second line of Eq. 25, it can be satisfied by letting z 1 = 0 and z 2 ∼ D Γ2 e -C/(4Γ2) = 0. In conclusion, Eq. 25 indeed solves Eq. 24 in the low-energy limit. Alternatively, we can also analyze the effective free energy To see the existence of the OSMP solution, we extract the mass term of z a . To do so, we define G f ab [z a ] as the saddle point value of G f ab at z a . We can extract the mass term of z via As discussed before, at z a = 0, we have G f aa [z a = 0] ∼ -sign(τ ) |τ | (1-s)/2 . Approximately, its density of states in the low-energy limit is In this parameter region, m 1 > 0 and m 2 > 0. Then z 1 is gapped and does not condense, but z 2 condenses and acquires a non-zero expectation value. This is exactly the OSMP solution.