In this study, a time fractional dual-phase-lag model with temperature jump boundary condition as a choice for the Fourier's law replacement in thermal modeling of transistors, is utilized. In more details, the numerical simulation of heat transfer in newly proposed TMTC field effect transistors using fractional DPL equation has been investigated. Moreover, the Caputo fractional derivative is employed to formulate the finite difference scheme for discretization of the fractional DPL model. In order to obtain more precise results for the peak temperature rise, the temperature and heat flux profiles, the sizedependent thermal properties are taken into account. Also, the temperature jump boundary condition has been also applied by means of a mixed-type boundary condition. It is obtained that considering size-dependent thermal characteristics for transistors under study, results in an increase of the peak temperature rise. As an instance, considering the film dependent thermal properties for a 1-D silicone MOSFET with uniform heat generation at the upper part, makes the maximum temperature increase up to 250 percent. Furthermore, considering constant bulk thermal properties for the silicon MOSFET, certain oscillations are observed in the time-variation of the peak temperature rise for α= 0.7, 0.9 and 1. This presents the so-called negative bias temperature instability appearing in electronic nano-semiconductor devices. Finally, the hotspot temperature has been researched in transis- The necessity for higher speed in constant power density, has decreased the size of the MOSFETs. New generation of transistors are built in sizes of less than 10 nm, in order to have more efficiency than that of the siliconbased transistors On the other hand, as the length scale of the electronic devices shrinks to the nanoscale, the classical equations of continuum mechanics fail to endorse the experimental data. Hence, it is necessary to develop creative models which predict more accurate results relative to the classical equations such as Fourier's law with less computational cost and more simplicity Here, in order to investigate reliability and functionality of the titanium trisulfide (TiS 3 ) and tetraindium triselenide (In 4 Se 3 ) quasi one-dimensional transistors, as an alternative to the previous generation silicon transistors, temperature distribution profile and the maximum temperature increase in these transistors are investigated using the fractional DPL model. The heat transport through a silicon slab considering the temperature jump boundary condition, and in existence of the heat generation zone, is scrutinized. In the present study, the heat conduction in MOSFETs will be investigated. In more details, first, the one-dimensional silicon MOSFETs will be investigated and the results will be used for verification. Then, the MOSFET containing silicon channel and buried oxide will be modeled using the fractional DPL. Then, the peak temperature rise and the temperature profile for quasi onedimensional MOSFET transistors including newly proposed transition metal trichalcogenides gates, TiS 3 and In 4 Se 3 , are studied using the fractional dual phase lag model. The MOSFET with maximum temperature increase of 19.63 K is found to have the least temperature rise. So, it can be suggested as the suitable replacement of the one-dimensional silicon channel. Moreover, the effect of size-dependent thermal conductivity on thermal behavior of the quasi-one-dimensional TMTC MOSFETs is studied. The structure of present study is as follows. In Sec. 2, the governing equations, and the assumptions will be demonstrated. The numerical method is exhaustively discussed in Sec. 3. The validation results for different cases and the obtained results are given in Secs. 4 and 5. At last, the paper is concluded in Sec. 6. In this section, first, the derivation of fractional dual phase lag equation is presented. Then, the discretization of the governing equation, the way of applying the boundary condition, the initial conditions and the numerical finite difference scheme for discretization of the fractional DPL equation will be presented. The DPL model for the one-dimensional geometry is written as, Where the q is the heat flux and T x is the temperature gradient vector. The thermal conductivity is also presented as k. On the other hand, the differential relation for energy conservation law is: Here ρ, C p and S(x, t), are respectively, the mass density, the specific heat and the heat source. There are points on how the heat source forms during the self-heating in a MOSFET. This electric field makes the charge carriers accelerate. So, they may scatter from each other, phonons, imperfections and interfaces. The electrons discharge energy, scattering from the phonons, while self-heating the MOSFET throughout the prominent Joule heating mechanism. Accordingly, the Joule heating results in a local temperature rise, hot spot. The local temperatures are notably higher than the average temperature. Joule heating is evidently the dominant self-heating process for low-dimensional systems, among all other heat generation mechanisms including current crowding and thermo-electrics. In nano-electronics, the reliability is defined by the hottest region temperature of the die. So, hotspots formation mainly manages the higher-level packaging and thermal management solutions like the material selections and the design of the heat spreaders. Consequently, the nano-device and the die thermal demeanor has an important role in detecting cooling requirements and also finding the environmental effects. It means, when the temperature gets larger due to the power density increase, the performance of the nano-device will be restricted. Therefore, many works have been done to make the cooling techniques optimized for heat spreading enhancement. One can say that the channels built from materials which produce the minimum peak temperature rise are the most suitable and desired choices for the nano-electronics industry. Rightfully so, maintaining the temperature of the nano-device under the stated temperature threshold is easier for the ones with lower maximum temperatures. Subsequently, the operation of the transistors in digital devices such as laptops, tablets, and cellphones completely relies on their thermal behavior. In more detail, inefficient thermal operation of these transistors causes the temperature to increase too much. This augmentation makes the nano-device stop working perpetually. The nanoscale heat transfer can be investigated via DPL model using three methods. In the first method, the DPL equation is expanded using the Taylor series and then the heat flux is replaced utilizing the relation dragged out from the energy equation. Consequently, an equation containing only temperature as the unknown parameter is obtained In the above equations, 0 < α < 1 and the C D α t operator is the Caputo fractional derivative of order α By substituting Eqs. (3) in Eq. ( Taking the x-derivative of two sides of Eq. (1) along using the energy conversation law, the fractional DPL is obtained as: Here, f (x, t) is defined as In order to make the governing equations ( where, Λ, L c , T , τ q and v are, respectively, the phonon mean free-path, the characteristic length, the reference temperature, the heat flux phase lag for silicon with constant bulk thermal properties, and the energy carriers' average velocity (the sound speed). Also, the heat conduction coefficient of the solid material and the sound velocity are defined as k = ρC p |v| Λ 3 and |v| = Λ/τ q . By substituting the non-dimensional parameters and using the mentioned definitions, the non-dimensional fractional DPL equation is achieved: It is easier to ignore the * sign and write the above equation in the following form: Also, F (x, T ) is defined as, The non-dimensional form of the Eqs. ( Using the boundary conditions considering no temperature jump, the phonon scattering effects are ignored. Hence, the numerical solutions obtained from the DPL model, especially near the boundaries, are not accurate and are different from the ones calculated using the Boltzmann equation. Actually, the important observed phenomenon dealing with the heat transfer in micro and nano dimensions, is the creation of temperature jump at the boundaries, and also its increase with decreasing the system size. This phenomenon can be modeled, using the mixed type boundary condition, u s -u w = -λKn ∂u ∂ n | Ω , at the boundaries of the solution field. In this relation, u s , u w , n, Ω are, subsequently, the jumped temperature at the boundary, the boundary temperature, the unit vector normal to the boundary directed outward, and all the boundaries of the solution domain. Also, λ is a constant value, which should be determined. Using this boundary condition along the DPL model, makes the simulation of the temperature jump at the boundary more probable. The values of two unknown parameters of B and λ are determined such that the solution obtained from the DPL model matches that of found from the Boltzmann equation, well. For a one-dimensional geometry, the temperature jump boundary conditions at the top and bottom boundaries are correspondingly established as: Moreover, the initial conditions are taken to be: In this section, we will discuss how one can discretize the one-dimensional fractional DPL equation with temperature jump boundary condition. So, the spatial interval [0, L] is discretized into M subintervals, and also the temporal interval [0, T ] is divided to K intervals: In this relations, h and τ are space and time steps. Further, as a mean to discretize the space and time derivatives, the following central finite difference operators are utilized: On the other hand, for the purpose of Caputo fractional derivative operator assessment, the L -1 approximation is employed. For 0 < α < 1, this approximation leads to The weighting factors are calculated via a l = (l + 1) 1-α -l 1-α , l 0. In similarity to the Eqs. Furthermore, the second-order derivative of an arbitrary function like g(x) considering g(x) ∈ C[x, x M ] is approximated contemplating the following equation, Besides, for an arbitrary function of f (t) with the assumptions Considering Eq. ( In the following, considering the above equation in k-th and (k-1)-th time steps (t = t k and t = t k-1 ), and taking the average of the two obtained equations and also using Eq. ( Taking the x-derivative of two sides of the above equation and applying x → x 0 , the following relation is obtained: Also, contemplating Eq. ( Here, W 0 (t) is defined as, In the next step, with consideration of Eq. ( In the above relation, Similarly, repeating the above discretization method, one acquires the finite difference scheme for the bottom boundary node, Where, The presented finite difference scheme for the fractional DPL model with temperature jump boundary condition, is unconditionally stable and convergent. The order of convergence based on the infinity norm, is the order of 2 -α and 2, respectively, on time and space In the relations above, μ, d 1 , d 2 , d 3 , c 1 , c 2 and c 3 are defined as, In this section, first, in order to test the accuracy of the presented finite difference scheme, five different one-dimensional cases with the temperature jump boundary condition and a source heat are investigated. The obtained results including the convergence order and the error in base of the infinity norm, are verified with the available data in Here, the one-dimensional fractional DPL model for the case containing the temperature jump boundary condition and the non-homogeneous heat source, which is presented in Fig. The considered source heat F (x, t) is, Also, the analytical solution is found to be U (x, t) = t 3 sin(πx) In order to find the convergence order, the time interval is divided into K = T ( M L 2 2-α ) subintervals. In Tab. 3, our obtained results using the infinity norm and the convergence order are compared with those calculated by Ji et al. 2.000 3.894 × 10 -5 0.00625 the numerical results comparison for the parameters Kn = 4 π < 1, λ = 1 10 , and B = 4 3 are displayed in Tab. 4. According to Tabs. 3 and 4, as one expects, the convergence order goes to O(h 2 ), and also as time and space steps decrease, the value of the numerical error based on the infinity norm reduces. As it is shown in Tab. 3, the average relative error between our results and the one reported in In this section, the case presented in Fig. Here, the governing equation and the boundary equations are described respectively, by Eqs. ( Here, thermal analysis of a silicon slab with uniform heat generation zone and temperature jump boundary condition like what presented in Fig. boundary equations are presented, respectively, by Eqs. ( In order to numerically investigate the problem, parameters B = 0.05, Kn = 10 and λ = √ 0.0037 + 0.4022e -Kn are taken from Ghazanfarian and Abbassi For the fourth case of verification, the heat transfer at a one-dimensional slab without a heat source considering the Dirichlet boundary condition, as shown in Fig. We have considered T 0 =300 K and T w =360 K. The non-dimensional temperature U = T -T 0 Tw-T 0 for Kn=1 is plotted in Fig. As Fig. Also, the parameter α=0.975 is found to show better consistency of the results. As it is obvious, reaching the steady state, B and λ become constant. Due to slow penetration of the heat for case Kn=0.1, the non-dimensional temperature distributions for T =1, T =10, and T =100 are plotted in Fig. The five cases of studies are presented in Fig. As Λ can be replaced from Λ=|v|τ q , the Λ ef f is obtained as: Also, the thermal conductivity is calculated via: Eq. 43 suggests that the silicon film thermal conductivity is always less than that of the bulk silicon. Considering the size effect in nano dimension, for certain, makes the obtained results more reliable. Also, the thermal properties of silicon, silicon dioxide, TiS 3 , and In 4 Se 3 are presented in Tab. 8. In this section, the first case, Fig. For example, at t=40 ps and when α 1, the maximum temperature rise is 32 K and 112 K, respectively for constant bulk and size-dependent thermal characteristics. On the other hand, the maximum temperature for the same system when considering both size and temperature dependent thermal properties, calculated from the common DPL model, is reported as 55 K and 112 K In consequence, taking into account the bulk thermal properties for the film structures, notably underestimates the obtained temperature profiles and the peak temperature rise. So, it is important to consider the size-dependent thermal properties of the film structures, in order to calculate a more accurate temperature distribution. In the following, the results for the second case, Fig. In this section, the obtained results for the cases presented in Figs. 1 (h), (i), and (j), while considering the film-dependent thermal properties, are discussed. As previously mentioned, the heat generation zone is considered at the center of the transistor. In Figs. Due to the need for increasing the performance of electronic devices, reducing the sizes of these systems is inevitable. On the other hand, as the system characteristic length decreases, the Fourier law loses its validity. Instead, atomistic methods such as the molecular dynamics (MD) simulation or the phonon Boltzmann equation (PBE) are utilized. These methods have high computational costs, and also owing to their complexity, there exist limitations for applying them in complex structures. So, researchers with the help of precious results obtained from the atomistic methods can provide new models for modified classical equations like the DPL model. The new proposed models can produce accurate atomistic results with lower compu- tational costs. In this regard, there have been many attempts to employ the DPL model for nanoscale problems. Recently, the combination of the fractional calculus and the phase lag theory, leading to more accurate results, has been the center of interest. On the other hand, the newly proposed TiS 3 , and In 4 Se 3 FETs are obtained to be suitable candidates for the silicon channel replacements. In the present study, the fractional DPL model discretized using the finite difference scheme is utilized to investigate the one-dimensional MOSFETs and quasi-one-dimensional FETs. To fulfill this aim, first, verification of the developed fractional DPL model has been performed considering five different cases. Then the elaborated fractional DPL method is applied for the newly quasi-one-dimensional suggested transistors while the thermal properties are taken to be size-dependent. It is obtained that considering size-dependent thermal characteristics make the peak temperature rise to increase, up to 250%. In other words, considering the bulk thermal properties for film structures, remarkably underestimates the obtained temperature profiles and the temperature rise. So, it is important to consider the size-dependent thermal properties of the film structures, in order to obtain a more accurate temperature distribution. Also, it has reduced the temperature jump at the bottom boundary. The maximum temperature of the hotspot. The reliability has been investigated for the FET containing new two-dimensional proposed materials with quasi-one-dimensional band gap, named as TMT. It has been obtained that among the studied FETs, the transistor with titanium trisulfide channel presents the least temperature increase (19.63 K). Hence, TiS 3 can be suggested as the noteworthy substitution of the silicon channel. Also, considering α=0.975 for Kn=0.1 is found to present better results.