Pb-chalcogenide colloidal quantum dots (CQDs) are attractive materials to be used as tuneable laser media across the infrared spectrum. However, excessive nonradiative Auger recombination due to the presence of trap states outcompetes light amplification by rapidly annihilating the exciton population, leading to high gain thresholds. Here, we employ a binary blend of CQDs and ZnO nanocrystals in order to passivate the in-gap trap states of PbS-CQD gain medium. Using transient absorption, we measure a five-fold increase in Auger lifetime demonstrating the suppression of trap-assisted Auger recombination. By doing so, we achieve a two-fold reduction in amplified spontaneous emission (ASE) threshold. Finally, by integrating our proposed binary blend to a DFB resonator, we demonstrate single-mode lasing emission at 1650 nm with a linewidth of 1.23 nm (0.62 meV), operating at a low lasing threshold of ~385 μJ.cm -2 . The Auger suppression in this system has allowed to achieve unprecedented lasing emission stability for a CQD laser with recorded continuous operation of 5 hours at room temperature and ambient conditions. Semiconductor colloidal quantum dots (CQDs) have shown great promise as gain materials for solution-processed lasers, ranging from the visible The photoexcited carriers in QDs can be captured by mid-gap surface trap-states, resulting in long-lived net charges. The passivation of these surface trap states has been demonstrated to improve performance in CQDs solar cells Figure Common Auger recombination (Figure To validate our hypothesis about the trap-state passivation, we conducted thermal admittance spectroscopy (TAS) (See Methods). TAS enables us to characterize the energy and number density of trap states in photosensitive materials. We investigated the effect of passivating trap-states in our binary CQD films on excitonic kinetics. To do so, we performed time-resolved photoluminescence (PL) and PL quantum yield (PLQY) measurements to understand the single-exciton kinetics (low injection regime). The details of time-resolved PL and PL-QY measurements are described in Methods Section. Figure Therefore, the nonradiative recombination associated to the trap-states is strongly suppressed in the single-exciton regime. Next, to evaluate the multiexciton behaviour of bare-PbS emitter QDs and PbS/ZnO binary blend samples, we performed femtosecond transient absorption (TA) spectroscopy (See Methods Section). The multiexciton dynamics of the samples were extracted using the simple subtractive method described by Klimov et al The obtained lifetime is the longest reported bi-exciton Auger recombination lifetime in PbS(Se)-based QDs, which give optical gain. Moreover, as shown in Figure The multiexcitonic Auger lifetime in PbS QDs can be estimated as , where N e = N h are the number of excited electron and holes, τ 2A is the biexciton Auger lifetime. Then, this expression suggests a ratio of τ 4 : τ 3 : τ 2 = 0.08:0.22:1 which is in good agreement with the ratio 0.085:0.19:1 of experimentally obtained lifetimes for 4-, 3-and 2-excitons relaxation of 5.6 nm PbS QDs(See Figure To investigate the effect of supressing trap-assisted Auger processes on optical gain performance, we carried-out ASE measurements in bare-PbS QDs and Pb/ZnO binary blend samples. The details of the ASE measurements can be found in Methods Section. As an In addition, varying the ZnO loading in binary blend led us to achieve fine-tuneable gain spectrum across the optical telecommunication band as depicted in Figure indicating lasing threshold (Figure -12 for other DFB lasers) outperforming the previously reported PbS-based DFB lasers. , where I ∥ and I ⊥ is the emission intensity parallel and vertical to the optical axis, respectively. Previously the use of doping had been reported as a means to reduce gain threshold by populating the first excited state of PbS CQDs allowing to reach population inversion at lower pump fulence Last but not least, this method led us to achieve a record stable lasing performance as well as an ultra-fine tuneable gain spectrum within the optical communication window. PbS QDs were synthesized by a multiple injection method, under inert atmosphere. Briefly, for 5.6 nm PbS QDs, 0.446g PbO, 3.8mL oleic acid and 50 mL 1-octadecene (ODE) were pumped for 1h at 100°C to form lead oleate. Once under argon, the solution was kept at 100°C and a solution of 70 μL hexamethyldisilathiane (HMS) in 3 mL ODE was quickly injected. After 6 minutes of reaction, a second solution of 90 μL HMS in 9 mL ODE was dropwise injected. Afterwards, the solution was cooled down naturally to room temperature and PbS QDs were precipitated with the addition of a mixture of acetone/ethanol, redispersing in anhydrous toluene. This process was repeated two more times for further purification. Finally, the concentration of PbS QDs was adjusted to 30 mg/mL and the solution was stored in the glovebox to avoid oxidation. NCs size was tuned by the variation of the amount of HMS used in each solution. For 5.8 nm QDs 65 μL HMS was used in the first injection, and 75 μL in the second. For 6.2 nm QDs, the amount of HMS added in the first injection was 60 μL and in the second, 80μL. . ZnO NCs were synthesized based on the method shown previously Zinc acetate dihydrate (2.95 g) was dissolved in methanol (125 mL) on a 250mL flask, under continuous stirring, and the temperature was set at 60°C. Simultaneously, another solution was prepared by dissolving 1.48 g of KOH in 65 mL of methanol. The prepared solution of KOH was slowly (in 4 min) added to the zinc acetate solution and the reaction was left unchanged for 2.5 h. After completion of the reaction, the heating was removed, and the solution was led to slowly cool down to room temperature under constant stirring. Prepared ZnO NCs solution was centrifuged at 3500 r.p.m. for 5 min. Then, the supernatant was discarted and the remaining NCs were dispersed in methanol, this centrifuge process was repeated three times. Finally, the ZnO NCs was dispersed in a solution of 5% butylamine in toluene for making the binary blend solutions, and in 2% butylamine in chloroform for formation of the base layer. Active layer was formed on the desired substrate by spin coating technique. First, the substrate was covered with 50 μL of QDs solution and spin coating started after 5 s, within a spin speed of 2500 r.p.m. for 15 s. Then, a mixed ligand of ZnI2/MPA (mixing of 25 mM zinc iodide (ZnI2) in methanol and 0.015% 3-mercaptopropionic acid (MPA) in methanol) was added on the formed surface. The spin coating was started after 7 s, at a spin speed of 2500 r.p.m. for 60 s, while a few drops of methanol were poured in order to clean the film from any unwanted organics. These steps were repeated until reaching the desired thickness. For bare-PbS QDs solutions, the QDs solution was prepared within a concentration of 30 mg. mL -1 . Before mixing, the ZnO NCs were prepared in separate vials with the same concentration (30 mg. mL -1 ). For PbS/ZnO binary blend solutions, the PbS QDs solution was mixed with ZnO solution at different volume ratios. The PV devices were prepared on a pre-cleaned indium tin oxide (ITO) coated glass substrate. The electron-transporting layer (ZnO) was prepared by spin coating of ZnO NCs in chloroform (40 mg. mL -1 ) on the substrate at a speed of 4000 r.p.m for 60 s. The thickness of this layer is about 40 nm. Then, the active layer of bare-PbS or PbS/ZnO binary blend was deposited on this layer. The active layer deposition follows the similar procedure as described above. In this case, the thickness of the active layer was ~200-220 nm. Next, two layers of ethanedithiol-treated PbS (~30-35 nm) were deposited on the active layer solid film, acting as the electron-blocking layer. Finally, the back-electrode was formed by deposition of approximately 100 nm Au through a pre-patterned mask in thermal evaporator (Nano 36 Kurt J. Lesker). The active area of each device is 3.14 mm 2 . The measurements were carried out on the prepared PV devices in a Lakeshore 4-probes cryogenic chamber, where the temperature is controlled by a Lakeshore-360 controller. The frequency-dependent capacitance was characterized with an Agilent B1500 connected to another external capacitance measurement unit. The temperature of the chamber was varied from 220 K to 330 K to record the frequency-dependent capacitance difference. To calculate the built-in voltage and depletion width of the devices, the voltage-dependent capacitance measurements were done with the same instrument. The measurements were performed using a Horiba Jobin Yvon iHR550 Fluorolog system coupled with a Hamamatsu RS5509-73 liquidnitrogen cooled photomultiplier tube and a calibrated Spectralon-coated Quanta-phi integrating sphere. A 637 nm continuous wave laser (Vortran Stradus) was used as the excitation source for PL measurements. The time-resolved measurements were performed by a pulsed laser (SpectraLED-625) at 637 nm. For extracting correct PL decay curves, the recorded decays were corrected by taking IRF of system into account. The details of the PLQY measurements were described in our previous report The measurements were performed using a mode-lock Ti-saphire oscillator based regenerative amplifier having a center wavelength of 800 nm and pulse width of 45 fs at a repetition rate of 1 kHz. The optical setup for the measurements was a typical pump-probe non-collinear configuration. The output of amplifier was directed into a half-wave plate and a variable neutral density to adjust the pump fluence on the samples. The probe beam (wavelengths ranging 1200 to 1700 nm) was generated by an optical parametric amplifier within almost 1 mJ at 800 nm. A precise motorized stage was used to control the time delay between pump and probe beam. The probe beam was directed on the samples within same excitation area of the pump. The changes in reflection and transmission signals were recorded by a lock-in amplifier. All measurements were carried out at room temperature in solid film formation of QDs on glass substrate within a thickness of ~110-120 nm. The solid films were prepared by the procedure described in active layer deposition on glass substrate. The samples were optically pumped by a femtosecond Yt:YAG ORAGAMI laser (NKT Photonics) operating at 1030 nm within a pulse width of 300 fs at a repetition rate of 10 kHz. After passing through a variable neutral density in order to adjust the excitation fluence, the laser beam was focused on to the samples as a stripe shape by using a cylindrical lens. The ASE spectra were collected perpendicular to the excitation utilizing a lens with f = 50 mm and diameter of 2 inch. Using free-space optic, the collected light coupled into Kymera 328i spectrograph (Oxford Instruments. Andor) which equipped by an InGaAs camera, via a f = 200 mm lens through a 100 μm slit. The solid films were prepared by the procedure described in active layer deposition on glass substrate. The thickness of the films is typically ~120 nm. Lasing spectra were collected perpendicular to the surface of the devices ~20 cm away from the DFB gratings. To do so, we employed a fiber coupled port of the spectrometer using 10-20 μm slit width to achieve high resolution. The integration time of the spectra collection was set to 1 s for all measurements. The picture and video of the DFB lasers were taken by a camera NIT-WiDy-SenS-320V-ST InGaAs camera (Iberoptics Sistemas Ópticos) with an attached SWIR lens. In all measurements, a long pass filter was located at front of the slit to block the pump laser light. Spectral data and threshold analysis of ASE and lasing measurements are presented in Supplementary Note 5. The gratings were fabricated on pre-cleaned alumina (Ossila Ltd.) substrate in a cleanroom. The PMMA (AR-P 662.04 Allresist) was firstly spin-coated at 4000 r.p.m. for 60 s followed by baking at 150 °C for 2 min. Then, a layer of a conductive polymer (AR-PC 5090.02 Allresist) was spin-coated on top of PMMA layer within a spin speed of 2000 r.p.m., and then baked for 1 min at 90 °C. To pattern the sample, it was transferred to an electron-beam lithography system (Crestec CABL 9000C). Following the lithography, the conductive polymer layer was dissolved in water for 1 min and e-beam resist was developed for 2 min. For etching the alumina substrate, we used reactive-ion etching within 80 sccm of Ar and 20 sccm of CHF3 under 290 V of an RF power for 5 min. Finally, the residual PMMA was then cleaned-off using an oxygen plasma asher and acetone/isopropanol solution cleaning. For DFB laser devices, the PbS/ZnO QDs blend solution was deposited on the pre-patterned alumina substrate through the method described in active layer deposition. The thickness of the active layer is approximately 240 nm (shown in Figure TAS are provided in Supplementary Note 1. The distribution of the trap-state density is plotted as a function of trap-state position (E T ) in Supplementary Figure