Cross-plane electrical and thermal transport in thin films of a conducting polymer (poly (3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene), PEDOT) stabilized with trifluoromethanesulfonate (OTf) is investigated in this study. We explore their electrical properties by conductive atomic force microscopy (C-AFM), which reveals the presence of highly conductive nano-domains. Thermal conductivity in cross-plane direction is measured with Null-Point scanning thermal microscopy (NP-SThM): PEDOT:OTf indeed demonstrates non-negligible electronic contribution to the thermal transport. We further investigate the correlation between electrical and thermal conductivity by applying post-treatment: chemical reduction (de-doping) for the purpose of lowering charge carrier concentration and hence, electrical conductivity and acid treatment (over-doping) to increase the latter. From our measurements, we find a vibrational thermal conductivity of 0.34±0.04 W m -1 K -1 . From the linear dependence or the electronic contribution of thermal conductivity vs. the electronic conductivity (Widemann-Franz law), we infer a Lorenz number 6 times larger than the classical Sommerfeld value as also observed in many organic materials for in-plane thermal transport. Applying the recently proposed molecular Widemann-Franz law, we deduced a reorganization energy of 0.53 ± 0.06 eV. Conducting polymers are recognized as promising candidates for varying applications: flexible and printable circuits where S is the Seebeck coefficient, σ is the electrical conductivity, κ v is the vibrational thermal conductivity, κ e is the electronic thermal conductivity and T is the temperature. In addition to high electrical conductivity, a suitable TE material is required to have low thermal conductivity in order to achieve high ZT values Recently, thin films of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PE-DOT) stabilized with trifluoromethanesulfonate (triflate, OTf) counter-ions have demonstrated exceptionally high electrical conductivity exceeding 3000 S cm Considerable attention was brought to investigation of thermal properties of conductive polymers due to the aforementioned interest in thermoelectric applications In addition to doping In this work we explore electrical and thermal properties of thin films of PEDOT:OTf in cross-plane direction using scanning probe microscopy (SPM) techniques. Electrical conductivity of polymer material is investigated with conductive atomic force microscopy (C-AFM), where electrical current through the sample between the conductive AFM tip and the underlying substrate is measured. Electrical current imaging reveals presence of highly conductive domains in PEDOT:OTf films corresponding to the crystallites with increased interchain order which is responsible for the favorable transporting properties. We used scanning thermal microscopy (SThM) for the characterization of local thermal properties of PEDOT:OTf. This technique is frequently applied to a large variety of samples, such as organic thin films 15 , 16 , 17 , nanomaterials Here, we study the dependence of thermal conductivity versus the electrical transporting properties of PEDOT samples. We are able to tune their conductivity by chemically reducing the polymeric film which results in a decrease of conductivity. On the other hand, we employ secondary doping with sulfuric acid to increase the conductivity of as-deposited PEDOT:OTf. Combination of these approaches allows us to vary the electrical conductivity in a span of 4 orders of magnitude. We extract the vibrational thermal conductivity κ v of PEDOT:OTF from the plot of thermal conductivity as a function of electrical conductivity. Furthermore, we are able to estimate the Lorenz number value for this material as well as to provide an estimate of the energy of molecular reorganization for a PEDOT chain according to the recently developed molecular Wiedemann-Franz (MWF) law PEDOT:OTf thin films were prepared according to the procedure described elsewhere XPS measurements were performed to analyze the chemical composition of the thin films and to estimate the doping degree of PEDOT. We used a Physical Electronics 5600 spectrometer fitted in an UHV chamber with a residual pressure of 3 × 10 -10 mbar. Confocal micro-Raman spectrometer (Horiba-Jobin Yvon, LabRam®HR) was utilized for Raman spectra acquisition. A diode pumped solid state laser (Cobalt Blues) with a wavelength of 473 nm (maximum output power of 25 mW) was used as an excitation source. Raman signal was collected in backscattering configuration with a x100 objective lens and dispersed by a 1800 lines/mm grating before being directed to a CCD detector. C-AFM measurements on as-prepared and doped with sulfuric acid samples were performed in air at T=22.5 °C and relative humidity of 35-40% on a Bruker Dimension Icon AFM. Measure-ments were performed in contact mode with a PtIr coated tip (Bruker SCM PIC V2, spring constant 0.1 N m -1 ). Measurements on chemically reduced materials were performed in ultra-high vacuum (UHV) conditions (10 -10 to 10 -9 mbar) in order to preserve the oxidation degree of the sample prior to the subsequent NP-SThM measurements. For these measurements, VT-SPM microscope (Scienta Omicron) with RMN-12PT400B probe (solid platinum, spring constant 0.3 N m -1 ) was used. Loading force was maintained between 10 and 20 nN during the measurements for both types of characterization. Details on calculation of crossplane electrical conductivity are provided in SI (Section 2). Nanoscale thermal characterization of PEDOT-based materials was carried out in air on a Bruker Dimension Icon AFM with Anasys SThM module. We used Kelvin NanoTechnology (KNT) SThM probes with Pd thin film resistor in the probe tip as the heating element (VITA-HE-GLA-1, spring constant 0.5 N m -1 ). This probe has increased contact area and thus a larger probed volume for SThM (see Section 3 of SI) when compared to a classic contact mode AFM probe (SThM probe tip radius ∼100 nm) which is necessary to attain a measurable heat flow from the tip into the sample Cross-plane thermal conductivity was estimated with the Null Point (NP) technique. This differential method allows to obtain quantitative information on thermal conductivity by subtracting the parasitic heat loss from the probe to the environment where T C is the probe tip temperature at contact, i.e. when the tip is in thermal equilibrium with the sample surface, T NC is the tip temperature just before contact with the sample surface, T amb is the ambient temperature, the calibration coefficients α and β are related to thermal contact area, i.e. tip and sample geometry as well as tip-sample thermal conductance and the parasitic heat flow As-deposited, PEDOT:OTf film presents granular structure with grain size in order of several tenths of nanometers which translates to relatively elevated roughness for a polymeric material (root mean square (RMS) roughness of about 4 nm, see Figure Electrical transport in PEDOT:OTf films was investigated with C-AFM. Figures We have performed measurements of the electrical conductivity in cross-plane direction of the PEDOT:OTf film in the area highlighted in the images (a) and (b) of the Figure Thermal characterization of PEDOT:OTf films was performed with SThM. Figures Calculated thermal conductivity as a function of polymer thickness is presented in the Figure where κ * is the measured thermal conductivity, κ f and κ Au are thermal conductivity of thin film and gold substrate, respectively, r is the radius of thermal contact between the SThM probe tip (see Section 10 of SI for details on r estimation) and the sample and t is the film thickness. By taking the film thickness of 40 ± 5 nm, we obtain κ f = 0.64 ± 0.03 W m -1 K -1 . Another equation ( 1 For measured thermal conductivity in the zones 1 and 2 (3 and 8 nm polymer thickness with 2 nm uncertainty) of 3.57 and 1.46 W m -1 K -1 , we get κ f = 0.69 ± 0.4 and 0.74 ± 0.22 W m -1 K -1 , respectively (Figure In "thick" film regime ( t r > 2), high variation of thickness results in much smaller error for the true value of thermal conductivity than for thinner films whose behavior is dominated by the highly thermally conductive substrate. As-deposited, PEDOT:OTf films may contain up to 28% of oxidized PEDOT chains We have modified the procedure described by Massonet et al 35 for our materials: pristine PEDOT:OTf films have shown poor wettability with aqueous solutions of reducing agents. We have To reduce PEDOT:OTf, the substrate with deposited polymer layer was immersed in the solution and the exposure time was varied. NaBH 4 was used as reducing agent for short reduction times, however it was found unsuitable for prolonged immersion times: PEDOT layers degrade and delaminate from substrate presumably due to hydrogen gas formation in the bulk of the film. Immersion in hydrazine solutions did not result in mechanical degradation of PEDOT films. The over-doping with H 2 SO 4 was performed by immersing the sample in 1M aqueous solution for 1h. These treatments produced samples with varying doping degree. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was performed to characterize the doping degree control in PEDOT films. The survey spectra for pristine PEDOT:OTf (Figure Reducing treatment has pronounced effect on electrical conductivity: decrease of the doping degree of PEDOT:OTf lowers the concentration of charge carriers and electrical conductivity. A sample with 10 minutes exposure to 10% wt. hydrazine solution exhibits strong decrease of current amplitude (Figure By utilizing different immersion times and concentration of reducing agents as well as over-doping in sulfuric acid as described by Massonnet et al. It was found that thermal conductivity increases with the electrical conductivity of the sample (Figure We have plotted the electronic contribution to thermal conductivity (κ e =κ-κ v ) corresponding to the samples with electrical conductivity over 1 S cm -1 ) in Figure where L is the Lorenz number. From our data, we extract L = 1.54 ± 0.18 × 10 -7 W Ω K -2 . This value is about 6 times larger than classic Sommerfeld value ( 2.44 × 10 -8 W Ω K -2 ). We have also made an attempt to apply recently developed molecular WF law (Eq. 6) where k B is the Boltzmann constant (in eV K -1 ). We obtain λ = 0.53 ± 0.06 eV from our data (Figure PEDOT-based materials are among the most studied conductive polymers due to the vast variety of works dedicated to the investigation of their electrical and thermal transport. It was demonstrated by Brédas et al. We have investigated charge and heat transport in PEDOT:OTf system as a function of oxidation degree. These approaches have been successfully applied in the past by Bubnova et al The value of cross-plane lattice thermal conductivity shown in the Figure Numerous studies of thermoelectric transport in organic semiconductors have investigated κ e in the framework of classical Wiedemann-Franz law, which was originally developed for metals. Though it provides reliable interpretation of κ e (σ ) trend in metals and some semiconductors, it was found that for systems with pronounced charge carrier localization such as disordered organic semiconductors, the κ(σ ) significantly deviates from expected behavior. It was demonstrated that for semiconducting polymers, the deviation from classic value of Lorentz number L in WF law can surpass the initial value by 10 times: polyaniline demonstrates L higher by an order of magnitude than Sommerfeld value The uncertainty of applicability of classic WF law to organic semiconductors has led to the development of a novel theory connecting thermal and electrical transport in molecular systems by Craven and Nitzan In this work, we present the study of charge and heat transport in the cross-plane direction of PEDOT:OTf material at the nanoscale. We have explored the link between the morphology and electrical properties of our material: the polymer presents highly conductive nanodomains which correspond to the grains of highly ordered PEDOT chains. Triflate-doped PEDOT presents ohmic behavior which has allowed us to obtain cross-plane electrical conductivity of the as-deposited polymer in the order of 50 S cm -1 . We have further investigated thermal conductivity in PEDOT:OTf thin films: the behavior of cross-plane thermal conductivity as a function of film thickness follows a simple analytical model, which allowed us to effectively decouple this property from thermally conductive substrate; for films of 40 nm and thicker the variation of thickness of ±5 nm results in experimental uncertainty no higher than 10%. The correlation between cross-plane thermal and electrical transport of PEDOT:OTf is also reported in this work. Chemical reduction and acid treatment allowed us to follow the evolution of electronic contribution to thermal transport on a range of more than three decades of electrical conductivity. We have found that in weakly conducting PEDOT, the electronic contribution κ e is negligible and the thermal conductivity is characterized by its vibrational term κ v = 0.34±0.04 W m -1 K -1 . In highly electrically conductive PEDOT samples, the electronic contribution κ e reaches the same order of magnitude as κ v . The Lorenz number value for cross-plane transport in PE-DOT:OTF which we have estimated from our data is about 6 times higher than classic Sommerfeld value, which raises questions on applicability of WF law to this class of materials despite almost metallic character of in-plane transport in PEDOT:OTf. We deduce reorganization energy of λ = 0.53 ± 0.06 eV from the newly developed molecular WF law, a value slightly higher than expected that calls for more theoretical studies and experimental confirmations. The authors declare no conflict of interest. Deresmes for his valuable help with the SThM instrument.