We use the phase-resolved imaging to directly study the nonlinear modification of the wavelength of spin waves propagating in 100-nm thick, in-plane magnetized YIG waveguides. We show that, by using moderate microwave powers, one can realize spin waves with large amplitudes corresponding to precession angles in excess of 10 degrees and nonlinear wavelength variation of up to 18% in this system. We also find that, at large precession angles, the propagation of spin waves is strongly affected by the onset of nonlinear damping, which results in a strong spatial dependence of the wavelength. This effect leads to a spatiallydependent controllability of the wavelength by the microwave power. Furthermore, it leads to the saturation of nonlinear spectral shift's effects several micrometers away from the excitation point. These findings are important for the development of nonlinear, integrated spin-wave signal-processing devices and can be used to optimize their characteristics. Nonlinear phenomena accompanying propagation of spin waves in magnetic films have been known for many decades to enable implementing a large variety of advanced signalprocessing devices The vast majority of previous work on nonlinear spin waves utilized millimeter-scale magnetic structures fabricated from low-loss magnetic insulatoryttrium iron garnet (YIG) Such miniaturization has been greatly advanced by the advent of high-quality ultrathin YIG films Although nonlinear spin-wave dynamics in microscopic YIG structures remain largely unexplored, it has already been demonstrated experimentally that the nonlinear shift of the dispersion spectrum of propagating spin waves can be used, for example, to control switching in coupled spin-wave waveguides via intensity However, until now it has remained unclear how large nonlinear shift is practically achievable and which factors can limit this effect in real devices. In this work, we study the propagation of intense spin waves in microscopic ultrathin-YIG waveguides using a wide range of power for the excitation signal. By using highresolution, phase-sensitive, magneto-optical detection, we directly measure the spin wave's spatial dependencies of intensity and wavelength. Our experimental findings indicate that the nonlinear spectral shift is strongly affected by the onset of the nonlinear magnetic damping: at large amplitudes, spin waves start to exhibit strongly enhanced spatial attenuation leading to a spatially-dependent magnitude of the nonlinear spectral shift. As a result, the wavelength (wavevector) of intense spin waves varies strongly along the propagation path. While the wavelength exhibits good controllability by the applied microwave power at the beginning of the propagation path, this controllability is almost completely lost several micrometers away from the excitation point. Our findings provide insight into nonlinear propagation of spin waves in microscopic waveguides and are of decisive importance for the development of efficient magnonic devices utilizing the effect of the nonlinear spectral shift. Figure For patterning, a double-layer PMMA resist is deposited on a <111> oriented GGG substrate. The resist is exposed by e-beam lithography using a RAITH Pioneer system and developed in isopropanol. Subsequently 110 nm of YIG are deposited at room temperature by pulsed laser deposition using a recipe by Hauser et al. We study the propagation of spin waves in the YIG waveguide with spatial and phase resolution by using micro-focus Brillouin light scattering (BLS) spectroscopy First, we characterize the expected effect by using micromagnetic simulations (Figs. 1(b) and 1(c)). We calculate amplitude-dependent dispersion curves using the simulation software MuMax3 As seen from the data of Fig. where MS is the saturation magnetization, m is the amplitude of the dynamic magnetization, and ’ü▒ is the mean precession angle. Because MST enters the expression for the frequency of ferromagnetic resonance: f FMR = ╬│ŌłÜH 0 (H 0 + 4ŽĆM ST ), its decrease causes the overall decrease in the frequency of spin waves. Additionally, the decrease of MST is known to lead to a decrease in the group velocity of spin waves To experimentally address the effect of the nonlinear spectral shift, we perform phaseresolved BLS measurements at a fixed frequency of the excitation signal f and analyze the variation of the wavelength of spin waves with the increase in the power P. Fourier analysis of these maps. As seen from these data, at P = 0.1 mW, the spin waves exhibit a well-defined constant wavelength ’ü¼ = 1.38 ’üŁm, which is in good agreement with the dispersion curve calculated for the small precession angle ’ü▒ = 0.1┬░ (Fig. We quantify the spatial decay of spin waves in the waveguide by analyzing the spinwave intensity maps (Fig. To characterize the modification of the decay with the increase of P in detail, we plot in Fig. The contribution of this phenomenon relative to the normal linear damping can be estimated based on the data presented in Fig. Finally, at x = 18 ’üŁm (point-down triangles), the maximum achieved shift never exceeds 0.1 ’üŁm -1 within the entire range of P. It is instructive to discuss approaches to suppress the detrimental effects of the nonlinear damping. The dominating mechanism of the nonlinear damping is the energy transfer from a coherent spin wave into incoherent modes possessing the same frequency. This process can be controlled by varying the geometrical parameters of the waveguide, which allows one to modify the spin-wave dispersion spectrum using the effects of spin-wave quantization and avoid the detrimental spectral degeneracy (see, e.g., We now turn to the estimation of characteristic precession angles ’ü▒ in our experiments. We base our analysis on the comparison of the experimental dependence dk(P) measured close to the antenna (point-up triangles in Fig. These facts allow us to estimate the critical precession angle corresponding to the onset of the nonlinear damping at the threshold power P=1 mW: ’ü▒ ’é╗ 9┬░. At this angle, the nonlinear shift of the wavevector dk = 0.27 ’üŁm -1 , which corresponds to the modification of the wavelength by about 6%. At powers P > 1 mW, the estimation of precession angles is less straightforward. Due to the influence of the nonlinear damping, the energy becomes transferred from the directly excited coherent spin wave into incoherent short-wavelength spin-wave modes each of them reducing the saturation magnetization accordingly. Under these conditions, the reduction of the static magnetization causing the spectral shift is determined not only by the intensity of the coherent wave but also by those of the incoherent modes. Therefore, we introduce an effective total precession angle, ’ü▒tot, which is generally larger than the coherent spin-wave precession angle, ’ü▒SW. The former can be directly found from the analysis of the shift of the dispersion spectrum (point-up triangles in Fig. We emphasize that, although the spectral shift is determined by ’ü▒tot, the linear increase of its value with the increase in P is only observed near the antenna, while at distances of several micrometers, this angle also exhibits saturation (circles and point-down triangles in Fig. We finally discuss possible effects of the heating of the sample by the intense microwave radiation. According to the theory of spin-wave interactions (Ref. 2), the increase of the temperature is not expected to noticeably affect the nonlinear damping. This was also shown experimentally in, e.g., Ref. In conclusion, we have shown that the effect of the nonlinear spectral shift enabling the controllability of the wavelength of spin waves by their intensity is a complex phenomenon, which is strongly affected by the nonlinear spin-wave damping. This effect becomes pronounced at precession angles exceeding 9┬░ and results in a spatially-dependent controllability of the wavelength. The efficient controllability can only be achieved at small distances from the excitation point, whereas the controllability becomes relatively poor several micrometers away. Additionally, the fast spatial decay caused by the nonlinear damping results in the strong spatial variation of the wavelength near the excitation point. These findings are critically important for the development of efficient nonlinear magnonic devices utilizing the effect of the nonlinear spectral shift. 