The realization of photonic microwave oscillators using optomechanical cavities has recently become a reality. By pumping the cavity with a blue-detuned laser, the so-called phonon lasing regime -in which a mechanical resonance is amplified beyond losses -can be reached and the input signal gets modulated by highly-coherent tones at integer multiples of the mechanical resonance. Implementing optomechanical cavities on released films with high index of refraction can lead to optical modes at telecom wavelengths and mechanical resonances in the GHz scale, resulting in highly-stable signals in the microwave domain upon photodetection. Owing to the extreme compactness of such cavities, application in satellite communications (SAT-COM) seems highly appropriate, but no experiments have been reported so far. In this paper, an optomechanical microwave oscillator (OMO) built on a micron-scale silicon optomechanical crystal cavity is characterized and tested in a real SATCOM testbed. Using a blue-detuned laser, the OMO is driven into a phonon lasing state where multiple harmonics are generated, reaching tones up to 20 GHz. Under this regime, its practical applicability, remarkably addressing its performance as a photonic local oscillator, has been validated. The results, in addition with the advantages of extreme compactness and silicontechnology compatibility, make OMOs very promising candidates to build ultra-low weight photonics-based microwave oscillators for SATCOM applications. Photonic technology is becoming a key ingredient of the most advanced SATCOM payloads, greatly upgrading their performance thanks to the intrinsic advantages of photonics over electronics: low weight, compactness, low-power consumption, broadband performance and immunity to electromagnetic interference, among others. Remarkably, the most important benefits of photonic payload in SATCOM systems have been demonstrated However, despite its appealing features as photonic microwave oscillator Here we describe the silicon OM cavity that we use in our experiments (see Fig. An important point is that we cannot choose the mechanical frequencies at will. Instead, they are constrained by our choice of photonic cavity which must resonate at 1550 nm in order to use telecom optical equipment for characterization. Since the light speed is about five orders of magnitude higher than the speed of sound in silicon, mechanical resonances will occur at frequencies five orders of magnitude lower than the optical frequencies From the optical and mechanical field patterns, which can be obtained via numerical simulations where U is the normalized displacement field (max|U|=1), n is the outward pointing normal to the boundary, ∆ε = ε Si -ε Air and ∆ε Air The PE coupling rate can be calculated as: with δε = -ε 0 n 4 p ijkl S kl . Here, ε 0 is the vacuum permittivity, n the refractive index of silicon, p ijkl are the photoelastic tensor components and S kl the strain tensor components. The vacuum OM coupling rate is one of the key parameters of an OM cavity: the higher it is, the more efficient all the underlying OM phenomena will be. In our case, we get g 0 /2π = 540 kHz Essentially, under the appropriate conditions (blue-detuned driving to achieve phonon lasing), at the output of the OM cavity we will have an optical carrier (provided by the driving laser and with frequency ω L ) modulated by a set of harmonics spaced by the mechanical frequency. Each one of these peaks will have a certain amplitude or power, which will determine the available microwave power P LO,n at a certain frequency f LO,n = nω m /2π. As shown below, these microwave tones will display very low phase noise, in particular the 1st harmonic When the laser is switched on, the light travels along the fiber and couples to the cavity -via evanescent field couplingprovided that the loop is close enough to it. The relative position between these two elements can be accurately tuned with piezoelectric controllers placed at the sample holder where the OM cavity is located. Then the cavity can scatter lights back into the fiber, being guided along both the transmission and reflection direction. Regarding the transmission channel, we can switch between two different configurations as a function of the measurement to be performed. For optical spectrum measurements, the signal is first amplified (if needed) with an EDFA and then it is analyzed through an optical spectrum analyzer (OSA) ANDO AQ6317C. The optical resonance measurements are recorded using an alternative configuration. In this case, the signal is attenuated with a variable optical attenuator (VOA), and then it is photo detected via a switchable gain amplified detector (Thorlabs PDA20CS-EC -InGaAs switchable gain amplified detector) and finally recorded with a scope (DSO81204B Infinium high performance oscilloscope). The reflection channel ends in either a 12 GHzbandwidth photodetector (New Focus 1544-B DC-coupled NIR fiber-optic receiver) or a 50 GHz-bandwidth photodetector (u2XPDV2120R). It must be noted that whilst the 12 GHz bandwidth detector has more sensitivity, the second one permits us to measure higher-order harmonics of the fundamental mechanical resonance. Once the signal has been photodetected we can choose either to analyze it through an RF spectrum analyzer (RSA) or use it as the trigger signal for the temporal trace measurements. It must be remarked that different RSA have been employed in our experiments: one for the analysis of the mechanical response of the cavity (Rohde & Schwarz FSQ 40) and another for the phase noise measurements (Rohde & Schwarz FSUP signal source analyzer or Anritsu MS2850A signal analyzer). When the cavity is driven by a low-power laser whose wavelength is blue-detuned with respect to the cavity resonance, the thermal motion of the cavity is transduced into the optical signal and can be detected in the photodetectors. An example of the transduced mechanical motion response before reaching the instability threshold is presented in Fig. Indeed, under sufficiently strong pumping Here, a noticeable difference between the optical response when the OMO is activated (blue curve) or not (green curve) can be appreciated. In the case when the mechanical motion is only transduced -OMO OFF case -only two sideband peaks spaced ±f m from the CW laser signal are observed. Once the cavity is in the self-sustained regime, different sidebands (depicted in red arrows) at frequencies n × f LO around the laser frequency, where n is the harmonic index, are generated. If we analyze the RF spectrum or power spectral density (PSD) of the system when the OMO is active, obtained upon photodetection of the previously analyzed optical signal, higher-order harmonics appear, as presented in Fig. A key aspect determining the quality of microwave oscillators is the presence of random fluctuations in the phase of the generated tone. In the frequency-domain representation, these fluctuations can be measured by the phase noise, which is related to the time domain deviations from the case of an ideal signal with zero jitter. In our case, once the cavity is in the lasing regime, the generated microwave tone can be characterized by these means. The phase noise of the different harmonics generated by driving the cavity in the lasing state was reported in The Allan variance σ 2 y (τ ) depends on the variable τ and expresses the mean square of all frequency counter samples separated in time by τ over the entire measurement interval where L(f ) is the measured phase noise, τ the averaging time and f c the carrier frequency of the oscillator under study To further assess the stability of the detected electrical signal for its use as an LO, the long-term signal stability was measured. This measurement was carried out by letting on trace in max-hold mode, so it maintains the maximum power value for the rest of the test. Figure Once the OMO has been validated and its basic performance has been characterized, it is time to assess its practical applicability on a real space-application testbed, like in the context of the OPTIMA project The testbed is schematically shown in Fig. Before showing the functional results, it is important to know the limitations of the OMO in terms of power availability and modulation depth. Figure After analyzing such figures, three important aspects must be highlighted. The first is that the OMO delivers less total optical power than the OPTIMA PhLO since the carrier and the first-order sideband give +8 dBm and -8 dBm, respectively. On the other hand, the PhLO gives +10 dBm on the carrier and +4.5 dBm on the first-order sideband. Thus, maintaining the rest of the parameters equal for both configurations, higher conversion gain is expected from the OPTIMA PhLO than in the OMO configuration. The second is that the OPTIMA PhLO exhibits a higher modulation efficiency than the OMO, given the fact that the first-order sidebands have more power density than the same sidebands in the OMO. This also contributes to a higher conversion gain in the case of the PhLO. The third observation is that the OMO is more non-linear than the PhLO. This is because the PhLO uses an optical modulator with a medium modulation depth and its behaviour is quite linear, providing most of the modulating power to the fundamental harmonic signal (first sideband). On the contrary, the OMO has a more non-linear response, generating more sidebands so that the power is more distributed among all the harmonic levels. This means that the OMO will beat the OPTIMA PhLO architecture (keeping the rest of the parameters equal in both architectures) when addressing frequency conversion beyond the first harmonic. This section presents the test results of the OMO when mounted in the OPTIMA testbed as described before. Three different configurations are measured to perform a full test of the device as a photonic local oscillator. In all of them, the input signal to PMFC is a 29.0 GHz RF tone with -8 dBm power. An example of the optical power spectrum of the OMO once it is driven through the OPTIMA testbed can be seen in Fig. To provide a reference for the functional tests and the testbed, a set of simulationsusing experimental datawas carried out. These simulations consider the performance of each key component at the photonic conversion sub-unit, as well as the known functional parameters already measured on the OMO subsystem (operational wavelength that depends on OMO final stable configuration, LO optical output power that is also dependent on the configuration and the pump power, LO fundamental frequency that depends on the cavity mechanical response, and LO harmonic levels that are dependent on the final configuration). Once the LO optical field is modeled, this signal is amplified by using the physical expressions of EDFA. Then, this LO amplified signal is modulated by using the theoretical expressions of a Mach-Zehnder EOM (insertion loss and half wave voltage (V π ), with a bias voltage as a trade-off between high gain, low noise, and good linearity). Afterwards, two cascaded amplifiers are simulated (the signal is amplified again to boost the signal level and compensate optical losses). Finally, the signal is detected by using a broadband RF photodiode (with responsivity, bandwidth and S 21 response given by the datasheet; and 50 Ohm impedance on all RF interfaces). All the harmonic and intermodulation products are located along the electrical spectrum to obtain the electrical power of each signal. It must be noted that the OMO has an optical resonance around 1522 nm with an optical quality factor up to 10 3 Another important measurement is the FM noise of the output products. Figure Also, the IF output signal is FM demodulated and Fig. In summary, we have characterized and discussed a new all-photonic microwave oscillator, essentially performing as an integrated OEO but implemented using an OM cavity built on a silicon chip, in a testbed suitable for validating devices aimed at SATCOM applications. The OM as a photonic operating approximately at multiples of the mechanical resonance frequency. Looking at the performance as a OMO+PMFC downconverter, first-order down conversion gain (RF-LO) exhibits results comparable to OPTIMA with equivalent parameters (in this case, -32.8 dBm for both OP-TIMA and OMO in configuration 3). This is a very positive aspect since it shows that the OMO can be substitute of a PhLO, which requires of an external RF source, whilst the OMO generates the LO in a purely optical way. Furthermore, higher-order down-conversion gain (RF-n•LO) shows better results than the OPTIMA system with equivalent parameters (-75.7 dB and -108 dB for OPTIMA RF-4LO and RF-5LO, respectively). This is because the OMO design has a nonlinearity factor higher than the EOM-based photonic LO in OPTIMA or similar systems. This is a remarkably good result as well, since higher LO frequencies can be generated to get more frequency conversion bandwidth in a future system architecture. One drawback is that the OMO optical sidebands exhibit less power than the typical EOM-based PhLO configuration. This is because the mentioned non-linearity factor in OMO. It gives more energy to the higher LO products, at the expense of less power to the first LO sideband. This has a direct impact in the system conversion gain, being lower in this solution than in the OPTIMA system. About the signal integrity, another improvable two parameters are the amplitude and the frequency stability. It has been seen that the output signal products mixed with LO (n•LO and RF±n•LO) exhibit one order of magnitude more FM noise than non-mixed products (particularly RF output signal). Also, the amplitude noise is higher in the IF signal than in the RF output level. Looking at other relevant parameters, the SSB phase noise is higher in this assessed test board than in the OPTIMA test board. From a practical perspective, the OMO can significantly reduce the SWaP (size, weight and power) over the conventional approach due to its intrinsically small footprint and the lack of control and biasing electronics. The device is passive and can fit directly in conventional payload configurations (based on Silicon-technology) without the need to implement specific interfaces. In addition, it also provide inherent frequency mixing capabilities as a result of the inherent nonlinear behavior of the OM cavity 