Cuprates are d -wave superconductors which exhibit a rich phase diagram: they are characterized by superconducting fluctuations even above the critical temperature, and thermal disorder can reduce or suppress the phase coherence. However, photoexcitation can have the opposite effect: recent experiments have shown an increasing phase coherence in optimally doped BSCCO with midinfrared driving. Time-resolved terahertz spectroscopies are powerful techniques to excite and probe non-equilibrium states of superconductors, directly addressing collective modes, such as amplitude (Higgs) oscillations. In this work, we calculate the full time evolution of the current generated by a cuprate with a quench-drive spectroscopy setup. Analyzing the response in Fourier space with respect to both the real time and the quench-drive delay time, we look for the signature of a transient modulation of higher harmonics as well as the Higgs mode, in order to characterize the ground state phase. In particular, this approach can provide a smoking gun for induced or increased phase coherence when applied to the pseudogap phase. These results can pave the way for future experimental schemes to characterize and study superconductors alongside incoherent phases and phase transitions, including induced and transient superconductivity. High-temperature superconductors have attracted much of the attention on the research on superconductivity since their discovery. In the last years, experiments on high-temperature superconductors have revealed the presence of signatures of superconducting fluctuations above the critical temperature T c . This behaviour has been attributed to incoherent or pre-formed Cooper pairs, leading to third-harmonic generation (THG) and enhancement of the reflectivity change in a pump-probe experimental configuration Cuprates are the prototypical example of hightemperature superconductors, exhibiting a complex phase diagram as a function of doping and temperature, with a superconducting dome enriched by chargedensity wave and pseudogap phases A variety of non-equilibrium experiments on cuprates have indicated the importance and the interaction between between collective modes, such as the amplitude (Higgs) mode and Josephson plasmon: different setups have been used to investigate it, from high-harmonic gen-eration to pump-probe spectroscopy, to reflectivity measurements In this paper we go beyond previous works of pumpprobe spectroscopy on cuprates, applying the quenchdrive spectroscopy setup In the present work, we numerically solve the Heisenberg's equation of motion derived within the pseudospin formalism The paper is organized as follows: in Section II we describe the theoretical models that we used. Starting from the pseudospin approach to solve the equations of motion in order to calculate the time-dependent superconducting gap and the generated nonlinear current, we extend it in order to be able to describe incoherent pairs. In addition, we perform the same calculations for the superconducting state using a diagrammatic approach, deriving the nonlinear susceptibility responsible for the measured response. In Section III we show the results of the numerical experiments for the quench-drive setup on a cuprate: we analyze the two dimensional plots in time and frequency domain, detecting the presence of higher harmonics and signatures of quasiparticles' and the Higgs mode. Then, we repeat the calculation in the presence of incoherent pairs: we show that even a moderate incoherence which only slightly reduces the superconducting gap can suppress the high-harmonic generation in the nonlinear current, as well as the quasiparticles' and amplitude mode's response. Finally, we provide a summary and an outlook on future applications and perspectives of quench-drive spectroscopy in Section IV. In this section we formulate the theoretical approach used to investigate the current generated by a clean (high-temperature) superconductor subject to an external field. We first develop the pseudospin model for a general superconductor, then we extend it in order to be able to describe incoherent pairs. Finally, we show a diagrammatic approach, where we derive the nonlinear susceptibility used to obtain the nonlinear current, disentangling quasiparticles' and Higgs' contributions. In order to describe the superconducting phase of a material, we adopt the BCS model expressed by the mean field Hamiltonian where ε k is the electronic band dispersion and ∆ k the momentum-dependent superconducting order parameter. This latter is described by a complex number which satisfies the gap equation with V k,k being the (momentum-dependent) pairing interaction. It can be factorized as with f k the form factor of the superconducting order parameter: for s-wave pairing f k = 1, while for d-wave pairing f Therefore, it follows from Eq. ( We write the BCS Hamiltonian using the pseudospin formalism as in Refs. with the pseudospin vector which is defined in Nambu-Gor'kov space, with spinor ĉ-k,↓ ) and the Pauli matrices τ = (τ 1 , τ 2 , τ 3 ). The pseudo-magnetic field is defined by the vector where ε k = ξ k -μ, ξ k being the fermionic band dispersion, μ the chemical potential. In the presence of an external gauge field represented by the vector potential A(t) coupling to the electrons, the pseudospin changes in time according to with δσ k (t) = (x k (t), y k (t), z k (t)). The external electromagnetic field is included in the pseudo-magnetic field by means of the minimal substitution k → k -eA(t) in the fermionic energy, resulting in The Heisenberg equation of motion for the pseudospin can be written in the Bloch form, ∂ t σ k = 2b k × σ k , providing the set of differential equations Here, for simplicity of calculations and without loss of generality, we assumed a real order parameter, therefore ∆ (t = -∞) = 0 at equilibrium, so that y(-∞) = 0. Moreover, in order to describe a quench-drive experiment, we choose the appropriate total vector potential is the driving field centered at t = t d . The expressions we used for the modulus of the quench pulse is a gaussianmodulated wave while for the driving we adopted an asymmetric pulse (see Fig. Introducing the quench-drive time-delay ∆t = t d -t q and choosing t d = 0, we can rewrite A(t) = A q (t + ∆t) + A d (t). Therefore the expressions in Eq.s ( where σ k,x (t) (σ k,y (t)) is the x (y) time-dependent component of the full pseudospin. The current generated by the superconductor in this quench-drive setup is given by the expression where the electron band velocity is calculated via In particular, if we consider to measure the current generated along the x direction, it can calculated by the expression However, since the fundamental harmonic is dominant in this regime, while the superconducting features are visible in the nonlinear response, we are interested in the lowest order nonlinear current contribution. The first non-vanishing nonlinear term generated by the driving pulse is the third order component, which reads Here, r i is the unit vector in the direction of axis i = x, y, z, A(t, ∆t) is the total vector potential. The nonequilibrium term of the third component of the pseudospin, z k (t, ∆t), contains a quadratic dependence on the full vector potential, A 2 , and is characterized by oscillations with frequencies 2ω q , 2ω d and ω q ± ω d , as well as 2∆ due to quasiparticles' and amplitude mode excitation. The Fourier transform of the nonlinear current with respect to both the real time t and the quench-drive delay time ∆t, j (3) (ω, ω ∆t ), provides the spectrum of the generated harmonics. Identifying the factor depending on the derivative of the velocity and the direction of the external field with C x (k), we can write the x component of the third harmonic generated current as where the two terms provide the contribution with a sumand difference-frequency mechanism with the external driving field, respectively. We used ω as Fourier transform of the real-time variable t, and ω ∆t for the Fourier transform of the quench-drive delay time ∆t. Analogously, the third order contribution to the fundamental harmonic is given by Moreover, since the third component of the pseudospin has a (non-resonant) peak in frequency domain at ω = 2∆, it is possible to obtain other local maxima for the generated nonlinear current at ω = 2∆ ± ω d : In addition to these contributions, other terms which involve the quench pulse are present, such as -among the others -the nonlinear current term This expression involves a sum-frequency process of two photons of the quench pulse, each with frequency ω q , embedded in the third component of the pseudospin, z k : thus the dependence z k (ω ∆t = 2ω q ), and it also implicitly depends quadratically on the amplitude of the quench pulse, A 2 q . We now want to describe a state with a superconducting instability and characterized by the presence of pre-formed incoherent pairs, which can be identified as the origin of the pseudogap phase: in this regard, as in Ref. 0 f k , obtained from the pure BCS gap equation, and the superconducting order parameter in the presence of incoherent pairs of the pseudogap phase as where V is the same pairing strength of the original state, and with the quasiparticles' energy The superconducting gap in the new equilibrium state can be written using the pseudospin formalism ∆(φ) where we have introduced the equilibrium pseudospin components Analogously to the derivation in Section II.A for the original superconducting phase, we can obtain the Heisenberg's equation of motion with the new pseudomagnetic field defined as The solution of Eq. ( where θ is the global phase of the superconducting gap, which differs from the local phase of the Cooper pairs in momentum space, φ k . As a consequence, the gap equation is not self-consistent anymore (see Eq. ( C. Quasi-equilibrium nonlinear susceptibility In this section we tackle the problem of a quencheddriven clean superconductor by means of a diagrammatic approach to calculate nonlinear susceptibility: this is provided only as a tool to interpret the numerical results obtained via the pseudospin model. Starting from the BCS Hamiltonian in Eq. ( (3) γγ (ω) in the limit of the light momentum q → 0. Here the Matsubara complex frequency is iω n , and T is the temperature. The Nambu-Green's function in matricial form is given by Ĝ This function can be expressed in its spectral form as where the imaginary part of the Green's function in real frequency is Therefore, the expression in Eq.( This is the pure quasiparticles' contribution, obtained neglecting the oscillations of the order parameter for small perturbations. The Higgs propagator is obtained by the random phase approximation (RPA) summation of the pairing interaction in the amplitude channel: which provides the expression where χ f f (q, ω) is given by We can include in the pure quasiparticles' Raman response in Eq. ( where Γ(k, iν m ) is the vertex' matrix which contains the corrections due to the Higgs mode. In the RPA we can identify it as Additional corrections can be included in this vertex with different forms. The linearized equations of motion obtained removing higher-order terms in Eq.( The vertex in Eq.( For example, for quench and drive pulses with nonzero components along both x and y directions, the thirdorder nonlinear response current generated along the x axis will be given by where ω is obtained by energy conservation, the vector potential A i,j is the i, j = x, y-component of the total vector potential given by the sum of quench and drive. We notice that, in contrast to the solution of the Heisenberg's equations of motion which are valid on a general basis, the diagrammatic approach is valid for small perturbations of the superconducting order parameter ∆. Therefore, when the intensity of the external pulses is such that the gap is significantly enhanced or suppressed, so that a new (transient) equilibrium value of the gap ∆ is reached, the quasi-equilibrium susceptibility calculation fails to catch all the features of the corresponding nonlinear response, requiring a full nonequilibrium calculation. Moreover, this approach cannot be easily applied when pre-formed pairs or superconducting islands are present in the material, such as in the pseudogap phase of a cuprate, giving rise to long-range incoherence of the Cooper pairs. We now present the results obtained from the numerical implementation of the time-dependent Bloch equations and expressions for the current derived from the pseudospin model in sections II A and II B. For the calculations we used the electronic band dispersion ε k = -2t(cos k x + cos k y + μ/2), where the wave vector's components are expressed in units of the lattice constant a. We used the values of t = 125 meV for the nearestneighbour hopping energy, chemical potential μ = -0.2 in units of t, in order to obtain an electron occupation n = 0.9 as in Ref. We first focus on the response of a cuprate in its superconducting phase, at optimal doping: in particular, we first analyze the features of the current response as a function of both the real-time evolution and the quenchdrive delay time. Then, we investigate the effect of both quench and drive pulses on the superconducting order parameter and its amplitude oscillations. We consider a quench-drive setup with both pulses linearly polarized along the diagonal direction (1, 1), and we analyze the nonlinear current generated along the x axis, with the geometry shown in Fig. In order to disentangle the main features, it is useful to separately extract one-dimensional tracks along highinterest directions in this 2D spectrum: in Fig. Additional information can be obtained by investigating the behaviour of the superconducting order parameter by using the same two-times plots, similarly to the nonlinear current analysis. Indeed, as shown in Sections 2.1 and 2.3, the order parameter oscillates due to the pseudospins' precession in momentum space, and this collective amplitude (Higgs) mode contributes to the enhancement of the nonlinear response, shown in the previous section. In Fig. Similarly to the study of the pure superconducting phase of cuprates of the previous section, we now focus on the response of the same cuprate structure in the presence of reduced phase coherent giving rise to preformed incoherent Cooper pairs, as described in Section II.D. In particular, for our calculations we adopted a random phase within the range [-π/2, π/2], which decreases the initial gap value of ∆ max = 31 meV to ∆(φ) = 27.92 meV. We also used the same duration and shape parameters for both the quench and the (asymmetric) drive pulse. We study here the nonlinear current generated by the superconductor with incoherent pairs under the application of a quench and a drive, with the same setup described before. In particular, we focus directly on the two-dimensional Fourier spectrum of the current, since all the other features in time domain are qualitatively similar to the pure superconducting case. In Fig. We now analyze the time-dependent response of the superconducting order to the quench-drive setup in the same conditions and with corresponding parameters of the nonlinear current discussed above. Indeed, the interpretation of the previous results of the nonlinear current can be supported by the study the amplitude mode of the superconducting order parameter. In Fig. In this work we have studied the quench-drive spectroscopy response of cuprate superconductors, which are interesting for their anisotropic d-wave superconducting order parameter and their rich phase diagram. In this work we have explored two different situations: the pure superconducting state and the phase with incoherent preformed Cooper pairs, which can reproduce the results of the pseudogap phase, or even originate from other conditions. With this method, we have moved a step forward with respect to previous experiments and calculations, where only a pump (short quench or longer drive) of cuprates was considered. In fact, in the common pump-probe configuration, only the real time evolution of the system driven out of equilibrium by the pump was tracked by the probe and analyzed. On the contrary, we have shown that in the quench-drive setup both the short-time and the long-time pulses can act as out-of-equilibrium drive on the material, affecting both the order parameter and the nonlinear current response. Moreover, this setup has an additional temporal degree of freedom with respect to pump-probe, namely the quenchdrive delay time is continuously swiped in order to gain insight of the dependence of the response on the absorption frequency ω ∆t . This has allowed us to investigate the high-harmonic generation, the modulation of such harmonics in the quench-drive delay time and the role of the amplitude mode in the features of the nonlinear current. In particular, we have detected a fifth harmonic (visible at ω = 5ω d ≈ 25 THz) generated by the superconductor in some conditions, as well as a peak at the energy 2∆, which can be attributed to quasiparticles and the amplitude (Higgs) mode, as shown by the analysis of the fluence and frequency dependence of the change of the order parameter. Furthermore, we have applied quench-drive spectroscopy to a cuprate with incoherent pre-formed pairs, artificially adding a random noise phase to the Cooper pairs in momentum space. The results have shown that, even for moderate incoherence, the decrease of the superconducting gap is accompanied by the partial or total suppression of the third harmonic response, as well as the amplitude mode contribution to the nonlinear current. These results can be experimentally addressed and tested by the measurement of the transmitted electric field or the nonlinear optical conductivity. A more detailed and systematic analysis of the response of incoherent pairs and the amplitude mode of their superconducting gap will be subject of a future work. We further speculate that an extended configuration, such as a pump-pump-probe scheme, could be used to add an independent time degree of freedom on the real time evolution and the pump-probe delay time, as already used to study molecular excitations and semiconductors 