In order to continue to improve integrated circuit performance and functionality, scaled transistors with short channel lengths and low thickness are needed. But the further scaling of silicon-based devices and the development of alternative semiconductor channel materials that are compatible with current fabrication processes is challenging. Here we report atomic-layerdeposited indium oxide transistors with channel lengths down to 8 nm, channel thicknesses down to 0.5 nm and equivalent dielectric oxide thickness down to 0.84 nm. Due to the scaled device dimensions and low contact resistance, the devices exhibit high on-state currents of 3.1 A/mm at a drain voltage of 0.5 V and a transconductance of 1.5 S/mm at a drain voltage 1 V. Our devices are a promising alternative channel material for scaled transistors with back-end-of-line processing compatibility. The scaling of complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) technology has been the driving force in the advancement of modern integrated circuits over the past few decades. Enhancing gate electrostatic control to improve immunity to short channel effects (SCEs) has, in particular, been a key strategy in the development of aggressively scaled transistor technology. This includes the development of high-k/metal gate technology for equivalent oxide thickness (EOT) scaling, as well as ultrathin body, fin and stacked nanosheet channel transistors; stacked nanosheet transistors are currently being adopted by the semiconductor industry (following FinFET technology) beyond the 3 nm technology node 1 . To further scale length dimensions, while maintaining good drive current, it is critical to suppress SCEs. This can be achieved using increased numbers of thinner stacked channels. However, the performance of conventional semiconductor based transistors decreases rapidly below a thickness of 3 nm for silicon and 10 nm for InGaAs. Two-dimensional (2D) semiconductors are an alternate channel material with nanoscale thicknesses and higher mobilities at monolayer or few-layer thickness compared to conventional semiconductors In addition, the materials are difficult to dope and suffer from high contact resistances induced at the Schottky metal/semiconductor contacts. Oxide semiconductors -and amorphous indium gallium zinc oxide (IGZO) in particular -are leading semiconducting channel materials in thin-film transistors (TFTs) for flat-panel display applications However, there has been interest in the use of oxide semiconductor transistors in CMOS back-endof-line (BEOL) for monolithic 3D integration applications The wafer-scale homogenous and conformal ALD indium oxide (In2O3) thin film has a low thermal budget of 225 °C and an atomically smooth surface. The ability to deposit conformal films on 3D structures by ALD could be useful for 3D integration applications, including 3D BEOL integration and 3D vertical NAND. ALD deposited In2O3 has a number of advantages for use in transistor applications. The layer-bylayer self-limited growth mechanism of ALD In this Article, we report high-performance In2O3 transistors fabricated using ALD. Our devices have channel lengths (Lch) down to 8 nm, channel thicknesses (Tch) as low as 0.5 nm and equivalent dielectric oxide thicknesses (EOT) down to 0.84 nm. The scaling and low contact resistance of the devices enable them to achieve on-state currents (ID,max) of 3.1 A/mm at drain voltages (VDS) of 0.5 V and transconductance values (gm) of 1.5 S/mm at VDS of 1 V. Our devices offer promising performance compared to devices based on conventional semiconducting materials (such as Si and GaAs), 2D semiconductors, and other oxide semiconductors, particularly at the ultrathin scale of 1-3.5 nm. Fig. EDX mapping with Ni/In/Hf/O elements is shown in Fig. The on-state performance degrades rapid below 1 nm, as shown in Fig. A second approach to enhance the gate electrostatic control is EOT scaling. Here, we demonstrate high-performance ALD In2O3 transistors with EOT scaled down to 0.84 nm. Fig. These numbers confirm a high-quality bulk gate oxide and oxide/semiconductor interface. The doping concentration (ND) of In2O3 can be extracted from 1/C 2 versus voltage characteristics , Lch of 8 nm, Tch of 2.5 nm, and EOT of 0.84 nm. A record high ID,max of 3.1 A/mm is achieved due to the scaled device dimension and low contact resistance, where ID > 3 A/mm is achieved on oxide semiconductor transistors. The ID,max and gm scaling metrics with Lch from 1 μm down to 8 nm of In2O3 transistors are shown in Figs. The performance of scaled ALD In2O3 transistors in this work are benchmarked with stateof-the-art high-performance transistors with ultrathin channel, such as 2D transistors and oxide semiconductor transistors, using figure of merits of ION, gm, RC and mobility versus channel thickness (the data is summarized in supplementary Table In summary, we have reported an ALD based oxide semiconductor transistor technology that shows promising on-state currents -in comparison to both established and emerging material technologies -when channel thicknesses are fabricated in the range of approximately 1 to 3.5 nm. Our approach takes advantage of the self-limiting growth mechanism of ALD and the unique band structure of In2O3. The conformal deposition on 3D structures by ALD also the potential to create new opportunities for 3D integration, such as BEOL compatible transistors for monolithic 3D integration and semiconducting channels for 3D vertical NAND. Device Fabrication. The device fabrication process is similar to previous work. Material Characterization. The thickness of the In2O3 was determined together by AFM, TEM and ellipsometry. AFM measurement was done with a Veeco Dimension 3100 atomic force microscope system. TEM lamella samples were prepared with Helios G4 UX Dual Beam SEM. FEI TALOS F200X operated at 200 kV equipped with super-X electron-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy was used for HAADF-STEM imaging. Device Characterization. Electrical characterization was carried out with a Keysight B1500 system and with a Cascade Summit probe station in dark and N2 environments at room temperature and at atmosphere. down to 8 nm. Z.C., X.S. and H.W. performed the STEM and EDX measurements. M.S. and P.D.Y. co-wrote the manuscript and all authors commented on it. The authors declare no competing financial interest. Additional details for HAADF-STEM cross-sectional image with EDX element mapping (O, Ni, In and Hf), I-V characterstics of ALD In2O3 transistors with Tch of 0.4 nm, SS and VT scaling metrics, C-V characterization of the gate stack capacitor, detailed information on the benchmarking are in the supplementary information. ION is extracted at VGS-VT=1V and VDS=1 V. gm is extracted at VDS=1 V. Each data point represents the average of at least 5 devices. High ION of 1.2 A/mm at VGS-VT=1 V and VDS=1 V and gm of 1.5 S/mm at VDS=1 V are achieved. 19. Si, M. et al. Indium-Tin-Oxide Transistors with One Nanometer Thick Channel and Ferroelectric Gating. ACS Nano 14, 11542-11547 (2020). doi:10.1021/acsnano.0c03978. 20. Si, M., Lin, Z., Charnas, A. & Ye, P. D. Scaled Atomic-Layer-Deposited Indium Oxide Nanometer Transistors With Maximum Drain Current Exceeding 2 A/mm at Drain Voltage of 0.7 V. IEEE Electron Device Lett. 42, 184-187 (2021). doi:10.1109/LED.2020.3043430. 21. Han, K. et al. First Demonstration of Oxide Semiconductor Nanowire Transistors: a Novel Digital Etch Technique, IGZO Channel, Nanowire Width Down to ~20 nm, and Ion Exceeding 1300 μA/μm. in IEEE Symposium on VLSI Technology (IEEE, 2021). 22. Si, M., Charnas, A., Lin, Z. & Ye, P. D. Enhancement-Mode Atomic-Layer-Deposited In2O3