Strongly correlated materials often undergo a Mott metal-insulator transition, which is tipically first-order, as a function of control parameters like pressure Mott physics, charge instabilities and quantum criticality are recurrent leitmotifs in the field of strongly correlated materials. Their connection was explored early on theoretically for the cuprate superconductors In this work we broaden the perspective and show that a phase separation zone ending in a QCP is an intrinsic features connected to the Mott transition. We ad-dress this issue within a different framework, namely a Hund's metal which is realized in a doped multiorbital Hubbard model. We can thus both build on the recent understanding of Hund's metals triggered by ironbased superconductors We start from the half-filled system. In Fig. A crucial feature is that the two stable solutions are adiabatically connected These features have substantial consequences for the doped system, which corresponds to a finite chemical potential μ (our model being half-filled for μ = 0). The two solutions evolve differently with μ in Fig. Calculated n(μ) curves for several values of U are reported in Fig. As we mentioned above, the two stable branches are connected through an unstable solution which implies that the boundaries of the two branches are two spinodal lines where the electronic compressibility κ = 1 n 2 dn dμ diverges. This also implies the crossing of the free-energies of the two stable solutions at some value of the chemical potential μ c in the coexistence range, which then corresponds to a Maxwell construction (see Fig. For U>U c2 no metallic solution exists at half-filling and the coexistence zone shifts to larger values of μ, and is seen to shrink (blue curves in Fig. sition between two differently doped metals. In contrast, for these (and all larger) values of U, the actual dopingdriven Mott metal-insulator transition becomes second order. Finally, we find that when U grows beyond a critical value U QCP the sigmoid straightens (red curve in Fig. This confirms and substantiates the scenario of Ref. 23 and 24, where in general a "moustache"-shaped zone of phase separation, delimited by a diverging compressibility and departing from the Mott transition point, crosses the U-doping phase diagram of the Hund's metals. It was also shown earlier in Ref. pressible insulating solution emerging from a first-order Mott transition generally crosses its energy again with the coexisting metallic solution at some finite μ, implying a first-order density-driven Mott transition and phase separation. We crucially modify and extend this picture here with the continuity between the two solutions, which implies the existence of spinodals limiting the coexistence zone and the phase separation to a small range of U, and with the unfolding of the continuous solution leading to a QCP. As a matter of fact, the model we solved realizes a zero-temperature analog of the liquid-gas transition, the role of temperature and pressure being played here by the chemical potential and the interaction strength. However this scenario holds only at finite Hund's coupling. At J=0 the transition becomes everywhere second order at zero temperature, and no QCP is realized at finite doping, similarly to the single-band case We can get this insight through the analysis of the present model in the Slave-Spin Mean-Field ap-proximation (SSMF -see Methods and Supplementary Information) The structure of the competing solutions can be analyzed within a Landau theory, by coupling a fictitious external magnetic field h ext conjugated to m x . The behavior of the numerically calculated Landau energy function (see Supplementary Information) Γ(m x ) (Fig. We can calculate Γ(m x ) analytically in the vicinity of a Mott insulator, that is around x ). In order to have the doubleminimum structure needed for a first-order transition γ 4 has to be negative when γ 2 goes from negative to positive for increasing U (which then marks U c1 in our case). We do find that γ 4 < 0 for every J<U in this model, and we can attach a physical meaning to this result. Indeed it can be easily shown (see Supplementary Information) that γ 4 has the same sign of the coefficient e 4 in the perturbative expansion of the slave-spin ground state energy E = e 2 h2 +e 4 h4 +O( h6 ), in terms of the field (self-consistent + external) h acting on each spin. In absence of the perturbation ( h = 0), the slave-spin Hamiltonian reproduces the local atomic spectrum (Fig. Hence the ultimate cause of a first-order Mott transition is a splitting of the atomic ground-state multiplet much smaller than the energy cost of charge excitations The scenario linking a first-order Mott transition with phase separation and quantum criticality naturally calls for a connection with models for the cuprates. In that context, phase separation appears ubiquitously in twodimensional strongly-correlated models The model we analyze is the degenerate two-orbital Hubbard model in the paramagnetic phase. The Hamiltonian reads: where d † imσ creates an electron with spin σ in orbital m = 1, 2 on site i of the lattice, and is the on-site interaction. Here ñimσ = nimσ -1/2 is a particle-hole symmetric form of the density operators nimσ = d † imσ dimσ, U is the on-site intra-orbital Coulomb repulsion and J the Hund's exchange coupling. We take J/U = 0.25 and customarily we do not include the off-diagonal terms of the interaction. Our analysis depends on the local manybody physics and not on details of the bandstructure obtained by diagonalizing the one-body part of the Hamiltonian Ĥ0 where μ is the chemical potential and N = imσ nimσ is the operator counting the total number of particles in the system. Thus we can choose without loss of generality a featureless bandstructure with semi-circular density of states (DOS) D( ) = 2 1 -( /D) 2 /(πD) of half-bandwidth D (corresponding e.g. to a Bethe lattice with infinite connectivity). With this choice the model is half-filled (i.e. the electron density n ≡ mσ nimσ = 2) for μ = 0. We study this lattice model at T=0 in proximity of halffilling within Dynamical Mean-Field Theory The Slave-Spin Mean Field approximation The latter is calculated with the slave-spin single-site Hamiltonian Hs = h sc mσ S x mσ + Hint[S z ], where Hint[S z ] is the local interaction (2) with the occupations expressed in the slavespin space (where a spin "up" corresponds to an occupied fermionic state and "down" to an empty one, so that in the Hamiltonian each ñmσ is replaced with the corresponding S z mσ ). The self-consistent Weiss field h sc = 8 0 S x mσ flips these occupations embodying the effect of the original hopping term, through 0 = μ -∞ d D( ) < 0 which is the bare kinetic energy of the non-interacting fermions. The authors are grateful to Rok Zitko for insightful exchanges and to Jakob Steinbauer for sharing some of his data. LdM thanks J. Lorenzana, M. Schirò for useful discussions. MCh, and LdM are supported by the European Commission through the ERC-CoG2016, StrongCo-Phy4Energy, GA No724177. AK and GS were supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) through Project-ID 258499086 -SFB 1170 and through the Würzburg-Dresden Cluster of Excellence on Complexity and Topology in Quantum Matter ct.qmat (Project-ID 390858490, EXC 2147) and gratefully acknowledge the Gauss Centre for Supercomputing e. V. (www.gauss-centre.eu) for funding this project by providing computing time on the GCS Supercomputer SuperMUC-NG at Leibniz Supercomputing Centre (www.lrz.de). MB and MC acknowledge support of italian MIUR through PRIN 2015 (Prot. 2015C5SEJJ001) and PRIN 2017 CenTral. Indeed NRG yields the exact low-energy physics in the limit of zero temperature, but describes the spectral features of increasing energy with a decreasing accuracy. Since DMFT connects the different energy scales a quantitative inaccuracy can be present in the final low-energy results which are however qualitatively exact at zero temperature. NRG calculations were performed using a modified version of the NRG Ljubljana code 6 with quantum numbers corresponding to (Q, S z , T z ) which implements a symmetry (U(1) charge ×U(1) spin ×O(2) orbital ). The Full Density Matrix algorithm 7 was used with Λ=4.0, 8000 states kept in every NRG iteration, 8 values for the z-interleaving parameter, and a log-normal broadening of the spectral functions with broadening parameter 0.3. The self-energy was calculated with the socalled Sigma-trick introduced in Ref. 8. The quasiparticle weight is evaluated from the real-axis self-energy: ED is the diagonalization of the Hamiltonian of an AIM with a discretized bath (where l = 1, . . . N l ), which becomes exact in the limit N l → ∞. In practice the method is limited to small N l by the exponential growth of the Hilbert space to be diagonalized, and this truncation comes with a limit in the spectral resolution and a systematic error. We use this method here to describe the arXiv:2203.02451v1 [cond-mat.str-el] 4 Mar 2022 zero-temperature physics in a numerically less expensive framework than NRG. At half-filling we can use N l = 14 thanks to the Lanczos/Arnoldi algorithm and the new parallel implementation EDIpack 9 . The self-consistency equation is enforced on a grid of Matsubara frequencies ω n = Π(2n + 1)/β grid with β grid = 200/D, with a weight 1/ω n in the leastsquare fit of the discretized variational form of ∆(ω n ) on the numerically obtained G R (ω n )D 2 /4. The quasiparticle weight is evaluated from the Self-energy on the Matsubara axis: Z = (1 -ImΣ(ω 0 )/ω 0 ) -1 . This allows us to cross-validate with NRG the first-order nature of the Mott transition at half-filling and the position of its critical interaction strength. Out of half-filling (and in particular in the Hund's metal regime) the Lanczos/Arnoldi algorithm fails (probably due to unresolved degeneracies in the eigenvalues) 10 and we have to use the full diagonalization of the Hamiltonian matrix, which is limited to much smaller bath sizes. We use then N l = 6 and β grid = 100/D. CTQMC 4 is numerically exact but limited to finite temperature. Here we use the CT-HYB solver implemented as part of the w2dynamics package 5 . Around the critical value of the interaction strength, at least 100 DMFT iterations per data point were done regardless of the temperature where in each of the 20 last iterations, a minimum total number of measurement cycles of 300000 was used. The quasiparticle weight is determined as a Z = (1b) -1 where b is the linear coefficient of a polynomial of degree 2 best-fitted to ImΣ(ω n ) on the lowest 5 Matsubara frequencies. Here we use CTQMC mainly to obtain low-temperature results that validate the NRG and ED against their possible systematic inaccuracies. Indeed in Fig. At T=0 single-site DMFT is bound to give a Fermiliquid solution in the single-band Hubbard model 12 and in the multi-band model with positive Hund's coupling 13 , if a metal is realized. It is indeed the case across the whole phase diagram we have described in this work. In the Hund's metal phase however the Fermi-liquid coherence temperature (the Kondo temperature of the AIM solved in DMFT) is found to decrease exponentially fast with decreasing doping 14 so that in order to uncover it the resolution of NRG has to be pushed to correspondingly low energies. We illustrate this in Fig. The relative agility of the ED solver for DMFT allows us to trace a complete map of the compressibility enhancement at T=0 in the present model. This is reported in Fig. In DMFT it is possible to follow the unstable branches which connect the stable solutions coexisting for a given value of U and μ 17-20 . At half-filling we have calculated, with NRG as an impurity solver, the corresponding reentrant behaviour of the quasiparticle weight Z as a function of the interaction strength U/D at T=0, as displayed in Fig. In the upper panel of Fig. In all these calculation a parameter α (α =U at half-filling, α = μ off half-filling) is adjusted at every DMFT iteration in order to search for a wanted value of Z = Z target . The latter is indeed found to monotonically decrease in all these curves, thus it labels uniquely a point along the curves, unlike the physical parameters as a function of which these curves are indeed multi-valued functions. We use, at iteration i+1, ). While the stable solutions can be found also in the standard way by fixing the physical parameters and using a suitable guess (typically the previously converged solution on the same branch) to start the iterative DMFT loop, a converged solution in an unstable branch is reached only using this protocol. We consider converged one such solution not only when the calculated and the target Z differ by less than a given low threshold, but also when the changes in the variable α at each iteration |α(i)α(i -1)| satisfy an analogous criterion. Obviously also the usual DMFT criterion of convergence is enforced, which requests that the local Green functions (or equivalently the baths ∆ or the self-energies) calculated at iterations i and i-1 (summed in absolute value over the frequency grid) differ by less then a given threshold. This requires typically a considerably larger number of iterations compared to the stable branches. This is also why we have studied in detail the unstable branches off half-filling only with ED, and then sketched the corresponding result on Fig. In the Slave-Spin Mean-Field (SSMF) method 21,22 the lattice system to be studied (eq. ( At half-filling for the present degenerate, particle-hole symmetric system the SSMF equations take the simple form (the Lagrange multipliers vanish by symmetry, and μ=0): where the renormalization factor is calculated through the single-site slave-spin Hamiltonian (dropping the site index i) and: The self-consistent Weiss field reads: where is the kinetic energy of the non-interacting system. At particle-hole symmetry (μ = 0, independently of U, implying half-filling) this is a constant, and the selfconsistency has to be enforced only within the spin Hamiltonian. A vanishing Z indeed signals the Mott transition. The SSMF result for the 2-band Hubbard model with J/U=0.25 is shown in Fig. The expression for Z eq. (S3) shows that Mott transition in SSMF is described as the vanishing of the xcomponent of the slave-spin on-site magnetization m x ≡ 2M S x imσ . It is thus mapped onto a ferromagneticparamagnetic transition of the auxiliary spin system, and √ Z ∼ m x plays the role of an order parameter. Landau theory for the Mott transition. The stability and competition between the solutions around this transition can be studied in the framework of a Landau theory. A fictitious external magnetic field h ext conjugated to m x can be introduced through a linear term in the Hamiltonian proportional to mσ S x mσ , turning eq. (S4) into Ĥs = h mσ S x mσ + H int , where h ≡ h sc + h ext . The corresponding Gibbs free energy 24 mσ is the energy of the ground state obtained in presence of the field h ext . In this mean-field approximation Γ(m x ) can then be viewed as a Landau function 25 : ∂Γ ∂mx = -h ext so that the extrema of Γ(m x ) indicate the equilibrium solutions in absence of driving field. In Fig. In order to have the double-minimum structure needed for a first-order transition, γ 4 has to be negative when γ 2 changes sign from negative to positive for increasing U (which then marks U c1 in our case). We can calculate these coefficients analytically using standard perturbation theory. The implied relationship between field and magnetization is the coefficients of which can be estimated by explicitly calculating m x (h ext ) in our model and inverting it. Indeed we can compute the groundstate energy of H s up to the fourth order in the total field h = h ext + h sc (the external field plus the self-consistent one h sc = 4 0 m x /M ) felt by each slave-spin, through standard perturbation theory: x . Subtracting the self-consistent field one finally gets: x . (S11) Comparing eq. (S11) with eq. (S9) shows that γ 4 has the same sign of e 4 , which we can calculate. Perturbative expansion of the Slave-Spin ground-state energy. Let's then solve the slave-spin equations in proximity of the Mott insulator Z = 4 S x mσ = 0, which implies h sc = 0. In absence of field, for h = 0, the spectrum is that of eq (S5), illustrated in Fig. For small h we can apply perturbation theory, the operator of the perturbation being V ≡ h mσ S x mσ , and the nonvanishing terms of the second order and fourth order corrections to the energy of the ground state |φ read: where we have defined V μκ = μ 0 |V |κ 0 and E μκ = E 0 μ -E 0 κ (the superscript 0 indicates unperturbed states and energies), and all the κ i are meant summed on all the states such that none of the E φκi vanishes. Note that V φφ = 0 in this case because the eigenstates of the unperturbed Hamiltonian H int are eigenstates of S z mσ , while the perturbation flips the spins (indeed S x mσ = (S + mσ + S - mσ )/2). Only neighbouring sectors in Fig. As motivated in the main article we are interested in the sign of the fourth-order contribution of the ground state energy, which determines the order of the Mott transition. The key observation here is that in the case of the ground state all the E φκ < 0, and all numerators are positive. Thus the first term in eq. (S13) (which we call "connected" since it involves a chain of "hops" starting and ending in the ground state, without going through it -or its degenerate manifold -otherwise) is negative, while the second (a product of lower-order, "disconnected", terms) is positive. Moreover only the connected term can visit the lowest excited states in the same charge sector (N=2) of the ground state (that is, spin excitations here), which lie at energy distance J from it. The lowest order terms (and thus the disconnected contributions involving them) only visit the states at distance U +J 2 ∼ O(U ). For small enough J then, the first term in eq. (S13) will dominate over the second, since its terms have a smaller denominator, and thus the sign of the whole fourth-order contribution will be negative. Performing all the summations we obtain: h2 -2(7j where j = J/U . The numerator of the fourth order coefficient is definite positive so that the whole coefficient e 4 is negative as long as of J<U. This implies that γ 4 < 0 and the Mott transition is first-order in this model as long as of J<U (that is, for all realistic situation in a material). This analysis substantiates and rationalizes the empirical rule of thumb proposed in Ref. An analogous phenomenology is displayed by Hubbard models with more than 2 orbitals, as partly explored in Ref. A. Georges, G. Kotliar, W. Krauth, and M. J. Rozenberg, Rev. Mod. Phys. 68,13 (1996). R. Bulla, T. A. Costi, and T. Pruschke, Rev. Mod. Phys. 80, (2008).