The mass-production of fuel-cell vehicles and the eventual transition to the hydrogen economy will require safe, inexpensive and reliable sensors capable of simultaneously detecting low concentrations of leaking hydrogen and measuring broad ranges of hydrogen concentration in storage and energy generating systems. Although several competing sensor technologies can potentially be used in this role, just a few of them have thus far demonstrated a combination of all desirable characteristics. This group of devices also includes magneto-electronic sensors that can detect the presence of hydrogen gas in a range of hydrogen concentrations from zero to 100% at atmospheric pressure with the response time approaching the industry standard of one second. The hydrogen gas sensing mechanism underpinning the operation of magneto-electronic sensors is based on the physical processes of ferromagnetic resonance, magneto-optical Kerr effect and anomalous Hall effect that enable one to measure hydrogen-induced changes in the magnetic properties of structures combining Pd with one or several ferromagnetic metals such as Co, Fe or Ni. In this chapter, we overview the physical foundations of emergent ferromagnetic Pd-alloy-based magneto-electronic hydrogen sensors and compare their characteristics with those of highperforming multilayer thin film-based counterparts that have already demonstrated a potential to find commercial applications. Hydrogen is the most common chemical in the universe. Apart from a number of applications as fuel for transport and heating, a means of storage and transportation of renewable energy and as a raw material in industrial processes However, several technical challenges have thus far prevented the roll-out of a reliable large-scale hydrogen-based technologies, including hydrogen fuel cells. In particular, there have been significant safety concerns due to the high reactivity of hydrogen fuel with environmental oxygen in the air. Indeed, hydrogen is flammable over a very wide range of concentrations in air (4%-75%) and it is explosive over a wide range of concentrations (15%-59%) at a standard atmospheric temperature Thus, to enable the use of hydrogen-based technologies in cars, trucks, buses and other vehicles, there is a need in efficient and low-cost hydrogen gas sensors and concentration meters. Sensors suitable for this role must reliably detect even the weakest leakages of hydrogen gas and therefore be susceptible to very small gas concentrations (in the ppm range). Significantly, the response time of a hydrogen sensor must be less than one second These stringent specifications challenge any existing hydrogen sensor technology Recently, several novel methods of hydrogen gas sensing were proposed using a combination of physical phenomena known from the fields of magnetism and magneto-electronics Magneto-electronic sensors exploit reversible hydrogen-induced changes in magnetic properties of thin magnetic films made of alternating layers of a ferromagnetic metal (FM) such as cobalt (Co), iron (Fe) or nickel (Ni) and non-magnetic metal (NM) palladium (Pd) layers (see, e.g., Of course, the application of Pd in a sensitive element of the emergent magneto-electronic sensors has been a result of decades-long research on physical and chemical processes that underpin a reversible absorption of hydrogen by Pd It has also been long known that during absorption of hydrogen certain physical properties of Pd change and that these changes can be used to detect the presence of hydrogen and its concentration. In particular, as a result of hydrogenation, the atomic lattice parameter of Pd can increase by up to 3% and the electrical resistivity of Pd by up to 80%. Pd was also found to be highly selective to H 2 absorption, but at the same time, it exhibits a much lower sensitivity to other gases Whereas Pd has been employed in many hydrogen gas sensor architectures, a combination of hydrogen-induced properties of Pd with the typical material, structures and experimental techniques used in magnonics, spintronics, magneto-electronics and adjacent areas (Section 2) is a result of very recent developments. Naturally, to optimise the operation of the first prototypes of magnetoelectronic sensors and to further demonstrate their plausibility and applicability in a wide range of practical situations, the researchers working on them could refer to the works on the previous generation of Pd-based hydrogen sensors. However, as for example stated in Among the previous works that have facilitated the development of the emergent magnetoelectronic sensor technology were, for example, the papers on PdNi alloy thin-film electricresistivity based gas senors To create such alloy-based sensors, research efforts were concentrated on measurements of higher concentrations of H 2 and on alloy formulation that would enable a reversible detection of the gas. The role of temperature relative humidity and of oxygen on the performance of the sensor alloys were also studied in great detail. For example, Fig. However, whereas Pd-FM interfaces have also been central for thin-film structures used in the fields of spintronic, magnonics and data storage, and therefore considerable understanding of the physics underpinning their operation has already been gained (for an extended relevant discussion see, e.g., We note the existence of a recent review article Here, we overview the fundamental physical processes that underpin the operation of magnetoelectronic devices, and we also discuss some of the key results presented in the seminal works on magneto-electronic hydrogen gas sensors using the effect of Ferromagnetic Resonance, magnetooptical Kerr effect and relevant physical phenomena. Whereas mostly multilayered thin films were investigated in those works, the results obtained using them are of immediate relevance to the physics of operation of alloy-based magneto-electronic sensors. Therefore, they can be considered to be a starting point. Ferromagnetic Resonance (FMR) is an effect of spin precession of the macroscopic vector of magnetisation in an external magnetic field The concept of hydrogen gas sensor exploiting FMR was originally proposed in Sketch of the gas cell used to demonstrate the plausibility of the concept of FMR-based magneto-electronic sensor. The sketch shows the co-planar stripline waveguide (CPW), where the sample is located, the microwave feed ports and the gas flow inlets. (b) The FMR spectra of the Co/Pd film at 10 GHz microwave frequency in N 2 atmosphere (solid line) and H 2 atmosphere (dashed line). (c) Changes in the CPW output voltage under the cycling of N 2 and H 2 gas through the cell with the Co/Pd film operating at the FMR frequency. Reproduced with permission from The FMR-based approach illustrated in Fig. In Ref. The FMR peak position for an ellipsoid of revolution is given by Kittel formula where f is the FMR frequency in Hz, γ is the gyromagnetic ratio, H is the static magnetic field applied to the sample, M s is the saturation magnetisation for the sample and N xx , N yy and N zz are the demagnetising factors for the ellipsoid. Equation (1) assumes that the static field H is applied along the z-direction and that the sample is magnetised uniformly (i.e. to saturation). Importantly, it must stand N xx + N yy + N zz = 4π. A thin film is a special case of the ellipsoid of revolution, for which one of the demagnetising factors equals to 4π and the other two vanish. Then, for two special cases of the orientation of the static magnetic field with respect to the film plane, Eq. (1) reduces to for the static magnetic field applied in the film plane ("in-plane" or IP FMR) and, for the static magnetic field applied perpendicular to the film plane ("perpendicular-to-plane" (PP) or "out-of-plane" (OOP) FMR). While writing down Eq. ( As seen from Eqs. (1-3), the FMR peak position depends on the applied static magnetic field H, the value of the saturation magnetisation of the constituent material of the film M s and of the effective field of PMA H PMA . The latter quantity requires explanation, and we will provide it later on in several contexts. Now we focus on Eq. ( For instance, the FMR traces in Fig. One more aspect needs to be explained before we are able to proceed further. This is the choice of the FMR configuration -IP or OOP. As seen from Eq. ( Now we return to the discussion of PMA, which is a type of magnetic anisotropy, and clarify the physical origin of this effect. By definition, the magnetic anisotropy is a dependence of magnetic energy of an FM material on the direction of its magnetisation vector with respect to particular directions in the sample. In the main discussion in this text, we are dealing with polycrystalline metal films of very large in-plane dimensions with respect to the film thicknesses. Subsequently, there is just one special direction in this geometry -the one perpendicular to the film plane. The dependence of the film magnetic energy on the angle of the magnetisation vector with the film normal is called the Perpendicular Magnetic Anisotropy or PMA Furthermore, there are two types of PMA in FM films -the interface PMA and the bulk PMA. The interface PMA exists at the interfaces of FM metals with metals of Pt group, including Pd On the contrary, the bulk PMA exists in the bulk of an FM layer and it originates from a break in symmetry of the spin system induced by growth of the film on its substrate. A particular orientation of film crystallites or a strain induced in the film during the growth are among the origins of this type of anisotropy. Importantly, the effect of the bulk anisotropy on the FMR response does not depend on the film thickness. One example of materials where bulk PMA may be present are the films of alloys of FM metals with Pd. Note that ultimately, on the microscopic level, any magnetocrystaline anisotropy is due to spin-orbit coupling, and that macroscopic effects of the preferential crystallite orientation or internal strain are able to modify the spin-orbit coupling such that macroscopic PMA is induced. The FMR spectroscopy is not a unique way to register the state of a magneto-electronic sensor. In fact, magneto-electronic hydrogen sensors using the magneto-optical Kerr effect (MOKE) have also been developed alongside the FMR-based sensors (see, e.g., Refs. MOKE represents a change in the polarisation and intensity of light reflected from the surface of a magnetic material. The change originates from the off-diagonal components of the dielectric permittivity tensor of the investigated magnetised material In one of the works that laid a foundation of the MOKE-based magneto-electronic hydrogen sensors, a reversible nature of the changes in the magnetic properties was first observed in Pd/Fe bilayer structures placed into an H 2 -containing atmosphere The term anomalous Hall effect (AHE) These physical processes lay a foundation of a special kind of magneto-electronic hydrogen gas sensors that are intrinsically compatible with existing electronic gas detection technologies and that enable a simultaneous measurement of two independent parameters affected by H 2 -resistivity and magnetisation. It has also been demonstrated that using the anomalous Hall effect one can create a device capable of detecting two gases -H 2 and CO Before we start discussing applications of Pd-based alloyed films in magneto-electronic hydrogen gas sensing, it is worth making the reader familiar with the physics underlying the impact of H 2 gas on the magnetic properties of alloyed thin films. Many of the material-science-orientated works discussed in this section were published after the introduction of the concept of magneto-electronic hydrogen gas sensing based on the alloyed films. However, alongside the predated works, the results presented in them help explain the available results on magneto-electronic H 2 sensing and to guide the future research in this field. It is well-known that alloys of Pd with a FM metal exhibit intriguing and practically important magnetic properties Hydrogen-induced changes in the interaction between magnetic layers were also investigated in Fe/Nb and Fe/V multilayer structures and they revealed a transition from an antiferromagnetic to a ferromagnetic coupling regime Furthermore, it is well-known that at high H 2 concentrations, the Pd atomic lattice experiences a significant expansion There exist two major physical mechanisms of the impact of hydrogen on the magnetic properties of PdCo and FeCo alloy films. The first one is a modification of elastic stress in the films upon absorption of hydrogen Following the authors of As already mentioned, absorption of H 2 gas is also known to lead to an expansion of the crystal lattice of pure Pd metal and its alloys. Films clamped to substrates cannot expand in the film plane, but they are able to expand in the vertical direction, which was confirmed by X-ray diffraction (XRD) in Ref. After desorption of hydrogen, all investigated films recovered their original anisotropies. The authors of The authors of another relevant work Ref. Finally, in Ref. Alloys of Pd with Co, Fe and Ni have been intensively investigated for applications in MOKEbased hydrogen gas sensing Earlier studies of Pd/Co/Pd trilayers by the same research group as in the paper Ref. It is noteworthy that in the MOKE measurements discussed above, a p-polarised 670 nm laser beam was focused on the sample and an analyser, consisting of a linear polariser oriented at a small angle φ with respect to the s-axis and of a photodiode, was used to detect the reflected light The magnetic properties of the alloys films also depend on the film thickness. To demonstrate such a dependence, MOKE hysteresis loops were measured for Co 39 Pd 61 alloy films with the thicknesses of 10, 14.8 and 20 nm as a function of hydrogen pressure (Fig. Continuing the discussion of the application of alloys of Pd with FM metals, it should be noted that whereas the effect of sensitivity to hydrogen has been demonstrated to have a high application potential, the correlation between the hydrogen pressure, ambient temperature and magnetic properties of the alloy still remains insufficiently understood from the physical point of view. To address this challenge, in a recent work Ref. The term anomalous Hall effect (AHE) As already discussed in Section 2.3, these physical processes open up opportunities to link the concept of magneto-electronic hydrogen gas sensors with the existing electronic gas detection technologies that, in particular, enable a simultaneous measurement of two independent parameters affected by H 2 -resistivity and magnetisation. Yet, using the anomalous Hall effect one can create a magneto-electronic sensor that can detect two gases -H 2 and CO It is well-established that hydrogen is highly soluble in Pd. This process results in a significant expansion of the lattice of Pd upon absorption of H 2 (0.15% in the α-phase and 3.4% in the β-phase) also leading to an increase in the electrical resistivity of Pd due to the conversion into palladium hydride To verify these assumptions, in Ref. For example, Fig. Anomalous Hall effect (AHE) resistance hysteresis loops for a 5-nanometre-thick Co 0.17 Pd 0.83 sample in the H 2 /N 2 atmosphere at different hydrogen concentrations: y = 0%, 0.125%, 0.25%, 0.5%, 1%, 2% and 4%. Reprinted from Alloying has also been known as an alternative method for improving catalytic activity and increasing the capability of hydrogen storage systems. In fact, it has been shown that in these contexts Pd-based bimetallic alloys can outperform pure Pd The hydrogenation of both the alloy film and the reference multilayered sample resulted in a reversible change in the saturation magnetisation. However, whereas the multilayered sample was completely insensitive to CO, the alloy sample exhibited a significant and reversible change in the saturation magnetisation when both H 2 and CO were present in the test gas cell. The hydrogeninduced changes in the saturation magnetisation are due to the insertion of hydrogen into the CoPd lattice, which is a well-established fact for both multilayers Although the results presented in the seminal work on FMR-based magneto-electronic sensors To check whether alloy thin films can help to meet those strict specifications, the FMR response of Co x Pd 1-x alloy-based sensors with a varying material composition parameter x (x = 0.65, 0.39, 0.24 and 0.14) was investigated in the work Furthermore, one can observe that the FMR response amplitude for the sample with x = 0.24 can exceed 30 mV, which is six times larger than 5 mV observed in the bilayer Pd/Co film with the Co layer thickness of 5 nm The absorption amplitude for the sample with x = 0.39 is about 6 mV and thus the Co content in it is approximately 1.5 times larger than for the sample with x = 0.24. Therefore, relative to the reference bilayer film, the FMR absorption amplitude per one Co atom for the alloyed film is approximately 1.1, i.e. eight times smaller than for the x = 0.24 sample. However, the x = 0.39 sample is characterised by an approximately 2.75 times larger linewidth ΔH. Thus, since for the same amplitude of the microwave driving field the FMR amplitude scales as 1/ΔH, if the value of ΔH for this sample were the same as for one with x = 0.24 then the absorption amplitude for it would be three times larger than for the reference bilayer film. These calculations indicate that reducing ΔH for the x = 0.39 alloy to the level of x = 0.24 could be beneficial for magnetoelectronic hydrogen gas sensing. To complement the current discussion, we discuss the response time of the sample with x = 0.24 to exposure to H 2 gas as well as the time required by the respective FMR signal to return to its original state after evacuation of H 2 from the test gas cell [Fig. Continuing the discussion of the FMR traces, we note that in practical magneto-electronic hydrogen gas sensors, a material with a large value of ΔH and a relatively strong FMR response, such as 6 mV observed for x = 0.39, could also be useful. As can be seen from Fig. Significantly, previously in Ref. Thus, to summarise the discussion above, it has been demonstrated that the alloy-based magnetoelectronic sensors employing FMR can measure H 2 concentration in the range from 0.05% to 100%. Furthermore, as shown in Fig. The height of the FMR peak also scales as the volume of resonating material. Above we mentioned that the effect of the interface PMA on the FMR peak position is significant only for thin magnetic layers. For that reason, the Pd/Co bilayer based hydrogen-gas sensor prototypes had a Co layer with the thickness of 5 nm The Pd alloy samples possess bulk PMA and, therefore, they do not need to be as thin as bilayer films to produce a significant value of δH. Hence, there is a possibility to compensate the decrease in the height of the FMR peak due to an increased ΔH by using a thicker alloy film. The experiment from Ref. As we already discussed, alloy samples that exhibited a large ΔH would be particularly suitable for FMR-amplitude-based H 2 sensing, where, in contrast to Co/Pd bilayer films Finally, recall that FMR does not distinguish between a change in the saturation magnetisation and a change in PMA [see the discussion around Eqs. (1-3)]. As follows from the raw FMR traces [Figs. 9(a,b)], the magnitude of FMR field for the employed OOP FMR configuration decreases with an increase the H 2 concentration. This may be due to either a H 2 -induced decrease in PMA or an increase in 4πM s . Which exactly of these effects takes place could not be determined in Ref. Nickel (Ni) is often employed in Pd-based hydrogen gas sensors that operate using the physical processes resulting in variations of the electric resistivity and optical response of the active material. Apart from playing a role in corrosion protection and increased mechanical strength of active layers of gas sensors Given the aforementioned general advantages of use of Ni in various gas sensors, it is plausible to assume that the addition of Ni to Co-and Pd-based structures of magneto-electronic sensors would help improve the ability of such sensors to detect H 2 . This hypothesis was verified in the work Such a behaviour was attributed to the certain differences in the fundamental physical processes occurring in the constituent materials of the alloy films. To demonstrate this, the effective magnetisation 4πM eff and the gyromagnetic ratio γ for the samples were extracted by fitting the FMR traces with the OOP Kittel formula Eq. (3). It was established that the dependence of 4πM eff on the Pd content is not linear but first it exhibits an increase and then a decrease [Fig. As seen from Fig. (1) the absorption of H 2 modifies the electronic structure of a Co/Pd layer, thereby changing the magnetic environment of the atoms and reducing the strength of PMA (2) the dilution of Pd with a transition metal reduces the ability of Pd to incorporate hydrogen into its crystal lattice In Fig. Interestingly, in Fig. In this section, we discuss the results of a work, where the property of an interface between Co and Pd layers was employed to fabricate a "pseudo-alloy" -a material with signatures of both being an alloy of the two metals and being a sequence of layers with magnetic interfaces between them at the same time. Let us recall that in multilayered FMR-based magneto-electronic sensors the effect of PMA is usually observed at an interface between a Co layer and a Pd layer, and that a change in the strength of PMA caused by exposure of the multilayered structure to H 2 gas is often registered as a shift δH in the position of a resonance peak. Whereas the absolute value of this shift is inversely proportional to the thickness of the FM metal layer, the amplitude of the FMR signal scales with the thickness of the FM layer. Subsequently, there is a trade-off between the amplitude and the PMAmediated resonance shift. On the other hand, using CoPd alloy films instead of Co/Pd multilayers allows observing an FMR response that is free of such a trade-off since the behaviour of alloyed films is governed by bulk PMA. However, while this property of alloys is advantageous for practical applications, using it comes at a cost: fabrication of thin films made of alloys of arbitrary composition may pose several technological challenges compared with well-established techniques used to produce thin-film multilayers. This situation has motivated research on layered structures containing a region of alternating ultrathin Co/Pd films that combine certain characteristics of both conventional multilayers and alloyed films, thereby allowing one to circumvent the trade-off between the magnetic layer thickness and the effect of hydrogenation on PMA while keeping the fabrication process simple. This section summarises the main experimental results obtained in a relevant recent work Ref. It has been demonstrated that exposure of such samples to H 2 leads to an upward shift δH in the FMR field, which is an expected results, and that the origin of this shift is due to a change in the effective PMA field that enters the expression for the effective magnetisation: 4πM eff = M S -H PMA . In turn, the change in PMA can be due to both hydrogen-induced mechanical strain in Co resulting in a magnetostriction contribution to the bulk anisotropy of Co layers and hydrogen ion induced electronic effect on the strength of the Co-Pd bond To reveal the actual composition of the fabricated samples compared with the nominal one, the cross-sections of the films were comprehensively characterised using a high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and a scanning transmission electron microscopy with energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (STEM/EDX). A theoretical Kittel equation-based model [Eqs. In each investigated sample, TEM and STEM/EDX measurements demonstrated a homogeneous mixture of Co and Pd with an averaged composition varying from Co 0.33 Pd 0.67 to Co 0.5 Pd 0.5 . No indication of layering was observed. Since the spatial resolution of STEM/EDS is, in general, insufficient to fully resolve the layer thicknesses of the investigated structures, X-ray reflectivity (XRR) measurements were also conducted since XRR can resolve subnanometre-thin layers provided the interface between them is abrupt. However, XRR measurements did not reveal the presence of any well-defined periodic multilayer structure either. All those observation are consistent with the fact that fabrication of well-defined ultra-thin layers of Co/Pd is technically challenging and that a particular magnetron sputtering regime used to fabricate the investigated multilayers is known to promote island-like polycrystalline film growth. Moreover, the growth of the films could be affected by intermixing of Co with Pd Thus, since the currently discussed samples contain alloy layers but PMA is induced by the residual interfaces due to the growth process, one may expect that several contributions of PMA to the response of the sample would be observed. In fact, as can be seen from Fig. As a next step, the linewidth ΔH of the FMR resonance line was extracted by fitting the fieldresolved FMR traces with a standard model equation. Then the ΔH values were converted into values of the Gilbert damping constant α G . While the values of ΔH typically showed a higher measurement uncertainty compared with the extracted values of the resonance field, α G demonstrated a clear trend with the increase in the t Co /t Pd ratio. This result is in good agreement with the previous relevant observations of enhanced damping of the magnetisation precession due to spin pumping The inhomogeneous linewidth broadening ΔH 0 is related to the linewidth ΔH and it describes the impact of extrinsic damping effects that include inputs from local variations of the magnetisation and anisotropy constants. In general, the observed behaviour of ΔH 0 was mostly random but for several t Co /t Pd ratios even negative values of ΔH 0 were obtained. While a negative value of ΔH 0 is unphysical, an observation of it may indicate that (i) the relationship between the frequency f and ΔH is not linear, which might be the case of a film that is not fully saturated, or (ii) the values of ΔH are significantly scattered. Nevertheless, for t Co /t Pd = 0.34, a significant increase in ΔH 0 was observed when the sample was hydrogenated and that increase was well-above any error that could arise during the fitting of data. That observation was explained by the fact that the presence of Pd could result in exchange-coupling between different regions of the Co islands that are characterised by different saturation magnetisation and magnetic anisotropy. Hence, it was plausible to assume that hydrogenation might weaken this exchange interaction if not completely destroy it, thereby resulting in a frequency-independent increase in ΔH. A number of previous observations speak in favour of this assumption, most notably the facts that Co/Pd multilayers exhibit a small change in the coercive field upon hydrogenation Finally, in general, ΔH did not show any significant hydrogen-induced variation (apart from the particular sample discussed just above), which is in contrast to the behaviour of Co/Pd bilayers, where ΔH consistently reduced as a result of absorption of H 2 . Such a reduction was explained by a decrease in the strength of spin-pumping Despite a number of technical and fundamental challenges that the developers of magnetoelectronic hydrogen sensors will need to resolve in the future, the magneto-electronic sensors have already reached the stage of device prototyping and intellectual property protection (see, e.g., Once one has a full schematic circuit designed using an Arduino platform, the next step is to turn it into a real-world printed circuit board (PCB). Given the wireless functionality of the sensor prototype, one has to pay special attention to the PCB layout for the antenna to maximise the power transmission and minimise interference with the internal microwave electron devices and systems. In addition, the Arduino code should be ported to a native firmware code for the particular microcontroller models used in the design. However, these technical aspects mostly belong to the area of electronic device design and testing and they are not directly relevant to the physics of magneto-electronic gas sensors. Nevertheless, the design of some of the sensor's elements might need to be changed to facilitate its integration with the electronic modules and especially antennas that can also operate at GHz-range frequencies. Screenshot taken from a supplementary video from Ref. [64] (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7fQ2xwPDQwc&feature=youtu.be) demonstrating an Arduino-platform prototype of a magneto-electronic H 2 /CO sensor proposed in Whereas this approach to converting an Arduino prototype into a manufacturable product significantly optimises the process of finding and fixing design flaws, there exist alternative ways of device prototyping that can be more compatible with the equipment available at university-based and industrial R&D centres and that can lead to a faster transition from the prototyping stage to a real-life device. For example, following this approach, an on-chip integrated magneto-electronic hydrogen sensor using the FMR as the detection mechanism (Fig. The design of the sensor in Thus, in the recent years there have been a significant progress in understanding the fundamental physical processes that underpin the operation of alloy-based magneto-electronic hydrogen gas sensors. It has been demonstrated that, in comparison with their multilayer-film-based counterparts proposed a decade ago ( However, extra research studies and development work are required for the alloy-based magnetoelectronic sensors to reach the industry. Here, we outline some of the important milestones that will need to be accomplished to achieve this goal. (1) At present, none of the investigated structures demonstrated a combination of all merits of the magneto-electronic hydrogen sensing technology discussed in this review. Firstly, this is because those sensors were fabricated using different sets of constituent materials, and different physical mechanism of the sensor state registration, such as FMR, MOKE, AHE and other effects, have been employed. More specifically, whereas it has been shown that using alloyed active materials may be advantageous in many aspects, for instance, while measuring large H 2 concentrations, the actual list of Pd-FM metal alloys that can be used for this application is long but the optimal alloy composition has not been established yet. In addition, in the sub-field of FMR-based magneto-electronic sensors extra work needs to be done to control the FMR peak linewidth in the alloyed films. Similarly, the effect of material nanostructuring on alloy-based structures has not been investigated yet. This situation urges a joint effort of physicists, material scientists, chemists and engineers intended to bridge this knowledge gap. (2) The research works on magneto-electronic gas sensors have considered mostly thin-film based structures, where the static magnetisation vector naturally lies in the plane of the film. However, structuring thin-film samples by forming, for example, long strips with a square nanoscale cross-section (called nanowires) is known to result in a FMR-based sensor operation at zero applied magnetic field, which is beneficial for real-life applications since it simplifies the design of the sensor (3) Both MOKE and FMR investigations demonstrated that film nanopatterning helps reduce the time response of multi-layer based sensor towards the industry standard of one second (4) It is noteworthy that, since the thickness of the active material films is very small, a relatively high cost of both Co and Pd does not significantly affect the cost of production of a magneto-electronic hydrogen gas sensor. For instance, CoPd alloy layer thicknesses used to generate a measurable FMR, MOKE or AHE response are typically from 5 to 20 nm. It can be estimated that such a magneto-electronic hydrogen gas sensor would typically contain less than 4 μg of Co and less than 2.5 μg of Pd. Given that Pd costs approximately USD 100 per gram and that Pd is much more expensive than Co, the contribution of these quantities of materials to the cost of fabrication of a sensor is rather negligible. (5) It is known that other gases can contaminate and interfere with Pd-based sensor ability to detect hydrogen. In the magneto-electronic sensors, this effect as well as the effects of humidity, gas flow and a water layer formation on the surface of the sensing element are also likely to be present. However, these effects are essentially the same as for any other pure-Pd and Pd-alloy based sensors, including those based on measuring the conductivity of a Pd-containing layer. Therefore, approaches to the resolution of this and other relevant problems will also be similar. On the other hand, the magneto-electronic sensor concept does not use the effect of hydrogenation on the general physical properties of Pd itself but specifically on the magnetic properties of its alloys with FM metals. Therefore, one may expect that some of the aforementioned adverse effects may affect magneto-electronic sensors in a different way but some of them may even be entirely irrelevant. However, this important aspect of magneto-electronic sensors has not been addressed in the literature yet. Therefore, we believe that the current review would motivate colleagues from academia and industry to bridge this and other existing knowledge gaps. Funding: We would like to thank the support by Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation (ANSTO), grants No. P4123, P4810 and P6126. We also acknowledge using the equipment of and receiving scientific and technical assistance from the Australian National Fabrication Facility and the Centre for Microscopy, Characterisation and Analysis of the University of Western Australia, a facility funded by the University, State and Commonwealth Governments. ISM has been supported by the Australian Research Council through the Future Fellowship (FT180100343) program. 8(c.i-c.ii) show the absolute value of R xy obtained for various H 2 /CO concentrations as a function of time for the multilayer and alloy sample, respectively, where one can see that both samples exhibit a reproducible H 2 -induced response in time but only the alloy sample is sensitive to CO. Finally, Figs. 8(c.iii-c.iv) show the concentration dependence of the absolute value of R It is important not to confuse PMA with the shape anisotropy of the film. The shape anisotropy is a pure magnetostatic effect that is fully described by the demagnetising factors for the film [see Eq. (1)]. Conversely, PMA originates from processes in the material on the mesoscopic and microscopic levels and represents a contribution to the total magnetic energy on top of the trivial contribution of the shape anisotropy energy.