We investigate the continuous variation of electronic states from a Fermi liquid to a quantum spin liquid induced by chemical substitution in the organic dimer-Mott system of κ-[(BEDSe-TTF)x(BEDT-TTF)1-x]2Cu[N(CN)2]Br. Electrical transport measurements reveal that the mixing of BEDSe-TTF into the BEDT-TTF layers induces a quantum Mott transition around x=0.10. Although a charge gap disappears at this point, magnetic susceptibility and heat capacity measurements indicate that fermionic low-energy excitations remain in the insulating salts, suggesting that fermionic spin excitations persist. We propose that the transition can be classified into a genuine Mott transition. Electron correlations can trigger a metal-insulator transition, known as a Mott transition, when Coulomb repulsion U exceeds bandwidth W in a half-filled electronic state In a genuine Mott transition from a conventional Fermi liquid (FL) to a QSL, excitations of the spin sector of electrons, namely charge-neutral spinons, are expected to remain and may possibly be delocalized even in the QSL Mott insulator. It has been theoretically predicted that that the QSL Mott transition exhibits some peculiar features, such as a continuous variation in physical quantities (Fig. The pristine salt κ-(BEDT-TTF) 2 Cu[N(CN) 2 ]Br (abbreviated BEDT-Br) is a well-known organic superconductor with a superconducting transition temperature T c ∼12 K Br to explore for the Mott transition and understand its nature. Br were prepared by electrochemical oxidations of mixed donor molecules BEDT-TTF and BEDSe-TTF. Note that our synthetic method did not yield salts with x>0.5. From X-ray crystal structure analyses, the mixing ratio x of the samples was determined by the average occupancy probability of the Se atom in the outer chalcogen sites. No peak splitting of X-ray diffraction confirmed that the mixed crystals are macroscopically homogeneous as the lattice parameters almost linearly change depending on x (Fig. Using a homemade high-resolution calorimeter Before discussing the present results, we must first need to discuss the absence of magnetic transitions reported in the pure salt BEST-Br Br, which are 0.8-0.9, 0.52, 0.52, and 0.45, in the DFT calculations, and 1.06, 0.80, 0.75, and 0.69 in the Hückel calculations, respectively. Considering the overestimation of 0.2-0.3 in the Hückel calculation and the relative comparison, BEST-Br possibly have a relatively strong geometric frustration with t /t∼1. Figure Figure To determine the variation in the physical properties of the ground states, we plot the x dependences of the physical parameters, as shown in Fig. To further investigate the characteristics of this possible continuous transition from the viewpoint of low energy excitations, the obtained χ(15 K) is additionally plotted in Fig. To discuss the excitations arising from the charge sector as well as the spin sector from a thermodynamic viewpoint, we present γ N in Fig. Note that, in the mixed crystals (0<x<1), the chemical disorder induced by mixing must suppress the AFM state and favor the QSL state We organize our results, the reported experimental data, and the theoretical calculations not only the Mott transition, but also the relation between the magnetic degrees of freedom and the competition among the phases. Considering the similarity with κ-[(BEDT-TTF) 1-x (BEDT-STF) x ] 2 Cu 2 (CN) 3 In summary, we investigate the low-temperature states of the dimer-Mott organic system κ-[(BEDSe-TTF) x (BEDT-TTF) 1-x ] 2 Cu[N(CN) 2 ]Br. The genuine Mott transition from the FL state to the QSL state occurs around x=0.10 as a possible continuous metal-insulator transition. We demonstrate that the pure Mott transition results in the freezing of only the charge degrees of freedom with the survival of the spin sector. The persistence of the fermionic spin excitations is distinct from those of the conventional Mott transition accompanied by AFM orders.