Increasing power densities in integrated circuits has led to an increased prevalence of thermal hotspots in integrated circuits. Tracking these thermal hotspots is imperative to prevent circuit failures. In 3D integrated circuits, conventional surface techniques like infrared thermometry are unable to measure 3D temperature distribution and optical and magnetic resonance techniques are difficult to apply due to the presence of metals and large current densities. X-rays offer high penetration depth and can be used to probe 3D structures. We report a method utilizing the temperature dependence of x-rays diffraction intensity via the Debye-Waller factor to simultaneously map the temperature of an individual silicon die that is a part of a stack of dies. Utilizing beamline 1-ID-E at the Advanced Photon Source (Argonne), we demonstrate for each individual silicon die, a temperature resolution of 3 K, a spatial resolution of 100 μm x 400 μm and a temporal resolution of 20 s. Utilizing a sufficiently high intensity laboratory source, e.g., from a liquid anode source, this method can be scaled down to laboratories for non-invasive temperature mapping of 3D integrated circuits. The increase in power density of processors has led to an increase in the occurrence of thermal hot spots within the processors Traditionally, the processor dies are embedded with thermal sensors to measure the temperature during operation. However, these sensors provide only single point temperature measurements and are thus limited in spatial resolution. To map the temperature across the entire processor, non-contact thermometry is required Infrared thermometry can be used to measure the temperature distribution of the surface of a single die High energy x-rays have great penetration depth for most materials In general, several features of x-ray diffraction depend on temperature. X-ray peaks shift due to the changes in lattice parameter, the structure factor changes due to thermally-excited lattice vibration (Debye-Waller factor), and peaks can broaden due to inhomogeneous strain induced by differences in thermal expansion of adjoining materials Sensitivity analysis can be used to determine which x-ray method has the highest temperature dependence. The sensitivity coefficient, given by , measures the percentage change in signal, S, with respect to 1% change in temperature, T The measurement of Debye-Waller factor via the reduction of diffraction intensity provides a much better sensitivity in temperature measurement Thermal vibrations modify the structure factor (scattering amplitude) of the unit cell, which can be described by the introduction of a temperature factor, Where, ; is the average quadratic displacement of an atom from its mean position, and is the scattering vector. s = in the case of Bragg reflection, with θ as the Bragg angle and λ as the incident wavelength. can be calculated approximately within the Debye model: Here, is the Planck constant, is the temperature of the measured region, is the mass of the silicon atom, is the Boltzmann constant, is the Bragg angle and λ is the x-ray wavelength. is the average Debye temperature given by where, and are Debye temperatures for the longitudinal and transverse modes of lattice vibrations. For silicon, = 543 K At room temperature, the mean square atomic displacement, , estimated by the Debye model is 0.0058 A°2, and this compares extremely well with the calculated from the dispersion of Si using inelastic neutron scattering (0.0059 A°2) For most materials, the integrated intensity of diffraction is directly proportional to the square of the structure factor, | | . This is according to the kinematic theory, which states that the diffraction intensities from each small volume elements of a crystal add incoherently and the effects of multiple reflection of the same beam within the crystal need not be considered Silicon, however, can be free from defects or dislocations for large length scales Batterman suggested two ways of interpreting the effect of thermal vibration in the case of dynamical diffraction In order to hypothesize if we expect dynamical diffraction in our experiment, one important parameter to look at is the x-ray extinction length. The extinction length is the path length through the crystal for which the amplitude reflectivity of the x-rays approach 1 and is given by , where is the plane spacing, is the Thompson scattering length, and is the volume of the primitive unit cell The silicon used in the experiment, however, are grown by Czochralski (CZ) method, which have an oxide concentration of 10 17 -10 18 / cm 3 CZ grown undoped (1 0 0) silicon dies (ρ > 400 Ω.cm) with a thickness of 100 μm and area of 10 mm × 10 mm were obtained from UniversityWafer Inc. The stacking of two dies (Fig The measurement of the temperature dependence of a (16 0 0) diffraction and mapping of the diffraction (16 0 0) diffraction intensities were carried out at beamline 1-ID-E of the Advanced Photon Source, Argonne National Laboratory. Using a bent Si (1 1 1) double-Laue monochromator A flux of 5 ×10 9 photons/s was incident on an area of ~ 400 × 100 μm 2 on the sample, resulting in a spatial resolution of 400 × 100 μm 2 . Diffraction intensities from (16 0 0) plane were collected by Pixirad-1 Cd-Te detector placed in symmetric Bragg geometry (2θ = 29.5 deg). The separation of the diffracted beams (~175 μm) being larger than Pixirad's pixel separation (60μm) allowed identification diffraction peaks from different dies. Integrated intensity (sum of individual intensities at each point in a Bragg rocking curve) of the (16 0 0) reflection were collected from 121 points of the stacked die sample at room temperature. The sample was rotated by 0.05 degrees around the Bragg angle, with intensities recorded at each deg rotation with an integration time of 2 s per rotation. This resulted in the measurement time of one spot to be 20 s. Temperature controlled measurements for the (16 0 0) were taken at 296 K, 321 K and 330 K from five different points of a single silicon die. The die was attached to the hot side of a Peltier cooler whose cold side was attached to a heat sink. The Peltier cooler was run at two different voltages to achieve equilibrium temperatures of 321 K and 330 K. A thermocouple attached on the surface of the Peltier module recorded the temperatures during the measurement. The kinematic diffraction deduced from the temperature dependence is in contrast to the dynamic diffraction observed by Batterman and Kohra for nearly perfect silicon crystals. The result, however, is not surprising given CZ grown Si have significantly higher impurity concentration that those used by Batterman and Kohra. Since the diffraction for all the investigated planes are kinematic, the sensitivity of diffraction intensity to temperature is double compared to the dynamic diffraction. For (16 0 0), the sensitivity is ~2.5, while for (12 0 0), the sensitivity is almost halved (~ 1.4) and is reduced by a factor of 4 (~0.65) for (8 0 0). Therefore, a sensitive thermometry using this method would require measuring symmetric Bragg reflections from a high momentum transfer plane similar to (16 0 0). An important demonstration using the synchrotron source was to show that the concurrent measurement and separation of diffraction intensities from different layers of stacked dies is possible, given the pixel size of the detector is smaller than the separation of the reflected beams. In the current experiment, the separation of the beam is given by: ( , where s is the distance between the two dies, and θ is the Bragg angle and is the spot size of a beam with a H x V cross section on the sample (the details of this calculations are included in the Supplemental Materials). For a Bragg angle of ~15 deg and the separation of dies of ~125 μm, the expected beam separation is ~175 μm along the x-axis of the detector (along the axis where the beam is elongated due to the small Bragg angle at incidence). In the present experiment, the expected separation along x-axis is ~175 μm. (b) Pixirad image shows Bragg peaks from two dies simultaneously. The spot from the bottom die (top left hand corner) is less bright (about a factor of ~0.9) than that from the top die. This difference in intensity is expected due to absorption from the top silicon die (~7%) and the polyimide separator (~ 2%). The Pixirad image is consistent with the expected ~175 μm separation along x-axis . The separation along y-axis (~600 μm) is due to the imperfection in the azimuthal (χ) alignment of the dies (estimated to be ~0.6 mrad as the detector is ~1 m away from the sample) and depends on the sample to detector distance. The colorscale represents the percentage deviation from the mean value of the integrated intensity, with black corresponging to -8% deviation and white corresponding to +8% deviation. The left and right ends of the die are not included in the map as the combined spot size and path length (~800 μm) is larger the distance from the edge of the die to the center of the beam (0.5 mm). The rms deviation in intensity at constant temperature is 2.5% and 3% respectively for die 1 and die 2. This contributes to the temperature uncertainty of 3 K and 3.5 K respectivey. Our results show that simultaneous temperature mapping of different silicon dies in a stack is possible. We have demonstrated a mapping technique with a temperature resolution of 3 K spatial resolution of 400 μm × 100 μm (the spot size of the beam) and a time resolution of 20 s per spot. We have observed that for high momentum transfer planes in an undoped silicon crystal grown by Czochralski (CZ) method, the diffraction in Bragg geometry, and consequently the temperature dependence of diffraction, is described well by the kinematic theory. Given the impurity (non Si) concentration in CZ silicon is similar for highly doped silicon (regardless of the method of growth), we expect kinematic theory applied in n-type dies irrespective of the method of their growth. The spatial resolution of this method can be improved either by using a beam with a smaller cross section or by increasing the Bragg angle by using a beam of smaller energy, as long as the energy is sufficient to obtain a high momentum transfer peak ((16 0 0)) and have a absorption depth greater than the path length through the stack of dies. The 2.5%-3% variation in intensity seems to be a systematic error rather than simply due to noise. Currently, we do not understand the cause of this variation. Obtaining a baseline image, which would be generally required for a 3D integrated circuit containing devices and wires, may reduce the temperature uncertainty coming from the intensity variation. Finally, we note that our mapping experiment at Argonne (APS Beamline 1-ID-E) utilizes several desirable properties of a synchrotron source: an x-ray beam with high energy and intensity and a small beam spot size, and these properties are required for a sensitive and accurate temperature mapping. High energy x-rays are required to obtain diffraction intensities for high momentum transfer peak like (16 0 0). High momentum transfer is desirable for sensitive thermometry as the Debye-Waller factor scales as ( ) 