Universal fractionalization of quantum transport characteristics in Majorana quantum dot devices is expected to emerge for well separated Majorana bound states. We show that the Majorana universality of the differential shot noise ∂S > /∂V and conductance ∂I/∂V at low bias voltages V arises only in ideal setups with only one Majorana mode entangled with the quantum dot. In realistic devices, where both Majorana modes are entangled with the quantum dot, ∂S > /∂V and ∂I/∂V become very sensitive to tunneling phases and their universal fractional values are hard to observe even for well separated Majorana bound states. In contrast, as revealed here, the ratio (∂S > /∂V )/(∂I/∂V ) weakly depends on the tunneling phases and is fractional when the Majorana bound states are well separated or integer when they significantly overlap. Importantly, for very large V we demonstrate that this ratio becomes fully independent of the tunneling phases and its universal fractional Majorana value may be observed in state-of-the-art experiments. Reliable access to electronic degrees of freedom fractionalized by formation of essentially nonlocal non-Abelian Majorana bound states (MBSs) One way to access MBSs is via quantum transport characteristics sensitive to fractionalizations of electronic degrees of freedom. Here average electric, thermoelectric and heat currents Due to well established technology to measure, e.g. electric currents, quantum transport in nanoscopic setups is relatively simpler to perform than quantum thermodynamics. In particular, measurements of mean electric currents in setups presumably involving MBSs provide corresponding electric conductances Here we demonstrate how one can access MBSs via directly measurable observables such as differential shot noise and conductance in realistic Majorana quantum dot (QD) devices. To avoid unreliable measurements A quantum device entangling both MBSs with external degrees of freedom. Due to this entanglement physical properties of the device, in particular quantum transport characteristics, such as its shot noise and conductance, strongly depend on the Majorana tunneling phases. provides a straightforward access to fractionalization in Majorana QD devices. Furthermore, a detailed numerical analysis of the dependences of the differential shot noise and conductance on the tunneling phases and bias voltage reveals a fine structure of their resonances. Using these resonances one can extract all the Majorana tunneling parameters including the tunneling phases. The dependence on these parameters also suggests a way to shift the Majorana resonances to higher bias voltages where it will be simpler to detect them in experiments. The paper is organized as follows. In Section II we present the physical model of a feasible experimental setup which admits measurements of quantum transport observables such as its differential shot noise and conductance. Numerical results obtained for these observables are explored in Section III. We conclude the paper with Section IV where it is shown that the Majorana universal fractionalization at high bias voltages may be accessed in experiments performed at high temperatures achievable in modern labs. To quantitatively analyze how an entanglement of a QD with both Majorana modes is revealed in fluctuations and the mean value of the electric current, flowing through the QD, we consider the setup in Fig. In particular, the regime |η 1 | > |η 2 | is used to implement driven dissipative Majorana qubits To perform a theoretical analysis, we assume that the physical system includes a QD, with one nondegenerate energy level d , whose location may be tuned by a gate voltage. Although here the QD is spinless and thus Kondo correlations are absent, in the following we assume d 0 (for example, empty dot, see also Ref. The setup also involves left (L) and right (R) contacts, which are normal metals, with continuum spectra approximated by a constant density of states, ν( ) ≈ ν c /2, in the range of energies relevant for quantum transport, and a grounded onedimensional TS, whose low-energy properties are governed by MBSs, γ † 1,2 = γ 1,2 , {γ i , γ j } = 2δ ij , localized at its ends and having a finite overlap, ξ = 0. The contacts' Fermi-Dirac distributions, are specified by the contacts' temperature T and chemical potentials μ L,R = μ ± eV /2, where V is the bias voltage. The QD is coupled to the contacts and TS via tunneling processes, where The interaction between the QD and contacts is characterized by the tunneling energy , and for simplicity we assume Γ L = Γ R . When V = 0, different chemical potentials, μ L = μ R , induce nonequilibrium which essentially determines the electric current, in particular, its mean value and random deviations from it. The MBSs γ 1 and γ 2 tunnel to the QD with different phases, φ 1 = φ 2 , inducing on the QD an interference controlled by the phase difference ∆φ = φ 1 -φ 2 which also essentially determines the mean value and fluctuations of the electric current. Having the full Hamiltonian, Ĥ = Ĥd + Ĥc + Ĥts + Ĥd↔c + Ĥd↔ts , one may consider various observables using, e.g., the Keldysh field integral formalism Within this formalism the second quantized fermionic operators are replaced by the Grassmann fields, ψ(t), φ lk (t), ζ(t), corresponding to the QD, contacts and TS, respectively. The electric current operator in the l-th contact is expressed through the Grassmann fields on the forward (q = +) or backward (q = -) branch of the Keldysh contour, where G.c. denotes the Grassmann conjugation. The Hamiltonians in Eqs. ( To generate the mean electric current and various current-current correlators one also adds the current action, with the source fields J lq (t). The full Keldysh action, S K [J lq (t)] = S d + S c + S ts + S d↔c + S d↔ts + S I [J lq (t)], determines the Keldysh generating functional, from which one, e.g., generates where . . . S K means averaging at J lq (t) = 0 that is with respect to the action In the following we will focus on the left contact, l = L, and explore the mean electric current I(V, ∆φ) = I Lq (t) S K and the greater current-current correlator S > (t, t ; V, ∆φ) = δI L-(t)δI L+ (t ) S K , δI Lq (t) = I Lq (t) -I(V, ∆φ). The Fourier transform of the correlator S > (t, t ; V, ∆φ) = S > (t -t ; V, ∆φ), is an important quantity because at ω = 0 it specifies the shot noise S > (V, ∆φ) ≡ S > (ω = 0; V, ∆φ). In experiments one directly measures the differential shot noise and conductance, ∂S > (V, ∆φ)/∂V , ∂I(V, ∆φ)/∂V , and below we focus on these partial derivatives. We obtain S > (V, ∆φ) and I(V, ∆φ) via numerical integrations and then perform numerical differentiations. The regime where ξ}, is of particular interest for observing Majorana universality in experiments and below we explore it explicitly. As discussed above, the physical setup assumes that Γ may be enhanced or suppressed by the voltage on gates located between the QD and contacts. Our motivation for suppressing Γ below |η 1 | is that for Γ < |η 1 | the properties of the QD will be dominated by Majorana fractional character in a wide energy range. Physically this is expected because the tunneling of the MBSs into the QD is much stronger than the tunneling from the contacts whose non-fractional degrees of freedom could significantly wash out various Majorana fractionalizations in the opposite regime, that is for Γ > |η 1 |. We also note that to get the numerical results presented below we specify all the energies in units of Γ. In particular, the bias voltage |eV | is varied in a wide range, from small to large values in units of Γ. However, since Γ is made very small using the gates mentioned above, |eV | will also be small even if it takes large values in units of Γ. This means that in our numerical results the bias voltage always remains small enough so that other levels of the QD are not relevant and our theoretical model provides a reasonable description of experiments. In the upper panel of Fig. The right inset shows ∂S > /∂V (solid curve) and ∂I/∂V (dashed curve) as functions of ∆φ for very large bias voltage, |eV |/Γ = 10 2 . As can be seen, at very large bias voltages both the differential shot noise and conductance are strongly suppressed, ∂S > /∂V e 3 /4h, ∂I/∂V e 2 /2h, and vary relatively weakly as functions of ∆φ. The curves in the lower panel demonstrate the ratio (∂S > /∂V )/(∂I/∂V ) corresponding to the two bias voltages in the upper panel. As in Fig. We have demonstrated how to reveal Majorana fractionalization using quantum transport characteristics such as differential shot noise and conductance in Majorana QD setups where both Majorana modes are entangled with a strongly nonequilibrium QD. Our numerical results show that the tunneling phases wash out the Majorana universal values of each of these two observables. At the same time it has been found that the ratio of the differential shot noise and conductance weakly depends on the tunneling phases and provides a reliable access to Majorana fractionalization in realistic strongly nonequilibrium setups. In particular, it has been explicitly demonstrated that this ratio takes fractional values when MBSs in a TS are well separated whereas the ratio becomes integer for strongly overlapping MBSs merging into a single Dirac fermion. Additionally, we have demonstrated the universality of the Majorana fractionalization that is its independence not only of the tunneling phase difference ∆φ but also its independence of the QD gate voltage d and bias voltage V . Regarding the behavior of the differential shot noise and conductance we have found that each of these observables has a resonant structure in its dependence on both the tunneling phase difference and bias voltage. Fine structures of these resonances have been explicitly shown and explored. Let us in conclusion probe the Majorana universality at high temperatures achievable in state-of-the-art experiments. The insets in the lower panel of Fig. 