Laser micro-welding is an advanced manufacturing method today applied in various domains. However, important physical limitations have prevented so far to demonstrate its applicability in silicon and other technology-essential semiconductors. Concentrating on circumventing the optical limits on the deliverable energy density at interfaces between narrow-gap materials with intense infrared light, we make the first feasibility demonstration of transmission laser welding between silicon workpieces using nanosecond laser pulses. We obtain a shear joining strength of 32±10 MPa which compares very favorably to the complex process alternatives. Supported by experiments repeated on different material combinations including gallium arsenide, we confirm that this remarkable performance level is achievable for similar and dissimilar semiconductors. The demonstrations rely on a small footprint fiber laser, an aspect that holds great promises for the advent of a high-efficiency flexible process beneficial for important technology developments including lab-on-a-chip and hybrid semiconductor systems. Laser welding is today a key process in modern manufacturing. In this view, the use of tightlyfocused ultrashort pulses has been an important breakthrough by providing the ability to achieve energy deposition by nonlinear absorption anywhere in the three-dimensional space inside transparent materials. Subsequent highly-localized material melting is the basis of femtosecond laser welding. For alternative methods directly applicable to silicon (Si) and other semiconductors, one can refer to wafer molecular bonding. It consists in appropriately preparing and placing two wafers in the most intimate contact so that intermolecular bonds appear across the wafer. In the race for a semiconductor laser welding technology, a critical step has been made very recently by translating the ultrafast regime into the infrared (IR) domain of the spectrum for a demonstration of Si-metal welding. To circumvent the impossibility of directly translating the excellent performances of ultrafast laser glass welding to semiconductor welding, we propose in this work a disruption in the approach and the use of the long pulse regime. This is inspired by the stealth dicing technology, a major successful application of sub-surface modifications in semiconductors by nanosecond lasers. To demonstrate the feasibility and reveal the critical parameters for laser welding of Si, we irradiate in this work Si-Si interfaces using an erbium-doped fiber source emitting pulses of <5 ns duration at 1550-nm wavelength; that is in the full-transparency domain of Si. Capitalizing on the mentioned previous works demonstrating the possibility of local energy deposition inside Si with tight focusing conditions, A major conclusion from these first observations is the imperative requirement of a nearly perfect optical contact to tentatively achieve welding of semiconductors or other high index materials. Obviously, it is a nontrivial problem that scales with the required contact area. For the following investigations we rely on high-grade polished wafers of typically 15×18 mm 2 surface-area and identical preparation procedures are systematically repeated including cleaning steps and the application of a mechanical clamping pressure on the contacting samples (see details in Section 4). As we will see later on, despite this procedure, slight local variations of the interface gap remain, as observed indirectly through the beam processing capability. However, these non-uniformities have been substantially diminished after carefully elaborated tests and sample preparation optimizations. In this report concentrating on Si and GaAs, these technical developments have been crucial for reproducible results and reliable statistical analyses of welding performances. As a next step towards welding, we produce continuous line-shaped modifications with repeated pulses employing the same irradiation conditions (0.45 NA, 11 J, 1 kHz). As for the above z-scanning approach with static irradiations and lateral IR imaging, we test the response to different focal shifts with respect to the interface. Each line is 100 m long and is obtained after a relative motion of the beam parallel to the interface plane at a speed of 2 m s -1 , corresponding to ~7500 applied pulses according to the 1 kHz repetition rate of our laser and ~15 m modification size as estimated from Figure Material transfer between samples becomes evident when we analyze the surface topography with the corresponding confocal microscopy images shown in Figure For further optimizing the irradiation conditions and perform measurements on the highest achievable bond strengths in our configuration, we investigated the influence of the number of applied pulses. For that, we produced 200 m lines at different scan speeds (from 1 m s -1 to 5 mm s -1 ) with the same irradiation conditions as before (0.45 NA, 11 J, 1 kHz). A representative selection of the optical images of the bottom wafer lines is shown in Figure Repeating the experiments on four Si-Si samples, we conclude on a shear tensile strength of 32±10 MPa before weld fracture. This value is obtained by calculating the ratio between the measured force and the apparently welded area which is a function of contact imperfections on the different samples but can be determined by microcopy after the wafers are separated (see Section 4). This measurement becomes the first evidence of Si laser welding obtaining an excellent bonding strength in comparison to alternative non-laser bonding techniques (including adhesive or molecular wafer bonding). For an even more general demonstration, we repeat the studies with through-GaAs configurations. GaAs samples are then placed on top of both Si and GaAs and pre-optimization studies similar to the previous cases are conducted. The optical microcopy images obtained to determine the best processing conditions are shown in Supporting Information. In this case, an important change is to decrease the pulse energy down to 1.4 J to achieve localized energy deposition and well-defined internal modifications. At the maximum laser energy used for through-Si processing (described above), the higher propagation nonlinearities in GaAs, including nonlinear absorption, are actually developing far prior to focus preventing enough energy delivery near focus to achieve modifications. Comparing the obtained values of shear joining strengths in Figure While this was obviously out of scope for the present paper aiming at demonstrating the general feasibility of semiconductor laser welding, it supports a vision for possible process improvements. This work proves the feasibility of laser welding of semiconductors using a very compact nanosecond laser technology and relatively loose focusing. In that regard, it must introduce a solution with great application potential. To our knowledge, it provides not only the first demonstration of laser welding for similar semiconductors but also dissimilar ones (Si and GaAs). The achieved bonding strengths in all configurations are on the order of tens of MPa, similar to those obtained by wafer bonding techniques and ultrafast laser welding of transparent dielectrics, a technique inapplicable for semiconductors with conventional laser processing configuration. In the context of these comparisons, the obtained results lead to unprecedented process efficiency. To illustrate this aspect, we realized that a weld of only few millimeters with the reported strengths must allow hanging from it the laser equipment that we employ to achieve welding. For this final evidence of performance shown in Figure Based on our demonstration, we anticipate various optimizations will derive rapidly depending on targeted applications. For instance, using high-powered industrial sources, the process will be easily scaled up for increased process efficiency. We extrapolate directly from our methods that scan speeds of several m s -1 should be accessible with MHz repetition rates and/or milli-Joule energy levels. All in all, we highly expect that the identified nanosecond laser solution for micro-welding of similar and dissimilar semiconductors opens the door for new high-value manufacturing practices in the semiconductor industry. Laser system: The laser experiments are carried out using an erbium-doped fiber laser source (MWTech, PF1550) delivering <5 ns (FWHM) pulses at 1-kHz repetition rate and 1550-nm central wavelength. The housing of the small footprint laser head can be seen in Figure After the laser, a telescope (focal length of 100 and 200 mm) is used to expand the beam and minimize the residual beam divergence from the fixed-focus commercial collimator (Thorlabs KAD12NT) installed at the laser fiber output. To control the delivered pulse energy, a half-wave plate and a polarizer combination is used in the beam path before the focusing optics. Accounting for the transmission of all optical elements in the beam path the maximum delivered energy with focused beam is ~11 J per pulse on target as measured by employing a thermopilebased laser power sensor (Ophir, 3A-P-V1). Samples and assemblies for welding: We employ two different semiconductors, Si and GaAs. Si samples are pieces of 15×18 mm 2 which are individually cut from 4-inch wafers of 1-mm thickness (Siltronix, orientation (100)+/-0.5°, FZ growth method, intrinsic, resistivity >900 Ω•cm,). For the GaAs sample same-size pieces are cut from 4-inch diameter wafers of 600-m thickness (Neyco, orientation (100)+/-0.3°, VGF growth method, intrinsic). All initial wafers are double-side polished ensuring a surface roughness <1 nm (RMS). The prepared samples are thoroughly cleaned to remove any organic material by wiping it with optical paper soaked in acetone and later rinsed with dry air. To determine appropriate cleaning procedure, we initially cleaned the wafers in an ultrasound bath and atmospheric pressure plasma (ULS Omega, AcXys Technologies) but we observed no difference in the final optical contact quality so we later omitted these steps. Finally, the samples are stacked on a custom holder with supporting screws which are tightened to ensure a uniform clamping force during processing and improve the wafer contact at the interface. Welding experiments: During the laser-semiconductor interaction experiments, the holder is mounted on motorized stages allowing fine three-dimensional positioning of the sample interface with respect to the beam focus. Absolute repositioning of the focusing depth is guaranteed by an in situ microscopy arrangement taking the observation of the front surface as a reference. For focusing the beam on the interface below the surface, we employ IR microscope objectives equipped with a correction collar for spherical aberration pre-compensation (LCPLN-IR, Olympus). Different NA of 0.85, 0.65, and 0.45 were originally tested, all permitting localized internal modifications near interface with our laser. Considering that long working distance and Rayleigh length are beneficial to avoid positioning complications, we have decided to concentrated the investigations on the 0.45 NA case for the feasibility demonstrations targeted in this work. Analyses of the welds: For internal inspections of the welds, we use a custom IR transmission microscopy arrangement consisting of an IR InGaAs array (Raptor, OWLSWIR 640), a tube lens, and long working distance microscope objectives (Mitutoyo Plan Apo NIR series). For non-coherent uniform illumination, we use a quartz-tungsten halogen lamp. The same IR imaging system is used for lateral and top view imaging of the modifications created at the interfaces between stacked semiconductors. After the separation of samples, the top and bottom samples are also inspected by visible light reflection microcopy (Nikon Lv-UEPI-N) so that we can differentiate the effects on surfaces separated from internal modifications. Additionally, to evidence material transfer between samples, confocal microscopy (Leica, DCM 3D) is used for surface profilometry with nanometric longitudinal resolution. A commercial software (Leica, LeicaMap) is used for the image data analyses. The welding strengths are measured using a commercial mechanical force tester (LF-Plus Lloyd Instruments). The system is equipped with a loadcell (Lloyd Instruments, XLC Series) appropriate for load measurements up to 10 N. The measurement procedure relies on a shear force increasing at a linear rate of 0.05 mm min -1 until the stack of semiconductor samples disjoins. The shear joining strength is obtained by calculating the ratio between the required force for sample separation and the welded area evaluated by optical microscopy of the surfaces after sample separation. While we based our shear strength measurements on the continuous highly-contrasted modifications observed by optical microcopy (see Figure 