Brillouin oscillation appears in picosecond ultrasonics for a transparent specimen because of backward light scattering by moving strain pulse. Its amplitude is comparable with those of other responses, such as pulse-echo signals and through-thickness resonance, obscuring these non-Brillouin-oscillation responses. We here find that Brillouin oscillation can be suppressed in a transparent free-standing film by coating both sides with metallic thin film of appropriate thickness and that this peculiar behavior is caused by strain pulses generated on both sides with a slight phase difference. This phenomenon allowed us to fabricate a Brillouin-oscillation-free diamond free-standing film, which showed high capability for sensor applications. Picosecond ultrasound For an opaque free-standing thin film, the ultrasonic pulse generated near the surface causes the pulse-echo signals or the through-thickness resonance. However, the response from a transparent free-standing thin film becomes more complicated because of the Brillouin oscillation, We used a typical picosecond ultrasound method in this study. A Ti-sapphire pulse laser with 140 fs duration and 80 MHz repetition rate was used. The wavelengths of pump and probe lights were 800 and 400 nm, respectively. The details of our optics are shown elsewhere. Figure On the other hand, the signals from the free-standing diamond thin films are significantly different from that from the graphite (opaque) free standing film as shown in Fig. Here, we find an unusual phenomenon: The Brillouin oscillation in diamond is occasionally highly weakened (almost disappearing) after the first echo when the Pt thin film is deposited on both sides, as shown in Figs. 1(a) and lower data in Figs. In order to explain the suppression of the Brillouin oscillation in the diamond free-standing films, we calculate the reflectivity change numerically based on theories developed previously. where r 0 (t) and ∆r(t) denote the reflection coefficient from the thin film and its variation due to the photoelastic effect, respectively, and they are given by r 0 (t) = r 01 + r 10 e -2ikd(t) 1 + r 01 r 10 e -2ikd(t) , Here, r 01 and r 10 are the reflection coefficients from the vacuum to the thin film and from the thin film to the vacuum, respectively. k denotes the wavenumber of the probe light in the diamond film. d(t) denotes the total thickness of the thin film, which is time-dependent because it is varied by the strain pulse, η(z,t). g(z,t) indicates the sensitivity function, which takes the following form for a free-standing film: 16 where t 01 and t 10 are the transmission coefficients from the vacuum to the thin film and the reverse, respectively. p denotes the piezo-optic coefficient in the thin film. Note that r 0 (t) is time-dependent because the total thickness is varied by the strain pulse, indicating that the reflectivity change will be detected even without the photoelastic effect (p=0) because of the change in the optical path. The strain pulse generated by the pump light pulse is estimated by 5 where η 0 and ζ are the strain amplitude and the strain pulse width, respectively. We simply used the Pt thickness for ζ and assumed the generation of the strain pulse directly on the diamond thin film, and performed the numerical simulation without propagation in the Pt layer. Because the acoustic impedance of Pt is close to that of diamond (the acoustic transmittance of 80%), the ringing of the Pt film is insignificant if any. (Such a ringing of Pt film is not observed clearly in experiments.) We calculated the reflectivity change ∆R(t) using the following procedure. First, the strain pulse with frequencydependent (wavenumber-dependent) attenuation at a propagation distance ξ (= vt) was obtained by reducing the amplitude of the Fourier component using the corresponding attenuation value determined by exp(-αξ ) and reconstructing the strain pulse using the inverse Fourier transform. α indicates the attenuation coefficient, and we assume that it is proportional to the square of the frequency because of the anharmonicity process 30 where β denotes the coefficient. Second, the total thickness d(t) was calculated by integrating the strain. Third, the reflectivity change was calculated by equations ( Concerning the sudden reduction of the Brillouinoscillation amplitude after the first echo observed for diamond free-standing thin films, we first considered the effect of surface roughness. Because the Brillouin-oscillation frequency in diamond is very high (215 GHz), a scattering loss would be caused at the reflection because the amplitude loss due to surface roughness is proportional to the square of the frequency, 32 so that the high-frequency component would be diminished at each reflection. However, the rms surface roughness on our diamond specimens is about 1 nm both before and after the Pt-film deposition, which was confirmed by an AFM measurement, and this value is much smaller than the ultrasound wavelength (81 nm), so we do not expect sig- nificant amplitude loss at the reflection. Moreover, the reduction of the Brillouin-oscillation amplitude was observed when the Pt film was additionally deposited on the back side (lower data in Figs. We thus assume that the extra strain pulse is generated at the back interface. We performed the numerical simulation of the reflectivity change caused by propagations of the two strain pulses. Because of the difference in the generation point, there will be a phase difference between the two strain pulses: The pump light pulse is expected to generate the strain pulses near the outer surface of the top Pt film and near the inner surface of the bottom Pt film, simultaneously. The light-pulse power for the latter should be lower than that for the former. However, the inner surface of the bottom Pt film is not a free end unlike the outer surface of the upper Pt film, and the thermal stress there will be enhanced because of the restriction of deformation. We then simply assumed the same strain amplitude for these two strain pulses based on these two opposite contributions. The time difference between them (∆t) may correspond to the propagation time of the strain generated at the upper surface of the Pt layer, which is estimated to be 2.4 ps with the wave speed of 4.2 nm/ps in Pt. Although it is not straightforward to take the fast diffusion of the hot electrons Figure We investigate the effect of the time difference and the film thickness on the reduction of the Brillouin-oscillation amplitude. Figure We have thus developed a free-standing diamond film with the Pt thin film on both sides, where Brillouin oscillation is sufficiently suppressed, and applied it to a biosensor to demonstrate the importance of this phenomenon. We immo- bilized protein A molecules on both surfaces using a selfassembled monolayer (SAM) for capturing immunoglobulin G (IgG) relying on the specific binding reaction between protein A and IgG (Fig. In conclusion, we performed the picosecond ultrasound measurement for free-standing diamond thin films and observed the significant reduction of the Brillouin-oscillation amplitude when the Pt thin film is deposited on both surfaces. This behavior was reproduced by the numerical calculation by considering the generation of the additional strain pulse at the bottom interface with a time difference and by introducing attenuation. It is also found that this phenomenon highly depends on the time delay and the diamond-film thickness. We eventually fabricated a diamond free-standing thin-film resonator that generates almost no Brillouin oscillations, and demonstrated the importance of this phenomenon by applying it to a mass-sensitive biosensor. See supplementary material for an experiment for the graphite specimen (Fig. 