Magnetic imaging with nitrogen-vacancy centers in diamond, also known as quantum diamond microscopy, has emerged as a useful technique for the spatial mapping of charge currents in solidstate devices. In this work, we investigate an application to photovoltaic (PV) devices, where the currents are induced by light. We develop a widefield nitrogen-vacancy microscope that allows independent stimulus and measurement of the PV device, and test our system on a range of prototype crystalline silicon PV devices. We first demonstrate micrometer-scale vector magnetic field imaging of custom PV devices illuminated by a focused laser spot, revealing the internal current paths in both short-circuit and open-circuit conditions. We then demonstrate time-resolved imaging of photocurrents in an interdigitated back-contact solar cell, detecting current build-up and subsequent decay near the illumination point with microsecond resolution. This work presents a versatile and accessible analysis platform that may find distinct application in research on emerging PV technologies. Continued progress in photovoltaics technology critically relies on the development of new techniques to characterize photovoltaic (PV) materials and devices A potentially more direct way to gain insight into localized sources of inefficiencies or to measure device properties is by directly resolving the spatial distribution of * jean-philippe.tetienne@rmit.edu.au charge flow (current) within the device. Such a mapping technique can be achieved, at least partially, using magnetic current imaging (MCI) In this work, we employ a recently developed technology, quantum diamond microscopy (QDM), as an alternative method for realizing MCI of PV devices. QDM exploits an array of optically addressable quantum sensors (nitrogen-vacancy centers) in diamond to generate a magnetic field image Importantly, the diamond sensor is transparent, allowing illumination on the same surface of the cell as the mapping, without shading. QDM therefore appears promising as a tool for minimally-invasive quantitative characterization of PV devices at the micrometer scale, for instance to aid the analysis of recombination processes at defects or near contacts. QDM has previously been applied to MCI in the context of (non-photoactive) solid-state devices, including small-scale (microns to tens of microns in size) graphene The principle of the experiment is depicted schematically in Fig. The devices probed in this work are crystalline silicon (c-Si) solar cells in which both contacts are placed on the rear of the cell [top side in Fig. Figure One challenge of applying QDM to interrogate a PV device is that the NV laser may induce additional photocurrents and therefore perturb the device under study. One solution is to add a metal coating to the diamond so as to obstruct the NV laser The protocol we implement is depicted in Fig. The photocurrent measured externally with an oscilloscope during the pulse sequence is shown in Fig. We note that the MW encoding pulse is short (≈ 300 ns) compared to the dynamics of the current, which allows us to perform stroboscopic imaging. We initially place the MW pulse at the end of the IR pulse where the photocurrent is largest as shown in Fig. The photocurrent sensing protocol was first employed on a simple custom device with an interlocking trident geometry, shown in Fig. The Ørsted magnetic field generated by the current J (r) is described by the Biot-Savart law where μ 0 is the vacuum permeability and the integral is over all space. In general, there is no unique solution for J (r) when the current extends over a three-dimensional (3D) volume, as is the case here (the light penetrates some depth into the absorber, and the current paths extend throughout the entire thickness). Nevertheless under appropriate assumptions it is possible to extract useful information using knowledge of the source or sample geometry If the current is confined to a 2D plane, the current density is reduced to J 2D = [J x (x, y), J y (x, y), 0] and we can invert Eq. 1 in Fourier space (taking the unitary, -i convention) Here J (k x , k y ) is the Fourier-space (2D) current density, B(k x , k y ) is the Fourier-space magnetic field at the NV plane, k x and k y are the in-plane angular wavenumbers with k = k 2 x + k 2 y , and α = 2e k∆ /μ 0 for a samplesensor offset distance of ∆. This method utilizes the vector capability of our ensemble measurement to employ the in-plane field only, improving accuracy Figure We now investigate the presence of internal current paths under open-circuit conditions. Figure To simplify analysis and verify the existence of these internal current loops we now image isolated solo contacts. In Fig. These open-circuit experiments illustrate a useful aspect of MCI, which can detect internal current loops without the need for an external circuit. Importantly, these internal loops correspond to shunt resistances which, in normal solar cell operation, cause a loss of energy conversion efficiency. A tool allowing direct observation of these internal loops may therefore aid research into PV materials and cell designs. Advancing from test devices, we now analyze a largerscale (2×2 cm 2 ) c-Si solar cell with high efficiency (24.4% measured for a similar device As previously mentioned, the strobosocopic nature of the measurement protocol allows for temporal information to be extracted by changing the position of the MW pulse relative to photoexcitation. To illustrate this capability, we display images taken at different times [Fig. In this report we have demonstrated magnetic current imaging of crystalline silicon photovoltaic cells with a quantum diamond microscope. Compared to other methods to realize MCI, this platform offers generally superior field sensitivity for imaging at micrometer scales For c-Si PV cells as studied in this work, where the current is dispersed throughout a thick absorber (100s of μm, commensurate with the carrier diffusion length), analysis of the magnetic field data remains a challenge as there is no unique solution for the current density. Nevertheless, even a simple reconstruction algorithm which assumes a planar current source, as employed here, is successful at revealing key features of the device's behavior, such as the internal closed current paths associated with shunt resistances observed in our experiments. This type of analysis may be useful, for example, to investigate shunt pathways in cell architectures with overlapping contact regions In the PV research space, a promising application of QDM is as a precision analysis tool for the imaging of thin-film devices, such as perovskite solar cells. Indeed, for such devices the absorber layer is typically less than a micrometer in thickness, such that 2D reconstruction algorithms may be employed while introducing little error. Perovskites bring additional technical challenges for QDM, such as overlap between the NV and perovskite absorption spectra, but the latter can be circumvented by temporal (via an appropriate pulse sequence) or spatial separation (by shielding the NV laser and using front illumination). However, thin-film PV devices generally feature much shorter diffusion lengths (≈ 1 μm) compared to c-Si, as well as geometrically complex electrode structures A few principal use cases of our technique present themselves. First is the imaging of local excitation phenomena (such as the internal currents presented here) that are difficult to simulate, with an eye to improving theoretical models. The second opportunity comprises measurement without optical excitation alongside application of a voltage across specific contacts, and then comparison of the image to a diode model for the extraction of device parameters NV orientation ( 111 ; Z is the symmetry axis), S = (S X , S Y , S Z ) are the spin-1 operators, D ≈ 2.870 GHz is the temperature-dependent zero-field splitting, and γ NV = 28.033(3) GHz/T is the gyromagnetic ratio of the defect. The total magnetic field B tot at the NVs is calculated by minimizing the RMS error between the fit frequencies f i and those calculated theoretically from the Hamiltonian H. Any background fields, for example that from the bias magnet, are normalized via a reference measurement (e.g. the same experiment without PV laser) B ref , which is then subtracted to give B = B tot -B ref . 