In this paper, a differential micro-opto-electro-mechanical system (MOEMS) accelerometer based on the Fabry-Pérot (FP) microcavities is presented. The optical system of the device consists of two FP cavities and the mechanical system is composed of a proof mass that is suspended by four springs. The applied acceleration tends to move the PM from its resting position. This mechanical displacement can be measured by the FP interferometer formed between the proof mass crosssection and the optical fiber end-face. The proposed sensor is fabricated on a silicon-on-insulator wafer using the bulk micromachining method. The results of the sensor characterization show that the accelerometer has a linear response in the range of ±1g. Also, the optical sensitivity and resolution of the sensor in the static characterization are 6.52 nm/g and 153 μg. The sensor sensitivity in the power measurement is 49.6 mV/g and its resonant frequency is at 1372 Hz. Using the differential measurement method increases the sensitivity of the accelerometer. Based on the experimental data, the optical sensitivity in static mode is two times as high as that of a similar MOEMS accelerometer with one FP cavity. Mechanical Systems (MEMS) accelerometers play an essential role in different applications such as vibration monitoring, inertial navigation, and consumer electronics due to their high sensitivity, small size, lightweight, and easy integration [1]- Mojtaba Rahimi, Mohammad Malekmohammad*, Majid Taghavi, Mohammad Noori and Gholam Mohammad Parsanasab M design and simulation of the optical, mechanical, and electrical parts of the sensor are described. In section 3, the fabrication process as well as the results of the sensor characterization in both open-loop and closed-loop modes are presented. Finally, the conclusions are given in section 4. The working principle of the MOEMS accelerometer is based on the optical measurement of the mechanical displacement caused by acceleration. Fig. The optical spectrum shift can be measured using two different approaches: spectral monitoring and intensity monitoring. In the spectral method, optical spectrum shift is measured using a spectrum analyzer. In the intensity monitoring method, the intensity variation of a specific wavelength is measured using a photodiode. Due to the limited sampling rate of the optical spectrum analyzers, the first method cannot provide a high dynamic response. Therefore, the intensity monitoring method is more practical in most applications. Due to the repetitive pattern of the FP optical spectrum, the maximum detectable spectrum shift is limited to the free spectral range (FSR). FSR is the spectral range between two consecutive maximum or minimum of the FP optical spectrum. The optical sensitivity of the MOEMS accelerometer is defined as the ratio of optical spectrum shifts to the applied acceleration (Δλ/Δa). For a specific measurement range (Δa), the maximum achievable sensitivity of the sensor is limited by the FSR of the FP spectrum. To overcome this limitation and achieve higher sensitivity, differential measurement method based on two FP cavities is proposed here. As shown in Fig. The optical sensing system of the MOEMS accelerometer consists of two FP cavities located on the opposite sides of the PM (C1 and C2). Each FP cavity is formed between the crosssection of the PM and the end of a cleaved single-mode optical fiber. The FP cavities are located along the sensing axis (Yaxis) and at the center of the PM length. The PM displacement changes the length of the FP cavities. When the PM displacement is the +Y direction the length of C2 is decreasing, while the length of C1 is increasing by the same value and vice versa. Hence, two cavities have an equal optical spectrum shift while in the opposite direction. The finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) method is used to simulate the light propagation in the FP cavities. The characteristics of the FP cavities and parameters used in the optical simulation are mentioned in Table The mechanical structure of the device consists of a PM which is suspended by four L-shaped springs. The PM can move freely along the sensing axis, and its movement is restricted to other orthogonal axes to minimize the cross-axis sensitivity. Therefore, the mechanical structure can be considered as a one-dimensional mass-spring system, and its static response is described by the following equation The sensor is fabricated on a silicon-on-insulator (SOI) wafer by bulk micromachining method. The fabrication process flow is shown in Fig. To determine the sensitivity of the sensor, the fabricated MOEMS accelerometer is placed on top of a turning table. The schematic of the experimental setup is shown in Fig. The sensor is placed on top of a turning table. By rotting the turning table with a stepper motor, a static acceleration is applied to the sensor. The amplitude of the applied acceleration is a function of θ as shown in Fig. To investigate the dynamic response of the sensor, a shaker that can apply horizontally sinusoidal acceleration is used instead of the turning table in the previous test. The experiment setup is shown in Fig. For the dynamic characterization of the sensor, the shaker applies the sinusoidal acceleration with the amplitude of 0.25g to 1g and the frequency of 150 Hz. As shown in the Fig. The frequency response of the sensor is investigated by sweeping the frequency of the shaker in the range of 500 Hz to 1700 Hz. The response of the sensor is shown in Fig. To compare the performance of the presented MOEMS accelerometer with those of other sensors in this field, the main characteristics of the sensor and three recent accelerometers are summarized in Table In this paper, the design and fabrication of a MOEMS accelerometer based on FP micro-cavities was reported. The sensor consisted of a PM suspended by four springs. The displacement of the PM was measured by two FP microcavities. The read-out system of the MOEMS accelerometer was based on differential measuring the output of the two optical signals. This approach could overcome the limitation to achieving high sensitivity in the FP-based MOEMS accelerometers and provide the optical sensitivity two times as high as the same MOEMS accelerometer with one FP cavity. The sensor was fabricated by a straightforward bulk micromachining method. The dimensions of the fabricated MOEMS accelerometer were in the millimeter scale and its structure was completely integrated. The fabricated device is characterized in the range of ±1 g. According to experimental data, the sensor provided the optical sensitivity of 6.52 nm/g in the static mode and the sensitivity of 49.6 mV/g in the dynamic characterization. The resonant frequency of the sensor was 1372 Hz in the range of ±1g.