We discuss standard and tighter upper bounds on the critical temperature Tc of two-dimensional superconductors and superfluids versus particle density n or filling factor ν, under the assumption that the transition from the normal to the superconducting (superfluid) phase is governed by the Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless (BKT) mechanism of vortex-antivortex binding and a direct relation between the superfluid density tensor and Tc exists. The standard critical temperature upper bound T up1 c is obtained from the Glover-Ferrell-Tinkham sum rule for the optical conductivity, which constrains the superfluid density tensor components. However, we show that T up1 c is only useful in the limit of low particle/carrier density, where it may be close to the critical temperature supremum T sup c . For intermediate and high particle/carrier densities, T up1 c is far beyond T sup c for any given interaction strength. We demonstrate that it is imperative to consider at least the full effect of phase fluctuations of the order parameter for superconductivity (superfluidity) to establish tighter bounds over a wide range of densities. Using the renormalization group, we obtain the critical temperature supremum for phase fluctuations T θ c and show that it is a much tighter upper bound to T sup c than T up1 c for all particle/carrier densities. We conclude by indicating that if the T θ c is exceeded in experiments involving single band systems, then a non-BKT mechanism must be invoked. Several recent experiments have studied the critical temperature T c of two-dimensional (2D) superconductors as a function of carrier density n or filling factor ν for various materials, including doubleand triple-layered twisted graphene The question of the existence of an upper bound for T c in superconductors and superfluids is of fundamental importance Here, we study two examples where tighter upper bounds on T c can be established for one-band 2D systems: the continuum limit with parabolic dispersion, and the square lattice case with cosinusoidal dispersion, both with spatially dependent but non-retarded interactions. We show that the standard upper bound obtained via the bare superfluid density ρ s To construct tighter upper bounds on T c , we discuss 2D continuum and lattice Hamiltonians. In the continuum, we start from the Hamiltonian density H(r) = H K (r) + H I (r), for a single band system in units where = k B = 1. The kinetic energy density is H K (r) = s ψ † s (r) -∇ 2 2m ψ s (r), and the interaction energy density is The magnitude of the s-wave attractive interaction V s has units of energy, and the dimensionless function g(|rr ′ |/R) has spatial range R. Fermions with spin projection s at position r are represented by the the field operator ψ † s (r). In the square lattice, we start from an extended Fermi-Hubbard , where nis = ψ † is ψ js is the fermion number operator at site i with spin s. The nearest neighbor hopping is t, the local (on-site) interaction is U , and the interaction between fermions in sites i and j is V ij . Hamiltonians in Momentum Space: The Hamiltonians in momentum space, for both continuum and lattice, are where b kq = ψ -k+q/2,↓ ψ k+q/2,↑ is the pairing operator, ε k = k 2 /2m for the continuum, and for the square lattice. The summation over k and k ′ represent integrals in the continuum and discrete sums in the lattice. The momentumspace interaction V kk ′ is the double Fourier transform of the real space interactions. In the examples discussed below, we focus on s-wave pairing, and thus, we will use an expansion of the momentum space interaction V kk ′ in terms of its continuum or lattice angular momentum In the continuum, for an attractive well with depth V s and radius R, the symmetry factor can be approximated by Γ plays the role of the interaction range in momentum space Effective Action: We introduce the chemical potential μ and the order parameter for superfluidity ∆ in terms of its modulus |∆| and phase θ. The effective action is S eff = S sp (|∆|) + S ph (|∆|, θ). The first contribution to S eff is the saddle-point action is the energy of quasiparticles with ξ k = ε k -μ, and ∆ k = ∆Γ s (k) is the order parameter function for s-wave pairing. The second contribution represents the phase-only fluctuation action in the low frequency and long wavelength limit. Here, the integrals run over position and imaginary time r = (r, τ ), with dr ≡ 1/T 0 dτ d 2 r. In Eq. ( is the superfluid density tensor, where ∂ i is the partial derivative with respect to momentum k i with i = {x, y}. Here, )] is the momentum distribution per spin state, and for the square lattice. The second term in Eq. ( with κ s = κ/4, where κ = ∂n/∂μ| T,V is related to the thermodynamic compressibility K = κ/n 2 . The phase of the order parameter can be separated as θ(r, τ ) = θ c (r, τ ) + θ v (r), where the τ -dependent (quantum) term θ c (r, τ ) is due to collective modes (longitudinal velocities), and the τ -independent (classical) term θ v (r) is due to vortices (transverse velocities). This leads to the action S ph = S c + S v , since the longitudinal and transverse velocities are orthogonal. The collective mode action is The vortex contribution arises from the transverse velocity v t = ∇θ v (r), where ∇ • v t (r) = 0, by using the relation ∇ × v t (r) = 2πẑn v (r) where n v (r) = i n i δ(rr i ), is the vortex density and n i = ±1 is the vortex topological charge (vorticity) at r i . Using these relations, we write where E c is the vortex core energy, and G(r ir j ) is the interaction potential between the topological charges n i and n j satisfiying Poisson's equation Critical Temperature: The self-consistency relations for |∆| and μ for a given temperature T are obtained from effective action S eff = S sp + S ph as follows. The order parameter equation is obtained through the stationarity condition δS sp /δ∆ * = 0, leading to To relate μ and n = N/L 2 , where N is the total number of particles per band and L 2 is the area of the sample, we use the thermodynamic relation n = -∂ Ω/∂μ| T,V , with Ω = Ω/L 2 , where Ω is the thermodynamic potential The critical temperature, within the BKT mechanism, is given by the Nelson-Kosterlitz as T → T θ c from below, where is the renormalized superfluid density. Here, n v (q) is the Fourier transform of vortex density n v (r). From Eq. ( that is, (2/πK c ) ≤ 1 for any value of the vortex core energy E c . Therefore, ρ R s is always less or equal to ρ s , that is, ρ R s ≤ ρ s . The equality between ρ R s and ρ s occurs only when is always upper-bounded by the phase fluctuation supremum T θ c , that is, T sup c ≤ T θ c , it is clear that a lower upper bound is reached using ρ R s rather than ρ s . Physically, T θ c is a better upper bound to T sup c than T ub0 c = πρ s (T = 0)/2 as suggested for superconductors with small superfluid density x ξ k is the first term of Eq. ( Conclusions: We investigated tighter upper bounds on the critical temperature of two-dimensional (2D) superconductors and superfluids with a single parabolic (cosinusoidal) band in the continum (square lattice). Using the renormalization group, we obtained the phase fluctuation supremum critical temperature T θ c as the best upper bound for the supremum T sup c within the Berezinksii-Kosterlitz-Thouless (BKT) vortex-antivortex binding mechanism. We showed that standard upper bounds which are independent of interactions and order parameter symmetry are only useful at extremely low carrier density and pratically useless anywhere else. Our results have important implications on measurements of T c for one band superconductors/superfluids with nonretarded interactions, showing that any measurements that exceed T θ c must arise from a non-BKT mechanism. We thank the National Key R&D Program of China (Grant 2018YFA0306501), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grants 11522436 & 11774425), the Beijing Natural Science Foundation (Grant Z180013), and the Research Funds of Renmin University of China (Grants 16XNLQ03 &18XNLQ15) for financial support.