Graphene's near-field radiative heat transfer is determined from its electrical conductivity, which is commonly modeled using the local (wavevector independent) Kubo and Drude formulas. In this letter, we analyze the non-locality of the graphene electrical conductivity using the Lindhard model combined with the Mermin relaxation time approximation. We also study how the variation of the electrical conductivity with the wavevector affects near-field radiative conductance between two graphene sheets separated by a vacuum gap. It is shown that the variation of the electrical conductivity with the wavevector, k ρ , is appreciable for k ρ s greater than 100k 0 , where k 0 is the magnitude of the wavevector in the free space. The Kubo model is obtained by assuming k ρ → 0, and thus is not valid for k ρ > 100k 0 . The Kubo electrical conductivity provides an accurate estimation of the spectral radiative conductance between two graphene sheets except for around the surface-plasmon-polariton frequency of graphene and at separation gaps smaller than 20 nm where there is a non-negligible contribution from electromagnetic modes with k ρ > 100k 0 to the radiative conductance. The Drude formula proves to be inaccurate for modeling the electrical conductivity and radiative conductance of graphene except for at temperatures much below the Fermi temperature and frequencies much smaller than , where μ c and ħ are the chemical potential and reduced Planck's constant, respectively. It is also shown that the electronic scattering 2 processes should be considered in the Lindhard model properly, such that the local electron number is conserved. A simple substitution of ω by ω + iγ (ω, i, and γ being the angular frequency, imaginary unit, and scattering rate, respectively) in the collision-less Lindhard model does not satisfy the conservation of the local electron number and results in significant errors in computing the electrical conductivity and radiative conductance of graphene. Radiative heat transfer is in the near-field regime when the separation distance of the heat exchanging media is comparable to or less than the wavelength of thermal radiation. Otherwise, radiative heat transfer is said to be in the far-field regime. Near-field radiative heat transfer (NFRHT) exceeds the far-field blackbody limit by several orders of magnitude due to an extraneous contribution from evanescent waves that are confined in a distance approximately equal to the thermal wavelength from the emitter. When the heat exchanging media support surface modes such as surface phonon polaritons and surface plasmon polaritons (SPPs), NFRHT can become quasi-monochromatic. Near-field radiative heat transfer is very promising for applications such as thermophotovoltaic conversion of thermal to electrical energy Most of the theoretical studies on graphene's NFRHT are based on using the local Kubo where μ c and ħ are the chemical potential and reduced Planck's constant, respectively. It is also shown that except for around the SPP resonance frequency of graphene and at distances smaller than ~20 nm, where there is a non-negligible contribution from modes with k ρ > 100k 0 to NFRHT, the radiative conductance between two graphene sheets obtained using the local Kubo formula agrees well with the one found from the non-local Lindhard-Mermin model. The problem under consideration is schematically shown in Fig. The total (integrated over frequency) radiative conductance, G tot , is defined as G tot = lim δT→0 q tot δT , where q tot is the total radiative heat flux between the two graphene sheets. The total radiative conductance is obtained by integrating the spectral (frequency dependent) radiative conductance, G ω , over frequency as: where ω is the angular frequency. The spectral radiative conductance is found by integrating the spectral radiative conductance per unit parallel component of the wavevector, G ω,k ρ , over the parallel component of the wavevector, i.e., The term G ω,k ρ in Eq. 2 is found using the framework of fluctuational electrodynamics as where Θ(ω, T) = ħω e ħω/k B T -1 is the mean energy of an electromagnetic state (k B is the Boltzmann constants), ζ refers to the polarization state which can be transverse electric (TE) or transverse magnetic (TM), r ζ and t ζ are the reflection and transmission coefficients at the interface of graphene and vacuum for polarization ζ, respectively, and k 0z = k 0z ′ + ik 0z " is the z-component (as shown in Fig. where ε 0 and μ 0 are the permittivity and permeability of the vacuum, respectively, and σ is the electrical conductivity of graphene. Equations 4a-4d are obtained by assuming an isotropic electrical conductivity for graphene, which is valid except for electromagnetic modes with k ρ ≫ 300k 0 The electrical conductivity of graphene is the key parameter for determining its NFRHT. Three electrical conductivity models, namely, Drude, Kubo, and Lindhard models, have been used for studying NFRHT in graphene-based materials. In this section, we briefly discuss these three models. An extensive review of various electrical conductivity models for graphene can be found in Ref. The local Kubo model is obtained using the linear response theory and the Kubo formula under the assumptions that k ρ → 0, ω ≫ k ρ υ F , and ω ≫ γ, where υ F is the Fermi velocity and γ is a phenomenological parameter called the scattering rate accounting for the electronic scattering processes where T is the temperature, and while In Eqs. 5b and 5c, i is the imaginary unit, and σ 0 and G are defined as: where e is the electron charge. The scattering rate is the inverse of the relaxation time, i.e., γ = τ -1 , where τ is the relaxation time. The relaxation time linearly varies with the chemical potential as In Eq. 6, m is the carrier mobility with a value of 1000-230000 cm 2 /Vs depending on the method used for fabricating graphene. In this study, υ F = 9.5×10 5 m/s At low frequencies (i.e., when ω ≪ ), the second term in the intraband electrical conductivity is also negligible. In this case, the Kubo electrical conductivity is simplified to the following equation which is referred to as the Drude model The Lindhard electrical conductivity of graphene is a non-local model which follows from a quantum mechanical description of the material using the self-consistent linear response theory The polarizability of graphene in the collision-less Lindhard model is given by where η is a small number accounting for the Landau damping As indicated by Eq. 9d, θ is the angle between vectors q and q + k ρ . It is shown that the Lindhard model can reproduce the polarizability of graphene found from ab initio calculations for frequencies below 4.5×10 15 rad/s (or wavelengths above 0.42 μm) where Π (k ρ , ω + iγ, T, μ c ) is given by Eq. 9a. A comparison of the discussed electrical conductivity models is presented in Section IV. The real part and the absolute value of the imaginary part of graphene's electrical conductivity as predicted using the Lindhard-Mermin (Eqs. 9 and 10), Lindhard (Eq. 9), Drude (Eq. 7), and Kubo (Eq. 5) models are shown in Fig. In the Kubo electrical conductivity, it is assumed that k ρ → 0, ω ≫ k ρ v F , and ω ≫ γ. Considering that v F ≈ c 0 300 (c 0 being the speed of light in vacuum) To study the effect of the variation of σ with k ρ on NFRHT, the spectral radiative conductance between two graphene sheets is calculated using the discussed electrical conductivity models. The radiative conductance at d = 50 nm is shown for Cases 1 to 3 in Figs. 4a to 4c, respectively, while Fig. The Kubo total radiative conductance is within ~ 5% of the one found from the Lindhard-Mermin model. Inversely, the total radiative conductances predicted using the Drude and Lindhard models are significantly different from the one found from the Lindhard-Mermin electrical conductivity. It is seen from Fig. This difference constantly decreases with increasing temperature such that the two models are different by only 1.3% at T = 1000 K. Figure As discussed before, the Kubo electrical conductivity cannot be used when k ρ > 100k 0 . Additionally, Fig. In summary, the Kubo formula can be used for modeling NFRHT with an acceptable accuracy except for at separation gaps smaller than ~20 nm and around the SPP resonance frequency. In this study, the difference between the total radiative conductance found using the Kubo formula and the one obtained using the Lindhard-Mermin electrical conductivity exceeded 20% at gaps smaller than 20 nm. The peak spectral radiative conductance at the SPP resonance predicted using the Kubo formula was different from that of the Lindhard-Mermin model by up to 17%. At small separation gaps or around the SPP frequency of graphene, there is an appreciable contribution from electromagnetic modes with k ρ greater than 100k 0 for which the Kubo formula ceases to be valid. As the chemical potential, temperature, and separation distance of the graphene sheets increases, the contribution of large-k ρ modes to the NFRHT decreases and thus the accuracy of the Kubo formula for predicting the radiative conductance increases. It was also shown that, in contrast to previous findings 