Understanding the rich and competing electronic orders in cuprate superconductors may provide important insight into the mechanism of high-temperature superconductivity. Here, by measuring Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+x in the extremely underdoped regime, we obtain evidence for a distinct type of ordering, which manifests itself as resistance oscillations at low magnetic fields (≤10 T) and at temperatures around the superconducting transition. By tuning the doping level p continuously, we reveal that these low-field oscillations occur only when p<0.1. The oscillation amplitude increases with decreasing p but the oscillation period stays almost constant. We show that these low-field oscillations can be well described by assuming a periodic superconducting structure with a mesh size of about 50 nm. Such a charge order, which is distinctly different from the well-established charge density wave and pair density wave, seems to be an unexpected piece of the puzzle on the correlated physics in cuprates. A fundamental property of superconductivity is the fluxoid quantization, which can manifest itself in a superconducting hollow cylinder through a periodically modulated superconducting transition temperature (T c ) as a function of magnetic field-the socalled Little-Parks effect Characterization of lightly doped samples. We investigate transport properties of Bi-2212 over a wide doping range by further optimizing the technique we developed previously Magneto-resistance oscillations. On top of the increasing trend of the magnetoresistances, we observe regular dips, which occur repeatedly in multiple samples, including a one unit-cell (1-UC) thick Bi-2212 without lithium intercalation (Figs. We further show that the oscillations are of two-dimensional (2D) nature. Here, we measure sample S2 at a similar doping to S1-#5. We employ a setup where the sample can be rotated within an applied magnetic field. The measurement temperature is chosen such that the general behavior of the magneto-resistance is linear, in order to better appreciate the oscillating features. Figure In addition, samples S1 to S4 show multiple superconducting transitions, indicating possible inhomogeneity in doping. However, we observe pronounced resistance oscillations only in the extremely underdoped regime, in which the temperature dependent resistance shows predominantly a single transition. By contrast, in the gated state where the multi-step transition is most pronounced (gated state #1 to #3 of S1, for example), we observe no magneto-resistance oscillations. For sample S5 and S6 shown in the supplementary information (Supplementary Figure Overlapping data points at p=0.055, 0.064, 0.07 and 0.075 are slightly shifted horizontally for better presentation. In the low temperature regime where resistance oscillations occurred, the actual measurements were taken with denser sets of temperature points (with steps of ΔT = 0. Here data points marked as S1 and S4 are from the same flake but with two different pairs of contacts in two separate regions. S5 is a 1-UC Bi-2212 flake that is in the underdoped regime after exfoliation. Yellow shadow highlights the region where RO can be experimentally observed. decreasing doping as indicated by the increasing scales of the color bars. In Fig. First, we exclude quantum oscillations of the normal state as the origin for the observed oscillations. As alluded to before, the resistance oscillations only occur at magnetic fields below the phase boundary between the vortex solid and vortex liquid. These magnetic fields are far below the upper critical field, such that the contribution from the normal state can be neglected. Furthermore, gating our sample into the nonsuperconducting state (the left-most column of data points in Fig. Studying quantum oscillations in cuprates, instead, often requires the combination of ultrahigh-quality single crystals [typically YBa2Cu3O6+x (YBCO) or Tl2Ba2CuO6+x (TBCO)] and high magnetic field facilities. The necessity of a powerful magnet is not only because of large upper critical fields in cuprates. It also stems from the criterion for observing quantum oscillations Second, our results differ from the low-B oscillations of mesoscopic origin as reported previously. Table Apart from resistance oscillations, Nernst effect, which is particularly sensitive to vortex motions, revealed oscillations in Bi-2212 We now consider the relation between our results and the Little-Parks oscillations. Our results are reminiscent to the intriguing phenomenon recently observed in ionic liquid gated TiSe2 Apart from the oscillating period, we carry out a quantitative analysis of the oscillating amplitude. At each T and p, we extract ΔR from the difference between the neighboring local minimum and maximum in the resistance trace as a function of B, after subtracting the smoothed background. Figure In order to quantitatively describe the resistance oscillations, we have to take into account the vortex effect in a periodic superconducting array. In cuprate superconductors, vortices play a much important role than those in low temperature superconductors do Here R n is the normal state resistance, I 0 and I 1 are the zero-and first-order modified Bessel function of the first kind, respectively. The two energy quantities are: E 1 = Φ 0 2 /8πμ 0 Λ(T) ⋅ w/a and E v = Φ 0 2 /2πμ 0 Λ(T) ⋅ ln(2w/πξ(T)), where μ 0 is the vacuum permeability, w is the separation between the squares (inset of Fig. As shown in Fig. Our results indicate that there exists a distinct phase in the lightly doped cuprate superconductors with large spatial periodicity of about 50 nm (hereafter referred to as P-50). The surprisingly large periodic structure has not been reported before. RXS and STM experiments identified charge ordering (CO) with a small period of about 4a 0 In summary, we study transport properties of Bi-2212 thin flakes in the underdoped regime and observe peculiar resistance oscillations at low magnetic fields. Samples with different thicknesses and sizes reproducibly show low-B resistance oscillations in the lightly doped regime with consistent oscillating periods. It indicates that there exists a spontaneously emerged periodic structure in the underdoped Bi-2212 (p ≤ 0.08) with a size of about 50 nm. We speculate that such a large periodic structure may emerge as a competition between the commensurate and incommensurate charge ordering. Our work not only highlights the rich and enticing physics in extremely underdoped high temperature superconductors but also demonstrates a facile technique to access this less-explored regime. Future experimental work may be devoted to unveiling the large periodic structure in real space by scanning probe microscopy. Methods: Bi-2212 thin flakes were fabricated in a glovebox with Ar atmosphere (H2O<0.1 ppm, O2<0.1 ppm). Mechanical exfoliation was carried out by using standard scotch tape technique. Thin flakes were first exfoliated onto Gel-Films and then dry-transferred onto solid ion conductors or SiO2/Si substrates Transport measurements were carried out in two closed-cycle cryogenic systems (Oxford Instruments TelatronPT: 1.55-300 K, 9/12 T) with three different inserts. The electrical resistance was measured in a standard four-terminal configuration by using either the AC lock-in technique (S1, S4, and S5, excitation current: 1 μA) or a combination of DC current source and voltmeter (Keithley 6221 and 2182A) in the delta mode (S2 and S3, excitation current: 10 μA). The DC gate voltage was applied with a source measure unit (Keithley 2400). The measurement of B c2 in cuprate superconductors is not as straightforward as lowtemperature superconductors. Not only B c2 often exceeds the highest available magnetic field, but also there exists complications brought by the vortex solid and liquid phases Based on our transport data, we obtain the magnetic field at which the vortex solid melts-B vs at different temperatures below T c0 . Although B vs (T) is usually lower than the upper critical field B c2 (T) at finite temperatures, previous experiments on a variety of cuprate superconductors (underdoped YBCO, overdoped Tl-Bi2201 In Fig. Fig. After the transport measurements, we peeled off the hBN layer and measured the sample thickness by atomic force microscopy (AFM). The AFM image is shown as an inset of Fig. A second Bi-2212 flake on SiO2/Si, which shows low-field oscillations, is presented in the next section. To investigate the mesoscopic effect as a possible cause for the low-field oscillations, we intentionally pattern a microbridge in Bi-2212 flake. Figure Fig. Here the doping level p is evaluated by using the experimentally measured T c0 and the formula: T c0 = T c,max Comparison between the resistance oscillations of this work and the previously reported low-field oscillations in transport.