We propose a realization of flux qubit based on the hybrid ferromagnetic-superconducting device where the flux bias is induced purely by vector potential of the vanishing magnetic field. We support our conclusions with theoretical analysis and self-consistent three-dimensional simulations for material specific parameters. One of the promising strategy to realize a quantum bit is based on creation of a superposition of circulating currents in a superconducting device We propose biasing the device in a superconductor-ferromagnet hybrid realization where the flux bias is induced purely by vector potential from the ferromagnet component (Fig. In idealized scenarios, i.e. in the case (Fig. where μ 0 is the vacuum permeability, M s is magnetization and ρ m is the radius of the whisker. Direct calculation of the magnetic field, B = ∇ × A, from (1b) gives B = μ 0 M s inside the magnet and B = 0 in the exterior. Despite the zero magnetic fields in the exterior, the vector potential is non-trivial at any distance from the magnet. Accordingly, the condensate of Cooper pairs of electrons in a coaxial superconducting coil is affected by this vector potential. The corresponding effect on the condensate energy density is proportional to |ψ| 2 | ∇θ + 2eA| 2 , where θ is the phase of the wave function ψ = |ψ|e ιθ and e is the absolute electron charge. Considering that the phase winding, N = 1 2π ∇θ • dl is an integer, we find that if the setup provides A(ρ s ) = /4eρ s , then there is a two-degenerate energy minima (corresponding to the values N = -1 and N = 0). In our notation, ρ s denotes the radius of a negligibly thin superconducting loop. Taking into account equations ( It is important to emphasize that among the geometrical parameters, the radius of the superconducting loop plays a fundamental role in the first case, while in the second case it is the radius of the magnetic whisker. Accordingly, in the first case, taking into account (2a), the compact design entails an undesirable strong increase in the bias field. While in the case of using a ferromagnet, taking into account (2b), the radius of the superconducting loop can theoretically be reduced down to tens of nanometers, due to the fact that the field inside the magnet, μ 0 M s can be about 2 Tesla. The above argument is based on simple generic considerations. However, to implement the device in practice, one needs to address several problems which are not present in the case of bias magnetic fields. Namely, because the device does not involve external tuning tools, it must be designed as accurately as possible in relation to the main requirement -the energy (near-) equivalence of two quantum states. Accordingly, it is important to take into account a number of features that matter when considering realistic materials and shapes. For example, a magnetic whisker must have a finite size. Which, in turn, entails stray fields, and also the magnetization inside the whisker becomes inhomogeneous. In addition, the supercurrent induces its own magnetic field, which contributes to the energy balance. Finally, for circuit elements, rectangular shapes may be preferable to cylindrical ones. Below, we demonstrate that these issues are addressed using self-consistent material-specific simulation of the device. We have designed an example device in such a way as to achieve matching the energies of quantum states with clock-wise and counterclock-wise currents. The static Hamiltonian for a hybrid system of superconductors and magnets coupled through magnetic potential could be written as: where Ω s and Ω m -superconducting and magnetic domains respectively, and R 3 denotes threedimensional space. Expression (3) is a combination of the Ginzburg-Landau and micromagnetic functionals based on the uniform consideration of the vector potential . The parameter A denotes the exchange stiffness of a ferromagnet. The unit vector field, m(r) represents the magnetization texture in a ferromagnet. We consider (as Ω s ) a superconducting rectangular loop 200 nm wide with squared 20×20 nm cross-section. We choose the material parameters of the superconductor loop similar to those fitted for nanosamples of aluminum at low temperatures We consider (as Ω m ) a centered ferromagnetic whisker of size 24×24×(280 -330) nm. Similar Feand Co-based nano-whiskers can be synthesized, for example, via physical vapor deposition The solutions for (3) were obtained by numerical minimization technique by using Excalibur software By adjusting the length of the magnetic whisker, we found that the length corresponding to the equality of the total energies for CW and CCW currents is approximately equal to 316 nm. Figure Our fully-self-consistent calculations confirm that this ferromagnetic material of this size and shape is in a single-domain state, hence allowing this qubit set up. Furthermore, as shown in the insets of the Figure In conclusion, by using a fully self-consistent simulation of superconducting loop coupled to a ferromagnet we demonstrated that it is possible to realize a quantum bit where the flux is induced by a ferromagnet. The compact design, due to high internal magnetic fields in the ferromagnet, and at the same time the robustness of this magnetic state is a potential advantage of such a device, and the degree of freedom associated with the almost arbitrary loop area opens up a wide range for circuit engineering. The shown numerical solvability of the problem also allows designing more complicated geometries such as linked superconducting and ferromagnetic loops that would diminish stray fields of such a qubit.