Magnetic adatoms on a superconducting substrate undergo a quantum phase transition as their exchange coupling to the conduction electrons increases. For quantum spins, this transition is accompanied by screening of the adatom spin. Here, we explore the consequences of this screening for the phase diagrams and subgap excitation spectra of dimers of magnetic adatoms coupled by hybridization of their Yu-Shiba-Rusinov states and spin-spin interactions. We specifically account for higher spins, single-ion anisotropy, Ruderman-Kittel-Kasuya-Yosida coupling, and Dzyaloshinsky-Moriya interactions relevant in transition-metal and rare-earth systems. Our flexible approach based on a zero-bandwidth approximation provides detailed physical insight and is in excellent qualitative agreement with available numerical-renormalization group calculations on monomers and dimers. Remarkably, we find that even in the limit of large impurity spins or strong single-ion anisotropy, the phase diagrams for dimers of quantum spins remain qualitatively distinct from phase diagrams based on classical spins, highlighting the need for a theory of quantum Yu-Shiba-Rusinov dimers. Assemblies of magnetic adatoms on superconductors are currently attracting much attention as platforms for topological superconductivity So far, dimer experiments have been largely interpreted assuming classical impurity spins. In this framework, the impurity spin acts as a local Zeeman field on the substrate superconductor and the coupling in the dimer depends on the relative orientation of the adatom spins Experiments on individual adatoms on superconductors suggest, however, that their spins are quantum. In particular, this is implied by the observation of Kondo resonances, both on normal-metal Here, we present a simple yet flexible approach to discuss dimers of quantum spins on superconductors. Sidestepping the substantial and rapidly forbidding numerical effort of full-scale NRG calculations, our approach focuses on the subgap excitations by limiting the substrate superconductor to a single site per adatom and conduction electron channel (zero-bandwidth model There are important qualitative differences between the physics of classical and quantum spins on superconducting substrates. First, Kondo-like screening of the adatom spin is limited to quantum spins. Both classical and quantum adatom spins induce a quantum phase transition as their exchange coupling K to the conduction electrons increases The qualitatively different screening behavior of classical and quantum adatom spins can be understood by considering a spin- 1 2 monomer within the zero-bandwidth model (see App. A 1 and Within models of classical spins, one assumes that the adatom spin S is aligned along, say, the z direction, so that it couples only to a single component of the conduction-electron spin (density) c † σ s σσ c σ and there are no transverse spin couplings. Within the model of Eq. ( Regardless of K ⊥ , the monomer ground state exhibits a quantum phase transition with increasing exchange coupling. It is fully paired with a free adatom spin at weak exchange coupling and binds a quasiparticle at strong coupling. The weak-coupling state |⇑ / ⇓, BCS is a direct product of a free impurity spin (|⇑ / ⇓ ) and a paired electronic ground state (|BCS ) with even fermion parity, and takes the same form for classical and quantum spins. In contrast, the strong-coupling states of classical and quantum spins differ in their screening properties. In the classical case, the monomer continues to have two degenerate ground states, namely the odd-fermion-parity states |⇑, ↓ and |⇓, ↑ . Consequently, the quantum phase transition leaves the impurity-spin state unaffected and thus unscreened. For quantum spins, the nonzero transverse exchange coupling K ⊥ lifts the degeneracy between |⇑, ↓ and |⇓, ↑ and the singlet state |s = |⇑, ↓ -|⇓, ↑ becomes the unique strong-coupling ground state. Now, the impurity spin no longer points along a preferred direction and is thus screened by the conduction electrons (see also App. A 1). The different phases of the monomer can in general be labeled by the fermion parity P = (-1) σ c † σ c σ as well as the magnitude and/or projection of the effective spin depending on the degree of spin rotation symmetry The excitation energy of the YSR state is the energy difference of the lowest monomer states in the odd and even-fermion-parity sectors (E o and E e , respectively). With this definition, E YSR is positive in the weak-coupling phase and negative in the strong-coupling phase, and takes on the value for a spin-1 2 monomer. The zero-bandwidth approximation fails to account for the quasiparticle continuum and can thus only be expected to describe deep subgap states. We account for this limitation by assuming large ∆, K, and V in such a way that the YSR energy E YSR and the dimer couplings remain small by comparison. In particular, this assures that E YSR is well within the gap. This assumption will be made throughout this paper, in both the numerical and the analytical calculations. The distinctly different screening properties of classical and quantum spins have important ramifications for the phase diagram of dimers. This can already be illustrated for a spin- 1 2 dimer within the zero-bandwidth model Here, the adatom spins S j (j = 1, 2) are coupled to separate superconducting sites (c jσ ). Hybridization of the YSR states is incorporated through intersite hopping of strength t. The RKKY interaction Ĵ = diag(J ⊥ , J ⊥ , J z ) is incorporated explicitly as it is mediated by the quasiparticle continuum, which is not accounted for within the zero-bandwidth model. Due to the oscillatory dependence of the RKKY interaction, strength and sign of Ĵ depend on the distance between the adatoms. To characterize the phases of the model in Eq. ( Figure Provided that the model retains spin rotation symmetry about the z-axis, the projection S z tot of the total spin is also a conserved quantity. For the special case of Heisenberg exchange and RKKY interactions, the model has full spin rotation symmetry and we can further classify phases according to S tot . Finally, we can label the dimer phases by their spatial parity Σ (with Σ 2 = 1), which interchanges the monomers as defined by Note that this operation also exchanges the fermions, which gives rise to an additional minus sign when both adatom spins are screened. The quantum numbers P tot , S z tot , and Σ can be used to classify the model's phases. We also find it useful to consider the expectation value of which is a proxy for the number of bound quasiparticles. It should be noted, however, that for nonzero YSR hybridization t, this is not a conserved quantum number 2 . In the even-fermion-parity phases, tunneling is possible into the symmetric and antisymmetric doublets. In the doublet phase, all (low-energy) even parity states are in principle accessible by tunneling, resulting in three peaks (or more for anisotropic RKKY interaction, see Fig. due to the presence of pairing correlations in the model. While ground states with different quantum numbers define phases of the quantum YSR dimer, we refer to the unscreened (F 0) or doubly-screened (F 2) parts of the phase diagram as regions. Figure This difference arises as follows. The phase boundaries correspond to lines in the phase diagram, along which states with different total spin are degenerate. For a classical impurity spin, the quantum phase transition does not affect the impurity-spin state. Consequently, it leaves the RKKY energy of the dimer unchanged, which will then cancel from the energy balance governing phase boundaries and crossovers. In contrast, for quantum spins, the impurity spin is fully screened in the strongcoupling state. Thus, only the unscreened phases benefit from the RKKY interaction, while the RKKY interaction energy vanishes for the phases in which one or both spins are screened. Now, the RKKY interaction enters into the energy balance governing phase boundaries and crossovers. The phase diagram of a quantum spin-1 2 dimer with Heisenberg interactions was also computed in Ref. For weak RKKY coupling and small |E YSR |, there is an odd-fermion-parity phase with half-integer total spin, (P tot , S tot ) = (-, 1 2 ). The doublet ground state of this phase, |s 1 ⊗|⇑ / ⇓, BCS 2 +|⇑ / ⇓, BCS 1 ⊗|s 2 , emerges when the hybridization splitting of the dimer states with one screened adatom is large enough to offset the cost in YSR energy. Figure ergy of the doublet with half-integer spin to become the ground state. Note that we use 2 t to denote the actual energy splitting of the singly-screened states due to the hybridization t. The phase diagrams in Fig. Figure To connect to tunneling experiments, we also consider the spectral function where |gs denotes the ground state and |λ the excited states with opposite fermion parity. Spin rotation symmetries give rise to selection rules for the matrix elements. In Fig. A. Isotropic RKKY coupling YSR dimers based on transition-metal and rare-earth systems typically involve higher-spin adatoms. In many cases, higher spins effectively behave more classically. Remarkably, in the present problem, the phase diagrams for classical and quantum spins remain qualitatively distinct even as S → ∞. This is a direct consequence of the difference in the screening properties. Although a single conduction-electron channel screens higher quantum spins merely from S to S -1 2 , we find that the change in RKKY energy associated with a quantum phase transition to the screened state approaches a nonzero constant and thus remains relevant even for large S. Figure As appropriate for isotropic couplings, we label phases by their total spin S tot . The phase diagrams for adatom spins S = 1 and S = 3 2 in Fig. only be partially screened. Thus, even in the doublyscreened region, they will couple to different total spins for ferromagnetic and antiferromagnetic RKKY coupling. This introduces a phase boundary at J = 0 and negative E YSR , which is absent for a dimer of fully screened S = 1 2 adatoms. Apart from this additional phase boundary, the phase diagrams for higher spins are similar in appearance to the phase diagram for S = 1 2 . In particular, nonzero RKKY coupling of either sign favors the unscreened phases. At the same time, the half-integer spin phase [white region in Figs. We note in passing that Fig. We can obtain additional insights into the phase boundaries by explicitly computing the RKKY energy E RKKY in the various phases as a function of S. This also allows us to ask about the limit of large impurity spins, S → ∞. In general, the RKKY coupling JS 1 • S 2 between spins of magnitude S 1 and S 2 coupling into a total spin of S tot has the magnitude Assuming, say, ferromagnetic coupling (S tot = S 1 + S 2 ), one might then naively expect that the difference in RKKY energies of the fully unscreened phase (S 1 = S 2 = S) and the singly screened phase (S 1 = S and S 2 = S-1 2 ) is JS/2 and thus proportional to S. A more careful treatment accounting for changes in the effective RKKY coupling J between the different phases shows that the difference in RKKY energies approaches a constant independent of S for S → ∞. Given that the exchange coupling K is large compared to the RKKY coupling, the projection theorem implies that the impurity spins S 1 and S 2 can be replaced by the effective screened spin of the adatom, S eff , albeit only up to an overall prefactor, which can be absorbed into a renormalization of the RKKY coupling J (see App. B 3 for details). One finds that for each screened spin, the RKKY coupling is renormalized by a factor 1+1/(2S+1). Focusing first on ferromagnetic RKKY coupling, J < 0, this gives the RKKY energies The phase boundary E YSR = E YSR (J) between the unscreened (S tot = 2S) and the singly screened (S tot = 2S - 1 2 ) phases follows from the energy balance Here, t again denotes the energy gain of the singly screened phase due to the hybridization t of the YSR states. Thus, we find for the phase boundary on the ferromagnetic side J < 0. An analogous consideration for the phase boundary between the singly screened phase and the fully screened (S tot = 2S -1) phase yields As advertized above, the slope of these phase boundaries E YSR = E YSR (J) approaches 1 2 in the limit of S → ∞, which is distinctly different from the purely classical result of zero slope. Thus, the distinction between classical and quantum spins persists to arbitrarily large spins. The phase boundaries in Eqs. ( describing the phase boundary. Antiferromagnetic RKKY interaction couples the impurity spins to S tot = 0 (see App. B 2 for an exception). At large and positive E YSR , this results from a coupling of the unscreened impurity spins. As E YSR is reduced and becomes negative, this eventually crosses over to coupling of the screened impurity spins. As for spin- 1 2 dimers, this is a crossover rather than a phase boundary. We can deduce the crossover line by equating the energies of the S tot = 0 states for unscreened and screened spins, which yields Thus, the slope of the crossover line for antiferromagnetic RKKY coupling approaches -1 4 for large S. We note that the zero-bandwidth model not only provides detailed insight into the physics of YSR dimers, but that the corresponding phase diagram for the spin-1 dimer in Fig. In Fig. as for ferromagnetic coupling of screened spins or in the half-integer-spin phases, tunneling couples to additional states and thus leads to further resonances as shown in Fig. For strictly isotropic spin interactions, the ground and excited states are degenerate multiplets associated with different spin projections of S tot . These degeneracies are lifted by anisotropic couplings as illustrated Fig. For simplicity, we retain fully isotropic exchange coupling K and RKKY interaction J. The results are only weakly affected by moderate anisotropy of K and Ĵ, in particular if the type of anisotropy is consistent with the sign of D. For D < 0 (easy-axis anisotropy), H ani favors the maximal spin projections S z eff = ±S (unscreened monomer) and S z eff = ±(S -1/2) (screened monomer) of the monomer spins. Large and negative D frustrates the transverse part of the RKKY interaction, so that the monomers act as effective Ising spins. However, it is important to note that the magnitude of these effective Ising degrees of freedom depends on the screening state of the adatom spin. For this reason, easy-axis anisotropy does not induce classical behavior of the dimer. (Classical behavior requires longitudinal exchange coupling K in addition.) Figure In contrast, easy-axis anisotropy changes the phase diagrams qualitatively for antiferromagnetic RKKY coupling. We observe a change in slope of the crossover line, when the anisotropy and RKKY energies become comparable. For large RKKY coupling, J |D|, the anisotropy is a small perturbation. Then, the ground state has S tot = 0 and the crossover line is given by Eq. ( where the last term on the right-hand side accounts for the renormalization of the RKKY coupling for screened spins. This yields a crossover line with a steeper slope than at large J. The monomer spin of S = 1 is a special case. While the unscreened monomers act like Ising spins, the screened monomers are effective spin- 1 2 degrees of freedom and gain energy through the transverse part of the RKKY interaction regardless of the magnitude of J. For antiferromagnetic RKKY interaction, the screened monomer spins couple into a singlet. Accounting for the renormalization of the RKKY coupling for screened spins, the gain in RKKY energy due to singlet formation is E RKKY = -4J/3. Thus, for weak RKKY coupling the crossover line follows from the energy balance which predicts a crossover line with a positive slope. Interestingly, in this regime, small RKKY coupling favors the screened over the unscreened state. We finally observe that surprisingly, ferromagnetic RKKY interaction couples the screened monomers into the triplet state with S z tot = 0. The screened monomers have S eff = 1 2 and the easy-axis anisotropy does not affect them directly. However, unlike the S z tot = ±1 states, the S z tot = 0 state gains energy by admixing the antialigned state of the unscreened dimer. The phase diagrams for easy-plane anisotropy in Fig. The different behaviors of integer and half-integer monomer spins S at weak RKKY coupling, |J| |D|, can be understood as follows. The easy-plane anisotropy favors small spin projections of the monomers. In the unscreened state, anisotropy favors S z eff = 0 for integer S and S z eff = ± 1 2 for half-integer spins. The situation is reversed in the screened state. When the single-ion anisotropy favors S z eff = ± 1 2 , the adatom acts effectively as a spin- 1 2 degree of freedom. We first consider integer-spin monomers. In the unscreened state, the monomers are in S z = 0 states and the RKKY coupling is ineffective. Correspondingly, there is a single S z tot = 0 phase regardless of the sign of the RKKY coupling. In contrast, the screened monomers effectively act as spin- 1 2 degree of freedom. The effective RKKY coupling written in terms of these spin- 1 2 degrees of freedom has an easy-plane anisotropy (S = 1 monomers are again an exception), so that the ground state has S z tot = 0 even for ferromagnetic RKKY interaction. Importantly, however, there is still a phase boundary at J = 0. While the phases are not distinguished by fermion parity or spin projection, the phases differ in their spatial parity Σ as defined in Eq. ( For half-integer spins, the behavior of unscreened and screened monomers are essentially reversed. This explains the difference in the phase boundaries at J = 0. The difference in the sign of the slope of the phase boundary at weak RKKY coupling can be understood as follows. There is a gain in RKKY energy only when there is a residual spin- 1 2 degree of freedom. For integer spin, this is the case for screened monomers and consequently, RKKY coupling favors the screened phases. In contrast, it is the unscreened monomers which retain a residual spin- 1 2 degree of freedom for half-integer spins and the RKKY coupling favors the unscreened phases. We finally note that strong RKKY coupling, |J| |D|, couples the monomer spins into a total spin S tot . In view of the projection theorem, the monomer spins are effectively proportional to S tot , which is integer for both the unscreened and the fully screened phases. Then, the single-ion anisotropy favors the S z tot = 0 state regardless of the sign of the RKKY coupling. Anisotropy of the exchange coupling K strongly affects the phase diagram. As we have seen above, purely longitudinal (Ising-like) coupling with K ⊥ = 0 effectively corresponds to a classical-spin model, leading to qualitatively distinct phase diagrams from quantum spins. For spin- 1 2 adatoms, the classical spin model remains adequate only as long as the transverse exchange coupling K ⊥ is small compared to the hybridization and RKKY coupling between the adatom spins. As we show in App. B 4, for higher spins and ferromagnetic RKKY coupling, the condition for classical behavior is K ⊥ K z . For antiferromagnetic RKKY coupling, J ⊥ J z has to be satisfied, in addition. Since anisotropy of K is a consequence of spin-orbit coupling and diminishes under Kondo scaling, this is a rather stringent condition. Note that the zero-bandwidth model can be viewed as the result of integrating out the quasiparticle continuum, so that its exchange coupling should effectively account for Kondo renormalizations down to scales of order ∆. For xy-like exchange coupling, i.e., when K ⊥ dominates over K z , the exchange coupling forces the effective adatom spin S eff of the screened state into the xyplane. When this occurs along with easy-axis single-ion anisotropy, screening of the adatom spin is accompanied by a reduction of S z eff from its maximal value (S z eff = ±S) |D| favors the screened spin phases as expected from classical considerations, see Fig. Corresponding phase diagrams (with K z = J z = 0) are shown in Fig. For half-integer spins, the situation remains unchanged for the unscreened dimer. In contrast, the screened monomers are now in a S z eff = 0 state. As a result, the transverse RKKY coupling couples only to excited states of the monomer, and the gain in RKKY energy is also quadratic in J ⊥ , leading to a smooth boundary between unscreened and doubly-screened regions. The curvature of the boundary at small J ⊥ can be deduced by noting that the excited states lead to energy denominators of order D for the unscreened monomer and of order K ⊥ for the screened monomer. This implies a larger gain in RKKY energy for the unscreened dimer, so that the phase boundary in Fig. It is also evident in Figs. As shown in Figs. with M = M ŷ lying in the xy-plane. DM of this form was argued to be relevant in the above-mentioned experiment by Ding et al. In the presence of DM interactions, neither the spin projection S z tot nor the spatial parity Σ are conserved quantum numbers. There is, however, a spin rotation symmetry which leaves both the single-ion anisotropy and the DM interaction invariant. For P tot = 1, the dimer is an integer spin system and Π 2 = 1, so that Π has eigenvalues ±1. For P tot = -1, in contrast, the dimer has half-integer spin and Π 2 = -1, so that Π has eigenvalues ±i. Figures It is interesting to distinguish more explicitly between classical and quantum aspects of the phase diagrams in Fig. where α is the angle of the adatom spins relative to the z-axis. Minimizing with respect to α predicts an abrupt transition between spin polarizations along the z-axis at small |J ⊥ | and in the xy-plane at large |J ⊥ |. In contrast, the doubly-screened dimer has spins that lie in the xy plane regardless of J ⊥ , so that its energy equals Then the phase boundary follows from E oo = E ee , which yields with an abrupt transition between cos α = 1 at small J ⊥ and cos α = 0 at large J ⊥ . This is consistent with the initial cusp-like behavior of the phase boundaries at small J ⊥ , which we find for integer adatom spins in Fig. Motivated by recent experiments, we have discussed Yu-Shiba-Rusinov dimers of quantum spins. Both Kondo resonances and spin excitations of individual adatom spins show that magnetic adatoms on superconductors act as quantum spins. This contrasts with theoretical discussions of YSR dimers, which focus on a description in terms of classical spins. Moreover, the existing works on quantum YSR dimers are limited to small adatom spins and do not account for single-ion anisotropy or DM interactions, which are relevant for the transition-metal and rare-earth systems used in many of the experiments. At first sight, one may expect that the physics of quantum YSR dimers becomes more classical for larger impurity spins or stronger (easy-axis) single-ion anisotropy. Remarkably, we find that this is not the case and the qualitative differences between the phase diagrams for classical and quantum spins persist even in the limit of S → ∞. These differences are rooted in the distinct screening properties of classical and quantum spins. While in both cases, binding of a quasiparticle induces a quantum phase transition with increasing exchange coupling between adatom spin and substrate electrons, this transition is associated with Kondo-like screening for quantum spins only. The screening of the adatom spins by bound quasiparticles directly modifies the RKKY energy of the dimer. Since the RKKY energy is typically larger for higher adatom spins, one frequently finds that RKKY coupling stabilizes the unscreened phases. In some cases, however, the RKKY coupling can also stabilize the screened phases, for instance when easy-plane singleion anisotropy frustrates the RKKY coupling of the unscreened phases. This example also shows that even such gross features of the phase diagrams can depend on whether the adatoms have integer or half-integer spins. In the present paper, we have focused on illustrating basic phenomena in quantum YSR dimers. Evidently, this system has an exceedingly rich parameter space, and several aspects are left for future work. For instance, we have restricted attention to a single conduction-electron channel per magnetic adatom. More generally, higher spins couple to multiple conduction electron channels, admitting for multistage screening of the adatom spins. While coupling to multiple conduction electron channels can be addressed within the zero-bandwidth model employed here, there are also interesting aspects which are beyond the reach of this approach. Most notably, this concerns the spatial structure of the hybridized YSR wave functions which are readily resolved in state-of-theart experiments. Recent works have made proposals for qubits based on YSR dimers The lowest-energy state for even fermion parity is a direct product of a free impurity spin |⇑ / ⇓ and the paired BCS state |BCS = (u+vc † ↓ c † ↑ ) |0 with amplitudes This state has energy independent of the exchange coupling K. For odd fermion parity, the lowest-energy state binds a quasiparticle and has energy independent of the pairing strength ∆. For purely longitudinal (Ising-like) exchange coupling, the state is a doublet |⇑, ↓ , |⇓, ↑ . For nonzero transverse coupling, there is a unique singlet ground state corresponding to a screened adatom spin. The quantum phase transition between even-fermionparity (weak coupling) and odd-fermion-parity (strong coupling) ground states occurs when E o = E e . The energy of the subgap YSR excitation vanishes at the quantum phase transition. For isotropic couplings K = K z = K ⊥ and J = J z = J ⊥ , states can be labeled by the total fermion parity P tot as well as the total spin S tot and its projection S z tot . Below, we measure dimer energies relative to the energy of two uncoupled and unscreened monomers. For ferromagnetic coupling, the unscreened phase (P tot = 1, S tot = 1) has energy -1 4 J due to RKKY coupling of the adatom spins into a molecular triplet. The doubly-screened phase (P tot = 1, S tot = 0) does not gain RKKY energy and has energy 2E YSR . These energies are unaffected by the hybridization t. Thus, the phase boundary at large and negative RKKY coupling follows E YSR = J/8. For antiferromagnetic coupling, we first ignore the hybridization t. Then, the unscreened ground state (P tot = 1, S tot = 0) has energy -3 4 J due to RKKY coupling into a molecular singlet. The doubly-screened state has the same quantum numbers and energy 2E YSR independent of the RKKY coupling. This leads to a crossover line at E YSR = -3J/8. The width of the crossover is governed by the nonzero matrix element of the hybridization t between these states, which can be interpreted as an effective nonlocal singlet pairing The odd-parity phase (P tot = -1, S tot = 1 2 ) derives from the hybridization of the two configurations with a screened and an unscreened monomer into symmetric and antisymmetric superpositions. The corresponding splitting is equal to (A8) Thus, the lower-energy superposition has energy E YSRt. The expressions for the ground-state energies of the various phases can be used to find analytical results for the phase boundaries seen in Fig. This yields Eq. ( For anisotropic exchange couplings K ⊥ = K z or with uniaxial anisotropy D, fermion parity and S z eff are conserved quantities. The low-energy states of the unscreened monomer have energy (assuming large ∆ and K, as usual) where ρ i are Pauli matrices acting in this subspace and we define α(S z eff ) = S(S + 1) -(S z eff ) 2 + 1/4. Diagonalizing h(S z eff ) yields the low-energy eigenstates and amplitudes We ignore extremal S z eff , i.e., states |S, S ⊗ |↑ and |S, -S ⊗ |↓ , as they do not contribute at low energy. The lowest-energy state is E o = min S z eff E o (S z eff ). We again define E YSR = E o -E e . There are subtleties for weak RKKY coupling J, which are briefly mentioned in the main text. In general, both the hybridization t and the pairing ∆ depend on S tot . For instance, in the unscreened phases, ∆ will vanish for sufficiently strong ferromagnetic RKKY coupling (maximal S tot ), but is generally nonzero for antiferromagnetic coupling (minimal S tot ). Close to J = 0, however, it is not a priori clear which S tot minimizes the total energy. t favors a partially screened phase, J favors ferromagnetic or antiferromagnetic coupling depending on its sign, and the singlet pairing ∆ favors a singlet phase. The results of this competition are illustrated in Fig. The phase diagram depends sensitively on the relative magnitude of t and ∆ as controlled by the ratio V /∆. As we have seen in the main text, the available spin is typically maximized (minimized) for ferromagnetic (antiferromagnetic) RKKY coupling for ∆ ∼ V (so that t ∼ ∆) and the phase boundaries between ferromagnetic and antiferromagnetic phases occur at J 0. In contrast, for V ∆ and thus t ∆ [Fig. For ∆ V and thus ∆ t [Fig. Unlike for spin- 1 2 adatoms, the RKKY coupling of higher spins is also nonzero for the (partially) screened states, in which the monomers now have a nonzero effective spin. To calculate the RKKY energy, we note that in the screened state, the matrix elements of the adatom spin S are proportional to the matrix elements of the effective adatom spin S eff . As a consequence of the projection theorem, the constant of proportionality depends only on the magnitude of the effective spin S eff defined in Eq. ( The constant c j is equal to unity if the monomer is in the unscreened state with S eff = S and c j = 1 + 1 2S+1 if the monomer is in the screened state with S eff = S -1 2 . In computing the RKKY coupling, we can then work with the effective adatom spin provided that we use the renormalized RKKY coupling c 1 c 2 Ĵ. It remains to compute c in the screened state. The projection theorem gives where |S z eff denotes the projections of the effective spin S eff for S eff = S -1 2 . Since S • S eff = (S as advertised above. As the ratio K z /K ⊥ increases, the phase diagrams should become more and more classical. We probe this crossover in the limit of large S by calculating how the phase boundaries and crossover lines in Fig. (B12) Thus, the phase boundary becomes classical only in the limit K ⊥ K z . This is in contrast to spin-1 doubly-screened dimer. This gives a crossover line in the limit of large S. Thus, for Heisenberg RKKY interaction, the slope of the crossover line is independent of the anisotropy of the exchange coupling. One finds classical behavior only when J z J ⊥ in addition to K z K ⊥ . We complement the semiclassical argument for the stabilization of the singly-screened phase due to DM interactions in Sec. III C by a quantum-mechanical calculation. To this end, we estimate the energy gain due to the DM interaction in the various phases at small J ⊥ . First consider integer S, so that unscreened monomers have S z eff = ±S and screened monomers S z eff = ± 1 2 . In the unscreened phase, the DM interaction M (S z 1 S x 2 -S x 1 S z 2 ) lowers the energy only in quadratic order in M . In the doubly-screened phase, the DM interaction M (S z 1 S x 2 -S x 1 S z 2 ) couples dimer states with S z tot = ±1 (parallel monomer spins) to states with S z tot = 0 (antiparallel monomer spins). The corresponding matrix el-ements involve These results should be contrasted with the fact that in the partially-screened phase, the DM interaction couples monomer states with S z tot = ±(S + 1 2 ) to states with S z tot = ±(S - (B15) Thus, the gain in DM energy scales as M S 2 in the singlyscreened phase, compared to M S for the doubly-screened phase and a yet smaller result in the unscreened phase. This explains the emergence of the odd-parity phase due to DM interactions in Figs. The situation is more subtle for half-integer S. Now, the screened monomers have S z eff = 0. Thus, the DM interaction only couples to excited states involving monomer energies ∼ |D| (for unscreened monomers) or ∼ K ⊥ (for screened monomers). Correspondingly, the gain in DM energy approximately vanishes in the doubly-screened phase and equals -M 2 S 2 /2|D| in the unscreened phase. This should be compared to a gain in DM energy of -2M 2 S 5 /K ⊥ in the singly-screened phase. Thus, there is no singly-screened phase when the exchange coupling K ⊥ dominates over the other energy scales, as is the case in Fig. dimers, for which the classical behavior requires the even stronger condition K ⊥ t, J. For antiferromagnetic RKKY coupling, the unscreened dimer gains RKKY energy -JS(S + 1), compared to -J(S -d 2 -) 2 for the