Recent progress in the synthesis and assembly of two-dimensional (2D) materials has laid the foundation for various applications of atomically thin layer films. These 2D materials possess rich and diverse properties such as layer-dependent band gaps, interesting spin degrees of freedom, and variable crystal structures. They exhibit broad application prospects in micro-nano devices. In the meantime, the wide bandgap semiconductors (WBS) with an elevated breakdown voltage, high mobility, and high thermal conductivity have shown important applications in high-frequency microwave devices, high-temperature and high-power electronic devices. Beyond the study on single 2D materials or WBS materials, the multi-functional 2D/WBS heterostructures can promote the carrier transport at the interface, potentially providing novel physical phenomena and applications, and improving the performance of electronic and optoelectronic devices. In this review, we overview the advantages of the heterostructures of 2D materials and WBS materials, and introduce the construction methods of 2D/WBS heterostructures. Then, we present the diversity and recent progress in the applications of 2D/WBS heterostructures, including photodetectors, photocatalysis, sensors, and energy related devices. Finally, we put forward the current challenges of 2D/WBS heterostructures and propose the promising research directions in the future. Two-dimensional (2D) materials have been attractive for investigations since the successful isolation of a single atomic layer of graphite material ⎯ graphene ⎯ by the team of Geim in 2004. This will be beneficial to advance the research and development in this realm. The main fabrication methods and progress of 2D/WBS heterostructure in different application fields are introduced. We summarized the potential applications of 2D/WBS heterostructures in photodetectors, photocatalyst, sensors, light emitting diodes (LEDs) and energy storage devices, etc. Then we summarized the article and put forward the main obstacles to overcome in the future. This work provides a very useful reference for the future direction for development of the heterostructure of 2D materials based on SiC and GaN. Figure Reproduced with permission. For 2D materials grown on WBS, different layers are combined through weak vdW interactions for perfect 2D materials, and therefore constraints such as chemical bonding and lattice matching are relaxed. However, epitaxy of 2D materials on WBS is governed by similar considerations, such as lattice constant matching for conventional heteroepitaxial systems. In reality, chemical bonding often exists, because of defects and vacancies in the interfaces. The vdW layer also orients to minimize energy concerning electrostatic interactions and orbital overlap. Similarly, the strain and morphology of a vdW 2D material on the substrate are arising from the competition between the energy of film-substrate vdW interactions and the elastic energy associated with distortion of the layer. For example, MoS2 possesses the same lattice symmetry with GaN, and the lattice constant mismatch is very small (< 1%), compared with conventional substrate like silicon (~40%). So are the good lattice matching of MoS2/SiC and MoSe2/GaN, which causes the monolayer domains to align with the rotation symmetry, reducing the grain boundaries of heterostructure. Reproduced with permission. Finally, the PMMA/graphene microsheets were transferred onto nanoporous GaN sheets with a site-specific transfer printing technique, and the PMMA was removed by acetone to obtain the graphene/nanoporous GaN heterostructures. In addition, the construction of 2D/WBS heterostructure materials can be achieved with many other methods, such as solution processing method, wet chemical method or their combinations. The WBS material SiC, heterostructures is utilized to make devices with outstanding stability in harsh environments. The large band gap of SiC enables the devices to operate at high temperature with low leakage current. Fang et al. investigated the effect of hydrogenated SiC sublayers (unit cell in vertical orientation c) at the interface of heterostructure on electronic states and charge transfer in monolayer MoS2 by firstprinciple calculations. Photodetectors have promising applications in a variety of fields including image sensing, communications, environmental monitoring, and space exploration. SiC is considered to be one of the most important WBS materials in the development of UV photodetectors. Under the high reverse bias voltage, photocarriers rapidly separated to anticipate photoconduction, and the photoelectrons in the conduction band might be captured by the electronic traps, so that the photogenerated carriers recycle multiple times in the circuit before recombination, achieving an internal gain mechanism related to the trapassisted photocurrent multiplication. Besides, Li et al. reported the UV photodetector with high responsivity and low operating voltages based on graphene/4H-SiC (Si face) wafers, with the structure schematic shown in Figure Photocatalysis, which can directly convert solar energy into chemical energy, is recognized as one of the most effective methods to solve the problems of energy shortage and environmental pollutions. Figure In addition, the characteristics of MoSSe and WSSe are very sensitive to strain, the tensile or compressive strain of the heterostructure can obviously modulate the charge transfer and regulate the band gap structure at the interface. The heterostructure can effectively utilize solar energy and be used as a high-efficient photocatalyst. Gas sensors properties. Roy et al. demonstrated a gas sensor consisting of epitaxial graphene nanowalls (EGNWs)/SiC/silicon (Si). In Figure Advanced energy storage devices are being developed to meet the growing energy demand. The operating advantages of wide-band gap SiC in harsh environments such as high pressure and temperature are significant attributes for the development and application of energy storage devices. The heterostructure materials of graphene and SiC have received special attentions as potential electrode materials for electrochemical energy generation and storage. Emiliano et al. fabricated graphene-encapsulated SiC nanomaterials (graphene@SiC) the first time by simple adiabatic process, and used the heterostructures as supercapacitor materials and anodes in lithium-ion batteries (LIBs). Xia et al. presented a self-assembled SiC/MXene heterostructure by ionizationbombardment-assisted deposition, providing a new method for the mass production of high-performance nanostructures and the fabrication of micro energy storage devices. The assembled SiC/MXene micro-supercapacitor had a specific capacity of 97.8 mF/cm 2 at current density of 1 A/cm 2 , an energy density of 8.69 μWh/cm 2 , and excellent multiplicative capability and stability with over 90% capacitance retention after 10,000 cycles at scan rate of 500 mV/s. The applications of SiC-based 2D heterostructures go far beyond what has been mentioned above, their excellent performances also show great promises in other high frequency electronic devices and magnetic devices, and of course the fields that are unexplored and awaiting investigation. For example, Li et al. presented a simple method for creating graphene/SiC tuned plasma cavities in the infrared (IR) range. The WBS material GaN GaN with the bandgap of 3.4 eV has high radiation hardness, visible blind detection capability, and ability to operate in both photovoltaic and photoconductive operational modes, making it a suitable semiconductor material for the development of efficient UV photodetector devices. In Figure Photoinduced I-V curves, f. Responsivity and detectivity under different laser intensity of MoS2/GaN heterostructures. Reproduced with permission. Reproduced with permission. GaN-based nitrides show strong emission in the UV-visible region which is beneficial for spontaneous water splitting, such that GaN is also expected to be used as a photocatalyst or photoanode. For example, Chen et al. investigated the effect of nitride interfacial layer on the structure, electronic, and optical properties of MoS2/GaN heterostructures by firstprinciple calculations and experimental analysis. GaN-based light emitting diodes (LEDs) have been extensively studied, but most of the energy are dissipated in form of heat despite the increasing efficiency of devices, especially the blue light LEDs based on InGaN/GaN. Therefore, the 2D/GaN heterostructures are expected to show good performance in LED devices. For example, Lin et al. introduced the high-performance surface plasmon-enhanced graphene/p-GaN LEDs by inserting Ag nanoparticles (Ag NPs) into the graphene/p-GaN interface, which showed broadband emission from 550 nm to 650 nm under forward bias and sharp emission at ~400 nm under a biased voltage. GaN nanostructure-based gas sensors such as nanowires (NW), nanoparticles (NP), and nanonetworks (NN) have been reported for the detection of a variety of gases such as hydrogen, alcohols, methane, benzene, and their derivatives. Furthermore, Lin et al fabricated a MoS2/Au/GaN based PEC aptamer sensor for the detection of cancer biomarker alpha-fetoprotein (AFP). This method can be used to detect the significantly suppressed photocurrents. The difference in photocurrent with and without AFP was linearly related to AFP concentration, and in the range of 1.0 -150 ng/mL with a detection limit of 0.3 ng/mL. The combination of MoS2/Au/GaN and aptamer can be applied to develop novel photoelectrochemical aptamer sensor for the model cancer biomarkers AFP. time with and without UV illuminations at 27 °C and f. responses vs. gas concentration at different temperatures of n-MoS2/p-GaN sensor in NO2 ambience. Reproduced with permission. The unique electronic interaction and good geometric matching structure between GaN and 2D materials provide ideal electron migration channels for high charge carrier extraction efficiency, resulting in excellent performance and showing brilliant promise for multiple applications. For example, Huang et al. described a novel memory device based on wrinkled MoS2-GaN nanowires (NWs), showing good stability and retention characteristics of 798 cycles and 3.4 × 10 3 s with a low switching voltage. The heterostructures of 2D/WBS materials provide new platforms for theoretical studies and experiments in fundamental physics. They hold excellent properties that single-phase 2D or WBS materials do not possess, leading to new physical phenomena or significant improvement of the performance of devices. Here, we briefly introduce the fabrication methods of 2D/WBS heterostructure materials, including the direct preparation methods such as CVD and PLD, as well as the most widely used multi-step construction methods combining chemical or physical approaches of exfoliation and transfer or etching. Furthermore, we mainly focus on the applications of 2D/WBS heterostructure materials, covering a variety of topics, including photodetectors, photocatalysis, photoelectrochemical, photodiodes, novel sensors, energy storage devices, and memristor devices. The interface effects of the heterostructures, such as band alignment, built-in electric field, defects, doping, or super-exchange interaction at the interface, have a crucial influence on the performance of the device. The various 2D/SiC and 2D/GaN heterostructures presented in this review demonstrate the diversity of applications of 2D/WBS heterostructures, having the potential to develop practical high-performance devices. The results achieved are briefly summarized as follows. For 2D/SiC heterostructures, current researches on 2D/SiC primarily focus on graphene/SiC heterostructures, followed by heterostructures of SiC with TMDs and MXene, etc. The photodetectors of graphene/SiC heterostructures exhibited favorable performances, such as high photoresponsivity, EQE and detectivity. A variety of 2D/SiC heterostructures have been used as high-efficiency photocatalysts. For example, SnO2/SiC heterostructure device demonstrated a high hydrogen evolution rate and large current density at low voltage. Besides, the gas sensor of EGNWs/SiC/Si achieved unprecedented sensitivity with fast response, and even the supercapacitors of CuS/SiC heterostructure for energy storage displayed a high capacitance. For 2D/GaN heterostructures, they exhibited obvious advantages for the development of optoelectronic devices, especially the MoS2/GaN heterostructures due to the excellent properties of GaN and the interface effects. The photodetectors of different MoS2/GaN heterostructures showed high responsiveness and detection in the UV-visible range. The heterostructures of TMDs/GaN also displayed excellent promise in photocatalysis and photoelectrochemical hydrolysis. In addition, multiple types of devices such as the dual-color LEDs of n-SnO2/p-GaN heterostructure, high sensitivity gas sensors and novel PEC aptamer sensor of MoS2/GaN heterostructures, revealed the great application potential of 2D/GaN heterostructures. Although theoretical predictions or experiments have been reported and confirmed on 2D/WBS heterostructures, the researches on them are still in the preliminary stage. Both fundamental researches and practical devices on 2D/WBS heterostructures still face many challenges but also opportunities. These issues need to be addressed for further applications, such as the quality of heterostructures, interface modulation mechanisms, and device paradigms of the 2D/WBS heterostructures. (i) The functionalities largely rely on the quality of heterostructures, including the quality of materials and the interface. The exfoliation and transfer will induce residues. CVD has problems of controllability and stability. PLD yields polycrystalline 2D materials. Moreover, the combination of multiple methods is complicated and difficult to integrate high-quality 2D/WBS heterostructure devices. How to solve the scalable synthesis of 2D materials and achieve high-quality heterostructures, especially in a large scale? It awaits more investigations. (ii) It is crucial to explore new physics, realize multi-platform functions and study the mechanisms of modulation on the optical, electrical or magnetic properties of 2D/WBS heterostructures in more depth. The unique properties of 2D materials, such as strong spin-orbit coupling, spin-valley locking, high layer number and interfacial tunability, topological physical properties are all not exploited for 2D/WBS heterostructures yet. Besides, the high breakdown electric field, thermal conductivity, and electron velocity of WBS materials could be added to the study of 2D-WBS heterostructures in high-power and microwave devices. Novel physics and applications could be achieved by taking into account of these. (iii) Designing and implementing high-performance and high-uniformity device patterns is the most challenging in device applications. Currently, the typical integration method of 2D and WBS materials is by transfer. The interface quality is influenced by the wrinkles, disorder and the organic residue induced by the transfer procedure. The organic residue will also produce some doping effect. This integration method is time consuming and in low efficiency and scalability. Questions such as how to break through the key scientific issues of heterostructure integration, and achieve effective and scalable integration and interconnection of 2D/WBS devices are also urgent for answers. The integration of 2D/WBS heterostructure materials will combine the unique properties of both, promises to provide not only flexibility in constructing hybrid structure with a variety of material choices but also novel functions that conventional devices have inadequate capability to achieve. Moreover, the study of interface doping or defects on specific 2D channels is critical for miniaturizing devices in integrated circuits. 