Two-dimensional (2D) semiconductor of MoS2 has great potential for advanced electronics technologies beyond silicon 1-9 . So far, high-quality monolayer MoS2 wafers 10-12 are already available and various demonstrations from individual transistors to integrated circuits have also been shown Since the successful exfoliation of 2D MoS2 In terms of a further improvement of the electronic quality of the large-scale 2D-MoS2, structural imperfections should be eliminated as much as possible; however, there is not much space left for monolayer MoS2 after ten years of synthesis optimizations in this field. Another direction is to switch to multilayer MoS2, e.g. bilayers or trilayers, since they have intrinsically higher electronic quality than monolayers Generally, to produce MoS2 multilayers, the best practice is to begin with monolayers, then increase their thicknesses by gradually growing additional layers. However, considering the case of freestanding MoS2, this route is problematic in the thermodynamic point of view. The surface energy of free-standing MoS2 increases with the number of layers In this work, we developed a new technique, i.e. layer-by-layer epitaxy, to grow high-quality 4-inch multilayer MoS2 wafers with controlled number of layers. By using sapphire (0001) as the starting substrate, we successfully achieved the growth of uniform NL-MoS2 (N=1, 2, 3), where N is the number of layers, in a layer-by-layer manner. All sapphire wafers used in our growth are 4-inch wafers cut along the zero-degree plane, or C-Cut, which were vacuum annealed at ~1000 oC to form atomically flat surfaces before epitaxy. Note that sapphire wafers are cheap and widely used for various semiconductor thin film epitaxy; and sapphire (0001) surface is so far one of the best substrate for MoS2 epitaxy due to a negligible lattice mismatch. Obviously, two processes are involved in this layer-by-layer growth, i.e. heteroepitaxy of 1 st layer on sapphire and homoepitaxy of (N+1) th layer on NL with N > 0, as illustrated in Figure Both heteroepitaxy and homoepitaxy growth were performed in a multi-source oxygen-enhanced CVD system. As shown in our previous studies, this new CVD approach for monolayer MoS2 growth features greatly enhanced growth rate and excellent film uniformity across the entire 4-inch sapphire surface (benefited from the stable and uniform S-and Mo-source supply during the growth process) Note that monolayer MoS2 growth on sapphire or SiO2 substrates follows a unique self-limiting process As shown above, the dedicate control of the growth kinetic process, e.g., nucleation and edge growth, is the key to achieve continuous layer epitaxy. In our growth tests, we achieved MoS2 wafers with N up to 6. It was noticed that the ideal 2D growth mode is difficult to keep for N th layer when N ≥ 3, leading to appearance of additional mono-or multilayer domains on NL-/MoS2. Such failure is more and more significant with increasing N and the growth mode evolves gradually from 2D to 3D, in consistence with the classical Stranski-Kranstanov growth mode Since as-grown MoS2 films are very uniform for mono-/bilayers and quite uniform for trilayers across entire 4-inch wafers, we thus mainly focus on the bilayer and trilayer samples in the following characterizations. Fig. In order to elucidate the layer stacking orders in these multilayer MoS2 wafers, we further performed atomic structure characterizations by STEM. As shown in Fig. As mentioned above, MoS2 multilayers would have N-dependent band gaps. In order to confirm it in our epitaxial samples, we thus collected optical spectra for our mono-, bi-and trilayer MoS2 wafers. Corresponding Raman spectra are shown in Fig. Based on the obtained high-quality multilayer MoS2 wafers, we hence fabricated FETs for performance benchmark testing. Let's look at the short channel trilayer MoS2 FETs first. The structure of these back-gated MoS2 FETs is illustrated in Fig. Transfer curves of mono-, bi-and trilayer devices with Lch=100 nm are shown in Fig. Next, we also fabricated long-channel FETs with Lch varying from 5 to 50 μm and Wch varying from 10 μm to 30 μm based on our multilayer MoS2 wafers, as illustrated in the inset of Fig. As shown above, the developed layer-by-layer epitaxy on sapphire can yield uniform and large-scale multilayer MoS2 with clean interfaces and well-controlled number of layers, e.g. 1, 2, 3. In each individual layer, the high lattice continuity/quality are accomplished via seamless stitching of large domains aligned along sapphire<11-20>. Bilayer and trilayer MoS2 wafers exhibit remarkably improved electrical quality with respect to their monolayer counterparts, as evidenced from higher on-current densities and higher electron mobilities, suggesting a great potential of using them for 2D electronics. Regarding technological improvements, further investigations are required. Firstly, the high-temperature growth process is less compatible with the conventional semiconductor processes thus needs to be lowered. Secondly, steady improvements of wafer sizes and control of singlealignment of domains are also required for producing single-crystalline multilayers at large scale. Besides, it is also very interesting to apply this layer-by-layer epitaxy technique for large-scale and high-quality heterogeneous 2D layers to broaden the application field of 2D semiconductors. Layer-by-layer epitaxy of MoS2. All growths were carried out in a home-built multi-source CVD system with three temperature zones, named zone-I, zone-II and zone-III. In a typical growth, one Ssource (Alfa Aesar, 99.9%, 15 g) was loaded in zone-I and carried by Ar (40 sccm) and six MoO3source (Alfa Aesar, 99.999%, 30 mg each) were loaded in zone-II and carried by Ar/O2 (40/1.7 sccm) individually. Sapphire substrates (single side polished, c-plane (0001) with off-set angle (M-axis) of 0.2±0.1 deg., 4-inch wafers) were loaded in zone-III. During the heteroepitaxy of MoS2 on sapphire, the temperature in zone-I, zone-II, and zone-III is kept at 120 o C, 540 oC and 910 o C, respectively; while the temperature in zone-II and zone-III was increased to 570 oC and 940 o C, respectively, for homoepitaxy of MoS2. Structural and spectroscopic characterizations. AFM imaging was performed with Asylum Research Cypher S system. Raman and PL spectra were collected with Horiba Jobin Yvon LabRAM HR-Evolution Raman system with the excitation laser wavelength of 532 nm. SAED was performed in a TEM (JEOL Grand ARM 300 CFEG) operating at 80 kV, and atomic resolution images were achieved with an Aberration-corrected scanning transmission electron microscope Grand ARM 300 (JEOL) operating at 80 kV. Device Fabrications and Measurements. FETs were fabricated by lithography and etching process. The device fabrication process is illustrated in Fig. 