Multiple speckle diffusing wave spectroscopy (MSDWS) can be applied to measure spatially heterogeneous mechanical behavior in soft solids, with high sensitivity to deformation and both spatial and temporal resolution. In this paper, we discuss the mathematical approach behind the quantification of the deformation rate from MSDWS data and provide guidelines for optimizing the selection of experimental parameters in measurements. After validating the method in extensional tests on an elastomer, we provide an example of the potentiality of MSDWS by measuring the spatial distribution of the deformation rate during shear debonding of adhesive tapes. We quantitatively characterize the deformation rate distribution related to shearing and peeling under loading. A highly heterogeneous deformation rate distribution is observed, and time-dependent measurements reveal an increase in deformation localization hundreds of seconds before full debonding. This behavior, previously predicted by theory and simulation, is here demonstrated experimentally for the first time. The mechanical response of soft materials under external loading provides valuable information about the structural composition and the application properties under dynamic conditions, especially for soft materials with high deformability and viscoelasticity. In common tests on soft solids, such as shear rheology and uniaxial stretching, one assumes that the material properties are spatially homogeneous, so that the macroscopic stress under deformation (or macroscopic strain under creep stress) completely defines the mechanical response Although measurements of the macroscopic mechanical response can also unveil local failure birefringence imaging Multiple speckle diffusing wave spectroscopy (MSDWS) uses a similar way to measure mesoscopic deformation. In contrast to usual DIC, however, no spray painting is needed: speckles are generated from multiply scattered light upon illuminating a turbid sample with coherent laser light Accordingly, MSDWS has been applied to dynamics characterization in soft The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In section II, we recall the general theoretical background of MSDWS and its application to the measurement of heterogeneous deformation. Focusing on the case of soft solids, we show how to simplify the mathematical processing to directly obtain spatially revolved strain rate from in-situ imaging, addressing practical issues commonly associated to this kind of measurements. In section III, we introduce the set-up and the preparation of the material. In section IV, we describe uniaxial extension tests on an elastomer that demonstrate and validate the method. Finally, in section V, we apply the method described in this work to obtain spatial maps of the deformation rate during debonding of an adhesive tape, a quantity that was experimentally inaccessible in previous works on adhesion. In this work, we focus on MSDWS in the backscattering geometry When the scatterers are in motion due to thermal energy or owing to an external drive, the intensity of the scattered light fluctuates with time, at a rate related to the rate at which scatterers are displaced. The dynamics of the scatterers can be thus extracted by quantifying the rate of intensity fluctuations, which is achieved by calculating the autocorrelation function of the backscattered light intensity measured by the camera In Eq. 1, t is the experimental time and τ is the delay or lag time for the correlation calculation. Images are divided into small region of interests (ROIs), so that spatially resolved dynamics can be obtained. I is the intensity at p-th pixel, and 〈... 〉 r ⃗ is the average over the pixels corresponding to a ROI with center position r ⃗, as indicated in Fig. At a fixed time t and position r ⃗ , C is a function of the time delay  only, C(τ) r ⃗ , , whose decay time quantifies the t -dependent local dynamics. A convenient functional form that describes well C(τ) r ⃗ , under many experimental conditions is where ε depends on the polarization of the incident and detected light. a = 3l * /l depends on the ratio of the photon transport mean free path l * and the absorption length l (usually, a ≪ 1 ). τ is the characteristic decay time, corresponding to the time scale over which C decreases to around exp (-2ε) after normalization (as indicated in Fig. Note that by construction Eq. 2 cannot capture complex dynamics, e.g. stemming from the coexistence of two distinct dynamical processes occurring over different time scales. Nonetheless, Eq. 2 is sufficiently flexible to reproduce a variety of microscopic motions of interest, from Brownian motion (corresponding to p = 1) to the ballistic motion resulting from an applied deformation at constant rate (p = 2). Given the functional form of C, τ is also the time scale where the autocorrelation function is most sensitive to a change of the probed time scale. Accordingly, τ is commonly used for quantifying and comparing different dynamical processes Coexisting dynamic processes yielding multiple modes of decorrelation are commonly reported in DWS measurements In particular, we show that in a wide range of practical mechanical testing conditions, MSDWS results can be safely analyzed by considering only the contribution due to the affine deformation field, which greatly simplifies the processing. One source of dynamics for scatterers in a soft solid is thermally activated motion. Let us first consider the case of a soft solid whose turbidity is high enough for MSDWS to be viable with no addition of probe particles. Thermal energy results in (overdamped) fluctuations of the structure around its equilibrium position (think, e.g., of the fluctuations of strands in a colloidal gel or of network vibrations in elastomers). The amplitude of these fluctuations depends on the elastic modulus of the material, and is typically on the order of several nanometers for stiff materials up to tens of microns for very weak colloidal gels An additional source of dynamics in soft solids is the slow evolution of the sample, also referred to as aging A third source of dynamics, specific to soft solids under mechanical loading, stems from the deformation field induced by loading. Indeed, light scattering is sensitive to the relative motion of the scatterers. When the displacement is not spatially uniform, scatterers are displaced by a position-dependent amount, which results in the decorrelation of the scattered light. The scatterers displacement contains in general an affine contribution (i.e. the displacement field expected for an ideal, homogeneous elastic body under the same loading conditions) and, possibly, non-affine contributions U(τ) is expressed as the product of D times the time interval by: where D denotes the rate of deformation tensor By replacing Eq. 4 in Eq. 3 and comparing with the general form, Eq. 2, one finds that for a deformation at a constant rate This implies p = 2 (ballistic dynamics) and As an example of simple test geometries, we shall consider uniaxial extension and simple shear and discuss typical time scales for τ due to affine deformation. For uniaxial extension along the x axis in an incompressible solid with true strain rate λ ̇ one has For simple shear along the x direction at shear rate γ̇ Eq. 8 results from decomposing the shear rate tensor in the sum of two terms, corresponding to pure shear and pure rotation, respectively and for simple shear: The above discussion shows that the MSDWS relaxation time in the backscattering geometry for a sample undergoing a macroscopic deformation depends on l * , unlike the case of the spontaneous dynamics of a system at rest As mentioned above, the minimum time delay accessible to MSDWS is about 1 ms (2.9 ms for camera used in this work). This sets a limit on the highest measurable deformation rate, since the relaxation time of the correlation function must be at least a few times the smallest τ, in order to be correctly measured. Using typical parameter values l * = 100 μm, n=1.5, λ = 532 nm, τ , = 5 ms, one obtains the following estimates: To access higher deformation rates, one may reduce l * by increasing the concentration of tracer particles, or by choosing tracer particles with a higher refractive index contrast with the sample, or by optimizing the size of the tracer particles, since l * has a non-monotonic behavior with particle size Alternatively, one can also plot the correlation value (C) at a fix time delay τ to qualitatively visualize and identify spatial heterogeneity, thus obtaining "dynamic activity maps" (DAMs). This approach will be discussed later when analyzing the experiments presented in section V. A fourth source of dynamics for soft solids loaded beyond their linear regime stems from rearrangements associated with plastic events, as exemplified in Refs. A final issue to be considered in space-resolved MSDWS measurements coupled to mechanical tests is the rigid displacement of the sample, and hence of the speckle pattern. The rigid displacement causes a loss of the correlation in the autocorrelation function The contribution of the rigid displacement is negligible when τ , the time it takes for a ROI to travel a speckle size due to rigid displacement, is much longer than τ , , the relaxation time due to the relative motion of scatterers associated to the macroscopic deformation, see e.g. Eqs 9 and 10 for the case of extensional and shear tests. For the former, one has where l is the speckle size, which can be measured by calculating the spatial autocorrelation function of one single speckle image N values. The cameras used in MSDWS produce images with a linear size of several hundreds to a few thousands of pixels, while the speckle size ranges from a fraction of a pixel to several pixels: thus, N ranges from a few hundreds to a few thousands. We first consider an extensional test with only one clamp moving, and the other one fixed (commonly to a force sensor). A popular geometry consists in imaging the whole sample, which allows to obtain full information on the sample response and to check for slippage at both clamps. Under these conditions, FOV = L, L being the sample length. The largest velocity occurs at the moving clamp: v = λ ̇ L, where λ ̇ is the nominal strain rate. Here we simply consider λ ̇ = λ ̇ to estimate the approximately scale for comparison. Inserting this expression in Eq. 12 and using Eq. 9, we find the following lower bound Using the same parameters as above ( l * = 100 μm, n = 1.5, λ = 532 nm), one finds τ /τ , ≈ 1370/N . Remarkably, the ratio of the two characteristic times does not depend on the strain rate and may be tuned to be either smaller or larger than unity by varying the speckle size, which in turn controls N. For example, we will show in section IV that in the experiments on a stretched PDMS elastomer presented here the speckle size was such that kl* = 7260, N = 683 and τ = 8.2τ , . Under these conditions, the speckle pattern fluctuates (due to the affine displacement field) much faster than it translates (due to the displacement associated to elongation), such that no correction needs to be implemented. On the contrary in Ref. For a shear test, we consider a sample of thickness d undergoing simple shear. We recall that MSDWS in the backscattering geometry is not sensitive to displacements in the full depth of the sample, but rather in a layer of thickness ~10l * on the side of the illumination and collection optics Note that the right-hand side of Eq. 14 is particularly simple, since it does not depend on strain rate nor on l * . With the typical values used above, k ~1.7×10 7 m -1 , such that for usual geometries (FOV ≥ 1 cm and N ~1000) τ /τ , ≥ 20 . Thus, for simple shear while imaging on the fixed side of the sample the speckles fluctuate much faster that they are displaced and no correction is required. This will be the situation for the experiments on the adhesive debonding reported in section V. If a sample of thickness d undergoing shear is imaged from the moving side, the velocity averaged over the layer probed by MSDWS is v = γ̇(d -5l * ) (assuming again that d > 10l * ) In this case, the lower bound for the ratio of the displacement and fluctuation times becomes which does not depend on the strain rate, but does depend on l * . Inserting in Eq. 15 typical values for the various parameters (FOV = 1cm, l * = 100 μm, d = 1 mm), one finds τ /τ , ≥ 16, showing that the correction of rigid displacement may be safely neglected. To summarize this section, we have shown that in the typical range of time delays probed by MSDWS coupled to mechanical tests (1 ms <  < 100 s), the relaxation time of the intensity correlation function is directly related to the (local) deformation rate. The latter may be extracted from the MSDWS data provided that l* is known and that the deformation geometry may be approximated by a simple geometry such as extension or shear. While in principle correcting the speckle images for rigid displacement may be necessary, we find that for typical experimental parameters this correction is not necessary, apart for tensile tests when the speckle size is small enough for thousands of speckles to fit in the (linear) size of the image. As MSDWS and DIC can provide similar information on the deformation rate spatial distribution, it is worth to quantitatively compare the two methods. Considering that the correlation function is sufficiently informative when τ ≈ 0.02τ and C(τ) ≈ 0.93, this gives a strain accuracy for MSDWS (≈ f[U(0.02τ )]) of the order of 10 -6 . This is much more accurate than DIC, whose strain resolution is limited to the scale of 10 -3 in practical experimental conditions A. Materials water and matched to the experimental one, using l * as the only fitting parameter The uniaxial extension test of the elastomer was performed with a custom set-up, see Fig. Inserting this value and n = 1.43 for PDMS The debonding process of a pressure sensitive adhesive tape in single-lap shear First, the tape was glued to an aluminum plate using instant glue (Loctite 406) to ensure adhesion stronger than at the debonding interface. Then, a glass microscope slide with a thickness of 3 mm was pressed to the other side of the tape, using a weight of 0.3 N for 10 min. A shear stress was imposed to the tape by holding the glass slide fixed in a vertical plane, while hanging a weight to the aluminum plate. Rectangular samples were used, with different sizes as shown in Table To estimate whether any correction may be needed, we use a slightly modified version of Eq. The samples were illuminated by a diode green laser with  = 532 nm (wavelength 532 nm, power 300 mW). Speckle images in the backscattering geometry were collected using a CMOS camera (BASLER acA2000-340km). To optimize the time resolution and speckle quality, the exposure time was set to 0.03 s. The strong spatial fluctuations of intensity due to the speckled appearance of individual images makes it difficult to obtain morphological information on the surface, such as evidence of cavitation Images are collected by commercial software Norpix Streampix 8 and data are processed by self-developed program in Python. We first validate MSDWS applied to mechanical tests in uniaxial extension of a dog-bone PDMS sample to which a nominal strain rate λ ̇ = 1.25 × 10 -4 s -1 is applied. The autocorrelation function is calculated for a ROI located in the center of the sample (with size of 1 cm × 2 cm, indicated by the dashed rectangle in Fig. Assuming that the observed dynamics are only due to the imposed strain, the strain rate λ ̇ is calculated from τ using Eq. 9 with l * = 430 μm and plotted in Fig. The value of λ ̇ , is in Fig. We argued in section IIIB that no correction for the rigid displacement of the sample was required in the experiments on PDMS reported here. To validate experimentally this result, the contribution of the rigid displacement is investigated using a customized dog bone sample, whose width along the extension direction varies, as shown in Fig. The experiments on PDMS under uniaxial extension confirm that the spatially-revolved strain rate can be effectively measured by MSDWS. Furthermore, the combination of MSDWS and uniaxial extension provides a simple way to estimate l * for a (solid) sample with unknown scattering properties, by tuning l * in order to match the MSDWS strain rate to the macroscopic one. This provides a simple alternative to optical methods to measure l * , which are often quite delicate to implement, especially for solid samples MSDWS is applied here to measure the spatially-resoved shear deformation rate at the interface between a soft adhesive film under fixed shear stress σ and a glass substrate during adhesive debonding, with the set-up shown in Fig. . A rapid increase in γ right after loading is observed, followed by a steady growth of γ , exhibiting a power law behavior with a constant exponent around 0.25. The results are in agreement with previous work where creep behavior was studied in the linear viscoelastic regime The values of time when γ reaches 1, t , are plotted as a function of σ in Fig. to compare the debonding kinetics. The debonding time itself is not used to compare debonding kinetics as it can depend strongly on the edge effects at the interface. We found that t decreases with σ following power law with exponent around -6, indicating the strong dependence on applied load of the creep failure kinetics. This type of experiment is classically carried out in industry and the only time measured is the failure time. Yet the debonding mechanisms are difficult to investigate and so are the heterogeneities in stress. A recent study on a similar shear failure geometry combining a fracture mechanics approach of shear failure and a finite strain modeling, showed clearly the heterogeneity of the load along the bonded surface We now focus on the spatial mapping of the deformation process on the interface with the glass. Images of the interface at different times after loading are displayed in Fig. In the central region of the tape, where shear localization and peeling are not dominating, we expect the deformation measured by MSDWS to match the macroscopic strain inferred from the aluminum plate displacement, provided that the deformation is homogeneous through the thickness. We compare the MSDWS strain rate and the macroscopic one for a sample with σ = 0.62 MPa, from the beginning of loading up to t = 1404 s, when debonding occurs. The MSDWS shear strain rate γ̇ is calculated from the fitted relaxation time τ , of C(τ) using Eq. 10, with kl * = 3.3 × 10 3 independently measured in an uniaxial extension test on the bare tape (see Fig. We now turn to a more detailed analysis and quantify the observations in Fig. The results shown in Fig. In Eq. 18, C(0) and C(∞) are the correlation values at zero delay and infinite delay, respectively, which can be approximately calculated as the correlation of one image with itself and with images at a large time delay τ. In writing Eq. 18, we have used the expression of D for simple shear: one can write similar equations for different deformation geometries, e.g. for uniaxial extension using Eq. 9. Using Eq. 18, the DAMs can thus be directly converted to maps of the local strain rate A few remarks on the limits of the DAM approach are of interest. First, we note that retrieving the deformation rate from a DAM is only valid when the autocorrelation functions have the same shape over the whole image. Furthermore, when the magnitude of the deformation rate varies too much over the imaged sample or with time, the DAM approach significantly loses accuracy, due to the exponential shape of the autocorrelation function, which makes the DAMs poorly sensitive to deformation for time delays too small or too large compared to the relaxation time of C. Finally, the amplitude of the autocorrelation function, A in Eq. 3, depends on the coherence of the scattered light, which may vary over the imaging field. In practice, the most reliable and efficient approach would mix both fitting and using DAMs: (1) correlation functions calculated in real time on a subset of the acquired images should be monitored, in order to determine the optimal τ DAMs. (2) Renormalization of the correlation value by spatially resolved A in the subset images. We have shown that MSDWS is a powerful tool for the measurement of spatially-and temporally-varying mechanical responses. Even though a complete modelling of the intensity autocorrelation function remains challenging, we have demonstrated that in a wide range of common testing situations it is possible to directly quantify the deformation rate distribution from the decay of space-and time-resolved correlation functions. MSDWS is relatively simple, requiring only illumination of the sample with coherent laser light and detection with a 2D sensor, typically a standard CMOS camera. Because MSDWS is not too sensitive to the exact illumination and detection parameters (angles of the incident and collected light with respect to the sample, acceptance angular range of the detector etc.), the requirements on optical alignment and the experimental environment are less strict than in other optical methods. The tests on PDMS under elongation strain have allowed us to validate the theoretical analysis presented in section II. The method was then applied to the investigation of adhesive debonding, unveiling a heterogeneous deformation rate distribution and the emergence of microscopic precursors of failure hundreds of seconds before macroscopic debonding. This paper provides theoretical and practical guidelines for using MSDWS as a powerful tool for measuring the local mechanical response of a loaded soft solid. A successful and efficient implementation requires a suitable combination of sample opacity (l * ), range of deformation rate, testing geometry and data processing strategy. We hope that our work will further spur interest in this powerful method.