We have studied the electronic properties of ScS, a transition-metal monochalcogenide with rocksalt crystal structure, using magnetization, specific heat, transport, and muon spin rotation/relaxation (μSR) measurements. All measurements confirm the bulk superconducting in ScS with a transition temperature of TC = 5.1(5) K. Specific heat together with transverse-field μSR measurements indicate a full gap, while our zero-field μSR study reveals the presence of spontaneous static or quasi-static magnetic fields emerging when entering the superconducting state. We discuss various possible microscopic origins of the observed time-reversal-symmetry breaking. As none of them can be readily reconciled with a conventional pairing mechanism, this introduces ScS as a novel candidate material for unconventional superconductivity. The study of unconventional superconductors However, even the identification of unconventional pairing is a challenging endeavor: while the presence of nodes in the gap function, which can be protected by symmetry in an unconventional state, is a good indication for unconventional pairing, there are also more subtle unconventional pairing states with a full and approximately isotropic gap Binary transition metal arsenides (TMA) where TM represents a transition metal and A can be any element from the carbon, pnictogen or chalcogen group, have been widely studied as they provide an exciting family of candidate materials where a range of exotic features has been * rpsingh@iiserb.ac.in observed over the years. For instance, NbC, TaC, MoC, VC, and CrC In this work, we report the macroscopic and microscopic study of superconducting properties in ScS by means of magnetization, resistivity, specific heat, and muon spin rotation and relaxation (μSR) measurements. Superconductivity in ScS has been known for a long time Thermodynamics and transport-The polycrystalline sample of ScS was prepared by arc melting both the constituent elements on a water cooled cooper hearth under an argon gas atmosphere. To get structural information, powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) on well grounded powder was performed at 300 K using a PANalytical diffractometer equipped with CuK α radiation (λ = 1.5406 Å). ScS adopts a cubic (NaCl defect) crystal structure, see inset of Fig. μSR measurements-Muon spin rotation/relaxation experiments were performed at the ISIS Neutron and Muon facility at the Rutherford Appleton Laboratory, United Kingdom, using a MuSR spectrometer with 64 detectors in both transverse and longitudinal directions. A full description of the muon technique is provided in Ref. where A 1 , B 1 , and σ are the initial asymmetry, internal field, and the Gaussian muon spin relaxation rate belonging to the sample. γ μ /2π = 135.5 MHz/T is the muon gyromagnetic ratio and A 0 is the flat background. A bg and B bg are the asymmetry and field contributions coming from the background when muons hit the sample holder. The relaxation rate corresponding to the superconducting contribution, σ sc , can be calculated after subtracting the nuclear magnetic dipolar contribution, σ ndip , using the following expression: , where σ ndip is assumed to be constant over the entire temperature range; the resulting temperature dependence of σ sc is shown in Fig. Here f = [exp(E/k B T )+1] -1 is the Fermi-Dirac function and . represents the average over the Fermi surface. ∆(T, k) = ∆ 0 (T )g k is the temperature (T ) and the directional ( k) dependent superconducting gap. Using spherical coordinates with angles φ and θ, we will consider the cases g k = 1, | sin(θ)|, and | cos(2φ)| for a fully gapped s-wave, p-wave with nodal points, and dwave state with nodal lines, respectively. The temperature dependence of the gap function is approximated by ∆ 0 (T ) ∆ 0 (0) tanh{1.82(1.018(t -1 -1)) 0.51 } where ∆ 0 (0) is the magnitude of the superconducting gap at zero temperature. As can be seen in Fig. To search for the possible magnetism (static or fluctuating) in ScS, we have performed ZF μSR measurements as this technique is extremely sensitive to tiny magnetic fields associated with TRS-breaking phases; these measurements were performed in the presence of an active compensation system in order to cancel the stray magnetic field within the range of 0.01 G. The time domain spectra were taken above (8.0 K) and below (0.3 K) the transition temperature T C as shown in Fig. where Λ is the Lorentzian relaxation component, A 1 is the flat background, A 0 is asymmetry signal coming from the sample; furthermore, G KT is the static Kubo-Toyabe function provided as with ∆ representing the Gaussian muon spin depolarization rate which accounts for the randomly oriented, static nuclear moments experienced at the muon site. The rise in the extracted Λ(T ), see Fig. In scenario (i), we assume that the superconducting phase is reached by a single phase transition, which is natural as there are no indications of multiple superconducting transitions. The order parameter must then transform under one of the (10) irreducible representations (IRs) of the normal-state point group O h . We further assume that the observed magnetic moments result from the time-reversal-symmetry breaking of the superconducting state itself. As is well-known, this is only possible if it transforms under a two-or higher-dimensional IR-in our case, one of the six IRs E g , T 1g , T 2g , E u , T 1u , T 2u , leading to a total of 10 possible time-reversalsymmetry-breaking candidate states Another possibility, scenario (ii), to reconcile broken time-reversal symmetry and a full gap is based on having two consecutive superconducting transitions that are so close that they cannot be resolved. When the dominant repulsive Cooper-channel interactions are between the three symmetry-unrelated Fermi sheets of the system, a natural compromise in this 'frustrated' situation might be to have non-trivial complex phases of the order parameter between these sheets and a fully gapped s+i s state might be realized (see, e.g., the toy model discussion in One additional complication for both of these scenarios is that we have estimated the coherence length ξ 0 to be larger than the mean-free path l e , indicating a significant amount of disorder in the superconductor. Therefore, common wisdom Importantly, all of these scenarios, (i-iv), require effectively repulsive Cooper-channel interactions, at least for parts of the Fermi surface, and thus necessitate Conclusion and outlook -We have presented transport, magnetization, specific heat, and μSR experiments in the superconducting and normal state of ScS, which crystallizes in rocksalt (NaCl) structure. All measurements confirmed the bulk nature of superconductivity, with a transition temperature T C = 4.6 K. We extracted various superconducting and normal-state parameters of ScS. Specific heat data and the temperature-dependence of the penetration depth following from TF μSR measurements are most naturally explained by a fully established superconducting gap. Surprisingly, our zerofield μSR data reveal time-reversal-symmetry-breaking moments at the onset of superconductivity. We have discussed several possible microscopic origins of these moments, which suggest that the underlying pairing glue cannot arise solely from the electron-phonon coupling, but rather requires repulsive components. As such, our results establish ScS as a system exhibiting complex superconducting properties that deserve further investigation. In particular, μSR measurements in high-quality single crystals, specific heat measurements at low temperatures, as well as complementary penetration depth measurements The starting materials for the preparation of ScS were scandium ingot, and sulphur powder which were weighed in a ratio of 1:1.2 and melted together on a water-cooled copper hearth under an argon gas atmosphere. The ascast ingots were flipped several times and remelted in order to achieve homogeneity. Rietveld refinement of powder XRD confirmed the crystal structure as cubic and single phase nature within the detection limit of the technique. Other parameters obtained from the refinement, such as atomic positions, cell volume, are summarized in Table where ρ 0 is the temperature-independent residual resistivity, resulting from scattering due to the presence of * rpsingh@iiserb.ac.in defects, and ρ BG is the BG resistivity, given by which results from the scattering of electrons and phonons. In Eq. (S1b), Θ D is the Debye temperature, C is a material-dependent prefactor and n takes values from 2 to 5 depending upon the nature of electron scattering To determine the lower critical field, H C1 , and its temperature dependence, we use the magnetization versus field curves at different temperatures, see inset of Fig. which yields H C1 (0) = 21.0(2) mT. The upper critical field, H C2 (T ), was estimated from the field dependence of three different physical quantities: i) the specific heat C(T, H), ii) the magnetization M (T, H), and iii) ρ(T, H); to this end, the transition temperature for magnetization is defined as the temperature that corresponds to the onset of superconductivity and the midpoint of transition temperature in the case of specific heat and resistivity measurements. As shown in Fig. This provides H C2 (0) = 0.37(1) T, 0.44(1) T, and 0.49 There are two different mechanisms by which a magnetic field interacts with the conduction electrons in a nonmagnetic superconductor and destroys superconductivity. One is orbital pair breaking where the magnetic field couples to the orbital motion of the electron, and the other is the Pauli paramagnetic limiting effect, in which the interaction of the magnetic field is with the electronic spin. The orbital limit for an upper critical field is given by the Werthamer-Helfand-Hohenberg (WHH) expression The initial slope -dH C2 (T ) dT at T = T C is estimated to be 0.07(1) T/K. Considering α = 0.693 for dirty limit superconductors, gives the orbital limiting upper critical field H orbital C2 (0) = 0.27 T. The value obtained is less than the value of the critical field at T /T C = 0.55 which suggests that single gap model cannot accurately model this system and multigap effects should be considered. Within BCS theory, the value of the Pauli paramagnetic limiting field is given by H P C2 (0) = c P T C where c P = 1.86 T/K To determine the Ginzburg-Landau coherence length ξ GL (0), the vale of H C2 (0) as extracted above from our measurements has been used in the relation H C2 (0) = Φ0 2πξ 2 GL This yields λ GL (0) = 1077(6) Å. The Ginzburg-Landau parameter κ GL = λ GL (0) ξ GL (0) , which distinguishes between type I and type II superconductivity, is evaluated to be 4.0 C lnκ GL , which yields H C = 82(2) mT. The temperature dependence of the specific heat C(T ) in the temperature range 1.9 K to 9.0 K in the zero ap- plied field is shown in the inset of Fig. where γ n is the Sommerfeld coefficient, which represents the electronic contribution, and β 3 describes the phononic contribution. The fit to the data yields: γ n = 5.17 , where R = 8.314 J mol -1 K -1 is a gas constant, N is the number of atoms per formula unit, and β 3 = 98.6(9) μJmol -1 K -4 is the Debye constant extracted from Eq. (S6). After employing the values, we obtained Θ D = 340(3) K. The electron-phonon coupling parameter, λ M can be estimated using McMillan's model where μ * is the screened Coulomb repulsion and the typical value of 0.13 will be used here. From the values of Θ D = 340(3) K and T C = 4.8(1) K, we obtain λ M = 0.61 Having extracted the values of the Sommerfeld coefficient γ n , carrier density n and residual resistance ρ 0 , we can estimate the ratio of mean free path and coherence length ξ 0 /l e . Based on the Drude model, the mean free path is given by l e = v F τ where τ is the scattering time and is defined as τ -1 = ne 2 ρ 0 /m * . The effective mass m * is given by the expression: employing the values of n and γ n obtained above. The Fermi velocity v F = k F /m * is found to be 2.5(2) × 10 5 m/s and the mean free path l e is 51(4) Å. Within the BCS framework, the coherence length is given via the expression: ξ 0 = 0.18 v F /k B T C and by substituting the values of v F and T C , we obtained ξ 0 = 667(59) Å. All parameters are listed in Table The electronic specific heat in the superconducting state is calculated from the normalized entropy expression, which can be written as which depends only on the reduced temperature t = T /T C . In Eq. (S8), f = [exp(E/k B T ) + 1] -1 is the Fermi function and E( ) = 2 + ∆ 2 k where is the relative energy(measured in units of T C ). ∆ k represents the temperature and angle dependence similar to as described in the main text. The normalized entropy S is related to the normalized electronic specific heat by We have analyzed the temperature dependence of the normalized specific heat with the aforementioned models where the fitting is represented by the solid lines shown in Fig. -1 