Superconducting resonators are now found in a broad range of applications that require high-fidelity measurement of low-energy signals. A common feature across almost all of these applications is the need for increased numbers of resonators to further improve sensitivity, and the ability to read out large numbers of resonators without the need for additional cryogenic complexity is a primary motivation. One of the major limitations of current resonator arrays is the observed scatter in the resonator frequencies when compared to the initial design. Here we present recent progress toward identifying one of the dominant underlying causes of resonator scatter, inductor line width fluctuation. We designed and fabricated an array of lumped-element resonators with inductor line width changing from 1.8μm to 2.2μm in step of 0.1μm defined with electron-beam lithography to probe and quantify the systematic variation of resonance frequency across a 6-inch wafer. The resonators showed a linear frequency shift of ≈20M Hz (140FWHM) and 30M Hz (214FWHM), respectively, as they are connected to two different capacitors. This linear relationship matches our theoretical prediction. The widely used MLA photon lithography facility for MKID fabrication has a resolution on the order of 600nm, which could cause frequency fluctuation on the order of 100M Hz or 710FWHM. 5] due to their simple fabrication process and frequency domain multiplexing capability. Among the various types of superconducting resonator-based detectors, Microwave Kinetic Inductance Detectors (MKIDs) One solution for mitigating frequency fluctuations is capacitor trimming To develop some intuition about the relationship between changes in linewidth and the resonator frequency, we use an equation for meander inductance on PCB with w the width of the meander strip. Inductance change ∆Lm due to small line width change ∆w can be approximated by Taylor expansion around w: Similarly the kinetic inductance change ∆L K due to line width variation ∆w is: where we have used kinetic inductance equation from reference and fractional frequency shift We carry out a more detailed model of our resonators by using a Sonnet simulation of our lumped element resonators where we change the inductor width from 1.5 to 2.5 μm in steps of 0.5 μm. Figure To empirically study the impact of resonator geometry on frequency placement, we designed a test device comprised of five nearly identical lumped element resonators with varying inductor linewidth. In our design (see Fig. Our devices were fabricated on a single silicon wafer, which minimizes the impact from comparing materials from different depositions. To achieve the required 100 nm linewidth resolution, the resonators were patterned using ebeam writing with the highest resolution of 10 nm. Details of the fabrication process are: The bare wafer was vacuum baked in 120 • C for six minutes for removing moisture. Ebeam resist of PMMA 950 A4 was spincoated at a speed of 4000rpm for 40 seconds and then baked at 180• for 4 minutes afterward. The inductor, capacitor, and connection lines are on a single layer and were written with a dose of 720μC/cm 2 . The feed-through lines as well as the contact pads are on another layer and written with a dose of 800μC/cm 2 . Proximity effect correction effectively lowers the dose for large structures, and the dose is increased purposely to compensate for it. After pattern writing, the wafer was developed with MIBK and IPA with a ratio of 1:3 for 40 seconds and rinsed in IPA for 10 seconds. After development a 20 seconds oxygen descum process was applied to remove leftover ebeam resist. Then, a 30 nm thick Al film was deposited via DC magnetron sputterring at a base pressure of 1.7E-8mBar. The final processing step was an overnight soak in acetone for lift-off. We chose the two tested chips near the center of the wafer to minimize film thickness non-uniformity across the two chips. During fabrication, one of the ca- pacitors on one of our devices (chip B) had a liftoff issue and was discarded from our measurements. This only impacted one single resonator. We tested two chips (chip A and chip B) in a dilution refrigerator with a base temperature of 10 mK. The input lines have ≈70dB attenuation. The output signal is amplified with a HEMT amplifier with a gain of around 40 dB. A superconducting coaxial cable is used between the output of the sample box and the HEMT amplifier to minimize signal loss. The resonances are scanned with a standard S 21 measurement of VNA. Figure We estimate the frequency scatter from our ebeam process by comparing the frequencies for identically designed resonators. We find the largest scatter is ∼1 MHz, which is consistent with the 10 nm ebeam resolution and our measured dependence of inductance on linewidth. To give a sense of the importance of linewidth control, we compare our results with a similar measurement of fre- quency scatter for two other sets of resonators that were patterned using Direct Write optical lithography and wet etching (see Fig. We have demonstrated the impact of meander linewidth variation on the frequency scatter of lump element resonators. Our results are in good agreement with our simulations and show that control of resonator geometry can be a significant contributor to frequency scatter in large arrays of MKIDs.