The tetragonal heavy-fermion metal YbRh2Si2 orders antiferromagnetically at TN = 70 mK and exhibits an unconventional quantum critical point (QCP) of Kondo-destroying type at BN = 60 mT, for the magnetic field applied within the basal (a, b) plane. Ultra-low-temperature magnetization and heat-capacity measurements at very low fields indicate that the 4f -electronic antiferromagnetic (AF) order is strongly suppressed by a nuclear-dominated hybrid order ('A-phase') at TA ≤ 2.3 mK, such that quantum critical fluctuations develop at B ≈ 0 [1]. This enables the onset of heavyfermion superconductivity (Tc = 2 mK) which appears to be suppressed by the primary AF order at elevated temperatures. Measurements of the Meissner effect reveal bulk superconductivity, with Tc decreasing under applied field to Tc < 1 mK at B > 20 mT. The observation of a weak but distinct superconducting shielding signal at a temperature as high as 10 mK suggests the formation of insulated random islands with emergent A-phase order and superconductivity. Upon cooling, the shielding signal increases almost linearly in temperature, indicating a growth of the islands which eventually percolate at T ≈ 6.5 mK. Recent electrical-resistivity results by [2] confirm the existence of superconductivity in YbRh2Si2 at ultra-low temperatures. The combination of the results of [1] and [2] at ultra-low temperatures below BN, along with those previously established at higher temperatures in the paramagnetic state, provide compelling evidence that the Kondo-destruction quantum criticality robustly drives unconventional superconductivity. Lanthanide-based intermetallic compounds showing heavy-fermion phenomena are well understood within the framework of the Kondo lattice The onsite Kondo screening competes with the intersite magnetic Ruderman-Kittel-Kasuya-Yosida (RKKY) interaction. While predominant Kondo screening results in a paramagnetic heavy-fermion ground state, a dominant RKKY interaction causes magnetic, most frequently antiferromagnetic (AF), order. For a substantial number of these heavy-fermion metals the Kondo screening turns out to almost exactly cancel the RKKY interaction. In this situation, a continuous transition may exist at T = 0 between the heavy-fermion and the AF phase. This continuous quantum phase transition or quantum critical * steglich@cpfs.mpg.de point (QCP) can be tuned by a non-thermal control parameter, e.g., pressure or magnetic field YbRh 2 Si 2 is a prototypical heavy-fermion metal region) turns out to be proportional to T . The QCP at B N (T = 0) is of an unconventional 'local' (instead of itinerant) variety, which may be called a 'partial Mott' or Kondo-destroying QCP. It is characterized by a dynamical spin susceptibility with frequency-overtemperature scaling and a fractional exponent in the singular parts of both the frequency and temperature dependences Figure We here focus on predominantly encountered Siterminated surfaces. In case of such surfaces, the Kondoactive Yb atoms are located in the fourth-to-topmost layer which prevents a reduced screening of the Yb local moments at the surface In this simplified picture, the successive formation of the singleion Kondo effect upon lowering the temperature results primarily in a modification of the density of states of the conduction band seen as a strong decrease of the tunneling conductance g(V, T ) for V small enough to not break up the quasiparticles. This process is observed to commence at around 100 K and coincides with the onset of local Kondo screening involving excited crystalline electric field levels as concluded from entropy estimates The relation of this -6 meV-peak to the Kondo lattice is supported by calculations: Results of a multilevel finite-U non-crossing approximation Albeit this Kondo lattice peak sets in at around T K , i.e. T coh ≈ T K as mentioned above, it only slowly increases in height down to about 3 K ≈ 0.1 T coh , cf. tunneling conductance at 5.5 K in Fig. STS was also conducted at 0.3 K for magnetic fields applied B c, see exemplary data for B = 9 T in Fig. Consequently, the question concerning the nature of the 'local' QCP in YbRh 2 Si 2 and the associated critical excitations remains. To answer this question, combined thermal and electrical transport investigations on YbRh 2 Si 2 single crystals were carried out down to 25 mK at zero field, close to B N and up to B = 1 T ( B N ) Very different phenomena can cause a violation of this law: (i) Fermionic excitations like spinons, i.e., chargeneutral heat carriers, may lead to L(T → 0)/L 0 > 1. This was indeed concluded from measurements on, e.g., LiCuVO 4 In the following, we describe the violation of the Wiedemann-Franz law in YbRh 2 Si 2 with the aid of Fig. Several groups have reported very similar experimental data compared with those by In Fig. When YbRh 2 Si 2 single crystals were investigated by resistivity measurements at T > 10 mK, and specific-heat as well as susceptibility measurements at T > 18 mK, no superconductivity could be detected Figure We now turn to the peak in the fc-M DC (T ) curve at 2 mK which reveals a pronounced decline ∆M of about 0.075 μ B per Yb down to 0.8 mK (Fig The temperature-magnetic field phase diagram in Fig. displayed in Fig. One can derive the effective g-factor of the A-phase, g eff 0.051, from the ratio of the transition temperature T A (B = 0) = 2.3 mK and the critical field B A (T → 0) 45 mT (Fig. resembles the shape drawn by the yellow color code (50% resistance) in Fig. In what follows we give a few simple estimates of character Both samples are from batches studied in detail previously 17,32 . Their residual resistance ratios RRR 10 mK = R(300 K)/R(10 mK), as well as the zero-field Fermi liquid behavior ρ = ρ 0 + AT 2 below T N and the non-Fermi liquid behavior ρ 1⁄4 ρ 0 0 þ A 0 T at the quantum critical field of 60 mT confirm high sample quality. To remove uncertainties in the geometric factors, we have assumed ρ(300 K) = 80 μΩcm 15 . The Sommerfeld coefficient in zero field γ 0 T KW , calculated from A via the universal Kadowaki-Woods ratio A/γ 2 = 10 -5 μΩcm(mol K) 2 /(mJ) 2 , is a good estimate of the non-quantum critical contribution (see Supplementary Note 2: Estimates on Planckian dissipation). 8 and the results of Fig. Measurements of the electrical resistivity at ultralow temperatures are extremely difficult in view of the unavoidable contact resistances which may easily heat up the sample. Recently, Nguyen et al. were successful in performing such measurements on YbRh 2 Si 2 single crystals down to 0.5 mK To put these new results in perspective, we wish to note that resistive transitions (at T c,ρ ) commonly probe percolative superconductivity, with ρ(T ) reaching zero when the first percolating path through the sample is formed. On the other hand, both χ AC (T ) (with T c,χ ) and zfc-M DC (T ) provide shielding signals due to 'networks of screening currents' in the sample surface. The thermodynamic (bulk-) T c is obtained through transitions in the specific heat and/or the Meissner effect as measured by fc-M DC (T ) (with T c,M ). For inhomogeneous superconductors one frequently finds T c,ρ > T c,χ > T c,M . In case of the Ce-based 115superconductors with anisotropic transport owing to the delicate interplay of competition and coexistence between superconductivity and AF order, an exotic type of percolative ('textured') superconductivity has been reported In the YbRh 2 Si 2 sample, the onset of superconductivity at very low fields is observed at almost the same T c,ρ ≈ 8 mK in measurements of both the electrical resistivity Concerning the 174 YbRh 2 Si 2 sample, we believe that (i) it contains a low, but finite, concentration of residual Yb ions with nuclear spins which give rise to a weakened hybrid A-phase order and, thus, weakened superconductivity, and (ii) YbRh 2 Si 2 free of nuclear spins would not be a superconductor, at least near B = 0. To check this, future studies of superconductivity of YbRh 2 Si 2 samples with enriched 174 Yb isotope should be assisted by high-precision mass spectrometry, which is required to determine the amount of residual nuclear spins. A three-component Landau theory was applied in It is, therefore, natural to assume that a peak in χ 4f (Q) exists at yet another finite wave vector Q 1 , different from Q AF . Along Q 1 , the RKKY interaction generates an order parameter Φ J among the 4f -electronic spins and simultaneously an order parameter Φ I among the Yb-derived nuclear spins. According to the size of the effective g-factor discussed above, Φ I must be much larger than Φ J . As Φ J and Φ I exist at the same wave vector Q 1 , they are coupled bilinearly via -λ Φ J Φ I , where the coupling parameter λ ≈ 25 mK is related to the hyperfine coupling constant A hf by λ ∼ A hf ≈ 100 T/μ B . As a result, one finds the transition temperature of the nuclear-dominated hybrid (Bottom line) With hyperfine coupling, TAF is not affected, but a hybrid nuclear and electronic spin order is induced at T hyb TI. (B) Temperature evolution of the primary electronic spin order parameter (mAF) and the superconducting order parameter ΨSC. ΨSC is developed when mAF is suppressed by the formation of hybrid nuclear and electronic spin order directly below T hyb . Reproduced from Here, the value of the bulk susceptibility was taken for that of the unknown χ 4f (Q 1 ). In view of this uncertainty, the agreement between the theoretical result for T hyb and the experimental value T A = 2 mK is surprisingly good. Within the afore-described Landau treatment it may be assumed that the nuclear order parameter Φ I competes with the primary 4f -electronic order parameter Φ AF that was found to be detrimental to superconductivity. Consequently, superconductivity sets in once the primary order Φ AF is suppressed, cf. Figure As this Landau theory is a mean-field theory, it does not treat short-range order. However, unique nuclear short-range order, as visualized by a significant temperature dependence of the nuclear spin entropy (Fig. In the following we summarize, and offer a-possibly oversimplified-explanation of, the multitude of puzzling results achieved by the previous magnetic and calorimetric as well as the recent resistive measurements: i. Superconductivity in YbRh 2 Si 2 apparently exists in a wide field range almost up to B A = 45 mT, with the maximum T c occurring at B = 0 ii. The T -dependence of fc-M DC (T ) displayed in Fig. iii. The simultaneous onset of both a weak, but distinct shielding signal (Fig. iv. The network of superconducting islands turns out to be extremely fragile as the shielding signal is suppressed already by a very small external magnetic field (Fig. v. Upon further cooling, the resistivity reaches zero at about 6.5 mK. This can be reconciled with the above results in terms of the onset of superconducting percolation as mentioned before. The percolation initiates a considerably increasing strength of A-phase short-range order as illustrated by a pronounced increase of fc-M DC (T ) below 5 mK (Fig. Remarkably, the shielding signal due to the network of superconducting islands in the sample surface does not exceed 20% when cooling from T ≈ 10 mK to T ≥ T A , the temperature range previously called 'B-phase', cf. Fig. vi. At T A (= 2.3 mK as B → 0, see vii. From the magnetization measurements 5A and 6A), slightly below T A . Future fc-M DC (T ) measurements on annealed powder samples below the lower critical field B c1 are needed to confirm that bulk superconductivity indeed exists well below T c,ρ at magnetic fields up to B B A . We should welcome future work by other groups to cross-check the above reasoning. The new resistivity study by If here, the existence of the nuclear-dominated hybrid A-phase can be proven by future specific-heat experiments, the Cooper-pairing mechanism emphasized above in the low-field regime will most likely be operating as well. An alternative scenario proposed by The discovery of superconductivity in YbRh 2 Si 2 at ultra-low temperatures opens up new dimensions. It expands the horizon of ultra-low temperature physics towards strongly correlated electronic matter in solids and conversely, it determines a new area of heavy-fermion physics by reaching down to ultra-low temperatures. Up to now, heavy-fermion superconductivity has been detected in more than fifty f -electron compounds. Despite the fact that, compared with PuCoGa 5 , exhibiting the record-high T c of 18.5 K [66], YbRh 2 Si 2 shows a transition temperature which is lower by almost four decades, this may be called 'high T c '-in the sense that T c is limited by an enormously high ordering temperature of nuclear spins. This nuclear order paves the way for the superconductivity, not by actively helping in the Cooperpair formation, rather by destroying the 4f -electronic order below T N = 70 mK, which appears to be extremely hostile to superconductivity. The apparent competition between the nuclear and the 4f -electronic orders results in an AF QCP at, or very close to, B = 0. Most likely, the latter-like its field-induced counterpart at B = B N -is of the 'local' type, as inferred from the B = 0 results of electrical and thermal transport as well as specific-heat measurements in the paramagnetic state as presented in Section I. The ultra-low temperature work on YbRh 2 Si 2 strongly supports the notion that superconductivity robustly develops in the vicinity of such a 'partial-Mott' QCP, as has been theoretically derived in Kondo-lattice models for a Kondo-destroying QCP 