Recently discovered magnetic topological insulators T Bi2Te4 (T =Mn, Fe) crystallize into the R 3m rhombohedral structure and exhibit the antiferromagnetic order. Here, we discuss the lattice dynamics of these compounds to confirm the stability of these systems. We show that the phonon dispersion does not contain soft modes, so both compounds are dynamically stable in the R 3m phase. We perform theoretical analyses of the mode activity at Γ point for the discussed compounds. In the case of the Raman active modes, our results are in agreement with the experimentally observed frequencies. Finally, we also discuss the possibility of realization of chiral phonons. MnBi 2 Te 4 is the first intrinsic antiferromagnetic (AFM) topological insulator The topological properties of the MnBi 2 Te 4 are exhibited by the realization of the electronic surface states More recently, a successful single crystal growth of FeBi 2 Te 4 was reported The paper is organized as follows. First, we briefly describe the computational details (Sec. II). The phonon dispersions are presented and discussed in Sec. III. Next, in Sec. IV, we discuss thoroughly the Raman active modes in relation to the available experimental and theoretical results. In Sec. V, we discuss the realization of the chiral phonons in the T Bi 2 Te 4 . Finally, we conclude our findings in Sec. VI. The first-principles (DFT) calculations were performed using the projector augmented-wave (PAW) potentials The magnetic unit cells were optimized using 24 × 24 × 4 k-point Γ-centered grids in the Monkhorst-Pack scheme The dynamical properties were calculated using the direct Parlinski-Li-Kawazoe method Phonon dispersion. -The phonon dispersions of T Bi 2 Se 4 are presented in Fig. The total (dashed line) and partial (solid lines) phonon density of states. Phonon density of states. -The total and partial density of states are presented in Fig. Irreducible representations. -The phonon modes of T Bi 2 Te 4 at Γ point can be decomposed into the irreducible representations of the space group R 3m as follows: In total, there are 21 vibrational modes, seven nondegenerate A 1g and A 2u modes, and seven doubly degenerate E u and E g modes. Here, optical vibrations 3A 2u + 3E u are infrared active (IR), while optical modes 3A 1g + 3E g are Raman (R) active. The activity and symmetries of the modes at Γ point for T Bi 2 Te 4 are presented in Tab I. The atoms participating in the vibrations of the E g and E u types oscillate in the SL plane (a-b plane in Fig. to out-of-plane oscillations (perpendicular to a-b plane). Interestingly, the magnetic T atoms do not participate in the vibrations of the Raman active modes (i.e. A 1g and E g ). Selection rules for Raman-active modes. -The nonresonant Raman scattering intensity depends in general on the directions of the incident and scattered light relative to the principal axes of the crystal. It is expressed by Raman tensor R, relevant for a given crystal symmetry, as where e i and e s are the polarization vectors of the incident and scattered light. respectively. According to the group theory, the Raman tensor for the R 3m space group takes the following forms for the A 1g and E g modes: In the backscattering configuration, e i and e s are placed within the xy plane. The polarization vectors for linearly polarized light in the x and y directions are e x = (1 0 0) and e y = (0 1 0), respectively. Similarly, the polarization vector for left σ + and right σ -circularly polarized light are σ ± = 1 √ 2 (1 ± i 0). Using Eq. ( Comparison with related results. -In Tab. III, we present a comparison of our theoretically obtained frequencies of the Raman active modes with previous results (both experimental and theoretical). It should be mentioned that not all Raman modes can be observed at each measurement. This is caused by the relatively weak intensity of some Raman modes and the insensitivity of the used method for observing low-frequency modes. For example, for MnBi 2 Te 4 , in Ref. For example, the frequency of the first A 1g mode is reduced from ∼ 62 cm -1 in Bi 2 Se 3 to ∼ 50 cm -1 in T Bi 2 Se 4 , while the high-frequency A 1g is shifted from ∼ 135 cm -1 for Bi 2 Te 3 to ∼ 140 cm -1 for T Bi 2 Te 4 . Contrary to this, the E g modes are almost unchanged. As we mentioned previously, A 1g and E g modes realize the out-of-plane and in-plane vibrations, respectively The helicity of incident photons is completely reversed in the Raman process involving the double degenerated E g modes. This phenomenon is highly relevant in the context of circularly polarized phonons The circular polarization of the phonons can be studied by analyzing the phonon polarization vector, which can be found from the diagonalization of the dynamical matrix: where q is the phonon wave vector and m j denotes the mass of jth atom. Here Φ αβ (j0, j n) is the IFC tensor (α and β denotes the direction index, i.e. x, y, and z) between jth and j th atoms located in the initial (0) and nth primitive unit cell. Then, the phonon spectrum as well as the polarization vectors are given by the eigenproblem of the dynamical matrix: Here, the ε branch describes the phonon with a frequency ω εq and a polarization vector e εqαj . Each αj component of the polarization vector is associated with the displacement of the jth atom in the αth direction. The phonon mode related to the particular polarization vector e εqαj can be discussed in the context of the circular polarization. For this purpose, we introduce a new basis defined as where α V j = V j |e , for V ∈ {R, L, Z} and j ∈ {1, 2, • • • , N } (N is a total number of atoms in a prim-itive unit cell). The way of the jth atom movement is determined by a circulation C = |α R j | 2 -|α L j | 2 . When C = 0, the atom is involved in an ordinary non-circular vibration, and when C = 0, it realizes a circular motion. In T Bi 2 Te 4 , T atoms do not exhibit circular vibrations, being the only magnetic atoms in the compound. The other atoms, Te(1), Te(2), and Bi, realize a circular motion with different frequencies. Fig. In this paper, we investigated the dynamical properties of T Bi 2 Te 4 (T =Mn, Fe) compounds. Both systems crystallize in the R 3m rhombohedral structure. The phonon dispersion relations do not exhibit any imaginary frequencies and thus, both compounds are dynamically stable. We performed the analyses of the mode symmetries at the Γ point. The Raman and infrared active modes were calculated. The frequencies of the Raman active modes are in agreement with previous theoretical and experimental results. We point out that the Raman backscattering using co-or cross-circular configuration can be useful in distinguishing the A 1g and E g Raman active mode. Additionally, we show that the initially double degenerate E g modes (at the Γ point), give rise to emergence of the circularly polarized modes away from the Γ point. Moreover, chiral phonon modes are separated in the frequency domain depending on the atomic layer within the septuple layer.