Copper oxide high temperature superconductors universally exhibit multiple forms of electronically ordered phases that break the native translational symmetry of the CuO2 planes. The interplay between these orders and the superconducting ground state, as well as how they arise through doping a Mott insulator, is essential to decode the mechanisms of high-temperature superconductivity. Over the years, various forms of electronic liquid crystal phases -including charge/spin stripes and incommensurate charge-density-waves (CDWs) -were found to emerge out of a correlated metallic ground state in underdoped cuprates. Early theoretical studies also predicted the emergence of a Coulomb-frustrated 'charge crystal' phase in the very lightly-doped, insulating limit of the CuO2 planes. This charge crystal phase was observed only recently at the surface of Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+y, raising new questions on whether such a state may also exist in the bulk and thus be a common instability of cuprates. Here, we use resonant X-ray scattering, electron transport, and muon spin rotation measurements to fully resolve the electronic and magnetic ground state and search for signatures of charge order in very lightly hole-doped cuprates from the 123 family RBa2Cu3O 7-δ (RBCO; R: Y or rare earth). X-ray scattering data from RBCO films reveal a breaking of translational symmetry more pervasive than was previously known, extending down to the insulating and magnetically ordered Mott limit. The ordering vector of this charge crystal state is linearly connected to the charge-density-waves of underdoped RBCO, suggesting that the former phase is a precursor to the latter as hole doping is increased. Most importantly, the coexistence of charge and spin order in RBCO suggests that this electronic symmetry-breaking state is common to the CuO2 planes in the very lightly-doped regime. These findings bridge the gap between the Mott insulating state and the underdoped metallic state, and underscore the prominent role of Coulomb-frustrated electronic phase separation among all cuprates. Following the discovery of high-temperature superconductivity The driving mechanisms behind electronic order in the CuO 2 planes have been the subject of longstanding questions that are essential for understanding of quantum matter and high-temperature superconductivity in cuprates A clear discriminant between these two frameworks is the existence of an electronic crystal phase in the very lightly hole-doped and insulating CuO 2 , before the onset of superconductivity. This state has been predicted under the real-space scenario To address this question, we turn our attention to the 123 family of RBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ compounds (RBCO; R: Y or rare earth). Among cuprate high-temperature superconductors, the RBCO family is one of the most widely studied, owing to its low degree of electronic disorder that is enabled by sourcing the carrier doping far away from the CuO 2 planes. This possibility is uniquely enabled by the crystal structure of RBCO, with the CuO chain layer providing a charge reservoir for the CuO 2 planes, which form a bilayer around the spacer rare earth layer [Fig. Using resonant soft X-ray scattering (RXS) at Cu-L 3 (2p → 3d) and Pr-M 5 (3d → 4f ) edges, we reveal an electronically modulated state across the extended phase diagram of Y 1-x Pr x BCO, from the underdoped superconducting regime (x = 0.275 and 0.5) to the Mott limit (x = 1). In PrBCO, the observation of a Cu-site density wave in the absence of a Fermi surface and its coexistence with static Neel order crucially underscores the need for Coulomb frustration to support charge order in RBCO. We first present the basic characterization of Y 1-x Pr x BCO films with Pr content x = 0.275, 0.5, and 1. X-ray absorption spectra are shown in Figure Figure To understand these initial observations, we performed RXS experiments as a function of photon energy across the Cu-L 3 (931.3 eV) and Pr-M 5 (930.0 eV) edges. As shown in Fig. X-ray scattering data indicate the presence of two electronic modulations. The Q Pr CDW peak can be ascribed to a spatial modulation of the Pr-4f orbital occupation [see schematics in Fig. On the other hand, the Q Cu CDW peak corresponds to a periodic modulation of the occupation of Cu-3d x 2 -y 2 orbitals [Fig. and hole doping (p) in the YBCO 7-δ series [Fig. The resonant profiles (X-ray scattering intensity vs. photon energy) for Y 1-x Pr x BCO samples at intermediate doping levels are shown in Fig. For the temperature dependence, we first focus on PrBCO, where the diffraction signatures at the Cu and Pr edge display a differing temperature dependence. As shown in Fig. To summarize the trends for the cutoff temperature and the correlation lengths, while the former tends to increase with Pr-doping [Fig. In Figure The present RBCO phase diagram demonstrates the coexistence between static Cu charge and spin orders in the very lightly-doped limit. Combined with the recent observation of electronic modulation on a very lightly- (e-g), Resonant profile of the charge order peaks in x = 0.275 (e), x = 0.5 (f), and x = 1 (g). In (g), the resonant behavior of Q Cu CDW and Q Pr CDW is displayed by the red and blue lines. Overlaid filled grey curves represent the X-ray absorption spectra of each sample. (h-j) Doping-dependence of wave vectors (h), cutoff temperatures (i), and widths (j) of the charge order peaks in Y1-xPrxBCO. YBCO (x = 0, δ ≈ 0) data are adopted from previous RXS studies (Ref. doped insulating surface of Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+y Regarding the origin of charge order in cuprates, two main viewpoints have been adopted over the years HoBCO and EuBCO films were deposited on LSAT (100), polished single crystal substrates. The substrates were heated from 825 °C during deposition. A DC magnetron sputtering source was used with 50 mm HoBCO and EuBCO stoichiometric targets that had been verified by XRD. The chamber during growth was 330 mTorr with an Argon to Oxygen ratio of 1.5 sccm. Once the chamber settings were stable the DC magnetron sputter gun was ignited and ramped up to 55 watts over the course of 10 minutes. Typical growth rates were around 1 nm/min with a final film thickness of 55 nm. After deposition the chamber was filled with 500 Torr of ultrahigh purity oxygen and allowed to stand at deposition temperatures for 10 minutes. After, power was cut from the heater and the samples were allowed to cool to room temperature in 500 Torr of oxygen. The critical temperatures were 92-94K with current density of 3MA/cm 2 at 77 K. Electrical transport measurements for HoBaCuO Josephson devices are reported here The as-grown films were characterized using X-ray diffraction (XRD) and resistance vs. temperature (R vs. T ) measurements. XRD measurements were done using the θ-2θ method and show the expected substrate and film peaks. The R vs. T measurements were done in a He-4 cryostat using an AC resistance bridge and silver contacts in the Van der Pauw configuration. Superconducting transitions were observed in the x = 0.275 and x = 0.5 films, and insulating behavior in the x = 1 film. The critical temperatures (T c ) and R vs. T behaviors are similar to other YPrBCO films of comparable Pr and oxygen doping (see Refs. Resonant X-ray scattering experiments RXS experiments were performed in two different beamlines, the UE46-PGM1 beamline of BESSY II at Helmholtz Zentrum Berlin (x = 0.275 and 1) and the REIXS (10ID-2) beamline of Canadian Light Source (x = 0.5). All RXS measurements were conducted in ultra-high vacuum diffractometers with the pressure better than 10 -9 torr. Samples were aligned insitu using (0 0 2) and (1 0 2) Bragg diffractions. Momentum-space scans were obtained by rocking the sample angle at a fixed detector position. X-ray absorption spectra (XAS) were measured by monitoring total electron yields. We used outof-scattering-plane (σ) polarizations for both RXS and XAS measurements unless specified. The Low Energy μSR experiments where performed at the μE4 beamline where A osc is the coherent zero field oscillation amplitude, γ μ is the muon gyromagnetic ratio, B int the internal magnetic field at the muon site, and φ is the phase between the initial muon spin direction and the decay positron detector. λ T,L are the transverse and longitudinal depolarization rates. β 1 except close to the phase transition where it is close to 2.