We present a combined experimental and theoretical work that investigates the magnetic proximity effect at a ferromagnetic-insulator -superconductor (FI-S) interface. The simulation is based on the boundary condition for diffusive quasiclassical Greens functions, that accounts for arbitrarily strong spin-dependent effects and spin-mixing angles. The experimentally found differential conductance of an EuS-Al heterostructure is compared with a theoretical calculation. With the assumption of a uniform spin-mixing angle that depends on the externally applied field, we find good agreement between theory and experiment. The theory depends only on very few parameters, mostly specified by the experimental setup. We determine the effective spin of the interface moments as J ≈ 0.74ħ. The proximity effect between superconductors and ferromagnets has been investigated intensively in recent years The setup of the underlying experiment is shown in fig. To describe the FI-S bilayer as illustrated in fig. We defined ε σ = ε+σμ B H. Note, that due to the normalization condition for quasiclassical Green's functions one has g 1,σ = √︃ 1 -g 2 3,σ . Due to the small coercivity of EuS the assumption of only one magnetization direction as in We further assume that all spin mixing angles are the same, δφ n = δφ and, thus, replace the sum over the channel index n in the matrix current conservation with the number of channels, i.e. n → N. However, in a phenomenological way we assume that effectively only a certain fraction r N ∈ [0, 1] of scattering channels contributes to the spin mixing effect. Alternatively, we may say that the spin mixing only occurs with a certain probability r N . The corresponding equation then reads Hence, the strength of the magnetic proximity effect is taken into account in the dimensionless pa- πΔ(T=0) of the superconducting coherence length and the approximation Δ(T = 0) ≈ 1.76 T c , one finds ε ≈ 2.76r N ξ 0 /d. Hence, the parameter ε determining the influence of the ferromagnetic insulator on the superconducting film becomes smaller for increasing thickness of the film and with the fraction of spin active channels which is also physically intuitive. With the above definitions, the BCS self-consistency relation is given by: We defined the cutoff energy Ω BCS related to the upper limit of the phonon spectrum. In the following, we use Ω BCS = 100k B T c ., and the coupling constant λ that can be eliminated for the bulk superconductor in favor for the critical temperature T c . After solving the fully selfconsis- Tr[ τ3 Ĝσ ] = 1 2 (g 3,+ + g 3,-). Note, that the actual, total density of states per volume is given as N (ε)N ε F . We now discuss the self-consistency relation for different values of the parameter ε . Fig. The changes in the density of states of the superconductor are dominated by two effects. On one hand the initial peaks at the T = 0 superconductor gap Δ 0 are spin-split into two separated peaks, each positioned depending on δφ and Δ. On the other hand Δ self-consistently also depends on the spin mixing angle. In fig. To illustrate our model, we use it to fit experimental data obtained on a sample made of a superconducting aluminum film on top of the ferromagnetic insulator europium sulfide. Fig. Examples of the conductance spectra measured for different applied fields in one of the junctions is shown in Fig. Lacking a microscopic model, we have attempted to fit the field dependence of δφ with a Brillouin function. The fit is shown as a line in Fig. Concluding, based on the boundary condition We applied our theory to our experiment measuring the differential conductance in an EuS-Al bilayer. In the experiment, an enhanced spin splitting of the density of states in an external magnetic field was observed. To reproduce the experimental data, we have determined the spin-mixing angle as a function of the applied magnetic field, and given an estimate is given on how to take into account the relation between the external field and the spin mixing angle. We are thus confident that our theory will in the future provide further motivation for the interesting physics of ferromagnetic insulators and the proximity effect in ferromagnet or antiferromagnetsuperconductor heterostructures. 