We performed 75 As-NMR measurements to investigate the normal-state magnetic properties of CeRh2As2, a recently-discovered heavy-fermion superconductor. The magnitude and temperature dependence of the Knight shift at the As( Unconventional superconductivity is mostly considered to be mediated by magnetic fluctuations. One such feature is the lack of local inversion symmetry in Ce layeres with global inversion symmetry. The crystal structure is of the tetragonal CaBe 2 Ge 2 -type with space group P 4/nmm (No.129, D 7 4h ). 7) CeRh 2 As 2 has two crystallographically inequivalent As and Rh sites; As (1) [Rh (1)] is tetrahedrally coordinated by Rh (2) [As (2)], as shown in Fig. In this study, we performed 75 As-NMR measurements to investigate the normal-state magnetic properties of CeRh 2 As 2 . The temperature dependence of the Knight shift and 1/T 1 indicates spatially two-dimensional magnetic fluctuations with easy-plane (XY )-type anisotropy in CeRh 2 As 2 . Two-dimensional magnetic correlations in the real space are quite different from those of other heavy-fermion superconductors, as a result of which it exhibits a unique SC state. Single crystals of CeRh 2 As 2 and a non-magnetic reference compound LaRh 2 As 2 were grown by the Bi flux method. where h, ν Q = 3heQVzz 2I(2I-1) , and η = Vyy -Vxx Vzz are the Planck constant, NQR frequency, and asymmetry parameter, respectively. η is zero at each As site because of the 4-fold symmetry of the atomic position. Because ν Q of the As(1) site (∼ 30 MHz) is larger than that of the As(2) site (∼ 10 MHz), where A hf,i , χ spin,i , and K orb,i are respectively the hyperfine coupling constant, spin susceptibility, and orbital part of the Knight shift in each direction (which is generally temperature independent). K i in CeRh 2 As 2 for both magnetic field directions increased on cooling. While K c shows a broad maximum at 3 K [see the inset of Fig. and CeIrSi 3 21, 22) have this kind of XY -type magnetic anisotropy. Unlike in the case of CeRh 2 As 2 , K i in LaRh 2 As 2 slightly decreased on cooling. In conventional metals, K i remains constant with changes in temperature. The weak temperature-dependent K i in LaRh 2 As 2 can be explained by the increase in the density of states due to thermally excited quasi-particles. This suggests the presence of a peak of the density of states near the Fermi energy E F , as in the case of iron-based superconductors. The hyperfine coupling constant A hf,i can be determined by the slope of the K-χ plot, as shown in Figs. Next, we discuss the spin dynamics in CeRh 2 As 2 . Figures 4 (a) and 4 (b) show the temperature dependence of 1/T 1 . 1/T 1 of CeRh 2 As 2 showed a complex temperature dependence; specifically, it decreased slowly at high temperatures, decreased significantly below ∼ 100 K, and finally became constant below 10 K. In contrast, 1/T 1 of LaRh 2 As 2 is roughly proportional to temperature in both magnetic-field directions; this is the typical behavior of conventional metals. To extract the contribution of Ce 4f moments (1/T 1 ) 4f , 1/T 1 of LaRh 2 As 2 was subtracted from that of CeRh 2 As 2 as shown in the inset of Fig. where R i ≡ |H hf,i (ω res )| 2 and |X(ω)| 2 denotes the power spectral density of a time-dependent random variable X(t). Because both As sites have 4-fold symmetry of the atomic position, R a = R b ; thus, the relations (1/T 1 T ) 4f,c = 2R a and (1/T 1 T ) 4f,⊥ = R a + R c can be applied. Figure Finally, we comment on the relationship between the magnetic anisotropy and a magnetic structure in the AFM state inside the SC phase. From our NQR measurements, the A-type AFM (in-plane ferromagnetic and inter-plane antiferromagnetic) order with magnetic moments parallel to the c axis or a helical order with inplane moments are promising candidates for the magnetic structure. In conclusion, we performed 75 As-NMR measurements to investigate the normal-state magnetic properties of CeRh 2 As 2 . The magnitude and temperature dependence of the Knight shift at the As(2) site indicated XYtype magnetic anisotropy in CeRh 2 As 2 . For spin fluctuations, spatially two-dimensional XY -type antiferromagnetic fluctuations were confirmed from the temperature dependence of 1/T 1 . These results should be crucial for clarifying the origin of the SC multi phase and the special coexistence of superconductivity and magnetism in CeRh 2 As 2 .