In this study, we fabricate 5-30-nm-thick films of FeSe/STO using pulsed laser deposition (PLD). The grown films exhibit superconductivity with an onset Tc that is much higher than that of bulk FeSe under ambient pressure. The observed Tc values are exceptionally high in terms of the strain vs. Tc relationship of the same material established so far. Furthermore, Tc increases as the film thickness decreases, except for films thinner than 10 nm. This thickness dependence of Tc is in good agreement with the results reported for films grown by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) that exhibit interface superconductivity. These results indicate the realization of interface superconductivity in PLD-grown FeSe/STO. Furthermore, our PLD technique requires no post-annealing to realize interface superconductivity, which is different from MBE techniques. Because the PLD technique has the advantage that various interfaces can be fabricated easily by simply altering the target materials, our results open novel routes to study interface superconductivity toward higher Tc by systematic control of the interface. The iron chalcogenide superconductor FeSe has garnered significant attention for its high tunability of the superconducting transition temperature (T c ). Although the onset T c (T onset c ) of bulk FeSe is 9 K at ambient pressure In contrast to the ARPES results, resistivity measurements reported a T onset c of 40-45 K This discrepancy in the reported values of T c observed by different measurement techniques suggests that the exact feature of interface superconductivity in FeSe/STO is still far from being fully understood. Therefore, a more detailed investigation of the interfacial effects is essential. In this context, the artificial control of the interface is a promising approach. For feasible control of the interface, pulsed laser deposition (PLD) has advantages in fabricating various heterostructures at low cost because different materials can be deposited by simply switching the target materials. However, all studies on the interface superconductivity of FeSe published so far were performed using the molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) technique. This is because it is difficult to grow high-quality thin films of compounds that contain highly volatile Se using other growth techniques. Indeed, none of the previous studies by PLD succeeded in fabricating FeSe films that exhibited the interface superconductivity. In this paper, we report the successful growth of FeSe/STO which exhibits interface superconductivity, using the PLD technique for the first time. We fabricate 5-30-nm-thick FeSe films on atomically flat STO substrates. The grown films exhibit a T onset c higher than 19 K, which is much higher than that of bulk FeSe All the FeSe thin films in this study were grown on insulating STO (001) substrates using PLD with a KrF laser. The STO substrate was annealed at 1000 • C in air and rinsed with water to obtain a TiO 2terminated surface with a step-terrace structure The orientation and crystal structure of the grown films were characterized using X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements with Cu Kα radiation at room temperature. The c-axis and a-axis lengths of the films were estimated from (00l ) (l = 1, 2, 3, and 4), (±204), and (0±24) reflections using 2θ-ω scans. The thicknesses of the films were estimated from the Laue fringe around the (001) reflection peak or using a Dektak 6M stylus profiler. Resistivity was measured using a physical property measurement system (PPMS), from 2 to 200 K. Figures It is well known that in-plane strain strongly affects the superconducting properties of FeSe The interface superconductivity in the grown films is also suggested by the thickness dependence of T onset c . Figure Compared with MBE-grown films The PLD-grown films with d < 10 nm did not show a significant increase in T onset c as the film thickness decreased, different from the MBE-grown films, and the 5-nm-thick film did not even exhibit superconductivity. Figure In conclusion, we fabricated FeSe films on STO with a thickness of 5-30 nm which exhibited superconductivity with T onset c much higher than that of bulk FeSe under ambient pressure. The observed T c in the grown films was exceptionally high in terms of the strain-T c relation of the same material established so far. T c increased with decreasing film thickness, except for films thinner than 10 nm. This thickess dependence of T c is in good agreement with that of MBEgrown films that exhibited interface superconductivity 