The book by Volovik The book by Volovik The argument goes as follows. The Green function of the ideal Fermi gas has a pole in the (E, |p|) plane (where E and p are energy and momentum). If we consider the closed contour around this pole, then the change of the phase along this contour is 2π, which is considered as the topological invariant. The same topological invariant exists in the case of a vortex in liquid helium. On this ground, the pole is considered to be topologically equivalent to the vortex. The vortex is a topologically stable object: you can do nothing with it, if you have not at hand the energy comparable with the vortex binding energy. Hence, one can include interaction adiabatically (as a succession of small perturbations) and observe transformation of the Fermi gas pole to the Fermi liquid pole. Since only existence of the pole is topologically protected, its position and residue can be changed, leading to the Fermi liquid renormalization of parameters. As a result, one reproduces all essential statements of the Luttinger theorem One can easily suspect that not all is good with this argument. According to it, the topological stability arises already on the level of the ideal Fermi gas; however, the ideal Fermi gas posseses the wellknown Cooper instability. As a result, one is staying before a choice: either something is wrong with this argument, or "topological stability" is physically irrelevant in this context. In fact, both things are true. If references to topology are put aside, the logical mistake is very simple. The pole and the vortex have one common property: a change of the phase is 2π along the embracing contour. However, it does not mean that all other properties are analogous. In fact, the analogy between the pole and the vortex is absolutely incorrect. The vortex is a quantized object, while the pole is not subjected to any quantization: the residue in it can be changed continuously The given considerations can be illustrated on the example of the Anderson model, describing the movement of an electron in the random potential, and corresponding to discretization of the usual Schroedinger equation (J is the hopping integral, E is the energy, Ψ n is a wave function at the site n). If J = 0 and all V n are equal to V 0 , then the Green function of (1) has a simple pole at E = V 0 . If the model of an alloy is considered, when V n = V 0 with probability 1p and V n = V 1 with probability p, then the pole is splitted into two poles at E = V 0 and E = V 1 . It can be done for arbitrary small p and V 1 -V 0 , which corresponds to an arbitrary small concentration of arbitrary weak inpurities and is admitted as a small perturbation according to all physical criteria. If V n have the Gaussian distribution with the arbitrary small width, the pole transforms to the infinite cut The latter example reveals one more qualitative difference between the pole and the vortex. The vortex obeys the binding energy, which provides rigidity against attempts to deform it. No energy is associated with the pole and it has not rigidity against extention. The given illustration does not correspond to the book What about references to topology and the topological invariant? The clear answer can be given for the case of the pole in the complex E plane, using the spectral representation of the Green function where Ψ s (x) and ǫ s are eigenfunctions and eigenvalues of the Hamiltonian. Let begin with some simple situation like J = 0 and V n = 0 in The situation is analogous for the case considered in the book It should be clear from above that references to topology should be made with great precaution. It set other questions in respect to content of the book As for the plasticine roll, there is no problem to make a ball from it, and there is no topological stability. A simple existence of the topological invariant does not mean anything. The first question should be asked, is this topological invariant really unchangeable. Is a situation of rubber or plasticine? Unfortunately, such questions are never asked in the book The helium vortex can be associated with the pole in the behavior of the order parameter, but the residue in this pole is a fixed number for a given temperature. The topological protection from perturbations is a serious thing, which is vividly discussed in the context of quantum computing. The main idea is to reduce a system to a set of the quatized objects; continuous objects are not suitable for it. The cut is infinite, because Vn are unbounded for the Gaussian distribution. If Vn are restricted, then the cut will be finite.