We study a multiorbital Hubbard model coupled to local Jahn-Teller phonons to investigate the superconducting state realized in fullerides. A weak-coupling approach is employed in combination with a local self-energy approximation. In addition to the normal and anomalous self-energies of the electrons, we consider the phonon self-energy, which allows a self-consistent treatment of the energetics. The frequency dependence of the self-energies and their characteristic coefficients, such as renormalization factors and dampings, are investigated in detail using numerical calculations. It is clarified that the anisotropic phonons play an important role in the stabilization of the superconducting state. By comparing the full results to those without phonon self-energies, we show that the superconductivity is stabilized by the softening of the phonon frequency. The effects of electronic fluctuations are also considered, which leads to the coupling to orbitons, an analog of plasmons in the electron gas. This additional contribution further stabilizes the superconducting state. Electron-phonon coupling is ubiquitous in solids, and it causes a variety of interesting phenomena. One prominent example is superconductivity: the effective interaction between electrons becomes attractive, due to contributions mediated by the phonons, and results in Cooper pair formation. Although in the conventional BCS theory the attractive interaction is treated as instantaneous, the actual electron-phonon interaction leads to a retardation effect in the effective interaction. This situation is described by the Eliashberg theory Usually, the phonons describe atomic oscillators in solids. The situation is however different in the fulleride superconductors In the three-dimensional fullerides with cubic symmetry, intersite correlations are relatively weak so that the dynamical mean-field theory (DMFT), which takes into account local correlations, is a suitable theoretical ap-proach In this paper, we analyze the model by using the Eliashberg theory within the framework of DMFT, which provides an intuitive understanding of the Jahn-Teller Hubbard model. We focus on the fact that the electronelectron interaction and electron-phonon interaction can be handled in a unified way by introducing the chargeorbital (multipolar) moments This paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we derive the self-consistent Eliashberg equations from the variational principle. In Sec. III, the phonon self-energy is introduced, which is necessary for the selfconsistent treatment of the internal energy. Section IV is devoted to the analysis of the normal Fermi liquid in the weak-coupling limit. We provide detailed numerical results in Sec. V. In Sec. VI, we study a more complicated situation by considering the fluctuations from the electron-electron interaction. Finally, we summarize the results in Sec. VII. Appendix A explains the connection to the actual C 60 molecule. Convenient formulae and some calculation details are provided in Appendices B and C. A. Jahn-Teller-Hubbard model We consider the three-orbital Hubbard model coupled to isotropic and anisotropic phonons. The Hamiltonian is written as The electron part is given by H e = H e0 + H int , where H e0 describes the non-interacting part and H int is the local Coulomb interaction with the Slater-Kanamori form where i is the lattice site index and σ =↑, ↓ denotes spin. The orbital index is written as γ = x, y, z and refers to the molecular t 1u orbitals relevant for alkali-doped fullerides. We use the standard parametrization for the interaction: U γγγγ = U is the intra-orbital interaction, U γγ γ γ = U is the inter-orbital interaction, and U γγ γγ = U γγγ γ = J (> 0) is the ferromagnetic Hund's coupling (γ = γ ). Assuming spherical symmetry in the interaction, we set U = U -2J. The non-interacting part will be specified later. In the phonon parts, we consider local phonons arising from the dynamical deformation of the fullerene molecule, which couples to the orbital degrees of freedom of the electrons. The Hamiltonian is given by where φ iη = a iη + a † iη is a displacement operator for molecular vibrations. The charge-orbital moment T iη (η = 0, 1, 3, 4, 6, 8) is introduced together with the Gell-Mann matrices as and describes the change in the isotropic (η = 0) and anisotropic (η = 1, 3, 4, 6, 8) electron charge distribution. The hat symbol (ˆ) indicates a 3 × 3 matrix in the orbital space. There are useful orthogonality relations: Tr λη λη = 2δ ηη , ( λ0 and η=1,6,4 ( λη ) 2 = 2 1. In cubic symmetric systems, such as fcc fullerides, polynomial representations can be assigned to each component: ), where r 2 = x 2 + y 2 + z 2 and the irreducible representations are written in the parenthesis. We note that the decomposition into irreducible representations relevant for the electronic degrees of freedom is where [• • • ] stands for the symmetric product corresponding to electric (timereversal-even) degrees of freedom such as charge and orbital moments. In an actual isolated fullerene molecule (point group I h ), there are 174 vibrational modes, and two A g and eight H g modes are coupled to the charge-orbital moments defined in the t 1u electronic orbital space Using the above Gell-Mann matrices, the Slater-Kanamori interaction can be rewritten in a symmetric and compact form where the colon (:) symbol represents the normal ordering. The interaction parameters are I 0 = 3 4 U -J and 2 , as derived from the original H int and reflecting the spherical symmetry. One can recognize that the forms of the electron-electron interaction in Eq. ( It is convenient to trace out the phonons by employing the path-integral formalism. In order to do this, we consider the partition function where c and a are Grassmann and complex numbers associated with the electrons (fermions) and phonons (bosons), respectively. The bosons can be integrated out, and the resultant partition function is given by where A is an unimportant constant. The effective action is given by S eff = S e0 + S int with For simplicity, we have used a vector notation for the Berry phase term in Eq. where G η (τ ) = -T a η (τ )ā η (0) 0 is the non-interacting boson Green function. Here T indicates the imaginarytime ordering operator. The explicit expression is We note that, while the formulations are written in terms of continuous imaginary time for simplicity, the actual calculation must be performed for discrete variables The DMFT approximation, which allows to treat strong local correlation effects, is a suitable theoretical framework for three-dimensional electron systems. However, taking full account of the retarded interaction in multiorbital systems is technically challenging, and some additional approximations are needed. Here, we take a different approach and analyze the above model by employing the variational principle. We introduce the model action in the form where ρ and ∆ are complex local auxiliary fields to be determined. This model action is the most generic one with bilinear terms with respect to the Grassmann numbers. At this point, we also introduce the single-particle Green function, which is defined by where the quantum statistical average is defined with the model action as The check symbol (ˇ) indicates a 2 × 2 matrix in the Nambu space. The Nambu spinor has been introduced as ψ iγ = (c iγ↑ , ciγ↓ ) T and ψiγ = (c iγ↑ , c iγ↓ ). We employ the Gibbs-Bogoliubov inequality for the variational free-energy functional F var given by -ln Z ≤ F var = -ln Z model + S eff -S model , where we have defined the symmetrized interaction as and defined Ĝγγ (τ ) ≡ Ĝγγ (ii; τ ) assuming translational symmetry. We note that the Hartree term just gives a chemical potential shift for a cubic-symmetric system and is neglected. We have assumed spin-singlet pairing and even imaginary-time dependence of ∆ ↑↓ (τ, τ ). Next, we define the self-energy by Note that Σ is introduced in the restricted local Nambu basis for a spin-singlet pair, while the auxiliary fields in Eq. ( where the diagonal and offdiagonal parts correspond to the normal and anomalous self-energies, respectively. This Eliashberg equation is consistent with the weak-coupling perturbtation theory with respect to the electron-phonon coupling constant g η and the electronelectron interaction I η , which confirms the validity of our equation. Let us make a comment on the difference between our formulation and that utilizing the Stratonovich-Hubbard transformation. In the latter case, we must be careful about the sign of the interaction term and the convergence of the Gaussian integrals. Furthermore, the decoupling of the interaction using the auxiliary bosonic field is not unique Models with retarded interactions have been numerically studied using DMFT combined with the continuoustime quantum Monte Carlo method The cubic symmetry simplifies the self-consistent equations considerably. Within the restricted t 1u orbital space, the cubic symmetry requires that the self-energy must be proportional to the identity matrix in orbital space. Hence we can write the self-energy as where we have chosen the phase of the anomalous selfenergy as real. (We write these relations with the fermionic Matsubara frequency ω n = (2n + 1)πT (n ∈ Z) at temperature T .) Correspondingly, the Green functions are also proportional to the identity matrix: Ĝ = G 1 and F = F 1. With this, we obtain a much simplified Eliashberg equation: The last expression shows that each η equally contributes to the effective interaction among the electrons. This point will be discussed in Sec. IV in more detail. We note that we do not consider the possibility of orbital symmetry breaking, even though such a symmetry breaking can occur in the strongly correlated regime The Dyson equation, which has now also a simple form due to the cubic symmetry, connects the local self-energy and Green function as where the intersite information is included in the density of states ρ(ε). We will take a semi-circular shape for ρ(ε), since we want to understand the qualitative features which do not depend on the details of the density of states. As derived in the last section, the simple variational principle for the effective electron system results in a coupling to the free bosons. Here, we consider the self-energy for the phonons and show that it is important for a selfconsistent energetics in electron-phonon coupled systems. In the presence of the self-energy, the a † a † -type average becomes finite. Hence, a representation involving φ iη = a iη + a † iη instead of a iη is more appropriate. The corresponding Green function is defined by The relations among the phonon Green functions is detailed in Appendix B. The off-diagonal part with respect to η is zero because of the orthogonality theorem in the group theory under the cubic symmetry. The Fourier transform is given by where ν m = 2mπT (m ∈ Z) is the bosonic Matsubara frequency at temperare T . We have assumed a local self-energy also for the phonons. Note that the Dyson equation for the phonon part does not involve any intersite information, because of the local nature of the non-interacting Hamiltonian, in contrast to the electron case. The self-energy is obtained by weak-coupling perturbation theory. Up to second order in the electron-phonon coupling g η , we obtain where we define the charge-orbital correlation function and 'conn' represents the contribution from the connected diagrams. The phase of the pair potential, and therefore the pair amplitude (= anomalous Green function), is fixed as real. The factor of 4 originates from spin and the trace of the square of the Gell-Mann matrices. Note that the charge-orbital correlation function χ η is expressed only in terms of the electronic degrees of freedom. It is not dependent on the index η because vertex corrections are neglected. Correspondingly, the effective interaction in Eq. ( which now includes the self-energy. This may be derived by second-order perturbation theory or by repeating the procedure in the last section with the phonon self-energy. Although the phonon self-energy from the coupling to the electrons is sometimes neglected in strong-coupling theories When the electron-electron interaction is absent, the two expressions must give the same result, and hence the phonon self-energy is necessary for a self-consistent theory. The equations obtained above ensure this selfconsistency and can be used to derive the expression for the phonon self-energy. Practically, if we consider only the electron selfenergies, the electron-electron interaction energy and electron-phonon interaction energy always appear together in Eq. ( Before we study the numerical solution of the Eliashberg equations, we consider the normal-state properties based on the lowest-order perturbation theory. The physics in this section is basically the same as previously discussed for the usual electron-phonon coupling where G is the local Green function and the normal state is assumed so that the anomalous Green function is zero (F = 0). Here we take the zeroth-order contribution for the Green function: Using a semi-circular bare density of states, ρ(ε) = at low energies and at low temperatures (see Appendix C for the derivation). The first term corresponds to a static local susceptibility Re χ(0) ∝ ρ(0). The second term gives the Korringa relation Im χ(ω +i0 + )/ω ∝ ρ(0) 2 for a normal metal, which originates from a dynamical local correlation function. This expression immediately yields the phonon selfenergy according to Eq. where the shifted frequency ωη and the damping γ η for the phonons are given by The decrease in the frequency implies a softening of the phonons caused by the coupling to the electrons. Indeed, the denominator of Eq. ( where we have defined the bare attractive interaction λ η = 4g 2 η 3ωη (not to be confused with the Gell-Mann matrices λη in Eq. ( where we have used the cubic symmetry, i.e., the equivalence of η = 3, 8 (E g ) and that of η = 1, 6, 4 (T 2g ). The first and second lines of Eq. ( It can be recognized that the Jahn-Teller phonon contributions λ 1,3,4,6,8 are important as they give five times larger contributions in total in the present system, compared to the isotropic component λ 0 (∼ λ 1 , see Appendix A). In contrast, for the electron-electron interaction, the anisotropic parts I 1,3,4,6,8 are of the order of the Hund's coupling J, which is small compared to the isotropic component I 0 ∼ U , especially in fullerides with extended molecular orbitals. Hence, compared with the isotropic case which has only the η = 0 component in the first line of Eq. ( Once the phonon propagator has been obtained, the self-energy for the electrons can be also evaluated as where we have assumed the magnitude relations T, |ω n | ω η D (see Appendix C for the derivation). This expression determines the properties of the Fermi liquid such as the mass renormalization (first term) and quasi-particle damping (second term) near zero temperature. While the above expressions are based on several assumptions such as λ η , ω η D, they fit the numerical results well at small electron-phonon coupling, as shown in the next section. On the other hand, the electronelectron interaction only gives a chemical potential shift in the normal state and does not alter the physical properties. We will reconsider this point in Sec. VI and take fluctuations from I η into account. A. Parameters Throughout this section, we take the energy unit 2D = 1, where D is the half band width of the semi-circular density of states (D will be varied in Sec. VI). We consider the three half-filled orbitals, as realized in the alkalidoped fullerides, and choose λ η = λ 0 . This condition with no η-dependence approximately corresponds to the realistic situation for fullerene molecules (see Appendix A for more details). The Hund's coupling is fixed as J/U 0.03 We begin with the discussion of the frequency dependence of the self-energies. We take T = 0.002, and change the electron-phonon coupling λ 0 (= λ η for all η). The system becomes superconducting for λ 0 = 0.125 and 0.175 if we allow for a nonzero pair potential. Here we concentrate on the normal state, while the pairing state will be discussed in the next subsection. In the normal phase, the Coulomb interaction U just contributes to the chemical potential shift and may be neglected, while it affects the pair potential. We also show the phonon self-energy in Fig. Next, we show the characteristic coefficients extracted from the self-energies. The renormalization factor a of the electrons is defined by and the quasiparticle damping Γ by The actual extrapolation to zero frequency is performed numerically at each temperature. Hence the extrapolated values are meaningful only at low temperatures. Figure In panel (b), we plot the data on a logarithmic scale since the damping covers a wide range of values. Both quantities are increasing functions of the electron-phonon coupling. At small couplings, λ 0 0.1, the renormalization factor is temperature-independent as shown in Fig. Actually, the non-Fermi liquid behavior in the normal state seems to be unavoidable for a strong-coupling superconductor: it is closely related to the entropy balance seen in the specific heat. We will consider this aspect later in Sec. V C. We note that, in the context of the present paper, the terminology 'strong coupling' means a strong retardation effect from the electron-phonon coupling tronic correlation effects. In the case of the phonons, the shifted quasiparticle energy ωη and damping γ η are extracted from the lowenergy properties of the self-energy: These parameters are shown in Fig. In this subsection, we discuss the frequency dependence of the anomalous self-energy shown in Fig. The effect of the pair potential is also reflected in the normal self-energy as shown in Fig. The anomalous self-energy in Fig. We now consider the specific heat which is evaluated as the temperature derivative of the internal energy: Solving the self-consistent equations, we obtain the self-energies for the electrons and phonons. Then, the interaction energies can be calculated by Eqs. Figure If we consider the superconducting state, the logarithmic region is replaced by the superconducting region (see filled symbols). Although the system above the transition temperature shows a nearly temperatureindependent C/T , the renormalization factor plotted in Fig. Next, we focus on the entropy balance: both in the normal (n) and superconducting (s) state, the entropy must be the same at the transition temperature: This quantity may be graphically estimated as the closed area shown in Fig. Figure It is interesting to compare these results with those for zero phonon self-energy (Π = 0). We note that, with the above approximation, Eq. ( We now proceed one step further in order to improve the accuracy of the theory. Utilizing the fact that the electron-electron interaction (3) and electron-phonon interaction where I η > 0 (the case with I η < 0 can be considered separately). Given the above form of the interaction terms, it is tempting to describe the electron-electron interaction and electron-phonon interaction in a unified way. The Stratonovich-Hubbard transformation for the Coulomb interaction term is unique for this representation, and the integral with respect to the p-field gives The newly introduced local variable Q iη is similar to the plasmon in the electron gas problem where g may be regarded as a renormalized coupling constant. Then the formulation in the last sections can be recycled, by replacing g → g and φ → φ. The electronic part can be integrated with the use of second-order perturbation theory. In the frequency domain, the effective action for the bosons is given by where Dη = D η,φφ D η,φQ D η,Qφ D η,QQ with D η,AB (τ ) = -T A iη (τ )B iη (0) is the bosonic Green function matrix of the coupled phonon-orbiton system. The orbital correlation function χ has already been defined in Eq. ( The off-diagonal components show that the phonon and orbiton are coupled locally through the coupling to the electrons. If we set I η to zero, we reproduce the results in Sec. III. We can also calculate the electronic self-energy from Eqs. ( Note that this expression is based on second-order perturbation theory with respect to the coupling between the electrons and bosons. With the coupling to orbitons, a dynamical correction to the electron self-energy appears even without the coupling to phonons. In order to recognize the effect which is newly included here, let us consider the case with g η = 0. The effective interaction for the channel η can then be written as where Ũη (∞) = I η corresponds to a bare interaction (χ < 0). Since the relation 0 < Ũη (iν m ) < I η holds, the effective interaction Ũ (iν m ) represents a locally screened Coulomb repulsive interaction. The different η-channels are not mixed in this expression. It follows from Eq. (59) that the screening factor (1 -2I η χ) -1 becomes smaller if the original interaction I η is bigger. This indicates that the charge part I 0 ∼ U is strongly screened, while the effect for the orbital part I 1,3,4,6,8 ∼ J ( U ) is much weaker. Figure Let us emphasize again that the present approach is based on perturbation theory and the results are not necessarily physical when they are applied to large coupling constants. For example, the system becomes superconducting even without the coupling to phonons (at D = 0.5 and T = 0.002, superconductivity appears for U 8). This is because the fluctuation effect included in the above formulation always gives an attractive contribution to the effective interaction. Hence, the results are valid only at small Coulomb interactions, while the region with larger couplings requires more sophisticated techniques. Despite this limitation, the approach formulated in this paper is useful for the physical interpretation of the solutions. In this paper, we have studied the Jahn-Teller-Hubbard model, where the electrons in multiple orbitals are locally coupled to both isotropic and anisotropic phonons. We employed the Eliashberg approach and calculated the self-energies for the electrons and phonons. We discussed the characteristic behaviors of the specific heat and mapped out the phase diagram. The effect of the coupling to the anisotropic phonons and their selfenergy is important to account for the superconduct-ing transition temperature. The fluctuations from the Coulomb interaction may be incorporated by introducing the orbitons through the Stratonovich-Hubbard transformation of the Coulomb interaction, where the phonons and orbitons can be handled in a unified way because of the charge-orbital moment description of the interactions. The formulation given in this paper may be understood in analogy to the electron gas model with infinitesimal translational symmetry. There, the electron-electron interaction can be written as and the electron-phonon coupling as where n(q) is the Fourier transformation of the electron density, and φ(q) that of the local dilation with the interaction density of states J η (ω) = ξ (g ξ η ) 2 δ(ω -ω ξ η ). This is a familiar expression reminiscent of the standard Eliashberg theory In Fig. We consider the Green functions of φ = a+a † = φ † and p = (a-a † )/i = p † where the indices (i, η) are suppressed in the Green functions for simplicity. We define the Green functions as where A(τ ) = e τ H Ae -τ H is the Heisenberg picture with imaginary time τ . We have the following relations in the Fourier domain: where z is a complex frequency and we take z = iν m for the Matsubara representation. These relations can be used for a general Hamiltonian with the form H = iη ω η a † iη a iη + H 1 [φ]. Combining Eqs. (B4) and (B7), we obtain where the first term on the right-hand side is the inverse of the non-interacting Green function. Namely, the off-diagonal Green function G 21 ∼ a † a † , which is the difference between G φφ and G pp according to Eq. (B7), is proportional to the self-energy. Appendix C: Self-energies in the normal state 1. Derivation of Eq. (39) The calculation can be performed in a manner similar to Refs. We begin with the spectral representation of the self-consistent equation, The real and imaginary parts are given by Re Σ R (ε) = - Assuming that the phonon energy scale is small compared to the electronic energies (band width), and by using the fact that Im U R is an odd function, we obtain the imaginary part at low energies as where we have assumed that the the dominant contribution to the integral comes from ω T at low enough temperatures due to the Fermi distribution functions. The real part can also be explicitly evaluated by assuming that the damping of the phonons is sufficiently small: Expanding the expression by ε and noting that the electronic band width is much larger than the phonon energy scales, we find the first term of Eq. ( 