Piezoelectric optomechanical platforms present one of the most promising routes towards efficient transduction of signals from the microwave to the optical frequency domains. New device architectures need to be developed in order to achieve the stringent requirements for building efficient quantum transducers. In this work, we utilize the mechanical supermode principle to improve the overall microwave to optical transduction efficiency, by fabricating Lamb wave resonators that are hybridized with the mechanical breathing modes of a rib waveguide in a suspended gallium arsenide (GaAs) photonic integrated circuits (PIC) platform. Combining the strong elasto-optic interactions available in GaAs with the increased phonon injection efficiency enabled by this architecture, we demonstrate signal transduction up to 7 GHz, and an increase in transduction efficiency by ≈ 25× for the hybridized mode (fm ≈ 2 GHz), using this approach. We also outline routes for improving device performance to enable quantum transduction within this platform. Engineering hybrid quantum systems The key challenge with building efficient microwave to optical signal transducers lies in overcoming the massive disparity in frequencies (GHz -100s THz) and associated wavelengths (cm -μm), which reduces the interaction strength between the fields considerably. By converting the microwave signal to an acoustic wave which has ≈ μm wavelength at GHz frequencies, piezoelectric optomechanical transducers overcome this wavelength mismatch problem and present one of the most promising routes towards building microwave to optical signal transducers In a piezoelectric optomechanical platform, the microwave to optical signal transduction is carried out in two steps. The microwave signal is first converted to an acoustic wave and this acoustic wave then either directly or indirectly excites the mechanical mode of an optomechanical cavity. An optical pump field circulating in the cavity is modulated by this acousto-optic interaction and produces an optical sideband, which is the desired signal of interest. The overall transduction efficiency (η peak ) In this work, we design and fabricate Lamb wave resonators in a suspended GaAs photonic integrated circuits platform While the mechanical supermode principle The Lamb wave resonator is designed by building a traditional interdigitated transducer (IDT) on a suspended membrane. A Lamb wave resonator We would like to note here that while Lamb wave resonators have been demonstrated around integrated photonics platforms before Fig. The Lamb wave resonator is built to incorporate the rib waveguide. A schematic of the device cross-section, showing the interface between the Lamb wave resonator and the rib waveguide, and the resulting mode hybridization, is shown in Fig. The microwave signal is coupled to the IDTs using standard RF probes (Picoprobe 40A GSG). The Lamb wave resonances of the membrane can be measured from the RF reflection (S 11 ) spectrum of the device. Representative S 11 spectra for devices with IDT periods 1 μm and 0.8 μm are shown in Fig. The acousto-optic (AO) interaction inside the waveguide can be accurately modelled using an FEM simulation (COMSOL Multiphysics) of the acoustic and optical fields and calculating the AO perturbation using an overlap integral between the two. In general, the AO interaction has two contributions of different physical origin. When the acoustic wave perturbs the rib waveguide, it changes the waveguide dimensions perturbing the overall optical field distribution. This is referred to as the moving boundary perturbation where G MB and G PE represent the gradient of the optical frequency with displacement (dω/dx) for movingboundary and photoelastic contributions, respectively, and ω 0 is the resonance frequency of the unperturbed optical mode. In equation ( GaAs --1 air . In equation ( where p 11 = -0.165, p 12 = -0.14 and p 44 = -0.072 are the photoelastic coefficients of GaAs. The photoelastic matrix in equation ( For the experiments, the more relevant quantity to define is the vacuum optomechanical coupling rate g 0 , which quantifies the interaction strength between a single photon and a single phonon in the mechanical mode (due to vacuum fluctuations). This is defined as g 0 = Gx ZPF , where x ZPF is the zero-point mechanical fluctuation amplitude: where, is the effective mass of the phonon mode. The mode displacement is integrated over a simulation domain region R, defined by a coordinate variable r ∈ R. ρ is the density of the material (GaAs, isotropic) and Q is the mechanical displacement of the mode as define above in equation In this work, we perform FEM simulations and overlap integrals of propagating modes across the device crosssection in 2D. Therefore, surface integral (dS) and volume integral (dV ) in equations ( The total optomechanical interaction strength (g 0,tot ) is calculated as (g 0,MB + g 0,PE ) * η cav , where η cav is the ratio of the rib waveguide section coupled to acoustic resonator (L c ), to that of the overall length of the microring. This acousto-optic participation ratio (η cav ) in our current designs is 20%. The numerically evaluated g 0 from equations ( The acoustic and optical modes are simulated independently, as shown in Fig. In GaAs, the AO interaction is primarily dominated by the photoelastic effect. For reference, in the case of a rib waveguide with width 540 nm, thickness 220 nm, rib thickness 100 nm and rib width of 3.54 μm, we calculate g 0,MB = 3.12 kHz and g 0,PE = -100.06 kHz. As noted above, the shear horizontal breathing mode of a rib waveguide has a large overlap with the fundamental TE optical mode, leading to g 0 ≈ 100 kHz. We would like to note again that all g 0 values are calculated for an overlap length of 60 μm, which corresponds to the width of the fabricated Lamb wave resonator devices. To observe the coherent AO modulation, we use the experimental setup shown in Fig. By parking the laser at the optimal detuning (∆ ≈ κ/2), and sweeping the VNA frequency, we can measure the coherent AO modulation induced by the Lamb wave resonator. Fig. The waveguide widths in the two cases are 0.564 μm and 0.574 μm respectively. The device dimensions are estimated from SEM images of the device post fabrication, the images are shown in Appendix C. The overlap integrals are calculated for the mechanical mode with the fundamental TE optical mode. We can see that the additional peaks in the S 21 spectrum are approximately aligned (subject to fabrication tolerance and uncertainty in determining device dimensions) with high g 0 mechanical modes, which provide moderate transduction efficiencies, even though they are mis-aligned with the Lamb wave resonator frequency (cf. modes at ≈ 3.5 GHz in Fig. to a dimensional uncertainty of ± 25 nm. From Fig. The suitability of the Lamb wave resonator geometry for achieving high frequency transduction can also be seen from the solid green boxes in Fig. To quantify the overall signal transduction efficiency and in particular, the enhancement due to the supermode, we extract the experimental acousto-optic cou-pling strength g 0 and the overall signal transduction efficiency for different mechanical modes using the magnitude of the measured AO S 21 signal. To estimate this, we assume we are operating with weak microwave input power and in the regime where the mechanical frequency (Ω m ) is comparable to but does not exceed the optical cavity decay rate (κ) valid in both the sideband resolved and unresolved regimes. Here κ (κ e ) and γ (γ e ) are the total decay rate (external coupling rate) of the optical and acoustic mode respectively, R P D is the conversion gain of the photodetector (16.5 V/W), P rec is the power received at the photodetector and R load = 50Ω is the impedance of the input microwave source. The detailed analysis and derivation are provided in the Appendix A. Table I lists the experimental transduction efficiency and associated opto-electro-mechanical system parameters for the devices shown in Fig. We would like to note here that while we have used the enhancement in η peak and the spectral alignment of modes to infer the formation of the supermode, ideally, one would like to map the acoustic displacement field To achieve quantum transduction in this platform, the microwave to optical photon transduction efficiency, η peak ≈ 1, which requires a significant improvement in current device performance. Although the supermode approach helps with increasing the η peak considerably in our current devices, the overall device performance is still limited by the bare device optical (Q o ) and mechanical (Q m ) quality factors. In particular, the Q o is ≈ 2 * 10 4 , which is significantly lower than one would expect from a rib waveguide microring geometry. It is possible that our devices have some residual underside roughness af-ter the AlGaAs undercut, due to the modified cleaning procedure. We believe the main factor for optical loss in our devices is the limited thickness (1 μm) of bottom cladding (air following the undercut of AlGaAs). This is explored in more detail in Appendix E. Improvements in the fabrication (cleaning) process, along with incorporation of alumina surface passivation The Q m is similarly < 400 in our devices, mainly due to the tethering geometry used. As can be seen in Fig. The biggest improvement in transduction efficiency comes from designing the supermode around the right optomechanical mode of the cavity, since S 21 ∝g 2 0 . This was the main motivation behind designing the supermodes around 1D nanobeam optomechanical crystals in the original proposal In the near-term, improving Q o by 10× using surface passivation and higher AlGaAs thickness, and achieving a 100× increase in Q m by better mechanical resonator design and cryogenic operation seem feasible. Incorporating an in-situ tuning mechanism to achieve a supermode between the SH breathing mode and the S 0 Lamb wave resonator mode, which results in higher piezoelectric transduction, would result in a further improvement. Assuming an N cav ≈ 10 4 as in our current experiments, this gives us an η peak of ≈ 10 -5 -10 -3 , which we can realistically hope to achieve in the near future. The final step towards η peak ≈ 1 will likely require a move towards a hybrid AlN-on-GaAs platform, mostly for shrinking the number of IDT finger pairs on the Lamb wave resonator front-end. We would like to reiterate that the supermode principle is independent of the underlying material platform used and can be used to enhance the transduc-tion efficiency in any material platform. For instance, the ideas presented in this work can be applied to GaP, a material with similar piezoelectric and optomechanical device parameters as GaAs, but which provides better cryogenic (mK temperature range) performance due to reduced surface heating, especially in a 1D nanobeam optomechanical crystal geometry. In summary, we have experimentally demonstrated that Lamb wave resonators, suitably hybridized with high g 0 optomechanical modes into mechanical supermodes, can result in a significantly enhanced microwave to optical transduction efficiency. While we have shown a 25× improvement in these proof-of-principle devices, our overall transduction efficiency is limited by the bare optomechanical device performance. Improving the bare device performance and engineering in-situ mode tuning to form supermodes around desired optomechanical modes sets the stage for achieving quantum transduction using this approach. We would like to thank the European Research Council (ERC-StG, SBS3-5, 758843) and the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EP/V052179/1) for funding support. Nanofabrication was carried out using equipment funded by an EPSRC captial equipment grant (EP/N015126/1). The GaAs wafers were obtained from the EPSRC national epitaxy facility in Sheffield through a pump-prime award. We would like to thank Kartik Srinivasan, Marcelo Wu, Emil Zeuthen, Biswarup Guha, Seung-Bo Shim, Stefano Valle, Laurent Kling, Vinita Mittal, Robert Thomas, Rob Airey and Andy Murray for useful discussions and suggestions. AK would like to acknowledge funding from the Bristol Quantum Engineering Center for Doctoral Training, EPSRC-NPIF grant award EP/LO15730/1. The device can be modelled as a coupled optomechanical system with an acoustic resonator driven by a microwave signal and an optical resonator coupled evanescently to a waveguide. The coupling exists in the form of a feedback loop where the mechanical motion shifts the optical resonance frequency of the cavity which in turn exerts a radiation pressure force. The system can be analytically treated by using input-output formalism evanescently coupled unidirectional waveguide-resonator system is given by The output microwave voltage V generated at the photodetector from the beating between the transmitted pump laser and the optical sidebands is given by R P D T (terms oscillating with Ω m ), where R P D is the conversion gain of the photodetector (defined in V/W). Following some analysis, the expression for voltage is reduced to the following equation, as, The output of the photodetector is received at port 2 of the VNA where it is mixed with a local oscillator at Ω m and then passed through a low-pass filter of bandwidth 10 kHz. Now if we consider, and, The voltage registered at port 2 of the VNA is then given by, Using the values of A -and A + from equations (A17) and (A18), respectively, in equation (A21), we obtain, Plugging this value of |M | in equation (A23), we obtain the amplitude of the microwave voltage registered in S 21 signal as, where, P opt = ω L a 2 in , is the input optical power going into the cavity. The microwave power generated at the port 2 of the VNA is then given by, where, R load (50 Ω) is the impedance of the VNA and P opt is replaced by the optical power received at the photodetector (P rec ), accounting for the insertion losses of the device from the output of the cavity to the input of the photodetector. Finally, the acousto-optic transmission spectrum S 21 is defined as, using the value of B from equation (A7) and P in = Ω m B 2 in . The above equation can be re-arranged to extract the value of g 0 from the S 21 transmission spectrum. The extracted g 0 has units of angular frequency (rad.Hz) but it is divided by 2π to get g 0 in Hz. The equation (A29) is valid for both sideband-resolved and sidebandunresolved regimes when the pump laser is detuned by ±κ/2 from the optical resonance frequency. In the case of sideband resolved regime, where Ω m κ, we can write equation (A29) as, The equation (A30) is also valid for for the case when the laser detuning ∆ = ±Ω m . The intracavity photon number (N cav ) or the average number of photons circulating inside the cavity for the input optical power P opt is given by In this work, ∆ = κ/2, which gives us, where, P opt = -4 dBm in our case owning to 7 dBm of loss from the grating coupler and 4 dBm of loss between the fiber array and air for 7 dBm of input power from the laser. The photon number conversion efficiency (η) is defined as the ratio of the number of optical sideband photons, which are coupling out of the cavity, to that of the number of input microwave photons. It can be expressed as, Using equations (A7), (A17) and (A18), the above equa-tion can be written as, where, C om is the single-photon optomechanical cooperativity and N cav is the intracavity photon number. The experimental results for our devices have been tabulated in Table The device is fabricated on a 220 nm thick Gallium Arsenide (GaAs) layer We begin our device fabrication by spin coating PMMA resist on a cleaned sample and patterning the PMMA resist to define the metal electrodes for IDTs and contact pads. The electrodes are patterned such that they are aligned parallel to 110 set of directions. This is immediately followed by deposition of 45 nm of gold layer with 5 nm of chromium adhesion layer using thermal evaporation. PMMA is then lifted off the sample using acetone leaving only the metal layers behind. After a brief inspection of the IDTs, we spin coat the sample with hydrogen silsesquioxane (HSQ), which is a negative tone resist for electron-beam lithography. In the next step, we pattern the HSQ to define the waveguide, resonator and the grating couplers but we also use HSQ to cover the metal region to protect against dry etching. The patterned resist is developed using tetramethylammonium hydroxide (TMAH) and the GaAs layer is etched to a depth of 70 nm using Ar/BCl 3 chemistry in an inductively coupled plasma-reactive ion etcher (ICP-RIE). By keeping the current HSQ layer intact, we spin coat another layer of HSQ and pattern with electron-beam lithography to cover the grating couplers in order to protect them from getting further etched. Using the same chemistry, we etch the GaAs layer another 50 nm defining our waveguide ribs, which are now 100 nm thin. We repeat the spin coating, lithography and etching steps one more time to etch the GaAs layer 100 nm + 20 nm (overetch) and open slots for undercutting, while protecting the waveguide ribs. All the etch steps are monitored with an ellipsometer to ensure the etch depths within ±5 nm are achieved. Finally, the device is suspended by wet etching the underlying Al 0.6 Ga 0.4 As layer with (24%) hydrofluoric acid (HF). To remove any by-products and smoothing the GaAs walls, the sample is cleaned in diluted hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2 -30%) and potassium hydroxide (KOH:H 2 O = 1g:4mL) solutions The RF reflection (S11) spectra for each are also shown in the same color for reference. obtained for the mechanical mode at ≈ 1.92 GHz. This shows that the supermode formation is reasonably robust to fabrication errors. As long as the modes are lined up within the IDT transduction bandwidth, η peak is signif-icantly enhanced. The sensitivity of supermode formation can be estimated by looking at the three curves, which correspond to nominally identical devices. The green curve in Fig. To better understand the factors affecting the optical loss observed in our devices, in particular the lower than expected Q o , we simulated our rib waveguide structure (shown in the inset of Fig. The correspondence between the 2D mechanical mode simulations used for determining the acousto-optic overlaps and the 3D mode shapes can be determined by taking a cross-section of the mode displacement in Fig11(a). Fig. g 0 has the units of angular frequency (rad.Hz), but g 0 /2π is more often used which is specified in Hz. In this article, g 0 also represents g 0 /2π wherever the units Hz are used.