Flat bands are an ideal environment to realize unconventional electronic phases. Here, we show that fermionic systems with dissipation governed by a Bloch Lindbladian can realize dispersionless bands for sufficiently strong coupling to an appropriately engineered bath. These flat bands emerge in a "dark space" of the system-environment coupling and are long-lived by virtue of symmetry protection from dissipation. We exhibit the robustness of this mechanism for general one and two band models with and without spin, and discuss conditions for their experimental realization such as in a 2D material on a superconducting substrate. Introduction. -Flat bands are a fascinating environment to realize unconventional quantum phases. With kinetic energy quenched, the behavior of electrons at partial filling of such bands is exclusively governed by Coulomb interactions and can lead to remarkable quantum collective behaviors, ranging from unconventional superconductivity to the fractional quantum Hall effect. While flat bands have long been appreciated to emerge from kinetic interference, as exemplified by the Kagomé In this Letter, we present an alternate pathway to realizing flat bands that is independent of the underlying lattice structure and instead relies on the dissipative coupling of a lower-dimensional quantum systemfor instance a 2D material or 1D nanowire-to a higherdimensional substrate, which acts as a bath. Central to our work, whereas the presence of a substrate is typically treated as an obstacle, we find that incoherent particle exchange with an appropriately engineered substrate can induce "singular" and spectrally isolated flat bands that counter-intuitively are long-lived in the limit of strong dissipation. Their origin can be traced to the emergence of a "dark space" of the system-bath coupling which is symmetry-protected from dissipation. We formulate a generic theory of such dissipationinduced long-lived flat bands for electronic systems. We then apply this theory to the most general spinless twoband model and illustrate our results for a paradigmatic example of a 2D topological insulator, and the most general inversion symmetric time-reversal symmetric oneband model with spin and illustrate our results for a triangular lattice, which could correspond to the isolated topmost band in a twisted bilayer transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD) such as WSe 2 Over the last decade, combined dissipation and external driving has emerged as a way to drive systems into desired states In quantum systems, a minimal model for dissipation that properly accounts for quantum jumps is provided by the Lindblad master equation i ∂ ∂t ρ = L[ρ] describes the joint evolution under a coherent Hamiltonian H, together with dissipative processes governed via quantum jumps J m induced by the bath. These jump processes encode the fundamentally quantum processes of dissipation: measurement (collapse) processes and decoherence towards a thermal state over time-processes that are not captured by non-Hermitian Hamiltonians which exhibit the inherently classical phenomena of gain and loss. Here, the overall dissipation rate is parameterized by an energy scale Γ, and details of the quantum jumps are encoded in the form of operators J m with unit norm. This can be "vectorized" so that L • ρ = i ∂ ∂t ρ in which case L permits a matrix representation In this Letter, we focus on the simple but conceptually rich scenario of a non-interacting system subjected to dissipative tunnel coupling to a bath. In their most general form, the corresponding quantum jump operators are linear in both electronic creation and annihilation operators, corresponding to particles tunneling in (a m,α ) and out (b m,α ) of the system. In particular, jump operators with a = 0 and b = 0 for the same m are crucial to arXiv:2203.07453v2 [cond-mat.str-el] 18 Oct 2022 the emergence of a flat band as discussed below. These operators could arise from a superconducting or squeezed state bath Formalism. -We introduce a set of superoperator fermions that act on the left and right of the density matrix k,α ρ = c k,α ρP and r k,α ρ = ρc † k,α P, with fermion parity P = exp(iπ k,α c † k,α c k,α ). These operators can be viewed as a complex-fermion version of Prosen's third quantization algebra We note that this decomposition can be viewed as operators acting on forward and backward Keldysh contours The Lindbladian can now be succinctly expressed as ) where boldface 's and r's denote vectors k = ( k,1 , k,1 , . . . , k,N ) representing N orbitals. The coherent and dissipative contributions take a 4N × 4N single-particle matrix form respectively, with N × N dimensional blocks determined by the jump operator amplitudes of Eq. (3), and a sum over m is implicit. The quadratic Lindbladian is of standard-albeit non-Hermitian-Bogoliubov de Gennes (BdG) form and can be diagonalized by a set of single-particle fermionic normal modes in analogy to a non-interacting Hamiltonian [see Supplemental Material]. Introducing a pseudospin representation for particles/holes and left/right contours in terms of Pauli matrices η and τ makes the symmetries of the Lindbladian manifest. Analogous to a conventional BdG Hamiltonian, the Lindbladian is invariant Furthermore, L obeys a "contour reversal" symmetry where This defines a timereversal (TR) like symmetry that squares to one and guarantees an eigenvalue - * for each eigenvalue of L. Notably, as the quadratic Lindbladian accounts for both left and right contours propagating forward and backward in time, it always exhibits a TR symmetry that exchanges contours even if the underlying Hamiltonian is not TR symmetric. Conversely, a TR symmetric system entails an additional TR symmetry that acts only on a single contour (i.e. on , r fermions individually). Combined with charge conjugation, this implies that all eigenvalues of L come in quadruplets ±Re( ) ± i Im( ), with the particle-like modes (with negative imaginary part) representing the physical excitation spectrum with finite lifetimes /|Im( )|. Finally, the combination of charge conjugation and TR forms a chiral symmetry Dissipative Dark Space. -Remarkably, imposing one additional unitary symmetry D = η 3 ⊗τ 1 , that commutes with L can now be shown to dictate the emergence of a dissipationless "dark space"-the dissipationless subspace of the purely dissipative Lindbladian that describes coupling to the bath-which guarantees the persistence of long-lived bands of the system even in the limit of strong system-bath coupling. Exceeding a critical system-bath coupling strength necessitates the formation of a longlived flat band. We will see that this symmetry is naturally satisfied for coupling to a superconducting substrate. Whereas the coherent contribution trivially commutes with D from its pseudospin representation [38] D imposes strong constraints on the form of the systembath coupling by demanding that where S is any real, symmetric matrix for the simplest inversion symmetric case where Remarkably, one finds that L dis becomes a Hermitian operator due to the dark space symmetry constraint. Invariance under D has important consequences for the eigenspectrum of the dissipative part of the Lindbladian. The latter can be shown using a unitary rotation U = diag(1, -1, 1, 1) to decompose as where ces that parameterize the jump operators, and we used the fact that The tensor decomposition illustrates that each eigenmode of the right-side (2N × 2N ) operator with energy comes with a charge-conjugate mode with energy -, as expected. More importantly however, the eigenspectrum of the right-side operator guarantees, for an N -band system, there are exactly N zero modes. These zero modes span a "dark space" that is protected from dissipation; explicitly, they read |φ , where ± indexes particle-like and hole-like modes, and u i , v i are N -dimensional vectors in orbital space that compose the i th solution of the equation au i + bv i = 0, and hence depend on details of the jump operators. The remaining eigenmodes of L dis have a finite lifetimes proportional to 1/Γ. However, further zero modes are possible if the number of jump operators is M < N ; then a and b have rank M , guaranteeing an additional set of N -M zero modes, similar to a Hermitian case discussed in Ref. Flat Bands from Dissipation. -We now turn to implications of this "dark space" on the spectrum of the full Lindbladian L coh -iL dis . Let the dark space be spanned by a set of particle-like zero modes |φ i of L dis , and suppose that the overall dissipative coupling Γ is large with respect to the coherent energy scales of the band Hamiltonian. In this limit, L coh can be treated as a "coherent" perturbation on L dis . The lowest-order contribution follows from projecting L coh into this (at least N -dimensional) dark space. Diagonalizing the resulting effective Lindbladian L ij = φ i |L coh |φ j yields N bands with infinite lifetime, which are generically dispersive. However, contour reversal symmetry T [Eq. ( Second-order corrections in L coh attribute a finite lifetime to this dissipation-induced flatband. As such pro-cesses scale as 1/Γ, a strong dissipative coupling Γ counter-intuitively ensures a long lifetime τ ∝ Γ for the flat band The above mechanism readily generalizes to account for electron spin. Here, each contour is individually invariant under spinful time-reversal symmetry (TRS) T trs with T 2 trs = -1. Crucially, T trs commutes with contour reversal T . Modes that span the dissipative dark space now come in Kramer's pairs ν (k), ν (-k), where ν, ν denote spin-orbital indices; if the system again also obeys inversion I, the dark space splits into two degenerate subsectors of opposite spin for each k, analogous to spindegenerate bands in a centrosymmetric system with TRS. For each spin sector, the same rules of zero-mode counting apply, and a stable flat band again forms for all Bloch momenta if the number of bands (or more precisely, the dimension of the dark space) per spin is odd. Example: Generic Spinless Two-Band Model. -As a first candidate, consider a generic two-band Hamiltonian H(k) = d(k) • σ where σ i are the Pauli matrices. Now, the simplest form of dissipation that satisfies Eq. ( with m = 1 or 2. This jump operator describes the creation/annihilation of a Majorana fermion in the electronic system. As the number of bands is even, we choose a single jump operator to ensure an odd-dimensional dark space via rank-deficiency. A natural physical realization would be a system with an in-plane and out-of-plane orbital, with only the latter coupled to the substrate. The resulting single-particle modes of L can be found exactly and break into two groups: the modes of the dissipationless system, s ± = ±| d|, and The s states are stable and the u states acquire a finite lifetime with Γ > 0. As an example, we consider the Qi-Wu-Zhang model of a two-dimensional Chern insulator at k = 0, and so we identify Γ c = (m + 2)t at and above which isolated flat bands form. Fig. with σ = ↑ and ↓, and taking both J ↑ and J ↓ to ensure time-reversal symmetry. The modes of L are the same as in Eq. ( where 0 , and t set the energy scales of the model, k i = k • a i and a 1 = (1, 0)a, a 2 = (1/2, √ 3/2)a and lattice constant a. Fig. Superconducting Substrates. -Having revealed a generic mechanism for flat band formation in Lindbladian systems, we see that the essential property to engineer the substrate is that jump operators obey the form Eq. ( The resulting jump processes involve electrons/holes jumping from the system into the superconducting bulk. If the bandwidth is large compared to the superconducting gap, flat bands will emerge, however with shortened lifetimes for electronic states above the superconducting gap. If, however, the electronic band lies within the substrate's superconducting gap, jump processes from sufficiently strong system-substrate hybridization arise solely through particle exchange processes via intermediate pair breaking states. For states of the 2D material near the center of the superconducting gap, these processes retain approximately equal electron and hole amplitudes. The corresponding jump operator thus takes the form of Eq. ( Conclusion. -We have shown a new and robust route for realizing dispersionless bands in generic lowdimensional quantum systems via strong coupling to a bath. The underlying mechanism can be traced to the emergence of a dissipationless dark space of the systembath coupling, and applies generically for systems with an odd number of valence bands with or without spin. We argued that in a fermionic system a superconductor could serve as such a bath. An intriguing follow-up question concerns whether analogous considerations can be utilized for bosons, such as photonic systems coupled to a squeezed bath The Lindbladian is where we take the coherent part of the evolution to be given by a Bloch Hamiltonian and the jump operators are given by: both of which are expressed in terms of sum(s) over orbitals α (β). This can be reexpressed in vectorized form or, using the hermiticity of H and Below, we show that where The "left superfermions" and "right superfermions" are Compared to the manuscript r ↔ r † we first arrive at a "block" form of the Lindbladian that makes its dark space zero modes manifest. In Section SI E we transform it into the BdG form presented in the manuscript. The parity operator is where the number operator is the non-local operator and we have for all j {c j , P} = 0, (S17) which motivates the definition of parity. We also have the standard Fermionic anti-commutation relations {l j , r j } = 0, (S19) Now, and We have and and D. Matrix Representation (Block Form) In the last section, we showed that where With the Fermionic anti-commutation relations this is We have And we introduce the notation for vectors of left and right creation and annihilation operators = ( 1 , 2 , . . . , num orbitals ), (S77) † = ( † 1 , † 2 , . . . , † num orbitals ), (S78) r = (r 1 , r 2 , . . . , r num orbitals ), (S79) Now the coherent part of the Lindbladian is where we used the anti-commutation relations to make the indices appear in the correct order. Next we introduce a notation for matrices A, B, C as where The dissipative part of the Lindbladian is -rA + rBr † -rC r -rC † (S102) +r † C † -r † C * r † + r † A * r + r † B * † (S103) Now, it turns out that the normal modes in this matrix representation are not normal modes of the second quantized Lindbladian L. The matrix representation whose normal modes are normal modes of the second quantized Lindbladian have r ↔ r † . E. Matrix Representation (BdG Form) From the last subsection, we have that the vectorized Lindbladian permits a representation in terms of left and right fermions. Now, let us reexpress this in the form whose normal modes are the normal modes of the second quantized Lindbladian. To do so we take r ↔ r † so that r † j = c j P ⊗ 1. (S108) Doing so, our ordered basis is now ( , -r, r † , † ). Now, U ( , r, † , +r † ) = ( , -r, +r † , + † ) for 1 0 0 0 0 -1 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 under which L coh is clearly invariant. Now, This means that Ldis = -iΓ 4 We can symmetrize (using the Hermiticity of A and B) or, simplifying which, as desired is in BdG form.