Recent experiments reported the puzzling zero energy modes associated with ferromagnetic impurities in some iron-based superconductors with topological band structures. Here, we show that the sufficiently strong exchange coupling between a ferromagnetic impurity and substrate can trigger a quantum phase transition, beyond which, the phase of the topological surface superconducting order parameter around the impurity acquires a sign-change. In such a case, we prove that a Kramers degenerate pair of Majorana modes can be induced at the boundary separating the two sign-change regimes and trapped around the impurity in the topological surface superconducting state. Furthermore, we show that our theory can explain the controversial observations and confusing features of the zero energy modes from recent experiments in some iron-based superconductors. In superconductor, the impurity can induce various quasi-particle states, such as Yu-Shiba-Rusinov (YSR) state from the classical impurity scattering potential In this work, we first perform the first-principles calculations to investigate the interaction between IFI and substrate FeSe 0.45 Te 0.55 . The numerical results indicate the exchange coupling J(r, z) between magnetic moment of IFI and spin of the 3d electron of FeSe 0.45 Te 0.55 has the form of Friedel-like oscillation with the characteristic length a 0 of lattice constant of iron square lattice. The amplitude of J(r, z) and the magnetic moment of IFI strongly depend on the height z between IFI and sub-strate. We further consider the impact of IFI on topological surface superconducting order parameter ∆(r) by solving the Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) equations defined on iron square lattice with self-consistency. We find that there exists a quantum phase transition (QPT) at a critical height z c , i.e. a critical J c (r, z c ), beyond which, ∆(r) change sign in the r < a 0 regime. Then, we prove that a Kramers degenerate pair of Majorana ZMs can be induced at the boundary separating the two signchange regimes and trapped by the IFI. For the smaller J(r, z) < J c (r, z c ), the QPT cannot be triggered. The IFI can only induce the trivial YSR states, which has the near-zero energy in vicinity of QPT. Within this picture, the contradictions between the results from different STM/S measurements can be solved, and properties of the ZMs, such as robustness against external magnetic field and lower critical temperature can also be understood. The STM experiment shows that the height of IFI can be tuned by STM tip Another crucial experimental signature is the presence of a level crossing at the transition from YSR states to ZMs, and the level crossing is robust against magnetic field and Here, μ is the chemical potential. The second term in Eq. (2) describes the topological surface Dirac states defined on square lattices. dij is the unit vector pointing from i to j. ∆ i is site-dependent superconducting order parameter. Note that such trivial s-wave pairing is good approximation for the topological surface Dirac state, can give the consistent results with the STS experiments Here, H s is spanned in Nambu space, i.e., [c ↑ , c ↓ , c † ↓ , -c † ↑ ]. τ x/z is Pauli matrix to span particle-hole space. ∆(r) = -∆ 1 when r < R 0 and ∆(r) = ∆ 2 when r > R 0 with ∆ 1/2 > 0 and ∆ 1 < ∆ 2 . The phase of ∆ 1/2 is uniform and is omitted due to the absence of topological defect such as vortex. Thus, ∆ 1/2 is angle-independent and ∆(r) is real in Eq. (4). In continuum limit, eigenequation of H s is which can be solved under boundary conditions with a 0 -π disk junction shown in Fig. The above arguments can be exactly proven by both analytic and numerical solutions of Eq. ( The wave function of the second Majorana ZM can be obtained by ψ 2 (r, θ) = T ψ 1 (r, θ). Note that the minigap to protect Majorana ZMs is proportional to v F /R 0 , which ensures only a pair of Majorana ZMs survive for small R 0 The case for Majorana ZMs is plotted in Fig. Aforementioned theory can be utilized to understand multiple features and common properties of ZMs in ironbased superconductors. We summarize bound-state spectrum as function as J(r = 0, z 0 ) in Fig. At last, the reliablity of theory can be enhanced by estimating some relevant parameters. The first one is J c ∼ 1.3t with t measuring the energy scale of the surface Dirac state, i.e., t ∼ v F k F . Acoording to the experiment In conclusion, we provide a new understanding to resolve the debate about whether STM/S observed ZMs induced by IFI on some iron-based superconductors is Majorana ZMs or not. We find a QPT can be triggered by the exchange coupling between the IFI and substrate. Then, the local superconducting order parameter of the surface superconduting state changes sign around the impurity, and we prove that a robust Kramers degenerate pair of Majorana ZMs can be induced and trapped around the IFI. Our theory can explain series confusing features observed by experiments. More meaningfully, our theory can be extended to other material categories, which host both topological bands and superconductivity. First-principles calculations were performed by density functional theory (DFT) using the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) where S imp and S N N is the magnetic moment of the impurity and its nearest neighbor iron atoms. Because the impurity has four nearest neighbor, we can get The effective magnetic field generated by the impurity is where n, S imp ,μ B labels the concentration of localized moments, the average value of the localized spins, Bohr magneton and ferromagnetic exchange integral, respectively The exchange interaction is very local, so we can assume that J(r, z 0 ) = Jδ(r), and then we can adopt a mean-field approximation as Comparing Eq. 10 and Eq. 8, we find that the existence of the magnetic impurity is equivalent to applying a local magnetic field at the impurity site. So the strength of the exchange coupling can be characterized by the effective magnetic field generated by the impurity, which can be calculated as In our calculations, the S N N is set to be 0.05μ B , S imp = ±3μ B for FM and AFM coupling respectively. FIG. To model the superconductivity in right way, it is better to start from the experimental measurements. From Fig. We consider a square lattice, the topological surface Dirac Hamiltonian can be expressed as which includes the on-site term, and linear Dirac term. Now a magnetic impurity is put onto the site i 0 and thus would introduce an exchange term as which performs like an effective magnetic field generated by the impurity. Note that S imp is merged into J for simplicity. And when superconductivity is induced, the surface trivial s-wave Cooper pairing potential is introduced as The total Hamiltonian is We can perform the Bogoliubov transformation where ′ denotes summation over the positive eigenvalues, and numerically solve the equations in the Nambu spinor representation where And the order parameter ∆ i should be self-consistently determined as To get the numerical results, we have adopted a 25 × 25 lattice. The hopping parameter t = 10 meV , homogeneous order parameter ∆ 0 = 2 meV and chemical potential μ = 0.1t. The calculated spectrum of H in Eq. 15 is shown in Fig. Now we will check the same process between the magnetic impurity and bulk state of iron-based superconductor. The main difference is the pairing pattern. The numerical calculation is also carried on a square lattice and the minimal two-orbital band structure is adopt and After introducing the interacting term and at the mean field approximation, we obtain the BdG Hamiltonian as Here, ∆ ij,αβ describes the next-nearest neighbor pairing with S ± symmetry i.e., cos k x cos k y form in momentum space. The IFI induced intra-orbital scattering is considered as The total Hamiltonian is The self-consistent condition is and the final homogeneous order parameter is expressed as ∆i = 1 8 j,αβ ∆ α/β ij .The calculated spectrum of H ′ in Eq. 20 is shown in Fig. By comparing the calculation results of the above two models with the experimental measurements We first calculate the spectrum of the geometries, as shown in Fig. For comparison, we also analyzed the general vortex-induced Majorana mode. When there exist quantum vortexes, the SC order parameter should have a attached phase as ∆ = ∆(r)e iθ . The complete Hamiltonian can be expressed as Correspondingly, the trivial wave functions should have this form Also, the Majorana condition requests that The radial equation can be obtained as Here, we first derive the analytic solution for Majorana mode when ∆(r) is approximated as a constant ∆ 0 . Similarly, the equation can be simplified as the solution can be obtained as : which is consistent with Ref. where ν = ±1 for (anti-) vortex, τ ± = τ x ± iτ y . The wave functions of a vortex has a form shown in Eq. ( Both ψ v+ and ψ v-are periodic. However we can apply this gauge transformation here U + = diag(e -iθ/2 , e -iθ/2 , e iθ/2 , e iθ/2 ) and U -= U * + . It is obvious that the new wave functions ψ ′ v± is antiperiodic, the corresponding Hamiltonian can be obtained as H ′ v± = U ± H ν U -1 ± , which reads Eq. ( The Hamiltonian of a magnetic field applied to a superconductor with a Dirac-type topological surface state can be expressed as H = d 2 rΨ † (r)HΨ(r), where Here Ψ = (c ↑ , c ↓ , c † ↓ , -c † ↑ ) denotes the Nambu basis, σ i and τ i (i = x, y, z) are Pauli matrices but spans spin and Nambu space respectively, ∆(r) takes the real value due to no superconducting vortex. B(r) is the external magnetic field B = (B x , B y , B z ). Due to the existence of impurity, translation invariance is broken. Thus we need to solve Eq. ( Substituting it into Eq. ( Here, we assume the magnetic field is along the z direction. The BdG equation is Assuming the trivial wave function with the antiperiodic boundary condition has the form Then we can obtain the radial equation of Eq. (36) as: The matrix form is : where ν = l -1 2 . The Majorana solution requests Cψ(r, θ) = ηψ(r, θ), where the particle-hole operator C = τ y σ y K, with K the complex conjugation operator, and η is some constant. Without loss of generality, we assume u ↑(↓) (r) and v ↑(↓) (r) is real. This yields the following constraint condition: Obviously, η can only be +1 or -1, and they correspond to the exponential increase and decay solution, respectively. For an infinite large 2D space, only η = -1 is reasonable. And then the equation set of Eq. ( For the Majorana condition, we can set E = 0. Now, let's check the simplest condition where B z = 0, which means there is no magnetic effect and then the system should return to the TI+SC model, however with a antiperiodic boundary condition. When B z = 0, Eq. ( where ξ 0 = vF ξ0 , k F = μ vF . Note that c 1 should equal to c 2 to ensure u(r) is real, and then the radial wave functions can be reduced as u ↑/↓ (r) ∝ J ∓1/2 (k F r)e -r/ξ0 , by contrast with the vortex condition the order of Bessel function has a 1 2 shift. Note that we have obtain one zero energy mode solution as shown in Eqs. 37, 49 and 50. However, the Hamiltonian in Eq. 34 has the time-reversal symmetry (TRS) when B z = 0. Therefore, there must exist another zero-energy mode, which is the TRS partner of the first one denoted by Eqs. 37, 49 and 50. Both of them form the Kramers degenerate states. The TRS operator takes the form T = iτ 0 σ y K. When the magnetic field B = (B x , B y , B z ) is taken into account, the Hamiltonian for the zero modes in Eq. 42 can be expressed as H zero = (-iσ y T (r) + αB x σ x + αB y σ y + αB z σ z )τ z + ∆(r)τ x (51) Here, T (r) = v F (∂ r + 1 2r ). In such a case, one can define a mirror symmetry M l=0 = iσ y τ y Ô(r). Ô(r) is a spacial inverse operator along the radial direction with the inverse center at R 0 . Note that T (r) and ∆(r) changes sign under the operation Ô(r). Now, one can get [M l=0 , H zero ] = 0 for non-zero B x and B z . For non-zero B y , [M l=0 , H zero ] = 0. Therefore, a pair of zero modes are robust against non-zero B x and B z , but are fragile for non-zero B y . When B z = 0, we set m z = αB z , the Zeeman term has the form of m z τ 0 σ z , and the spliting between two zero energy modes can be estimated by ψ 1 (r, θ)|m z τ 0 σ z |ψ 2 (r, θ) = 0 (52) Therefore, the z-direction Zeeman coupling cannot split the zero-energy mode. However, if we directly solve the Eq. 46 and 47 with B z = 0, one can find that only parameter k F is modified as k F = √ Quasiparticle's scattering From Eq. ( e -ikF r √ r e r/ξ0 (r < R 0 ) (53) The Majorana condition requests that Cψ = ηψ, in the main text we choose η = -1 because we adopt a infinite large diameter of the disk and if η = 1 the wave functions have an exponentially increasing form, which is not physical. However if the diameter is finite, η = 1 would be reasonable and forms another probability-density peak at the boundary. Thus the zero-energy solution should be a linear combination of η = ±1 as And that is the reason why every zero-energy mode contains both the core and edge state. In the line-type 0 -π junction, the gapless bound state has energy dispersion as E = ±v F k y . When the line is bent to form a ring, the energy becomes discrete and can be estimated by the Bohr-Sommerfeld quantized condition, which is : Thus the mini gap is ∆E = v F /R 0 . With a large Fermi velocity and a small radius of the π-phase area, the bound states except zero-energy Majorana mode are hidden in the ground state.