Transition metal dichalcogenides offer unprecedented versatility to engineer 2D materials with tailored properties to explore novel structural and electronic phase transitions. In this work, we present the atomic-scale evolution of the electronic ground state of a monolayer of Nb1-δMoδSe2 across the entire alloy composition range (0 < δ < 1) using low-temperature (300 mK) scanning tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy (STM/STS). In particular, we investigate the atomic and electronic structure of this 2D alloy throughout the metal to semiconductor transition (monolayer NbSe2 to MoSe2). Our measurements let us extract the effective doping of Mo atoms, the bandgap evolution and the band shifts, which are monotonic with δ. Furthermore, we demonstrate that collective electronic phases (charge density wave and superconductivity) are remarkably robust against disorder. We further show that the superconducting TC changes non-monotonically with doping. This contrasting behavior in the normal and superconducting state is explained using first-principles calculations. We show that Mo doping decreases the density of states at the Fermi level and the magnitude of pairbreaking spin fluctuations as a function of Mo content. Our results paint a detailed picture of the electronic structure evolution in 2D TMD alloys, which is of utmost relevance for future 2D materials design. In transition metal dichalcogenides (TMD), the possibility of substituting one of the atomic elements by different species has greatly expanded the potential of this family of 2D materials. This route to obtain novel and stable TMD layers with tailored properties in the form of alloys (M1-δNδX2 or MX2(1δ)Y2δ where M, N are TM and X, Y chalcogens, for binary alloys), has been recently demonstrated, So far, isovalent group VI TMD alloys such as MoδW1-δS2 and WS2(1-δ)Se2δ have received most of the attention due to the possibility to tune the electronic and optical bandgaps. More fundamentally, TMD alloys are also an ideal playground for the study of 2D phase transitions and critical phenomena. Monolayer alloys that connect two MX2 materials with different phases (structural, electronic, magnetic, etc.) should enable one to manipulate these phase transitions where the chemical composition of the alloy serves as the tuning parameter. However, the synthesis of a particular TMD alloy is subject to the miscibility of the components and its thermodynamic stability. One of the latest and most intriguing additions to the collection of nontrivial collective states in the TMDs is a novel superconducting state dubbed "Ising superconductivity", A closer look reveals that the microscopic reasons for the destruction of CDW and SC are different. While the SC undergoes an initial strengthening at low Mo doping levels followed by a monotonic weakening, the CDW gradually loses the 3 x 3 long-range order. The effect of Mo on SC, including the initial increase, are due to doping and therefore a monotonic reduction of the density of states (DOS) at the Fermi level. The non-monotonic behavior appears due to the competition between two factors: the electron-phonon coupling strength is directly proportional to DOS, and the proximity to magnetism is resonantly related to the DOS. As a result, at low doping concentrations of Mo, the proximity to magnetism is reduced more rapidly than the coupling strength, ensuring the initial rise of Tc, but then becomes unimportant as the weakening of the electron-phonon interactions becomes the main factor. Instead, the weakening of the CDW order is weakly dependent on doping, and is mostly due to a systematic reduction of the CDW domain sizes due to Mo pinning the domain boundaries. We have grown monolayers of the aliovalent alloy Nb1-δ MoδSe2 with different compositions (0 < δ < 1) on bilayer graphene (BLG)/6H-SiC(0001) by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE), as sketched in Figure The crystal field splitting of MoNb levels provides a key to understand the origin of this resonance. The Mo atom is in a trigonal prismatic coordination with Se when incorporated as MoNb, which splits the five Mo 4d states into three different groups as illustrated in Figure states to be located 0.47 eV below the NbSe2 Fermi level in our calculations. In addition to the resonance, MoNb also induces a rigid shift (grey arrows) of the peak labelled as E2, which corresponds to the flat region at the top of the Nb-derived band at Γ ̅ of monolayer NbSe2 We will discuss this shift in more detail in Section 4 and show that it is due to MoNb acting as a source of electron doping. Now that we have established the trigonal prismatic metal coordination of both TM elements by Se atoms in the TMD alloy, we characterize the morphology of the MBE-grown monolayer alloys as a function of δ. In total, we grew up to 24 TMD alloys to explore the whole range from NbSe2 (δ = 0) to MoSe2 (δ = 1). The composition of the grown TMD alloys relies on a calibration carried out in the dilute alloys (δ < 0.12 and δ > 0.9) by counting the number of individual dopants per area from highresolution STM images (see SM for details). Figure STM imaging also allowed us to gain key information regarding the spatial distribution of the dopants across the monolayer. Our large-scale topographic images for δ < 0.5 reveal a homogeneous distribution of Mo atoms except very close to the edges (~10 nm), where a sudden depletion of Mo is observed (see Figure We experimentally determined the evolution of the electronic structure of monolayers of Nb1-δ MoδSe2 from the metallic NbSe2 (δ = 0) to the semiconducting MoSe2 (δ = 1). Figure Doping NbSe2 with Mo up to  = 0.2, we find that EF shifts up by 0.071 eV with respect to pristine NbSe 2 , in agreement with our experiment. For large Mo concentrations (δ > 0.5), the E2 peak amplitude is largely damped, likely due to the significant broadening of the d-band. This coincides with the emergence of a significant DOS for energies below EF. This peak in the DOS is the origin of the valence band of Nb-doped MoSe2 monolayer, which develops from the localized d z 2 state shown in Figure Next, we address why E1 remains constant as a function of δ. As mentioned, the energy separation (which we define as ) between the highest occupied transition metal d-state at  and the next lower lying state (which gives rise to the feature E1) that is comprised of Se p-orbitals with admixture of transition metal dxz, dyz orbitals is larger for NbSe2 compared to MoSe2. This is accompanied by a reduction in bandwidth of the valence band around  when going from NbSe2 to MoSe2 (see Figure Within this line of reasoning, we expect  to decrease as a function of δ, which is indeed what we find with our first-principles calculations (see Figure Feature E3 is probably the most complex of all. At first glance, it reflects the crystal field gap, as it represents transitions between the Fermi level and the conduction d-band with the minimum at K. However, this state at K has pure d z 2 character, similar to the band below at Г. Therefore, the magnitude of the crystal field splitting is affected more by the dispersion of the d z 2 band and d z 2 /(d xy , d x 2 -y 2 ) hybridization. Since the d-d hopping largely proceeds via the Se orbitals, it is again controlled by t pd 2 /(E d -E p ). Hence, within the simplest approximation the crystal field splitting should also decrease linearly as a function of δ, albeit with a different prefactor (note that in all three cases somewhat different combinations of tpd and tpd form the effective tpd). Indeed, in our experiments we find E3 moves down roughly proportionally to, but faster than E2. This is corroborated by our calculations (see Figure Lastly, we experimentally investigate the properties of the superconducting and CDW orders subject to disorder in the TM plane, which is key to understand their development in NbSe2. Similar to the metal-semiconductor transition, the evolution of the electronic structure of SL-Nb1-δMoδSe2 from SL-NbSe2 to SL-MoSe2 implies the occurrence of two electronic phase transitions, i.e., the SC and CDW transitions. First, we focus on the superconducting state. Figure Based on the DOS of monolayer NbSe 2 , to determine the ferromagnetic spin susceptibility, χ , defined as χ = ( . We find that χ decreases monotonically as a function of increasing Mo content compared to pristine NbSe 2 (inset of Figure This behavior of N(EF) and χ as a function of δ yields important insight into the non-monotonic change in Tc. In the first approximation, the electron-phonon coupling constant, p, is proportional to N(EF), while the electron-paramagnon coupling, s, is proportional to the spin susceptibility χ(q), averaged over the Brillouin zone. Using χ(q = 0) as a proxy, it is proportional, in the standard random phase approximation, to N(EF)/[1-IN(EF)], where the Stoner parameter I is roughly independent of . In monolayer NbSe2, [IN(EF)], was estimated to be rather large, ~0.7, Then both constants, p and s, become too small and superconductivity wanes and eventually disappears. As a result of this competition, the actual dependence of Tc on  is non-monotonic (Figure As seen for the lowest Mo concentration ( = 0.007), the 3x3 spots in the FFT are sharp with an intensity comparable to that of the (1x1) Bragg peaks, which indicates a fully developed CDW. However, as the Mo concentration increases, the 3x3 peaks gradually broaden, become fainter and, ultimately, turn indistinguishable for  ~ 0.2, a critical value for the CDW melting. This scenario is quantitatively reproduced in the plots in Figure One can anticipate two processes that contribute to the destruction of the CDW. First, as discussed, Mo impurities act as electron donors, and eventually turn the material semiconducting (at which point we do not anticipate a CDW to remain stable in pristine MoSe2). Second, Mo impurities, as most defects, act as pinning centers for the phase domain walls. Nevertheless, as Figure Figure 7c also shows that maximum intensity of the superlattice peaks. Assuming the integrated intensity is independent of  (the reduction due to electron doping is too small), this parameter should behave approximately as I3x3/I1x1W -2 . In reality the strong background introduces considerable noise around this average expression, yet it does capture the overall trends. In summary, we were able to grow high-quality monolayers of Nb1-δMoδSe2 across the entire alloy composition range (0 < δ < 1), thus bridging two electronically distinct 2D TMD materials. This aliovalent alloy allowed us to investigate the atomic-scale evolution of the electronic ground state across three different phase transitions, i.e., superconductor-metal, CDW, and metal-semiconductor. Our measurements reveal a remarkable robustness of the collective electronic states (CDW and SC) against disorder, and a curious non-monotonic evolution of the SC state with disorder, which strengthens at small Mo concentrations. While some aspects of the evolution of electronic and superconducting properties are seemingly unexpected, and even counterintuitive, our first-principles calculations yield complete microscopic insight into these changes as a function of doping. Our work provides a general methodology to study a wide variety of disorder-driven 2D electronic phase transitions, which remain largely unexplored due to the lack of suitable platforms. Bilayer graphene substrate preparation: BLG substrates were prepared by annealing 6H-SiC (0001) at 1675 K for 35 minutes in our home-made MBE system operated in ultra-high-vacuum (UHV) conditions (base pressure of ~ 5.0 × 10 -10 mbar). We used Si-faced polished SiC wafers with resistivity ~ 120 Ω•cm. Before vacuum graphitization of 6H-SiC(0001), they were first degassed in UHV at 920 K for 15minutes and then directly annealed to the target temperature with a heating rate of 10 K•s -1 . dopants in atomically resolved STM images of the 2D alloys enabled the nearly exact determination of their stoichiometry for δ ≤ 0.12 (δ ≥ 0.9). Within these dilute regimes, we found a linear relationship between  and the dopant flux ratio, as shown in Figure these calculations allows us to determine the change in energy with respect to the non-magnetic ground state as a function of the total magnetization, m. We then fit our results to an expansion of the total energy as a function of m. The ferromagnetic spin susceptibility obtained from FSM calculations (see main text) is sensitive to the choice in energy convergence threshold, and the number of magnetization values used in the fit to expansion in the total energy as a function of magnetic moment. We use an energy convergence threshold of 10 -8 eV, and up to 50 magnetization versus energy points between 0 μ B and 0.6 μ B for all of the FSM calculations. The fixed spin moment calculations and the density of states of the alloys are obtained using VCA calculations for Mo content that corresponds to  = 0, 0.01, 0.02, 0.05, 0.1, 0.15 and 0.2. The VCA calculations use the same k-point grid as the unit cell calculations. To verify our VCA calculations we also performed FSM calculations using supercell calculations for  = 0.033 and  = 0.066 and find semi-quantitative agreement between the VCA and supercell calculations. 