Josephson junctions display long range quantum coherence are reported. The networks consist of superconducting islands connected by Josephson junctions and have a tree-like topological structure containing no loops. Enhancements of superconductive gap over specific branches of the networks and sharp increases of pair currents are the main signatures of the coherent states and, in order to unambiguously attribute the observed effects to branches being embedded in the networks, comparisons with geometrically equivalent, but isolated, counterparts are reported. Tuning the Josephson coupling energy by an external magnetic field generates increases of the Josephson currents, along the above mentioned specific branches, which follow a functional dependence typical of phase transitions. Results are presented for double comb and star geometry networks and in both cases the observed effects provide positive quantitative evidence of the predictions of existing theoretical models. In 1979 it was proposed The development of laser cooling techniques in mid 80s From the experimental point of view, to our knowledge, there has not been much activity dedicated to investigate experimentally the bosonic nature of Cooper pairs and therefore a probe of the predictions of ref. 11, relying on Cooper pairs acting as hopping bosons, would costitute evidence of such an integer spin behavior. Beside the exposed analysis in terms of BEC it is worth noting that a parallel between a BKT transition and the phenomena predicted in ref. 11 exists: the "hopping" of bosons between all the islands of the superconductive arrays can generate long range correlation of the wave functions in the system only when the Josephson coupling energy is of the order or less than the thermal energy The systems we herein investigate present a two fold topological aspect: the first concerns the spatial long range coherence of macroscopic wavefunctions, a phenomenon nowadays addressed as "topological order". The second comes from the fact that the "topological order" in the specific case can be achieved through specific node-to-node connections, which are the basis for the topological analyses of electrical networks and graph theory. We will show that evidence of long range order in our systems comes both from Josephson supercurrent peculiarities and from gap increases of the islands of the discrete systems we investigate. It is herein shown, by new samples, new data, and more quantitative arguments, that previously observed effects on double-comb In Fig. The IV characteristics we investigate are those obtained biasing the arrays from four final contact pads (two to the left end and two to the right end) and we observe the voltage sum of 100 junctions, in a typical four probes configuration. In order to isolate the arrays from the final contact pads we insert normal metal layers between array's ends and contact pads. In general, for the present design, N+1 superconductive islands (including the two final "contact" island) generate N junctions. The data we present herein were all obtained with the samples immersed in a 4 He bath. The helium dewar was put inside a μ-metal cylinder and an additional cryoperm shield was surronding the samples in the bath at 4.2K. The current noise level for our combined analog/digital acquisition system is of the order of few nanoamperes; the voltage signals generated at the "cold" end by the chips are amplified at room temperature and fed to a data acquisition system. The "philosophy" behind our chip design is, first, to identify the effects generated on the IVs of the backbone array by the fingers eliminating these (as in Fig. A comparison between the three arrays of Fig. It is important to point out that when tracing current-voltage characteristics, as we did for Fig. In Fig. In terms of gap dependence on temperature In Fig. Hereafter we present a comparison between the magnetic field behavior of the arrays of Fig. In Fig. It is worth noting that, while the amplitude of the Josephson currents of the backbone increases noticeably with respect to those of the reference array, as shown in Fig. being the latter temperature amplified compared to the critical temperature TT cc of a single disconnected island. Interestingly, no amplification can be observed for pp = 2, being the latter a condition topologically equivalent to a linear array of coupled islands (like in Fig. with Δ ccccssss and Δ ii the superconducting gap of the array and of the isolated island, respectively. We have designed star graphs having respectively 8, 12, and 18 rays (this latter shown in Fig. In Fig. which is a direct consequence of Eq. ( with the best fit parameter AA ≈ 0.56 mmVV. From the way the theoretical line fits our results we conclude that the gap increase in the star graphs is consistent with a "granular" model of superconductors. As far as star graphs arrays are concerned, we must specify that even the effects described in previous publications Our results on graph-shaped, loopless networks of coupled superconducting islands show clear evidences of collective behavior in these systems. Some effects appear to be specific of a BEC topological condensation favored by the hopping of pairs (seen as bosons) through Josephson junctions and this phenomenon requires the existence of a condensate. However, the superconducting condensate itself, as seen from the variations of the gap energy, is also affected by the specific network topology. We have shown that the two phenomena (noticeable increases of Josephson currents and increases of the gap voltages) are not trivially related. In the star topologies, an increasing number of rays generates an increasing excess voltage which can be well fitted by the De Gennes-Alexander theory for granular superconductors, however, the increase of the number of rays does not generate a consequent increase of the Josephson currents. It also has to be noted that the noticeable Josephson current increases observed in double comb-topology structures do not seem quantitatively relatable to the more modest excess voltages that remain constant under magnetic field and temperature variations. In conclusion we can say that, while the Josephson currents of our structures (the pair current between the islands) is strongly influenced by magnetic field, and temperature, the gap excess seem to be strictly determined by topology of the network and does not show significant changes as a function of field and temperature. Overall, our impression is that we have scratched the top of a reservoir of more intriguing phenomena involving macroscopic quantum condensates. array. From the plot we extract that a single gap voltage of an island of a backbone array is 3% higher than the reference backbone array. the backbone of the complete comb (Fig. This effect is also visually illustrated in the insert where we see that the "shorted fingers" array currents remain much lower than the values attained by the backbone of the complete comb structure. 