The current stage of quantum computing technology, called noisy intermediate-scale quantum (NISQ) technology, is characterized by large errors that prohibit it from being used for real applications. In these devices, decoherence, one of the main sources of error, is generally modeled by Markovian master equations such as the Lindblad master equation. In this work, the decoherence phenomena are addressed from the perspective of the steepest-entropy-ascent quantum thermodynamics (SEAQT) framework in which the noise is in part seen as internal to the system. The framework is as well used to describe changes in the energy associated with environmental interactions. Three scenarios, an inversion recovery experiment, a Ramsey experiment, and a two-qubit entanglement-disentanglement experiment, are used to demonstrate the applicability of this framework, which provides good results relative to the experiments and the Lindblad equation, It does so, however, from a different perspective as to the cause of the decoherence. These experiments are conducted on the IBM superconductive quantum device ibmq bogota. Decoherence, which is perhaps one of the most critical aspects of quantum computation, is the loss of information that exists in the subsystems of a quantum device. It is typically viewed as resulting from environmental effects and random disturbances that affect the capacity of quantum systems to store information. Hence, the development of realistic quantum computers requires understanding, controlling, and/or correcting for decoherence. The typical approach to modeling decoherence is to use linear Markovian quantum master equations (QMEs) of the Kossakowski-Lindblad-Gorini-Sudrashan type to represent the dynamics of system state evolution An alternative approach results when instead of assuming that the relevant irreversible effect on the system is due to an environment, quantum mechanics (QM) is complemented with the second law of thermodynamics represented by the steepest entropy ascent (SEA) principle. Such an approach assumes that the irreversible effect is fundamental to the system itself. This idea can be traced back to the work of Hatsopoulos and co-workers With the advent of NISQ devices In the present work, the loss of coherence in three different scenarios is experimentally evaluated. First, a qubit relaxation experiment is implemented to determine how fast the system looses information due to the interaction with the environment. This phenomenon is measured in terms of the time T 1 . Next, the dephasing on individual qubits using the Ramsey experiment is evaluated. This experiment measures the loss of phase by a system through time, which is quantified with the time T * 2 . The last experiment is a two-qubit cross-resonance interaction. Here, the loss of entanglement by a composite system is evaluated. To conduct this experiment, a two-qubit system in a Bell state |Φ is entangled and disentangled. The experiments are conducted on IBM's ibmq bogota quantum device in qubits 0 to 4 for the T 1 and T * 2 experiment and in qubits 0 and 1 for the entanglement experiment. The experimental results are compared with simulations using the SEAQT framework and the Lindblad approach. The paper is organized as follows. In Sections II A to II D different features of the SEAQT equation of motion are laid out and discussed, while Section II E presents the Lindblad type quantum master equation used here. Section III then describes the experimental setup of IBM's ibmq bogota quantum device for each of the three experiments conducted. Section IV then provides the results of the experiments and the simulations and a discussion of the results. The paper then wraps up with a number of conclusions in Section V. In the SEAQT framework, the dynamics of the density operator, ρ, of a quantum system is governed by both a symplectic (unitary) and a dissipation (non-unitary) term. The former, the so-called von Neumann term of quantum mechanics, captures the reversible (i.e., linear) dynamics of state evolution, while the latter, which is based on the principle of steepest entropy ascent (SEA), captures the irreversible (i.e., nonlinear) dynamics. This principle states that at every instant of time the density operator evolves in the direction of maximal entropy increase such that the conservation constraints placed on the generators of the motion (e.g., the Hamiltonian and the identity operator) are satisfied. Note that the view of physical reality assumed here is one in which the nonlinear dynamics of state evolution resulting from the dephasing phenomenon are intrinsic to the system and not a consequence of interactions with an environment. This contrasts with the standard open quantum system framework (see Section II E) that forms the basis for the Lindblad equation of motion, which assumes that this phenomenon is the result of a continual cyclic buildup and loss of correlations between the system and environment. As pointed out in Section I, this assumption fails if the system-environment coupling is strong The SEAQT equation of motion for a general quantum system where Ĥ and ρ are the Hamiltonian and the density operator, respectively, for a composite system. The ρJ (J = 1, 2, ...) are the density operators for each individual qubit with ρJ = Tr J (ρ) and J indicating the direct product on the Hilbert space that does not contain the subsystem J. In addition, the τ D J (J = 1, 2, ...) are internal-relaxation parameters that are positive constants or positive functionals of the ρJ , while the DJ (J = 1, 2...) are the dissipation operators for each qubit. To assure positivity and hermiticity of the density operator, ρ, the latter operators are written as where the symbol † signifies the adjoint and each DJ for a two-qubit system is expressed as Here (•, •) J is the Hilbert-Schmidt inner product defined on Hilbert space H J by ( F , Ĝ) J = Tr J (ρ J {( F ) J , ( Ĝ) J }) with J = A, B, ( F ) A = Tr B [( ÎA ⊗ ρB ) F ], and ( F ) B = Tr A [(ρ A ⊗ ÎB ) F ]. In Eq. (3), B is the projector onto the range of ρ, i.e., the idempotent operator that results from summing up all of the eigenprojectors of ρ belonging to its nonzero eigenvalues. For more details, the reader is referred to B. Equation for a system interacting with a reservoir One way to represent the interaction between a system J and a reservoir R consists of considering the degrees of freedom of both subsystems to be orthogonal J + e 2 R Γ . (4) Here the expected values for the system are s J = -Tr(ρ J ln ρJ ), e J = Tr(ρ J ĤJ ), and es J = -Tr(ρ J ĤJ ln ρJ ). Also, | • | is a determinant and Γ is a Gram determinant. Expanding this last expression results in where In the limit, when the number of eigenlevels of the reservoir P R are much greater than those of the system P J (P R P J ), one can show that B 3 reduces to Now assuming a canonical distribution for the reservoir characterized by the inverse temperature β R and the Hamiltonian ĤR , B 3 is approximately Therefore, DJ of Eq. (3) for the system (i.e., for J) interacting with a reservoir can be expressed as The first two terms in Eq. ( Even though Eq. ( and A usual approach for simulating a quantum process with the SEAQT equation of motion is to consider the relaxation parameter τ D in Eq. ( where x 0 is a constant to be determined. The Hamiltonian for a transmon qubit can be described using a Duffing oscillator where ω and δ are the transmon frequency and anharmonicity, respectively, and b is the annihilation operator. Using the definitions that b †b = j j |j j| for the eigenlevels j of the transmon and ω j = ω -δ 2 j + δ 2 j 2 , the Hamiltonian is rewritten as For simplicity, it is assumed that the transmon is a two-level system. In that case, the Hamiltonian is given by and as a consequence, the relaxation parameter can be written as Here, σz is the z-component Pauli matrix with the set of Pauli matrices given by σx = 0 1 1 0 , σy = 0 -i i 0 , and σz = 1 0 0 -1 . The Lindblad equation, which is also known as the Gorini-Kossakowski-Sudarshan-Lindblad (GKLS) master equation, predicts the evolution of state of a quantum system as Markovian interactions between the system and multiple baths and The L 1 operator is used to simulate the amplitude damping phenomenon (i.e., the relaxation), while the L 2 operator is employed to simulate dephasing. γ 1 is the strength of the relaxation and γ 2 is that of the dephasing. The ibmq bogota device used in the experiments is a superconductive quantum processor with a Falcon r4L architecture, 5 qubits, a quantum volume (QV) of 32, an average T 1 = 88.34 μs, an average T 2 = 128.54 μs, and an average CNOT gate (see the Appendix) error of 1.056 x 10 -2 . Qubits q0 to q5 are employed with the following excitation frequencies: f 0,1,2,3,4 = 5.00, 4.85, 4.78, 4.86, 4.98 GHz. Three experiments were conducted on this device: an inversion recovery experiment, a Ramsey experiment, and a two-qubit entanglement experiment in the qubits 0 and 1. The first two experiments involved all of the qubits. The inversion recovery and the Ramsey experiments are based on the Hamiltonian given by Ĥ = ∆ωσ z + θ G (t)σ y The inversion recovery experiment provides information about how fast a qubit suffers thermalization because of its interaction with an environment (or reservoir). It is measured with the relaxation time T 1 where T 1 is the time that it takes the qubit to reach 1 -1/e or 63% of its initial condition. Here, a π pulse gate (X gate) is used to move the system from state |0 to state |1 . Next, a delay time is applied and measurement made. This process is repeated with 25 different delay times, ranging from 0 to 42.6 μs. What is observed is a decay of the probability of being in state |1 . This decay can be approximated with the relation, where ρ(0) is the density operator at time 0, t is the time, and T 1 is the relaxation time constant. Fig. The Ramsey experiment measures the dephasing time T * 2 and the qubit detuning The two-qubit entanglement state experiment, shown in Fig. The inversion recovery experiment is used to characterize how fast a qubit loses information because of an interaction with the environment. Fig. iment. Models to fit the constants γ 1 and γ 2 for the Lindblad equation and τ D R for the SEAQT equation of motion are used. The results seen in this figure indicate that the qubit that looses information the fastest is Q1, while the loss for the other 4 qubits is significantly less. In addition, there is some deviation between the experimental results and the Lindblad and SEAQT predictions. This deviation could come from either source of coherent errors or instabilities of near-resonant two-level-systems (TLS) coupled to the qubit. This phenomenon is usually reported in these kind of devices Fig. In addition to the decay of the X observable seen in this experiment, the relaxation phenomenon resulting from an interaction with the environment (reservoir) is present. The latter's effect on the Ẑ component or observable is shown in Fig. Finally, a two-qubit entanglement-disentanglement experiment between the qubits Q0 and Q1 is executed to explore the decay rate of information stored in the twoqubit system. This experiment shows how the maximum entanglement is lost with time. The results in Fig. Two different scenarios are tested with the SEAQT equation of motion. The first uses the relaxation τ D R and dephasing τ DJ parameter values found for the singlequbit experiments with qubits Q0 and Q1, while the second keeps the relaxation parameter τ D R values of the single-qubit experiments but utilizes values for the dephasing parameters τ 2Q DJ found from the present twoqubit experiment. The results for the first scenario show that the decoherence is greater than what is found in the two-qubit experiment (see the dotted-green line in Fig. In this paper, an approach based on the principle of steepest entropy ascent is used to predict the relaxation, dephasing, and loss of entanglement phenomena in superconductive qubits during the state evolution of inversion recovery, Ramsey, and entanglement-disentanglement experiments. The results obtained suggest that the SEAQT framework can predict the different decoherence scenarios occurring in superconductive qubits. These results supplement the purely dephasing results found previously by applying the SEAQT framework to a CPHASE gate on a double-quantum-dot qubit device Another point to make is that the use of a variable τ D R that depends on the energy of the system provides a relaxation parameter for the SEAQT equation of motion that results in predictions that compare well with the experimental data for the relaxation and Ramsey experiments. Clearly, the SEAQT framework is a reasonable model for predicting the dynamics of quantum protocols, providing an alternative approach for determining T 1 and T 2 in superconductive quantum processors. As described at the beginning of Section IIA, conceptually the SEAQT framework treats the dephasing phenomenon as intrinsic to the system, while the open quantum system framework, which is the basis for the Lindblad equation, treats it extrinsically, requiring two limiting assumptions: i) weak couplings with an environment and a linear description of the non-linear evolution of the density operator. Neither of these limitations apply to the SEAQT framework. Of course, with this loss of generality, the computational cost of the Lindblad equation is less than that of the SEAQT equation but only slightly so. Furthermore, the SEAQT framework's greater generality results in an easier setup since the specific form of the environmental interaction needed by the Lindblad equation for the dephasing phenomenon is not required by the SEAQT equation, which treats this phenomenon intrinsically via the SEA principle. Even for the relaxation phenomenon, a specific form of the interaction is not needed by the SEAQT equation of motion. Of course, both the Lindblad and SEAQT equations of motion can be scaled to larger qubit arrays and do so on the basis of 2 N where N is the number of qubits in the array. Thus, since both equations are 1st order ordinary differential equations in time, an array of up to at least 20 qubits could be run on a desktop computer (e.g., an iMac). Clearly, larger arrays would require additional computational resources although even then both approaches would in the end be limited to relatively small quantum devices or subsets of larger devices. Finally, the possibility of conducting experiments on cloud-based quantum devices opens new opportunities or testing different equations of motion and scenarios for the non-equilibrium evolution of quantum systems. Future work will focus on developing ways to mitigate the error inherent to these devices and recover as much of the information as is possible lost in the operation of these devices.