BaNi2As2 is a superconductor chemically related to the Fe-based superconductors, with a complex and poorly understood structural phase transition. We show based on first principles calculations that in fact there are two distinct competing structures. These structures are very different from electronic, transport and bonding points of view but are close in energy. These arise due to complex As bonding patterns and drive distortions of the Ni layers. This is supported by photoemission experiments. This leads to an interplay of electronic and structural behavior including induced anisotropic of the electronic transport. The competition between these distortions is associated with the complex behavior observed in BaNi2As2 samples. The discovery of iron-based superconductivity Superconducting BaNi 2 As 2 is a particularly interesting case This large hysteresis is different from the transition in BaFe 2 As 2 , and is also different from typical charge den-sity wave (CDW) instabilities. It is noteworthy that there is a strong suppression of this structural phase transition with P alloying in Ba(Ni 1-x P x ) 2 As 2 with a concomitant enhancement of the superconducting critical temperature, T c We started with first principles calculations examining the stability of the triclinic structure proposed by Sefat and co-workers We find in both cases that while the triclinic structure, with zigzag chains of Ni atoms are maintained in the relaxation, the energy differences with respect to the tetragonal are very small and in the case of the structure of Lee and co-workers, the energy is higher than the tetragonal structure. In the case of the structure of Sefat and co-workers, the energy is lower for the relaxed triclinic structure by less than 10 meV per formula unit, which is very small considering the first order transition at ∼ 130 K. The structure highlighting the Ni-Ni chains is shown in comparison with the ideal tetragonal structure in the first two panels of Fig. We searched for possible structures by starting with the tetragonal cell with various larger displacements of the atoms, and then relaxing the structures. We did this in a tripled conventional cell containing six formula units (denoted 3×2 in the following). No symmetry was imposed. We used the projector augmented-wave (PAW) method The first is a monoclinic structure, with a unit cell containing a single formula unit, as depicted in Fig. In the PBE relaxed tetragonal structure each Ni has four Ni at 2.93 Å, and each As has one As at 3.65 Å, and four at 3.71 Å. In the triclinic structure with relaxed atomic positions and lattice parameters constrained to those of Sefat and co-workers We now turn to the electronic structure. The distortions strongly affect the electronic structure, including near the Fermi level, where the states are mainly Ni d derived. The electronic densities of states (DOS) of the two low energy structures are compared with the ideal tetragonal structure in Fig. We additionally did angle integrated photoemission spectroscopy to probe the DOS in the tetragonal and lower symmetry distrorted structure. The result is as shown in Fig. The Fermi surfaces are stromgly affected by the transition. The tetragonal structure has four sheets of Fermi surface as seen. The monoclinic has only three sheets, with a noticeable anisotropy. This is quantified by the transport function σ/τ as given in Table The characteristic of the two distortions that we find is a formation of dimers or trimers of As. The results imply rebonding of the As as an important ingredient in understanding the structural distortions of BaNi 2 As 2 . The formation of the electronic structure of AB 2 X 2 ThCr 2 Si 2type materials is known to depend on both B-X and X-X bonding, which can vary between compounds To summarize, we find that the structural instability of BaNi 2 As 2 is related to rebonding of the As anions, which then drives reconstruction of the electronic structure. We find low energy structures related to the formation of As dimers and trimers. Other structures with more complex bonding arrangements of the As may occur. It is likely that the competition between structures underlies the complex structural and electronic behavior observed in BaNi 2 As 2 . There is a strong interplay of these bonding arrangements with the Ni derived electronic structure, including strong changes in the Fermiology and transport function. This may provide novel routes to modify and control the electronic properties of correlated metals and exploring the physics of such systems. Theory work at the University of Missouri was supported by the Department of Energy, Basic Energy Sciences, Award DE-SC0019114. Crystal synthesis at Rice University was supported by US DOE DE-SC0012311 and by the Robert A. Welch Foundation under Grant No. C-1839 (P.D.)..