A two-dimensional optical-phased array is demonstrated by using a multiple-input star coupler, compatible with FMCW LiDAR. Previous approach using a single-input design achieves two-dimensional beam-steering by relying on a tunable laser source, taking advantage of grating coupler radiation angle wavelength dependance and variation of the waveguide refractive index. While implementing a convenient way to distribute power in a single step, star coupler architecture is inefficient in terms of employed waveguide length and thus, optical loss and footprint. Multi-input approach partially alleviates this by condensing several single-input devices into one, permitting to reduce the footprint proportionally to the employed number of inputs. We fabricated in silicon nitride technology a proof of concept steerer with beam waist 0.36 • ×0.175 • addressing a field of view of 15 • ×2.8 • . A new design iteration is also reported with and 0.24 • ×0.16 • beam waist and 15 • ×11.2 • field of view. Implications of this optical-phased array chips from a LiDAR system perspective are also presented. C OMPACT and functional light detection and ranging (LiDAR) system requires a working combination of laser, beam-steering system, detector and digital signal processing (DSP) In this paper we present and experimentally demonstrate a OPA PIC architecture compatible with FMCW. The ar-chitecture can randomly address a scene, by combining the operation of a tunable laser and a switch matrix selector. The fundamental OPA block is based on a slab coupler and a waveguide array equipped with grating couplers (SC-OPA), similar to the one proposed in In the literature, several implementation of solid-state OPAs can be found, that resort to tunable lasers and switch matrices. The beam steering dimension exploiting wavelength tuning and diffraction effect on gratings is typically 0.08 • /nm on silicon nitride and 0.14 • /nm on silicon on insulator Other groups have reported switched architectures applied to a free-space propagation region The same wavelength tuning controlled double H and V sweep concept has been proposed also in The footprint and architecture scaling when the number of radiating elements in the OPA increases are root concerns of the different proposals. Bogaerts et. Our paper is structured as follows. Next section presents the rationale behind our work, from the specification to the technology selection and proposed architecture. In section III, two of our multi-input SC-OPA designs are elaborated. Section IV provides the results of the technology validation and building block performance. Next, section V reports on the experimental setup, methods and test results of the two aforementioned designs. The connection between the PIC and LiDAR system level implications is developed in section VI. Finally the conclusion is given in section VII. The purpose of our research was to determine the best combination of a scalable chip architecture and photonic integration technology, incorporating an OPA, that ultimately would lead to meet a set of specifications. The sought OPA scanner should cover a 2D scene spanning a field of view (FOV) of ±15 • in both the horizontal (H) and vertical (V) directions, with a resolution of 0.1 • . Additionally, the scanner should feature random access to parts of the scene, with the lower power consuming approach. From a system perspective, the resulting architecture should be compatible with FMCW LiDAR. Last but not least, when resorting to off-chip devices, they should be state of the art, and co-integrable with the OPA in the mid-term. One on-chip key block, as in many other proposals in the literature, is the grating coupler (GC) as radiating element. These radiate light on different directions for different wavelengths. Thus, with a tunable laser (TL), one of the two dimensions in the FOV, in our case V, can be addressed. Consequently, the phased-array is constructed, in the H dimension, by placing a number of ideally identical GCs, N GC , spaced d GC from each other. The scan in H can then resorts to different mechanisms that have implications in the power distribution network to the GCs. We soon discarded architectures based on meander or serpentine waveguides such as In summary, all the above points to a large number of elements / area OPA with a considerable number of optical paths and anticipated long lengths. Thus, among the most common monolithic photonic integration technologies, we selected silicon nitride that features the lowest propagation loss. Among the platforms available Firstly we considered the GC implementation in such platform. As reported in Secondly, increasing the FOV in H is accomplished by placing the GCs close enough. The GC relative spacing needs to follow d GC = 1.9λ to ultimately meet the 30 • FOV H set at the start. The angular separation of the OPA diffraction orders in H is inversely proportional to d GC . This is totally analog the the concept of free spectral range (FSR) in an arrayed waveguide grating (AWG), as described in Thirdly, and as a consequence of the first remark above, stitching VBs by placing different GC design OPAs has footprint implications: the larger the footprint for each OPA is, the lower number of VBs in a given chip area will be. The OPA radiating elements block footprint is bounded to the GC length, L GC , times the (N GC -1)d GC . However we cannot neglect the footprint of the distribution network, that is the array of waveguides from the slab coupler to the GC set. These have a relative length increment of ∆L as introduced above. In the simplest case, in which one of the diffraction orders in H is shifted the full FOV H by sweeping the wavelength of the TL an amount of ∆λ, the length increment needs to satisfy ∆L = λ 2 /(n g ∆λ), where n g is the waveguide group index. As shown in Fig. Faced to this roadblock, in fourth place we explored an additional degree of freedom within the SC-OPA device. All the above refers to a device using a single input to the SC. The SC far-field phase for light coming from different SC inputs can differ by a constant amount. It can be designed and controlled so as to span a range of 2π for P inputs. Consider then a SC-OPA with P inputs, whose positions are engineered in such a way that the SC far-field phase at a given wavelength, for two adjacent inputs, differs 2π/P . For a fixed (not scanning) wavelength, the spot produced in the scene, will be shifted in H an amount F OV H /P when switching between consecutive inputs, while staying in the same V position within the VB. This is depicted in Fig. . ( with N cycles = N lines /P . As numerical example to compare with the previously presented, consider a multi-input SC-OPA with P =14 to draw the same 28 lines (N cycles = 2 diffraction orders). Then the required ∆L for the same TL tuning range of 35 nm would be 65.37 μm. For each input, 2 lines are drawn in the FOV. The H position shift due the the SC relative phase for the inputs, ensures the next 2 lines for the next input do not overlap in the FOV. When considering the ultimate target of H beam width and FOV, the length difference between the shortest and longest waveguide would be now reduced by the same factor P , that is 2.2 cm, comparatively a less daunting challenge. Last but not least, the slab coupler (SC) element feature power distribution with ideally equalized phase at the start of all the paths to the GCs. For silicon nitride, as compared to very low index contrast silica on silicon technology, the arrangement of the SC outputs is done as in In summary, the proposed switched architecture, with interlaced scene scan, features smaller footprint for the OPA, as compared with a single input device. Details on the footprint advantage, including the switching matrices, are elaborated in section V. As indicated in the previous section, we resorted to the silicon nitride AN800 platform by Ligentec, whose details can be found in With this waveguide cross-section, we firstly addressed the design of the long GCs. We resorted to a single etch step for the silicon nitride layer, thus the gratings were patterned as lateral corrugations of a regular waveguide. This way, the GC period is comprised of two sections of different widths, W a,b = W wg ±∆w GC . In order to cover several VBs as outlined in the previous section, GCs with different period length, Λ GC were designed as well. A design of experiments (DoE) from previous building block (BB) development runs comprised gratings of periods of [842.39, 872. Secondly, the design of the slab coupler was faced following the findings in In third place we designed the unit switch cell, based on a balanced Mach-Zehnder Inteferometer (MZI). This builds upon a previously designed 2x2 MMI available in the process design kit (PDK) for the AN800 Ligentec technology. Two thermo-optic heaters were used, one per MZI arm. Anticipating to the well-know thermal cross-talk effect for neighboring heaters, we did also use the deep trench module. Our switch cell layout has three of these trenches, one placed in the symmetry axis of the MZI, between the two arms, and two other at the opposite side of each arm. With regards to the OPA design combining the BBs above, we have previously reported as proof-of-concept (PoC) In this paper we additionally report on a new design iteration, labeled SC1, with some of the features changed, and fabricated in a different run than SC0. The H emission area was doubled by increasing the number of emitters to 78, while keeping d GC = 6 μm, with the purpose of reducing the beam width in H. We kept the same target H×V FOV of 15 • ×2.8 • . The V resolution was set to 0.23 • , which then requires N lines = 12 and P = 12, so ∆L = 32.7 μm. However, we just laid out 8 of the 12 inputs, aiming at a more compact switch matrix stage (with number of lines a power of 2). Consequently, and as shown later, parts of the FOV are not covered, but there is not a fundamental limitation as we demonstrated and show hereby for the SC0 design. In addition, one aspect was to keep the longest path difference equal in both the SC0 and SC1 designs, which is met by halving ∆L while doubling N GC . The motivation behind was to investigate the addition of more radiators, in terms of the phase distortions added, but with the same path length. Phase errors stem from non-uniform fabrication of the waveguides, mainly due to variations in waveguide material composition and waveguide thickness (deposition effects) and waveguide sidewall roughness (lithography and etching effects). Design improvements such as waveguide up/down taper in the straight sections of the waveguides are common place, such as in In conclusion, two SC-OPA designs are considered, termed SC0 and SC1. They differ in the number of radiating elements (two times for SC1), that is the OPA aperture, and consequently the target beam width in the horizontal FOV. Another key difference is the number of horizontal lines per VB, which for SC0 is 2, while for SC1 is 1, implying ∆L is half for the latter, so the length difference between the shortest and longest path to the GCs is the same for both designs. Firstly we addressed on the technology performance. The results are given in Table The features for the straight waveguides (width 0.8 μm, height 0.8 μm) were derived from multiple test structures. As core test structure (TS) for both the basic properties of waveguides and multi-mode interference (MMI) couplers, we used an unbalanced MZI with arms having sufficient length difference to resolve the optical losses. The design follows our previously reported approach in Unbalanced MZIs were used as TS to asses on the thermal tuner efficiency. This TS had thermal tuners immediately on top of the arm waveguides. Then, for one of the arms, additional tuners were laid out at multiple distances of 10 μm. On the other hand, a similar layout was used for the other arm, but one out of two heaters well replaced by deep trenches, that is the arm heater was separated by 30 μm of the next heater, with a deep trench between them. The spectral shift of the MZI was measured for a current range of 0-60 mA, for every heater of the described above. More specifically, for the lateral displaced heater at 30 μm without trench the relative spectral shift was 12% respect to the direct heater. In the same geometrical, but with a trench at 15 μm (middle point) we measured a relative displacement of 2.5%. The MZI switches use thermal tuners, with current to shift π of 41.91 mA for those equipped heat isolation trenches, as detailed in Table With the OFDI setup, we did also retrieved the reflectometric time domain response and obtained the decay rate of energy for the GCs, as shown in Fig. Finally, some TSs were used to explore the coupling strength of GCs running in parallel. These comprised pairs of GCs placed at distances from 1.2 to 3.0 μm. We found that the cross-over length of such directional coupler-like structure, for the GCs at 3.0 μm distance was above 88 cm, that is negligible coupling for GCs of 1 mm at the designed d GC = 6 μm. Our different OPA proposals were experimentally tested in the laboratory after refining designs, fabrication processes and several BBs. As described in the previous sections, two were the main devices so as to prove the interlaced scanning We performed edge coupling by using microscope objectives as mechanism for feeding light into the PIC. In order to control the input polarization, polarization controllers are employed previous to the microscope objectives, filtering TM mode and letting TE mode be coupled. In the case of design SC0, as the scan is performed with a purely passive method (we directly access the SC input ports), the PIC is deposited on top of a copper chuck which holds the die through a vacuum channel. For the SC1 design, the scanning pattern is accomplished by controlling the switching matrix to select the operating VB and the corresponding input to the SC. Thus, this PIC was assembled in an aluminium PCB, where wirebond connectors link the DC pads contained in the PIC with the pads contained in the PCB. Moreover, as heat dissipation is crucial in this case, the PCB is fixed on top of an aluminium chuck and a heat radiator. To control the temperature changes happening in real time in the PIC, a ceramic thermistor is also included and routed to the PCB terminals. The thermal management is performed by means of a thermal electric controller (TEC), which maintains a constant temperature through the characterization process using a Peltier cell. In other hand, a proper arrangement must be done to capture the light beam generated by the OPA. We employed a infrared (IR) CCD 2D array placed 14 cm over the PIC for the acquisition of the beam profiles with enough definition (≈10 pixels along the main beam). This distance is just slightly larger than the far-field distance for the apertures considered, but via simulations we confirmed this have no substantial effects. Next, in a second arrangement, and in order to capture the complete FOV, we resorted to a mirror and projection screen. For this, a 90 • gold protected mirror (96 % reflectance) is allocated above the PIC (4cm) and a viewing screen is mounted and adjusted in height to collect the beam reflected. At the other end of the setup, the InGaAs CCD array (Hamamatsu C12741-03, 14 bit resolution, 42 dB dynamic range), is mounted with an IR objective and prepared to capture the viewing screen. Processing includes dark frame subtraction to eliminate laboratory ambient light, and gamma correction. After the adjustment and characterization of this setup, the area covered with the InGaAs camera was 22.5 • H x 17 • V. The difference between the horizontal and vertical axis is due to the detector array of the InGaAs camera (640x512 pixels). This range is enough to properly capture the scanning patterns created by designs SC0 and SC1. In the case of design SC1, the switching matrix must be electrically powered up. For this, two FFSD 40-pin flat cables are connected to both sides of the PCB and to an interconnection 40 points electrical box, where several DC lines can be easily switched to activate different heaters from the switching matrix. Finally, the electrical interconnection box is connected through an interface to a couple of 10channel, 300 mA current sources provided by LuzWaveLabs. This current sources are especially designed for PIC testing, able to provided 16 bits of resolution, high stability and excellent noise performance. For their control, several Python and MATLAB scripts were generated. The primary objective then is to capture the scanning pattern of the OPAs using the experimental setup previously described. In the case of SC0, it contains a single VB where the multiinput SC has 8 inputs which were accessed individually from the chip facet. For the SC1 design, the 4 VBs can be selected by a 2x4 switching matrix followed by a 2x8 for each of the VBs. Thus, the first task to generate the OPA scanning pattern is to calibrate the different switching matrices. It is worth mentioning that the tuning of each phase shifter contained in the MZIs (just one of the two arms was tuned) was done by performing a current sweep of 0-60 mA, range in which a π phase shift is seen. This information was obtained by previous BB individual characterization. For each VB light is edge coupled to the upper 2x2 MZI of its corresponding switching matrix. Note that in both designs, SC0 and SC1, the not needed MZI inputs at all stages of the switching matrix are routed independently to the die facets on purpose, so they can be employed in the switching matrix calibration phase. In short, once light is applied to one of the sparse 2x2 MZI input we can observed using the camera both radiated spots, and tuning the phase shifter light can be redirected to just one of the spots (i.e. one inputs of the SC). This step is repeated for the each sparse 2x2 MZI input. This task has been developed manually. Nevertheless, the process can be easily adapted to be performed through image recognition and automated edge coupling. After the experimental setup preparation and the switching matrix calibration, the OPA interlaced scanning patterns can be properly tested. In the case of design SC0, light is edge coupled to the desired VB through the outer 2x2 MZI from the switching matrix. Similarly, in the case of design SC1, light is edge coupled to the VB selector, located in the left lower part of the die (see Fig. We firstly expand the results for our SC0 chip, previously reported in There is observed some no ideal behaviour though. Along their trajectories, which are not exactly linear, beam widths vary and significant intensity fading is observed. Individual frame captured beams are fitted to a 2D Gaussian model, so the H and V widths are retrieved by computing its full width at half maximum (FWHM). We observed beam quality was degraded when capturing from the projection screen, as compared with direct beams captured with the IR cam on top of the chip. The beams from the projection screen exhibited glitches and peaks, we attributed to stray photons both from the screen and other light sources in the lab. These degrading artifacts were not observed for the IR cam on top of the chip. Consequently, we acquired beams following the same TL scan and video record procedure directly seen from the chip in the IR cam, at the cost of a reduced FOV. In Fig. The layout and picture of the SC1 chips are given in Fig. The power of the main peak ultimately determines the detection range and the power in the side lobes is wasted. This is discussed in section VI later on. The main lobe power emission efficiency (percentage of power with respect to the input power of the chip) is given in Table The experiments were performed operating the switch ma- trix and the tunable laser. After calibration, the switch matrix bias current required for every state were be stored, and we observed fully reproducible matrix configuration along the experiments. For the results shown, the TL was continuously tuned for every matrix selected SC-OPA input. However there architecture can sport further scanning schemes, some of them we outline hereby. • Random access: the TL wavelength range and switch matrix state can be arbitrary. Thus, parts of the scene can be accessed, i.e. addressing those areas in the FOV where targets have been identified (e.g. fast moving targets) while neglecting others (static or slower moving targets). • Adjustable resolution: since the switch matrix state can be arbitrary, two adjacent SC inputs could be enabled at the same time. Two spots would be created simultaneously (i.e. two of the lines shown in the trajectories figures scanning parallel in time), which would represent and effective reduction of the spatial resolution. Time wise, with respect of LiDAR system integration time (see section ahead) the scan rate could be halved to preserve the same SNR, owing to the fact the optical power in this situation would is split in two beams, instead of one. • Object framing: two far inputs, e.g. input 1 and 8 could be enabled simultaneously. This way, an outline of a large object, duly identified by processing algorithms in a regular higher resolution spatial scan. In summary, the architecture allows for addressing parts of the scene randomly, with different spatial resolutions. Considerations on the laser and switch matrix set and reset times should be addressed, but are out the scope of this paper. In terms of footprint, the switch matrix (SM) stage, in its most simple structure without resorting to special layouts for the MZIs, scales in length as the number of required stages. That is, if P is the number of inputs to one of our SC-OPAs, the SW stage length will be L SM = L M ZI log 2 (P ), and the height (or width) will be W SM = W M ZI P/2. Thus, the total area , where the factor 1/2 stems from the tree-like structure. In our design, this amounts for 5.14x0.4 mm 2 (see Fig. Optical beam steering approach and the ranging technique employed can have crossed implications that we summarize in this section. First of all just recall the main differences between the two main approaches for the range determination. Time of flight (ToF) is a incoherent technique so direct detection (DD) is employed. A train of optical pulses is emitted and a broad area receiver based on broad aperture optics focus the incoming beam to the detector plane (broad area or and array of detectors). Finally, the range of the target is obtained by evaluation of the time delay between emitted and received pulse sequence electronically. The Frequency Modulation Continuous Wave (FMCW) technique uses coherent detection. The transmitter emits continuously in power, but modulated in optical frequency with a symmetrical saw-tooth shape In general FMCW presents a number of advantages versus ToF, but it has an intrinsic requirement that is the coherent beating on the detector of the two combined signals, LO and received signal from target. This in turn can pose restrictions on the practical structure for the TRx/RCx pair. In this sense, on ToF-LiDAR the transmitter and receiver can be separated devices with optimised designs and just located together with only electronic interconnections with the control system. However, in FMCW the LO signal from the transmitter must be driven to the detector for the beating. In free space optics based LiDARs employing large area detectors, or detector arrays, this could be a complex issue taking into account that incoming signals can reach the receiver from a broad field of view (FOV) and the efficient control of the LO and signal overlapping at the detector would require complex solutions. According with this intrinsic requirement, a natural approach is to employ the same optical device for the beam steering for transmission and reception, separating the two propagation directions by means of non-reciprocal components as optical circulators. Those are very mature for the case of discrete optical fiber components, but present very promising evolution as integrated components This section presents some of the implications between scanning strategies and distance detection techniques. First of all we must recall an intrinsic limitation relative to the speed of light. The round trip time for each meter in free space is approximately 6.66 ns. Depending on the application it will determine the minimum "waiting time" (WT) (time between the ranging signals have been emitted and they comeback to the LiDAR receiver). As example, for autonomous driving where the maximum ranges can be > 200 m waiting time can reach W T = 1.33 μs. Additionally to WT, a key parameter is the "processing time" (τ p ). This quantity includes all the treatments over the detected photo current, such as filtering, sampling, Fourier transforming depending of the employed approach, and thresholding. All these procedures can be carried out in analogue or digital manner (or as a combination). In an optimum design case, we could assume full advantage of the the complete τ p is taken for the "signal integration" or in other words for the noise reduction. This is the case for the electrical noise bandwidth B e on the Signal to Noise Ratio (SNR) models where B e = 1/τ p . Values for τ p will depend on the maximum range, source power and component losses (we develop them later on) but for AD applications it can range > 1 -2 μs. Notice at this point that WT + τ p is imposing a limitation on the frame rate. For example, a 300x300 complete image will be limited to a 3.7 frames/s assuming an optimistic W T +τ p = 3 μs. Additionally to WT and the processing time, the establishment and stabilization times must be considered in each LiDAR image point for both steering process (i.e. switching matrix control or MEMs activation time, etc), and also for the ranging signal generation (i.e. FMCW saw-tooth generation and linear frequency control system After the previous general considerations we can conclude the beam steering approach and the signals employed for the ranging/speed determination, including their optimum relationships, will determine the final LiDAR features. Thus, we dedicate the rest of the section to explore these relations for the proposed architecture, assuming the use of FMCW ranging signals. A classical approach is the point to point switching. It implies a sequence of steps: 1) Beam steering and stabilization time. It encompass two actions, the wavelength tuning to perform both the H and V steering into the Vertical Block (VB) and the switching matrix to select the proper VB, 2) The FMCW generation consisting in the saw-tooth frequency modulation with ∆f excursion and 2T period. The theoretical limit for the spatial ranging resolution is only related with ∆f as ∆R = c/2∆f with c the speed of light. As a reference, in autonomous driving resolutions below 15 cm are demanded, that correspond with ∆f > 1 GHz. The coarse wavelength tuning for beam steering, and the fine linear optical frequency sweep, are carried out and optimised in a separated way, resulting in greater time consumption for the entire process. Furthermore, there is a unavoidable cross-relationship between FMCW signals and wavelength tuning steering systems, which is the beam deviation according to the frequency modulation of the saw-tooth signal itself. In these cases, it must be ensured that the angle variation induced by FMCW signal is smaller than the desired beam divergence (or alternatively image point separation). As previously described vertical dispersion on GC was (∂θ/∂λ) V =0.08 • /nm but horizontal dispersion due to the delay line section previous the OPA is (∂φ/∂λ) H = N lines F OV H /P ∆λ, being for N lines = 4 and P = 1 a value of (4x15 • /35nm)=1.71 • /nm. Notice that in this case, the maximum FMCW frequency excursion ∆f is 7.2GHz (case when H beam deflection equals the desired H divergence of 0.1 degree). It is important to note that this maximum feasible excursion decreases as the number of lines into the VB increases. For example for P = 1 and N lines = 28 (compatible with the vertical density of 0.1 degrees along 2.8 • ), the maximum ∆f is 1 GHz (close to a range resolution of 15 cm as previously indicated). In this sense, the proposed switched architecture once again plays to our advantage by decoupling the N lines concept from the N cycles through the product N lines = P × N cycles , increasing the possible FMCW excursion by a factor × P. An alternative approach employs the laser sweep to accomplish both the beam steering and the FMCW ranging process simultaneously, in a continuous way We define the T V B as the available time to scan a complete VB. The frame time will be T f rame = T V B N V B , the time to scan all the lines at each SC input will be T port = T V B /P and finally T in Fig. In practice, this continuous swept is effectively sliced after detection by the signal processor in a set of "time beams", according with the specified angular resolution and/or beam divergence (div). This way, the number of "time beams" into the single time ramp T can be formulated as M F M CW = γ(N cycles F OV H )/div, with F OV H the horizontal field of view and γ an over-slicing parameter γ >= 1. Once M F M CW is set, the effective optical frequency excursion is obtained as ∆f ef f = F/M F M CW , and from this the expected range resolution ∆R = c/2∆f ef f together with the maximum RF tones that should be detected and processed RF tone = ∆f ef f . Table A good approximation to determine the LiDAR achievable range is usually based on a shot noise dominant approximation. We will assume the laser source provides a linewidth less than a few tens of kHz, so that beating noise can be neglected against the inherent level of shot noise. The FMCW technique works in a coherent detection regime, applying a relatively high optical power coming directly from the FMCW source that acts as the local oscillator, in order to obtain the RF tone after beating with the received signal. Usually in these cases the thermal noise can be considered below the shot noise, and neglected as well. The inset in Fig. In order to summarize the results of maximum achievable range for the FMCW-LiDAR, we will focus on Fig. The maximum range results are shown, for three values of optical power injected by the laser source P 0 =100, 200 and 300 mW. Clearly, the available laser power and OPA losses are extremely demanding parameters over the maximum range, so that, even assuming an optimistic value of 6 dB for the OPA losses, distances of 26 meters are obtained for 100 mW, which can be increased to approximately to 43 m for 300 mW. OPA losses L AB are summarized in a detailed manner in Table Starting from the indicated base system, it is interesting to have simple relationships that allow for evaluating the impact on the maximum achievable range by simple calculations. More specifically, each dB increase or decrease in OPA losses affects the range by a factor ×0.81 or ×(1/0.81) respectively, while in optical power P 0 each dB impacts by a factor ×1.11 or ×(1/1.11). Finally, a ×2 increase in the OPA aperture A results in a ×1.358 range increase, while in the case of the process time T a factor ×2 produces an improvement in the range of ×1.433. The MZI based limited extinction for the 1xP SM preceeding the SC-OPA, can lead to the emission of P-1 spurious beams evenly spaced in the horizontal FOV by FOV H /P, with intensities -20 dB (worst case, and the closest to the main radiated beam). -23 dB for 2 beams, -26 dB for 4 beams, and so on. In transmit / receive mode, the optical signals (main beam and spurious) go through the OPA and SM twice, hence the cross-talk ratio is a factor of x2. In the worst case, the cross-talk of a spurious to the main beam would then be -40 dB. Considering this worst case, two different ranging and detection scenarios may arise: 1) Same distance to target than to spurious direction. In that case, after beating with the LO FMCW signal, two RF tones of the same frequency are obtained, which add in photocurrent. The amplitude for the interferer in photocurrent will be 100 times lower (beat term square root, √ 10 4 ) thus with negligible effect over the main beam signal. 2) Spurious beam comes from an object located closer or further from the main beam target. In this case, after the detector, there are 2 RF tones, main and spurious, but with different RF frequency. Thus, they can be distinguished and separated by processing the received signals. Even though, their value will be very low as explained in the following. (3) The worst case of the two outlined in the last point above, would be when the spurious beam comes from an object closer (L sp ) and with reflectivity higher, to the main beam target (ρ sp ). The power ratio between spurious and main beam can be written as: X t (dB) = -40 + 10 log 10 (ρ sp /ρ main ) + 20 log 10 (L main /L sp ). The first term accounts for the different reflectivity, and the second from the different range (see propagation loss equation in the manuscript). As numerical example, for ρ sp /ρ main =10 and L main /L sp =10, Xt = -10 dB (10 in natural units). In that case, the spurious would be detected with an amplitude level of (10)=3.16 but a frequency 10 times lower. In conclusion, simple mechanisms could be established for the processing of the detected signal, that would allow to discard tones below a given threshold from the main beam tone. In any case, those resulting from a SM with cross-talk -20 dB, can be neglected. We consider here the benefits of using optical amplifiers (OA) embedded into the specific points of the LiDAR architecture. We begin placing the OA just before the signal input port of the differential detector in the typically called pre-amplifier configuration (case on Fig. LO-ASE = 2η 2 e 2 P LO N B e where η is the detectors quantum efficiency, e is the electron charge, P LO is the LO power at the detector input, B e the electrical bandwidth and N = n sp (G -1) with n sp the OA population inversion factor and G the gain. On the other hand, the shot noise term is σ 2 shot = 2e(ηe/hν)P LO B e and comparing the two expressions we have σ 2 LO-ASE /σ 2 shot = ηn sp (G -1). We can see that pre-amplier configuration leads to a dominant LO-ASE term approximately G times the shot noise, preventing any hypothetical benefit assumed from optical gain. Lets consider now a more general configuration where the OA is located far from the detector input, so that a certain quantity of optical losses are in between (case on We will illustrate the OA net gain benefits in three different locations along the LiDAR architecture. For all the cases we take a modest gain G=4 (6 dB), N F = 2n sp and η = 0.8. 1) AO just before detectors (location (1) in Fig. In summary, amplification on chip is anticipated as a must. Furthermore, a distributed set of amplifiers with modest gain are outlined as the optimum in terms of signal to noise ratio. A fully passive two-dimensional OPA based on wavelength sweeping and consisting of a multi-input star coupler has been proposed and demonstrated in silicon nitride technology. Existing slab coupler OPA permits to distribute optical power between the numerous radiating elements in a single step and creating a Gaussian profile in the H direction. Our novel proposal uses P inputs at the entrance of the slab coupler, that allows to relax the up-scaling problem with the star coupler approach, permitting to reduce both footprint and optical power losses in a P factor with respect to the singleinput approach. Expanded results for a previously reported proof-of-concept device have been reported, featuring a H×V FOV of 15 • ×2.8 • , and a beam size of 0.36 • ×0.175 • , for wavelength sweep of ∆λ = 35 nm, as expected by design. A new design incorporating on-chip switch matrix stages to select among four different vertical blocks, features H×V FOV of 15 • ×11.2 • , and a beam size of 0.24 • ×0.167 • . The architecture can be operated as progressive scene scanner, but it can also feature random scene access with selectable resolution. From a LiDAR system perspective, we have shown the proposed OPA is compatible with FMCW LiDAR, taking advantage of the tunable laser wavelength sweep. Moreover the switched architecture has the ability to reduce by a P factor the horizontal angular dispersion, for a given line density, which in turn reduces the impact of the FMCW signals on the steering deviation. Additionally, the relationship between FMCW frequency tuning in continuous mode with the interlaced steering trajectories has been described in detail, as well as the implication of the double slope use for the target relative speed determination. Dependency relationships between the steering architecture parameters P and N cycles and system parameters of interest, such as the number of FMCW points, the equivalent per point frequency excursion and the range resolution have been discussed. The power balance and distance limitations have been described, providing quick-use scaling rules that can be quickly used for the evaluation of maximum-range with respect to losses. A breakdown of the current losses and paths for improvements have been provided for the proposed architecture and technology. Finally the use of optical gain inside the LiDAR structure is theoretically evaluated, in what we believe may represent a path of disruptive change toward a new generation of LiDAR systems that will build upon hybrid photonic integration.