The optical conductivity encodes the current response to a time dependent electric field. We develop a theory of the optical conductivity σ(ω) in presence of a dc supercurrent. Current induced optical response is prohibited by Galilean invariance from occurring in systems with a single parabolic band. However, we show that lattice effects give rise to a pronounced current dependent peak in σ(ω) at the gap edge ω = 2∆, which diverges in the clean limit. We demonstrate this in a model of a multi-band superconductor. Our theory explains the recent observation of a current induced peak in the optical conductivity in NbN by Nakamura et al. The nonlinear electromagnetic response of quantum materials at terahertz (THz) frequencies and below allows direct probing of electronic structure In the context of superconductors, the nonlinear response has long been a focus of interest In contrast, there has been less focus on nonlinear effects due to a combination of externally driven electric fields and currents. Notably, experiments on s-wave superconductor NbN observed a dc supercurrent to produce giant second-harmonic generation (SHG) in the THz range In this work we analyse current enabled optical response in a superconductor. We study the effect of a uniform, dc supercurrent density j sc on the ac optical conductivity σ(ω) in a time reversal symmetric superconductor at temperature T = 0. This dc supercurrent may be due to an external source, or a screening current induced by a magnetic field A second important ingredient is current relaxation. The large gap edge response is thus absent in common minimal models of superconductors in which the current is conserved due to Galilean invariance. We provide a minimal model in the form of a multiband superconductor, as has been proposed for NbN We focus on a response that is linear in the electric field, and thus characterised by the optical conductivity σ(ω) We calculate the tensor σ(ω) in the presence of a dc supercurrent, for finite frequencies, via the Kubo formula where j is the current density operator, V is the system volume, a, b are spatial indices, • 0 denotes thermal expectation values calculated for E(ω) = 0, and D ab is the Drude weight in the clean non-interacting limit (for a parabolic band D ab = ne 2 δ ab /m where n, m and e are electron density and mass, and charge). Current conserving system-We begin with the canonical model of an s-wave superconductor: a single parabolic band with a contact interaction: where the interaction is attractive g < 0, ξ k = k 2 /2m -μ is the dispersion, and P † q = k c † k+q↑ c † -k↓ creates a pair of electrons with total momentum q. The optical response of the system (3) is trivial and independent of the presence of the supercurrent or otherwise. This follows from the Galilean invariance of H, which entails that the current density operator is a conserved integral of motion where Current conservation forbids the electromagnetic energy dissipation, and results in a trivial optical conductivity. Specifically, the real part of the optical conductivity is zero at all finite frequencies, while the imaginary part, given by σ(ω) = iD/ω, encodes the uniform acceleration of the electron centre of mass by the electric field. Let us now examine how the trivial optical conductivity of a current conserving superconductor may be correctly obtained in mean-field theory when the system is carrying a supercurrent j sc . For j sc = 0, Cooper pairing occurs at a finite momentum q, this is related to the supercurrent density j sc and condensate velocity v c by The corresponding mean field Hamiltonian, which depends on the Cooper pair momentum q, is obtained in the usual way where ∆ and θ are the magnitude and phase of the superconducting order parameter respectively. In the standard BCS theory, the phase factor e iθ is treated as a c-number. Although this leads to an artefactual violation of electron number conservation [ H, N ] = 0 (N = kσ c † kσ c kσ ), this treatment still allows for accurate calculation of the optical conductivity in clean and dirty systems at j sc = 0. The standard approach works for q = 0 as the pairing and kinetic terms in H still conserve current as desired. However, for a finite supercurrent j sc = 0, Cooper pairing occurs at finite momentum q, then the pair operators P q in the mean field Hamiltonian alter the current [P q , j] = 0. In this case treating the condensate phase e iθ as a c-number leads to an additional artefactual violation of the current conservation: [ H, j] = 0 and consequently artefactual contributions to the optical conductivity. In order to obtain the optical conductivity correctly, we treat θ as an operator associated with the phase of the condensate, the canonically conjugate operator -i∂ θ then counts the number of Cooper pairs making up the condensate. The physical picture Importantly this restores the conservation of electron number to the mean field theory, so that [ H, Ñ ] = 0, respecting the charge conservation present in the original theory where in the second line, we have substituted We have presented physical arguments for the form of the number and current density operators appropriate for a superconducting mean field theory with a finite supercurrent. Importantly, these operators provide the correct book-keeping for the charge and current carried by the condensate. In the Galilean invariant system considered, this restores conservation of current to the mean field theory, and hence recovers the desired trivial optical conductivity. This approach is formalised in App. A where we show the mean field current and number operators Lattice effects-Current conservation in a Galilean invariant system follows from the fact that the interaction conserves current. However in solids, the presence of an underlying lattice means that current is generically not conserved: non-parabolic bands, Umklapp processes, or multi-band effects all break Galilean invariance, leading to current relaxation, and allowing for a non-trivial optical response. To illustrate this, we now show how coupling between bands with different effective masses allows for a non-trivial optical response in a current carrying superconductor. We consider a minimal model which, after the kinetic term has been diagonalised, consists of two parabolic bands α = 1, 2, and interactions that scatter electrons within (g 11 , g 22 ) and between (g 12 = g * 21 ) bands where ξ αk = k 2 /2m α -μ α , and For simplicity, we assume the primary pairing interaction occurs in the first band, and induces a pairing potential in the second band via the inter-band coupling, providing the dominant source of pairing in both bands This may occur either due to a hierarchy of scales in the coupling g 11 g 12 g 22 , or because the density of states at the Fermi surface is much greater in the first band. In this regime the mean field Hamiltonian takes the form where the primary gap is ∆ 1 e iθ = g 11 P † 1q , and a smaller gap is induced in the second band ∆ 2 = ∆ 1 g 12 /g 11 . In Boguliobov-de Gennes (BdG) form we obtain where is the Nambu spinor and we have defined the BdG matrices where ξαk = 1 2 (ξ α,q/2+k +ξ α,q/2-k ), δξ αk = 1 2 (ξ α,q/2+kξ α,q/2-k ), and τ a are the usual Pauli matrices. In this model Galilean invariance is broken, thus the current density is not conserved, but relaxes due to pair scattering between the bands. This non-conservation is quantitatively captured by the commutator of the current operator (4) and Hamiltonian (9) which details the rate of change of current due to each microscopic process where δm = m 1 -m 2 , and v c = q/2m 1 is the condensate velocity. Though for the parabolic bands considered here current is conserved upon intra-band scattering, the current changes upon inter -band scattering: pairs of electron from the second band are scattered with rate g 12 into the first band, each causing a change to the current density of δj, and vice versa. The mean-field theory current operator must preserve this commutator in order to preserve the microscopic dynamics of current, correctly capture the current relaxation, and allow for accurate calculation of σ(ω). Current induced optical conductivity of a clean superconductor: The red (blue) line show the dissipative (reactive) response In direct generalisation of ( The mean field operators have the commutator This commutation relation corresponds directly to the mean field equivalent of where vαk = ∂ k ξαk = k/m α . We note the appearance of the τ 3 term in j2k with a current dependent coefficient. This term measures the density of electrons in the second band. This term will be important to obtaining a large gap edge response, and is only possible in a multiband system where electrons may be exchanged between bands. Within a single band system the conservation of the total number of electrons prevents the coupling of electron density to an external field. We may now evaluate the optical conductivity using ( where we have set temperature T = 0, θ(x) is the usual step function, and ρ 2F is the normal phase Fermi surface density of states of the second band. The appearance of mass in this result is due to the dependency on the curvature of the bands at the Fermi surface. As is necessary, this current mediated contribution to the optical conductivity ( The current mediated optical response ( where ∼ indicates asymptotic equality as δω → 0. For fields oscillating at frequencies just below the gap, where the reactive part is large, a large ac current is induced, carried by electrons in the second band. As the peak is found only in σ , with σ ⊥ remaining trivial, the induced ac current runs parallel to the super-current. We emphasise that while the Doppler shift (the tilting of the dispersion) causes the indirect gap to shrink with increasing supercurrent ω ig-= 2∆ 2 -qk 2F /2m 2 + O(q 2 /m 2 ), the large response is always set by the current independent direct gap 2∆ 2 . Moreover, as both the direct gap, and the change to the current (13) induced by scattering δj are independent of position on the Fermi surface, the current induced response Impurity scattering-Impurities couple different momentum sectors, altering the optical response. We consider the effect of quenched non-magnetic disorder 2Δ 2 τ • 8. • 4. • 2. • 1. • 0.5 and focus on its effect on the dissipative response, from which the reactive response follows via the Kramers-Kronig relation. Let us recall some useful properties from the usual BCS theory of response functions for the case j sc = 0, T = 0. In the presence of time reversal symmetry, response functions can be decomposed into case I (case II ) terms which are generated by operators which are even (odd) under time reversal symmetry where | k is the eigenvector of H2,k for zero current δξ 2,k = 0. In the limit of states either side of the gap edge ( k , p ) → (∆ 2 , -∆ 2 ) we find that in case II | k |o - kp | p | 2 → 0, whereas in case I the matrix element | k |o + kp | p | 2 approaches double its normal phase (∆ 2 = 0) value. Thus we see that, due to selection rules (or equivalently coherence factors), the case I (case II) response is enhanced (suppressed to zero) as ω → 2∆ + 2 . Whereas inside the gap |ω| < 2∆ 2 both the case I and II responses are zero. Thus the (enhanced) case I response drops discontinuously to zero at ω = 2∆ 2 . The distinct gap edge behaviour of case I and case II operators relies only on the time reversal symmetry of H In the presence of the current this picture is altered, the pairing is at finite momentum, and thus the BdG matrices τ 3 and τ 0 are not odd/even under time reversal. However, for weak scattering, the distinction in behaviours of the matrix elements close to the gap remains, and so we retain the nomenclature of case I and case II for τ 3 and τ 0 respectively. Using this convention, we find the case I term in the current ( In We find (23) where ∼ indicates asymptotic equality at large τ , and the second equality in The case II contribution (Fig Discussion-In this manuscript we have described a supercurrent enabled optical response present in BCS superconductors. Such a supercurrent may be due to an external current source, or a screening current induced by a magnetic field. An important ingredient was the breaking of Galilean symmetry, i.e. the presence of some form of lattice physics. As an example we considered pair scattering between bands with different Fermi velocities. However, the type of lattice physics employed is unimportant, the current mediated response should be expected in any system where electron scattering does not conserve the total current. Other examples of physics which provide such non-conservation of current include Umklapp scattering, and strongly non-parabolic dispersion at the Fermi surface. These examples, though generically providing a weaker response, may be appealing avenues for future study as they require only a single band. The current enabled optical response predicted in this work is in good agreement with the observations of Ref. We comment on interesting avenues for future studies. The large reactive response which is generated in the superconducting gap provides a mechanism for the coherent coupling of THz radiation and superconducting circuits where v c = q/2m 1 is the condensate velocity. To obtain C(ω) in the τ → ∞ limit we apply the Sokhotski-Plemelj theorem and evaluate the subsequent integrals to obtain where Taking the real part we obtain For finite τ we may evaluate (C3) directly, obtaining it may be verified that in the limit of τ → ∞ (i.e. in the limit of z ∈ R) this coincides with the previous result (C5). In the limit of large τ , in the vicinity of the gap edge, this form simplifies where ∼ indicates asymptotic equality when the limit of large τ is taken with τ (ω -2∆ 2 ) held fixed. This reveals the maximum height of σ aa (2∆ 2 ) = O( √ τ ) which holds for the complex conductivity, and for the real and imaginary parts individually. We comment that this approach does not recover the Case I response, i.e. the term which reproduces Drude conductivity in the limit ∆ 2 → 0. This term must be obtained by other means We begin from the BdG Hamiltonian In words: we assume that ω c is at least τ -1 above the larger indirect gap of the second band, and at least τ -1 below the smaller indirect gap of the first band. In this frequency range the current operator for the first band has no spectral weight, and we may calculate the optical conductivity considering consider only the current operator for the second band. At the end of this section we discuss violations of this assumption. We thus consider only the Hamiltonian of the second band where Ψ is the vector of all ψ k . It is convenient to choose a basis in which h takes the block diagonal form where here and throughout σ α are the usual pauli matrices. Here h is denoted as block matrix with the top left (bottom right) blocks correspond to the particle (hole) sector, and the off-diagonal blocks correspond to the pair creation/breaking processes. Within the particle sector h0 there are two further block-left movers and right movers (which have a relative offset due to the Doppler shift σ 3 δξ 2F ), and within each of these blocks there are d states labelled by their different crystal momenta k-thus h isa 4d × 4d matrix. The normal phase Hamiltonian is the sum of kinetic and potential energy terms In the one dimensional setting considered here, the kinetic energy T 0 may in turn be expressed as a 2 × 2 block diagonal matrix, with the two blocks corresponding to left and right movers respectively where k is a matrix which measures the unsigned momentum. For exact diagonalisation we keep only a finite number of states in the vicinity of the Fermi-surface, such that k is a d × d diagonal matrix whose diagonal values (i.e. eigenvalues) k ν are evenly spaced over the interval specified by where we The pairing potential matrix may be written in this basis where ∆ is the scalar paring potential. The scattering potential V 0 is a 2d × 2d matrix which mixes couples left and right moving electrons. As the scattering potential is assumed to be real in the position basis, the matrix V satisfies where σ 1 is the usual Pauli matrix, in this context implementing coordinate inversion, sending left movers to right movers and vice versa. We use a random matrix model of the scattering potential, assuming it induce a statistically identical coupling between all low energy momentum modes. Specifically, we use where R = R T , one may verify that V satisfies (D7) as required. We take R to be a Gaussian orthogonal matrix, i.e. the matrix elements R ij are real, identically distributed Gaussian random numbers with correlations where v sets the typical scale of the matrix elements of V . The matrix element scale v is related to the scattering time τ by Fermi's Golden rule where ρ = d/E c is the density of states coupled by the disorder, i.e. of T 0 . We note that for the Fermi Golden rule result to be valid, we must be in the regime where it has a non-perturbative effect on T 0 , the kinetic term, ρv = dv/E c 1. However we also want to remain in he regime where the disorder does not alter the density of states of the minimal model-that is the typical eigenvalue of T 0 is of scale λ . The current operator is given by Finally we discuss parameters. As noted in previous paragraphs, the parameter regimes where this model is accurate are constrained. Specifically we require 1. The disorder strength is non perturbative ρv = dv/E c 1. 2. The disorder bandwidth is small compared to the window of kinetic energies λ T /λ V = E c /(v √ 6d ) 1. 3. We need sufficient density of states to observed the expulsion of levels from the superconducting gap 2∆ 2 ρ = 2d∆ 2 /E c 1. 4. The energetic bias determining the current must also be non perturbative, requiring √ d δξ 2F /E c 1. This is the condition that the matrix elements of δξ 2F σ 3 τ 3 (which encode the energy bias setting the finite current) are of scale δξ 2F / √ d far exceed the density of states in the electron/hole sectors ρ = d/E c . When these constraints are satisfied, the calculation of the optical conductivity is accurate for ω < ω c . For the numerics presented in the main text, we use these constraints, determining x to satisfy x 1 if x > 2. Specifically we set ∆ = 1, E c = 8.5, 8.6, and d 4624, 3450 for the data with δξ 2F = 0.5, 0.6 respectively. Sufficient conditions for the case I/II cross term to average to zero is 1. The kinetic energy ξ k may be linearised at the Fermi surface 2. The scattering matrix elements are identically distributed, and symmetric about 0 (i.e. V and -V occur with equal probability). To see this, as before let T 0 = t 0 σ 0 , V denote the kinetic and disorder terms in H. Let also u denote the normal involution (uu † = u † u = u 2 = (u † ) 2 = 1) which changes the sign of the kinetic energy ut 0 u = -t 0 . One may show that two Hamiltonians H and H which are identical but for their disorder realisations V and V = -uV u make exactly cancelling contributions to the case I/II cross term (D15) Thus if V and V = -uV u occur in the disorder ensemble with equal probabilities the cross term averages to zero. The first condition above is sufficient for the involution u to exist, and the second is sufficient for V and V = -uV u to occur with equal measure in the disorder ensemble.