Topological modes (TMs) are usually localized at defects or boundaries of a much larger topological lattice 1,2 . Recent studies of non-Hermitian band theories unveiled the non-Hermitian skin effect (NHSE), by which the bulk states collapse to the boundary as skin modes 3-6 . Here, we experimentally demonstrate that the NHSE can conversely affect wavefunctions of TMs by delocalizing them from the boundary. At a critical non-Hermitian parameter, the in-gap TMs even become completely extended in the entire bulk lattice, forming an "extended mode outside of a continuum." These extended modes are still protected by bulk-band topology, making them robust against local disorders. The delocalization effect is experimentally realized in active mechanical lattices in both onedimensional (1D) and two-dimensional (2D) topological lattices, as well as in a higher-order topological lattice. Furthermore, by the judicious engineering of the non-Hermiticity distribution, the TMs can deform into a diversity of shapes. Our findings not only broaden and deepen the current understanding of the TMs and the NHSE but also open new grounds for topological applications. Topological matters 1 have generated long-lasting influence across many realms, as evidenced by the vibrant development in topological photonics 7 , acoustic and mechanical systems 8 . A hallmark of most topological matters is the existence of TMs localized at the boundaries or interface or defects in a specimen. Imbued with topological protections, many applications such as waverouting devices Non-Hermitian systems generally have a complex spectrum 19 , making them naturally suitable for describing open systems. An open system can exchange energy with the external environment, thereby permitting the presence of effects such as gain and loss, and nonreciprocity, giving rise to a kaleidoscope of novel phenomena Here, we leverage NHSE to alter the wavefunctions of TMs. The theoretical grounds and proofof-principal experiments in an active mechanical lattice 29,37 are introduced using a 1D non-Hermitian topological system, in which the complete delocalization of a topological zero mode (TZM) is observed. The effect is extended to 2D topological lattices, wherein we demonstrate the morphing of 1D topological edge mode (TEM) and a 0D second-order topological corner mode (TCM) into diverse profiles by engineering the non-Hermiticity distribution. Although the TMs become extended under the NHSE, they remain spectrally isolated in the bandgap and their topological protections are intact, effectively making them "extended states outside of the continuum"an opposite of bound states in the continuum We start with a 1D non-Hermitian Su-Schrieffer-Heeger (NH-SSH) chain, as shown in Fig. The bulk Hamiltonian is where v x and w x are intracell and intercell hopping coefficients, and δ x is nonreciprocal hopping, which is the origin of non-Hermiticity in the system. Here, v x , w x , δ x ∈ R and v x = -2.33, w x = -0.38. The hopping values are retrieved from experimental data. When δ x = 0, the system is Hermitian and both bulk bands are topologically trivial with a zero topological invariant (quantized Zak phase). When δ x ≠ 0, the system is non-Hermitian, consequently, the energies E ∈ C form loops in the complex plane, as shown in Fig. We next build an interface with the NH-SSH and a Hermitian SSH (H-SSH) chains, as shown in where A j and B j respectively denote the wavefunction components at sublattice A and B of the jth unit cell. Since E = 0 for the TZM and all B j = 0 because of the bipartite property, the magnitude ratio is A decay-free extended TZM appears when |η| = 1, which corresponds to δ xc = v x -w x (exact non-Bloch PT -symmetry In Fig. We experimentally validate the above findings in an active mechanical lattice Our experimental lattice consists of a 10-site NH-SSH chain and a 9-site H-SSH chain (Fig. We excite the lattice at the interface by sending a signal covering 5 -20 Hz to site-11. We first turn off the nonreciprocity and measure the bulk and interface responses (Fig. Next, we turn on the nonreciprocal hopping in the NH-SSH chain and measure its effect on the spatial profile of the TZM. In Fig. The extended TM can also be realized in a single nontrivial NH-SSH chain, even in the presence of long-range hopping. Extended TM and extended bulk mode can even coexist (see Next, we demonstrate such capability by generalizing the phenomenon to two different types of 2D topological systems. We build a 2D rectangular lattice by stacking the NH-SSH chain along the y-direction with an interchain hopping v y , as shown in Fig. where V = v x + w x e -ik x , and These effects are experimentally observed in the mechanical lattice. The photo in Fig. By further engineering the distribution δ x as functions of y, a wide variety of profiles for the TEMs can be obtained. Three examples are presented in Fig. by which we can obtain δ x = w x (e -1 ξ NH ⁄ -e -1 ξ H ⁄ ). The NHSE can also be produced in the ydirection, by which the TEM can be further collapsed to a corner (Supplementary Fig. The HO-NHSE is a recently discovered non-Hermitian phenomenon by which bulk states in a lattice collapse to 0D corner skin modes. Here, we conversely leverage the HO-NHSE to manipulate the TCM in the 2D topological quadrupole insulator. Figure where R μ (k μ ) = v μ + w μ e -ik μ and M μ (k μ ) = (v μ + δ μ ) + w μ e ik μ with μ = x, y, v y = -0.49, w y = -2.12. Note that to generate HO-NHSE, nonreciprocal hopping terms are required for both x and y directions. Here, the hopping terms, including the nonreciprocal ones, are arranged to preserve the π-flux within each four-site plaquette, thereby giving a quantized non-Hermitian generalization of quadrupole moment (see Supplementary Information section VII). Also, despite the presence of non-Hermiticity, equation ( There is an alternative understanding of the NHSE's influences on the TMs when the nonreciprocal hopping is uniform: the 2D Hamiltonians [equations ( However, this is not a necessary condition. The delocalization can be achieved without chiral symmetry (see Supplementary Information section II). The NHSE is known to collapse the bulk states towards open boundaries. Our work achieves the opposite by converting localized TMs into extended modes of unconventional shapes while preserving the topological characteristics (the robustness of the extended TMs is discussed in Supplementary Information section IV and section V). The morphing effect is reconfigurable by reprograming the nonreciprocity. The extended TMs have no Hermitian counterpart and the underlying physics is general. Our findings show that non-Hermiticity is a powerful new degree of freedom by which the wavefunction of TMs can be tailored to suit different needs. Because both topological matters and nonreciprocity have been extensively studied in photonics Our experimental systems are lattices of coupled active rotational harmonic oscillators. The elementary building block is comprised of a brushless DC motor (LDPOWER 2804) with a rotational arm attached to it (Supplementary Fig. The motor can be actuated by a driver chip (STMicroelectronics L6234PD), which is programmed to generate a response torque based on the measured θ(t) from the neighboring site. Take the nonreciprocal hopping δ x between site B I-1 and site A I in Fig. 