Intense debate has recently arisen regarding the photoinduced changes to the iron-chalcogenide superconductors, including the enhancement of superconductivity and a metastable state. Here, by employing high energy resolution, we directly observe the melting of superconductivity on ultrafast timescales. We demonstrate a distinctly nonequilibrium response on short timescales, where the gap fills in prior to the destruction of the superconducting peak, followed by a metastable response. We propose that the former is due to pair phase decoherence and speculate that the latter is due to the increase in double stripe correlations that are known to compete with superconductivity. Our results add to exciting new developments on the iron-based superconductors, indicating that the photoinduced metastable state possibly competes with superconductivity. The superconducting iron chalcogenides have recently generated considerable attention with the recognition that they bring together superconductivity, topology and magnetism in a single material There have also been a number of studies of this material using time-resolved pump-probe techniques where the system is pumped out of equilibrium and the pathway back to equilibrium provides further insights into the complex interactions that take place between the electrons and collective modes Such techniques also have been applied to the cuprate superconductors for Fermi surface wave vectors ranging from the nodal direction to the anti-nodal direction. In general, these studies show a return to equilibrium via different stages. First the non-equilibrium state de-cays via e-e interactions on time scales of the order of 100 femtoseconds, establishing a state with a "pseudoequilibrium" Fermi-Dirac distribution Pump-probe studies of the Fe-chalcogenide superconductors show a different behavior. These systems still show the fast electron-electron equilibration but then the material appears to enter a metastable phase that exists on the order of nanoseconds or longer In systems with closely competing quantum states, it is known that an incident IR pulse can push the system from one state to another. In the FST materials, it is well established that two different spin or magnetic configurations exist. The low temperature superconducting phase is characterized by spin correlations of the singlestripe type Single crystals were grown by the unidirectional solidification method. The superconducting properties of the single crystals studied here were previously characterized by magnetization measurements, having a superconducting transition temperature, T c of 14.5 K The time-resolved ARPES was performed at Brookhaven National Laboratory using a SES-2002 analyzer. The probe pulse was generated using the output of a Coherent Vitara-T/RegA 9050 setup, which consists of 70 fs long, 800 nm pulses at 250 kHz. A cascade of nonlinear process was then used to produce the fourth harmonic (200 nm). The fourth harmonic pulses were finally passed through a monochromator before entering the vacuum chamber. The 800 nm fundamental pulses were used to pump the system. The energy and time resolutions were 6.6 meV and 500 fs, respectively. Space charge effects were carefully monitored before each experiment. The temperature-dependent measurements were acquired first at 5 K, then by increasing to 15 K, and finally reproduced again at 5 K on the sample spot, in order to ensure that the effect was reproducible over a full temperature cycle. The results in this paper have The momentum integration windows were 0.03 Å-1 and 0.02 Å-1 for (e) and (f). Red and blue EDC's represent those at 15 K and 5 K, respectively. The data in (e) and (f) has been smoothed for clarity. been repeated on multiple cleaves. The fits in Fig. We start by reviewing the changes to the band structure near the Γ point though the superconducting transition, schematically shown in Fig. The system undergoes several changes upon cooling through the superconducting transition (Fig. Next, we demonstrate the high energy resolution of the trARPES experimental configuration by showing the static ARPES results above and below T c respectively (Figs. Figure Figure We consider the results for two different fluences. Figure Figures The dynamics of the SP (Figure To further emphasize the behavior at short delays, we display the difference EDCs (figure The most obvious implication of the results in this work is to demonstrate that superconductivity is melted on ultrafast timescales and does not return within the measured time window. This direct demonstration contradicts the conclusions in two recent works that have suggested enhanced superconductivity due to photoexcitation Isoyama et al. found an increase in both the real and imaginary parts to the conductivity within the first 1-2 ps, contradicting equilibrium measurements that showed an increase and decrease in the real and imaginary parts to the optical conductivity, respectively, with increasing temperature Here, ω is the energy, ∆ is the gap amplitude, Γ s is the single particle scattering rate, and Γ p is the pair scattering rate, indicative of pair scattering with phase fluctuations To provide a more quantitative picture, we modeled the difference curves by using the self-energy in equation 1 (see Supplemental for more details). First, we show the experimental data at three delay times in figure The photoinduced changes that we observed contain three timescales that offer further insight into the microscopic mechanisms responsible for the ultrafast melting of superconductivity. First, the gap filling occurs within our resolution. This suggests that the phase fluctuations are of electronic origin. The fluctuations may be caused by the scattering of Cooper pairs with nonequilibrium bosons It is reasonable to assume that the mechanisms responsible for melting superconductivity also play a role in its recovery. As mentioned above, we observe electronic and phononic timescales that contribute to the melting of superconductivity. The first explanation is that pairs are reformed by the absorption of low energy (acoustic) phonons, which can occur on nanosecond timescales. Indeed, this was used to explain the recovery of superconductivity after photoexcitation in the BCS superconductor MgB 2 , which has similar gap sizes to the present material The second possibility is that the pairs are prevented from recombining because of the disruption to the correlations caused by the electronic redistribution. For example, direct excitations can occur at different locations throughout the Brillouin zone. The natural pathways for relaxation may cause most holes to relax to the Γ point, and most electrons to the M point in the Brillouin zone. This redistribution of particles modifies the correlations that are key to mediating iron-based superconductivity. Though it is difficult to narrow down the specific correlations that would be impacted, examining the changes that occur at higher excitation densities, where the changes are more apparent, may offer further insight. Thus, we turn to recent works that have identified a photoinduced metastable state in FST for clues. Properties of this metastable state include the renormalizations of the band structure and chalcogen positions that resemble the ground state effects of increasing the Te concentration At higher Te concentrations, the correlations favor double stripe magnetism. Additionally, these magnetic correlations are known to compete with superconductivity In conclusion, we directly show, for the first time, the pump-induced changes to the electronic band structure of FST below T c . Our observations show a reduction of two features that are directly associated with superconductivity, namely the superconducting peak and gap. We observe changes both on electronic and picosecond timescales, and find that they are metastable, lasting for > 100 ps. Close examination of the initial changes to the band structure are indicative of nonequilibrium behavior that shows the filling of the superconducting gap occurring before the reduction of the SP. We hypothesize that the orbital fluctuations directly induced by the pump-induced electronic redistribution are linked to double stripe magnetic correlations known to compete with superconductivity. A better theoretical understanding of the precise electronic excitations and relaxation pathways would be crucial in understanding the changes to the orbital occupancy that results from the pump. Furthermore, experiments aimed at directly imaging the photoinduced orbital and magnetic changes, as well as trARPES with high energy resolution extending out to the edge of the Brillouin zone, would be needed in order to corroborate this picture, and may ultimately yield clues to understanding the interactions that lead to ironbased superconductivity.