Two-color (2C) pyrometry has long been used for flame temperature and soot concentration studies and is now becoming more widely used to measure surface temperatures of burning materials. With the obvious advantage of being a contact-free method that requires only minimal optical access, 2C pyrometry combined with high-speed acquisition is a promising diagnostic tool to obtain exceptional temporal and spatial resolution of thermally degrading samples. However, its conceptual simplicity relies on a set of basic assumptions that when violated can result in large errors. In this work, we use an experimental configuration representative for fire resistance testing for aerospace and naval applications to analyze the impact of camera parameters and test setup on the accuracy of the surface temperature results obtained. Two types of fibre reinforced polymer composites and a steel plate are used to investigate material specific aspects that effect the measurements. An improved workflow for camera calibration is presented that takes the actual experimental setup into account. The temperature and emissivity mapping obtained trough in-situ IR measurements is compared against data acquired trough thermocouples and post-fire hemispherical directional reflectance measurements at room temperature. This comparison illustrates the necessity for proper post-processing and demonstrates that emissivity values obtained from pristine or burnt samples are not well suited to obtain accurate surface temperatures through conventional (single color) IR thermography. We also present a detailed error budget and suggestions for calibration measurements to keep the overall error well below 50 • C in a temperature range from 400 • C to 1200 • C. Polymer matrix composites (PMC) are widely employed in the transportation sector and continue to replace traditional metal parts. Despite their versatile mechanical properties and the significant weight reduction they allow, important challenges must be addressed for applications at high temperature. Under these conditions, thermal degradation results in rapid changes in the material mechanical, thermal and optical properties. For aerospace or naval applications, these materials are subjected to certification testing where they are exposed to a calibrated heat source, typically a heating coil, a lamp, or a flame. For components located close to fire hazards, the tests involve a pilot flame fueled by either propane or oil. Predicting and understanding the thermal degradation mechanisms of PMCs requires precise knowledge of the material temperature, a quantity difficult to obtain experimentally under the conditions of certification fire tests. Optical techniques such infrared (IR) thermography can provide high spatial resolution, non-intrusive measurements but require careful calibration to yield accurate results, a time-consuming step not always implemented in practice. Here we introduce a novel two-color IR camera calibration approach that includes optical path modelling and geometrical corrections, drastically reducing the error budget associated with optical thermography, thus bridging the gap with point-based thermocouple (TC) measurements. Regardless of the heat source used in fire testing, radiative heat transfer towards the sample is the main process that initiates and drives the PMCs thermal degradation The radiation absorbed by a sample causes its temperature to change, and the measurement of this change is essential to understand the outcome of many fire test. In large-scale certification setups, this measurement is commonly limited to a few thermocouples (TCs) at defined positions, allowing limited insights In this paper, we present a rigorous 2C pyrometry framework, covering hardware selection, camera calibration and postprocessing, and implement it to measure the backside temperature of thermally degrading materials. The experimental campaign covers metallic samples and PMCs commonly used in aerospace and transportation applications. We discuss the potential sources of noise and error associated with the IR acquisition for rapidly degrading materials such as PMCs. We also develop a radiation model and assess the validity of the assumptions underlying 2C pyrometry and how they affect the accuracy of the surface temperature and emissivity measurements. This multi-step thermography image processing scheme offers a comprehensive approach to accurately study rapidly degrading materials under intense flame attack. 2 Material and methods Two types of carbon fibre and one type of glass fibre reinforced polymer (CFRP and GFRP, respectively) composite panels were tested, along with stainless-steel samples, to cover effects of emissivity and thermal conductivity. The two SAE 304 stainless steel panels measured 305 mm × 305 mm, with a thickness of 1.6 mm. Concentric circles with 10 mm radial spacing were marked onto the backside, as reference for welding thermocouples (TC). All metal panels were used in the condition they were received in and do not display significant surface wear. Two CFRP panels with phenolic CYCOM 2400-1M resin and T650 carbon fibers (8 harness satin) were fabricated with four plies in [0/+45/-45/0] S orientation. Type K TC with a diameter of 0.08 mm, coated with a thin layer PFA insulation to prevent electrical conduction with the material, were embedded in-between plies, as well as on each face to measure the temperature evolution throughout the sample thickness. The panels measured 65 mm × 300 mm and were 1.65 mm thick. CFRP samples were also manufactured with epoxy resin as 25.4 mm × 305 mm wide coupon strips and used for flame calibration and some verification testing. A glass-fibre panel with phenolic resin (GF-Ph), 35 mm × 300 mm, was used for emissivity measurements. The top view of the experimental configuration used to expose the material samples to open flames is shown in Fig. A laboratory-scale kerosene burner 2.4 Temperature, emissivity, and high-speed infrared thermography measurements Type K TC were used to measure the sample temperature, with the probe design adapted to the sample type and test setup. These measurements served as second independent measurements for validation and comparison against IR thermography. Probes that measured the temperature on the sample back (cold) face were not in direct contact with the flame and thus needed no protective coating to prevent catalytic reactions or surface degradation. For the steel samples, sturdy type K thermocouples (1.628 mm in diameter) were welded at different radial distance from the sample centre to ensure proper contact throughout the tests. The radius was increased in steps of 10 mm. Most of the composite samples had thin (0.08 mm) PFA-coated type K TC placed in-between each ply, with their beads slightly shifted relative to their neighbours, allowing the temperature gradient throughout the sample thickness to be measured without inducing local deformation. All thermocouples, except for those irreversibly integrated in composite panels, were tested prior to use with a dry-well (Fluke Calibration 9140). The multispectral (MS)-IR camera (Telops FAST-M350) was configured with a 50 mm lens and an eight-position fast-rotating filter wheel to record different wavelength bands (Fig. The emissivity of the samples is expected to change as the samples thermally degrade and their surface alters. To compare the initial and final emissivities obtained through IR measurements against alternative techniques, CFRP and GFRP samples have been analysed in their pristine state and post-fire. The absorptivity of selected regions on the samples were measured using a SOC100 Hemispherical Directional Reflectometer (HDR) (Surface Optics Corporation) coupled with a FTIR Spectrometer at a sample temperature of 20 • C. The incident polar angle is fixed at 10 • , near normal incidence. Kirchhoff's law (α = ε) and assuming the transmissivity of an opaque material (τ = 0) enable the link between the hemispherical directional reflection factor ρ and the emissivity ε for a given wavelength: The total directional sample emissivity was then calculated from the ratio between the luminance L(λ) radiated from the sample and the luminance L 0 (λ) from a black body integrated over the spectral range from 2.0 μm to 30.2 μm. 3 Theory and calculation The radiative power of a blackbody L σ (σ, T ), an ideal material with an emissivity ε equal to unity at thermal equilibrium, depends on temperature and wavenumber as described by Planck's law: Neutral density filter, OD 3 1.5 6.00 With L σ (σ, T ) the spectral radiance, σ the wavenumber [cm -1 ], T the temperature [K], h the Planck constant, c the speed of the light and k B the Boltzmann constant. Integrating the spectral radiance over all wavenumbers yields the well-known Stefan-Boltzmann law, but for our application, only the spectral range of the camera for a given optical configuration is of interest. The in-band radiance (IBR) for a given filter from a cut-on, σ low to cut-off σ high wavenumber is mathematically linked to the black-body temperature by: A key feature of Eq. 4 is that the function is strictly monotonic, thus allowing only one value of IBR per temperature for a given optical configuration. The radiometric camera calibration provides this unique link between an incoming radiance signal and a given black-body temperature. Through this relation, the radiometric temperature measured by a calibrated thermal infrared camera assumes an ideal black-body (BB) radiation L BB (σ), from which real materials typically deviate, with the degree of deviation accounted for by their specific emissivity ε(σ). This value must be obtained experimentally or from the literature to yield the corrected spectral radiance L(σ) = L BB (σ)ε(σ). As the emissivity is a surface property, the important change in composition and morphology occurring as composite materials degrade has a direct effect on ε. For metallic samples, the formation of oxide layers and changes in surface finish may present an important source of error Two-color (2C) pyrometry overcomes some of the challenges associated with obtaining accurate emissivity data. Instead of assuming an overall constant emissivity, it is only assumed constant between two narrow and closely located wavebands (σ 1,low to σ 1,high , and σ 2,low to σ 2,high ). The IBR measured by the camera for a given spectral bands becomes: Although the relation between temperature and IBR is nonlinear and may even vary depending on the spectral filter, it remains monotonic. Therefore, the ratio of the two IBR signals is monotonic as well. 2C pyrometry employs this mathematical property to eliminate the emissivity-dependance and to retrieve the true temperature of a material based on the IBR ratio. The processing of IR image to extract temperatures requires proper assessment of the optical path (Fig. Table Background The radiance L 1 (σ,T) close to the sample surface is determined by the sample spectral emissivity ε s (σ) and temperature T s as well as by potential background contributions L bkg reflected to the sample: The atmosphere can alter the total radiance received at the detector, especially if species with strong absorbance bands in the IR spectrum are present, such as water vapour and carbon dioxide: The camera band-pass filters characteristics finally determine the total spectral radiance incident on the camera detector: In the case of an external filter wheel and un-cooled camera used in other setups In our experiments, the filters are installed in an internal wheel located within the cooled MS-IR camera (Fig. Secondly, band-pass filters are chosen to be transparent to the atmosphere at short distances (<1 m) from the target and the camera is place at 85 cm from the sample surface. It is thus assumed that both, τ atm (σ) and τ ft (σ), are equal to unity over the full spectral range. With this, L 3 (σ,T) = L 2 (σ,T), and L 2 (σ,T) = L 1 (σ,T), and Eq. 9 becomes: With a band gap as small as 0.04 μm for FW#7 and 0.08 μm for FW#8, emissivity is assumed constant over these two spectral ranges. With this important simplification, ε s (σ) = ε s and Eq. 10 now becomes: The surface emissivity ε s also determines the relative importance of the reflected background radiance, but this contribution may be disregarded if the sample temperature is significantly higher than its background, which is generally the case in the fire certification test considered here. As a rule of thumb, the background radiance should be less than one percent of the sample radiance Finally, the assumption that led to Eq. 11 is generalized. Since the two filters bands are close to each other by design, the sample emissivity is not only considered invariable in the spectral range of each filter, but also assumed to be the same for both filters. The initial radiation model with nine unknowns can thus be reduced to a system of only two unknowns, IBR filter, 1 and IBR filter, 2 , which are both experimentally accessible. Applying the 2C pyrometry principle, we use Eq. 12 to form the IBR signal ratio for two filters, an expression independent of the sample emissivity: The monotonicity of Eq. 12 ensures that Eq. 13 is also monotonic and hence that any given temperature for a sample with emissivity ε s corresponds to a distinct IBR ratio value. Simulated IBR-temperature curves for FW#7 with different ε are shown in Fig. Wrongly assuming an emissivity of 0.8 for a sample with ε= 0.6, the sample temperature is underestimated by 53 • C in our example. The practical implementation of the 2C techniques is referred to hereafter as the Temperature-Emissivity-Separation (TES) algorithm and relies on several steps. First, the IBR ratio in Eq. 13 for two different filters is simulated by numerically solving Eq. 12 over the respective filter bands and over a temperature range of interest. Then, the IBR ratio obtained from the actual camera readings IBR filter1 and IBR filter2 is compared with the simulation to identify the corresponding sample temperature. In a last step, this sample temperature can be used to calculate the corresponding spectral radiance for a black body based on Eq. 12 and using the information from a single filter channel. This allows to calculate the sample emissivity: Because the IBR ratio, r(T s ) is built pixel-wise, the TES algorithm allows to obtain sample temperature and emissivity mappings with the size and resolution determined by the exposed detector area and distance to the sample. The principle of 2C pyrometry allows to separate temperature and emissivity calculations for the same scene using two images acquired with different band-pass filters. The apparent simplicity of this technique to obtain both quantities from the same measurement comes with several key requirements for the acquired IR signal that are implied by the choice of radiation model and assumptions described in Sec. 3.1. Any deviation from the ideal case contributes to the overall error budget. Starting right-to-left with respect to Fig. The selection of an appropriate acquisition frequency is thus an essential part of the experimental design. The frame rate is limited by a combination of window size, exposure time, and the fastest (mechanically) attainable wheel speed. The temporal noise at the detector impacts the pixel-wise error for each frame and shall be limited by the camera shot noise. For this requirement, the camera manufacturer usually refers to the noise equivalent temperature difference (NETD) at room temperature. The NETD can be expressed in terms of radiance with the noise equivalent differential in-band radiance (NEdIBR). This formulation provides a useful performance figure for each filter within a specific temperature range as to the amount of change in radiance needed to equal the system noise. High-quality band-pass filters with a narrow gap and sharp cut-on and cut-off characteristics increase the radiometric accuracy. Neglecting test specific error sources, the ultimate performance limit of 2C pyrometry is therefore governed by the camera hardware (detector, filter, rotating wheel) and the resulting camera specific NEdIBR. The challenge to quantify both temperature and emissivity becomes immediately apparent when considering a small error in one of the spectral bands. This error can be caused by a calibration inaccuracy for a filter, by variations of the radiance signal within a filter's spectral band or in-between acquisitions. Using the spectral bands for filters FW#7 and FW#8 used in our experiment (cf. to Tab. 1), the calculated temperature variation due to an error of 1 % or 3 % in the spectral band of filter FW#7 is simulated in Fig. Finally, the samples are required to behave as gray bodies with an emissivity that is independent of wavelength, temperature, and solid angle in both filter bands, ε s (λ, T, Θ) = ε s . The crux of the problem for PMCs is that the "body" thermally degrades into several different materials, as shown in Fig. In general, the total emissivity for many materials shows a strong temperature dependency. Additionally, the change of emissivity with temperature is often correlated to its change with wavelength. A surface temperature rise for a sample means also that its emission is shifted to shorter wavelengths. In general, ε(T) increases with T for conductors and decreases for insulators The TES algorithm uses the IR raw signals from filter channel FW#7 and FW#8 to calculate a pixel-wise IBR ratio. This ratio is then used to retrieve the corresponding radiometric temperature from look-up tables. The post-processing accounts for the simplifications that have led from Eq. 8 to Eq. 12 by dedicated measurement blocks. The MS-IR camera records the IBR signal per pixel and registers the sequences in a proprietary Telops format (.hcc). Signal post-processing was performed using Matlab® 2019 and the Python programming environment (Python Software Foundation). The analysis workflow is depicted in Fig. Part of the filter-wise correction account for the radiance of the detector area actually illuminated. This step is necessary as the camera calibration by the manufacturer is based on black body measurements with all sensor pixels exposed to a similar radiant flux. For tests with composite coupons strips, the camera field of view (FOV) was chosen to cover the vertical sample length that corresponds to the diameter of the stagnation zone of the impinging flame. The numerical simulations based on Eq.12 rely on the manufacturer calibration of the camera for each filter which is based on a homogeneously illuminating each pixel of the sensor. Black-body measurements are used to create a look-up table that relates the number of illuminated pixels to a suitable radiance correction factor. It is important to note that each filter needs to be corrected independently. The calibration block tests, the gray body assumption as well as the temperature and emissivity mapping are compared against HDR and TC measurements. Since the HDR emissivity measurements were performed on 25.4 mm × 25.4 mm cut-out samples after fire exposure, the TES algorithm used only the respective regions of interest (ROI) of the same samples on a subset of frames at the end of acquisition. The emissivity thus calculated was then averaged over the sub-region and frame set. In a similar manner, temperature mapping in a small pixel region at the estimated TC position was extracted over all frames and compared against the TC data. 5 Results and discussion In a first step, a gas flame (2.7 slpm C 3 H 8 and 8 slpm oxidizer mixture consisting of 60 % O 2 , diluted with CO 2 ) was used to heat a 305 mm × 305 mm stainless-steel sample with thermocouples welded at different radial distances from the stagnation point on its backside. A rich flame (Φ=1.3) is used to create a homogeneously heated zone with a temperature maximum below or equal to 500 • C that can be recreated with the black-body. The IR image of the steel back face and the temperature curves measured by the TC in the FOV are shown in Fig. The calibration starts by comparing the internal camera calibration against a black-body (set at 500 • C) with a similar apparent temperature and FOV as the exposed sample during the experiment. To this end, the black-body was partially shielded, with the size of the illuminated area (IA) increased from 4 % to 58 %. The IA represents the fraction of total pixels 640 px × 512 px contributing to the total signal. The results are listed in Tab. 3. Radiance correction (rc) is the inverse of the radiance ratio between the full aperture and a given IA. The IA-radiance relation is highly nonlinear, as can be seen in Fig. The insitu emissivity values obtained with the TES algorithm are compared against an independent measurement technique implemented at room temperature following fire exposure. A kerosene flame (calibrated to 116 kW/m 2 ) was used to burn a carbon-fibre phenolic (CF-Ph) and a glass-fibre phenolic (GF-Ph) sample, both with integrated thermocouples, as well as a stainless-steel plate with welded thermocouples (Fig. As a general trend for two composite materials, the emissivity is lower when CF is used as reinforcement compared to GF, and spatial variations are small (∆ε = 0.02). The average emissivity was 0.9 for GF-Ph samples, while it was 0.86 for CF-Ph samples. The effective emissivity of pristine CF samples has been measured as 0.88. Total emissivity of pristine GFRP is typically indicated between 0.9 and 0.95 in the literature For the large SAE 304 steel plate sample, the flame was impinging on the centre, approximately where SS-3 is located. As Fig. The HDR results presented in Sec. 5.2 and in Tab. 4 give the effective emissivites of the samples, that is the integrated value over the entire spectral range. However, emissivities often show a spectral dependency, as shown in Fig. Comparison between the emissivity mapping obtained from the TES algorithm and the HDR measurements was carried out by computing the average over the pixel-area within the FOV that corresponds to the sample cutouts in Fig. Jones et al. For the stainless-steel sample, the emissivity obtained for SS-3 through TES calculations from IR data is in excellent agreement with the HDR measurements. Once the oxide layer has reached substantial thickness (>10 μm), temperature and emissivity variations over successive 50 frames interval can be neglected. Moreover, the oxide layer reduces reflective contributions which contributes to reduce the overall error. The results from this analysis suggest that total emissivity can indeed be regarded as independent from wavelength within the spectral range of the filters. Moreover, it can be justified to use averaged emissivity values for subregions that are homogeneously burnt. A global constant emissivity value measured at room temperature is not representative for high-temperature tests for composite samples not even for ones that are significantly degraded and whose emissivity is mainly determined by their fibre reinforcement. Although the emissivity from steel samples has a less pronounced temperature dependence, it is important to notice that the surface oxidation progresses rapidly under flame exposure resulting in drastically changed emissivity and making it extremely challenging to measure surface temperatures during heat-up with conventional IR thermography. To test the radiometric accuracy of the TES algorithm, the temperature was simultaneously acquired at the back of a CF epoxy sample using a thermocouple probe and the IR camera. The acquisition frame rate was set to 20 Hz as temperature changes were not expected to be fast, based on previous TC measurements on similar samples. Fig. Fig. The acquisition with the IR camera was triggered slightly delayed so that the first data points start when the back face temperature has already risen above 400 • C. The curve obtained with the 2C technique implementing the necessary corrections is in excellent agreement with the thermocouple data. The results are compared against an implementation of conventional 1C pyrometry data, using only a neutral density filter (FW#2) or a single channel (FW#7), relying on the emissivity of pristine CF epoxy samples (ε=0.88). This data illustrates that assuming a constant emissivity value for composite samples, often taken from post-fire measurements, might result in high errors in temperature readings, as variation exceeding 10 % are easily observed during the test, especially when doing single-color pyrometry. With the temperature available, the emissivity evolution was calculated and is shown in Fig. Tab. 5 lists the individual contributions to the overall error budget, along with typical values. The temporal noise is the uncertainty of measurement associated to a single temperature reading and thus a single pixel. The radiance ratio suffers from the temporal noise in each of the two filter channels. The typical FW#7 camera noise for an apparent temperature of 500 • C is 30 mW/(m 2 sr) for a radiance of approximately 43.5 W/(m 2 sr). This figure of performance is similar with the second filter. The resulting standard deviation on the radiance ratio is then 0.00094, translating to an error of 3.8 • C for a scene of approximately 500 • C. This pixel-wise performance figure can be improved with either temporal or spatial averaging. The temporal noise measurement for high temperature targets can be for instance be performed with a high temperature black-body in front of the camera, but is difficult due to thermal turbulence. Therefore, the temporal noise is simulated and scaled to the filter response to provide the noise equivalent differential IBR. If the image superposition is not perfect between the two frames used for the 2C pyrometry method, a parallax error is associated with a band ratio difference, leading to inaccurate temperature-emissivity retrievals. The camera enables a position correction for each spectral band in both axes, but results on the sample backside did not require its implementation for our tests. Since the spatial resolution is about 0.6 mm per pixel, the region of interest is chosen wide enough to spatially average the signal. This allows for an improved signal to noise ratio for the macro-pixel. The error caused by the difference in spatial features from one filter to the other is evaluated to be lower than 0.01 W/(m 2 sr). Radiometric accuracy is verified against a calibrated black-body for each spectral band. The camera absolute accuracy is found to be in the order of ±0.2 % for a black-body set at 500 • C, that translates into an error contribution of 5.5 • C for the retrieved temperature. As outlined in Sec. 5.1, the filter-wise radiometric correction requires an estimation of the number of pixels in the illumination area. The uncertainty of providing the accurate illumination area leads to a maximum error of 0.7 % in the illumination ratio for each spectral band. The resulting error is 6.4 • C for a scene at 500 • C. The assumption that the emissivity remains constant within the filter spectral range for both filters also contributes to the error budget. For a maximum error of 1 % in the emissivity difference between the two filter bands, the resulting error is 8.1 • C. For the measurements considered here where both the sample temperature and emissivity change with time, the choice of the acquisition frequency can be an important source of error. Ideally, the frame rate must ideally be selected such that the overall uncertainty of the measurement is on the same order of magnitude as the temporal noise. The temperature increase remained below 0.224 • C/s at a sample temperature of approximately 500 • C. Acquiring the signal at a frequency of 0.8 Hz allowed to keep the maximum error below 0.28 • C. The corresponding error contribution is 7 • C. However, if the temperature increase is instead 2.24 • C/s, the associated error is ten times higher. This specific behaviour underlines why great care must be applied to select a frame rate sufficiently high to limit frame rate related errors as they can rapidly overwhelm other sources of uncertainty. Infrared thermography is a powerful tool for in-situ observation of the temperature evolution of fast degrading materials, such as polymer-matrix composite samples exposed to a flame. However, conventional IR thermography requires the prior knowledge of the sample emissivity. As burning composites degrade rapidly and the metallic samples carry over large contributions from the surroundings, the proper characterization of the source emissivity becomes virtual impossible. Two-color pyrometry is a technique that can overcome this problem, but although it becomes popular in the fire testing community its common error sources are often unappreciated. In this work, the temperature and emissivity evolution on the back face of samples subjected to a flame were studied using a multispectral IR camera equipped with a fast-rotating filter wheel. We present a detailed radiometric model to account for the contributing factors of the overall radiance signal originating from the sample itself, the background and the atmosphere. The background contribution is particularly significant below 300 • C but can be neglected in our case as the optical band-pass filter selected does not detect below this temperature. A thorough sensitivity analysis demonstrated that two basic assumptions must hold true between two subsequent acquisition frames: first, the material under thermal degradation must behave as a gray-body and second, the transmission of the selected optical filters must not depend on the emissivity of the object within their respective spectral band. 