We report the crystal structure, charge-density-wave (CDW), superconductivity (SC), and ferromagnetism (FM) in CuIr2-xCrxTe4 (0 ≤ x ≤ 2) chalcogenides. Powder x-ray diffraction (PXRD) results reveal that CuIr2-xCrxTe4 series are distinguished between two structural types and three different regions: (i) layered trigonal structure region, (ii) mixed phase regions, (iii) spinel structure region. Besides, Cr substitution for Ir site results in rich physical properties including the collapse of CDW, the formation of dome-shaped like SC, and the emergence of magnetism. Cr doping slightly elevates the superconducting critical temperature (Tsc) to its highest Tsc = 2.9 K around x = 0.06. As x increases from 0.3 to 0.4, the ferromagnetic Curie temperature (Tc) increases from 175 to 260 K. However, the Tc remains unchanged in the spinel range of 1.9 ≤ x ≤ 2. This finding provides a comprehensive material platform for investigating the interplay between CDW, SC, and FM multipartite quantum states. superconducting critical temperature Tsc, from organic and heavy-fermion superconductors with relatively low Tsc to iron pnictides and cuprates that can record Tsc > 100 K. On the other hand, there is a common phenomenon in the conventional low dimensional layered transition-metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), at which a dome-shape like superconducting phase is usually linked with the suppression of charge density wave (CDW). Recently, the coexistence of CDW and SC transition is observed in the quasi two-dimensional (2D) layered CuIr2Te4 compound, where the electronic states observed around the Fermi level mostly derive from Ir d and Te p orbitals. To this end, CuIr2-xCrxTe4 alloys were prepared successfully via a solid-state method. The crystal structures of CuIr2-xCrxTe4 alloys can be distinguished by two structural types and three regions: (i) trigonal structure with P-3m1 space group, (ii) mixed phase; (iii) spinel type with Fd-3m space group. Strikingly, a complex electronic phase diagram is formed, where the CDW quickly vanishes with tiny Cr doping and Tsc is enhanced to 2.9 K at x = 0.06, while SC disappears and ferromagnetic order is induced at x = 0.3 and remains at the whole spinel region from 1.9 to 2. Therefore, the phase diagram of CuIr2-xCrxTe4 shows multiple electronic orders where the SC phase exists between CDW and FM. To the best of our current knowledge, the SC competing with CDW and FM in one system is very rare yet valuable despite the fact that quantum critical behavior is not inapparent. Polycrystalline samples of CuIr2-xCrxTe4 were synthesized via physical solid-state method using Cu powder (99%), Ir powder (99.9%), Cr powder (99.5%), and Te powder (99.999%) as raw materials. Stoichiometric mixtures of raw powders with 5 at% excess of Te was mixed and sealed in an evacuated silica tube, and heated in a box furnace. The heat treatment condition depends on Cr doping concentration. For CuIr2-xCrxTe4 (0 ≤ x ≤ 0.4), the silica tube sintered at 850 o C for 120 h at the rate of 1 o C/min. For CuIr2-xCrxTe4 (1.9 ≤ x ≤ 2), the heat treatment condition was 500 o C for 120 h with a heating rate 1 o C/min. After first heating, the obtained samples were reground and pelletized again, then heated up in the same procedure to improve the sample homogeneity. PXRD data were obtained by MiniFlex, Rigaku with Cu Kɑ1 radiation. Rietveld refinements were performed with the FullProf suite software. The electrical resistivity and heat capacity were carried out using a Physical Property Measurement System (Quantum Design). The magnetic susceptibility was measured by a Quantum Design Magnetic Property Measurement System (MPMS). We performed First-principles calculations using projector augmented wave method The kinetic cutoff energy was set to 400 eV and Γ-centered Monkhorst-Pack scheme of 3×7×3 kpoints were sampled for the Brillouin zone integration. Figure . 1a,c displays the PXRD patterns of all the polycrystalline CuIr2-xCrxTe4 samples collected at room temperature. PXRD patterns show different features between 0 ≤ x ≤ 0.4 and 1.9 ≤ x ≤ 2 doping ranges. It indicates that the pristine CuIr2Te4 forms a trigonal structure, belonging to the P-3m1 space group. The samples remain in the same trigonal space group in the doping range of 0 ≤ x ≤ 0.4, though tiny Ir impurity is present, and the a and c lattice parameters both increase with increasing Cr doping concentration. For the doping region of 0.4 < x < 1.9, we find that the spinel CuCr2Te4 phase appears except for the layered tetragonal phase, indicating they are two-phase mixtures. When x  1.9, the main phase changes into a spinel type with space group Fd-3m, and the lattice parameters also increase with increasing x. Nevertheless, a small amount of CuTe2 is observed as an impurity, which is hard to be eliminated through various attempts. Similar impurity peaks are also observed in the previous literature. Compared with the parent CuIr2Te4, the doping of Cr makes the superconducting transition steeper. The normal-state resistivity of high doping spinel samples (1.9 < x ≤ 2) shows a change of slope around Tc (see Figure , where μ* is the Coulomb pseudopotential parameter. It can estimate λep  0.62, which suggests that CuIr1.94Cr0.06Te4 is a moderately coupling superconductor [52]. With the value of γ and λep, the density of states (DOSs) at Fermi level N(EF) can be obtained with the formula N(EF) = To gain further insights into the superconducting state, the temperature dependent electrical resistivity of CuIr1.94Cr0.06Te4 was tested by applying a magnetic field up to 0.08 T (see Figure . S5a). The zero-resistance point Tsc gradually shifts to 1.8 K with an increasing external magnetic field. In order to calculate the upper critical magnetic field (μ0Hc2(0)), the critical temperature is defined by the drop of the resistivity to 10 %, 50 % and 90 % of its normal state value varies with the magnetic field in a manner displayed in , where dHc2/dT is the slope of μ0Hc2(T) near Tsc. Utilizing the relation μ0Hc2 = Φ0/2πξ 2 , where Φ0 is the flux quantum (h/2e), we obtain the coherence length ξ = 43.4 nm. This value is smaller than that of the parent sample CuIr2Te4. Moreover, the μ0Hc2s for the CuIr1.91Cr0.09Te4 and CuIr1.88Cr0.12Te4 samples are also calculated, as shown in Figure T, the possible mechanism may be a non-collinear alignment. However, it needs further study to verify it. In order to compare with the experimental results, we further investigate the electronic structure and magnetism of the CuIr2-xCrxTe4 by combining First-principles calculations. In conclusion, the effects of Cr doping on the evolution of structure, SC, and FM in the CuIr2-xCrxTe4 system are studied. It was found that the CDW order was suppressed quickly by Cr doping, while the superconducting transition temperature Tsc was elevated to the highest value of 2.9 K around x = 0.06, and SC finally disappears at x ≥ 0.25. The ferromagnetic Curie temperature Tc increases from 175 to 260 K as x increases from 0.3 to 0.4. And Tc remains unchanged despite the Cr doping in the range of 1.9 ≤ x ≤ 2. Usually, unconventional SC appears around phase boundaries of magnetic phases in a strongly correlated electron system. As conventional superconducting materials, CuIr2-xCrxTe4 provides a rare example for studying the interplay between CDW, SC, and FM ordering. It is therefore a new platform for investigating strongly correlated phenomena, which 