Visible and infrared photons can be detected with a broadband response via the internal photoeffect. By using plasmonic nanostructures, i.e. nanoantennas, wavelength selectivity can be introduced to such detectors through geometry-dependent resonances. Also, additional functionality, like electronic responsivity switching and polarization detection have been realized. However, previous devices consisted of large arrays of nanostructures to achieve detectable photocurrents. Here we show that this concept can be scaled down to a single antenna level, resulting in detector dimensions well below the resonance wavelength of the device. Our design consists of a single electrically-connected plasmonic nanoantenna covered with a wide-bandgap semiconductor allowing broadband photodetection in the VIS/NIR via injection of hot carriers. We demonstrate electrical switching of the color sensitivity as well as polarization detection. Our results hold promise for the realization of ultra small, highly integratable photodetectors with advanced functionality. Active elements in modern integrated electronic circuits have reached sizes of only a few tens of nanometers All of these problems can be circumvented by employing electrically-connected plasmonic nanoantennas as light collecting elements, since they provide significant antenna gain, i.e. they channel light from an effective cross section that is larger than their geometrical footprint Here we show that the IPE in a single nanoantenna device can be utilized for photodetection at the diffraction limit by combining electrically connected gold nanoantennas with titaniumoxide ( TiO x ) as semiconducting material. This material stack allows a broadband VIS/NIR response while the antenna geometry determines the specific absorption wavelength. Further, we are able to electrically select this wavelength and determine the polarization angle of linearly polarized photons by employing different antenna geometries. Our results are promising for ultra-small photodetectors with potential application, e.g., in high-resolution laser beam profiling. In the simplest case, our device consist of a single dimer antenna on a glass substrate, like shown in figure Since the direct growth of TiO x on gold structures led to ohmic contacts, we introduced a thin interfacial layer of aluminumoxide (AlO x ) for interface passivation, which drastically lowers the dark current Figure Photocurrent measurements were performed with excitation-wavelengths between 500-900 nm, which cannot directly lift electrons above the bandgap within the TiO x layer To proof the capability of this design to create very small photodetectors, we fabricated the symmetric dimer antenna displayed in the scanning electron micrograph (SEM) in figure The bright areas in the image correspond to the gold of our antenna while the light gray areas represent the TiO x coating. The dark rectangular frame around the antenna is a trench resulting from the ion-milling process and does not have a significant influence on our measurements. The photocurrent for this antenna was measured at U B =1 V with tunable monochromatic light from a supercontinuum laser (see SI). The resulting spectrum (s3 in figure By changing the height and length of the antenna, the resonance can be precisely controlled over a wide spectral range, which is demonstrated by the four scattering spectra, from different antennas, featuring distinct peaks between 600-900 nm. Longer resonance wavelengths were achieved by increasing the aspect ratio of the antenna arms. The photocurrent peaks of all antennas coincide with the scattering resonances, showing that the colorselectivity of our detectors can be tuned via the antennadimensions. The electrical connection wire also features a resonance in the scattering and photocurrent spectrum below 600 nm. This contribution is similar for all discussed antennas. For clarity, only the resonances of the dimers are shown. A full photocurrent spectrum can be found the in the SI. The peaks in the photocurrent spectrum can be explained by the increased absorption at the plasmonic resonance, which results in a high rate of hot carriers around this spectral position Besides the static tuning of the detector via the geometry, our concept also allows a dynamic switching of the color-response by applying a voltage. To this end, the asymmetric antenna in figure As mentioned before, the photocurrent of a symmetric antenna is zero without applied bias voltage, which is visible in the gray curve in figure For comparison, we simulated the absorption in each arm separately, denoted as σ lef t and σ right , which is proportional to the hot carrier generation inside the respective arm. Therefore the difference ∆σ = σ lef tσ right resembles the net-photocurrent at zero bias. For comparability with the scattering, the absolute value |∆σ| is added to the top plot in figure To completely suppress the photocurrent peak at a specific wavelength, the applied bias needs to be chosen carefully. The simulations in 3 c) show that at, say, 770 nm the excitation is spread over both arms, while one is clearly dominant. So, while the main part of the light is absorbed in the long arm, a small fraction is still absorbed in the short arm. Consequently, at sufficiently high bias, the short arm defines the photocurrent at 770 nm, although it is not at resonance, because the long rod s hot electrons are blocked by the potential barrier. The optimal voltage, in our case U B = ±0.15 V , is therefore reached when the photocurrents of both arms cancel out at one resonance (the unwanted one). Choosing other values of U B can be used to tune the relative amplitude of the photocurrent peaks. We now show that our plasmonic photodetector concept also allows to detect the polarization angle Φ of linearly polarized light within a sub-diffractional device. The polarization pattern in figure To overcome this problem, the antenna design depicted in figure This independence is supported by FEM simulations for the cross antenna: The displacement-field plots in figure To measure Φ we now use both photocurrents I H and I V , which again depend on the power of the incoming light and its polarization angle. However, the total current through the cross I tot = I V + I H ∝ cos(Φ) 2 + sin(Φ) 2 = 1 changes with power but does not depend on the polarization angle. Thus, by normalizing I V,H by I tot , we arrive at a quantity that does depend on the polarization angle only, assuming that the amplitude of both photocurrent-patterns is the same for both dimers. Therefore, I P h (Φ, P ) only needs to be measured once, at a constant light power, substantially reducing the necessary calibration effort for the cross antenna. As an experimental proof, we measured the polarization pattern for different powers of the excitation laser (see SI) and observed no significant changes in the normalized photocurrent, while the absolute values increased with higher powers. This shows that the cross antenna can be used as an intensity-invariant polarization detector. Due to the four-fold symmetry, the cross antenna cannot uniquely resolve the angle of polarization. But this problem can be overcome by using an antenna with three-fold symmetry, like shown in the SI. The antenna presented there can resolve the polarization angle unambiguously, however at the cost of higher measurement complexity. The antennas discussed in this work were fabricated to feature resonances in the range between 600-900 nm, which was limited by our excitation source, towards long wavelengths, and by the increasing absorption of gold below 600 nm. But in principle this wavelength range can be easily extended to the infrared by further increasing the aspect ratio of the antennas A bigger limitation, in terms of possible applications, is the detection efficiency which is rather low compared to standard photodetectors based on silicon. We calculate the detection efficiency by dividing the photocurrent by the total incoming power of our laser light, corrected by the size of the laser spot and the antenna absorption cross section. See SI for details. With this we estimate an external quantum efficiency η ext ≈ 10 -4 electrons per photon. To a certain degree this efficiency is influenced by the thin AlO x layer, but since it is comparable to other reports In the future, this injection might be improved by the so-called "plasmon-induced interfacial charge-transfer transition", which features internal quantum efficiency of > 24% In conclusion, we showed, that plasmonic IPE devices can be scaled down to a single antenna level, enabling detectors with sizes well below the wavelength of the detected light. In addition we demonstrated that these detectors can exhibit complex functionality like dynamic color switching and polarization detection, while keeping the small device footprint. This renders our concept promising for small scale photodetectors, especially for applications where high resolution demands are combined with high light intensity, like, for example, the profiling of focused laser beams.