An interplay between pairing and topological orders has been predicted to give rise to superconducting states supporting exotic emergent particles, such as Majorana particles obeying non-Abelian braid statistics. We consider a system of spinless electrons on a Hofstadter lattice with nearest neighbor attractive interaction, and solve the mean-field Bogoliubov-de Gennes equations in a self-consistent fashion, leading to gauge invariant solutions that display a rich phase diagram as a function of the chemical potential, magnetic field and the interaction. As the strength of the attractive interaction is increased, the system first makes a transition from a quantum Hall phase to a skyrmion lattice phase that is fully gapped in the bulk but has topological chiral edge current, characterizing a topologically non-trivial state. This is followed by a vortex phase in which the vortices carrying Majorana modes form a lattice; the spectrum contains a low-energy Majorana band arising from the coupling between neighboring vortex-core Majorana modes but does not have chiral edge currents. For some parameters, a dimer vortex lattice occurs with no low energy Majorana band. The experimental feasibility and the observable consequences of skyrmions as well as Majorana fermions are indicated. It has been nearly a century since the discovery of quantum mechanics, and yet some of its fundamental consequences are still being uncovered to this day. In particular, the role of topology in the quantum description, even for single-particle physics, had been largely ignored until the discovery of the integer quantum Hall effect (IQHE) Superconductivity (SC), when combined with nontrivial band topology such as that found in the IQHE, can yield Majorana zero modes (MZMs), which are non-Abelian Ising anyons Previous works investigating SC in quantum Hall (QH) systems have focused on proximity-coupled superconductivity, so that the SC pairing potential has been treated as an external field, and has not been determined selfconsistently Previous works have studied the problem in the presence of a pairing field describing an Abrikosov vortex lattice -the expected ground state for type-II superconductors subject to a magnetic field Our approach in this paper is to solve the Bogoliubovde Gennes (BdG) mean field equations self-consistently for a model of spinless fermions with attractive interactions on a square lattice, where self-consistency guarantees gauge invariance. We do not assume a form of the pairing potential, other than its being the result of a nearest neighbor attractive interaction, and therefore we treat the possible ground states on an equal footing. We use many random initial guesses for the self-consistent iterations in order to explore all topological sectors of solutions. We are interested in the topological nature of the ground states, which is characterized by the (superconducting) Chern number of the BdG Hamiltonian (defined below). In particular, odd SC Chern number is an indicator for the non-Abelian, or topologically nontrivial, phase of superconductivity, which is of primary interest. A schematic of the various phases following from our calculations is shown in Fig. We start with the interacting Hamiltonian, which is defined on a square lattice with unit lattice constant as e iA j+δ,j ĉ † j+δ ĉj + e iA j,j+δ ĉ † j ĉj+δ -μ j ĉ † j ĉj where ĉ † j (ĉ j ) creates (annihilates) a spinless fermion on site j, located at position r j , and ĉ † j+δ (ĉ j+δ ) creates (annihilates) a spinless fermion on a site which is a nearest-neighbor to site j, located at position r j + δ where δ = x, y. The chemical potential is μ, the interaction strength is -U with U > 0, and the external magnetic field is incorporated through complex hopping matrix elements with phases A j+δ,j = -A j,j+δ . We set the hopping amplitude to unity. The set of hopping phases encodes the magnetic flux Φ j through each square lattice plaquette where Φ 0 = h/e is the flux quantum. In the presence of an external magnetic field, the noninteracting part of the Hamiltonian H 0 does not commute with translations by a single site. Therefore, the unit cell must be enlarged into the so-called magnetic unit cell (MUC) that encloses an integer number of flux quanta vanishes. We choose the MUC lattice vectors R 1 = M ŷ and R 2 = N x, with precisely h/e flux through the MUC. The phases A j+δ,j are periodic only if the total magnetic flux through the MUC is zero. This can be ensured by performing a singular gauge transformation that inserts a point flux of -h/e through a single square plaquette in the MUC so as to cancel the total flux. We emphasize that the insertion of the point flux, having magnitude h/e, has no effect on any physical observable, and is therefore a pure gauge transformation. To fix the gauge we impose the condition A j+x+ŷ,j+x = A j+x for all sites j, and the point flux is chosen to pass through the lower right plaquette of the MUC; with these conditions, the set of linear equations (2) uniquely fix the gauge. See the supplementary information (SI) for an example of our gauge fixing scheme. To proceed with mean-field theory in real space, we consider an alternative Hamiltonian H MF obtained by replacing the interaction term in H by fermion bilinears coupled to fields. The Hamiltonian, after the standard mean field decomposition in the pairing channel, is where the vector field ∆ j,δ is treated as a variational parameter whose optimal value is given by We consider a lattice with L × L MUCs, with each MUC of size M × M ; we will take L = 10 and M = 20 for our numerical calculations. We write the mean field Hamiltonian in momentum space by Fourier transforming ĉj = 1 L k e ik•R ĉα (k) where R is the position vector for the origin of the MUC in which site j lies and α is a site label within the MUC corresponding to site j. The number of allowed k magnetic momenta is L 2 . We have tested that our results do not change qualitatively when larger values of L are used. Assuming that the pairing field ∆ j,δ has the same periodicity as the MUC, we obtain the mean field Hamiltonian in the BdG form: where Hermitian, and so is diagonalizable by a unitary transformation. We write the quasiparticle operators, which are the eigenoperators of the Hamiltonian H, as where u α,m (k) and v α,m (k) are determined from the eigenvectors of H BdG (k), and m labels the BdG quasiparticle bands. Note that the BdG Hamiltonian is particlehole symmetric where P = τ x K, K is the complex conjugation operator, and τ x is a Pauli matrix acting on the particle and hole subspaces. This means that not all eigenvectors are inde- This, in turn, implies that not all quasiparticle operators are independent where band m is such that E m (k) = -E m (-k). Given all this, the full Hamiltonian Ĥ can be so expressed The ground state energy is given by By inverting Eq. 8, we can express the expectation value ĉj ĉj+δ in terms of u α,m (k) and v α,m (k) (at zero temperature) to write the self-consistency equation ( where α is the site within the MUC corresponding to site j and ∆R is difference in MUC location of site j + δ and site j. The subscript α+δ refers to the nearest-neighbors of site α, and is understood to be taken modulo the MUC. This equation is solved iteratively by starting with a random guess for the pairing potential ∆ (0) j,δ , diagonalizing H BdG to obtain u α 's and v α 's, and then obtaining a new pairing potential ∆ (1) j,δ using The BdG Hamiltonian H BdG (k), describing a system in two spatial dimensions and being particle-hole symmetric only, resides in class D of the Altland-Zirnbauer classification where ∂ μ is the shorthand for ∂/∂k μ . The Berry curvature is then defined as The only non-zero components of the Berry curvature are F xy = -F yx ≡ F . The Chern number is then given by the Berry curvature integrated over the magnetic Brillouin zone (MBZ): We compute Eq. 16 numerically using the method by Fukui, et. al The points on the grid are labeled by k α and the spacing vectors are e λ where λ = 1, 2. In terms of the link variables defined as the discrete Berry curvature at each point on the grid is given by The Chern number is then given by We are primarily interested in the ground state and the low-energy fermionic spectrum of the model. Indeed we find a rich phase diagram with unexpected ground states, as shown in Fig. Superconducting regions in the phase diagram are denoted with color, and the non-superconducting region is indicated in white, where the single particle spectrum forms very flat and nearly equally spaced Landau levellike Chern bands (we will henceforth refer to them as LLs), with superconducting Chern number C = -2ν where ν is the filling factor It should be noted that if the chemical potential is tuned so as to lie precisely within a LL, superconductivity extends to arbitrarily low interaction strength. The indicated boundary between the QH and the superconducting regions (dashed line) is determined for chemical potentials that lie between LLs. Starting from the non-superconducting region and increasing the attractive interaction strength, the QH system transitions into a superconducting ground state which forms a skyrmion lattice In a chiral p-wave superconductor, a skyrmion is a closed domain of inverted chirality with half-quantum vortices (HQVs) located on the domain wall gapped, indicating the absence of zero-energy Majorana bound states in the bulk. The SC Chern number, computed using ( It is useful to contrast the skyrmion phase from the more familiar vortex phase, which is discussed below. Unlike in the skyrmion phase, the vortices in each component occur at the same location in the vortex phase. Also, in the vortex phase the "total gap" |∆ j,x | 2 + |∆ j,y | 2 almost vanishes at the locations of the vortices; for the skyrmion lattice, in contrast, the total gap is everywhere finite. Finally, the vortex phase has a low energy Majorana band, which is absent in the skyrmion phase. In order to classify the self-consistent solutions of the order parameter ∆ j,δ , it is convenient to define a topological invariant called the (real space) skyrmion number where the pseudospin vector n is defined in terms of the superconducting order parameter in the continuum nα = ∆ † σα∆ ∆ † ∆ , where ∆ = (∆ x (r), ∆ y (r)) T and σ is a Pauli matrix (α = x, y, z). We expect Q = 0 for vortex solutions and Q = 2 for skyrmions To construct a gauge invariant skyrmion number on the lattice, we define the gauge invariant phase difference between the components of the order parameter in the following way. We first define the phase of the two order parameters θ j,δ where δ = x, y. Instead of the bare phase, we consider the phase θj,δ = θ j,δ -A j+δ,j which by itself is not gauge invariant, but the combination θj,yθj,x is gauge invariant: θj,yθj,x →θ j,y This motivates us to define a pseudospin vector on the lattice using θj,δ The pseudospin nj,α is gauge invariant on the lattice and the skyrmion number, computed using a latticediscretized version of ( It is also instructive to look at the spatial variation of the (gauge invariant) phase difference θj,yθj,x in the skyrmion phase. Figure The region where the ground state forms a vortex lattice is indicated by blue and cyan in Fig. The magnitudes of the two components of the order parameter, |∆ j,x | and |∆ j,y |, the particle density, and the low energy BdG quasiparticle band structure for the vortex lattice phase are shown in Fig. Additionally, we find that vortices show a tendency to dimerize (i.e. form a lattice with two vortices per vor- The sine of the gauge invariant phase difference between the x and y components of the order parameter for the skyrmion phase. Inside the skyrmion, the pairing symmetry is px + ipy, and outside, the pairing symmetry is px -ipy. tex unit cell). This phase is energetically competitive in the black gridded region of the phase diagram; for some parameters it is the clear ground state whereas in other cases it is only slightly higher in energy to the vortex lattice solution. It is also found as a higher energy selfconsistent solution in much of the phase diagram. The magnitudes of the two components of the order parameter, |∆ j,x | and |∆ j,y |, the particle density, and the low energy BdG quasiparticle band structure for the dimer vortex lattice phase are shown in 2 (i)-(l). As can be seen, the vortices are not equally spaced. This breaks the vortex magnetic translation symmetry The current texture for the skyrmion, vortex, and dimer vortex lattice phases are shown in Fig. In spite of the attention that vortices have received in the context of topological p-wave superconductivity in QH systems, the question of whether or not the vortex lattices are the stable self-consistent ground state solutions has been relatively unexplored. Nevertheless, recent studies have pointed out that systems with a regular lattice of Abrikosov vortices carrying flux h/2e have an even SC Chern number C, due to the vortex magnetic translation symmetry which enforces an even number of Dirac crossings, and hence these systems have the same classification as the QH phase with fermionic (as opposed to Majorana) chiral edge modes Similarly, the formation of skyrmions also opens a large gap at the Fermi energy which can stabilize it in some parameter regimes. It should be noted that our choice of a square MUC containing one quantum of flux h/e, which is limited by the need of computational resources, forces the skyrmions, Abrikosov vortices, and vortex dimers to all form a square lattice. Choosing a larger number of magnetic flux quanta per MUC would constrain the lattice to a lesser degree and could allow for a triangular lattice of vortices. Although the lattice type may change, we expect the phase diagram to qualitatively remain the same, especially when the skyrmions, vortices, and vortex dimers are far separated. A comment on the center of mass (COM) magnetic momentum of the Cooper pairs is also in order. Our assumption that the mean field pairing potential ∆ j,δ has the same periodicity as the MUC of the non-interacting system (described by the Hamiltonian H 0 ) only allows for pairing between fermions of opposite magnetic momenta k and -k, resulting in Cooper pairs with zero COM magnetic momentum. (A non-zero COM momentum would manifest through a phase twist across an MUC.) In studies of the SC Hofstadter model in large magnetic fields, pairing instabilities can also occur at finite COM momentum, due to degeneracies arising from the magnetic translation symmetry, leading to Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin-Ovchinnikov (FFLO) superconductivity We end with a remark on the experimental relevance of our results. We expect our model with nearest neighbor attractive interaction to be relevant to p-wave superconductors under external magnetic fields. In addition, our study will provide a guidance to understand physics in s-wave superconductors with strong spin orbit coupling under external magnetic field, or in heterostructures consisting of a 2D SC coupled to a 2D QH system. 