The Planar Model of the Electrode-Vacuum-Electrode configuration for STM in which electrode surfaces are assumed to be infinite parallel planes, with atomic size separation and vacuum between them, is used to calculate tunneling current densities for both low and high bias voltages. Non WKB, Airy function solutions for the Schrödinger Equation for the trapezoidal barrier in the tunneling region are used to calculate the tunneling probability. Temperature dependent Fermi Factors for each electrode are introduced and the calculation involves integration over the electron energies. In order to convert the current densities obtained in the planar model to tunneling currents the tip and sample surfaces are modelled as confocal hyperboloids, and the tip sample distance is replaced by the length of the line of force (field line). The current is found by integrating the current density over a finite area of the tip. The calculated tunnel currents for a few electrode pairs at room temperature are plotted for several values of bias voltage, tip sample distances, and tip radii of curvature. Pauli Effects are studied as a function of bias voltage and tip-sample distance. Some estimate of lateral resolution and its dependence on bias voltage and tip radius is also presented. Scanning Tunneling Microscopes (STM's) allow imaging of surface structures with atomic scale resolution and have been the workhorses for most surface science studies in recent decades. Scanning probe microscopes usually involve a sharp tip brought close to a sample which is mostly flat except for atomic scale surface features. The atoms of the tip interact with those of the sample and in case of the STM this interaction causes tunelling of the electrons between the tip and the sample. An experimentally measurable quantity such as the tunneling current is measured as a function of the tip sample distance and the bias potential between tip and sample. In typical STM applications, extremely sharp tips are used and further a very close proximity between the tip and sample is maintained. As a result, the tip-sample interaction is highly localized and the tunneling current is sensitive only to the local surface properties of the sample. This sensitivity is further enhanced due to the STM current having an almost exponential dependence on the tip-sample distance, thus achieving atomic scale resolution There are several other works in literature, that calculate tunneling current density such as Simmons Tersoff and Hamann The tip and sample here are initially treated as plane surfaces. In this so called planar model, only tunneling current densities and not tunneling currents can be calculated. The latter would be infinity in a planar model. In the non planar model considered here, the tip and the sample are modelled as confocal surfaces in a prolate spheroidal coordinate system. In this paper the tunneling current densities are converted into currents through a method described by Saenz and Garcia The energies of electrons inside the electrodes are distributed according to the Fermi-Dirac distribution. With these assumptions the tunneling current density and tunneling currents through the barrier are calculated for both high and low bias voltages. Consider two plane conducting electrodes with infinite plane surfaces, separated by vacuum whose width ranges from 2 Å to 20 Å. The electrode surfaces are initially assumed to be of infinite area. With this assumption, both the Laplace equation for the electrostatic potential, and the Schrödinger equation with this potential, reduce to one dimensional equations. Let a bias potential V b be applied across the electrodes. Let η 1 , φ 1 , η 2 , φ 2 , be the Fermi energies and work functions of the left (first) electrode and the right (second) electrode respectively (Fig. The connection between the tunneling current density and the probability of tuneling through the barrier, is well established and the earliest accounts of it are by Fowler and Nordheim The energy of these electrons is where z are the kinetic energies of the electrons for translational motion along the x, y, and z directions respectively. The number density of electrons in the electrode 1 that are available for tunneling would be is the Fermi Dirac Distribution function which can be regarded as the probability of occupation of the energy level E in the electrode 1. Note β = 1 kT where k is the Boltzmann Constant and T is the temperature (in Kelvin) of both the electrodes. Electrode 1 is at higher potential (U 0 = η 1 + φ 1 ) and the elctric field points along the negative x axis The number density of electrons that can tunnel through the barrier is where D(E x ) is the probability of tunneling through the barrier. In theoretical calculation where T is the transmission amplitude for tunneling through the barrier and if plane wave solutions are used within the electrodes then j inc = k 1 m and j out = k 2 m for forward currents. where k 1 and k 2 are x-components of the momenta of the electrons in the first and the second electrodes. where E x is the kinetic energy of motion of the electrons in the x-direction. For reverse currents j inc = k 2 m and j out = k 1 m . Note that the transmission amplitude is independent of the direction of tunneling. Hence it is the same for both forward and reverse tunneling currents. Not all of the electrons emitted by electrode 1 will necessarily be accepted by the electrode 2, since there will be partial occupation of this level by electrons already present in the electrode 2. This is due to the Pauli Exclusion Principle and may be called the Pauli Effect. Others To obtain the number density of electrons in the energy level E, that are accepted by the electrode 2, one must multiply n T by the probability of vacancy of this energy level, in the electrode 2. This is given by [1 -f 2 (E + ∆ b )] where The energy argument in the Fermi Dirac function for electrode 2 will be shifted by +∆ b = η 1 -η 2 -eV b , because the zero level of the energy in electrode 2 is shifted by -∆ b compared to that of the electrode 1. But as can be seen from Figures 2 and 6 Thus the number density of electrons that will be found in the states of electrode 2, and which contribute to the forward current are where The forward current density is then where the y, z velocity components are expressed in terms of their polar components Putting it all together and integrating over θ gives In a like manner one can also calculate the reverse current density to be The net current density is given by J Net = J For -J Rev , which becomes Define the Fermi Factor F(E x ) as Carrying out the integral over E r where The first two terms are the Non-Pauli contribution; these are the terms that one would get if Pauli Blocking were completely ignored. The third term in equation ( ) as a function of electron energies in the range (1 eV to 12 eV). The graph shows that Pauli Effects are significant for low energy electrons and especially for low bias voltages. For E x > η 1 -eV b the third term is essentially zero implying that there is negligible Pauli Effect. The inset in this figure shows the third term for 2V rising rapidly by at least 4 orders of magnitude for very low values of E x . Figure The net current density becomes where the limits of the integral in equation is the minimum of energy in the energy Stage I and E max x is the maximum of energy in the energy Stage II. The energy stages I, II, and III are described in the next section. Let the two planar electrodes described in the previous section be parallel to each other and parallel to the y-z plane. Let their surfaces be at x = 0 and x = d respectively, with the intervening space being occupied by vacuum. The entire extent of the x-axis can be divided up into three spatial regions and the potential energy of an electron in these three regions is given by where The wavefunctions in two regions (x < 0) and (x > d) are given by where, R, T are the reflection and transmission amplitudes. The wavefunction ψ b in the barrier region 0 x d is given by the Schrödinger equation for the linear (trapezoidal) potential where If the electrodes were at absolute zero temperature, only electrons at the Fermi levels of the electrodes would undergo tunneling. At higher temperatures, electrons with a wider range of energies will be involved in tunneling. The energy range of such electrons can be divided into three Energy Stages. Fig. as shown in Fig. In Energy Stages I and II the Schrödinger equation ( where x. The general solution of the Airy Differential equation can be written as where The denominator of the functions φ (1) and φ (2) contain Airy functions evaluated at x (a fixed value of x near the centre of the barrier region). These denominators are sometimes required to avoid overflow and underflow errors in the calculation of the wavefunctions for different values of x in the barrier. The constants C and D are determined from matching of the wavefunction and its derivative at the relevant spatial boundaries. In Energy Stage I these boundaries are at x = 0 and x = d. In Energy Stage II, two separate wavefunctions ψ b1 and ψ b2 have to be determined for x < x T , and x > x T respectively. The spatial boundaries for the former are at x = 0 and x = x T and that for the latter, are at x = x T and x = d. The Tunneling amplitude is given by Fig. In the low bias regime (0.1V to 1V) the Airy Function Ai becomes very small causing underflow problems and the Airy function Bi becomes very large causing overflow problems as in the calculation. Even introduction of denominators as in equation ( where The term f (x) in the equation ( Let the wavefunction in the barrier region be where φ 0 (x) is the solution to the homogeneous equation From equations ( The end point terms (viz at x = 0 and x = d) can be made to vanish if the Green function and the function φ are both made to vanish at x = 0 and x = d. Equation (30) can be iterated to obtain terms containing higher and higher powers of f (x). Here f (x) will be regarded as small enough to neglect higher than first order terms. Keeping only the first order term, gives and therefore (32) The tunneling amplitude T Gr is calculated using the wavefunction in equation ( For very low bias, the energy of the electrons in the Energy Stage II is well above the Fermi level of the first electrode and the Fermi Factor is extremely small for these erergies. Therefore these electrons will make a negligible contribution to tunneling and hence the Green function method outlined above is not extended to the second stage. Instead, the second stage contribution for very low bias voltages is zeroed out. As mentioned in the introduction it is necessary to go beyond the planar model and treat the tip as a sharp pointed surface and let the sample be flat. For a sharp tip, its radius of curvature at the point closest to the sample must be small, so that the length of the electric field lines increases rapidly as one goes away from the centre. Since the tunneling current densities fall off exponentially with increasing electric field line length therefore these current densities when integrated over the tip area will lead to a finite value for the current. A good model in which the tip is sharp and the sample is flat is provided by using confocal hyperboloids for the tip and sample shapes (Fig. The tip surface (treated here as an emitter) is represented by a hyperboloid described by equation (35 The sample surface is characterised by η = η sample = 0 which is the x -y plane. The equation of the field line that passes through the point (ξ, φ) is independent of φ and is given by and the length of this field line stretching from η = η sample to η = η tip is In Fig. The total current density J N et (ξ) is obtained by integrating the product of the tunneling probability and the Fermi Factor over the energy E x of the tunneling electrons for the translational motion along the x-direction. The tunneling amplitude T = T [E x , d f l (ξ)] depends not only upon the energy E x but also on the location of the point on the tip (dictated by ξ) from where tunneling occurs. The current density J N et (ξ), given by an equation similar to equation ( where the upper limit ξ max is chosen to have a value of 5, because the current density J N et (ξ) is essentially zero beyond this value as shown in Fig. is the area of the shaded region on the tip as shown in Fig. Figure The Pauli Effects have The ratio I J N et (ξ = 1) gives an area σ, which can be regarded as the area of a circle of lateral resolution; i.e., sample profile features that lie within this circle would be poorly resolved. The radius r = σ/π of this circle would therefore be a good measure of the lateral resolution limit, and can be named as the Lateral Resolution Parameter (LRP). Fig. The model used for calculating tunnelling current for the biased M-V-M tunnel junctions treats the effective barrier potential as a trapezoidal potential. Exact analytic expressions for the tunneling probability and current are obtained by solving the Schrödinger's equation for the trapezoidal potential, for which the wavefunctions can be expressed in terms of Airy functions. Electrons with xdirected translational energies ranging from 0 eV to η 1 + φ 1 contribute to tunneling. The current is calculated for a wide range of input parameters such as tip-sample distance, bias voltage, and radius of curvature of the tip, both electrodes being at room temperature. Pauli Effects are explicitly introduced and their behaviour as a function of bias voltage and tip-sample distance is studied. A measure of lateral resolution of the tunnel junction is introduced and its behaviour as a function of tip radius of curvature for several values of bias voltage, tip sample distance is also presented.