Two-dimensional (2D) magnet-superconductor hybrid systems are intensively studied due to their potential for the realization of 2D topological superconductors with Majorana edge modes. It is theoretically predicted that this quantum state is ubiquitous in spin-orbit coupled ferromagnetic or skyrmionic 2D spin-lattices in proximity to an s-wave superconductor. However, recent examples suggest that the requirements for topological superconductivity are complicated by the multi-orbital nature of the magnetic components and disorder effects. Here, we investigate Fe monolayer islands grown on a surface of the s-wave superconductor with the largest gap of all elemental superconductors, Nb, with respect to magnetism and superconductivity using spin-resolved 1 Two-dimensional (2D) chiral p-wave, or more generally topological, superconductors are predicted to host exotic dispersive 1D electron states on their edges, named Majorana edge modes. Experimental investigations of 2D Shiba-lattices so far focused on magnetic transition metal islands on superconducting crystals with a thin oxide decoupling layer, Magnetic disorder was investigated for the 1D spin-chain system, e.g. induced by missing magnetic atoms or variations in the Shiba couplings, Here, we experimentally investigate ferromagnetic 2D Shiba-lattices of the transition metal Fe grown directly ontop of the clean (110) surface of Nb, the elemental superconductor with the largest energy gap. We find that the system realizes strongly disordered Shiba-bands induced by ferromagnetic Fe monolayer reconstructions, and study these bands with respect to indications for topological superconductivity. The growth of Fe on the (110) surface of Nb films deposited on various substrates has previously been intensely studied by RHEED, Auger-electron spectroscopy, LEED and STM. To investigate the magnetism of the three types of Fe MLs, spin-resolved scanning tunneling spectroscopy (SP-STS) has been performed. Using a spin-polarized STM tip (see Methods), spectra taken on different regions of the reconstructions for varying out-of-plane magnetic fields within a bias range of V = ±1 V (Supplementary Note 2 and Figure shows qualitatively the same behaviour indicating a single domain out-of-plane ferromagnetic spin order also in this case. However, here the coercive field is considerably smaller (0.75 T ± 0.25 T). For the magnetization curve measured on the type III island, the dI/dV signal stays largely constant for the entire magnetic field range, apart from some tiny signal changes in the small field regime where the tip magnetization direction is reoriented. This also holds true if we use bias voltages in the entire range between ±1 V (see Supplementary Note 2 and Figure Firstly, the magnetization of the type III Fe ML reconstruction could be quenched. This can be excluded due to the residual spin contrast in the low magnetic field range and since this type of ML induces Shiba states in the band gap of the superconducting substrate (see below). Secondly, while the tip's magnetization is out-of-plane for |B z | > 0.5 T, a strong in-plane magnetic anisotropy could force the Fe spins in the type III ML islands into the direction perpendicular to the tip magnetization, thus yielding zero spin contrast. This scenario can be excluded by Monte-Carlo simulations (see Supplementary Note 4 and Figure showing that, even for relatively strong in-plane magnetic anisotropies of a ferromagnetic island, the maximum magnetic field would still yield an out-of-plane magnetization of 25% of the saturation magnetization which could be experimentally detected, In order to check the general validity of the above results for the different types of Fe ML islands, we investigated several islands of each type also using different tips (see Supplementary Note 5 and Table There might be, of course, additional effects of the different structural disorder of the three types of reconstructions on the coercive field via inducing nucleation centers for the domain walls. In the following, we will investigate the local properties of the Shiba bands which are expected to form by hybridization of the Yu-Shiba-Rusinov states of the Fe atoms in the islands, Spectroscopic line profiles taken with a superconducting tip from the Nb substrate across one of each type of the Fe ML islands are shown in Figure Such edge states would be observed in the left and right regions of the spectral line profiles in Figure In conclusion, our study unravels a correlation between different types of reconstructioninduced structural disorder in ferromagnetic Fe ML islands on clean Nb(110) with their coercive magnetic fields as well as with the spectral intensity and disorder in the Shiba bands which they induce in the superconductor. We assign the effect of the difference in reconstruction on the coercive field to a change in the magnetic anisotropy and/or exchange constant between the three different ML types. The different magnetic couplings in cooperation with the different types of structural disorder in the three ferromagnetic spin-lattices naturally explain a different disorder potential of their Shiba bands. The latter is quite massive, i.e. on the order of the superconducting energy gap for the spin-lattice with the strongest anisotropy times exchange constants and longest correlation length of the reconstruction, i.e. type I. Notably, the energetic position of YSR states has proven to be quite sensitive to disorder in previous studies, e.g. crucially depends on the exact adsorption site, All measurements were obtained in two low-temperature ultra-high vacuum STM facilities, one is a home-built system operating at 6.5 K, For the atomically resolved STM-images (Figure Furthermore, for the plot of the hysteresis loops in The outline of the individual islands is marked using dashed lines with a color according to the code. (e) Hysteresis loops of the same three islands, calculated from spin-resolved dI/dV values at the indicated bias voltages averaged over selected areas of each of the different Fe ML reconstructions. (f ) Exemplary sketch of the determined magnetizations of the tip and type I Fe ML island for different parts of the hysteresis loop as indicated by the according numbers in (e). Note, that the magnetic field dependence of the tip magnetization is the same for all three hysteresis loops. 