The unconventional superconductor Sr2RuO4 has been the subject of enormous interest over more than two decades, but until now the form of its order parameter has not been explicitly determined. Since groundbreaking NMR experiments revealed recently that the pairs are of dominant spin-singlet character, attention has focused on time-reversal symmetry breaking linear combinations of s-, d-and g-wave one-dimensional (1D) irreducible representations. However, a state of the form dxz + idyz corresponding to the two-dimensional representation Eg has also been proposed based on some experiments. We present a systematic study of the stability of various superconducting candidate states, assuming that pairing is driven by the fluctuation exchange mechanism, including a realistic three-dimensional Fermi surface, full treatment of both local and non-local spin-orbit couplings, and a wide range of Hubbard-Kanamori interaction parameters U, J, U , J . The leading superconducting instabilities are found to exhibit nodal even-parity A1g(s ) or B1g(d x 2 -y 2 ) symmetries, similar to the findings in two-dimensional models without longer-range Coulomb interaction which tends to favor dxy over d x 2 -y 2 . Within the so-called Hund's coupling mean-field pairing scenario, the Eg(dxz/dyz) solution can be stabilized for large J and specific forms of the spin-orbit coupling, but for all cases studied here the eigenvalues of other superconducting solutions are significantly larger when the full fluctuation exchange vertex is included in the pairing kernel. Additionally, we compute the spin susceptibility in relevant superconducting candidate phases and compare to recent neutron scattering and NMR Knight shift measurements. It is found that dxz +idyz order supports a neutron resonance in its superconducting phase, in contrast to a recent experiment [K. Jenni et al., Phys. Rev. B 103, 104511 (2021)], whereas s + id x 2 -y 2 does not. Furthermore, comparison of the Knight shift reveals that s + id x 2 -y 2 exhibits a larger low-temperature shift than dxz + idyz. The superconducting state of Sr 2 RuO 4 remains unresolved and after nearly three decades of study, the current lack of consensus on the nature of the superconducting ground state highlights the need for better quantitative theoretical descriptions of unconventional superconductivity Most previous theoretical works addressing the gap structure of Sr 2 RuO 4 were restricted to the two spatial dimensions of the RuO 2 planes. This approximation appears natural based on the pronounced 2D structure of the system as observed by e.g. the resistivity anisotropy ratio When onsite attractive interactions arise from large Hund's coupling, the superconducting gap structure is inherited from the normal state band structure. This gives rise to an inter-orbital spin-triplet pairing gap if onsite SOC dominates The above developments call for a closer comparison of the Hund's coupling versus spin-fluctuation-mediated pairing mechanisms for realistic 3D models for Sr 2 RuO 4 . In Ref. In this paper, we determine the leading superconducting instabilities from a 3D realistic band structure relevant for Sr 2 RuO 4 . Our calculations reveal the effect of Hund's coupling on the leading gap structures in a broad parameter range and thereby connect the pairing outcomes from the spin-fluctuation mediated mechanism with the regime where onsite Hund's coupling enables superconducting pairing, which is J/U > 1 3 at the meanfield level. Figure Additionally, we compute the dynamical spin susceptibility in relevant superconducting states for 3D Sr 2 RuO 4 . It is found that only d x 2 -y 2 and d xz /d yz superconductivity support neutron resonances, whereas for example s + id x 2 -y 2 does not. Lastly, a calculation of the uniform susceptibility shows that both s + id x 2 -y 2 and d xz + id yz exhibit pronounced Knight shifts, even though the former structure appears more compatible with recent bounds on the residual susceptibility at the lowest temperatures The presence of inversion and time-reversal symmetries in the normal state Hamiltonian allows for 15 distinct non-zero terms within the t 2g orbital subset and d k,μ,σ denotes the annihilation of an electron in orbital μ and spin state σ with momentum k. In Eq. ( with The onsite and momentum-dependent SOC terms enter-ing in the block diagonals of Eq. ( where λ so denotes the atomic SOC (L • S) and α k , β k are momentum-dependent, spin-flip SOC terms given by ( These higher order coupling terms can arise from the presence of orbital hybridizations and atomic SOC with and form factors given by The η-terms are spin-flip processes between the xz and yz orbitals, while the γ-terms quantify spin-preserving transitions between the xz/yz and xy orbitals with With the above expressions for hybridization and k-SOC, we work in a Brillouin zone (BZ) given by [-π, π]× [-π, π] × [-2π, 2π]. We have introduced out-of-plane hybridization terms, t and t int of similar amplitude as in Ref. 23 renormalized to the effective hopping parameters presented in Table The bare multi-orbital interaction Hamiltonian is given by where i is a site index, μ, ν are orbital indices and σ = -σ refers to electronic spin. As usual, intra-and interorbital Coulomb scattering as well as Hund's coupling and pairhopping terms are included, and U = U -2J, J = J. with μ = (μ, σ) introduced as a joint index of orbital and electronic spin. The bare electron-electron interaction matrix is specified by where μ and ν denote different orbitals. Within the usual mean-field Hund's coupling pairing scheme, where onsite interactions mediate superconductivity, the effective interaction of Eq. ( In the spin-fluctuation mediated pairing mechanism, the effective interaction is derived from RPA diagrams in the normal state including onsite as well as momentumdependent SOC. The complete pairing obtained in this framework is given by an expression resembling a multiorbital RPA susceptibility in which the bare interactions have the multi-orbital matrix structure detailed in Eq. ( (k -k ), We parametrize the Fermi surface by roughly 3000 kpoints and calculate the superconducting instabilities at the Fermi surface from the linearized gap equation where Γ l,l (k f , k f ) denotes the pairing kernel projected to band-and pseudospin-space As seen from Fig. As evident from Fig. To further compare the two different pairing scenarios, we show in Fig. The gap structures that we find for the spin-fluctuation pairing, Fig. The gap structures presented in Fig. The ratio between onsite SOC and k-SOC is decisive for the appearance of a leading E g solution within the Hund's pairing mechanism, as explored in Ref. The low-energy magnetic excitation spectrum at the incommensurate vector Q 1 (2π/3, 2π/3, q z ) has been probed in a number of recent neutron scattering studies In order to address these recent inelastic neutron measurements, we investigate the energy dependence of the spin susceptibility at Q 1 for two different q z vectors, q z = 0 and 2π (note that we have chosen the BZ [-π, π] × [-π, π] × [-2π, 2π] and therefore q z = 2π corresponds to an experimental value of q z = 0.5 r.l.u.). The calculated static ω = 0 spin susceptibility in the normal state is shown in Fig. In the corresponding 2D model, we find a larger out-ofplane spin component at the dominant peak structure at Q 1 at q z = 0, but well-pronounced at q z = 2π. We address the possible gap structures proposed by spin-fluctuation mediated pairing, i.e. s , d x 2 -y 2 (see Fig. The calculated low-energy spin susceptibility is shown in Fig. Even though the E u : p x /p y spin-triplet order appears ruled out by recent Knight shift measurements Hund's pairing as defined in this paper can be viewed as an approximation to spin-fluctuation pairing in the sense that the Hund's pairing kernel is simply the spinfluctuation kernel without the momentum-dependent terms, see Eq. Finally, we computed the spin susceptibility in the superconducting state of leading candidates for Sr 2 RuO 4 . In contrast to the s and s + id x 2 -y 2 states, it is found that d x 2 -y 2 and d xz + id yz orders support a sub-2∆ neutron resonance, which appears in contradiction to the most comprehensive currently-available neutron scattering data V. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS