Grain boundary roughness can affect electronic and mechanical properties of two-dimensional materials. This roughness depends crucially on the growth process by which the two-dimensional material is formed. To investigate the key mechanisms that govern the roughness, we have performed kinetic Monte Carlo simulations of a simple model that includes particle attachment, detachment, and diffusion. We have studied the closure of the gap between two flakes during growth, and the subsequent formation of the grain boundary (GB) for a broad range of model parameters. The well known nearequilibrium (attachment-limited) and unstable (diffusion-limited) growth regimes are identified, but we also observe a third regime when the precursor flux is sufficiently high to fully cover the gap between the edges. This high coverage regime forms GBs with spatially uncorrelated roughness, which quickly relax to smoother configurations. Extrapolating the numerical results (with support from a theoretical approach) to edge lengths and gap widths of some micrometers, we confirm the advantage of this regime to produce GBs with minimal roughness faster than near-equilibrium conditions. This suggests an unexpected route towards efficient growth of two-dimensional materials with smooth GBs. The variety of applications of two-dimensional (2D) materials such as graphene and transition metal dichalcogenides has motivated several studies of their growth kinetics in the last two decades Beyond the GB density, the GB roughness may also affect the properties of 2D materials in nontrivial ways. Sinusoidal graphene GBs are advantageous over atomically flat GBs because they increase the mechanical strength and improve electronic properties The GB morphology is strongly related to the growth conditions and several models were already proposed to explain this relation The recurrent observation of similar relations between the GB morphology and the growth conditions in a wide variety of materials is a motivation for the study of models that only contain the essential physico-chemical mechanisms that are needed to explain those relations. This reasoning has already been successful in the description of the morphology of homoepitaxial metal and semiconductor films by means of generic models including adatom diffusion and attachment/detachment from islands and terraces In this work, we introduce a model for the propagation of two grain edges and for the relaxation of the GB formed after the collision of those edges. The aim of the model is to identify the generic consequences of elementary microscopic processes such as adatom surface diffusion, attachment, and detachment from edges and GBs of a variety of 2d materials, in contrast with approaches that focus on particular applications The simulation results reproduce the main features of the regimes limited by attachment and diffusion described above, respectively for low and high fluxes. However, if the precursor flux is sufficiently high to produce full coverage between the grain edges when they begin to grow, the onset of a nontrivial regime is observed: after an uncorrelated growth of the edges, relatively smoother GBs are formed at relatively shorter times compared to the other regimes. From the simulation results at nanoscale and the support of a theoretical approach, extrapolations to micrometer sized edges separated by micrometer sized gaps are performed. They show the possible advantages of deposition with high coverages for reducing GB roughness. The solid structure is modelled by a square lattice, which differs from the geometry of most 2D materials, but is amenable to computational and analytical calculations. The substrate below this square lattice is assumed to be inert. Each lattice site may be empty or occupied by a particle, which may represent a graphene atom or a metal dichalcogenide molecule. The lattice constant is denoted as a. Two solid grains have initially flat interfaces (edges) of length L along the x direction and are separated by a gap of width l, as illustrated in Fig. Periodic boundaries are considered in the x direction. The model does not describe the process of grain nucleation and growth that lead to this initial condition because its aim is to focus on the late stages of edge propagation and on the coarsening of the GBs formed after their collision. Once they are incorporated in one of the grains, the particles are labelled with a index, A or B, that depends on the grain. These indices are kept even after the complete filling of the gap, so that the two grains do not coalesce into a single grain. This approach does not reproduce the details of the anisotropy and atomic rearrangements within the grain. However, it aims at catching basic features of the growth of the edges, as well as the slow reshaping of the GBs after their collision. These basic features should also be present in the case of grains with different crystallographic orientations or with some mismatch that prevents coalescence; note that imperfect match of 2D grains may also occur when they have the same orientation, as observed in WS 2 growth on sapphire The external particle flux F is the number of incident particles per site per unit time. If the incident particle reaches an empty site above the substrate, it becomes a mobile particle at that position; however, if it reaches an occupied site, the deposition attempt is rejected. This process is illustrated in Fig. The mobile particles can diffuse on the substrate, with a hopping rate to nearest neighbor (NN) sites per unit time equal to D. A hop attempt is executed only if the target site is empty, otherwise the mobile particle remains in the same position. The process is also illustrated in Fig. The grains evolve via the attachment and detachment of particles. To facilitate the connection with kinetic roughening theory and other analytical approaches, these processes in each grain are restricted to the topmost point in each lateral coordinate x (this is called the Solid-On-Solid constraint in the kMC and kinetic roughening literature). When a mobile particle is at the site immediately above the topmost grain particle, its attachment to the grain occurs with rate Q. Simultaneously, a topmost particle can detach from a grain with rate Q n , where n is the number of NNs of that grain and < 1 is termed the detachment probability per NN. These processes are illustrated in Fig. After the edge collision, the boundary between the grains A and B is formed. The above rules for attachment and detachment are maintained and the interactions between particles of different grains are restricted to excluded volume interactions. This means that the formation of bonds be-tween NN particles of different grains is neglected. This may be a reasonable approximation if the actual inter-grain bonds of a material are sufficiently weak in comparison with the intra-grain bonds. In this approximation, the characteristic time scales of the grain edge dynamics are not much different before and after the collision. The diffusion and detachment of particles are expected to be temperature activated processes, so that the rates D and increase as the temperature increases. In many systems, the attachment is also activated, so Q also increases with the temperature. These parameters may then be written in Arrhenius forms (see Sec. S.I of the Supplementary Material). It defines a true thermodynamic equilibrium in the model without deposition, which is enforced by detailed balance. However, since our aim is to address possible properties of several 2D materials, we do not choose a set of activation energies for the simulations, but study a large variety of possible relations between those rates and the flux F . Simulations were performed in lattices with edge length L varying from 128a to 1024a; most results are obtained for L = 512a. The initial gap width l varies between 16a and 128a. The model rates in the simulations are measured in terms of the flux rate F . The ratios F/D and F/Q vary from 10 -8 to 10 4 ; these limiting values respectively represent very low and very high fluxes for a given temperature. Most simulations are performed with = 0.1, which implies that the detachment rates have a weak dependence on the coordination number n; this is reasonable only at high temperatures for most materials (k B T ≈ 0.43 times the activation energy per NN). Additional simulations were performed with 0.01 ≤ ≤ 0.07 to analyze the effects of this parameter. For most parameter sets, average quantities are calculated over 100 different configurations, but in some cases 10 3 -2 × 10 3 configurations are considered. The kinetic Monte Carlo algorithm developed for these simulations is similar to that of previous works on submonolayer growth The main quantity calculated here is the roughness of the grain edges. Letting h (x, t) to denote the height of an edge at position x and time t measured relatively to its initial position, the roughness is defined as where the overbars denote a spatial average (over the values of x in a given sample) and the angular brackets denote a configurational average (over different samples). Due to the symmetry of the grains A and B, our configurational average also includes averaging over the two grains of each growing sample. We also measure the gap coverage, which is the fraction of the initial gap covered by deposited particles: where N d is the total number of deposited particles. Observe that particle attachment and detachment do not affect this quantity. To characterize the transition from edge growth (when attachment dominates over detachment) to GB relaxation (when the grains evolve with balanced attachment and detachment), we define an average collision time t c . For each position x and a given configuration of evolving grains, the local collision time t (local) c (x) is defined as the first time in which grains A and B occupy NN sites at position x (with any value of y). Observe that the GB is not frozen after collision, so particles may detach from one of the grains, move to NN sites, or reattach to one of the two grains. The value of t c is obtained by averaging t (local) c over all positions x and over different configurations of evolving grains; this averaging also gives the standard deviation of the collision times, ∆t c . Figs. For the lowest flux (F/D = 10 -6 ), Fig. As the gap is closed and a GB is formed, there is a drastic decrease of the boundary roughness. This decrease is also observed in models of collisions of uncorrelated interfaces that propagate with finite velocities and is independent of the detailed physics of their short range interactions The spikes that result from the unstable growth are particular features of this model. They contrast with the fractal or dendritic shapes observed in experiments and in other models with unstable growth When the gap is completely filled, the spikes remain, so the GB roughness is initially large. At Dt = 2 × 10 4 , Fig. Fig. The GB is formed at Dt ∼ 10 3 with a non-negligible roughness. The relaxation of the GB leads to its smoothening. This process is comparably faster than that reported in Fig. In Sec. S.II of the Supplementary Material, we show that similar morphologies are obtained if the ratio Q/D decreases by a factor 10 2 , corresponding to a larger particle diffusivity. A full coverage of the gap is also attained at short times for a high value of the flux, which corresponds to the same ratio F/Q = 10 2 of Fig. Thus, an apparently different growth regime is observed when the precursor flux is sufficiently high to produce full surface coverage before a significant edge displacement. In this high coverage regime, the GB may have an initially large roughness, but it attains smooth configurations in shorter times than those observed in diffusion-limited and attachment-limited regimes. In all cases, W increases during edge growth, as expected for any kinetic roughening process starting from a flat configuration The stationary regime can actually be mapped to a true thermodynamic equilibrium state, in which the roughness depends only on the detachment probability and on the edge length L; see details in Sec. S.III of the Supplementary Material. For all values of the model rates (F , D, and Q) and of the initial gap width, the roughness is expected to converge to the same stationary value at sufficiently long times. Thus, depending on the maximal roughness attained before the grain collision, W may increase or decrease after formation of the GB. For instance, Fig. For the intermediate flux, F/D = 10 -3 , Fig. For the largest flux (F/D = 10), the roughness in Fig. A common feature of the regimes limited by attachment and by diffusion is that the time of GB formation (the average collision time) is roughly proportional to the reciprocal of the flux rate: t c ∼ 3/F . The initial gap width and the mechanisms of particle diffusion, attachment, and detachment determine the edge morphology. However, in the high coverage regime (obtained with the highest fluxes), the time of GB formation depends on the rate Q but not on the flux F ; for instance, compare the data for F/D = 1 and F/D = 10 in Fig. Between the three regimes described above, the roughness evolution shows crossover features. In Fig. Qualitatively similar results are obtained for other ratios Q/D. Fig. Much larger diffusion coefficients (compared to the attachment rate) facilitate the particle redistribution in the gap and permit the observation of the attachment-limited regime, but suppress the unstable regime (diffusionlimited). However, for the largest flux rates, the features of the high cov- erage regime are still observed because the diffusion is not effective in this case. This is illustrated in Sec. S.VI of the Supplementary Material for Q/D = 10 -3 . Changes in the gap width l affect the crossover between the diffusionlimited and the attachment-limited regimes, but do not change the features of the very high flux regime. For smaller l, the unstable growth may not have sufficient time to develop, so the EW roughening of the edges is observed for slightly larger fluxes; see Sec. S.IV of the Supplementary Material. Instead, for larger l, the unstable regime extends to smaller fluxes because the instability has longer time to develop before the edges collide. Changes in the detachment probability (which relates the detachment rates with the number of NNs) lead to some relevant changes in the roughness evolution, as shown in Fig. For the largest flux in Fig. In our simulations, we identify three regimes of edge growth, i.e. before the edges begin to interact. The attachment-limited or near-equilibrium regime is charaterized by slopes of the log W ×log (Dt) plots near the EW value 1/4. The diffusion-limited or unstable regime is characterized by slopes larger than 1 at some time interval before the maximal W . Finally, the very high flux or random growth regime is characterized by slopes near 1/2. Other behaviors are considered as crossovers. Fig. However, these conditions change as the gap width l or the detachment probability change. For wider gaps, the instability has longer time to develop before the edge collision, so it can be observed for smaller values of F/D. As decreases, particle detachment becomes slower, which also favors the instabilities; thus, the unstable regime can also be observed for smaller values of F/D. The high coverage regime is more robust against changes in the physical or chemical parameters. It typically appears for F/Q 10, which is a condition in which the gap is almost completely filled before the attachment of a single layer of particles at each edge. As explained before, the diffusion coefficient D is not important in this regime because the particles in the gap cannot move to the occupied NNs. In the simulations of growth with high precursor coverage (F/Q 10), we measured the minimal value of the roughness obtained during the GB relaxation, W min , and the time in which this minimum was attained, t min . W min does not depend on the parameters F , Q, D, and L; it is affected only by the detachment rate and the gap width l. Fig. The dependence of W min on l can be explained by simple scaling arguments the characteristic rate of this growth is Q. As the GB is formed, there is a sudden change from this uncorrelated growth to a correlated kinetics. If the characteristic rate of attachment and detachment of the final kinetics is the same as the initial one, the uncorrelated fluctuations are rapidly suppressed and the roughness rapidly reaches the same time evolution of the final kinetics starting from a flat interface (see e.g. Fig. Since 1 -≈ 1 is a reasonable approximation in our simulations, Eq. ( (3). The Langevin approach also predicts that the minimum roughness is attained at where the first term accounts for the uncorrelated growth of the edges of independent grains and the second one accounts for the coarsening of the GB. For 1, the first term is negligible in comparison with the second one, which gives t (Lang) min ≈ l/ (16aQ 3 ); this is expected to be a reasonable approximation even for = 0.1, which was considered in most simulations. Guided by this analytical result, Fig. Here we discuss the application of the growth in the high coverage regime to produce 2D materials with small GB roughness. Eqs. ( For the application to a particular 2D material, it is necessary that isolated grains nucleate and grow to a configuration with smooth boundaries, which is the initial condition considered here; observe that the formation of this initial configuration is not addressed by our model. In such configuration, a common situation is that the grains cover a fraction of the substrate 0.1. The inspection of microscopy images with visible and isolated islands (grains) of 2D materials supports this estimate Following the reasoning in the paragraphs above, we also assume that: edge lengths L and initial gap widths l are ∼ 10μm; the lattice constant of the material is a ≈ 0.3 nm (which differs 20% from graphene and several metal dichalcogenides); = 0.1, meaning kink detachment rate 10 2 times smaller than the attachment rate; the condition F/Q ≤ 10 is fulfilled. From Eq. ( For comparison, if near-equilibrium growth conditions are chosen and the GB relaxes to its equilibrium configuration, the approach of Sec. S.III of the Supplementary Material predicts the GB roughness With the above parameters, we obtain W eq ∼ 7 nm, which is 3.5 times larger than the expected minimal roughness. The time of crossover to the equilibrium roughness is obtained from the EW kinetics of the GB in Sec. S.III of the Supplementary Material: It gives Qt eq ∼ 3 × 10 9 , which exceeds by three orders of magnitude the time to obtain the minimal roughness in the high coverage regime. This comparison clearly shows that the advantages of growing 2d materials in the high coverage regime can be extrapolated from our nanoscale simulations to more typical experimental conditions with microscale grains. The decrease of the GB roughness up to the minimum can be observed in a much shorter time than that necessary for the GB to reach its equilibrium value, which is larger than that minimum. Our model has the limitation that the mobile particle attachment is restricted to the topmost point of each column x. We noted that leads to unstable patterns that look very different from those of experiments and of models for specific applications. However, we believe that this limitation does not have significant effect on our prediction of a minimal roughness for the high coverage regime. If that condition for the attachment is relaxed, then the aggregation of mobile particles to the sides of the rough edges may lead to overhang formation. Such overhangs will encapsulate mobile particles, but these particles are effectively static in the high coverage condition. Thus, these particles will eventually attach at the same position and fill the overhang. It is possible that this process creates some lateral correlations along the edges, but such fluctuations, which are correlated at very small scales, can be suppressed approximately in the same way as the totally uncorrelated fluctuations considered here. A model for the propagation of two grain edges of a 2d material and for the relaxation of the grain boundary formed after the collision of those edges was proposed. The model considers simple kinetic rules for attachment and detachment of particles from the edges and for particle diffusion while there is a gap between them. This allowed to perform kinetic Monte Carlo (KMC) simulations for broad ranges of model parameters and investigate their consequences on the geometry of the grain edges. Besides the well known near-equilibrium (attachment-limited) and unstable (diffusion-limited) growth regimes, we observe the existence of a distinct third regime when the precursor flux is sufficiently high to fully cover the gap between the edges before they begin to grow. In this high covered regime, an uncorrelated growth of the edges is observed until they collide. Although this may produce an initial grain boundary with large roughness, we show that this boundary relaxes to configurations with a roughness smaller than those of the other regimes in a shorter time. Numerical predictions of the minimal roughness and of the time to attain such configuration are in good agreement with a theoretical approach for the grain boundary relaxation of the model. To investigate the possible extension of the above results to real grains of 2d materials, the simulation results (obtained at nanoscale) were extrapolated to edges and gaps sizes ∼ 10μm. It shows that the high coverage regime can produce grain boundaries with minimal roughness ∼ 2 nm, which is ∼ 3.5 times smaller than the roughness obtained in a near-equilibrium, stationary state. Moreover, the time to obtain that minimal roughness is three orders of magnitude smaller than the expected time for the grain boundary to reach that stationary state. Thus, if the control of the growth conditions of a 2d material permits to reach an initial high coverage condition and a relaxation dynamics as proposed here, it is possible that a novel route for efficient growth of that material with very smooth grain boundaries can be developed. Recent advances in microscopy methods allow accurate measurements of nanoscale fluctuations of GBs and may help such studies The diffusion coefficient of particles that are not bonded to the grains can be written as where ν is a frequency, E s is an activation energy, k B is the Boltzmann constant and T is the temperature. In the deposition model of Clarke and Vvedensky where Q 0 is an attempt frequency and E a is the activation energy for that process. These values are strongly dependent on the type of interaction between the atoms or molecules of the growing material. In some cases, Q may be considered as temperature independent, so E a = 0; this is the case of several models of deposition of metal and semiconductor films The detachment probability can be written as where J denotes the bond energy with a NN. In this section, we propose a Langevin model for the dynamics of the GB, when all sites are occupied by atoms from the two grains. The dynamics is well described by two types of rates. The first one accounts for the rate R + at which an atom detaches from the upper crystal and reattaches to the lower crystal. Since the detachment rate is 4-n where n is the number of in-plane nearest neighbors with the lower crystal, and the attachment rate is Q/2, we have Similarly, the rate of detachment from the lower crystal and attachment to the upper crystal is Since atomic steps are 1D systems with short range interactions, they are always in a high-temperature phase, i.e., they are always rough and cannot undergo a low-temperature facetting transition. Hence, there is always a finite concentration of kinks. At low temperatures, their concentration is small and is given by the Boltzmann weight of non-interacting excitations of energy E k . This leads to , where E k = J is the kink energy, and the factor 2 comes from the existence of two types of kinks (up and down kinks when going along +x). Using a model with kinks of arbitrary heights (but imposing the SOS constraint that neglects the possibility of overhangs as in KMC) the kink density reads (S6) In addition, the hopping rate of a kink to the left or to the right is , so that the diffusion constant of a kink along the x axis parallel to the (10) direction is where we have defined the lattice parameter a parallel to the GB (a = a in our simulations). From Einstein's relation, the mobility of a kink is In the presence of a kink chemical potential μ k , the velocity of a kink is assumed to obey a linear kinetic law We now wish to make link with macroscopic quantities. The macroscopic position of the GB is h GB (x, t). Its macroscopic velocity where a ⊥ is the lattice constant in the direction perperdicular to the GB. Note that Eq.(S15) was derived in Refs. where Ω = a a ⊥ . As a consequence The change in the number of atoms can also be written in terms of the frequency v k /a of addition or removal of atoms at kinks: Then, we switch to a summation on the index i of sites along the x axis Finally, we take the continuum limit where i a → dx: where v k is the average of v k over some mesoscopic lengthscale. Indentification of the two writings of ∂ t N leads to Eq.(S15). and, since the chemical potential represents the free energy gain upon the addition of a single particle, we expect that the microscopic kink chemical potential and the macroscopic chemical potential to be equal: In addition, we use the standard macroscopic law where: F and N are respectively the edge free energy and the number of atoms in the lower crystal; Ω = a a ⊥ is the atomic area; γGB is the grain boundary stiffness, obtained by the substitution J → 2J into the usual expression of the stiffness of a lattice model with bond energy J (see, e.g. Ref. Finally, we obtain Adding a Langevin force η GB , we obtain an EW equation with Γ GB = Ωγ GB / (k B T ). Using again the fluctuation dissipation theorem to determine the amplitude of the equilibrium Langevin force η(x, t) (following the same lines as in Refs. where h q (t) denotes the Fourier mode with q = 2nπ/L. At long times, we recover the well known expression of the equilibrium (stationary) roughness and using Eq.(S19) we obtain At short times, we find The second term of this equation is the well known equilibrium EW scaling. It is e.g. in agreement with Eqs.(2.63,2.65) of Ref. The roughness in Eq. (S25) can exhibit a minimum. We re-write this equation as The evolution of W 2 GB depends on the details of the initial condition which dictates the power spectrum |h q (0)| 2 just after collision. In the limit of fast growth with coverage 1, we assume that the growth regime before collision corresponds to RD, with forward atomic moves of the two interfaces appearing with a frequency Q. This gives a collision time t 0 = l/(2a ⊥ Q) and a roughness before collision W 2 1bc = a 2 ⊥ Qt 0 = a ⊥ l/2. As discussed in Ref. and, in Fourier space, As a consequence, |h q (0)| 2 = a W 2 1ac L = ΩlL/4 in Eq.(S27), leading to where Θ 3 is the Elliptic Theta function. For t 1/b, we have e -bt 1, Θ 3 (e -bt ) ≈ e -bt , and i.e., the sum is dominated by the slowest decaying mode n = 1. This expression does not necessarily lead to a minimum; the condition of existence of a minimum of the function e -x + αx 1/2 is that α < 2 1/2 e -1/2 . Using x = bt, we obtain the condition for the presence of a minimum (1 -) 2 1/2 a . In the opposite regime bt 1, when the time is to short to allow for the relaxation of the modes with wavelength close to the system size L, but long enough for short wavelength modes to have decayed (so that the sum on n can be taken up to infinity), one can take the continuum limit in n: up to an additive constant related to the accuracy of the continuum limit around n = 0. This leads to where τ = L 2 bt/π. A minimum then is found for τ min = 2πΓ GB W 2 1ac a /Ω, leading to Interestingly, t min does not depend on the stiffness γGB . This minimum is obtained for bt min = 2π 2 a Γ GB W 2 1ac /(L 2 Ω) = π 2 Γ GB l/ (2L 2 ) 1, leading to the condition Note the close similarity between the expressions of L inf in Eq.(S38) and L sup in Eq.(S34), which are identical up to their prefactors [which are numerically similar: π ≈ 3.14 and (8π 3 /e) 1/4 ≈ 3.09]. The value of the roughness at the minimum is As a remark, W 2 min does not depend on the kinetic coefficient R(2). Finally, the total physical time for the minimum is Again, note that t M does not depend on the stiffness. We also see that t M t 0 for 1. As a summary, for large L, we expect a minimum at a time t M that does not depend on the energetic properties of the interface, with a roughness W 2 min that does not depend on the kinetics of the interface. Here, we wish to evaluate the crossover time between the EW growth of the GB roughness and the equilibrium regime that occurs at long times. From Eq.(S27), the growth of the GB roughness in the EW regime reads From the condition W 2 GB,EW = W 2 eq at t = t eq , and using Eq.(S24), we obtain An alternative definition of the crossover time is that the decay of the slowest mode n = 1 in Eq.(S27) takes place, leading to bt * eq = 1. This conditions can be rewritten as t * eq = (36/π 3 )t eq ≈ 1.16t eq . As a consequence, this other definition of the crossover time is very similar to the one defined above and used in the main text. S.IV Roughness evolution for initial gap width l = 32 The smaller values of the roughness before and after the formation of the GB in Fig. The change in the edge length L neither affects the initial roughening nor the relaxation after the GB formation because there are not effects of the finite lateral size in those regimes. As explained in Sec. SI.III, this length affects only the stationary roughness, which increases as L 1/2 . S.VII Roughness evolution for small detachment rate ( = 0.01) We use the relation |n| = ∂ Jx β 0 in Eq.10.33 of Ref. A simple derivation of this equation follows. We first define the number of atoms under the interface