The intrinsic limitation of the material nonlinearity inevitably results in the poor mode purity, conversion efficiency and real-time reconfigurability of the generated harmonic waves, both in optics and acoustics. Rotational Doppler effect provides us an intuitive paradigm to shifting the frequency in a linear system, which needs to be facilitated by a spiraling phase change upon the wave propagation. Here we numerically and experimentally present a rotating linear vortex metasurface and achieve close-to-unity mode purity (above 95%) and conversion efficiency (above 65%) in audible sound frequency as low as 3000 Hz. The topological charge of the transmitted sound is almost immune from the rotational speed and transmissivity, demonstrating the mechanical robustness and stability in adjusting the high-performance frequency conversion in situ. These features enable us to cascade multiple vortex metasurfaces to further enlarge and diversify the extent of sound frequency conversion, which are experimentally verified. Our strategy takes a step further towards the freewheeling sound manipulation at acoustic frequency domain, and may have far-researching impacts in various acoustic communications, signal processing, and contactless detection. Frequency conversion is of fundamental interest in wave physics and practical significance for diverse applications. However, high-efficiency conversion of lowfrequency waves cannot be achieved with the current mechanisms based on nonlinear medium or up/down-conversion materials. Here, we theoretically propose and experimentally demonstrate a mechanism that bypasses these limitations with a rotating metasurface. In particular, the resulting frequency-conversion device high-efficiently and precisely converts the incident wave of arbitrary wavefront into the desired acoustic vortex mode and enables device cascading to further amplification of frequency shift. Our strategy with unprecedented advantages of close-to-unity mode purity, high conversion efficiency, wavefront robustness and cascadability opens a route to freewheeling sound manipulation at frequency domain, with important applications in acoustics and many related fields. Frequency conversion is of fundamental interest in wave physics and conventionally realized by utilizing nonlinear, up/down-conversion materials in optics. The most intuitive way of frequency conversion for light is to use the nonlinear process in a strong laser electric field, in which the energy of fundamental wave will be partially converted to high-order harmonic waves Due to the longitudinal nature of acoustic waves lacking spin angular momentum, airborne sound carrying OAM can be generated by using active and passive devices In the present work, we theoretically propose and experimentally demonstrate a mechanism for overcoming the above limitations by a rotation system and a hightransmittance acoustic metasurface that can load transmitted acoustic waves with an additional OAM. The phase-adjustable and high-transmittance units are periodically arranged along the azimuthal direction, forming a spiral phase distribution on the transmission surface with l -order OAM with the plane wave incident at working frequency f 0 . A rotation system drives the metasurface to rotate steadily around the axis of symmetry at an angular velocity of Ω. In this case, the phase distribution on the transmission surface leads to the rotational Doppler effect and the transmitted wave can be converted to a new frequency expressed as f 0 + lΩ/2π . Meanwhile, the high transmittance of the metasurface maintains in the rotation and keeps the conversion effective. We also demonstrate the robustness of the incident wavefront experimentally, meaning that high efficiency and frequency shift can be maintained regardless of the incident wavefront. This enables cascading of the frequency convertor for further enhancing the frequency shifts, which is also verified experimentally on frequency conversion and efficiency. Figure where z′ = 0 and z ′ = d are the incident and transmission planes of the metasurface respectively. The transmitted wave in the rest frame can be expressed as: Hence, one readily derives the frequency of transmitted wave probed by a static microphone behind the rotating metasurface can be derived as f′ = ω-lΩ 2π , and a high efficiency frequency convertor can be obtained by a metasurface with a high transmittance. From Eqs. ( Series numerical simulations have been carried out to demonstrate the performance of the designed Doppler frequency convertor. Figure With the increase and decrease of rotation rates, the frequency of the transmitted waves will shift according to f 0 + lΩ/2π , which also agrees well with the experimental results in Fig. Next, we performed experiments to verify the results of the theoretical prediction and numerical simulations. Figure Figures This efficient frequency convertor also has high robustness to incident wavefront. As a representative example, we use obstacles, such as plank, to block half of the frequency convertor, in which case the incident wavefront is no longer a plane wave and becomes a diffracted wave on the rim of acoustically-rigid plate, as shown in Fig. Figure , where N = 2 is the number of the metasurfaces and Δf i = Ω i l i /2π with the subscript i correspond to the sequence the metasurfaces in the cascade scheme. Illuminated by the incident acoustic wave with a frequency of f 0 equal to the working frequency of the first metasurface l 1 , the first frequency convertor twists the wave front of the incident plane wave into a vortex with topological charge equal to l 1 and converts the frequency of the wave to f 0 + Δf 1 . When the new frequency meets with the working frequency of the next metasurface l 2 , a further frequency conversion happens with the further frequency shift and additional topological charge equal to Δf 2 and l 2 . As shown in Fig. In summary, we present here the theoretical, numerical, and experimental work of the design of a frequency convertor and its cascade scheme for efficiently converting the frequency of the acoustic wave to a new frequency in rest frame. A rotating metasurface implementation is presented by a metasurface based on hybrid resonant unit cells in a waveguide driven by a servo motor. The designed frequency convertor and its cascade scheme are new approaches of manipulation of acoustic waves in frequency domain. After passing through the frequency convertor, the frequency of the incident acoustic waves can be efficiently converted to a new frequency with a specific additional OAM by a frequency shift which depends on the topological charge and the rotational angular velocity of the metasurface in the frequency convertor. Owing to the high efficiency, this frequency conversion mechanism can extend to a cascade scheme by cascading several frequency convertors to achieve a higher or lower frequency than the fundamental frequency. The cascade scheme has been verified efficiently by cascading two frequency convertors in experiments. In addition to the simple design, high efficiency and frequency shift capability, we still need to stress several important advantages of our mechanism: (1) It offers the flexibility of freely designing the unit cells in the rotating metasurface, given that the desired phase distribution as a l-order acoustic vortex at the transmitted plane can be achieved for the incident plane wave at working frequency. This significantly enhances the versatility and application potential of the frequency convertor (2) Robustness of the frequency convertor is verified experimentally which is important for its application in diverse scenarios with unpredictable incident wavefronts. Figures 3A and 5B demonstrate the experimental systems for frequency convertor and the cascade scheme. A metasurface made of photopolymer is driven by a servo motor via a transmission shaft and tooth synchronous belt. The bearing system fixed to the vibration isolation platform is used to ensure smooth rotation of the shaft without axial slip. Acoustic waves generated from a compression driver with a horn are incident on the rotating metasurface, which is covered by a waveguide to better mimic a plane wave and avoid the influence of the diffraction of the incident waves. The wedge made of sound-absorbing foam is placed at the end of waveguide to eliminate the undesired reflection. The radius of the metasurface used in the frequency convertor is 9.15 cm which is about 0.8 wavelength of the working frequency. All the metasurfaces are fabricated by 3D printing technology and fixed with the shaft through flanges. The design of the metasurfaces is demonstrated in Supplementary Materials. There are some unavoidable vibrations of the rotating metasurfaces caused by centrifugal action in the experiments so that the radius of the waveguide, set as 9.5 cm, needs to be slightly larger than that of the metasurfaces. The 0.25-in. Brüel and Kjaer type-4961 microphones were used to measure the sound pressure distribution behind the rotating metasurface in the waveguide. An additional microphone of the same type is used as the reference microphone in the measurement of the phase distribution of transmitted waves. Servo motors provide the rotating power for the metasurfaces through the gears and belts with the speed ratio of 1:1. In order to eliminate the error between the actual rotating speed and the number displayed on the servo motor controller, the speed in all experiments was calibrated by a tachometer whose error is less than 1/60 Hz. 