Outstanding wide-bandgap semiconductor material such as gallium nitride (GaN) has been extensively utilized in power electronics, radiofrequency amplifiers, and harsh environment devices. Due to its quantum confinement effect in enabling desired deep-ultraviolet emission, excitonic impact, and electronic transport features, two-dimensional (2D) or ultrathin quasi-2D GaN semiconductors have been one of the most remarkable candidates for future growth of microelectronic devices. Here, for the first time, we reported a large area, wide bandgap, and roomtemperature quasi-2D GaN synthesis and printing strategy through introducing the plasma medicated liquid metal gallium surface-confined nitridation reaction mechanism. The developed direct fabrication and compositional process is consistent with various electronics manufacturing approaches and thus opens an easy going way for cost-effective growth of the third-generation semiconductor. In particular, the fully printed field-effect transistors relying on the GaN thus made show p-type switching with an on/off ratio greater than 10 5 , maximum field-effect hole mobility of 53 cm 2 V -1 s -1 , and a small sub-threshold swing. As it was demonstrated, the present method allows to produce at room temperature the GaN with thickness spanning from 1nm to nanometers. This basic method can be further extended, generalized, and utilized for making various electronic and photoelectronic devices in the coming time. Semiconductor technology has been one of the most fundamental cores in developing the integrated circuit industry. Since witness of the bottleneck of the first two generations of semiconductors, the third-generation high-temperature wide-band-gap semiconductor nanomaterials such as gallium nitride (GaN) Liquid metal-based ultrathin quasi-2D GaN printing technology. Conventionally, quite a few processes have been available to prepare GaN films, such as metal organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) and atomic layer deposition (ALD), which are illustrated in Fig. The scheme in Fig. . Because the chemical reaction of nitrogen plasma is a thermodynamically stable excited state and ionic state, and the reaction activation energy is pretty low, it is much easier to generate GaN by the reaction of nitrogen plasma with liquid Ga than that through the traditional nitriding reaction (MOCVD) The schematic in Fig. It is noteworthy that the thickness of singly printed GaN film is below 1 nm (Supplementary Fig. The uniform thickness in broad regions and numerous samples supports the proposed Cabrera-Mott growth mechanism, where concurrent nitrides are formed among the whole metal interface, resulting in self-limiting growth to an accurate thickness. The mentioned approach is highly reproducible for growing large-area GaN sheets because the process was reproduced more than 50 times and always yielded identical, continuous, laterally extensive thin GaN films with reproducible features. The GaN film was initially printed on the SiO2/Si substrate, but further tests demonstrated that the formation of uniform centimeter-scale semiconductor films on various substrates could be reproduced through the printing technology (Supplementary Fig. It should be noted that, Supplementary Fig. Properties of the ultrathin quasi-2D GaN. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) can be utilized to characterize the crystallographic features of the printed GaN. The GaN films were immediately moved to a TEM grid since it was printed. A high-resolution TEM micrograph (HRTEM) and selective area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern of the GaN are presented in Fig. The GaN film's phonon modes also change compared to those of the bulk X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) is utilized to attain the printed GaN's chemical bonding states. Figures The obtained electronic band structure and density of states (DOS) of an individual unit cell of the printed ultrathin quasi-2D GaN are shown in Fig. Liquid metals have rather diverse unconventional functionalities. One of the essential value of such materials is that they can serve as a reactive and templating media simultaneously and thus to synthesis and print a wide range of 2D semiconductor materials with extensive practical values. In the present work, we demonstrated the successful room temperature printing of the high-quality ultrathin quasi-2D GaN films with a large scale via a plasma nitridation reaction and through transferring occurring in the liquid metal's nitride skin constructed under this specific condition. Moreover, complete explanation and analysis have been performed on the electrical features of the printed GaN films with thickness spanning from 1nm to several nanometers, giving essential advice for further evolution of liquid metal printed high-performance semiconductors and indicating their considerable potential for future nanoelectronics. As example, we effectively presented the printed FET devices using GaN for the first time, depicting significant field-effect mobility and relatively small values of SS, and demonstrating an extremely steep subthreshold voltage switching behavior. This high-efficiency, simple, large-size, and cheap production process provides a new way for advancing GaN devices for power electronics applications. Moreover, the 2D or qusia-2D semiconductor can be produced as the favored material in printing different electronic devices due to the mentioned advantages. This sets up a new standard for subsequent electronics, sensors, and more practical devices. It also offers a pathway toward employing printed ultrathin 2D high-efficiency semiconductors to construct novel electronic devices using liquid metal-enabled techniques in the near future. Materials. Gallium with a purity of >99.99% was bought from Sigma Aldrich and utilized without additional refinement. The remaining materials were bought from usual suppliers and employed without refinement. Formation of GaN on liquid gallium by nitridation reaction. In order to obtain GaN films with high purity and low defects, the whole preparation and printing process were carried out in a glovebox in a pure N2 environment at a pressure of 1 atm ~ 3 atm. The O2 content in the glove box atmosphere is maintained below 3 ppm and the H2O content is controlled below 0.5 ppm. High purity Ga was melted and then placed in NaOH solution to remove the oxide scale on the surface. The clean liquid Ga was extracted to 10 ml by a syringe and place it on the surface of the lowvoltage electrode stainless steel plate of the plasma trigger device, and the stainless steel plate is grounded. In the environment of high purity N2, it can be seen that the surface of liquid Ga is bright without any oxide film. The stainless steel disk wrapped in transparent quartz of plasma highvoltage electrode is suspended vertically above liquid Ga, and the distance between the disk and the surface of liquid Ga is 1mm. A voltage of 50 kV is applied between the two electrodes of the plasma trigger device through the voltage regulating device. At this time, the electric field strength of N2 breakdown is 5 × 10 7 V m -1 , the output current is 16 A, and the uniform and dense GaN skin can be obtained on the liquid Ga surface after glow discharge treatment for a certain time. Printing process of ultrathin quasi-2D GaN films. Wafers of 500 nm SiO2 on Si (SiO2/Si) were washed by the deionized (DI) water for 1 min, and then sonicated in acetone and isopropyl alcohol (IPA) for 10 min (25 °C) and blown dry with N2 gas. The 3 min of oxygen (O2) plasma (Emitech K-1050X) at 100 W was then applied to wafers under the low vacuum (0.6 Torr). The nitrided Ga droplets was placed on the SiO2/Si substrate and execute the complete printing program. The size of nitride film changes with the droplet diameter and the travel distance of the scraper. The nitride layer formed on the liquid Ga's surface can be transformed and printed on the substrate through gently scraping the droplets from one end of the substrate to the other end with a scraper. An extra force within the extrusion phase can damage the nitride layer. By this extrusion printing method, high-quality GaN films with a transverse size greater than a few centimeters can be effectively printed on the substrate. Mechanical and chemical cleaning process. In order to remove all liquid metal parts that remained on the sample, a facile mechanical ethanol cleaning method was employed. At first, about 100 ml of ethanol were taken in a beaker, and the beaker was heated on a heating plate to 100 °C. Then, the substrate with printed nitride film was immersed in hot ethanol with tweezers. In order to eliminate the metal residues, a swab tool was utilized for wiping the substrate immersed in ethanol. Due to a strong vdW adhesion between the nitride film and the bottom layer, the nitride film still sticks to the silicon oxide surface within the wiping proceeding. Besides, the weak adherence between the deposited nitride layer, the liquid metal, and the film could be quickly removed to maintain the film clean and intact. Moreover, a chemical process was employed to clean the samples for a complete elimination of the metal residue on the substrate. An Iodine/triiodide (I -/I 3-) solution (100 mmol L -1 LiI and 5 mmol L -1 I2) was constructed in ethanol and then located on a hot plate to heat up to 50 °C. In order to eliminate metallic inclusions, a substrate printed with the GaN film was immersed in a heated I -/I 3-solution for a time interval. At last, the residual etchant was removed by cleaning the sample in deionized water. The liquid metal particles can be successfully eliminated using the mentioned two cleaning processes. FET fabrication. In order to construct fully printed side-gated GaN FETs, firstly, part of the GaN/SiO2 region is etched with HF solution with concentration of 1mol L -1 for about 10 s. Then, the etching area was cleaned with ethanol, the clean Si of a certain area was obtained on the substrate. The Ag ink (Ag40X, UT Dots, Inc.) involved 40 wt % Ag nanoparticles, with about 20 nm particle diameters, dispersed in a solvent mixture of xylene and terpineol (9:1 by volume). The constructed ink was printed on the GaN films and SiO2/Si substrates. A scientific 3B inkjet printer from Prtronic was adopted to verify the inkjet printing details. The obtained sample was located on the inkjet printer's panel at room temperature. A target image file was applied to the computer, which could be converted into a printable file through the software. Under computer control, source/drain electrodes and side-gate electrodes were subsequently patterned by printing Ag on the substrate. Finally, the printed samples were then sedimented at 120 °C in the air for 30 min in a furnace (MDL 281, Fisher Scientific Co.) to improve the conductivity. Characterization. The AFM images were employed by a Bruker Dimension Icon with "Scanasyst-air" AFM tips. A JEOL 2100F TEM/STEM (2011) system working at a 200 kV acceleration voltage involving a bright-field Gatan OneView 4k charge-coupled device (CCD) camera was utilized for both the low-resolution HRTEM imaging and SAED. A laser micro-Raman spectrometer (Renishaw in Via, 532 nm excitation wavelength) was adopted to accomplish the Raman spectroscopy. Moreover, the energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopic (EDS) measurements were used to collect the elemental mapping of the as-prepared samples. A thermo Scientific K-alpha XPS spectrometer associated with monochromatic X-rays from an Al anode (hν=~1486.6 eV) was adopted to perform the XPS analysis. A UV-visible (UV-vis) absorbance spectrometer (Hitachi U3900 UV-vis spectrophotometer) was utilized to evaluate the film's optical bandgaps. A Cascade Microtech Summit 12000 semiautomated probe station linked to a Keithley 4200 Semiconductor Device Analyzer was adopted to measure GaN FETs at room temperature. In order to collect the carrier mobility for estimating the performance of printed FET and making a comparison with the reported GaN FETs, the field-effect mobilities were calculated using field-effect method, which is commonly used in former FETs. In the present work, the field-effect mobilities of printed GaN-FET devices at ambient temperatures were calculated using this method, i.e. Since the dielectric is 500 nm SiO2, the capacitance per unit area is calculated to be: where μdevice is the hole mobility, Ids and Vds refer to the drain-source current and voltage, respectively, Vgs is the gate voltage, L and W are the length and width of the channel, respectively. When the gate bias voltage is lower than the threshold voltage, there will be leakage current flow on the semiconductor surface. Generally, this working region is called sub threshold region. In the subthreshold region, the drain current comes from the diffusion of carriers from source to drain rather than drift. The slope of the drain current curve depends on the capacitance of the gate insulator and the interface trap charge density. The reciprocal of the logarithmic slope of the source drain current to the gate voltage is called the subthreshold swing (SS), as follows: (log )