We review some recent developments in the field of quasi-one-dimensional superconductivity. We demonstrate that low temperature properties of superconducting nanowires are essentially determined by quantum fluctuations. Smooth (Gaussian) fluctuations of the superconducting phase (also associated with plasma modes propagating along the wire) may significantly affect the electron density of states in such nanowires and induce persistent current noise in superconducting nanorings. Further interesting phenomena such as, e.g., non-vanishing resistance and shot noise of the voltage in current-biased superconducting nanowires, are caused by non-Gaussian fluctuations of the order parameter -quantum phase slips (QPS). Such phenomena may be interpreted in terms of tunneling of fluxons playing the role of effective quantum "particles" dual to Cooper pairs and obeying complicated full counting statistics which reduces to Poissonian one in the low frequency limit. We also demonstrate that QPS effects may be particularly pronounced in thinnest wires and rings where quantum phase slips remain unbound and determine a non-perturbative length scale L c beyond which the supercurrent gets suppressed by quantum fluctuations. Accordingly, for T → 0 such nanowires should become insulating at scales exceeding L c , whereas at shorter length scales they may still exhibit superconducting properties. We argue that certain non-trivial features associated with quantum fluctuations of the order parameter may be sensitive to specific circuit topology and may be observed in structures like, e.g., a system of capacitively coupled superconducting nanowires. An important role of fluctuations in reduced dimension is widely known. Of a special interest are fluctuation effects in low dimensional superconductors which properties -in contrast to bulk structures -cannot in general be adequately described by means of the standard Bardeen-Cooper-Schriffer (BCS) mean field theory. Fluctuations are most strongly pronounced in ultrathin superconducting wires causing a large number of intriguing physical phenomena. Over last decades these phenomena attracted a lot of attention of numerous researchers worldwide and were discussed in details in a number of recent books and review papers, see, e.g., Can superconductivity survive also in structures of lower dimension or do fluctuations disrupt any supercurrent in such systems? The answer to this question is of both fundamental interest and practical importance due to rapidly progressing miniaturization of superconducting nanocircuits. According to the well-known theorem This conclusion, however, would be somewhat premature because any generic superconducting system has a finite size in which case phase coherence can be preserved at least to a certain extent. For instance, two-dimensional structures undergo Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless (BKT) phase transition Likewise, the general theorem The superconducting state of a quasi-one-dimensional metallic wire can be described by means of a complex order parameter ∆(x) = |∆(x)|e iφ(x) , where x is the coordinate along such a wire. Both thermal and quantum fluctuations cause deviations of the modulus as well as the phase of this order parameter from their equilibrium values. Such fluctuations can be divided into two different types which are (i) small (Gaussian) fluctuations of the order parameter and (ii) non-Gaussian fluctuations, i.e. the so-called phase slips. Both these types of fluctuations are schematically illustrated in Fig. The effect of Gaussian superconducting fluctuations can be treated in a straightforward manner by expanding the exact gauge invariant expression for the effective action of a superconductor Here is dimensionless conductance, R q = 2π/e 2 25.8 KΩ is the quantum resistance unit, R ξ is the normal state resistance of the wire segment of length equal to the superconducting coherence length ξ and Gi 1D is the so-called Ginzburg number in one dimension Note that in Eq. ( It is also important to emphasize that even if the absolute value |∆| does not fluctuate, the superconducting phase φ can still do so. In the limit g ξ 1 phase fluctuations in superconducting wires can be essentially decoupled from those of |∆|. Such phase fluctuations are controlled by the dimensionless admittance where Z w = L kin /C is the wire impedance, L kin = 1/(πσ N ∆s) and C are respectively the kinetic wire inductance (times length) and the geometric wire capacitance (per length), σ N = 2e 2 ν F D is the normal state Drude conductance of the wire, ν F is density of states at the Fermi level and s is the wire cross section. Such phase fluctuations are intimately related to sound-like plasma modes Let us now turn to non-Gaussian fluctuations of the order parameter produced by phase slips. A non-trivial fluctuation of that kind corresponds to temporal suppression of |∆(x)| down to zero in some point x = x 0 inside the wire, as shown in Fig. Phase slips may have a strong impact on the behavior of sufficiently thin superconducting wires. For instance, as it was first pointed out by Little According to the Josephson relation each phase jump by δφ = ±2π implies positive or negative voltage pulse δV = φ/2e. In the absence of any bias current the net average numbers of "positive" (n = +1) and "negative" (n = -1) phase slips are equal, thus the net voltage drop across the wire remains zero. Applying the current I ∝ |∆| 2 ∇φ one creates nonzero phase gradient along the wire making "positive" phase slips to prevail over "negative" ones. Hence, the net voltage drop V due to TAPS differs from zero, i.e. thermal fluctuations cause non-zero resistance R = V /I of superconducting wires even below T C . A quantitative theory of this TAPS phenomenon was initially worked out by Langer and Ambegaokar This theory predicts that the TAPS creation rate and, hence, resistance of a superconducting wire R below T C are determined by the activation exponent where δF is the free energy difference or, in other words, an effective potential barrier which the system should overcome in order to create a phase slip. The height of this potential barrier is determined by the superconducting condensation energy for a part of the wire where superconductivity is destroyed by thermal fluctuations. At temperatures close to T C Eq. ( Recent progress in nanolithographic technique allowed to fabricate samples with much smaller diameters down to -and even below -10 nm. In such systems one can consider a possibility for phase slips to occur not only due to thermal, but also due to quantum fluctuations of the superconducting order parameter. The physical picture describing such quantum phase slips (QPS) is qualitatively similar to that of TAPS (see Fig. except the order parameter |∆(x)| gets virtually suppressed due the process of quantum tunnelling rather than thermal activation. As a result, the superconducting phase again suffers jumps by δφ = ±2π. Following the standard quantum mechanical arguments one can expect that the probability of such tunnelling process should be controlled by the exponent ∼ exp(-δF/ω 0 ), i.e. one should just substitute temperature T by some attempt frequency ω 0 in the activation exponent This effect was predicted and investigated theoretically According to the present theory, quantum phase slip effects are controlled by the QPS amplitude per unit wire length where, as before, ∆ is the superconducting order parameter, a ∼ 1 and b ∼ 1 are numerical prefactors. It follows immediately from Eq. ( Note that although the dimensionless admittance g (3) does not enter directly into the QPS amplitude Thus, we conclude that the same dimensionless parameters (2) and (3) which account for small fluctuations of the order parameter also essentially control the physics of quantum phase slips. These two parameters will play a central role in our further considerations. The main purpose of this work is to review some recent developments in the field. In doing so, we will merely emphasize fundamental aspects of the phenomena under consideration focusing our attention on recent advances in theory of quantum fluctuations in superconducting nanowires and nanorings. Wherever necessary, we will also briefly indicate relevant experiments and possible applications of the effects in question. The structure of our review paper is as follows. In Sec. II we will analyze the effect of small (Gaussian) quantum fluctuations of the phase of the order parameter on the electron density of states in ultrathin superconducting wires. The same type of fluctuations causing supercurrent noise in superconducting nanorings will be addressed in Sec. III. Section IV will be devoted to an important issue of phase-charge duality in superconducting nanowires and nanorings in the presence of quantum phase slips. The effect of quantum phase slips on both the supercurrent and its fluctuations in superconducting nanorings will be investigated in Sec. V. Voltage fluctuations in superconducting nanowires, such as, e.g., shot noise associated with quantum phase slips will be described in Sec. VI. In Sec. VII we will outline a theory of full counting statistics for quantum phase slips. Topology controlled quantum phase transitions and superconducting fluctuation effects will be analyzed in Sec. VIII. In Sec. IX we will address several interesting phenomena associated with quantum phase slips in capacitively coupled superconducting nanowires. The paper is concluded by a short summary in Sec. X. Let us consider a long superconducting wire with sufficiently small diameter ∼ √ s < ξ is attached to two big superconducting reservoirs. This structure is displayed in Fig. Superconducting properties of the wire are described by the order parameter field ∆(x, t) = |∆(x, t)| exp(iφ(x, t)) which depends both on the coordinate along the wire x and on time t. The wire remains in thermodynamic equilibrium at low enough temperature T |∆| and its parameters are chosen such that one can safely ignore fluctuations of the absolute value of the order parameter which is set to be independent of both x and t, i.e. |∆(x, t)| = ∆. As we already described above, this situation can be achieved provided the dimensionless conductance g ξ remains very large, g ξ 1. On the other hand, we will allow for fluctuations of the phase variable φ(x, t) along the wire and keep the dimensionless impedance g not very large. Our main goal in this section is to demonstrate that such fluctuations can affect and significantly alter the local electron density of states (DOS) of superconducting nanowires. The physical origin of this effect is directly related to the presence of Mooij-Schön plasma modes propagating along the wire and forming an effective environment for electrons inside the system. As it will be demonstrated below, interaction between electrons and such plasma modes can lead to substantial modifications and smearing of local electron DOS inside superconducting nanowires A. Green functions in the presence of phase fluctuations In order to proceed, we will note that typically the motion of electrons in metallic nanowires is diffusive implying that the elastic electron mean free path in such wires is much smaller than the superconducting coherence length ξ. This electron motion can be described quasiclassically with the aid of the standard approach based on the Keldysh version of the Usadel equations for the quasiclassical electron Green-Keldysh matrix function Ǧ = ĜR ĜK 0 ĜA which also obeys the normalization condition Ǧ2 = 1. Both retarded and advanced 2×2 Green functions , whereas the Keldysh matrix has the form ĜK = ĜR ĥĥ ĜA , where ĥ is the matrix distribution function. In Eq. ( where ν F stands for DOS in a normal metal at the Fermi level and It will be convenient for us to perform the rotation in the Keldysh space expressing initial field variables, e.g., the phase of the order parameter φ F,B on the forward and backward branches of the Keldysh time contour in terms of their classical and quantum components We also define the matrices Employing the gauge transformation we expel the phase of the order parameter from ∆(x, t) and get where Ǧ obeys Eq. ( where Then we obtain where Λ(t -t ) is the inverse Fourier transform of Λ . In order to evaluate any physical observable one needs to average the corresponding variable over all possible phase configurations. This can be done by means of the path integral technique employing an effective action S eff which controls phase fluctuations in our system at sufficiently low energies. This action was microscopically derived and analyzed elsewhere It is well known that global U (1) symmetry is broken in a superconductor whereas local gauge symmetry remains preserved. Within this picture the phase of the order parameter plays the role of a Goldstone boson implying that the action should be constructed from the gauge invariant quantities A and Φ rather than from the phase derivatives only. The simplest appropriate form of the action then reads where S em [V, A x ] is action for the electromagnetic field and ζ 1,2 are some constants. In the case of a quasi-one-dimensional wire we have where C is the capacitance per unit wire length and L is the geometric inductance times unit length. The constants ζ 1,2 can be identified evaluating the response to static fields V and A x with the result Integrating out the electromagnetic potentials we arrive at the effective action for the phase variable In the case of interesting for us here diffusive metallic wires with diameter of order super- Following the same route one can link fluctuations of the variables Φ and φ to each other. From the equations of motion we get and, hence, the effects related to weak (∝ Φ) penetration of the fluctuating electric field inside the wire can be safely neglected For the sake of completeness let us also comment on the differences between a superconducting metal considered here and a neutral superfluid. In the latter situation there exists no interaction with the electromagnetic field which can be formally achieved by taking the limit L → 0 and C → ∞, i.e. the opposite condition C 2e 2 ν F s is realized. Accordingly, the gauge transformation trick would not work anymore in this case. This fact constitutes a clear manifestation of fundamental difference between the situations of global and local gauge symmetry breaking. In order to evaluate the electron DOS we need to average the Green function ( where S K eff [φ] is the effective Keldysh action which accounts for phase fluctuations in a superconducting wire. As we derived above at low enough energies it can be written in the form where is the equilibrium Keldysh matrix propagator describing plasma modes and Making use of the structure of Λ in the Nambu space and performing Gaussian integration, we get where a, b = {0, 1}, τ 0 ≡ 1, and Note that Eq. ( Employing this theorem and taking traces both in Keldysh and in Nambu spaces, from Eq. ( where ν BCS ( ) is the BCS density of states in a bulk superconductor. Since for E +2T the combination 1+F F E-decays as ∝ exp((E -)/T ), the electron DOS at subgap energies is suppressed by the factor ∼ exp((E -∆)/T ) and at T → 0 the superconducting gap ∆ is not affected by Mooij-Schön plasmons at all. Evaluating B K in Eq. ( where an exponential high frequency cutoff at ω c ∼ ∆ is implied. This cutoff procedure is consistent with the fact that the effective action ( Equation (which follows directly from the condition B K (t = 0) = 1) implies that phase fluctuations can only redistribute the electron states among different energies without affecting the energy integrated DOS. In the low temperature limit T → 0 Eq. ( It is also instructive to evaluate the Fourier transform of Eq. ( where ω remains well below the superconducting gap ∆ and Γ(x) is Euler Gamma function. At low frequencies ω T Eq. ( whereas for the frequency interval T ω ∆ we find Making use of the above expressions, at energies in the vicinity of the superconducting gap ∆ we arrive at the following result for the electron DOS The energy dependent DOS ν(E) for superconducting nanowires in the presence of phase fluctuations is also displayed in Fig. This result demonstrates that, while at E < ∆ the electron DOS at T = 0 vanishes at all values of g, the behavior of ν(E) To summarize, we demonstrated that local properties of superconducting nanowires, such as the electron density of states, can be sensitive to phase fluctuations in such nanowires. At this stage we intentionally restricted our analysis to the effect of small phase fluctuations associated with low energy sound-like plasma modes propagating along the wire and forming an effective quantum dissipative environment for electrons inside the wire. The coupling strength between electrons inside the wire and such effective plasmon environment is controlled by the dimensionless parameter g. For relatively thick wires with g 1 or, equivalently, provided the wire impedance Z w remains much smaller than the quantum resistance unit R q , phase fluctuations weakly affect the electron DOS except in the immediate vicinity of the superconducting gap ∆. For larger values Z w ∼ R q the effect of phase fluctuations becomes strong and has to be treated non-perturbatively in 1/g at all energies. At any nonzero T the electron DOS depends on temperature and substantially deviates from that derived from the standard BCS theory. In particular, at T > 0 the BCS squareroot singularity in DOS at E = ∆ gets totally smeared and ν(E) differs from zero also at subgap energies, cf. Eq. ( describing smearing of the BCS singularity in DOS in the immediate vicinity of the superconducting gap. At T = 0 and subgap energies the electron DOS vanishes as in the BCS theory, while the BCS singularity in DOS at E → ∆ becomes weaker for any finite g > 2 and eventually disappears for g ≤ 2. The local electron DOS in superconducting nanowires can be probed in a standard manner by performing a tunneling experiment, as it is also illustrated in Fig. This power law dependence of the differential conductance resembles one encountered in small normal tunnel junctions at low voltages dI/dV ∝ V 2/g N The experiments similar to that described above were performed with both thicker ( √ s > 40 nm) and ultrathin ( √ s < 35 nm) titanium nanowires The observed effect (ii) can be interpreted in terms of theoretical predictions Let us now consider a somewhat different configuration for which small (Gaussian) fluctuations of the superconducting phase variable φ(x, t) also yield interesting physical effects. We will consider a superconducting wire with cross section s closed in the form of a ring of radius R pierced by an external magnetic flux Φ x , see Fig. It will be convenient for us to define the grand partition function of our system Z which can be expressed via the following path integral over the superconducting phase variable φ(x, τ ): where we introduced an effective coupling constant λ ≡ g/8 The path integral Here L = 2πR is the ring perimeter, φ x = Φ/Φ 0 and Φ 0 = πc/e is the superconducting flux quantum. Combining Eqs. ( where are defined as are the flux-dependent energy levels of the ring, θ k (u, q) is the third Jacobi Theta function and In the limit T → 0, the supercurrent I(φ x ) flowing around the ring in its ground state is obtained by means of a well known simple formula where is the ground-state energy of the ring, which is periodic in Φ x with the period Φ 0 . Hence, the supercurrent I is also periodic in Φ x , being defined as The supercurrent flowing across the ring can also be expressed in terms of the phase variable by means of the relation Combining Eq. ( Fluctuations of the phase should in general cause fluctuations of the supercurrent flowing inside the ring. It turns out that under the conditions formulated above one can derive formally exact expressions for all current correlators in our problem. Employing Eq. ( At T → 0 this expression obviously yields for all integer k ≥ 0. Equation ( Supercurrent fluctuations, however, may and do occur at non-zero temperatures. Below let us focus our attention on the supercurrent noise which power spectrum reads where and Î(t) = e it Ĥ Îe -it Ĥ is the current operator in the Heisenberg representation and Ĥ is the system Hamiltonian. In order to evaluate the above current-current correlation function it will be convenient for us to also define the irreducible Matsubara correlator where ÎM = e τ Ĥ Îe -τ Ĥ is the current operator in the Matsubara representation and ω k = 2πkT is the Matsubara frequency. It is also important that from the expression for the imaginary time correlator The quantities S(t) and Π(τ ) defined respectively in Eqs. ( and where defines the zero-frequency contribution and I = Z -1 n n| Î|n e -βEn is the expectation value for the current. With the aid of the above general expressions one easily arrives at the relation Equation ( It follows from Eqs. ( At non-zero temperatures the supercurrent noise power does not vanish being peaked at zero frequency, where from Eq. (51) one finds In the low and high temperature limits this expression reduces to where I(φ x ) is defined in Eq. ( and thus to the difference between Drude and Meissner weights of the system. We observe that at sufficiently low temperatures the magnitude of PC fluctuations can be tuned by the external flux φ x , hence, indicating coherent nature of such fluctuations. At higher temperatures quantum coherence is destroyed and P (T ) ∝ T becomes practically independent of φ x . The above picture remains applicable as long as the ring is sufficiently thick and one can essentially ignore quantum fluctuations of the absolute value of the order parameter field. However, upon decreasing the wire diameter ∼ √ s, typically down to values in the 10 nm range, one eventually reaches the regime in which quantum fluctuations of |∆(x)| gain importance and may strongly modify the low temperature behavior of the system. This regime of strong quantum fluctuations in superconducting nanowires and nanorings will be considered in the forthcoming sections. Loosely speaking, each QPS event involves suppression of the order parameter inside the phase slip core and a winding of the superconducting phase around this core. This process can also be viewed as quantum tunneling of the order parameter field through an effective potential barrier. As the phase φ changes in time, according to the Josephson relation V = φ/2e each QPS event causes a voltage pulse inside the wire, thus essentially influencing the system electrodynamics. An important property of superconducting nanowires is the so-called phase-charge duality. This property will be essentially explored below in this section. Note, that earlier duality between the phase and the charge variables was extensively discussed for ultrasmall Josephson junctions Within this picture, the charge q and the flux Φ are canonically conjugate variables exactly analogous to the momentum and coordinate variables in quantum mechanics. For more details on this issue we refer the reader to the book Later on it was pointed out We first consider a more intuitive operator approach. As before, we are going to deal with a uniform superconducting wire of length L and cross section s. The effective Hamiltonian of the wire can be expressed in a simple form where Q(x) and φ(x) are canonically conjugate local charge and phase operators obeying the commutation relations Employing the Hamiltonian (64) one should arrive at the results exactly equivalent to those derived, e.g., within the effective action approach based on Eq. ( At this stage we will assume that our superconducting wire is isolated from any external circuit, in which case the current at its end points x = 0 and x = L vanishes and, hence, we can define the boundary conditions for the phase in the form Employing the Fourier series expansion, we get where Let us now introduce the following (dual) operators which can also be expressed as Qn These new canonically conjugate operators obey the commutation relations and obvious boundary conditions Substituting the relations into Eq. ( where is the Hamiltonian for a transmission line formed by a superconducting wire. The above analysis does not yet include the effect of QPS. In order to account for the QPS contribution to the wire Hamiltonian let us first define the phase field configurations as and bear in mind that the phase of the superconducting order parameter is a compact variable implying that, e.g, the field configurations φ(x) and φ(x) + 2π correspond to the same quantum state of our system. Furthermore, in the absence of QPS, i.e. provided the absolute value of the order parameter |∆(x, t)| does not fluctuate, also the states φ and φ(x) = φ(x) + 2πθ(x -x 1 ) (where 0 < x 1 < L and θ(x) is the Heaviside step function equal to 0 for x ≤ 0 and to 1 for x > 0) are physically indistinguishable. For instance, the supercurrent operator Î proportional to the combination |∆| 2 exp(-i φ(x))∂ x exp(i φ(x)) remains the same in both cases. Let us now slightly modify the step function making it continuous by effectively smearing it at the scale of the superconducting coherence length ξ. We substitute θ(x) → θ ξ (x), where field configuration φξ (x) = φ(x) + 2πθ ξ (x -x 1 ), on one hand, remains very close to φ(x) and, on the other hand, is now physically distinguishable from the latter. The QPS process can be interpreted as quantum tunneling between these two different (though very close to each other) phase configurations. Making use of the fact that any shift by a constant phase does not change the state of our system, without loss of generality we may set φ0 |ψ = 0 for any system state ψ . This condition applies for quantum dynamics controlled by the Hamiltonian ( In the operator language this tunneling process can be denoted as where the operator Ûξ (x 1 ) can be established with the aid of the commutation relations. It reads As a result, the part of the Hamiltonian which explicitly accounts for the QPS contribution takes the form . Setting now ξ → 0 and making use of the second Eq. ( The above analysis can be easily generalized in order to include the effect of an external circuit. Let us consider one example of an external circuit displayed in Fig. where the term defined by Eqs. ( Let us now take a quick look at Fig. the Hamiltonians ĤSW (defined by Eqs. ( The above duality transformations -on one hand -interchange magnetic and charging energies in these two Hamiltonians (cf. Eq. ( We conclude that tunneling of a Cooper pair with charge 2e between two superconductors is a dual process to a QPS event that can be viewed as tunneling of a quantum fluxon (i.e. the flux quantum Φ 0 ) across a superconducting wire, as it is illustrated in Fig. Indeed, we note that the Hamiltonian (79) contains a linear combination of creation (e i χ) and annihilation (e -i χ) operators for the flux quantum Φ 0 . Each QPS event corresponds to the net phase jump by 2π associated with voltage pulse δV = φ/2e and magnetic flux |δV (t)|dt = π/e ≡ Φ 0 passing through the wire in the direction normal to its axis. Also the physical meaning of the quantum field χ(x, t) is transparent: It is proportional to the total electric charge q(x, t) that has passed through the point x up to the time moment t, i.e. q(x, t) = χ(x, t)/Φ 0 . Accordingly, the local current I(x, t) and the local charge density ρ(x, t) are defined as thereby satisfying the continuity equation. The property of the phase-charge duality in superconducting nanowires was confirmed and illustrated in a number of experiments. For instance, tunneling of magnetic flux quanta through such nanowires was detected in experiments We now turn to a more formal path integral analysis. For pedagogical purposes and also for the reasons which will be clear below in the next section we will now consider a closed ring (with perimeter L = 2πR and cross section s) made of a thin superconducting wire. The configuration remains essentially the same as that already treated in Section III (e.g., we again assume that the magnetic flux Φ x pierces the ring) with the only important difference: Now we allow for quantum phase slips. We will perform the whole calculation for the ring geometry and in the very end of it we will explain how to apply our results to superconducting wires with open ends and/or attached to an external circuit. In order to proceed we will again make use of the expression for the grand partition function Z (43) that accounts for the ring geometry as well as for an external magnetic flux inside the ring. It is also important to bear in mind that Eq. ( Apart from trivial solutions of this equation (linear in τ and x) there exist nontrivial ones which correspond to virtual phase jumps by ±2π at various points of a superconducting ring where the magnitude of the order parameter gets locally (at spatial scales x 0 ∼ ξ) and temporarily (within the time interval τ 0 ∼ 1/∆) suppressed by quantum fluctuations. These quantum topological objects can be viewed as vortices in space-time and just represent quantum phase slips. For sufficiently long wires or large rings and outside the QPS core |x| > x 0 , |τ | > τ 0 (which position in space-time can be chosen, e.g., at x = 0 and τ = 0) the saddle point solution φ(x, τ ) corresponding to a single QPS event should satisfy the identity implying that after a wind around the QPS center the phase should change by 2π. This saddle point solution has the form Configurations φ qps (x, τ ) consisting of an arbitrary number of quantum phase slips can be treated analogously. Our goal here is to effectively sum up the contributions to the partition function Z (43) from all possible QPS configurations. This goal can be conveniently accomplished with the aid of the approach involving the so-called duality transformation. Let us express the general solution of Eq. ( where a m and b n are some constants fixed by the boundary conditions. We also introduce the vorticity field (x, τ ) by means of the relations This field is single-valued obeying the equation where x j and τ j denote respectively the space and time coordinates of the j-th phase slip, while ν j = ±1 is its topological charge corresponding to the phase jump by ±2π. It follows from the boundary conditions ( Let us define the function One can verify that the function satisfies Eq. ( and, hence, We also note that for each of the above saddle point configurations the expression for the current (50) takes the form Let us now carry out the summation over all possible saddle point configurations. Expanding the partition function in powers of γ QP S we get Here J(τ ) is the source variable which we introduced introduced for our future purposes. Rewriting the sum over m, n with the aid of the relations employing the Kronecker delta-function representation δ m,n = 2π 0 dze iz(m-n) /(2π) and formally inserting the path integral over the -field, we find where the functional delta-function follows from Eq. . Introducing now the field which obeys the boundary conditions we obtain with the effective action These expressions define the generating functional and the effective action for superconducting nanorings in the dual representation. In other words, our original problem of a nanoring with quantum phase slips was exactly mapped onto a sine-Gordon model on torus. Equations (105), (106) keep track of interactions between different QPS and serve as a convenient starting point for the analysis of the ground state properties of superconducting nanorings that will be carried out in the next section. In the absence of the source J(τ ) → 0 the effective action (106) turns out to be exactly dual to that for spatially extended quasi-one-dimensional Josephson barriers described by the Hamiltonian (82), i.e. we again arrive at the duality transformations ( Finally, we point out that all the above arguments developed for superconducting nanorings equally apply for nanowires with open ends. In that case one should set φ x = 0, J = 0 and abandon the second boundary condition In Sec. III we already considered some quantum coherent effects associated with fluctuations of the phase variable in superconducting rings threaded by the magnetic flux. That analysis was performed for sufficiently thick rings, thus enabling one to fully neglect QPS effects. Our main goal here is to include quantum phase slips into our consideration. According to the existing microscopic theory [1, 2, 5, 12, 14] QPS represent quantum coherent objects [51] which may significantly affect not only transport but also equilibrium ground state properties of superconducting nanowires and nanorings. Coherent nature of quantum phase slips was also demonstrated in a number of experiments A fundamental manifestation of a quantum coherent ground state is the possibility for a non-vanishing supercurrent to flow around a superconducting ring pierced by an external magnetic flux. Provided such a ring is sufficiently thin, as displayed in the left side of Fig. All the same phenomena can also occur in rings consisting of thicker and thinner parts, as it is shown in the right part of Fig. Bearing in mind that QPS effects are basically the same in uniform superconducting nanorings and QPS junctions (Fig. A. Supercurrent in quantum phase slip rings In order to proceed we will make use of the effective action (106) derived in the previous section. At low enough temperatures T v/L and provided the ring perimeter L = 2πR remains sufficiently small one can ignore the spatial dependence of the field χ and, hence, neglect the term v 2 (∂ x χ) 2 in the effective action (106). Then our problem reduces to a zero-dimensional one with an effective Hamiltonian describing a fictitious quantum particle on a ring in the presence of the cosine external potential. Here we identify [52] and The average value of the supercurrent I flowing across the ring can be obtained by means of the standard formula In the zero dimensional limit described by the effective Hamiltonian (107) and at low temperatures T → 0 Eq. (110) reduces to where E 0 (φ x ) is the flux-dependent ground state energy. For smaller rings with U 0 E R one has i.e. the ground state energy is almost parabolic except in the vicinity of the crossing points φ x = 1/2 + n where the gap to the first excited energy band δE 01 = U 0 opens up due to level repulsion. Accordingly, not too close to the points φ x = 1/2 + n the supercurrent is not affected by QPS and is again defined by Eq. ( For larger U 0 the bandwidth shrinks while the gaps become bigger. In the limit we obtain [2, 5] This result demonstrates that quantum phase slips yield exponential suppression of the supercurrent even at T = 0 provided the ring radius R exceeds the critical value R c (113). Let us now generalize our analysis by including the spatial derivative term v 2 (∂ x χ) 2 in Eq. (106) or, in other words, by taking into account logarithmic interactions between quantum phase slips described by the sine-Gordon effective action. This task can be accomplished by means of the standard Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless (BKT) renormalization group (RG) approach where ζ = γ QP S Λ 2 is the dimensionless coupling parameter, Λ is the renormalization scale and K(λ) is some non-universal function (which depends on the renormalization scheme) equal to one at the quantum BKT phase transition point λ = 2 which separates and superconducting (ordered) phase λ > 2 with bound QPS-antiQPS pairs and a disordered phase λ < 2 with unbound QPS Starting renormalization at the shortest scale This result allows to conclude that inter-QPS interaction effects remain weak and can be disregarded only for very small values of This inequality, in turn, may severely restrict both the wire length and cross section values at which the system can still be treated as effectively zero-dimensional and analyzed by means of a simplified Hamiltonian (107). Substituting the renormalized QPS amplitude (116) instead of the bare one into Eq. (109), we again reproduce the same expressions for the supercurrent, now with γ QP S → γQPS . As before, for smaller rings with R Rc and at T → 0 the current is defined by Eq. ( where λ is supposed not to exceed 2. In the opposite limit of bigger rings R Rc we again reproduce Eq. ( We observe that the critical radius Rc (118) increases with increasing λ and eventually diverges at the quantum BKT phase transition point λ = 2. In the ordered phase λ > 2 QPS are bound in "neutral" pairs and, hence, become practically irrelevant. In this case the supercurrent is determined by Eq. ( Now let us analyze fluctuations of supercurrent in QPS rings. Taking the derivatives of the generating functional Z[J(τ )] over the source variable J(τ ) and setting this variable equal to zero afterwards, we obtain whereas the irreducible Matsubara current-current correlator (55) now reads One can also decompose the source variable as J(τ ) = J 0 + ∂ τ J 1 (τ ) and perform a shift under the functional integral Expanding both sides in powers of J 0 and J 1 (τ ) we again recover Eq. ( Let us restrict our attention to the low temperature limit T → 0. We are going to evaluate the imaginary time current-current correlator ( where averaging ... 0 is now performed with the non-interacting effective action The task at hand is to evaluate the correlation function which can be rewritten through the zero topological sector m = n = 0 as e i(χ(x,τ )-χ(0,0)) 0 = 1 Z 0 00 Dχe -S 0 +i(χ(x,τ )-χ(0,0)) 00 Dχe -S 0 mn e -2πgvβ(φx+m+τ /β) 2 where Performing gaussian integration in Eq. (128), we obtain where G(x, τ ) is the non-interacting Green function (with subtracted zero mode) obeying the equation with periodic boundary conditions. The solution of this equation reads The divergent term with m = 0 in this sum is regularized by means of the replacement G(0, 0) → G(x 0 , τ 0 ) which is appropriate since the above expressions do apply only at the space and time scales exceeding respectively x 0 ∼ ξ and τ 0 ∼ 1/∆. With this in mind we obtain the m = 0 term in the form In the zero temperature limit the above equations yield Integrating this expression over x, we get where again Γ(x) is the Gamma function. Performing now the Fourier transformation in Eq. ( and combining the result with Eq. (125) after a simple algebra we arrive at the following expression where denote the energy differences between the exited states and the ground state of our ring. Eq. ( What remains is to perform an analytic continuation of Eq. ( In accordance with general considerations The simplest process of this kind is associated with simultaneous creation of two plasmons with opposite momenta values propagating clockwise and counterclockwise around the ring. Such a process is illustrated in Fig. in the experimentally relevant limit R < Rc in which case one can proceed perturbatively in the QPS rate γ QP S . In the opposite limit R > Rc supercurrent noise also has the form of sharp peaks although its dependence on the magnetic flux becomes much weaker As follows from Eq. (138), in the immediate vicinity of level degeneracy points φ x = ±1/2 supercurrent fluctuations become strong and our perturbative in γ QP S analysis fails even for R Rc . In this case it is necessary to account for level splitting and regularize the corresponding terms in Eq. ( At non-zero temperatures supercurrent noise is modified in two ways: (i) a zero frequency peak (61) appears which is not related to QPS and (ii) numerous extra QPS-related peaks at non-zero frequencies emerge, cf. Eq. Finally, we point out a certain physical similarity between supercurrent noise studied here and that in superconducting weak links analyzed elsewhere In the previous section we demonstrated that quantum phase slips may strongly affect equilibrium properties of superconducting nanorings and even cause supercurrent noise in the ground state of such systemss. Here we will continue studying QPS-generated noise in a different physical situation. To this end we will get back to a thin superconducting superconducting wire embedded in an external circuit as shown in Fig. Can such a superconducting wire generate voltage fluctuations? Furthermore, can this wire produce shot noise provided it is biased by an external current I = V x /R x ? Posing these questions we imply that temperature T , typical values of voltage, frequency and all other relevant energy parameters remain well below the superconducting gap ∆, i.e. the superconductor is either in or sufficiently close to its quantum ground state. At the first sight, positive answers to both these questions can be rejected on fundamental grounds because a superconducting state is characterized by zero resistance. Hence, the system can sustain a non-dissipative current below some critical value and neither non-zero average voltage nor voltage fluctuations can be expected. These simple considerations -although applicable to bulk superconductors -become obviously insufficient in the case of ultrathin superconducting wires because of the presence of quantum phase slips. As we already discussed in Sec. IV, each QPS event corresponds to the net phase jump by δφ = ±2π implying positive or negative voltage pulse δV = φ/2e and tunneling of one magnetic flux quantum Φ 0 ≡ π/e = |δV (t)|dt across the wire perpendicular to its axis. This process is illustrated in the upper part of Fig. While these general arguments suggest a positive answer to the first of the above questions they do not specifically address the issue of shot noise. Let us recall that two key pre-requisits of shot noise are (see, e.g., Ref. An effective Hamiltonian Ĥeff for the structure depicted in Fig. express the expectation value of the voltage operator across the the superconducting wire in the form where and implies averaging with the Keldysh effective action S 0 corresponding to the non-interacting Hamiltonian Ĥ0 = Ĥeff -ĤQPS , where H QP S is defined in Eq. ( we obtain Eqs. ( where a(X) and b(X) denote one of the fields φ(t) and χ(x, t). As both these fields are real, the advanced and retarded Green functions obey the condition G A ab (ω) = G R ba (-ω), and the Keldysh function G K can be expressed in the form Expanding Eqs. ( Let us first re-derive the results where P x,x (ω) = P x,x (ω) + Px,x (ω) and dte iωt e iG(x,x ;t,0) , (147) Bearing in mind that lim ω→0 ωG R φχ (x; ω) = 2πi, Eq. ( where we identify Γ QP S as Comparing the result (149) with that found in Ref. Making use of the above results, evaluating the Green functions (144) and keeping in mind the detailed balance condition we obtain where Here for the sake of simplicity we assumed that vτ 0 ∼ x 0 . It is satisfactory to observe that the result (152), (153) matches with that derived in Ref. A detailed analysis of the relation between the ImF -approach and the Keldysh technique employed here can be found in Ref. Let us now turn to the voltage-voltage correlator. Our perturbative analysis allows to recover three different contributions to the noise power spectrum, i.e. The first of these contributions S Ω defines equilibrium voltage noise for a transmission line and has nothing to do with QPS. This contribution reads The remaining two terms are due to QPS effects. The term S r Ω is also proportional to coth Ω 2T and contains the products of two retarded (advanced) Green functions: where The remaining term S a Ω contains the product of one retarded and one advanced Green functions and scales with the combinations Eqs. ( In the zero bias limit I → 0 the term S a Ω vanishes, and the equilibrium noise spectrum Ω is determined from FDT, see also where V is specified in Eqs. ( At higher temperatures T IΦ 0 (though still T ∆ 0 ) Eq. ( Another interesting limit is that of sufficiently high frequencies and/or long wires v/L Ω ∆ 0 . In this case we obtain Note that this contribution is independent of the wire length L. At low T and Ω/λ E C = e 2 /2C we have S Ω ∝ 1/Ω, i.e. in a certain regime the wire may generate 1/f voltage noise. Evaluating the QPS terms S r Ω and S a Ω we observe that the latter scales linearly with the wire length L whereas the former does not. Hence, the term S r Ω can be disregarded in the long wire limit. For the remaining QPS term S a Ω we get At T → 0 from Eq. ( This result can be interpreted as follows. At T = 0 each QPS event excites (at least) two plasmons with total energy E = IΦ 0 and zero total momentum propagating in the opposite directions along the wire. One plasmon (which energy equals to E/2) gets dissipated at the grounded end of the wire while another one (also with energy E/2) reaches its opposite end causing voltage fluctuations (emits a photon) with frequency Ω measured by a detector. Clearly, at T = 0 this process is only possible at Ω < E/2 in the agreement with Eq. ( The result (162) is also illustrated in Fig. To conclude our analysis of QPS-induced shot noise in superconducting nanowires, we point out that the perturbative in γ QP S approach employed here is fully justified in the "superconducting" regime, i.e. for not too thin wires with λ > 2. In wires with λ < 2 (characterized by unbound QPS-anti-QPS pairs) the perturbation theory becomes obsolete at low enough energies and large distances since γ QP S gets effectively renormalized to higher values, see, e.g., BKT-like RG equations (115). Even in this case, however, our results may still remain applicable at relatively high temperature, frequency and/or current values. In the low energy limit long wires with λ < 2 show an insulating behavior, as follows from the exact solution of the corresponding sine-Gordon model Further interesting features of shot noise of the voltage in superconducting nanowires under different measuring schemes were analyzed in Refs. In order to fully describe voltage fluctuations in the system under consideration it is in general necessary to evaluate all cumulants of the voltage operator. Various aspects of voltage fluctuation statistics were already discussed in the case of quasi-one-dimensional wires As in Sec. VIA, we can again make use of the Josephson relation between the voltage and the phase variables. Then, analogously to the averages in Eqs. ( Here we stress that Eq. ( where T and T are, respectively, the forward and backward time ordering operators. In order to proceed with our calculation of higher voltage correlators it will be convenient for us to define the cumulant generating function where is a voltage drop across the wire and ... denotes the quantum average fulfilled with the total Hamiltonian of our system. Evaluating the N -th variational derivative of W[J] with respect to J(t) one recovers the N -th cumulant of the voltage operator. The function Z[J] can be conveniently derived with the aid of Keldysh path integral technique already described in Sec. VI. Defining the voltage values V (167) on both forward and backward time branches of the Keldysh contour, respectively V F and V B , and introducing, as before, "classical" and "quantum" can verify that the voltage cumulants of (164) are exactly equivalent to the cumulants of the "classical" variable v + (t) in our path integral formalism. With this in mind the function Z[J] can be expressed as where S QP S is defined in Eq. ( Let us eliminate the second exponent in Eq. ( Here we denoted χ 0 ≡ χ + 0 and introduced both Keldysh and advanced Green functions and The latter function coincides with the transposed version of the retarded Green function As a result of the above manipulations, we get where Keldysh Green function G K vv (t, t ) is defined analogously to that in Eq. ( while all averages of the type χ-χ-0 vanish identically due to causality. Let us now evaluate the cumulant generating function by expanding Z[J] up to the second order in γ QP S . We obtain instructive to define the time average where the time interval τ exceeds any relevant time scale for our problem. It is easy to demonstrate that the cumulants of v are identical to the corresponding cumulants of the voltage operator evaluated in the zero frequency limit. For instance, for the first two cumulants one readily finds where S ω (I) is the frequency dependent voltage noise power for our wire already evaluated in Sec. VI. In order to derive the cumulant generating function for v it suffices to make use of Eq. ( Employing the equation of motion we obtain and, hence, we have λ -(x, t) ≈ -Φ 0 j/τ . As a result we get Performing the Fourier transformation and introducing we find This expression fully describes the statistics of QPS-induced voltage fluctuations in superconducting nanowires in the zero frequency limit. It follows immediately from Eq. ( (149) and (159). Higher voltage cumulants in the zero frequency limit can be found in the same manner. Let us define them as After a simple algebra all zero frequency cumulants can be expressed through the currentvoltage characteristics for our system. In particular, for odd cumulants one has whereas for even ones we obtain The above results demonstrate that in the long time limit the effect of interacting QPS reduces to that of independent sharp voltage pulses which occur with the effective rate Γ(IΦ 0 ) and are described by Poisson statistics. Note that this conclusion holds only for not too thin wires with λ > 2 described by quantum phase slips bound in close pairs. C. Noise power in the short wire limit At non-zero frequencies the system behavior becomes more involved and the statistics of voltage fluctuations deviates from Poissonian, as it will be demonstrated below. The general expression for the noise power is defined as Making use of Eq. ( With the aid of FDT this result can be transformed to that already derived in Sec. VI where we merely addressed the long wire limit. Here, in contrast, we will specify the expression for the noise power for shorter wires. This limit also includes the case of Josephson junctions and other types of short superconducting weak links. Let us note that each term in the square brackets in Eq. ( where τ R is the effective RC-time of the system. Accordingly we obtain Employing these approximations, from Eq. ( where we introduced the function For an illustration let us consider a short superconducting nanowire embedded in a linear dissipative external circuit modeled by an Ohmic shunt resistor R S . This situation is equally relevant for resistively shunted Josephson junctions in the limit of large Josephson coupling energies E J . In this limit one has where μ = R Q /R S is the shunt dimensionless conductance and R Q = π/(2e 2 ) is the "superconducting" resistance quantum. The QPS rate then equals to where Γ(y) is the Euler gamma-function and τ -1 R plays the role of effective high-energy cutoff frequency. Evaluating the corresponding integrals in the short wire limit ω, T, IΦ 0 τ -1 R and also for 1 < μ < 3/2, we obtain These expressions can be simplified in certain limits. For example, by setting 0 < μ -1 1 we get where C is Euler-Mascheroni constant. Also the expressions for both QPS rates get significantly simplified in the limit |ω| T . One has Accordingly, in the zero-temperature limit one finds The above results are consistent with ones previously derived for ultrasmall Josephson junctions We now turn to higher voltage cumulants at non-zero frequencies. We adopt the following definition for the N -th voltage cumulant: In the zero frequency limit this definition yields S 00...0 Under the condition T, ω τ -1 R or, in other words, provided the detector immediately "feels" QPS-generated voltage fluctuations, one can set τ R → 0 and explicitly evaluate all voltage cumulants at non-zero frequencies. In this case the cumulant generating function takes the form One can observe that the second term in Eq. ( and where the sum is taken over all permutations of frequencies. The above results allows us to extend the relation between the voltage cumulants and the current-voltage characteristics of our device to non-zero frequencies. For the odd cumulants we obtain while the expression for the even cumulants reads These expressions can be evaluated numerically with the aid of Eqs. ( and Γ R (ω) derived above. The corresponding results for the third voltage cumulant as a function of two frequencies are displayed in Fig. As could be seen in the plots, both these functions become considerably smoother at higher T . To conclude our analysis of voltage fluctuation statistics in superconducting nanowires we emphasize again that in the zero-frequency limit the this statistics reduces to Poissonian similarly to the situation encountered in a number of other tunneling-like problems. In this limit all (symmeterized) cumulants of the voltage operator can be expressed in a simple manner through the current-voltage characteristics of the system V (I), cf. Eqs. (193), At non-zero frequencies, quantum voltage fluctuations in superconducting nanowires are not anymore described by Poisson statistics. This is because inter-QPS interaction produced by an effective environment (due to the wire itself and/or an external dissipative circuit) starts playing a more important role at shorter time scales making the whole problem much more involved. Remarkably, also in this case it is possible to establish a relation between the voltage cumulants and the current-voltage characteristics of our device V (I), though in a ReS ω1ω2 (I) S 00 (I) much more complicated form as compared to that in the zero frequency limit, cf. Eqs. (214), (215). The latter observation could be important for possible experimental verification of the above results. It is by now well established that at T → 0 a long superconducting nanowire suffers a quantum phase transition (QPT) controlled by the wire cross section s or, equivalently by the parameter λ ≡ g/8 which we already introduced above and which sets the magnitude of (logarithmic in space-time) interaction between different quantum phase slips Hence, as long as λ > 2 (or, equivalently, g > 16) the ground state of the system can be considered superconducting. In contrast, for λ < 2 inter-QPS interaction is weak, quantum phase slips are unbound, and the wire acquires non-zero resistance which tends to increase with decreasing T . The latter feature allows one to call the wire behavior insulating provided λ < 2. Thus, at g = 16 and T → 0 one expects a superconductor-to-insulator quantum phase transition (SIT) to occur in the systems under consideration. Let us emphasize that possible insulating behavior of superconducting nanowires is essentially linked to a certain type of experiment performed with such nanowires and may not always be realized. For example, an ultrathin superconducting nanowire forming a closed ring does not loose the ability to carry supercurrent even for λ < 2, as we have already demonstrated in Sec. V. In this case a characteristic length scale (118) emerges beyond which phase coherence (and, hence, supercurrent) gets exponentially suppressed by QPS. In what follows emerges beyond which phase coherence (and, hence, supercurrent) gets exponentially suppressed by QPS. The correlation length (217) diverges at λ → 2, thus signaling the transition to the ordered phase λ > 2 with bound QPS-anti-QPS pairs and more robust superconductivity. On the other hand, a closed ring geometry seriously restricts the space for phase fluctuations, thereby enhancing the tendency towards superconductivity, see, e.g., Ref. The latter phase is characterized by a non-trivial interplay between supercurrent and quantum fluctuations resulting in superconducting behavior of the wire at shorter length scales combined with its vanishing superconducting response in the long scale limit. Low energy processes in the system under consideration can be described by the effective action where, as before, is the low energy effective action for a superconducting nanowire in the φ-representation accounts for the Josephson energy of the contacts, where we set φ 1 = φ(0, τ ), φ 2 = φ(L, τ ). For simplicity, in Eq. ( As the wire action (220) is Gaussian it is possible to exactly integrate out the phase variable φ(x) at all values x except for x = 0, L. Then we arrive at the reduced effective action S R which depends on the two phase variables φ 1 and φ 2 . The grand partition function where Here the trace also includes integration over the imaginary time. The Green function G 0 = φ(x, τ )φ(0, 0) S 0 has the form In order to diagonalize the quadratic part of the action it is convenient to express S R in terms of the variables φ ± = (φ 1 ± φ 2 )/2. Then we obtain with the propagators Let us stress that the phase variables φ + and φ -account for different physics in our problem. The phase φ -= (φ(L) -φ(0))/2 determines the supercurrent flowing in-between two contacts inside the wire segment of length L. Hence, configurations with non-zero φ - have non-zero energies due the kinetic inductance of the wire and the mode corresponding to φ -has a mass equal to gv/2πL. The variable φ + , in contrast, describes simultaneous shifts of both phases φ(0) and φ(L) by the same value without producing any phase gradient along the wire. Thus, in the absence of interactions the mode corresponding to φ + is massless. At the same time, below we will observe that fluctuations of φ + yield renormalization of the Josephson coupling energies E J of the contacts and, as such, should also be taken into account. Let us make use of the variational perturbation theory as described, e.g., in Ref. The main idea here is to improve the standard perturbation expansion by adding an extra term δS which depends on the variational parameters to the quadratic part of the action S R . In order to accomplish this goal the partition function ( with the trial action S tr = S R + δS. The last exponent can then be conveniently expanded in powers of S J -δS. Being expanded to all orders, the partition function (225) obviously remains independent of the choice of δS and the variational parameters. However, such a dependence emerges as long as only a finite number of terms of this expansion is kept. Then the most accurate approximation is achieved by minimizing the result of the perturbative expansion with respect to the variational parameters. In what follows we choose the trial action in the form which corresponds to effectively performing a self-consistent harmonic approximation (SCHA). Here the parameters m ± represent the interaction-generated effective masses for the modes associated with the phase variables φ ± . The parameter ψ accounts for the average value of the combination (φ(L) -φ(0))/2. We note that a somewhat similar variational calculation with a massive term was proposed in the context of Brownian motion of a quantum particle in a periodic potential with linear Ohmic dissipation Expanding the last exponent in Eq. ( where Neglecting all higher order terms in the expansion (227) and evaluating the average in Eq. (228) with respect to S tr (226), we obtain where with ω n = πT (2n + 1) being the Matsubara frequency. Evaluating variational derivatives of F with respect to m ± and ψ, one readily finds Imposing the extremum conditions δF/δm ± = δF/δψ = 0 and making use of Eqs. ( and Note that the mass parameters m ± in Eq. As we already pointed out, the wire effective action in the form (220) applied in the low energy limit, i.e. for ω, vq ∆. Hence, a proper ultraviolet cutoff should be imposed which respects both causality and the fluctuation-dissipation relation. This goal is achieved by modifying the spectral density making it decay at ω > ∆. The retarded Green function G R ± (ω) can be obtained from its Matsubara counterpart by means of the standard analytic continuation procedure Then the Matsubara frequency summation in G ± (0) can be performed with the aid of the contour integration in the complex plane. Employing our regularization procedure we obtain where the spectral density functions J ± (ω) read and we define μ = 2πm/g. In the limit μL/v 1 these expressions reduce to Let us now evaluate the supercurrent I flowing in the wire segment of length L in-between two Josephson junctions. This current can be defined as Thus, within the framework of our approach the effect of phase fluctuations is accounted for by effective renormalization of the critical current by the factor e -G + (0)+G -(0) /2 . In the zero temperature limit T → 0 the solution of Eq. ( while the renormalized equation of motion (235) can be rewritten as We observe that for g < 2 one has ψ = 0 and, hence, the supercurrent I inside the wire is completely suppressed by strong quantum fluctuations of the phase. on the other hand, at bigger values of g > 2 a non-vanishing supercurrent I can flow across the wire segment between the two Josephson junctions. We arrive at an important conclusion: A quantum phase transition occurs at g = 2 separating two different phases with non-superconducting (g < 2) and superconductinglike (g > 2) behavior. This dissipative QPT belongs to the same universality class as the so-called Schmid phase transition in resistively shunted Josephson junctions Let us now focus our attention on the superconducting-like phase g > 2 and evaluate the supercurrent I affected by quantum fluctuations of the phase φ inside the wire. For this purpose let us combine the solution of the equation with Eq. ( Here we are merely interested in the case of small-size tunnel junctions with few conducting channels serving as probes aiming to disturb the superconducting wire as little as possible. Accordingly, one typically has g N g and L * diverges at g → 2 remaining much longer than the characteristic length scale v/∆ at any value of g > 2. The length scale (243) separates two different fluctuation regimes. For L L * the wire kinetic inductance contribution remains small as compared to that of the Josephson junctions. Then the phase difference across the wire segment in-between the junctions does not fluctuate being equal to φ(L) -φ(0) = φ. In this case we reproduce the standard mean field current-phase relation In the opposite limit L L * the renormalization of E J already becomes important and phase fluctuations tend to suppress the supercurrent flowing inside the wire. In this limit we arrive at the L-independent result We also point out that for L not much smaller than L * the supercurrent I(φ → π) behaves somewhat differently: It vanishes only for 2 < g < 4, whereas at g > 4 one has (106) derived in Sec. V. As we already discussed, this effective action defines the sine-Gordon model which has a QPT at T → 0 and λ = 2 (or g = 16) separating two different phases On the other hand, for g < 16 quantum phase slips are no longer bound in pairs. In this phase relevant excitations of our sine-Gordon theory are kinks and anti-kinks (as well as their bound states) with an effective gap in the spectrum The appearance of this gap for g < 16 (or λ < 2) gives rise to the correlation length L c ∝ 1/ ∆ which, similarly to the case of superconducting nanorings, can be evaluated by equating the renormalized QPS amplitude at this length scale L c γQPS (L c ) (see Eq. ( to the inductive energy Φ 2 0 /(2L kin L c ) ∼ ξ∆g ξ /L c with some numerical prefactor. Keeping track of all relevant prefactors, in the most relevant limit ξ v/∆ we obtain and (248). The first of these two lengths diverges at one of the phase boundaries g = 2 whereas the second one tends to infinity at another phase boundary g = 16. Consider the situation with L * < L c , in which case there exist three regimes. At L < L * the supercurrent is strongly affected only by smooth phase fluctuations and not by quantum phase slips. This regime is accounted for by Eq. (245). At L * < L < L c the supercurrent is insensitive to any kind of phase fluctuations and, hence, it is given by a simple mean field formula (244). Finally, for L > L c the supercurrent gets exponentially suppressed by quantum phase slips and similarly to Eq. (119) we have sin(φ). In practical terms, the latter regime can be regarded as non-superconducting provided L strongly exceeds L c . It is also possible to realize the opposite situation with L * > L c , in particular for values of g close to 2. In this case the length L * becomes irrelevant, and one distinguishes only two regimes: L < L c and L > L c . The first one is again superconducting with the supercurrent I(φ) affected by smooth phase fluctuations according to Eq. ( As we already emphasized, the setup displayed in Fig. We will demonstrate that such topology controlled phase pinning severely enhances the ability of the wire to conduct supercurrent. This effect can be interpreted in terms of the absence of a massless mode responsible for the destruction of superconductivity at g < 2 in the setup of Fig. In order to proceed we will again describe our system with the aid of the effective action (219), where the wire contribution S T L (220) remains the same, whereas the Josephson term S J now has a somewhat simpler form as compared to Eq. (221). Our further analysis will be fully analogous to that already carried out above for the setup of Fig. with We observe that fluctuations of the phase variable are massive with m 0 = gv/8πL. The absence of a massless mode in our setup (in contrast to that of Fig. Again employing the SCHA-type of analysis we define the trial action where the variational parameter m accounts for the interaction-induced effective mass for the φ-mode and ψ determines the average value of the phase difference. Evaluating the free energy of the system as a function of these two parameters and minimizing it with respect to both m and ψ, we arrive at the following SCHA equations where As before, the effect of phase fluctuations reduces to effective renormalization of E J by the factor e -G(0)/2 . The supercurrent I is then found from the equation At L v/∆ phase fluctuations are strongly suppressed and the system remains in the mean-field regime. In the opposite limit of large L the solution of Eq. ( In the interesting for us limit of small E J we may readily set 8πE J g∆ < 1. In this case the sine term is renormalized to zero faster than the kinetic inductance contribution ∝ L -1 and, hence, we obtain This expression demonstrates that for g < 4 phase fluctuations (i) modify the currentphase relation making it sine-like instead of the sawtooth-like and (ii) yield a decrease of the supercurrent as compared to the standard Josephson formula I(φ) = 2eE J sin φ that applies in the limit L → 0. In addition, we observe that in the presence of fluctuations the supercurrent (259) decays faster with increasing L than the standard mean field dependence Let us now turn to the case g > 4. Resolving Eq. (254) in the limit L → ∞ we obtain This solution remains valid only as long as L exceeds the length scale cf. Eq. ( This length separates the regime L > L * where fluctuations yield non-Gaussian renormalization of the interaction potential from the Gaussian regime L L * where |m| gv/8πL. As long as v/∆ L L * the current is again given by Eq. (259). The above analysis demonstrates that superconducting properties of metallic nanowires depend not only on their parameters, but also on the topology of the experimental setup and A. The model Consider the system of two long parallel to each other superconducting nanowires, as it is schematically shown in Fig. where x is the coordinate along the wires, L ij and C ij denote the matrix elements of the inductance and capacitance matrices As before, the Hamiltonian (262) is expressed in terms of the dual operators χ(x) and Φ(x) which obey the canonical commutation relation Provided the wires are thick enough the low energy Hamiltonian in Eq. ( However, for thinner wires one should also account for the effect of quantum phase slips. The corresponding contribution to the total Hamiltonian for our system can be expressed in the form (cf., Eq. ( where are the QPS amplitudes per unit wire length, ∆ is the superconducting order parameter in each of the wires, g jξ = R q /R jξ and R jξ is the normal state resistance of the j-th wire segment of length equal to the superconducting coherence length ξ. The total Hamiltonian for the system under consideration equals to the sum of the two terms in Eqs. ( representing an effective sine-Gordon model that will be treated below. Any QPS event causes redistribution of charges inside the wire and generates a pair of voltage pulses propagating simultaneously in the opposite directions along the wire with the velocity v, see also Fig. It will be convenient for us to go over to the phase representation and express the corresponding equation of motion for the phases φ 1,2 in both wires in the form (cf., e.g., Eq.( where V = ( Č Ľ) -1/2 is the velocity matrix that accounts for plasmon modes propagating along the wires. Assume now that a QPS event occurs at the initial time moment t = 0 at the point x = 0 inside the first wire. As we just discussed, at t > 0 voltage pulses originating from this QPS event will propagate in both wires. Resolving Eq. ( In the first wire each of the two voltage pulses propagating in opposite directions turns out to be split into two pulses of the same sign propagating with different velocities v + and v -, as it is also illustrated in Fig. This expression indicates that one of these velocities may strongly increase provided the wires are located close enough to each other in which case the cross-capacitance C m may become of order C. In the absence of inter-wire interaction we have κ = 1 and Eq. ( C. Quantum phase transitions: renormalization group analysis Let us now turn to the issue of a superconductor-insulator QPT in capacitively coupled superconducting nanowires with proliferating quantum phase slips. As we just demonstrated, the presence of capacitive coupling between the nanowires may significantly affect plasmon propagation in our system and, hence, alter the interaction between quantum phase slips. In this case, SIT in each of the wires is controlled not only by the parameters of the corresponding wire but also by those of the neighboring one as well as by the mutual capacitance. Interestingly enough, superconducting nanowires with properly chosen parameters may turn insulating once they are brought sufficiently close to each other In order to quantitatively describe QPT in coupled superconducting nanowires we will employ the renormalization group (RG) analysis. This approach is well developed and was successfully applied to a variety of problems in condensed matter theory, such as, e.g., the problem of weak Coulomb blockade in tunnel Provided the two superconducting wires depicted in Fig. where is the effective action corresponding to the Hamiltonian (267) and y i = γ i ξ/∆ denote the effective fugacity for the gas of quantum phase slips in the i-th wire. For the sake of convenience in Eq. ( As usually, let us divide the χ-variables into fast and slow components χ i = χ f i + χ s i , where Λ<ω 2 +q 2 <Λ+δΛ dωdq 2π χ ω,q e iωτ +iqx , χ s i (x, τ ) = ω 2 +q 2 <Λ dωdq 2π χ ω,q e iωτ +iqx . Assuming δΛ/Λ 1, expanding in χ f i and integrating these fast variables out we employ the perturbation theory in y 1,2 and observe that in order to account for the leading order corrections it suffices to evaluate the following matrix Green function at coincident points where λ = (R q /8) V Č. The matrix λ reads λ = 1 Following the standard analysis where λ 11 and λ 22 are diagonal elements of the matrix λ. Note that here we restrict our RG analysis to the lowest order in y 1,2 , in which case other parameters of our problem remain unrenormalized. It follows immediately from Eqs. (276) that our system exhibits two BKT-like QPT at λ 11 = 2 and λ 22 = 2. For the first wire the corresponding phase transition point is fixed by the condition The same condition for the second wire is derived from Eq. It is fairly obvious that capacitive coupling depends on the distance between the wires. While at large distances this coupling is negligible, as the wires get closer to each other the value C m increases and, hence, their mutual influence increases as well. Let us choose the wire parameters in such a way that for C m = 0 both λ 1 and λ 2 slightly exceed 2, i.e. the wires remain in the superconducting phase being relatively close to SIT. Moving the wires closer to each other we "turn on" capacitive coupling between them and, hence, decrease both values λ 1 and λ 2 below 2. As a result, two superconducting wires become insulating as soon as they are brought sufficiently close to each other. This remarkable physical phenomenon is illustrated by the phase diagram in Fig. We can also add that transport properties can be investigated in exactly the same manner as in the case of a single nanowire. Generalization of the technique where R i (T ) is the linear resistance of the i-th wire. This result remains applicable either for λ ii > 2 or for any λ ii at sufficiently high temperatures. The effects discussed here can be observed in a variety of structures involving superconducting nanowires. For instance, superconducting nanowires in the form of a meander are quite frequently employed in experiments, see, e.g., Ref. One can expect, therefore, that the wire of such a geometry should be "less superconducting" than the same wire that has the form of a straight line. Let us first mimic the behavior of the wire depicted in Fig. and the summation runs over the indices i, j = 1, 2, 3. Proceeding along the same lines as above we again arrive at Eq. ( Moreover, reanalyzing similar data reported previously Further non-trivial properties of superconducting nanowires may be sensitive to specific topology of the experimental setup under consideration. A number of interesting phenomena associated with quantum phase slips also occurs in capacitively coupled superconducting nanowires. Finally, it is worthwhile to point out that non-trivial quantum properties of superconducting nanowires and nanorings open up plenty of possibilities for their applications in nanoelectronics, metrology and quantum information technology. Various devices, such as, e.g., single-charge transistor 