The interplay of strong disorder and superconductivity is a topic of long-term interest in condensed matter physics. Here we explore the nonlinear THz response of superconducting NbN films close to the 3D metal-insulator transition. For the least disordered samples, the magnitude of the nonlinear χ (3) response follows the temperature dependence of the superfluid density as expected. In contrast, for high disorder samples near the metal-insulator transition the χ (3) nonlinearity persists to temperatures as high as even 4 times the Tc of the cleanest sample. We discuss the possible origins of this remarkably large nonlinearity, including the possibility that it arises in an enhancement of the temperature scales of superconductivity close to localization. Our work highlights the importance of finite frequency nonlinear THz experiments in detecting superconducting correlations even into regions where long-range ordered superconductivity does not persist. The effect of disorder on superconductivity is a fascinating problem that lies at the intersection of several fundamentally important phenomena in many-body electronic systems. Attractive interactions of electrons close to the Fermi surface leads to superconductivity and is nearly ubiquitous in metals at low temperatures Anderson first addressed the problem of nonmagnetic impurities in a superconductor where he posited that the BCS framework can be generalized to a theory of disordered superconductors where Cooper pairing of (k, ↑) and (k, ↓) electrons is replaced by pairing of the exact time-reversed partners of one-electron eigenstates in disordered systems when k is not a good quantum number While the theory of "dirty" superconductors is the basis of the understanding of superconductivity in many disordered alloys, poly-crystalline, and amorphous materials, there are serious limitations. These calculations implicitly assume that the pairing mechanism remains unaffected by disorder, which crucially ignores the evolution of electron-electron interactions with disorder. In fact, disorder can amplify repulsion or attraction between electrons depending on details of Coulomb repulsion, which then can suppress or increase T c Low energy THz-range nonlinear spectroscopy has emerged as a new tool for probing superconductivity and other quantum properties and have lead to insights that were hitherto inaccessible with other tools. Recent experiments have demonstrated that nonlinear response can be used as a sensitive probe of symmetry breaking in solids, Berry-phase effects in topological materials In Fig. To explore the nonlinear response, intense THz pulses were generated by exciting a LiNbO 3 crystal with amplified 800 nm laser pulses with ≈3 mJ energies in the tiltedpulse-front scheme A schematic of the experiment is given in Fig. We investigated the THz nonlinearity as function of disorder in samples with T c of ≈16K to 0K. Fig As T c is further suppressed by a little over twice the clean limit, we observe a qualitative change in the THz nonlinearity. While the overall magnitude remains lower than that in the clean samples, the temperature dependence does not track the superconductivity according to the conventional BCS estimate of an order parameter. The response remains nearly constant far beyond T c and only decays to zero at a much higher temperature scale the maximum of which is ≈ 60K (∼ 4 × T c of the cleanest NbN) as shown in Fig. Fig. What is the origin of this remarkable nonlinearity? Both anomalous aspects of the highly disordered normal state conductor and vestiges of superconductivity to high temperature must be considered as possibilities. As mentioned above, normal metals with parabolic bands (in which velocity changes are proportional to changes in momentum) and which are dominated by elastic scattering have zero nonlinear response The fact that the χ (3) signal appears to fall to zero when T c is suppressed to zero, and the fact that the response is smooth through the transition strongly suggests that despite its remarkable persistence to very high temperatures, the nonlinearity has a superconducting origin. It is well established that the T c of some superconductors with low superfluid density (decreased by disorder or correlations) is set not by the energy scale of Cooper pair formation, but by the superfluid stiffness which is the energy scale for disordering the phase stiffness of the superconducting order parameter As discussed above, a remarkable prediction of theories of superconducting systems near a localization transition is an enhancement of the superconducting transition temperature, and/or an increase of the gap energy Thin epitaxial films of NbN were deposited on (100) oriented MgO substrate using reactive dc magnetron sputtering using a Nb target. The thickness of these films are ≈20nm which is thicker than the 4-8 nm coherence length in these systems Nonlinear THz spectroscopy was performed using two intense THz pulses (A and B) generated by the tilted pulse front technique such that the pulses are overlapping in time. The two THz pulses are focused onto the sample in a collinear geometry resulting from the interaction of the two THz pulses with the sample. E AB is here refers to the transmitted signal when both THz pulses are present while E A and E B are the transmitted signals with each pulse A and B present individually. The THz linear optical response of these samples has been performed using custom built Auston switch based timedomain THz spectroscopy. Details of the experimental setup is given in ref. The subject of THz electrodynamic nonlinearities for degenerate Fermi systems was investigated extensively in the 60s and 70s in the context of in narrow gap semiconductors Non-parabolicity as a source for THz nonlinearity was first investigated by Wolff and Pearson . ( Here n is the electron density, m * is the band mass at the bottom of the band, and β is the quartic correction to the dispersion. γ e and γ m are the energy and momentum relaxation rates. Deviations from parabolicity not captured by the β term only manifest as a modified prefactor of this expression. Although similar dependencies on at least two different relaxation rates are found in the expression derived by Rustagi For large elastic scattering e.g. γ m ω 1 , ω 2 , ω 3 , γ e this expression simplifies to As expected the χ (3) that arise from non-parabolicity will be strongly suppressed by strong disorder scattering with large γ m . As discussed in the main text, the electrodynamic nonlinearities for a classical plasma with a parabolic dispersion are extremely small as they are driven in part by the light's oscillating magnetic field through a v×B effect Nominal T c for the samples were determined using two-coil mutual inductance measurements. The films were coaxially sandwiched between a quadrupole primary coil and a dipole secondary coil. Mutual inductance between the primary and the secondary coil was measured as a function of temperature by passing a small ac current through the primary coil and measuring the induced voltage, V p at secondary pick-up coil using lock-in techniques. The in-phase and out-of-phase components of the pick-up voltage V p and is related to the real and imaginary part of the mutual inductance. One expects a dip in the real part and a peak in the imaginary part at the critical temperature which correspond to the inductive and resistive coupling between the two coils respectively. Details on the experimental setup and technique can be found in Ref. Fig. 