We study the S > 1/2 antiferromagnetic Heisenberg model on the 1/5-depleted square lattice as a function of the ratio of the intra-plaquette coupling to the inter-plaquette coupling. Using stochastic series expansion quantum Monte Carlo simulations, we numerically identify three quantum phases, including the dimer phase, Néel phase and plaquette valence bond solid phase. We also obtain the accurate quantum critical points that belong to the O(3) universality class using the large-scale finite-size scaling. Most importantly, we study the dynamic spin structure factors of different phases, which can be measured by inelastic neutron scattering experiments. The low-energy excitations can be explained as triplons in the dimer phase and plaquette valence bond solid phase. While in the Néel phase, the more prominent magnon mode can be found as the spin magnitude increases. Furthermore, we find a broader continuum at smaller S, which may be the dynamical signature of nearly deconfined spinon excitations. 1/5-depleted square lattice has been found in some real materials, such as the compound CaV 4 O 9 Here, we briefly review some previous studies of the S = 1/2 Heisenberg model on the 1/5-depleted square lattice For higher-spin case, the spin-S AKLT state can be realized when the lattice coordination number z and the spin quantum number S satisfy the relation z = 2S/n, where n is a positive integer number insulator with multiorbitals on the 1/5-depleted square lattice or its topologically equivalent square-octagon lattice. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we introduce the Hamiltonian and the QMC methods for the higher-spin case. In Sec. III, we study the phase boundaries based on the finite-size scaling hypothesis at criticality (see Fig. We study the S > 1/2 antiferromagnetic Heisenberg model on a 1/5-depleted square lattice, which is topologically equivalent to a square-octagon lattice. The Hamiltonian is expressed as, where S i denotes the spin-S operator on each site i, ij denotes nearest-neighbor sites on the intraplaquette bonds and ij denotes the inter-plaquette bonds. J, J > 0 are the intra-plaquette and interplaquette antiferromagnetic couplings, respectively. For simplicity, we set J = 1 for J ≤ J , and J = 1 for J > J in the whole paper. Thus, the two potential quantum critical points can be expressed as J c (J = 1) and J c (J = 1), respectively. To obtain the phase boundaries of the Heisenberg model on the 1/5-depleted square lattice, we employ signfree QMC simulations based on the stochastic series expansion, which has been described in detail in Refs. The first one is diagonal updates. Because of the nonuniform coupling strengths on the inter-plaquette bonds and intra-plaquette bonds, we consider the following acceptance probabilities to satisfy detailed balance: (2) Here L n is the cut-off of the operator string, and n is the number of the non-unit operators. And J b represents J and J on the intra-plaquette and inter-plaquette bonds, respectively. More detailed explanations can be found in Ref. The second one is operator-loop updates. For the higher-spin case, even without external magnetic field and anisotropy, there are four possible paths through the vertices, including bounce, continue-straight, switch-andreverse and switch-and-continue processes We mainly explore the S > 1/2 antiferromagnetic Heisenberg model on a 1/5-depleted square lattice with periodic boundary condition and the inverse temperature β = 1/T = √ N (i.e., β = 2L) unless specifically mentioned. Here, L represents the linear number of the unit cells as shown in Fig. The uniform magnetic susceptibility χ is defined as and the x direction of spin stiffness ρ x s can be obtained from where N + x and N - x are the total number of off-diagonal operators transporting spin along the positive and negative x direction, respectively. And the spin stiffness ρ y s in the y direction has the same definition as Eq. ( According to the finite-size scaling hypothesis at criticality, the dimensionless quantities satisfy the following form where t = (J -J c )/J c for J ≤ J is the reduced coupling and ν is the correlation length exponent. Here, we try to fix the correlation length exponent ν at the wellknown standard O(3) value 1/ν = 1.406 in the finite-size scaling analysis 2(b) and 2(d), we present the results of the dimensionless quantities χL and ρ s L versus the reduced quantity tL 1/ν . The good data collapses of χL and ρ s L are achieved at J c = 0.1392(2) when we set J = 1. Therefore, with the knowledge of three-dimensional O(3) universality class as expected, we get the accurate estimation of the first quantum critical point that is J c = 0.1392 Therefore, two quantum critical points of the S = 3/2 Heisenberg model on the 1/5-depleted square lattice are obtained accurately to be J c = 0.1392(2) and J c = 0.1814(4) using finite-size scaling. In Fig. With the coordination number z = 3 of the 1/5depleted square lattice, an AKLT state can be form in the spin-3/2 case. However, due to the nature of twodimensional bipartite lattice, the ground state of pure Heisenberg model without the biquadratic and bicubic terms is more likely to be a Néel phase for arbitrary S. Next, we numerically calculate the spin correlations and get the extrapolated magnetic order in the intermediate Néel phase. And we also have numerically confirmed that other magnetic orders, such as block AFM, are not the ground state whatever the spin magnitude is. To detect the Néel order, we define the squared staggered magnetization as where (-1) i = ±1 is the staggered phase factor according to the Néel-type spin configuration as illustrated in Fig. In conclusion, we have got the phase diagram of the S = 3/2 antiferromagnetic Heisenberg model on the 1/5-depleted square lattice, including the dimer phase, the Néel phase and the PVBS phase with the quantum critical points J c = 0.1392(2) and J c = 0.1814(4). These two quantum phase transition belong to the threedimensional O(3) universality class. We also show the magnetization of the Néel phase in the thermodynamic limit. In this section, we explore the ground-state properties of the S = 1 antiferromagnetic Heisenberg model on the 1/5-depleted square lattice in order to seek rule without further calculations on other higher-spin case. Similar to the spin-3/2 case, we can get the phase boundaries with high accuracy by using large-scale finite-size scaling. To get the quantum critical points, we also extract the two dimensionless quantities, the L-normalized uniform magnetic susceptibility χL and the spin stiffness ρ s L defined in Eqs. ( Additionally, in order to verify the suppression of quantum fluctuation when S gets larger and goes to the classical Heisenberg limit, we calculate the squared staggered magnetization m 2 s defined in Eq. ( To conclude, we get the accurate critical points in the phase diagrams of the Heisenberg model on the 1/5-depleted square lattice for various spin magnitudes, which are summarized in Table Next, we study the spin excitations of the spin-3/2 Heisenberg antiferromagnet on the 1/5-depleted square lattice. The longitudinal dynamic spin structure factor S zz (q, ω) is obtained from the QMC simulations combined with stochastic analytic continuation along the path (0, 0) → (π, 0) → (π, π) → (0, 0) → (0, π) → (π, 0) of extended Brillouin zone. To make more momentum points fall into that path in the finite-size lattice, we choose the lattices to be the multiples of the supercell shown in Fig. In Fig. In order to further understand the spin excitations, we show the results of the dynamic spin structure factor S zz (q, ω) obtained by linear spin-wave theory as can be seen in Fig. where a † i , a i (b † j , b j ) are for up (down) spins as illustrated in Fig. ( 0 , 0 ) ( π , 0 ) ( π , π ) ( 0 , 0 ) ( 0 , π ) ( π , 0 ) theory When the coupling ratio J/J keep decreasing towards the quantum critical point J c = 0.1392(2), the excitation spectra are gradually pushed to lower energy and trend to be gapped at the wave vectors q = (0, 0) and (π, π) as shown in Fig. The spin singlets can form on the dimer bonds. And a dimer singlet can be excited to a triplet that can move in the whole lattice, which is a well-known triplon excitation. Further decreasing J/J to the isolated dimer limit, a nearly flat band can be observed in the spectrum, which is consistent with the exact diagonalization results shown in Appendix B. In Fig. In addition, we also extract the excitation spectra of the spin-1/2 and spin-1 cases aiming to compare the similarities and differences between the spin-3/2 and lowerspin case. As shown in Fig. In this work, we have revealed the phase diagram of the spin S > 1/2 antiferromagnetic Heisenberg model on the 1/5-depleted square lattice. By using the extensive finite-size scaling of the quantum Monte Carlo results, we obtain the accurate quantum critical points, and numer-ically verify that the continuous quantum phase transitions belong to the three-dimensional O(3) universality class. To generalize to other higher-spin case, we have representatively study the ground-state properties of 1/5depleted square-lattice Heisenberg model for the spin-1 and spin-3/2 case. According to the QMC results, when the spin magnitude increases, the magnetic order enhances, and the region of Néel phase extends to a larger area. Thus, in the higher spin case, very weak interactions between the plaquettes (or dimers) can give rise to the Néel phase. In other words, quantum fluctuation becomes very weak to suppress the long-range antiferromagnetic order as the spin magnitude increases. Moreover, we have studied the dynamical properties of the S = 3/2 Heisenberg model versus the coupling ratio on the 1/5-depleted square lattice. The dynamic spin structure factor S zz (q, ω) is well extracted by using stochastic analytic continuation of the imaginarytime correlation function obtained from the QMC simulations. In the dimer phase and the PVBS phase, the lowenergy excitations are numerically verified as the gapped triplons. In the Néel phase, there are well-defined gapless Goldstone modes (magnons) at the wave vectors q = (π, π) and (0, 0), which is consistent with the linear spin wave theory. And the depleted characteristic of the lattice and the Brillouin zone folding give rise to a magnon pole around q ≈ (π/5, 3π/5). What's more, the evolution of the separation between the low-energy and high-energy spectra can be well studied owing to the two triplet excitations in the isolated PVBS limit. Finally, we have also calculated the dynamic spin structure factor S zz (q, ω) for the spin-1/2 and spin-1 cases. The excitation spectra of the lower-spin case show a broader continuum, especially at (π, 0) and (0, π), suggesting that the nearly deconfined spinons may exist. The spin-S Heisenberg model on the 1/5-depleted square lattice can be simulated with ultracold atoms in optical lattices in the future or be synthesized in more Mott insulators with multiorbitals. Our numerical results can provide guidance for realizing different phases in this model. And the excitation spectra with different spin magnitudes provide a playground for studying the gapped triplons, the magnon and possible nearly deconfined spinon, which can be identified in the inelastic neutron scattering experiments. In addition, adding the biquadratic and bicubic interactions in the S = 3/2 case can induce an AKLT phase and some other phases, which is still worthy to be studed by the density matrix renormalization goup and tensor network in future.