We investigate the influence of microstructural traps in hydrogen-assisted fatigue crack growth. To this end, a new formulation combining multi-trap stress-assisted diffusion, mechanism-based strain gradient plasticity and a hydrogen-and fatigue-dependent cohesive zone model is presented and numerically implemented. The results show that the ratio of loading frequency to effective diffusivity governs fatigue crack growth behaviour. Increasing the density of beneficial traps, not involved in the fracture process, results in lower fatigue crack growth rates. The combinations of loading frequency and carbide trap densities that minimise embrittlement susceptibility are identified, providing the foundation for a rational design of hydrogen-resistant alloys. binding energy for the ith type of trapping sites When exposed to hydrogen, metallic materials experience a significant loss of ductility, toughness and fatigue crack growth resistance Hydrogen ingress into a metal can occur during manufacturing operations, such as casting, welding, machining or electroplating, and through exposure to hydrogenous environments such as water vapour, aqueous electrolytes or hydrogen-containing gas. Following ingress, atomic hydrogen diffuses through the crystal lattice and resides at either interstitial lattice sites or microstructural trapping sites (e.g., dislocations, grain boundaries, voids, carbides and interfaces). Whether embrittlement is governed by the hydrogen content in lattice or by the one in trap sites is still a matter of debate However, the hydrogen concentration in lattice sites C L is generally in equilibrium with the hydrogen concentration in trapping sites C T and by sufficiently slow tests (where hydrogen transport has reached the steady state) Recently, Fernández-Sousa et al. Their numerical results showed that the maximum hydrogen content attained in the fracture region was sensitive to f /D e for both open systems (where there is a permanent source of hydrogen) and closed-systems (where the content of hydrogen is limited). Their findings imply that the hydrogen content can be decreased below the embrittlement threshold if D e is reduced, suggesting that materials can be engineered to bring down their hydrogen diffusivity and susceptibility to hydrogen-assisted fatigue crack growth. The effective diffusivity of materials can be reduced by increasing the density of beneficial traps -microstructural trapping sites that are not involved in the fracture process In this work, we combine a coupled deformation-diffusion multi-trap model with a cohesive zone formulation for cyclic damage to simulate hydrogen-assisted fatigue crack growth and investigate the role of microstructural traps. Very few works have been published reporting fatigue crack growth predictions in the presence of hydrogen. Moriconi et al. The remainder of this manuscript is organised as follows. The theoretical framework combining multi-trap stress-assisted hydrogen diffusion, mechanism-based strain gradient plasticity and a hydrogen-and cyclic-damage cohesive zone model is presented in Section 2. Details of the material investigated, the numerical implementation, and the boundary value problem used are given in Section 3. The results are then presented in Section 4. First, the influence on fatigue crack growth rates of varying the trap density is quantified. Secondly, the sensitivity to the initial hydrogen content is investigated. Thirdly, we conduct numerical experiments at different loading frequencies to study the interplay between frequency and diffusivity. Finally, maps are built to assist in the development of hydrogen-resistant alloys that exploit the concept of beneficial traps to reduce or suppress the susceptibility to hydrogen embrittlement over technologically-relevant loading frequencies. Concluding remarks end the manuscript in Section 5. The total hydrogen concentration is given by the sum of the hydrogen concentration at interstitial lattice sites and the hydrogen concentration at microstructural trapping sites, The hydrogen concentration of lattice sites is related to the lattice site occupancy fraction θ L and the number of lattice sites per unit volume N L , as follows Here, β is the number of interestitial sites per solvent atom, N A is Avogadro's number, M M is the atomic weight and ρ M the density. In iron-based bcc materials β = 6 where θ T is the trap occupancy and N T is the trap density. For most trap types, N T is a material property that remains constant throughout the duration of the experiment. However, the number of dislocation trap sites per unit volume evolves with the dislocation density; a Taylor-based formulation is used in this work to determine the dislocation density from the mesoscale notions of plastic strains and plastic strain gradients. Thermodynamic equilibrium between traps and interstitial sites is assumed, following the work by Oriani with B being the trap binding energy for the ith type of trap, R = 8.3145 J/(mol•K) the universal gas constant and T the absolute temperature. This relation enables formulating the hydrogen transport equation solely in terms of the lattice hydrogen concentration. For a partial molar volume of hydrogen in solid solution VH , a hydrostatic stress σ H , and a lattice diffusion coefficient D L , the mass transport equation reads with the effective diffusion coefficient D e being defined as The mechanical behaviour of the solid is characterised by means of the so-called mechanismbased strain gradient (MSG) plasticity theory T . In Taylor's dislocation model The tensile flow stress σ f is then related to τ through the Taylor factor M. Considering that the total dislocation density can be additively decomposed into the GND density, ρ G , and the density of statistically stored dislocations (SSDs), ρ S , the flow stress can be expressed as where b and M respectively equal 0.2725 nm and 2.9 for bcc metals. The GND density is defined in terms of Nye's factor r (≈ 1.9 Here, the effective plastic strain gradient is computed from the plastic strain tensor as, Combining ( where σ ref is a reference stress and f (ε p ) is a non-dimensional function of the equivalent plastic strain, as given by the uniaxial stress-strain curve. Substituting back into Eq. ( A cohesive zone formulation is employed to model crack growth accounting for the combined effects of hydrogen and fatigue damage. The model is an extension of the cohesive zone formulation for fatigue developed by Roe and Siegmund The constitutive behavior of the cohesive interface is based on the exponential traction-separation law first presented by Xu and Needleman where δ n is the characteristic cohesive length under normal separation and φ n is the fracture energy. The latter is defined as follows where σ max,0 is the initial cohesive strength, before the hydrogen and fatigue degradations are accounted for. The role of hydrogen in degrading the fracture energy of the solid is incorporated in a phenomenological way, based on the experiments by Wang et al. However, this approach requires defining a priori the failure mechanism, as well as the nature of the decohering interface and its binding energy. To retain generality, we choose instead to base our analysis on an experimentally inferred degradation law. The influence of hydrogen is incorporated via the cohesive strength, as atomistic calculations show that, unlike σ max , the critical separation is rather insensitive to the hydrogen coverage Damage due to both monotonic and cyclic loading must be captured, and as a result the damage state is defined as the maximum of these two contributions: where Ḋc and Ḋm respectively denote the cyclic and monotonic damage rates. The latter is only updated when the largest stored value of ∆ n is greater than δ n and is given by, where t i denotes the current time increment and t i-1 the previous one. Finally, fatigue is characterised by the following damage evolution law, Here, σ Σ is the cohesive endurance limit, H is the Heaviside function and δ Σ is the accumulated cohesive length. Thus, Eq. ( Our numerical experiments are conducted on a AISI 4140 steel that has been extensively characterised with the yield stress being σ y = 622 MPa and the strain hardening coefficient n = 10. Note that the reference stress in Eq. ( Thus, hardening is assumed to be purely isotropic, neglecting kinematic hardening effects. However, kinematic hardening can play a role; even during static (monotonic) fracture, kinematic hardening impacts crack growth resistance due to non-proportional straining arguably of secondary importance. The fracture behaviour is characterised by an initial cohesive strength of σ max,0 = 4σ y Regarding the hydrogen transport properties, the lattice diffusion coefficient has been found to be D L = 1.3 × 10 -9 m 2 /s T,0 ). ABAQUS by means of user subroutines. Specifically, mass transport is modelled using a UMATHT subroutine that exploits the analogy with heat transfer Small scale yielding conditions apply, as it is generally the case in fatigue crack growth experiments in the presence of hydrogen, and accordingly predictions are obtained using a boundary layer formulation. As shown in Fig. Here, ∆K denotes the mode I stress intensity factor load range: ∆K = K max -K min . Unless otherwise stated, a load range of ∆K = 35 MPa √ m is used, with a load ratio of R = K min /K max = 0.1 and a load frequency of f = 1 Hz. As shown in Fig. The loading range equals ∆K/K 0 = 0.1, unless otherwise stated. Regarding hydrogen transport, no hydrogen concentration is prescribed on the boundaries of the domain (Neumann boundary conditions). At time t = 0, an initial lattice hydrogen concentration C L,0 is defined in the entire domain. Plane strain conditions are assumed and the model is discretised with 12,359 eight-node quadrilateral elements with reduced integration. The mesh is refined along the crack propagation region, with the characteristic cohesive length δ n being in all cases more than 5 times larger than the characteristic element size, which is sufficient to ensure mesh convergence The theoretical and numerical models described in Sections 2 and 3, respectively, are used to study the role of trapping in the fatigue crack growth resistance of metals exposed to an environment containing hydrogen. First, the carbide trap density is varied to investigate the impact of engineering alloys with beneficial traps (Section 4.1). The sensitivity to the initial hydrogen content is then assessed in Section 4.2. Subsequently, in Section 4.3, the role of the loading frequency is quantified. Finally, maps are built to relate the loading frequency and the carbide trap density to the degree of embrittlement, as characterised by an acceleration in fatigue crack growth rates (Section 4.4). Fatigue crack growth is simulated for carbide trap densities ranging from N T . This is rationalised as follows. First, note that the lattice hydrogen distribution mimics that of the hydrostatic stress for sufficiently long loading cycles, see Eq. ( However, if the loading cycle is short (or the material diffusivity is low), then there is less time for hydrogen to diffuse to regions of high σ H and, as a result, lower C L levels are attained in the fracture region. The limiting cases are the steady state conditions (long loading cycles), where T . Thus, for a given loading frequency, increasing the trap density is a suitable strategy to reduce the impact that hydrostatic stresses have in raising the hydrogen content, resulting in less C L in the fracture process zone and lower fatigue crack growth rates. T have no influence in the results. This saturation stage is reached when the ratio f /D e is sufficiently large and further reducing the diffusion of hydrogen within each cycle has a negligible effect. We observe that, for the conditions analysed here, a magnitude of N (c) T = 3.61 × 10 29 sites/m 3 is sufficient to reach such a threshold. At this stage, it is important to emphasise that our modelling framework is built upon the assumption of a trap density significantly smaller than the number of lattice sites per unit volume (N T << N L ). Hence, while they are provided here for completeness, results reported for trap densities beyond 1×10 29 are within a regime where accuracy is compromised by modelling assumptions. By running calculations with different load ranges ∆K and computing the slope of the ∆a/δ n vs N curve, the influence of the carbide trap density on the Paris law coefficients can be quantified, as shown in To quantify the role of the trap density on the Paris law parameters, we consider the data points obtained in the regime ∆K/K 0 ≥ 0.1, where the behaviour is linear. Then, the Paris coefficients are fitted by using the following normalised version of the Paris law equation: The values obtained for the coefficients C * and m are provided in Table T . It is shown that C * increases with carbide density but that the exponent m is fairly insensitive and remains in all cases within the range of experimentally reported values for metals in inert environments (m ≈ 4). While data on the sensitivity of Paris law coefficients to the trap density has not been reported yet, the results are consistent with experimental and computational data as a function of the hydrogen content We proceed to evaluate the influence of the initial lattice hydrogen content, C L,0 . As detailed above, our reference choice (C L0 = 1.06 wt ppm) is based on an estimate of the lattice hydrogen concentration present in the fracture process zone shortly before the onset of crack growth in the experiments where the estimated fatigue crack growth rate is divided by the one obtained in the absence of The estimated fatigue crack growth rates have been normalised by the one obtained in the absence of hydrogen; Eq. As expected, and consistent with the phenomenological degradation law adopted (see Fig. Frequency has an important effect on hydrogen assisted fatigue. Higher fatigue crack growth rates are observed when the loading frequency f is reduced, as the duration of each load cycle is sufficiently large to allow for hydrogen to diffuse and accumulate in the fracture region. We vary the frequency from 0.01 to 100 Hz and compute fatigue crack growth rates for two carbide trap density N T . While some sensitivity to the frequency is observed for N (c) T = 3.61 × 10 29 3 , differences are rather small as the frequency is only decreased by two orders of and the ratio /D e remains large. Consistently, it can also be observed that the differences between the two N (c) scenarios diminish as the loading frequency increases and the ratio f /D e becomes sufficiently large. The way the degree of susceptibility to hydrogen assisted fatigue is governed by the ratio of loading frequency to effective diffusivity is shown in Fig. We conclude the Section by mapping the regimes of susceptibility as a function of loading frequency f and carbide trap density N T . goal is to the design of resistant alloys that exploit the concept of beneficial traps. The two limiting cases in terms loading frequency regimes can be seen in Fig. T . On the one hand, for sufficiently low frequencies, there is enough time for the hydrogen to diffuse and follow the σ H distribution within each cycle; as a result, hydrogen susceptibility is maximised. For the range of loading frequencies considered in Fig. However, crack growth rates attained at low frequencies are typically reported to be 5 to 10 times larger than those measured at high frequencies Fast tests Finally, we map the influence of carbide trap densities on hydrogen-assisted fatigue crack growth rates over a wide range of loading frequencies -see Fig. T . Then, the blue regions in Fig. We have investigated the role of microstructural traps in hydrogen-assisted fatigue crack growth. To achieve this, a new formulation has been presented, which combines a stress-assisted hydrogen transport model that accounts for multiple traps, an enriched, gradient-enhanced description of crack tip stresses, and a cohesive zone model with cyclic loading and hydrogen degradation effects. The model is particularised to the analysis of a well-characterised AISI 4140 steel with dislocations, carbides and martensitic interfaces as main trap types. Fatigue crack growth rates and Paris law parameters are computed to investigate the influence of critical parameters such as the loading frequency f , the initial hydrogen content, and the carbide trap density N (c) T . In the literature, materials with an increased carbide density have been engineered to develop an in-built resilience to hydrogen embrittlement, so varying N (c) T enables assessing the feasibility of this approach. Our main findings are: • The fatigue crack growth behaviour of metals exposed to hydrogen is governed by the ratio between loading frequency and effective diffusivity (f /D e ). The limiting cases are given by sufficiently low f /D e values, where hydrogen has time to accumulate in areas of high hydrostatic stress, and sufficiently high f /D e values, where the diffusion of hydrogen within each load cycle is neglible. • Increasing the density of carbide traps (N (c) T ) diminishes fatigue crack growth rates, due to their influence on the effective diffusivity of the material. A threshold value of N (c) T exists above which the impact on diffusion is negligible (the ratio f /D e is sufficiently high). • In terms of Paris law parameters, increasing the trap density has a noticeable effect on the pre-factor but only changes minimally the exponent. • The role of traps in reducing fatigue crack growth rates is more significant for lower levels of the initial lattice hydrogen concentration, as the trap occupancy is smaller. • For the material and conditions considered, increasing the carbide trap density by three orders of magnitude is sufficient to extend the regime of low susceptibility from frequencies larger than 10 Hz to f ≤0.1 Hz. Maps have been provided that enable identifying the combinations of loading frequencies and carbide trap densities that result in a change from high to low hydrogen embrittlement susceptibility. These transitional parameters set the basis for the rational design of alloys with in-built resistance to hydrogen assisted fatigue. trap types, and a cohesive zone model sensitive to both cyclic loading and hydrogen degradation (see Section 2). These three ingredients are implemented in the commercial finite element package