A CMOS-compatible plasmonic TE-pass polarizer capable of working in the O, E, S, C, L, and U bands is numerically analyzed. The device is based on an integrated hybrid plasmonic waveguide (HPW) with a segmented metal design. The segmented metal will avoid the propagation of the TM mode, confined in the slot of the HPW, while the TE fundamental mode will pass. The TE mode is not affected by the metal segmentation since it is confined in the core of the HPW. The concept of the segmented metal can be exploited in a plasmonic circuit with HPWs as the connecting waveguides between parts of the circuit and in a silicon photonics circuit with strip or slab waveguides connecting the different parts of the circuit. Using 3D FDTD simulations, it is shown that for a length of 5.5 μm the polarization extinction ratios are better than 20 dB and the insertion losses are less than 1.7 dB over all the optical communication bands. For many applications of silicon photonic integrated circuits, polarization handling devices are needed. One example is for polarization diversity circuits like the ones used for optical interconnects, when edge coupling is employed. An important task of polarization diversity circuits is to handle polarization dependent loss and polarization mode dispersion which comes from the polarization dependence of the large birefringence in the silicon-on-insulator (SOI) platform. Another use of it is in separating the different polarizations, for example, in a coherent optical receiver. These functions are handled using devices like polarization beam splitters (PBS) and polarization rotators Another simpler approach is to design the circuit for one polarization Other important applications for pass polarizers are in the domain of quantum communications, optical sensing, and polarization filters. It is advantageous that the integrated TE-pass polarizer is Complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) compatible to leverage existing nanofabrication processes, mass production, and also be compatible with silicon photonic integrated circuits. With CMOS compatibility, we refer to the possibility of production in a state-of-the-art CMOS foundry Over the years, several CMOS compatible integrated polarizers have been proposed. They have either been all dielectric There are many plasmonic polarizers Many CMOS compatible integrated plasmonic polarizers have been recently shown. The TE-pass polarizer in Most of them have in common that they only operate in one band or they have limited bandwidth. To the best of our knowledge there is no TE-pass polarizer capable of working across the different optical communications bands O (1.26 μm -1.36 μm), E (1.36 μm -1.46 μm), S (1.46 μm -1.53 μm), C (1.53 μm -1.565 μm), L (1.565 μm -1.625 μm), and U (1.625 μm -1.675 μm) with the same simple structure and being able to be excited from a photonic and/or a plasmonic waveguide. Most of the designs, except In this work, a TE-pass polarizer based on a vertical hybrid plasmonic waveguide (HPW) In this section, the operational principle of the device, the design decisions, and the optimization process are described. The first decision was to use an HPW A TE-pass polarizer can be done with an HPW with a continuous metal. In this kind of waveguides, the TM fundamental mode, like the one in Fig. For reducing the length of such a TE-pass polarizer, in this work, the metal was segmented to diffract the TM 0 mode. The TM 0 mode is confined mostly close to the metal of the waveguide-like in Fig. If the metal is segmented, the TM mode diffracts due to the grating effect. On the other hand, the TE mode is relative away from the metal, and it is not affected by the grating. The structure of the proposed device is represented in Fig. In the following section, it is explained how the optimization of the TE-pass polarizer was done regarding materials and parameters. In this section, we present the optimization process done to design the structure. As a first step, we selected the material for the structure, then, we optimized the parameters of the structure (w, h, h gap and T metal ). To simplify we selected T metal = T dielectric . Regarding the selection of the materials, as the core of the waveguide, we selected Si to be compatible with the Silicon Photonics platform To select the material, we performed 2D simulations with MODE solutions of Lumerical On the other hand, the parameter α eff.TE is related to the insertion loss (IL) of the device when it is multiplying by the length of the polarizer L (when the metal is continuous). The insertion loss IL = P out,TE /P in,TE is defined as the power in the TE mode at the output P out,TE divided by the power of the TE mode at the input P in,TE . The final relation is IL = α eff.TE •L. Hence, a small value of α eff.TE is desired. Consequently, for the optimization of the cross-section of the HPW, we selected the Figure of Merit (FoM) equal to FoM = Δα eff /α eff.TE to maximize the polarization extinction ratio and reduce the insertion loss of the TE-pass polarizer. The main parameters that influence α eff,TM, and α eff.TE are the width of the Si core w, the height of the Si core h and the thickness of the slot h gap as shown in Fig. In Fig. In the case of Fig. In all cases, in Fig. Finally, for fabrication reasons, we have decided to employ SiO 2 in the rest of the study. Although using Si 3 N 4 , Ta, or Ti may result in a similar performance. Selecting SiO 2 in the slot will fix the parameter to h gap = 5 nm to obtain the maximum FoM. Now, it will be necessary to fix w and h. If we select the biggest values for w and h that are 500 nm, then the waveguide will be highly multimode. To avoid that, we fixed w = 450 nm and h = 400 nm. With such dimensions, there is only TE 0 and multimode TM modes (TM 0 , TM 1 , and TM 2 ). High order TM modes will also be filtered by the structure. The final optimized parameters of the cross section are w = 450 nm, h = 400 nm, and h gap = 5 nm (SiO 2 ). The optimization of T metal is the last parameter to be optimized. In this section, we study the performance of the TE-pass polarizer with the HPW previously optimized and with continues metal. Later, we segmented the metal of the HPW, and the parameter T metal is optimized. For the optimized values of the cross-section of the HPW the effective index of the photonic TE fundamental mode is n eff,TE = 2.75, and the absorption loss is α eff,TE = 0.0411 dB/μm. Regarding the plasmonic TM fundamental mode the effective index is n eff,TM = 3.21 and the absorption loss is α eff,TM = 0.2370 dB/μm. To calculate the polarization extinction ratio, we use the formula PER = (α eff,TM -α eff,TE )•L and for the insertion loss, we use the formula IL = = (α eff,TE )•L, where L is the length of the HPW. The results are shown in Fig. To optimize the last parameter T metal , it is needed to calculate the length of the TE-pass polarizer and the optimum size of the metal segments T metal . To do this, we performed 3D FDTD simulations using Lumerical For the initial simulations, we selected minimum value for T metal around 0.3 μm to use liftoff in the fabrication process. On the other hand, the maximum value of T metal was set to 1 μm to have a compact TE-pass polarizer still. To further complete the scanning, we also selected an intermediate value of T metal around 0.5 μm. To agree with the grating theory, we selected the period of the grating T = T metal + T dielectric , with T metal = T dielectric . Using the FoM = Δα eff •L/α eff,TE •L = PER/IL as previously explained, the result of the 3D FDTD simulation is presented in Fig. To the propagation of TM The optimized performance of the TE-pass polarizer is summarized in Table As a summary, we optimized the cross-section of the HPW of the TE-pass polarizer using 2D simulations solutions It will be interesting to check the simulations by scanning the cross-section of the HPW using 3D FDTD simulations to see if they agree with the 2D simulations. For this, we fixed h gap = 5 nm (SiO 2 ), T metal = 0.5 μm, and L = 5.5 μm. And we scanned w and h. The results of the 3D FDTD estimation is represented in Fig. In Fig. To conclude this section, we have analyzed the performance of the TE-pass polarizer with segmented metal for different optical bands in a plasmonic circuit. Now, it will be interesting to exploit the same device in a photonic circuit from which the TE-pass polarizer will be excited from a photonic strip waveguide. In this section, we calculate the optimization of the TE-pass polarizer to be excited from a photonic waveguide. The structure is presented in Fig. The TE 0 mode is represented in Fig. The bandwidth of the TE-pass polarizer is represented in Fig. By comparing Figs. 10(a) and 10(b) we can observe that the polarization extinction ratio of the TE-pass polarizer with segmented metal is larger for a similar insertion loss at 1550nm. Consequently, by segmenting the metal, the polarization extinction ratio is incremented while reducing the length of the device. As shown before, the TE 0 mode of the Si strip waveguide passes the structure as represented in Fig. Where T estimated is the estimated period of the grating, m is the order of the grating, λ valley is the wavelength of the valley in transmission, and n eff is the effective index of TM 0 mode at the wavelength λ valley . The results are summarized in Table In this section, the proposed device is compared with the CMOS compatible plasmonic TEpass polarizers reported until now. The main parameters, like the polarization extinction ratio, the insertion loss, and the bandwidth are discussed. The parameters are summarized in Table In conclusion, our structure offers a larger extinction ratio and a smaller insertion loss than the experimental work presented in On the other hand, the work presented by Mansoura The work in One of the advantages of our device is that it offers the possibility of working in the O, E, S, C, L, and U bands with an acceptable polarization extinction ratio and moderate insertion loss with the same simple structure. Such a concept can be exploited both in a plasmonic circuit and in a photonic circuit. This concept can be extended to TM-pass polarizers like in In this work, the design and optimization of a novel plasmonic CMOS compatible TE-pass polarizer were presented. To design the device, we optimized its most important parameters using 2D and 3D FDTD simulations. The device works in several optical bands with the same simple CMOS compatible structure being the main novelty of the device the segmented metal of the HPW. This allows to pass of the TE mode and blocks the TM modes. This TE-pass polarizer can work in the traditional communication bands for silicon photonics: O, E, S, C, L, and U with the same structure. Vol. 26, No. 23 | 12 Nov 2018 | OPTICS EXPRESS 30294