Memristors, when utilized as electronic components in circuits, can offer opportunities for the implementation of novel reconfigurable electronics. While they have been used in large arrays, studies in ensembles of devices are comparatively limited. Here we propose a vertically stacked memristor configuration with a shared middle electrode. We study the compound resistive states presented by the combined in-series devices and we alter them either by controlling each device separately, or by altering the full configuration, which depends on selective usage of the middle floating electrode. The shared middle electrode enables a rare look into the combined system, which is not normally available in vertically stacked devices. In the course of this study it was found that separate switching of individual devices carries over its effects to the complete device (albeit non-linearly), enabling increased resistive state range, which leads to a larger number of distinguishable states (above SNR variance limits) and hence enhanced device memory. Additionally, by applying a switching stimulus to the external electrodes it is possible to switch both devices simultaneously, making the entire configuration a voltage divider with individual memristive components. Through usage of this type of configuration and by taking advantage of the voltage division, it is possible to surge-protect fragile devices, while it was also found that simultaneous reset of stacked devices is possible, significantly reducing the required reset time in larger arrays. Since their conception On a separate front, efforts are being directed towards increased range in tuneability of devices Here, we propose a three terminal device, 1M1M topology, which consists of two memristors fabricated vertically, with an interleaved, but accessible common middle electrode. The case for three terminal connected devices has already been theoretically made where this configuration is used to propose neuromoprhic or conventional circuits Final device structure can be summarized as a metal-insulator-metal-insulator-metal (M-I-M-I-M). The two fabricated prototypes were: Pt(BE)/TiO x (AL1)/Pt(ME)/TiO x (AL2)/Pt(TE) and Pt(BE)/[TiO x /Al 2 O 3 ](AL1)/Pt(ME)/TiO x (AL2)/Pt(TE). Abbreviations in the parentheses denote the function of each layer within the device stack. A complete SEM image of all three electrodes, their access pads and the overlap area can be seen in Fig Memristive devices are initially fabricated as M-I-M capacitors, and they transition into memristors after an electroforming step. This electorforming step is carried out independently for each memristive device in the stack, by making use of the ME. Electroforming and measurements are carried out by using the ArC One platform , previously developed for memristor characterization The forming procedure was applied individually for both top and bottom devices. After forming, the possible measurement combinations available are Top device (Td), Bottom device (Bd) and the Complete device (Cd) or 'Total stack'. Measurements of each configuration were carried out by positioning the probing needles on the TE and ME, ME and BE, or TE and BE electrodes respectively. The third, unused, electrode was not engaged (floating terminal), to avoid any impact on measurement. Here, two types of measurements were carried out. The first type assesses switching impact on the Total stack due to only one device switching. In this case, a resistive readout was taken of the non-switching component and of the total stack, while a pulse train was used to induce switching in the switching component. This was followed by a subsequent resistive readout. For the second type of measurements, concerning the switching of the Total stack, a pulse train was applied across the Top and Bottom electrodes, which could lead to switching in both layers or only one of them. Due to the inherent non-linearity of memristive device IVs and to ensure consistency and comparability between measurements, whenever a resistive state value is quoted, this refers to static resistance under 0.5V read-out voltage unless otherwise specified. Device characterization has been initially carried out by switching one of the two memristors and observing the effect on the Total Stack and then switching the Total stack as a whole and observing the effect this had on the two devices it was composed of. As expected, full-stack resistance changes when either of the devices switches. This can be seen from the non-switching IVs recorded in Fig Individual switching was carried out independently on both of the devices comprising a total stack, as shown in Fig. A convenient way of exploiting this behaviour would be setting the aggregate stack state by using a device with large resistive state range and inter-state gaps for coarse tuning and a corresponding small range/gap device for fine tuning. To illustrate this, we utilize a multistate seeking protocol, which has been described at length in previous publications The 3-D map in Figure While many of the states presented here are duplicates, it is obvious that the combination of these two devices results in a state resolution which could not be achieved individually by any of the two devices. This section covers simultaneous switching of devices by using the top and bottom electrodes, TE and BE. This in effect enables the entire stack to work as a single device, but with the added functionality of being able to probe the individual components to ascertain where the switching took place and how it affected them. Two cases are studied in this section, the first is simultaneous switching of serially connected memristors, i.e. with the same switching polarity, while the second case is switching of antiserially connected memristors, i.e, alternate polarity. Figure In the first 4 states, as seen in Figures mark, the top device reached a threshold where the voltage applied was no longer enough to switch it to a higher state. This in turn left the bottom device able to continue its gradual switching towards higher resistive values, which naturally also led to a higher voltage share being directed to it. This resulted in the exponential increase in resistive value for the bottom device. Had the top device not hit a threshold it can be inferred that the switching of the bottom device would have been severely restricted. Reading or switching devices by using the TE and BE of the stack has the added effect of doubling as a surge protection mechanism, as the voltage division means that devices will not receive more voltage than they can process, reducing the probability of device failure. The last part of the test saw the simultaneous reset of both devices by only sending one pulse through the device. As devices are very sensitive to voltage, especially when applying reset pulses to them, this approach has multiple benefits. First, due to voltage division-induced negative feedback the reset pulse is less likely to exceed the absolute maximum device limits, mitigating the risk of failure. Second, reset time is effectively cut in half. Indeed even if these stacks where to be used just as two conjoined, but individually operating memory cells, the simultaneous reset could still prove extremely useful, due to halving memory reset time. Multistate probing in this configuration does not allow full access to all possible constituent device resistive state configurations, such as when individually switching each component, with an example of this given in supplementary S2. This comes as a result of the voltage division which pushes devices to specific states. Thus each time both devices are pushed, the intermediate states are lost, and in the event of a runaway exponential resistive switching, as depicted in fig (d), the second device becomes "state-locked", as it will continue to receive a progressively diminished share of the voltage input, effectively making switching impossible. The second case studied, and depicted in Fig. In this specific scenario the stack used was the second prototype, which was fabricated with a configuration of Pt(BE)/[TiO x /Al 2 O 3 ]/Pt(ME)/TiO x /Pt(TE), as is evident from the EELS image showing an Al peak in the upper Dielectric/Metal interface of the bottom device. This stack was created to take advantage of increased multistate capabilities offered by the bottom device, and to ascertain if mixing different types of memristors is possible. There were no indications that stacking devices with different active layers might have adverse effects on the switching behaviour of the entire stack. The same fundamental principles governing voltage division and switching conditions hold. To test this case, a stack was generated, where, after electroforming both devices, one of them would increase its resistance for a specific voltage polarity, while the other would decrease it for that same polarity. The electroforming mechanism responsible for deciding the Set/Reset polarity is outside the scope of this work, nonetheless, it has been found that forming polarity is responsible up to a certain level for switching polarity as confirmed in Supplementary figure Another important detail is that ,for this experiment, the resistive values of the devices are more important than in the previous case. Devices that have similar resistivities might exhibit resistive state changes of the same magnitude, leading to apparent total-stack inactivity, while underneath, both devices are affected. On the other hand, a significant difference in resistance, or switching voltage, will lead to resistive switching in only one of two devices. Here we present the second case, while the "similar resistances and voltage requirements" scenario is presented in supplementary figure Figure A double stack (M-I-M-I-M) memristive configuration was fabricated which combines two devices and the ability to individually switch them by using a middle electrode (ME), or the ability to simultaneously switch them by applying voltage pulses to the top (TE) and bottom (BE) electrodes of the device. Each individual device can be separately tuned, with resulting resistive changes carried over to the full stack. Full stack resistance is dependent on the nonlinearity of individual device IVs and thus is generally not equal to the sum of constituent device resistances, but rather the sum of their static resistances at the voltage shares they receive from the divider. Individually switching the devices and then registering the resistive state of the total stack can lead to increased resistive state resolution and consequently device memory density, even though the intrinsic state resolution of certain device technologies may exceed measurement resolution. Full stack switching can either switch both devices at the same time if they have similar resistivities, or only the most resistive one. Constituent device resistive state will influence the voltage balance in the voltage divider, thus deciding the amount of stimulus they will receive. In the case of serially connected devices of similar resistive range, switching will take place in both devices as long as the stimulus they receive is enough to change their state. For antiserially connected devices, evidence points towards a "memristive fuse" type of behavior whereby due to opposing changes in resistive states across the devices, the allocation of voltage in the divider can swing much more widely than for serial devices -in principle-. In the case of similar resistive states (and switching threshold voltages) in antiserially connected devices, the total stack may function as an attractor with unchanged resistive state, while the individual devices are impacted by the voltage stimulus applied. In either case, the existence of a second memristor in serial connection may, under the right conditions, function as a surge protection mechanism, in the same way as using a resistance in series, protecting each other from catastrophic failure. Finally, in the case of devices with the same polarity, simultaneous reset has been observed, which is a powerful tool to cut reset times in memristor arrays by half. In conclusion, we have demonstrated in silico a 3-terminal component consisting of 2 serially connected, vertically stacked, memristors, which can be used both as a 'fuse' and as individual devices. We have shown that: a) the cointegration of the two devices and b) the fact that they share an electrode does not cause any significant deviation from the theoretical behaviours that are expected when examining independent devices, either in isolation or in serial/antiserial configuration as was done in previous work. Furthermore, we show that it is possible to obtain full-stack switching in these co-integrated devices; the co-integration process does not skew the required switching conditions sufficiently to introduce catastrophic complications. We hope that this work will help the community develop such 3-terminal devices as basic components for applications that can use either their individual or their fuse-configuration properties in the future. Device composition consists of two vertically aligned memristors which share one electrode (Middle Electrode -ME) of the stack. To achieve this, five distinct deposition steps were required, one for each layer of the complete device. Patterning of all steps was carried out by negative tone photolithography. A post-lithography surface clean was conducted by using O 2 plasma, through Reactive Ion Etching. Devices were deposited on top of a 200 nm Silicon dioxide (SiO 2 ) insulating layer, which was thermally grown on top of 6-inch silicon wafer substrates. In steps 1-3-5 platinum electrodes were deposited by electron beam evaporation, with all electrodes having an average thickness of 12nm. For step 1 an adhesion layer consisting of a thin Titanium film (10nm) was deposited before the deposition of bottom electrodes. Following each metal deposition step a lift-off process was followed by submerging the substrates in N-Methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP). Thus, the three distinct electrodes were formed, Bottom Electrode (BE), Middle Electrode (ME) and Top Electrode (TE). During steps 2 and 4 the active layers for Top and Bottom devices were deposited, for which magnetron sputtering was used. Two different material configurations were explored in this work. In case one, steps 2 and 4 had an active layer (AL) consisting of TiO x , while in the second case an additional Al 2 O 3 was grown on top of the TiO x in step 2 only. This enabled a first look into combinations of different types of memristive devices. In this case the TiO x /Al 2 O 3 active layer device was selected as it had proven to possess good device characteristics in a previous study 