High-pressure synthesis techniques have allowed for the growth of samples on the indium-rich side of (Pb,In)Te, which have increased superconducting transition temperatures compared to lead-rich compounds. In this study we present measurements of the temperature dependence of the London penetration depth ∆λ(T ) in the compound In0.8Pb0.2Te, which shows a bulk Tc,onset of ∼ 4.75 K. The results indicate fully gapped BCS-like behavior, ruling out odd-parity, topologically nontrivial A2u pairing; however, odd-parity A1u pairing is still possible. Critical field values measured below 1 K and other superconducting parameters are also presented. Following the theoretical prediction In this work, we report on magnetization and transport measurements at 4 He temperatures and measurements of the temperature dependence of the London penetration depth ∆λ(T ) down to ∼450 mK in superconducting In 0.8 Pb 0.2 Te grown by HPHT synthesis (pink circle in Fig. Polycrystalline mm-scale ingots of In 0.8 Pb 0.2 Te were grown following the method of Katsuno Magnetization measurements were performed on an irregularly shaped ingot with a mass of 7.4 mg in a Quantum Design MPMS DC SQUID magnetometer at temperatures down to 1.8 K. The sample was mounted inside a gelatin capsule held inside a clear plastic drinking straw. The TDO technique Due to the brittleness and small sizes of polycrystalline pieces, polishing a flat surface for 4-point contact geometry with silver paint contacts was not viable. As a result, magneto-transport measurements were performed in a 2-point contact geometry using silver epoxy (Epotek H20E) and 50 μm gold wires, with the sample mounted on a custom-built probe in a cryostat capable of 1.6 K and 9 T. Transport measurements were performed with a DC current of 50 μA. Figure Low-temperature magneto-transport measurements are shown in Fig. to the H c1 datapoints, from which we extrapolate μ 0 H c1 at T = 0 to be approximately 9 mT. Measurements of the temperature dependence of the magnetization in multiple applied fields via SQUID magnetometry are shown in Fig. The shift of the TDO frequency with temperature and/or field is a measurement of the degree of screening of magnetic flux in the sample which is either due to superconductivity or the normal-state skin depth The TDO, SQUID and magneto-transport measurements can be used to determine a superconducting phase diagram which contains both the bulk phase and the higher-T c minority phase. We define the transition temperature of the minority phase as the onset temperature where deviation from the temperature-independent normal-state behavior occurs. Due to the higher transition temperature phase, the transition temperature in the bulk phase must be estimated as where the signal first deviates from linearity below the onset of the higher temperature phase; an example is shown in Fig. timate the zero-temperature London penetration depth λ 0 to be approximately 254 nm. This value suggests a Ginzburg-Landau parameter κ = λ/ξ of 20, identifying In 1 -x Pb x Te as extreme type-II. The two phase boundaries from all three techniques agree with each other. In Fig. where the geometrical factor G depends on the geometry of the resonator coil as well as the sample volume and shape. The small amplitude of the AC field in the coil (∼2 μT) ensures that the sample remains fully in the Meissner state below T c . The low-temperature variation of the London penetration depth ∆λ(T ) = λ(T ) -λ 0 can provide information on the superconducting gap structure BCS theory for an isotropic s-wave superconductor yields an exponential variation of ∆λ(T ): where ∆ 0 and λ 0 are the zero-temperature values of the superconducting energy gap and the penetration depth. In nodal superconductors, however, a stronger temperature dependence is observed due to the enhanced thermal excitation of quasiparticles near the gap nodes, where the gap amplitude decreases. This results in a powerlaw variation in the penetration depth, ∆λ ∼ T n , where the exponent n depends on the nature of the nodes and the degree of electron scattering; line nodes in the energy gap will generate a T -linear response, whereas point nodes will generate a T 2 response. Behavior with n ≥ 3 is generally considered indistinguishable from exponential and is taken as evidence of a full superconducting gap. The evolution of the normalized low-temperature TDO frequency shift of In 1 -x Pb x Te with x = 0.2 is shown in Fig. In summary, we have investigated the superconducting gap symmetry and critical fields of polycrystalline heavily In-doped PbTe, with doping well beyond the previously known In saturation limit. This doping regime, only available via high-pressure synthesis techniques, shows a higher T c while maintaining an FCC crystal structure. A small minority phase appears with higher T c than the bulk and is most probably associated with higher Pb-doped material due to inhomogenous doping in the growth; both phases have the same normalized magnetic phase boundaries down to sub-K temperatures. The superconducting gap structure is full and likely anisotropic, and the material is an extreme type-II superconductor with a κ of approximately 20. The zero-temperature upper critical field in the ∼5.7 K phase is 7.14 T, and is quite a bit higher compared with another report 