This preliminary* study presents a simple modulation scheme to dynamically create timeaveraged optical potentials to trap colloidal particles using acousto-optical modulation. The method provides access to control experimentally relevant parameters of a tunable doublewell potential. We show experimental data successfully adjusting the trapping distance in the range 20-2000 nm and discuss situations arising when reconstructing time-averaged optical potentials from trapped particle data. This is the first step towards studying colloidal particles in dynamically modulated optical potentials to explore the stochastic thermodynamics of mesoscopic systems and small-scale thermo-mechanical machines. The ability to optically control particles at the mesoscopic scale, allied to recent advances in light control techniques, has enabled the growth of a new range of applications for optical tweezers in fundamental studies of nonequilibrium systems. This versatile platform, well-known for studies in biological systems [1-3], has been retooled in recent years to study many physical and chemical processes on small scales. Novel theoretical and technological advancements, especially in optical potential engineering, make it possible to explore systems ranging from atoms to nano and microstructures Using acousto-optic modulators (AOM) Aiming at a broader range of applications, especially for fundamental studies, this work proposes a simple but effective scheme to implement dynamical control of optical potentials towards trapping and studying the behavior of colloidal particles in a modulated optical trap using AOM devices. Particularly, we target here the emblematic double-well potential, a paradigmatic model used in many areas. We demonstrate a method to dynamically control the most relevant parameters of this model with ease and precision (down to nanometers). One of our future interests is to use this method to emulate and dynamically control the well-known Kramers model, extensively used in Chemistry and Biophysics. The setup used in this work is shown schematically in Fig. Above the sample, a 10x condenser with N.A=0.25 collects the traversing beam and part of the scattered light. Before reaching the microscope objective, the (diffracted first order) beam is magnified by a telescope to overfill the objective entrance slightly. The available power at the sample is approximately 2 mW. Particle positions are detected using a CCD camera (bright field imaging) and a quadrant photodiode (QPD). The QPD monitors a dedicated low-power probe beam at 532 nm. Red and green dichroic mirrors and filters are used to separate and direct the different wavelengths and avoid saturating the camera. A high-speed multi-function data acquisition (DAQ) board (National Instruments, PCI-6259) controls the AOM and does the data acquisition, reading the QPD and the photodetectors (PDs). It is possible and frequently desirable to use direct measurements of the trapped particle to determine the effective optical trapping potential. Here, we describe the basic procedure since it is an integral part of the analysis. Later, we show a situation where this procedure does not apply, as it is relevant for this study, pointing out that this well-known method must be used with caution when dealing with dynamically modulated potentials. In thermal equilibrium with the fluid molecules, the probability distribution of trapped particles follows a Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution, according to In (1), U (x) represents the trapping potential, k B is the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature, and ρ 0 is a normalization factor such that ρ(x)dx = 1. The potential U (x) can be determined from measurements of ρ(x), or measurements of quantities directly proportional to it, following where U 0 is an arbitrary constant. One measurement that is relatively easy to obtain experimentally is the position of the colloidal particle as a function of time. Collecting the three QPD voltage outputs, proportional to the particle displacement in x, y, and z directions, one builds a histogram of positions for each spatial orientation. The calibration constant, used to convert voltage units to displacement units, is obtained moving a trapped particle by a known distance with a 3-axis nanopositioning stage while recording the QPD voltage signal. The position histogram is proportional to ρ(x), at least in equilibrium, and one has the necessary information to effectively measure U (x), directly from this data. Therefore, by building a normalized histogram of the trapped particle's positions, one can determine the trapping potential. Figs. 2c and 2d show an example, using experimental data, to illustrate this procedure for the x coordinate. Since we control (move) the optical potential only along the x direction, using the AOM, all the analysis is presented in terms of this coordinate. Even though the particle is trapped in three dimensions, as shown in the point clouds constructed from the QPD data in Figs. A focused single laser beam will produce nearly harmonic potential around its equilibrium position, as shown in Fig. In this study, we focused our attention on two limits: low switching frequency (5Hz) and high switching frequency (5kHz). Figure The signal applied in the amplitude channel is responsible for stabilizing the laser power during frequency modulation. The optimal frequency of the AOM is 80 MHz, and at different frequencies, the intensity of the first diffracted order beam drops. Therefore, an amplitude correction is always applied simultaneously with the displacement of the trap to compensate for it. Fig. The data clearly shows a correlation between the modulation (position of the laser beam) and the position of the trapped particle. At low modulation frequencies, the particle follows the displacement of the optical potential, as expected, with a delay due to the fluid's viscosity. However, at high frequencies, the particle experience the time-averaged potential caused by the fast (5 kHz) switching of the beam's position. The main idea here is to use this feature to propose a simple scheme capable of producing dynamically controlled double-well optical potentials from a time-averaging procedure of a square waveform modulation. To determine the control range and the resolution achievable by the proposed method, we performed several position measurements of trapped particles within a range of displacements of the equilibrium position of the harmonic trap. The stochastic trajectories of optically trapped particles were measured, initially in a static optical (single-beam) trap, as shown in Fig. In Fig. In Fig. When the laser intensity is the same for both traps (Fig. This project's long-term goal is to produce double-well optical potentials, dynamically controlling all the model's relevant parameters according to the desired protocol. The idea is to use the time-averaging (i.e., fast-switching) method to create such dynamically controlled double-well potential. Our results, so far, show data consistent with the time-averaged picture, when the light is switched much faster than the particles can follow, typically above 500 Hz. To be safe, we used a modulation of 5 kHz (M -5kHz). For small separations between traps, as in Fig. For large separations, as in Fig. It is worth noticing the difference between the reconstructed potential curves at high-frequency (in Fig. The home-built experimental system allows controlling the trap position from tens of nanometers to a couple of micrometers. This position control, combined with the modulation of the beam intensity, enables the generation of different types of optical potentials by time-averaging the optical potential at high frequencies. We show here that a simple scheme, using a square wave signal, can generate harmonic potentials and multiple traps with a high level of accuracy, but caution must be exercised when trying to reconstruct the optical potential from data when the system is out of equilibrium. Experimental modifications are underway in order to expand range of parameters, and to generate dynamically controllable bistable traps. We acknowledge the financial support provided by FAPESP (Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de São Paulo), the São Paulo Research Foundation, under research Grants 2019/27471-0 and 2013/07276-1, and also the scholarship funding provided by CAPES and CNPq. [1] M. L. 