Noise pollution remains a challenging problem requiring the development of novel systems for noise insulation. Extensive work in the field of acoustic metamaterials has led to the occurrence of various ventilated structures which, however, are usually demonstrated for rather narrow regions of the audible spectrum. In this work, we further extend the idea of metamaterial-based systems developing a concept of a metahouse chamber representing a ventilated structure for broadband noise insulation. Broad stop bands originate from strong coupling between pairs of Helmholtz resonators constituting the structure. We demonstrate numerically and experimentally the averaged transmission -18 dB within the spectral range from 1500 to 16500 Hz. The sparseness of the structure together with the possibility to use optically transparent materials suggest that the chamber may be also characterized by partial optical transparency depending on the mutual position of structural elements. The obtained results are promising for development of novel noise-insulating structures advancing urban science. Acoustic metamaterials and phononic crystals have been subjects of keen scientific interest for a couple of decades as they provide novel routes towards efficient control of acoustic field One of the developing branches in the field of acoustic metamaterials is dedicated to realization of novel noiseinsulating systems. Increasing noise pollution in urban areas is one of the endangering trends affecting global health and ecological environment FIG. Instead of the conventional mass-density law, reflection and attenuation of sound in metamaterials relies mostly on periodicity and shape of the structural elements rather than their material properties. One of the important options enabled by metamaterials is the possibility to implement structures allowing air flow In this paper, we propose a noise-insulating ventilated metahouse chamber allowing access of light into the inner area. The chamber is designed to be simple for manufacturing and assembling. At the same time, the requirements for materials are easily met and the structure can be made of ecologically friendly and optically transparent materials. The chamber is based on coupled Helmholtz resonators with C-shaped cross-section and exploits band-gap formation as the main mechanism for sound insulation. The artistic illustration of the concept is presented in Fig. We start with designing a 2D metamaterial-based periodic structure and tuning its parameters for maximization of the integral width of band-gaps in the audible spectral range. Then, we perform an experimental demonstration of stop-bands corresponding to band-gaps of the infinite system. Finally, we provide an experimental demonstration of a finite-size prototype of the metahouse chamber. All experimental results are verified by numerical simulations. The chosen unit cell consists of two coupled Helmholtz resonators with C-shaped cross-section, as shown in Fig. where i stays for the number of a band-gap and index ΓX indicates that the considered band-gaps lie within ΓX interval of the Brillouin zone [see Fig. Here it should be noted that summation is done over the band-gaps within the considered frequency ranges. For simplicity, we have considered a 2D geometry assuming that the resonators are infinite in the direction perpendicular to the surface of the cross-section. Since the system is scalable, for the tuning procedure we have normalized all geometric parameters to the outer radius of the resonators R. The size of the unit cell was fixed at values of a x /R = 4.5 and a y /R = 2.25. The inner radius of the resonators r is fixed as r/R = 0.905. The distance between the centers of resonators d as well as the width of slits w were varied as parameters directly affecting the local coupling. The frequencies are also normalized by R/c air , where c air = 343 m/s is the speed of sound in air. The colormap shown in Fig. Following the adjustment of slit widths and distances between the resonators, we analyze the effect of resonators' rotation on the integral width of band-gaps. Figure To experimentally verify the presence of wide bandgaps, we consider a configuration of the structure corresponding to the point A in Fig. The finite-size prototype of the metahouse chamber is shown in Fig. The developed metahouse chamber demonstrates good insulating properties with the average transmission of -18 dB in the broad spectral range from 1500 to 16500 Hz [Fig. All numerical simulations are performed for 2D systems using finite element method (FEM) via COMSOL Multiphysics, Pressure Acoustics module. Throughout the calculations, the boundaries of resonators are assumed to be sound-hard walls. Such an approximation is justified by high impedance contrast between the material of resonators and air. For example, the acoustic impedance of polypropylene is about 2.4 MRayl The semi-infinite structure is modelled as an array made of N halved resonators placed into a 2D waveguide with sound hard walls. The distance between the walls is equal to a y /2. The ends of the waveguide are modelled as perfectly matched layers (PML). The incident plane wave with amplitude p 0 propagates along the direction of periodicity (x-axis, parallel to the walls of the waveguide). Pressure values are calculated at the sample point located at the distance x t = 15 mm from the rightmost resonator. Parameters of the resonators correspond to those of the fabricated samples. In the model for the finite-size case the chamber is placed into the 2D box in which all walls are PML such that the distance between the walls is 1210 mm and 510 mm along x and y axis, respectively. The structure is located at the center of the waveguide and the sample point is placed at the center of the structure. Incident waves with amplitude p 0 are generated by a point source located near one of the walls. Geometric size of the 2D chamber correspond to the parameters of the manufactured structure. The experimental measurements are provided inside a waveguide with rectangular cross-section. The walls and the bottom of the waveguide are made of aluminum with thickness of 15 mm. The lid is made of 6 mm thick transparent plexiglass. The height of the inner cross-section of the waveguide is fixed and equal to 60 mm. However, the width is adjustable and can be varied from 0 to 650 mm via displacement of one of the walls. The loudspeaker (Visaton BF 45/4) is located at one end of the waveguide and the microphone (BOYA BY-PVM1000) is placed at the other one. While the full length of the waveguide is 135 cm, the distance between the microphone and the loudspeaker is 107 cm. The rest of the waveguide's length is occupied by two pieces of foam rubber, each 14 cm long. The loudspeaker and the microphone are embedded into these inserts. The microphone is directly connected to a USB audio interface Roland Rubix22. To connect the loudspeaker to the same sound card we use an amplifier based on the Yamaha YDA138-E microchip. The sound card itself is connected to a personal computer via USB interface. Control of signal generation and recording is realized via specially developed software based on the Python programming language (in particular, generation and recording of signals exploit the sound device module To imitate semi-infinite structure in the experiment we consider an array consisting of N pairs of coupled res-T exp = -18.6 dB onators. Proper boundary conditions -namely, sound hard walls at geometrical symmetry axes -allow to imitate periodicity along the two other axes (y and z axes). The numerical 2D model corresponds to a structure infinite in the z direction, while in the experiment it is mimicked by keeping the waveguide width and height smaller than λ/2 for the considered spectral range. The operational range of the setup for the case of the semiinfinite structure is 200 -2100 Hz. In order to imitate an infinite structure, all walls have to be totally reflective. At the same time, symmetry of the unit cell and of field distributions within it have to be preserved. Therefore, we select the size of the cross-section such that it's width and height are smaller than the smallest wavelength in the spectrum of a generated signal. Otherwise, the walls have to be perfectly symmetric and elements within the waveguide have to be centered ideally, which is hardly achievable. In order to increase the reliable frequency range in the waveguide below λ/2, we therefore only use half instead of full resonators. Such modification is valid since it does not violate symmetry of the structure. The resonators were manufactured by 3D printing (PLA filament). Note, that to simplify placement of resonators inside the waveguide, there are small place-holders in the slits of the resonators. All measurements were conducted for generated chirped signal with the frequency changing from 200 to 2100 Hz. For each measurement the signal was generated several times and then the measured spectra were averaged in Fourier space. Sampling frequency was always fixed at 44100 Hz. Following the conventional definition, the transmission was defined as where p ref is a pressure amplitude of the wave in the absence of a structure (reference signal) and p tr is a pressure amplitude of the transmitted wave. The measurement of transmission for the finite-size chamber were conducted in the same waveguide, as for the case of semi-infinite structure. However, the distance between the walls was increased to 650 mm. The walls and the ends were covered by foam rubber pyramids (with height 50 mm and square base 50 by 50 mm). The chamber was located at the center of the waveguide such that microphone (BOYA BY-M1) was placed inside the structure (at the center). All other elements and connections between them were the same as for the semi-infinite system. The procedure of signal generation and averaging also remained the same, however the frequency range was changed to be from 1500 to 16500 Hz. Switching to the case of metahouse chamber, Fig. 