Resonant lattice Kerker effect in periodic resonators is one of the most interesting generalizations of the Kerker effect that relates to various fascinating functionalities such as scattering management and Huygens metasurfaces. However, so far this effect has been shown to be sensitive to the incident polarization, restricting its applications. Here, we report, for the first time, polarization-independent resonant lattice Kerker effect in metasurfaces composed of periodic Ge 2 Se 2 Te 5 (GST) disks. For such a metasurface of square lattice, the spectrally overlap of the electric dipole and magnetic dipole surface lattice resonances can be realized by choosing an appropriate GST crystalline fraction regardless of the incident polarization. The operation wavelength and the required GST crystalline fraction can be conveniently tuned over large ranges since these parameters scale linearly with the disk size and the lattice period, greatly facilitating the design. Making use of the obtained resonant lattice Kerker effect, we realize a reconfigurable and polarization-independent lattice Huygens' metasurface with a dynamic phase modulation of close to 2π and high transmittance. This work will advance the engineering of the resonant lattice Kerker effect and promote its applications in phase modulation and wavefront control. High-index all-dielectric nanoresonators with low losses and multipolar resonances have emerged as new building blocks to realize unique functionalities and novel photonic devices, and have been expected to complement or even replace the plasmonic counterparts In order to achieve the spectral overlap and thus the destructive interference of optically induced electric dipole resonance (EDR) and magnetic dipole resonance (MDR), one needs to tune their spectral positions. This can be done by changing the resonator's parameters, which include the radius Recently, Mie surface lattice resonances (Mie-SLRs), owing to the coherent interference between the localized Mie resonances and the Rayleigh anomaly (RA) diffracted light, have attracted increasing attention because of their appealing merits including narrow linewidths, large quality factors, strong field enhancements extended over large volumes, and large wavelength tunability By varying one of the lattice period, resonant lattice Kerker effect due to the destructive interference of the ED-SLR of the array and the MDR of single nanoparticles can be implemented, resulting in resonant suppression of light reflection Taking advantage of the transition between the ED-SLR and the MD-SLR upon the change of the incident polarization, it is possible to achieve resonant lattice Kerker effect under the same conditions for two orthogonal linear polarizations based on the destructive interference of the ED-SLR and the MD-SLR in a square lattice. However, by illustrating with two types of arrays that consist of either silicon nanoparticles or core-shell nanoparticles, Babicheva and Evlyukhin As a consequence, the obtained resonant lattice Kerker effect due to the ED-SLR and MD-SLR overlap remains sensitive to the incident polarization because of the unequal lattice periods. Additionally, even when Λ x = Λ y , the resonances for two linear polarizations that are not orthogonal (for instance, with polarization angles are 0 • and 30 • ) may be different, since the nanodisks pattern in these directions are different. As a result, the conditions for achieving the resonant lattice Kerker effect would also be different. In other words, to date all the reported resonant lattice Kerker effects have been polarization dependent, which is distinct from the conventional Kerker effect without involving the SLR(s), and it remains challenging to realize polarization-independent resonant lattice Kerker effect. In this work, we tackle this challenge and numerically demonstrate, for the first time, polarization-independent resonant lattice Kerker effect based on the destructive interference of the ED-SLR and the MD-SLR in metasurfaces composed of Ge 2 Se 2 Te 5 (GST) disk array with equal lattice periods (Λ x = Λ y = Λ). As illustrated by figure The zeroth-order reflectance and transmittance spectra are then obtained with R 0 (λ) = |r 0 (λ)| 2 and T 0 (λ) = |t 0 (λ)| 2 , and the transmission phase spectra are obtained with φ t (λ) = arg{t 0 (λ)}. Wavelength dependent permittivities of the GST material in different crystallization levels are determined by where m is the GST crystalline fraction with 0 ≤ m ≤ 1, and ε a (λ) and ε c (λ) are the complex permittivities of the amorphous (m = 0) and crystalline (m = 1) GST, respectively. The values of ε a (λ) and ε c (λ) are taken from ref are shown in figure 3 Results and discussion Therefore, we have numerically demonstrated that both the ED-SLR and MD-SLR are excited, and that these SLRs can be spectrally tuned by changing the GST crystalline fraction, and that it is possible to realize the ED-SLR and MD-SLR overlap, i.e., the resonant lattice Kerker effect by choosing appropriate GST crystalline fraction. Although the above results are obtained for the specific incident polarization along the x direction, we find that the far-field spectra in figure where [A] is a Jones matrix. If we know the reflectance coefficients of E x and E y , the reflectance coefficient of this polarization state can be expressed as provided r xx = r yy = r and r xy = r yx = 0 (the detailed derivation can be found in the supplementary document). In other words, if the reflectance coefficients for E x and E y are equal and there is no polarization conversion between these two orthogonal components, the reflectance coefficient will be polarization independent. This precondition can be satisfied for a metasurface composed of periodic disks and square lattices, regardless of whether SLRs or coupling between disks are involved. Similar derivation and the same conclusion also hold for the transmittance coefficient. Because the ED-SLR (or MD-SLR) is due to the coherent interference between the Mie EDR (or MDR) and the RA diffracted light, the Mie resonances strongly depend on the GST disk size, and the RA wavelength is determined by n 0 Λ under normal incidence, we expect that the wavelength as well as the GST crystalline fraction These behaviors can be understood by the spectral shifts of the ED-SLR and MD-SLR. Since the EDR is independent from h, whereas the MDR experiences redshift that linearly scales with h, the ED-SLR are almost independent from h, whereas the MD-SLR red-shifts linearly with h. The smaller spectral distance between the Therefore, in order to minimize the GST crystalline fraction m Kerker for achieving the ED-SLR and MD-SLR overlap, for example, to realize m Kerker = 0 to the extreme limit, one can increase the disk height or diameter, or decrease the lattice period. This points to alternative approach to achieve polarization-independent resonant lattice Kerker effect, especially in periodic silicon or core-shell nanoparticles, of which the refractive index cannot be easily tuned. Based on the obtained polarization-independent resonant lattice Kerker effect enabled by changing the GST crystalline fraction, we further realize reconfigurable and polarization-independent lattice Huygens' metasurfaces. Here, "lattice" is added in order to highlight the key role of the SLRs, which involve only the zeroth-order diffraction and suppress scattering in side directions, inherited from the resonant lattice Kerker effect. shows that the obtained polarization-independent lattice Huygens' metasurface can be tuned actively. In figure In conclusions, we have theoretically demonstrated polarization-independent resonant lattice Kerker effect in a phase-change metasurface. Simulation results have shown that by properly choosing the GST crystalline fraction, the ED-SLR and the MD-SLR, which initially do not spectrally overlap for the amorphous GST when the lattice periods in the x and y directions are not equal, can be tuned to the spectral overlap. This leads to the polarization-independent resonant lattice Kerker effect. We have attributed the polarization-independent characteristic to the periodic GST disks with square lattice, which have equal reflectance/transmittance coefficients for the x and y polarizations and have no polarization conversion. We have also shown that the operation wavelength can be adjusted linearly by varying the disk diameter and the lattice period, but it is almost independent from the disk height, facilitating the design. On the other hand, the GST crystalline fraction required for achieving the ED-SLR and MD-SLR overlap decreases linearly with the disk height and diameter, but increases linearly with the lattice period. These behaviours point to the alternative approach to realize the polarization-independent resonant lattice Kerker effect: by properly choosing the geometric size for a given the material system. This approach, which is equivalent to the one adopted in this work, that is, changing the GST crystalline fraction for a given geometry, deserves further investigation especially in metasurfaces composed of periodic silicon nanoparticles. Taking advantage of the ED-SLR and MD-SLR overlap enabled by changing the GST crystalline fraction, we managed to realize reconfigurable and polarizationindependent lattice Huygens' metasurfaces. We have shown that full transmission phase coverage of 2π and high transmittance above 68% over the spectral range, and dynamic phase modulation of up to 0.8 • 2π with transmittance above 31% can be achieved. Therefore, this work also suggests a new approach to realize programmable polarization-independent Huygens' metasurface, which, we expect, would be more favorable over that based on conventional Kerker effect, since the scattering in the side directions is well suppressed thanks to the lattice effect. As a final remark, we expect that the proposed polarization-independent resonant lattice Kerker effect will be demonstrated and find applications in other operation wavelengths by tuning the geometric parameters, and that the transmittance can be significantly improved to near unity by adopting other low-loss or even lossless phase-change materials such as Ge 2 Sb 2 Se 4 Te (GSST) 