Today, fast-growing energy demands and fuel resource depletion are among the hottest concerning issues that treating our world. So, a huge need is felt to find efficient, affordable and eco-friendly energy storage and production systems. Much current research effort proved that gaseous energy carriers such as CH4 and H2 seem to be the right choice for alternative fuel resources. However, the most important challenge with this new-faced resource is the comparatively low volumetric energy storage density. Fortunately, the high-pressure gas storage technique inside the porous media of solid adsorbent is considered as one best way to tackle the energy density problem. Famous family of porous carbon materials, with a suitable pore size distribution centred in the micropore range and a large number of adsorption sites per volume of solid, open up a great scope for gas storing applications. This review article represents the state-of-the-art with a precise focus on what has and can be done to improve/enhance the gas/energy storage capacity of traditional and novel structures of low-cost carbon-based adsorbents. We review a wide variety of design strategies to synthesis carbonaceous adsorbents, with a strong focus on creating the connection between structural properties and gas adsorption performance. In this regard, various synthesis techniques have been studied with emphasis on the more interesting recent progress that allows better control and optimisation of porosity of porous carbons for maxing gas storage capacity. We will also show The energy crisis and environmental effects are interconnected concerning issues the world is dealing with today. For years, the nations have been alarmed by the possible climate changes due to an increasing level of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. Moreover, according to the worldwide energy consumption statistics, oil and coal as the primary available energy resources will deplete in the next few decades (Figure Global depletion of coal and oil as the primary resources of fossil fuel predicted by recursive-dynamic MIT Emissions model Methane, the main constituent of natural gas (NG), is known as an alternative energy source due to its accessibility and clean-burning properties over conventional fuels. Among all hydrocarbons, methane emits the least amount of pollutants during the combustion Figure Natural gas storage has predominately been conducted through compressed natural gas (CNG) or liquefied natural gas (LNG) systems. However, these methods have been considered expensive 1 due to the high compression and liquefaction prices and the costly storage tanks that should withstand high pressures Besides CH4, the use of H2, as a clean source of energy with zero carbon foot print, attracted considerable interest in recent years due to its fascinating characteristics; H2 as the light element (second lightest element after helium), produces the largest amount of energy on a gravimetric basis in comparison with other fuels as shown in Figure Developments in H2 storage technologies, such as metal hydrides, spillover, physisorption and chemisorption, might improve the H2 low volumetric energy density. However, most of these strategies are still far from commercialization due to economic and/or technical challenges. Among the current technics, physisorption of H2 on porous materials seems to be promising due to its fast kinetics and the reversibility of the storage process (1) micropore size distribution with predominant pores around 0.8 -1.1 nm width for methane and 0.6 nm for hydrogen storage (should be noted that with such an optimum PSD, two CH4 and H2 molecules can be adsorbed easily inside the micropores) (2) high packing density to guarantee that volumetric storage capacity will be high (3) appropriate thermal properties (i.e. high specific heat capacity and low heat of adsorption) to minimize the thermal fluctuations inside the adsorbent bed The advantages and disadvantages of some groups of adsorbents are listed in Table Carbon-derived adsorbents are one of the main studied classes of adsorbents for gas storage and energy-related applications due to their particular characteristics such as high porosity, and chemical/thermal/mechanical stability. More importantly, compared to other porous materials that require the use of expensive precursors and time-consuming synthesis, production of carbon derived adsorbents is affordable. As shown in Figure Adsorbent's type Feature Advantage Disadvantage Carbons -Challenging to prepare different batches of a carbonaceous adsorbent with a uniform structure (As zeolites or MOFs). Zeolites Metal Oxides Careful fabrication of carbonaceous matters can significantly improve their properties for specific applications. For instance, some new-reported activated carbons possess a significant porosity and surface area of more than 3000 m 2 .g -1 . However, it needs to be considered that the porosity of adsorbents does not necessarily guarantee their high gas storage capacity. Numerous investigations are still going on to optimise production methods for the cost-effective microporous carbons that satisfy the latest value of the DOE target. The linear relationship between methane adsorption capacity and micro/meso porosity of adsorbents has been discussed by Rodríguez-Reinoso et al. and Monge et. al The majority of available research outcomes on carbon preparation rely on a trial and error approach with relatively considerable uncertainty and poor reproducibility of the results. One best way to maximise carbon-based materials' gas storage performance is to design them with a precise and predictable synthesis approach. Such an approach provides a specific large-scale synthesis pathway which is a complete departure from conventional methods. Therefore, we believe it is an appropriate time to provide a comprehensive guide to the developments in this field over the past decade. Activated carbons (ACs) is one the main members of porous carbon materials which have been extensively investigated in different fields of application. Their tunable micro/mesoporosity has been instrumental in achieving their best performances, especially for fuel gas storage and separation requests. A variety of synthesis approaches have been developed to control the pore size distributions in these materials -some of these were undoubtedly succeeded in theoretical and experimental assessment ACs are prepared through the decomposition of organic substances with high carbon content (which is called carbonization process) followed by the activation of the carbonized materials to improve the porosity, as presented in Figure Renewable sources with inherent advantages like cost-effectiveness and availability are classified into three main groups including (i) polysaccharides (e.g. starch According to the literature, the precursors with a high carbon content are promising candidates for the gas storage/separation application A high temperature of up to 650-700 °C is applied during carbonisation to evaporate and remove volatile components from the precursor under an oxygen-free environment. In other words, noncarbon ingredients are volatilized under inert gasses such as N2 and Ar, which causes an increase in the carbon content of the carbonized samples Here, we reviewed several conventional and novel production approaches for ACs comprising physical activation, chemical activation, combined phisico-chemical activation, hydrothermal carbonization, templating method together with practical techniques for assembly of ordered/structured adsorbents. The synthesis principles, type of carbon starting materials (precursors), pore structure formation, as well as the CH4/H2 storage and separation performance of the prepared ACs were analyzed under each preparation approach. Physical activation, also known as "thermal oxidation", is considered an inexpensive approach for producing activated carbon without applying any chemical. This method can produce ACs with well-developed porosity in the solid structure favourable for gas adsorption requests. The primary purpose of such activation is to extend and open the incipient porosity developed during the carbonization Among many preparation parameters, activation temperature and gas flow rate can effectively impress the final textural features of activated carbon Among many of the reported physically prepared ACs for gas storage requests spherical porous carbons (SPCs), shown in Figure Chemical activation is believed to be one of the favourite approaches capable of developing lowcost and efficient micro/mesoporous carbonaceous adsorbents for gas storage requests. Chemical activation, which is also known as "wet oxidation", includes a series of chemical reactions between a solid precursor and a chemical activating agent during the heating process under an inert environment. The precursor + chemical agent complex is simultaneously thermalized and activated at the targeted temperature (400 to 800 °C) under nitrogen or argon atmosphere. The chemical activation is considered economical for preparing ACs due to the relatively lower activation temperature and shorter retained time than the physical activation. Moreover, the resultant ACs show to have a higher specific surface area, uniform pore size distribution (PSD), and relatively higher packing density; these advantages positively affect the volumetric adsorption capacity of the products. The last item is especially essential for onboard gas storage applications. A detailed study on the mechanism of different chemical activation reactions in the precursor + chemical agent complex can be found in Rodriguez et al. efforts The likely reactions that might be happening between KOH and carbon raw materials are presented in the following equations: The initial mixing of the precursor and the chemical agent, also called the "mass-transfer" step, is critical to reaching well-developed porous carbons for gas storage uses. The raw carbon materials can be mixed with the agent in an aqueous solution (impregnation method) or just directly by grinding in the solid phase (dry method). Depending on the application of interest, either of these mixing methods is efficient. As a general rule, activated carbon produced via the dry mixing of precursor + alkaline agents has a higher and more well-developed porosity than those made by the impregnation method Finding optimum synthesis conditions to achieve a high gas capacity is challenging since many different preparation parameters were involved in the chemical activation process. Moreover, a multivariate study including an empirical investigation and laboratory analysis is quite expensive and time-consuming. Practising soft computations and using their nonlinear mapping capability and lack of necessity for detailed mechanical knowledge seems to be an excellent choice to attain ACs with high stored gas capacity. Several well-known empirical models are used for similar material designs to maximize the corresponding adsorbent's gas storage characteristics The pore structure and consequently gas adsorption capacity of ACs profoundly is affected by many parameters such as type of precursors, type and amount of chemical agents, carbonization temperature, and activation parameters (e.g. thermal condition and retention time) Sawant et al. used raw and calcined petroleum cokes as a carbon precursor to prepare activated carbons on medium and pilot-scale by chemical activation method Past decades have witnessed a rapid development of synthetic polymers and related materials, including poly(vinylidene chloride) terephthalaldehyde The CH4 uptake value for the activated PC was reported up to 10.25 mmol.g -1 (16. Shirazani and co-worker's synthesized nanoporous carbon spheres by KOH activation of starch as the starting carbon source to reach the high CH4 uptake An almost new term of "Physio-chemical" methodology generally represents a combination of two conventional physical and chemical activation approaches, involving chemical impregnation of carbon precursors with an activating agent, followed by a physical activation step under an oxidizing gas atmosphere (mainly CO2). Well-regulated porous textural properties and surface modification ability are considered the advantages of this mixed-method Although the combined activation approach enjoys the advantages of both originated physical and chemical activation methods, it is a complex and energy-consuming technique. As a result, there is a considerable gap between laboratory studies and large-scale production for industry application Table Besides the direct effect of carbon's microporosity on gas storage capacity, modifying the solid's surface chemistry (surface functionalization) can improve the adsorbent-adsorbate interaction and gas adsorption capacity. Nitrogen (N), and fluorine (F) containing contents, as well as other cations, are some of the functional groups which can be introduced (doped) into the carbon skeleton to create some momentary polarisation in the gas molecules Nitrogen/oxygen doping is a common modification method to introduce basic sites into the carbon framework and enhance the polarity of the carbon surface We have previously studied the effect of oxygen/urea (as a source of nitrogen-containing components) on the gas storage capacity of porous carbons The as-prepared carbon samples maintained developed microporosity of 0.20-0.32 cm 3 .g -1 and a good BET surface area of 912-1615 m 2 .g -1 . The gas adsorption measurements showed that although nitrogen doping contributes significantly to the selectivity of CO2/CH4, 8.09 based on IAST calculation, it almost harms the CH4 uptake of the N-dope carbons (1.46 mmol.g -1 at 25 °C and 1 bar) compared to those simple counterpart samples (1.59 mmol.g -1 at 25 °C and 1 bar). This observation might be interpreted by the fact that methane molecule possesses relatively low polarizability and heteroatom doping does not facilitate CH4 storing Blankenship II et al. experimentally optimized the fabrication of ACs to generate a set of porous carbons that simultaneously enjoyed a high surface area and high level of microporosity along with a high oxygen-rich nature Hydrothermal Carbonization (HTC) is a well-established thermochemical synthesis approach for making functional carbon materials with high surface area and controlled porosity from wet or dry carbohydrates or lignocellulosic biomass One of the main restrictions associated with the HTC technique is the relatively poor textural characteristics of the products (i.e. low surface area and undeveloped porosity). Thus the prepared adsorbents can not efficiently be applied for gas storage and separation. Post-activation of the hydrochars might be considered as a solution for producing ACs with high surface area Yuan et al. synthesized a series of nitrogen-doped porous carbons from a mixture of algae and glucose via hydrothermal carbonization and post-chemical activation The HTC's temperature strongly influences the porosity of the post-activated carbons glucose), its polymer (i.e. cellulose) and lignocellulosic biomass (i.e. rye straw) under different thermal conditions. Results showed the HTC temperature is a highly influential parameter affecting the development of the ACs porosity and PSDs. It was reported that the samples prepared at medium HTC temperature (180-240°C) possessed higher total/micropore volume (in the range of 0.94-1.21 cm 3 .g -1 ), whilst those obtained under higher HTC temperature (upper that 280 °C) exhibited lower microporosity development (lower than 0.95 cm 3 .g -1 ) after the KOH activation. Blankenship and Mokaya studied the preparation of HTC porous carbons from cigarette filters/butts for H2 storage Table Recently, many research attempts have been devoted to fabricating new carbon-based adsorbents with controlled and well-defined porosity inside the adsorbent's skeleton Generally speaking, the templating approach involves several steps: (1) carbon raw materials and templating agents need to be mixed, where carbon is assembled with the templating agent (soft templating) or set inside the porosity of the agent (hard templating); (2) the resultant should be exposed to thermal treatment (i.e. carbonization) to remove the agent from the mixture ~12 mmol.g -1 at 25 °C and 35 bar & H2: 8.27 mmol.g -1 at 25 °C and 30 bar) was reported. An extensive surface area of 3591 m 2 .g -1 and, more importantly, the presence of narrow micropores (~1.2 nm) in the ZTCs structure was reported as the main reasons behind their significant storage capacity. Such a narrow pore width inside the materials' framework is nearly close to the optimal value of 1.14 nm, which is recommended for maximum gas uptake The uniform crystal morphology of ZTCs is their other important characteristic, which provides the opportunity to have adsorbents with homogenius particle size distributions and higher packing density compared with the conventional activated carbons 78.5, and 25 °C), maximum gas uptake value of 1.27 wt.% was found to be reached at -196 °C and 1.05 bar pressure. Some of the ACs paprepared by templated method were listed in Table Table Carbide-derived carbons (CDCs), or "mineral carbons", are attractive candidates for gas storage mainly due to their tunable pore size distribution (PSD) with sub-Angstrom accuracy In some ways, many similarities exist between the synthesis of CDCs and the templating approach. The rigid metal carbide lattice acts as a template in the CDCs preparation, with the metal atoms extracted layer-by-layer. Thus, the as-prepared carbon structure is 'templated' by the carbide structure (see Figure Structural properties of the initial carbides (precursors) and CDCs preparation method significantly impact the tunable PSD characteristics of these materials. CDCs can be produced by selective etching of metals from crystalline metal carbides As an example, titanium tin carbides (Ti2SnC)-based CDCs were synthesized via chlorination at 400-1100 °C to study their gas adsorption properties (at 60 bar 25 °C) for CH4 and 442 cm 3 .g -1 (at 35 bar -196 °C) for H2. As mentioned earlier, the pore size of CDCs can be fine-tuned by optimizing the preparation condition. However, there is a limitation in applying such materials, especially for gas storage or as electrochemical capacitors, where larger specific surface areas are required -the highest values of SBET reported for CDCs are in the range of 2000-2500 m 2 .g -1 Consequently, the hydrogen storage capacity was promoted up to 63%. Traditional carbon-based adsorbents are fabricated in beads or granules, which are associated with some disadvantages in operational conditions such as mass transfer limitations and loss of the space between the particles, affecting the bed's volumetric capacity Mobile adsorptive gas storage/separation requests need to consider the volumetric adsorption capacity of microporous carbon materials besides their gravimetric capacity. The gravimetric storage capacity of adsorbents is strongly affected by their microporosity; however, the volumetric capacity depends on both porosity and packing density of the as-made adsorbents. Although ACs in powder form show a large specific surface area (>3500 m 2 .g -1 ), their low bulk density might question their ability for energy storage. Reshaping the low-dense ACs powder into dense/bulked structures such as pellets or monoliths makes it possible to compensate for the limiting factor Activated carbons can be compacted into monoliths or pellets with or without the use of a binder simply by the selection of appropriate carbon precursors. The synthesis procedures to prepare bulked ACs with/without binder are represented in Figure 11 One effective way to prepare dense ACs is the compactification approach that includes a pressing step before thermochemical activation Chen and colleagues recently reported the development of high-performance dense carbon nanoflower pellets (Figure freestanding polymer pellets can be readily made via controlling the packing of AC nanoflowers monodispersed particles, which significantly improves the bulk density. Freestanding polymer pellets can be readily obtained by reducing the solvent concentration (from 2:1 to 1:2 acetone/acrylonitrile) before the polymerization step and drying the formed polyacrylonitrile particles at 70 °C under vacuum. As-made adsorbents showed a record-setting bulk density (0.96 g.cm -3 ) with interconnected micro/meso/macropores and a surface area of 1077 m 2 .g -1 . This simple production method could record high CH4 storage capacities of 165 and 196 cm 3 .cm -3 at 35 and 65 bar, respectively. Carbon foams are spongy carbonaceous materials with cellular microstructures and hierarchical pore arrangements that attracted significant interest because of their unique structure and extraordinary performance in adsorption, energy storage, catalyst support, sensors and electromagnetic interference shielding applications A comprehensive study on the adsorption of a series of gasses, N2, CH4, and CO2, on carbon foams, was reported by Arami-Niya et al. Pitches are considered a customary carbonaceous precursor used to produce carbon foams due to their low cost and ease of accessibility Foaming strategies include blowing, and spontaneous foaming, wherein pitch releases light components and small molecules (volatilization). Afterwards, as-made foam materials experience carbonization (750-1400 °C) and graphitization (usually higher than 2100 °C), to form the final carbon foam structures Oxidative or thermal stabilization is considered a crucial phase to reach high-quality ACFs. The treatment temperature in the range of 150-400 °C, precursor diameter, and raw fibre characteristics are the critical thermal treatment parameters Carbonization comprises several complex physiochemical changes such as dehydrogenative condensation, polymerization, aromatization and removal of almost every impurities (e.g. O, N, CO, H2 and H2O) from the as-prepared fibre resulting in up to 90% improvement in carbon content Conte and co-workers synthesized a series of ACFs via CO2 activation of poly p-phenylene terephthalamide, commercially known as Kevlar 4 They prepared KOH-activated carbon fibres from polyvinyl alcohol/polyacrylonitrile (PVA/PAN) bi-component, as a precursor, using the wet spinning method. As-prepared ACFs showed a highly porous structure with a surface area of 3058 m 2 .g -1 and micropore volume of 1.18 cm 3 .g -1 . AFCs were measured to have a superior hydrogen storage capacity of 5.14 wt.% at -196 °C and 100 bar, ACs possess amorphous nature, disorderliness inside their framework and complicated crystalline structures originating from defects, curvatures, edges, heteroatoms or even randomly arranged stacked-carbon fragments The discovery of carbon nano-allotrope structures began with the detection of fullerenes (e.g. C60), known as the smallest carbon nanostructure and a representative of 0D carbon nano-allotrope Fullerenes have closed-cage structures composed of sp 2 hybridized carbon atoms connected by single and double bonds. Each C60 molecule comprises 60 sp 2 carbon atoms organized in a series of hexagons to develop diverse structures such as a hollow sphere, ellipsoid, tube, or any other configuration. The most famous member of this family is buckminsterfullerene (C60) 5 . The closed fullerenes, especially C60, which is so-called buckyballs, have the shape of a soccer ball with twelve pentagons and twenty hexagons in its particular framework (Figure Generally, carbon fullerenes (i.e. C60, C70 and other configurations) are synthesized via two basic synthesis methods, including (i) vaporization through the arc and plasma discharges soot) Moreover, alternative preparation techniques such as naphthalene pyrolysis (1) low yields and (2) difficulty of isolation/purification of the final products. As a result, although carbon fullerene originates from cheap and abundant raw materials such as graphite, its production is a high-cost process with undesired environmental impacts. Fullerene's curved geometry helps these structures to store guest species either outside their spherical surface, known as exohedral adsorption, or inside the nano-cages cavity called endohedral adsorption or encapsulation. C60 molecules can form monolayer and multilayer films of gas adsorbate inside their particular framework. Methane and hydrogen adsorption on the C60 film seems to yield well due to the large curved C60 molecules (1 nm diameter), with a highly corrugated adsorption potential So far, gas adsorption properties of the fullerene-based adsorbents have been mostly explored through theoretical studies The robust spherical cage-like structure of fullerenes theoretically provides ample space for capturing/storing certain gases such as H2 and CH4. However, the challenging question for onboard gas storage application of these materials is the gas accessibility and the presence of active and selective adsorption sites in their spherical structure. Zottel et al. investigated available adsorption sites for CH4 storage on fullerenes C60 by a combined theoretical and experimental analysis They measured the adsorption capacity of different sites by mass spectrometry analysis, density functional theory and molecular dynamics (MD) simulations. They distinguished four different adsorption sites, including (1) registered sites above the carbon hexagons and pentagons, Besides, it should be noted that confinement of a guest in the cavity of a fullerene cage would affect both the host and the guest molecules. Lately, the stability of "endohedral fullerenes" (socalled gas@C60), where guest gas molecules are enclosed inside the fullerene cage, has been investigated experimentally and theoretically In the case of C180 fullerene, the most stable configuration Optimized structures of CH4 as well as A) C60, B)1CH4@C60, C) C84, D) 1CH4@C84, E) C180 and F) 6CH4@C180 calculated by DFTB + code. Reproduced from ref One of the other approaches for forming endohedral fullerenes is "molecular surgery", wherein an orifice will be created on the nanocage to make open-cage fullerene accessible to atoms or small molecules (Figures The stability of the endohedral fullerene H2@C60 was assessed, and the results proved that the complex was nearly as stable as C60 itself; for instance, the encapsulated H2 did not escape even when the temperature rose up to 500 °C for 10 min. In a similar study, Bloodworth and co-workers fabricated an endohedral fullerene of CH4@C60 Figure The second class of carbon nano allotropes adsorbents, "Carbon Nanotubes" (CNTs) were discovered independently in 1993 by Iijima and Ichihashi The most elementary form of CNT is a single graphenic wall with a closed cap at both end sides (Figure Although various CNTs hold the same basic structure as graphene, they are prepared entirely differently. CNTs are produced via several well-established methods, including a simple hightemperature (> 800 °C) synthesis using arc discharge or laser ablation and novel low-temperature (< 800 °C) techniques such as chemical vapour deposition (CVD) approach Several attempts have been made to examine the impact of structural properties of curved graphenic surfaces for gas adsorption requests and specific morphology illustrated a high ability to adsorb CH4 (160 cm 3 .cm -3 ) at 35 bar and 30 °C. adsorbents experimentally Numerous studies have suggested that defects in CNTs structures increase the possibility of their gas storage capacity Due to practical difficulties associated with experiments in controlling/adjusting the geometrical properties of CNTs, the reported results in the literature are often controversial. One best way to precisely clarify the impact of the design parameters on the gas storage capacity of carbon nanotubes is using theoretical molecular studies. This method makes it possible to describe the nature of the interactions between gas and host nanomaterials, which helps to better understand the basic mechanisms of gas storage. As an example, the physisorption of pure CH4 on bundles of single-wall carbon nanotubes (SWCNT) was studied by computational methods to investigate the influence of the material's porosity on the storage capacity and the adsorbate distribution In another theoretical study, Peng et al. performed a molecular simulation on CH4 and CO2 storage/separation on carbon nanoscrolls Zhang and Wang used GCMC simulations and DFT calculations to explore the adsorption of CH4 in a square lattice of nanotubes array with different diameters of 2.04-4.077 nm, wherein the tubes were separated by a van der Waals distance of 0.334 nm Most of the reported values from theoretical studies seem promising for gas storage in CNTs (Table Another important group of graphitic nanostructures is the building block of graphite known as "Graphene". Graphene is an ideal one-atom-thick two-dimensional (2D) sp 2 bonded carbon sheet arranged in a hexagonal honeycomb lattice These particular 2D carbon nano-allotropes have attracted interest in various research areas such as medicine, aviation, as well as automotive and aerospace industry, and military applications because of their unique structure and exceptional characteristics. Recently, a significant number of investigations have been focused on applying graphene and its oxygen-containing derivatives, so-called graphene oxide (GO), for gas storage/separation requests. These carbonaceous structures usually possess a large surface area with adjustable microstructures, excellent electronic conductivity, and remarkable mechanical, chemical, thermal, and electrochemical stability. The graphene's quality is affected strongly by its production method. Briefly, the fabrication technics can be classified as chemical vapour deposition (CVD), plasma-enhanced CVD, graphitization, solvothermal, thermal and chemical exfoliation In relevant research, the hydrogen storage capacity of the so-called "pristine single-layer graphene sheet" with a BET specific surface area of 156 m 2 .g -1 , was evaluated The highest volumetric CH4 uptake value of 317 V.V -1 was reported in a simulation study of general multilayer frameworks (GMFs), multilayer graphene frameworks (MGFs) and pillared graphene frameworks Recent advances in hydrogen storage on 3D graphene materials confirm their possible high capacity and acceptable stability for practical usage. In a simulation study, using idealised models, Garberoglio et al. assessed the amount of H2 uptake of hypothetical organic pillared reducedgraphene-oxide sheets Considering the energy crisis and environmental pollution as the current global threats, developing practical, clean, affordable, and available energy storage systems becomes vital. High-pressure storage of energy carrier gases such as CH4 and H2, as adsorbed phase on porous materials, is a promising safe alternative for current expensive and energy-consuming techniques. The porous carbons family, particularly activated carbons, has a long usage history in energy storage systems. These tunable structures, with unique inherent properties, are experiencing continual development to satisfy the requirements of emergent applications. This paper reviewed various recent design strategies to synthesise carbonaceous adsorbents for CH4 and H2 storage. Carbon-based adsorbents in different forms of granule, powder, fibres, foam, pellet and monoliths, with a high surface area and good packing density, can play a meaningful role in gas storage/separation applications. The key factor for gravimetric gas uptake of these adsorbents is their porosity; however, for the volumetric gas storage capacity, another critical parameter of packing density should be counted simultaneously. Between these two different storage capacity scales, the volumetric uptake of energy carriers is more important and applicable for onboard vehicular applications. In the case of methane storage, the highest volumetric uptake can reach up to 200 cm 3 .cm -3 at 25 °C and 65 bar, getting closer to or meeting the new DOE targets. For hydrogen storage, the adsorbent with a well-developed microporosity exhibits high storage capacity of 4 wt.% at -196 °C and 1 bar condition. Traditional activation of carbon materials enlarges the pores to prepare adsorbents with high surface area. However, to better control and tune the porosity, new techniques such as HTC, templating, and CDC methods have been developed to fabricate carbonaceous materials. These methods showed repeatable results, and products with relatively well-controlled structural characteristics (i.e. surface area, pore-volume, pore size, particle size, morphology, etc.), and, as a result, higher gas uptake. For example, some zeolite-templated carbons showed to have a high pore volume, fined-tuned PSD and exceptionally high methane storage of up to 210 cm 3 .cm -3 at 25 °C and 65 bar. Activated carbons are recognized as well-studied adsorbents in many application fields. Still, limitations such as their relatively low gas storage efficiency, disorder pore geomorphology, and even etching contamination during the activation procedure are associated with these adsorbents. It is essential to explore new configurations of carbons with fewer inherent problems to overcome the limitation of these valuable materials. Over the past decade, carbon nano-allotrope adsorbents with highly ordered organized structures were introduced to compete with conventional amorphous disorder activated carbons. These novel adsorbents with different classes of zero (0D, carbon fullerenes), one (1D, carbon nanotubes), two (2D, graphenes) and three (3D, graphitic carbons) dimensions show great potential to serve as a suitable platform for loading gases such as methane and hydrogen. There is a strong possibility of significantly improving gas adsorption on carbon nano-allotropes structures due to defects inside their unique carbon cell. Recent studies on carbon nano-allotropes have revealed that the gas storage capacity of these materials can be enhanced by treating them with acids/basic media under different thermal conditions. However, most of the promising reported gas storage on this class of nanomaterials is based on theoretical studies. It seems experimental attempts to reach or even approach such values have been unsuccessful and need further investigation. In the end, it should be acknowledged that despite the latest progress on developing novel materials, activated carbons remain a primary option for the fabrication of gas molecular adsorbent due to their accessibility, low cost, and ability to mass production and facile preparation methods. However, as motioned earlier, these materials also associated with some drawbacks and further technological and scientific research is required to improve carbon-based adsorbents: For instance, new-faced materials like hybrid nanocomposite structures can be used as an energyefficient platform for advancing porous carbon sorbents. One advantage of using such novel structures' is to benefit the unique properties of its two (or even more) pristine components at the same time, however, more precise research and study should be done to economize and facile the fabrication methods of these adsorbents. Furthermore, the exact mechanism of gas adsorption on, inside or outside, curved-carbon structured or pillared graphene adsorbents is still controversial. Thus, further investigation should be performed to find fundamental molecular gas adsorption mechanisms inside the skeleton or on the surface of these carbon structures as next-generation gas adsorbers. Finally, we hope the topic of carbon-based materials continuously develops in other emerging regimes and attracts more scientists to join. * This symbol represents theoretical study. Traditional 4 ). Moreover, since the dry process requires less time and energy consumption than the The most stable configuration of gas@fullerene complex demonstrate the geometry with the lowest mean polarizability.