Strong Coulomb interaction in monolayer transition metal dichalcogenides can facilitate nontrivial many-body effects among excitonic complexes. Many-body effects like excitonexciton annihilation (EEA) have been widely explored in this material system. However, a similar effect for charged excitons (or trions), that is, trion-trion annihilation (TTA), is expected to be relatively suppressed due to repulsive like-charges, and has not been hitherto observed in such layered semiconductors. By a gate-dependent tuning of the spectral overlap between the trion and the charged biexciton through an "anti-crossing"-like behaviour in monolayer WS 2 , here we present an experimental observation of an anomalous suppression of the trion emission intensity with an increase in gate voltage. The results strongly correlate with time-resolved measurements, and are inferred as a direct evidence of a nontrivial TTA resulting from non-radiative Auger recombination of a bright trion, and the corresponding energy resonantly promoting a dark trion to a charged biexciton state. The extracted Auger coefficient for the process is found to be tunable ten-fold through a gate-dependent tuning of the spectral overlap. Semiconducting monolayers of transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) exhibit strongly bound excitons and other higher-order excitonic complexes The excitonic Auger process involves two excitons where one recombines non-radiatively, providing the recombination energy to a second exciton. This energy usually ionizes the receiving exciton One of the essential advantages of monolayer TMDCs lies in the gate tunability of the optical response. Under gating, the neutral exciton can easily transfer its oscillator strength to a charged exciton (or trion). Similar many-body effects like trion-trion annihilation (TTA) should be intriguing since, on the one hand, the relatively larger Bohr radius of trions may enhance the Auger process. In contrast, on the other hand, trion-trion repulsion due to like-charges would suppress such interaction. While Auger processes in higher-order excitonic complexes have been demonstrated in quantum dots We prepare a stack of 1L-WS 2 /hBN/few-layer graphene on a heavily-doped Si wafer covered with 285 nm SiO 2 using the dry transfer method. The stack is then annealed in high vacuum at 200 • C for 3 hours (see Methods section for sample preparation). A gate voltage (V g ) is applied to the top graphene electrode while connecting 1L-WS 2 to a grounded few-layer graphene contact. The device configuration is schematically depicted in Figure The spectral evolution of different excitonic peaks with V g is depicted in a color plot in Figure The p-doping side (V g < 0 V) shows three distinct features (Figure The spectral features are rich in the n-doping side (V g > 0 V). With an increase in doping density, the χ 0 peak gradually fades out due to a transfer of its oscillator strength to the negatively charged trion (χ -) As indicated in Figure Hence, as V g increases, the allowed trion emission moves to a higher momentum. This effect, in turn, results in a reduction in the trion emission energy due to the different curvatures of the two participating bands. The corresponding redshift ∆(V g ) = ω(V g = 0)ω(V g ) can be directly mapped to the momentum ( Q) of the emitting trion following the equation: In the above equation, we neglect any minor blue shift due to screening and field effect. We also assume that there is negligible filling in the conduction band (CB) around V g = 0, thus, V g = 0 corresponds to transitions at Q = 0 (shown in Figure Similarly, the charged biexciton emission moves to a larger momentum with an increase in V g due to Pauli blocking for the final trion state, and results in a similar red shift due to the difference in curvature between the charged biexciton and trion bands. The COM momentum Q of the emitting charged biexciton is related to the corresponding red shift where m 5 is the mass of the charged biexciton. Using equations 1 and 2, in Figure The zoomed-in version of the PL color plot in Figure The PL spectra of some representative V g values, along with the fitting of individual peaks (shaded area), are shown in Figure It is striking to note that the χ -peak intensity is highly non-monotonic with V g . In particular, after an initial increase (V g ≤ 1.5 V), there is an anomalous suppression in the χ -peak intensity with an increase in V g in the range of 1.5 V ≤ V g ≤ 5 V (shaded region), beyond which it again increases strongly. Comparing Figures Further, we observe no such anomalous decrease in trion intensity when we excite the same sample with a continuous wave laser (532 nm) at a power of 8.04 μW (see Supplementary Material [24] Figure These observations directly indicate the role of TTA in the anomalous suppression of the trion emission intensity. The mechanism is explained in Figure Energy and linear momentum conservation during the Auger process provides the following relation between the momenta of the participating trion and biexciton: where δ = (ωω ). We assume that the effective mass for electron and hole are 0.5m 0 each. Using the maximum overlap energy value (indicated by the red dots in Figure As stated before, when the spectral resonance reduces (V g > 5 V), TTA is gradually suppressed, and χ -peak intensity increases with V g , as usual (Figure V g > 6 V (when ζ is small), the β -peak intensity reduces with an increase in V g , which could be due to a less generation of charged biexciton from the dark trion due to the suppressed Auger process. To support the above-mentioned TTA mechanism, we perform in situ TRPL measurement on the sample (see Methods section for experimental details). The raw time-resolved spectra are provided in Figure The decay of the time dependent bright trion population density [n(t)] at Q is given by Here, τ is the trion decay timescale which includes both radiative and non-radiative mechanisms (other than TTA), while γ is the Auger coefficient for the TTA process. n(t) and n d (t) are the bright and dark trion population density at Q and Q , respectively. Note that both the bright and dark trion bands have similar curvature. Given that we are considering a two-dimensional system, the density of states is independent of the momentum. Thus, both the bands have a similar density of states irrespective of the values of Q and Q . In addition, we also expect that at these momentum values, the filling factors are similar since trion and biexciton radiative recombination peaks around Q and Q , respectively. Hence, we approximate n d (t) ≈ n(t). Then n(t) can be written as: n(0) is the trion population at time t = 0, and is estimated to be ∼ 10 12 cm -2 at the given laser power. Finally, the experimental TRPL spectra is fitted with by deconvoluting with the instrument response function (IRF). The second and third terms respectively take into account the decay from the charged biexciton and small defect tail in the spectral overlapping region. We use γ, β 1 and β 2 as fitting parameters. The respective values of τ , τ 1 and τ 2 are obtained from the non-TTA region (that is, V g < 0 V) and kept as constant at τ = 14 ps, τ 1 = 50 ps, and τ 2 = 750 ps (see Supplementary Material It is clear from Figure In conclusion, we demonstrate a large tunability of charged exciton and charged biexciton spectral features by applying a gate voltage. This allows us to directly map the large center of mass momentum associated with these emitting species, in stark contrast to the zero-momentum neutral exciton. When the two charged species are close to spectral resonance, we observe an anomalous suppression of the bright trion intensity with increasing gate voltage, suggesting a trion-trion annihilation through the Auger process facilitated by the spectral resonance. We could tune the strength of the Auger process ten-fold by varying the gate-voltage-dependent spectral overlap. Such an electrically tunable resonant Auger process could be a prospective tool to explore more complex many-body phenomena among higher-order excitonic complexes. Sample preparation. The top-gated stack is prepared by mechanical exfoliation of the individual layers from bulk crystals of WS 2 , hBN, and graphite. First, the exfoliation is performed on Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) using 3M TM scotch tape, and then the layers are transferred sequentially onto Si substrate covered with 285 nm thick SiO 2 . The few-layer graphene layers for the top gate electrode and the grounding electrode are connected to two different pre-patterned metal pads. The metal pads are fabricated using direct laser lithography, followed by sputtering of Ni/Au (10/50 nm) and lift-off. The deterministic transfer process is performed at room temperature under an optical microscope using a micromanipulator. After the transfer process is complete, the stack is annealed at 200 • C for 3 hours in a high vacuum chamber (10 -6 mbar) to ensure better adhesion between layers. ) state, emitting one photon at two different V g values. V g = 0 V transition occurs at Q = 0 (shown by dark blue arrow). At finite V g , the χ - D state is blocked up to Q , pushing the vertical transition to occur at higher Q (shown by red arrow). In-plane (Q x -Q y ) slice area, shaded in red, indicates a larger filling compared to (a) (bottom panel). Loss of electrons from conduction band in order to form χ - D is represented by a shaded arrow from |CB to χ - D . (c) COM momenta of the emitting χ -and β -species plotted as a function of V g indicating a cross over at higher V g . A pulsed laser source (pulse width ∼ 48 ps) of 531 nm wavelength and 10 MHz repetition rate is used for excitation. A temperature of 5 K is maintained in the cryostat during measurement. FIG. - FIG. V range) with a single as well as two voigt curves. Fitting with two voigt curves improve the fit quality significantly, proving existence of both χ -and β -even after strong spectral overlap. where Auger-effect is negligible by ensuring minimal spectral overlap between trion and charged biexciton, that is, in the voltage range -10 ≤ V g ≤ 0 V. In this region, since Auger effect is negligible, we fit the experimental TRPL data using the expression Ae -t/τ +A 1 e -t/τ 1 +A 2 e -t/τ 2 (after deconvolution with the IRF) accommodating the decay for the trion, charged biexciton, and any small defect luminescence tail. (a) An example fit (in solid black trace) with the experimental spectra (in symbols) at V g = -0.5 V. (b) The extracted value of τ , τ 1 and τ 2 in the non-TTA range (-10 ≤ V g ≤ 0 V), suggesting the values are independent of V g . The used vales for τ , τ 1 and τ 2 in the TTA regime are 14, 50, and 750 ps, respectively.