This paper presents a comprehensive study of the performance of Sezawa surface acoustic wave (SAW) devices in SweGaN QuanFINE ® ultrathin GaN/SiC platform, reaching frequencies above 14 GHz for the first time. Sezawa mode frequency scaling is achieved due to the elimination of the thick buffer layer typically present in epitaxial GaN technology. Finite element analysis (FEA) is first performed to find the range of frequencies over which the Sezawa mode is supported in the grown structure. Transmission lines and resonance cavities driven with Interdigital Transducers (IDTs) are designed, fabricated, and characterized. Modified Mason circuit models are developed for each class of devices to extract critical performance metrics. We observe a strong correlation between measured and simulated dispersion of the phase velocity (v p ) and piezoelectric coupling coefficient (k 2 ). Maximum k 2 of 0.61% and frequency-quality factor product (f.Qm) of 6×10 12 s -1 are achieved for Sezawa resonators at 11 GHz, with a minimum propagation loss of 0.26 dB/λ for the two-port devices. Sezawa modes are observed at frequencies spanning up to 14.3 GHz, achieving a record high in GaN microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) to the best of the authors' knowledge. SAW devices are essential components for filters, oscillators, and RF signal processing blocks in wireless communication due to their advantages of lithographically defined resonance frequency, simple fabrication process despite the use of materials that have historically been difficult to etch, low manufacturing cost, and low sensitivity to acceleration Sezawa acoustic waves in a technology platform such as GaN on SiC provide a much-needed solution due to high phase velocity to scale to higher frequencies for given lithographic feature sizes, with the added benefits of high piezoelectric coupling and low viscoelastic losses GaN heterostructures which are generally available commercially, are typically grown epitaxially on substrates including (111) Si, SiC, and Sapphire using a thick buffer layer composed of alternating GaN/AlN layers to minimize residual stress generated in high-temperature growth The presence of SHF Sezawa modes in the QuanFINE ® heterostructure is confirmed through 2D FEA simulation using COMSOL Multiphysics. Eigenmode analysis is performed on a unit cell spanning one acoustic wavelength (λ) and IDT width (WIDT) and gap each spanning one quarter wavelength (λ/4). The 2DEG formed in the heterostructure can be used to block electromechanical actuation by shielding the electric fields from penetrating inside the piezoelectric layers IV. FABRICATION AND CHARACTERIZATION SAW devices are fabricated on a QuanFINE ® substrate using a two-mask process. We begin with a shallow blanket etch of in-situ SiN and AlGaN layers using CHF3/O2 and BCl3/Cl2 plasma inside an inductively coupled plasma-reactive ion etcher (ICP-RIE) (Fig. Four different types of designs for Sezawa mode devices are studied in this work, including (a) one-port IDTs, (b) oneport resonators confined by shorted metal with one IDT set centered in the cavity, (c) two-port delay lines consisting of two IDT ports separated by an acoustic transmission region, and (d) two-port resonators with metal reflectors forming a resonance cavity and two IDT sets for drive and sense embedded within the cavity. Schematic illustrations alongside optical micrographs of these four are provided in Fig. The devices are measured at room temperature in a radio frequency (RF) probe system (Cascade PMC 200) under vacuum. RF input signal of -15 dBm is applied using GSG probes (|Z|, 150 μm pitch) with 50 Ω termination, and scattering parameters (S-parameters) are obtained by a parametric network analyzer (Agilent N5225A). SOLT calibration is performed prior to measurement. The devices under test are then deembedded from the measured frequency response using open and short structures fabricated on-chip to eliminate electrical parasitics from probe pads and routing to the devices. The cross-field Mason model As the IDT fingers are electrically shorted at the ends for Measured frequency spectra for Sezawa mode IDTs, delay lines, and resonators are shown in Fig. The dependence of phase velocity (v $ ) on the normalized piezoelectric thickness (hp/λ) for the Sezawa mode in the QuanFINE ® structure is obtained from simulated and measured resonance frequency (f # ) using the following equation Fig. Series (f # ) and parallel (f $ ) resonance frequencies (Fig. k ' are also calculated from the extracted circuit parameters via fitting the measurements (Fig. Here, J is the Jacobian elliptic integral According to theoretical analysis, a maximum k # of 1.3% and ~2% can be achieved for in-plane and thickness mode devices, respectively, in the GaN platform Although the maximum k # achieved from the SAW devices (0.61% at 11 GHz) may seem low for wideband filter application, it can be further extended by incorporating high k # materials such as GaScN Modified Mason circuit models developed in the previous section (Fig. A modified Butterworth-Van-Dyke (BVD) model Fig. A maximum Qm of 542 at 11 GHz is achieved from our resonators as shown in Fig. The f.Qm product for each resonator is calculated by multiplying the resonance frequency (f # ) of a mode by its extracted Qm. Fig. The QuanFINE ® platform is shown in this work to enable frequency scaling beyond the state-of-the-art MEMS devices in GaN MMICs with simple fabrication. Extracted phase velocity and electromechanical coupling from modified Mason model fittings for different SAW designs show the dispersion of the Sezawa mode in the structure and close agreement with FEA simulation. The resonators exhibit low propagation loss and high frequency-quality factor product towards the fundamental limits at record high frequency in GaN MMICs. This technology with AlGaN/GaN heterostructure and high 2DEG density provide a platform for low-cost and high-performance reconfigurable MEMS components in GaN MMICs for programmable ad-hoc radios in the super high frequency regime Microfabrication and characterization of the SAW devices were performed at the Birck Nanotechnology Center at Purdue University. The authors are thankful to Jackson Anderson from 