Noble-metal-free surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) substrates have attracted great attention for their abundant sources, good signal uniformity, superior biocompatibility, and high chemical stability. However, the lack of controllable synthesis and fabrication of noble-metal-free substrates with high SERS activity impedes their practical applications. Herein, we propose a general strategy to fabricate a series of planar transition-metal nitride (TMN) SERS chips via an ambient temperature sputtering deposition route. These planar TMN (tungsten nitride, tantalum nitride, and molybdenum nitride) chips show remarkable Raman enhancement factors (EFs) with ~10 5 owing to efficient photoinduced charge transfer process between TMN chips and probe molecules. Further, structural engineering of 2 these TMN chips is used to improve their SERS activity. Benefiting from the synergistic effect of charge transfer process and electric field enhancement by constructing nanocavity structure, the Raman EF of WN nanocavity chips could be greatly improved to ∼1.29 × 10 7 , which is an order of magnitude higher than that of planar chips. Moreover, we also design the WN/monolayer MoS2 heterostructure chips. With the increase of surface electron density on the upper WN and more exciton resonance transitions in the heterostructure, a ∼1.94 × 10 7 level EF and a 5 × 10 -10 M level detention limit could be achieved. Our results provide important guidance for the structural design of ultrasensitive noble-metal-free SERS chips. As a powerful analytical tool, surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) has been widely applied in the fields of biomedicine, food safety, environmental monitoring, and reaction process analysis for its high sensitivity, nondestructive detection, and spectroscopic fingerprinting In recent years, searching for noble-metal-free SERS materials with high sensitivity, superior stability, and low-cost has attracted much attention. The SERS activity of noble-metal-free materials mainly originates from the photoinduced charge transfer (PICT) process between the SERS materials and probe molecules, that is the chemical mechanism (CM) crystal orientation Fortunately, some methods such as careful doping, adjustment of morphology or size have recently been used to obtain the LSPR effect in the visible range With the advantages of excellent conductivity, high hardness, and superior stability, transition-metal nitrides (TMNs) are widely applied in catalysis, energy storage, and medicine Herein, a simple and general method to fabricate a series of planar TMN SERS chips are demonstrated, in which the WN and TaN are taken as SERS materials for the first time. By means of experimental and theoretical research, we prove that sensitive SERS activity of these planar TMN chips is attributed to the efficient PICT process between TMN chips and probe molecules, and their Raman enhancement factors (EFs) are up to ~10 5 . Furthermore, by constructing nanocavity structure, the Raman EF could be increased to ~1.29 × 10 7 , which is an order of magnitude higher that of planar chips. We also design the WN/monolayer MoS2 heterostructure chips, achieving a ~1.94 × 10 7 level EF and 5 × 10 -10 M level detention limit. Our research results provide economical and effective guidance for the structural design of ultrasensitive noble-metal-free SERS chips. Tungsten nitride, tantalum nitride, and molybdenum nitride are deposited on Si wafer using direction current (DC) reactive magnetron sputtering technique, widely used for the large-scale production of chips. The morphologies of these sputtered TMN chips are investigated by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). As shown in Figs. have reported that adsorption behavior of R6G molecules on SERS substrate surface would impact the relative peak strength of Raman spectra In summary, we demonstrate a facile and universal strategy to fabricate a series of planar TMN SERS chips by an ambient temperature sputtering deposition technique. For the first time, WN and TaN are used as SERS materials. Because of highly efficient PICT process between TMNs and probe molecules, the Raman EFs of these planar TMN chips could be to ~10 5 . Going further, taking WN as an example, we design WN nanocavity chips and WN/monolayer MoS2 heterostructure chips to improve their SERS activity. Benefiting from the synergistic effect of the CT process and electric field enhancement, the Raman EF of nanocavity chips could be greatly enhanced to as high as ∼1.29 × 10 7 , which is an order of magnitude higher than that of planar chips. Thanks to the increase of surface electron density of the upper WN layer and more exciton resonance transitions in the heterostructure, the detection limit of R6G molecule on the WN/monolayer MoS2 heterostructure is as low as 5 × 10 -10 M with a Raman EF of ~1.94 × 10 7 . Our results provide a promising strategy for the structural design of novel chips with noble-metal-comparable SERS activity. gas was used to purge the chamber for 30 s. The thickness of Al2O3 was controlled by setting the number of reaction cycles. Typically, the deposition rate of this process is about 0.1 nm cycle -1 , and 5 nm Al2O3 was obtained after 50 ALD cycles. Characterization: XRD patterns were obtained using a Rigaku Smartlab (3) X-ray diffractometer (λ = 0.15406 nm). The SEM images and the elemental mapping images were recorded on a FEIXL-30 SEM equipped with an energy dispersive spectrometer. The XPS measurements were performed by a Thermofisher ESCALAB 250Xi apparatus. The optical absorption spectra were measured by a UV-vis Spectrophotometer (Shimadzu, UV-3600) in the diffuse reflectance mode. The thickness of the samples was obtained by a BRUKER Dimension Icon AFM. The Raman measurements under laser excitation at 532 nm were achieved from a Jobin Yvon Lab RAM HR800 Raman spectrometer. The Raman signal of probe molecules could be detected if the signal-to-noise ratio is more than or equal to 3. We prepared a series of probe solutions with different concentrations, including 1×10 -4 , 5×10 -5 ,1× 10 -5 , 5×10 -6 , 1×10 -6 , 5×10 -7 , 1×10 -7 , 5×10 -8 , 1×10 -8 , 5×10 -9 , 1×10 -9 , 5×10 -10 , and 1×10 -10 M. Different concentrations of probe molecules are adsorbed on SERS substrates from high concentration to low concentration, respectively. If SERS substrate could detect Raman signal of probe molecules with A concentration rather than B concentration (one level lower than that of A), we would regard that the limit of detection for probe molecule is below A concentration. All samples were maintained in probe solution for 1h and taken out, followed by a drying treatment under N2. The laser beam was focused to a spot about 2 μm in diameter with a 50× objective lens. The laser power on the sample surface was 36.5 μW and the spectra were acquired for 5 s unless specified. The Raman mapping spectra were collected from an area 28 ×30 μm 2 with 2 s on the heterostructure chips and the step length is 2 μm. the SERS intensity, which can be described as follow formula where I k (CT) is the Raman intensity of a band in which the CT contributes to the intensity of enhanced Raman signals. Two bands with no CT contribution are selected as a reference. One is I 0 (SPR), the intensity of the totally symmetric band only comes from the contribution of the surface plasmon resonance (SPR). The other is called I k (SPR). If the k band is totally symmetric vibration band, the main contribution to the intensity arises from the SPR, and I k (SPR) = I 0 (SPR). If k band is non-totally symmetric vibration band, the contribution from CT dominates the intensity. At this moment, I k (SPR) is usually quite small, and it can be assumed to be zero in many cases. It can be seen from formula that when PCT is zero, there are no CT contributions; when PCT close to 1, the CT contributions will dominate the spectrum. We could select the totally symmetric 1360 cm -1 mode and the non-totally symmetric 612 cm -1 mode as line 0 and k, respectively All our first-principles calculations were carried out within the framework of density functional theory energy difference between subsequent self-consistency iterations below 10 -5 eV is used as the criterion for reaching self-consistency. All geometries have been optimized using the conjugate-gradient method, until none of the residual Hellmann-Feynman forces exceeded 10 -2 eV/Å. The finite element method (FEM) simulations are carried out on COMSOL. These modes are excited by a plane wave source with incident direction perpendicular to the plane of structure. The incident light wavelength is 532 nm, and its electric field intensity is 1 V/m. The scattering boundary conditions are applied to the model. The dielectric constants of tungsten nitride are set as ′ = -8.80 and ′′ =1.15 Constant technological parameters (working pressure, gas flow, sputtering power and reaction temperature) during the magnetron sputtering determine the growth velocity of the chips. We set the sputtering time as 7000 s and obtained ~1.175-μm-thick film confirmed by SEM (Figure The RSD value (612 cm -1 ) of R6G (10 -6 M) gathered from 30 random sites on the WN nanocavity. The structural models of (a) nanocavity and (b) planar chips utilized in the FEM simulations. The Raman spectrum of monolayer MoS2. The transmittance of (10 nm) WN layer deposited on transparent substrate. (j)), indicating that significant SERS enhancement could be obtained for the adsorbed molecules on the cavity walls. The maximum electric field intensities (|E|/|E0|) are 6.32 and 1.78 for the WN nanocavity and planar chips, respectively.