Spatially resolved transport in two-dimensional quantum materials can reveal dynamics which is invisible in conventional bulk transport measurements. We predict striking patterns in spatially inhomogeneous transport just above the critical temperature in two-dimensional superconducting thin films, where electrical current will appear to flow as if it were a viscous fluid obeying the Navier-Stokes equations. Compared to viscous electron fluids in ultrapure metals such as graphene, this analogue viscous vortex fluid can exhibit a far more tunable crossover, as a function of temperature, from Ohmic to non-local transport, with the latter arising on increasingly large length scales close to the critical temperature. Experiments using nitrogen vacancy center magnetometry, or transport through patterned thin films, could reveal this analogue viscous flow in a wide variety of materials. Despite transport being arguably the simplest possible experiment in solid-state physics, the electrical conductivity σ can also be the most challenging quantity to predict theoretically, especially in strongly correlated systems. Over the coming decade, it will be increasingly possible to measure not only the bulk conductivity σ, but also a wave number dependent conductivity σ(k), using either microscopically-etched devices Here, we study theoretically the spatially-resolved transport of a two-dimensional metallic system near the onset of superconductivity in the absence of external magnetic fields. We consider a system at temperature T just above the critical temperature T c , below which there is superconductivity and essentially no bulk resistivity. The experimental signature which gives superconductivity its name is that the bulk conductivity σ(k = 0) → ∞ as T → T c from above. Yet σ(k > 0) is not likely to diverge as well: at finite k, the system will already appear ordered -nothing should seem singular at T c . On phenomenological grounds, we can therefore conclude that σ(k) ≈ 1 a(T -T c ) + bk c , as k → 0. ( where a(0) = 0 and b, c > 0 are approximately Tindependent constants. Space-resolved transport should * koushik.ganesan@colorado.edu † andrew.j.lucas@colorado.edu be quite dramatic if σ(k) stays finite at fixed k = 0 as T → T c . We will argue that (1) indeed holds, with exponent c = 2. This dependence on k is mathematically equivalent to what happens in a viscous electron fluid Before describing our derivation of (1), let us explain how this quantity can be (indirectly) probed in experiment. Due to the large speed of light c, one cannot simply shine light on a sample, since ω = ck is very large (in fact, it is then more appropriate to approximate k = 0 while ω = 0). We advocate the following strategy instead. Consider etching a constriction into a 2d material, as sketched in Figure where E (0) and E ind. are the background and induced electric fields respectively. The induced electric fields will vanish except inside of the forbidden regions where electrons cannot traverse. We thus require that outside the walls E ind. = 0, while inside J = 0. Making a final assumption that σ( x, x ) = σ( x -x ) (the sample is otherwise approximately homogeneous), one can look for solutions to (2) consistent with these requirements. This prescription has been detailed at some length elsewhere Assuming translation invariance, the spatially dependent conductivity σ ij ( x -x ) can be formally defined as Consider a two-dimensional metal (or a thin film of thickness d of an intrinsically three-dimensional metal) at temperature T just above a superconducting transition temperature T c (here T c corresponds to T BKT ). In the 3d case, we require d ζ 0 , where ζ 0 is the 3d coherence length of the superconductor, which will be finite at the critical temperature of the 2d film. We take T < T GL , but T > T c . In this temperature range, vortices proliferate and destroy (quasi-)long-range order. As T → T c , the diverging conductivity σ(k = 0) is a consequence of the vanishing of "free" vortices (not bound in a vortexantivortex pair) We acknowledge that the Aslamazov-Larkin (AL) theory of fluctuations T GL -T c , there may be a narrow temperature window where the effects we predict are visible, and those of the AL theory are not. We leave a precise answer to this question to future work. Strictly speaking, an essential difference between a superconductor and superfluid becomes important close to T c : as the supercurrents that circulate around a vortex generate a magnetic field, this leads to an effective potential energy between vortices that scales as ∼ r -1 instead of the usual ∼ log r interaction of the superfluid To understand the implications of these long-lived vortices in transport, we observe that for T -T c T c , there is a long-lived supercurrent J φ . In general, computing σ(k) is incredibly challenging. However, because J φ is long-lived, we expect σ(k) to be dominated by the relaxation of J φ To explain more quantitatively, let u φ ∝ ∇φ be the superfluid velocity, which is thermodynamically conjugate to J φ . On general grounds Using the memory matrix formalism Here Γ J φ J φ is the relaxation rate of the supercurrent: Precise computations of any of the three terms in (6) are difficult near T c in any microscopic model, but we can reliably estimate the scaling of each term, beginning with the susceptibilities. Importantly, we find that χ JiJ j φ and χ J i φ J j φ are finite as T → T c , and do not exhibit power law dependence in k. In the absence of rotational symmetry breaking, one can define them as follows: Here the superfluid boson degree of freedom has mass m and charge q, and ρ s is the local bare superfluid density outside of vortex cores, which is finite near T c The non-trivial calculation is thus of Γ (k). Γ (k) is where the vortex physics highlighted earlier becomes important. The superfluid velocity u φ = ( /m)∇φ is the gradient of a phase, a U(1) order parameter which exhibits point-like defects called vortices in two dimensions. The stable vortices have phase φ which winds by ±2π around a point: let us denote the density of free positive circulation and negative circulation vortices with n + f and n - f respectively. The density of free vortices is given by n , where with b a material-dependent constant (usually b ∼ 0.1 Since spatial variations are aligned along x, and thus we can deduce the leading order behavior in Γ (k) by calculating the signed vortex decay rate. Just above T c the vortices form an analogue "Coulomb gas" ζ 0 , simply because this is the generic hydrodynamics of a conserved quantity • • • indicates higher-order terms suppressed by additional powers of ζ 0 k. Combining ( This is the main result of our paper. Our claim is that ( Remarkably, the exact same mathematical structure as ( where ρ 0 is the normal charge density and η is the shear viscosity, and the scattering rate off of impurities, which relaxes momentum, is proportional to -2 . The mathematical analogy between ( As we detail in Appendix B, our microscopic argument for the scaling k -2 assumes that we are exactly at T = T c ; it is possible that for T < T c , corrections to this scaling arise. While our microscopic argument does not suggest that the exponents of the equilibrium inter-vortex distribution modify the scaling exponent in k -2 , a more detailed analysis could be worthwhile. Even if such corrections do eventually emerge far from the critical temperature, from an experimental point of view, observing these corrections could be challenging, as even observing the scaling given in There have been several older studies looking at viscosity in the context of vortex liquids in superconductors and we now compare our findings to earlier work. The first studies of σ(k) The physics responsible for analogue viscosity was first identified in an even older literature It has also been recently argued The link between vortex diffusion and non-local conductivity identified in this work has serious experimental implications, as we now discuss. Due to the large speed of light, optical probes readily measure σ(k = 0, ω = 0), rather than σ(k = 0, ω = 0); indeed, 40 years ago, most experimental works focused on finite ω (not k) response for this reason. However, we have emphasized here that σ(k) is a direct window into vortex diffusion, an effect which is readily seen in σ(ω). Perhaps the most direct way to measure the latter is by using local magnetometry. One can either measure current fluctuations (which give σ(k) due to the fluctuation-dissipation theorem If probing σ(k) directly is not possible, one may alternatively engineer devices with narrow constrictions through which current is forced to flow. Mirroring known results for viscous electron fluids where c ∼ 1 will depend on the geometry of the device and may exhibit some dependence on ratios of w to the size of the device as a whole Patterning such constrictions into a thin film superconductor can be done via focused ion beam etching A natural candidate material to test our theory is MoGe One challenge for realizing this non-local transport over parametrically large scales in a real material may be inhomogeneities -not because they can directly relax the "viscous" mode as in a conventional electron fluid where 0 is the bare dielectric constant without including free vortices and the polarization of bound vortices (which we keep just for clarity, though it may as well be 1). One expects that for T ≈ T c (for some constant κ > 1 and O(1 where a ∼ ζ 2 0 is a non-singular term. The first term is extremely singular and corresponds to the Poisson-Boltzmann screening of point charges whenever n f > 0, since the combined potential V (k) ∼ n v (k)/k 2 (k); the second term is regular and just corresponds to microscopic scale corrections to the Coulomb gas analogy to point charges. Combining (A4) and (A5) and neglecting the a-term, we find Combining (A6) with ( If κ 1, we can essentially treat this susceptibility as a constant; if κ 1, then this susceptibility could change by some O(1) factor; however this would modify neither limit of our main result Now we estimate Γ (k) with the memory matrix formalism where the memory matrix where ṅv = i[H, n v ] is the operator corresponding to the rate of change of vortex density. We may write where J v (k) is the vortex current operator. In a semiclassical limit with large vortices, where a indexes the vortices in the system with orientations Γ a = ±1. To proceed farther and evaluate the spectral weight (B2) we need to make a few more assumptions. For simplicity let us begin working exactly at T = T c . Following the Coulomb gas literature, at this point all vortices are "bound" in pairs; letting ζ 0 denote the superfluid healing length (which is finite, and corresponds to roughly the radius of the vortex core), one finds Let us further assume the dominant contribution to the spectral weight arises from interactions between two vortices in a vortex pair (possibly screened via other more tightly bound pairs, but this is accounted for by renormalized coefficients where with x ± (t) denoting the position of the positive/negative vortex in the pair, obeying |x + -x -| = r; the average • • • This formula is rather imprecise, as a pair will tend to dynamically change its value of r over time, but intuitively our approximation is to understand the contribution of each bound pair on its own to M (k). In the absence of thermal fluctuations and dissipation (both coming due to interaction with the normal fluid), a bound pair will simply propagate in a straight line, perpendicular to the orientation of the vortex dipole. Orienting the dipole for simplicity by placing the ± vortex at (0, ±r/2), we find this bound pair's contribution to However, since the isolated pair will move in a straight line forever, it's contribution to K(r) would be ∞ due to the integral over t; thus we need to also incorporate dissipative effects. In the presence of dissipation (but not thermal noise), a bound vortex pair will deterministically annihilate in a time τ (r) ∼ ηr 2 where we have taken the r → ζ 0 k -1 limit since, as we will see immediately, the smallest vortex pairs dominate the spectral weight. Plugging in (B9) into (B6) we obtain since the integral over r is convergent. (Although the convergence is slow, accounting for sin(kr)/kr corrections would give at best k 4 / log(kζ 0 ), which is subleading compared to the contribution from r ∼ ζ 0 .). Hence with no logarithmic corrections despite the power-law nature of the interactions in the system. Indeed, observe that even if our estimate of τ (r) was too large, because the integral over r in M (k) is dominated at small r not large r, a modified τ can only change M (k) by an O(1) constant, but not lead to any anomalous k-scaling in the answer at leading order. There is one important subtlety overlooked thus far in the argument, which we must address. Naively, the dominant contribution to k•J v (k) arises due to the drift of vortex pairs together (or apart), which could contribute (in the absence of noise) which seems to dominate the scaling found in (B8). Indeed, at time t = 0, this "dissipative" part of the vortex current will dominate J v (k, t → 0)J v (k, 0) . However, we claim that when integrating the correlator over all time t, as in (B7), this contribution will be small (at least for the tightly bound pairs). Indeed, suppose that the superfluid consisted of a single bound pair, which popped in and out of existence (mainly staying tightly bound). Applying a weak "analogue electric field" (supercurrent), by the fluctuation-dissipation theorem, the spectral weight K(r) will pick up a contribution proportional to the average contribution of this pair to J v (k) as t → ∞, even when averaging over orientations of the vortex dipole. This will vanish: the pair is bound and the electric field is not strong enough to overcome the "activation barrier" to pull the pair apart. Moreover, the actual drift of the vortex dipole in the background velocity field does not on average contribute to J v (k), as it flips sign when exchanging the positive/negative vortex (and each configuration is equally likely). Thus K(r) cannot pick up any contributions from the vortex current associated with fluctuations in vortex distance, unless the vortex pair is widely separated, where the electric field can unbind it. Yet similar to the previous argument, the contributions to M (k) from such weakly bound pairs are suppressed by a power of 1/ log(kζ 0 ). For T > T c , we expect that . Beyond this point, the contribution of unbound vortex motion to k • J v in (B8) will not come with an extra factor of sin(kr); thus we will find an additional contribution, of relative magnitude (kr) -2 ∼ (kζ) -2 ∼ n f /k 2 relative to the bound pair contribution; this leads to (B13) and thus to There is a somewhat curious observation that we can make. We have just argued that M (k) is dominated by tightly bound pairs; however, from the equation of motion for n v (k), we also conclude that the effective diffusion constant of one isolated vortex (also known to be finite Let us also briefly connect our somewhat microscopic arguments for Γ (k) to the more recent works where C ∝ D 0 n f . Together with the constitutive relation for the supercurrent (here = 1) and the relation n v ∝ ij ∂ i u j φ , one can immediately solve (B15) and find that D 0 [cn f + k 2 ]u y φ (k) ∼ E(k), which leads to possible to find a purely longitudinal flow in any twodimensional geometry for any fixed boundary conditions on the current. Expressing such a current flow pattern as J = -σ 0 ∇V (we have chosen suggestive notation, whereby σ 0 represents σ(k = 0) (the diverging bulk conductivity near T c ) and V represents a characteristic voltage profile which would be consistent with Ohmic flow), the uniqueness of solutions to ∇ 2 V = 0 with Neumann boundary conditions implies that one can find a current flow pattern obeying ∇×J = 0. It is not clear that on this flow pattern vortex physics must be relevant. However, if current flow patterns deviate at all from this special profile, then viscous effects must contribute to the conductance to some degree. Since experiments 