Superconducting vortices are promising traps to confine non-Abelian Majorana quasi-particles. It has been widely believed that bulk-state topology, of either normal-state or superconducting ground-state wavefunctions, is crucial for enabling Majorana zero modes in solid-state systems. This common belief has shaped two major search directions for Majorana modes, in either intrinsic topological superconductors or trivially superconducting topological materials. Here we show that Majorana-carrying superconducting vortex is not exclusive to bulk-state topology, but can arise from topologically trivial quantum materials as well. We predict that the trivial bands in superconducting HgTe-class materials are responsible for inducing anomalous vortex topological physics that goes beyond any existing theoretical paradigms. A feasible scheme of strain-controlled Majorana engineering and experimental signatures for vortex Majorana modes are also discussed. Our work provides new guidelines for vortex-based Majorana search in general superconductors. In condensed matter systems, the marriage of topology and electron correlations allows for fractionalizing electronic degrees of freedom into exotic non-Abelian quasiparticles such as Majorana zero modes (MZMs) In this work, we show that a three-dimensional (3D) s-wave spin-singlet SC, with certain non-topological normal states, is capable of harboring Majorana-carrying topological vortices. This conclusion is explicitly demonstrated in the superconducting phase of 3D Luttinger semimetal (LSM) LSMs generally show up as the Γ 8 quartet in HgTeclass materials, where the inversion between Γ 8 and Γ 6 bands usually creates a zero-gap topological insulator (TI). The composition of TI and LSM bands offers a minimal exemplar to visualize the competition between topological and trivial bulk bands for deciding the vortex topology. While a topological-band-only analysis anticipates a Majorana-carrying Kitaev vortex, our new vortex paradigm predicts a Majorana-free topological nodal vortex instead, further confirmed by our numerical simulations. We propose lattice strain effect as a promising control knob to detect and engineer vortex MZMs in superconducting HgTe-class materials. Experimental signatures of the proposed vortex topological physics are discussed in the details. We conclude by highlighting the potentially crucial role of low-energy trivial bands in deciding the vortex topology in general SCs and further providing suggestions on the ongoing Majorana search. C n -symmetric vortex topology. We start with a general topological discussion on the superconducting vortex-line states. A superconducting vortex in a 3D Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) system is a 1D line defect that traps low-energy Caroli-de Gennes-Matricon Invariant ν0 ν0,1 (ν0, Q1) (ν0,2, Q1) (ν0,3, Q1,2) TABLE I. Vortex topological classification of Cn-invariant swave spin-singlet superconductors. νJ z ∈ Z2 is a symmetryindexed topological invariant signaling the presence (νJ z =1) or absence (νJ z = 0) of a Jz-labeled vortex Majorana zero mode (MZM). The Cn topological charge QJ z ∈ Z characterizes the symmetry-protected vortex band crossings (i.e., a nodal vortex) near the zero energy. In principle, a vortex line is capable of carrying multiple 0D vortex MZMs and nodal bands that do not interfere with each other, as long as they are supported by distinct topological indices. (CdGM) bound states. Generated by an external magnetic field B, the CdGM states disperse along k B B to form an effective 1D system in symmetry class D, as described by a vortex-line Hamiltonian h vort (k B ). Throughout this work, we will denote ẑ as the magnetic field direction for simplicity. Besides the built-in particlehole symmetry (PHS), h vort can additionally respect G B , a subgroup of the 3D crystalline group G in the zero-field limit. The band topology of h vort is protected by both PHS Ξ and G B . We focus in this work on general s-wave spin-singlet superconductors, where G B is a n-fold rotation group C n and every CdGM state carries a C n index J z ∈ {0, 1, 2, ..., n -1}, i.e., the ẑ-directional angular momentum modulo n. CdGM states with different J z labels are decoupled from each other along k z and each J z sector can be characterized by its own 1D topological index. With an s-wave pairing, J z ∈ {0, n 2 } sectors are PHS invariant themselves and carry a Z 2 Pfaffian index ν Jz ∈ {0, 1} where n Jz (k z ) counts the number of J z -carrying CdGM states with a negative energy at k z . A derivation of Q Jz is provided in the Supplemetary Note 1. Physically, Q Jz indicates the number of pairs of C n -protected BdG nodal points along k z , signaling a band-inverted gapless vortex state dubbed a nodal vortex. Kitaev and nodal vortices are elementary building blocks to construct general C nprotected vortex topological phenomena. We now demonstrate our classification scheme. For instance, C 2 group possesses two PHS-invariant J z sectors J z = 0 and J z = 1, and a general C 2 -invariant vortex can only harbor Kitaev vortices but not the nodal ones. The vortex topology is then characterized by ν 0,1 , thus being Z 2 × Z 2 classified. When ν 0 = ν 1 = 1, a Majorana doublet emerges in the surface vortex core and the two MZMs will not mix for carrying distinct J z labels. Take C 6 as another example, the (Z 2 ) 2 = Z 2 ×Z 2 part is contributed by the PHS-invariant sectors J z = 0 and J z = 3, similar to that in the C 2 case. In addition, (J z = 1, J z = 5) and (J z = 2, J z = 4) form two pairs of particle-hole conjugate sectors indicated by Q 1 and Q 2 , so that only nodal vortices can occur in these sectors. This leads to another Z × Z contribution, promoting the classification of C 6symmetric vortices to (Z 2 ) 2 × (Z) 2 . We summarize the vortex topological classification and characterization for all C n groups in Table . I. Notably, the protection of vortex-line topology is decided by both the bulk crystalline symmetry group and the magnetic field orientation. Thus, it is possible to realize distinct vortex topological states in a single superconducting material by simply rotating the applied magnetic field. This clearly implies the absence of an exact one-to-one mapping between bulk-state and vortexline topologies. This observation motivates us to explore the possibility of topological vortices inside a completely trivial SC, whose topological triviality manifests in both its Cooper-pair and normal-state wavefunctions. Vortex topology from trivial bulk bands. Our target trivial-band system is a 3D Luttinger semimetal (LSM), which is defined by a single four-fold degenerate quadratic band touching at Γ The Γ 8 -bands are captured by the atomic basis T with ↑, ↓ denoting the electron spin and p ± = p x ± ip y orbitals. Under this basis, we consider a k • p model Hamiltonian around Γ that respects inversion, time-reversal, and around-ẑ-axis full rotation symmetries. In particular, Here, generality, we set λ 1 = 0 in the following discussion, and the four bulk band dispersions are Therefore, H LSM describes a quadratic semimetal with different in-plane and out-of-plane dispersions, serving as an anisotropic generalization of the conventional isotropic LSM model A dispersion plot for the isotropic LSM phase is shown in Fig. where μ is the chemical potential. H ∆ = i∆(r)γ 13 describes an isotropic s-wave spin-singlet pairing, making H BdG carry a trivial bulk topology. A superconducting vortex line centering at r = 0 can be generated by ∆(r) = ∆ 0 tanh(r/ξ 0 )e iθ , with (r, θ) being the in-plane polar coordinates and ξ 0 the SC coherence length. Origin of topological vortex-line modes in LSMs can be understood in a perturbative manner, which is schemat-ically depicted in Fig. Here k ± = k x ± ik y . The unperturbed part h (0) describes two identical copies of 2D massless quadratic Dirac fermions, each of which carries a 2π Berry phase and is similar to those live in bilayer graphene Taking into account h (1) (k , k z ), the four zero modes start to hybridize, split, and disperse along k z . Crucially, we note that in h (1) , 2 < 0 for an isotropic LSM. As we rigorously prove in the Supplementary Note 3, a negative m 1 will send two zero modes with J z = 0, 1 [i.e. colored in black and green in Fig. As a 4D irrep of the crystalline group, the quadratic band touching of LSM is unstable against lattice strain effects. It is natural to ask about the stability of the LSMorigined vortex topological phases under strain-induced perturbations. Motivated by this, we consider to perturb the original LSM Hamiltonian with two different strain effects described by H LSM = -Σ str γ 5 + Σ sb γ 15 . In particular, a positive (negative) Σ str describes a uniaxial tensile (compressive) strain that reduce the original O(3) symmetry to an around-ẑ continuous rotation symmetry C ∞ . Meanwhile, Σ sb further breaks C ∞ down to a two-fold rotation C 2 . Both terms preserve inversion symmetry P = γ 0 of the normal-state Hamiltonian. In Fig. Let us start with the Σ str -μ VTPD in Fig. Switching on Σ sb generally spoils symmetry protection of the nodal vortex phase by introducing a topological gap for the CdGM states. Due to the PHS and the remaining C 2 , this new gapped vortex state necessarily carries a nontrivial Kitaev Z 2 index ν 1 = 1 in the C 2 = -1 sector. Therefore, this Σ sb -induced Kitaev phase is topologically distinct from the preexisting Kitaev vortex phase that carries ν 0 = 1, a manifestation of the C 2 -stabilized Z 2 × Z 2 vortex topological classification shown in Table . I. We thus dub a Kitaev vortex phase living in the C 2 = ±1 sector a Kitaev ± vortex phase, to highlight its symmetry-eigenvalue label. For a fixed Σ str = 0.3 (i.e., the normal state is the trivial insulator phase), we numerically map out the Σ sb -μ VTPD, as shown in Fig. Material realization. The LSM-band physics has been experimentally established in HgTe-class materials, including HgTe Given the Dirac surface state in Fig. Here, two Kitaev vortices annihilate with each other topologically due to their Z 2 topological classification. To verify Eq. ( The TI bands are described by ). Controlled by κ, the inter-band-coupling term is given by Notably, the limit with κ = 0 turns off all the couplings between HH bands and TI bands, which is dubbed a decoupling limit. As κ increases, LSM physics is gradually turned on among the Γ 8 bands until it eventually reaches the isotropic limit of LSM at κ = 1, which is dubbed the LSM limit. Without loss of generality, we choose the realistic parameter set of bulk HgTe Strain-controlled Majorana engineering. Given the richness of topological physics in the strain-controlled VTPDs for LSM, we are motivated to explore the physical consequence of perturbing the six-band Kane-model system in Eq. ( In Fig. A tensile strain with Σ str > 0 allows LH and HH bands to detach from each other. In this case, the HH bands behave as a set of trivial bands floating inside the topological gap formed by Γ 6 and LH bands, without touching any of them. Notably, TI surface state is now the only electron state inside the strain-induced energy gap E g ∼ 2Σ str between LHs and HHs. Inside this energy window E g , we expect an emergence of Kitaev vortex as required by the Fu-Kane paradigm. Indeed, Fig. Remarkably, the Kitaev-vortex dome shows up only after a finite positive critical strain Σ c [i.e., the distance between two black dashed lines in Fig. To eliminate this finite-pairing effect and further test the limit of the Fu-Kane theory, we carry out a careful scaling analysis of Σ c as a function of ∆ 0 . As shown in Fig. where χ 1 = 0.59 and χ 2 = 1.31 meV -1 . Physically, the scaling relation implies a monotonic shrink of the Fu-Kane-violation region as the pairing amplitude ∆ 0 decreases. When the weak-pairing limit is reached at ∆ 0 → 0 + , the Fu-Kane limit is fully restored with Σ c → 0 + . Crucially, we note that ∆ 0 is always small but finite in realistic superconducting systems. For example, an experimentally relevant ∆ 0 ∼ 1 meV will lead to Σ c ∼ 0.6 meV following Eq. ( (i) The absence of Kitaev vortex in a unstrained HgTe generally holds for any small but finite ∆ 0 ; (ii) Vortex MZMs can be recovered via a strain control, and the critical strain trigger Σ c ∼ 0.6 meV is experimentally accessible Experimental signatures. The Σ str -μ VTPD in Fig. By tuning Σ str , we expect a Kitaev-trivial-Kitaev transition for a finite Σ sb . As schematically shown in the top panel of Fig. Finally, we wonder if the Kitaev ± phases in HgTe, despite their topological equivalence, could be locallly distinguished from each other through surface LDOS measurements. Using the recursive Green's function method, we numerically calculate the spatial spin-resolved surface LDOS D ↑ (r ) and D ↓ (r ) at a zero-bias voltage for the strained HgTe model in a semi-infinite geometry along the ẑ direction. Open boundary conditions are imposed for both in-plane directions with N x = N y = 35 and we have chosen Σ sb = 0.2 eV, μ = 0.2 eV and ∆ 0 = 0.2 eV for all calculations to eliminate the in-plane finite size effect. Here, r = (x, y) and the vortex core center locates at r c = We have demonstrated the possibility of topological nontrivial superconducting vortices based on a set of topology-free electronic bands. On the material side, we have established HgTe-class materials as an unprecedented playground to study trivial-band-induced vortex topology. We notice that intrinsic or proximity-induced superconductivity has already been observed in several members of this material family, including HgTe/Nb heterostructure Our results further suggest several new guidelines for the ongoing vortex-based Majorana search. First of all, we note that most topological-band-based SC candidates have coexisting trivial bands near the Fermi level, while most literatures choose to drop the trivial bands to simplify the vortex topology analysis. Our finding, however, suggests that trivial bands in a topological-band SC should have also been in the spotlight, without which the Majorana interpretation of the material could be fallacious. Second, we should not limit the Majoranaoriented material search to intrinsic TSCs or topologicalband SCs, since Majorana vortices can exist in certain types of bulk-topology irrelevant SCs as well. We hope that our work will motivate more theoretical and experimental research efforts under the spirit of Majorana from trivial bands and further initiates a new journey of the Majorana research in this large uncharted territory, the trivial superconductors. Bessel Function Expansion. The Bessel function expansion technique enables the calculation of vortex energy spectrum for continuum models, which we will describe below. In a rotation-symmetric disk or cylinder geometry, a BdG Hamiltonian H BdG is characterized by two good quantum numbers, z-directional crystal momentum k z and z-component total angular momentum J z . In particular, the angular momentum operator is where I 2N h ×2N h is the 2N h -by-2N h identity matrix with N h the dimension of the normal-state Hamiltonian and (r, θ) denote the in-plane polar coordinates. For the 4band LSM (N h = 4), we have Here, J vortex arises from the vortex phase winding, Clearly, [ Ĵz , H BdG ] = 0, and the BdG Hamiltonian matrix can be decomposed into J z -labeled matrix blocks, As a result, we only need to solve H Jz (r, θ)|Φ(J z , r, θ) = E|Φ(J z , r, θ) , where a general energy eigenstate is J z labeled and further takes the following form, where both u i (n, r) and v i (n, r) with i = 1, 2, 3, 4 yield the following expansions, Here, the normalized Bessel function is defined as where J n is the Bessel function of the first kind. α i and R denote the i th zero of J Jz (r) and the radius of the disk, respectively. c and c are expansion coefficients that are yet to be numerically calculated. We further note that in the polar coordinate system, the crystal momenta which satisfy It is also easy to show that The energy eigen-equation is now essentially a set of 1D radial equations for fixed k z and J z . In addition, the disk geometry with hard-wall boundary conditions requires |Φ(J z , r, θ) to satisfy u i (r = R) = v i (r = R) = 0. Notably, a Bessel functions with a large α i will oscillate rapidly and we expect it to contribute little to the lowenergy vortex bound states. Therefore, for a reasonaly large N ∈ Z >0 , we can truncate the zeros of the Bessel functions at α N , making the dimension of each decoupled Hilbert subspace to be 8N . Physically, this truncation can be interpreted as a Debye frequency cutoff around the Fermi energy. Solving these radial equations leads us to the vortex-bound states and their energy relations for a general vortex problem. The vortex simulation of LSM model in the continuum limit is performed using the above Bessel function expansion technique with R disk = 250. We further truncate the zeros of Bessel function at N = 250 and numerically confirm the validity of this truncation. As discussed in the Supplementary Note 4, the continuum model approach agrees quantitatively with the discrete tight-binding model approach. As for the 6-band Kane model (N h = 6), a general vortex wavefunction that respects the rotation symmetry is given by |Φ Kane (J z , r, θ) = e iJzθ [u 1 (J z , r), u 2 (J z + 1, r)e iθ , u 3 (J z , r), u 4 (J z + 1, r)e iθ , u 5 (J z + 2, r)e 2iθ , u 6 (J z -1, r)e -iθ , v 1 (J z , r), v 2 (J z -1, r)e -iθ , v 3 (J z , r), v 4 (J z -1, r)e -iθ , v 5 (J z -2, r)e -2iθ , v 6 (J z + 1, r)e iθ ] T , We finally remark on the particle-hole symmetry Ξ of |Φ(J z , r, θ) . Starting from an eigenstate at k z = 0 with Since our continuum models with isotropic s-wave spinsinglet pairings feature a full rotation symmetry, the J z = 0 subspace H Jz=0 is the only sector that respects particlehole symmetry, while a J z = 0 subspace is related to the -J z one via particle-hole symmetry. Chiral Winding Number and Vortex Zero Modes. We discuss the winding number argument to understand the existence of vortex zero modes of LSM in Fig. As shown in the Supplementary Note 2.2, it is suggestive to separate Eq. ( It is easy to check that h ∆ (k , θ) respects an emergent chiral symmetry which is independent of the sign of ∆. A stable vortex zero mode is necessarily an eigenstate of S and carries a S = ±1 label. Only zero modes that are differently Slabeled can interact with each other and get hybridized, while those carrying the same label cannot get coupled. Now h ∆ (k , θ) manifests as an effective 3D Hamiltonian in the symmetry class AIII, whose topological behavior is characterized by a chiral winding number N S ∈ Z Here N ±1 denotes the number of vortex zero modes that carry S = ±1. Evaluation of N S can be achieved by noting that h ∆ (k , θ) yields an off-block-diagonal form, as a result of the chiral symmetry, with Then the chiral winding number can be written as where μ, ν, ρ ∈ {k x , k y , θ} and μνρ is the Levi-Civita tensor. Applying Eq. ( Similarly, N S = 2 also holds for the other 4 × 4 block h -∆ since the value of N S is independent of the sign of ∆. As a result, the net chiral winding number for H 0 is indicating four robust zero-energy vortex bound states with S = +1. Projecting H 1 (k , k z ) onto the zero-mode basis will lead us to a perturbative understanding of the nontrivial vortex topology in superconducting LSM systems, as illustrated in Fig. Supplemental Material for "Topological Superconducting Vortex From Trivial Electronic Bands" In this part, we provide mathematical expressions of the Z 2 and Z-type topological invariants defined for the quasi one-dimensional (1D) vortex line Hamiltonian in the main text. 1.1 Z 2 Topological Invariant For C n -symmetric vortex lines, Z 2 topological invariant ν Jz characterizes the gapped vortex-line topology of Caroli-de Gennes-Matricon (CdGM) states that belong to a particle-hole symmetry (PHS) invariant angular momentum sector, i.e., J z = 0 or J z = n/2 for spin-singlet s-wave pairing. Therefore, ν Jz is exactly the Z 2 topological invariant for 1D class D systems but with an additional J z index. In this case, the quasi-1D system is always fully gapped without a topological phase transition. Following Ref. The equivalence between the Pfaffian invariant in the Majorana representation and the quantized Berry phase of the occupied BdG bands in the Nambu basis has been established where the non-Abelian Berry connection is defined for all occupied CdGM bands carrying J z . The above Berry phase formula can be further simplified if the 1D CdGM system features additional out-of-plane mirror symmetry M z . Notice that the superconducting vortex line is aligned along z-axis. To unambiguously extract the value of ν Jz , we just need the knowledge of the pattern of symmetry eigenvalues for the BdG occupied bands at high-symmetry momenta k z = 0, π This symmetry-based expression of ν Jz aligns with the spirit of symmetry indicator theory. 1.2 C n Topological Charge In addition to the above Z 2 topological invariant, we also define the C n topological charge Q Jz ∈ Z that will indicate the number of symmetry-protected Dirac nodal crossings in the quasi-1D vortex-line spectrum. Our definition is similar to the topological charges defined for 3D Dirac semimetals Here, Q Jz are defined for J z sectors that are not PHS-invariant. PHS generally flips J z to -J z , forming a pair of PHS-related J z sectors. Namely, if there exists a J z -labeled CdGM state at k z with an energy E, PHS mandates the existence of another partner state at -k z and energy -E, which is -J z labeled. The effective vortex Hamiltonian h vort (k z ) is generally gapped at k z = 0, π and we will focus on the occupied CdGM states with E < 0 at these high-symmetry momenta. Now we define n (α) Jz (k i ) as the number of occupied (unoccupied) J z -labeled CdGM states at high-symmetry momentum k z = k i (e.g., k i = 0, π) with α = v (α = c). The C n symmetry charge is defined as for J z = 1 for C 3,4 and J z = 1, 2 for C 6 . Because of the connectivity of energy bands, n Meanwhile, PHS requires that n (c) It is then easy to show that equivalently, |Q Jz | determines the number of C n -protected 1D Dirac nodes from k z = 0 to k z = π, which is also the number of pairs of 1D Dirac nodes in the CdGM spectrum. These nodes can not be removed without (i) breaking C n symmetry; and/or (ii) closing the energy gap at k z = 0, π. As schematically shown in Fig. (i) Consider a PHS-related sector (l, -l) and assume n l (π) = m, and n (iii) To ensure the connectivity of the bands, there must be N l number of l-indexed bands starting from the occupied bands at k z = 0, crossing the zero energy, and ending at the conduction bands at k z = π, where Note that N l is exactly our choice of C n topological charge. Similarly, one can find We note that when a pair of CdGM bands get inverted around a generic momentum k z = 0, π, they can contribute to an additional pair of Dirac nodes that are not captured by Q Jz . These Dirac nodes, however, can be eliminated without closing the energy gap at k z = 0, π. As a result, gapping these Dirac nodes will not lead to any topologically gapped state like a Kitaev vortex state. Therefore, we do not term vortices carrying these Dirac nodes as "topological" nodal vortex and we leave a discussion of these states to future works. In this section, we introduce the model Hamiltonian of a generalized Luttinger semimetal and study its vortex topological phase diagram. We first introduce the spin-3 2 matrices It is easy to check that [J i , J j ] = i ijk J k . Then the isotropic Luttinger Hamiltonian formed by the Γ 8 bands is The Hamiltonian form in terms of gamma matrices are defined in the main text. To fully incorporate the band topology of relevant quantum materials, we need to generalize the Luttinger model into a 6-band Kane model by including the Γ 6 bands. Therefore, we have where h 6 = (E c + λ 3 k 2 )σ 0 and Note that H Kane is essentially the same as H Kane (1, k), but in a slightly different form. To identify the conditions for Luttinger semimetallic phase in the Kane model, we now project everything onto the Γ 8 bases, following As required by the O(3) symmetry, the effective Hamiltonian must take the same form as h 8 but the band parameters will get renormalized accordingly, where In this case, the energy spectrum for H eff is given by For HgTe-class materials, Γ 6 and Γ 8 bands are electron-like and hole-like, respectively, leading to λ 1 > 0, λ 2 < 0, λ 3 > 0 and λ 1 > -2λ 2 . Meanwhile, the Γ 6 -Γ 8 inversion requires E c < 0. Therefore, to achieve a semimetallic phase, E 1 2 must play the role of electron bands and E 3 2 will be the hole bands. As a result, the LSM condition is Next, let us estimate the above projection parameters for the six-band Kane model, whose parameters are given by Note these parameters are all in unit of energy Thus, the diagonal term for the J z = ±3/2 bands reads We note that the sign is opposite with those for the LSM model used in the main text and Supplementary Note 2, where -(k 2 x + k 2 y ) + 2k 2 z is used for the numerical simulation. This sign difference could directly give rise to the opposite vortex band dispersion between Fig. x + k 2 y ) + 2k 2 z , the vortex-band with J z = +1 is a hole-like band, Fig. x + k 2 y ) -3.3k 2 z , the vortex-band with J z = +1 is a electron-like band. ( The opposite effective mass due to the sign switching will be explicitly shown after deriving the low-energy vortex Hamiltonian from the perturbation theory in the Supplementary Note 3. However, the physics we want to address in the main text would not be affected (see We now discuss in details the Bogoliubov-de Gennes Hamiltonian of LSM and the numerical mapping of its vortex topological phase diagram. As shown in the main text, Hamiltonian for a general anisotropic LSM consists of four Γ 8 bands, Here, z and the 4 × 4 γ-matrices are defined as with γ mn = -iγ m γ n and γ 0 = σ 0 ⊗ s 0 the identity matrix. H LSM satisfies time-reversal symmetry Θ = iγ 13 K with K being the complex conjugate, as well as an out-of-plane mirror symmetry M z = iγ 5 . Without loss of generality, we choose λ 1 = 0 for simplicity. Similar to the Kane model discussed in the main text, we further include the effect of lattice strain described by Σ str will become an important tuning parameter in our vortex topological phase diagram, as will be shown soon. We now turn on an isotropic s-wave spin-singlet pairing potential and consider a vortex-line configuration along the z-axis. The corresponding Bogoliubov de-Gennes Hamiltonian (i.e., Eq. (1) in the main text) is given by where μ is the chemical potential. The pairing function is captured by H ∆ = i∆(r)γ 13 . Apparently, H BdG carries a trivial BdG bulk topology because of the s-wave pairing. The Nambu basis for H BdG is where the atomic basis with a subscript e or h carries a crystal momentum k or -k, respectively. In particular, the particle-hole symmetry and a constant pairing term between |J z , s e and |J z , s h describes a spin-singlet s-wave Cooper pairing in our notation. Under this basis, we have where ṽ = √ 3λ 2 is used for short. Here (r, θ) describe the in-plane polar coordinates and k z remains a good quantum number. The vortex line centering at r = 0 is described by ∆(r) = ∆ 0 tanh(r/ξ 0 )e iθ , where ξ 0 is the SC coherence length. Here F and The continuum LSM Hamiltonian can be regularized into a tight-binding (TB) model by replacing k i , k 2 i with sin(k i ), 2(1 -cos(k i )), respectively. Compared to the continuum Hamiltonian, the advantages of a TB model are (2) it allows for an iterative Green's function method to calculate the surface local density of states (LDOS) for a semi-infinite slab geometry. In Fig. Step 1: initialize the in-plane vortex Hamiltonian H and the z-direction hoping Hamiltonian H z , Step 2: initialize the first iteration, T Step 5: after convergence (typically iteration number N itr ∼ 13), Then the spin-resolved surface LDOS are defined as where M ↑ and M ↓ are the projection operator onto spin-up and spin-down subspace, respective. For the Luttinger semimetal model, they are Similarly, the spin projection operators for the six-band Kane model are ⊗ Diag[0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1], Vortex MZMs of both Kitaev -and Kitaev + vortex phases will induce pronounced zero-bias peaks (ZBPs) in both the total and spin-resolved LDOS at the vortex core. The simulation is performed on a 39 × 39 lattice with the following parameter set, The Kitaev ± vortex phases are achieved when μ = ∓0.5. We set the energy resolution η = ∆ 0 /80 and show the numerical results in Fig. Combining the above two contributions together, we have proved that and clearly sgn(K ) = sgn(m 1 ). Similarly, we can prove the other relations in Eq. ( With μ = Σ str = 0, we have This immediately indicates the inverted band structure for both h Kitaev and h Nodal , leading to The above topological invariants explain the coexistence of Kitaev vortex and nodal vortex for LSM. The mapping between bulk and vortex coefficients further allow us to qualiatively understand the strain-induced vortex topological phase diagram. For example, a negative Σ str < 0 enhances the vortex-mode band inversion and further stabilizes the Kitaev⊕nodal vortex phase. A positive Σ str , however, weakens the vortex topology and make other phases in the VTPD (e.g. Kitaev, nodal, trivial vortex phases) to emerge. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTE 4: CONTINUUM MODEL V.S. LATTICE MODEL In Fig. 