One of the key features of the Majorana bound states emerging in topological superconducting (SC) wires is increasing oscillations of their energy under the growth of magnetic field or chemical potential due to concomitant enhancement of hybridization of the Majorana mode wave functions initially localized at the opposite edges of the structure. In this study we found that the other consequence of it is a shift of Aharonov-Bohm (AB) oscillations of linear-response conductance in an interference device where two ends of the SC wire connected with a normal contact via non-SC wires (arms). In addition, it is accompanied by an oscillation period doubling. The numerical calculations for the spinful system are supported by the analytical results for different spinless models allowing to track the conductance evolution as the hybridization of the Majorana modes increases. It is shown that since the coupling between the different arms and normal contact is implemented only via the different-type Majoranas the AB oscillations acquire a fundamental π/2 shift in comparison with the effect for an analogous system of zero-energy quantum dots. Starting from theoretical works The further progress in epitaxial growth of the hybrid nanowires allowed to synthesize the samples with uniform and clean interfaces between an SC shell and semiconducting core. It led to the hard SC gap induced by the proximity effect If the lengths of Majorana-state localization (inversely proportional to the induced gap) and SC part of the wire are comparable quantities the Zeemanfield dependence of conductance should demonstrate increasing oscillations when the strength of magnetic field grows up. Such a behavior takes place due to the overlap of wave functions of the Majorana modes (hereinafter, it is assumed that the Majorana bound state consists of two Majorana modes) Many mechanisms were suggested to explain this discrepancy between the theory and experiment. The absence of oscillations can be caused by the Coulomb interaction Different interference setups have been proposed to detect the nontrivial phase in the SC nanowire. If it is embedded in one of the arms of Aharonov-Bohm (AB) ring, then the Majorana excitation permits to transfer individual electrons and holes instead of Cooper pairs resulting in the change of the magnetoconductance oscillation period Here we propose the other way to test the overlap of the Majorana wave functions utilizing interference transport scheme. The setup sketched in Fig. The rest of article is organized as follows. In Sec.2.1 we describe a spinful model of the interference device and present a theory of quantum transport based on the nonequilibrium Green's functions (GFs). Sec. 2.2 is devoted to the numerical analysis of transport properties of the spinful model in the linear-response regime. In Sec. expression of conductance for a spinless model of the interference device is obtained. In Secs.3.2-3.4 we discuss the AB effect differences in the situations of nonoverlapping, weakly hybridizing and overlapping Majorana modes, respectively. We conclude in Sec.4 with a summary. In Appendix A equations of motions (EOMs) and retarded GFs for different lowenergy models of the spinless interference device are provided. In Appendix B transport properties of an interferometer containing zero-energy quantum dots (QDs) are numerically studied. One can treat the system under consideration as the normal (N) and superconducting (S) contacts coupled by the top (1) and bottom (2) arms, which are one-dimensional normal wires, as it is schematically depicted in Fig. ( The summand ĤN characterizes the single-band normal contact, where c kσ -an annihilation operator of the electron with momentum k, spin σ and energy ξ k = ε k -μ in the contact; μ -a chemical potential of the system; eV -an electric-field energy related to bias voltage. The second term is a tight-binding Hamiltonian which models a device consisting of two normal wires (or top and bottom arms) coupled to the opposite ends of the SC wire, ĤD = Ĥ1 + Ĥ2 + ĤS + Ĥτ , - where ξ i = ε i -μ, t i , α x i -a single-electron energy, hopping parameter and intensity of the Rashba spinorbit interaction in the ith arm (i = 1, 2), respectively; ξ S = ε -μ, t, α y -the analogous quantities in the SC segment of the device; ∆ -a strength of SC pairing induced by the proximity effect; τ i -a parameter of hopping between the ith arm and SC wire; h -the Zeeman splitting energy caused by the longitudinal magnetic field, B (see Fig. The last term in (1) takes into account tunneling processes between the normal contact and structure, where t 1,2 -intensities of tunnel couplings; φ = 2πΦ/Φ 0 -the AB phase induced by a magnetic flux Φ penetrating the device; Φ 0 = h/e -the flux quantum. To calculate a stationary charge current in the normal contact, I = e ∂ ∂t kσ c + kσ (t)c kσ (t) , the Hamiltonian (1) is diagonalized based on the Gorkov-Nambu operators Performing a series of transformations, the following expression for the current is obtained where σ = diag (1, -1, 1, -1). The matrix blocks of the device's advanced GF, Ĝa ji , are determined by the solution of the Dyson equation, Ĝa = ω -ĥD -Σr (ω) where Σr (ω) -a matrix of the retarded self-energy function reflecting the influence of the contact on the device. Assuming that the normal contact band is wide, one has the following nonzero blocks of Σr (ω): where Γii = Γ i τ0 , Γ i = 2πρ (t i /2) 2 -functions characterizing the broadening of the device levels (i = 1, 2); τ0 -an 4 × 4 identity matrix; ρ -the contact density of states; Γ 12 = √ Γ 1 Γ 2 . The matrix lesser GF, Ĝ+ij , in where n e(h) ≡ n (ω ∓ eV /2) -the Fermi-Dirac distribution functions. For simplicity, in the following numerical analysis we will assume that At the same time, to study the influence of spin-orbit coupling in the arms on the AB effect in more details the cases of identical and different normal wires will be analyzed separately, namely: 1) In order to model real InAs, InSb semiconducting wires of μm length the lattice constant is chosen as a = 50 nm. Then, using the effective mass value found experimentally, m = 0.015m 0 , the hopping parameter is t = 2 /ma 2 ≈ 2 meV To extract the effect related to the presence of SC segment in the device on low-energy interference transport we start with the limiting case when α x = 0. The corresponding Zeeman-energy dependence of conductance is shown in Fig. where u jσ , v jσ -the spin-dependent Bogoliubov coefficients of the device lowest excitation; γ jσA(B) = γ + jσA(B) -the Majorana operators of type A(B). At the high fields the hybridization of Majorana wave functions becomes nonzero giving rise to the oscillations of E 1 (h) and G (h). At zero AB phase the conductance is significantly suppressed. If the spin-orbit coupling in the arms is taken into account and that there is a slight quantitative difference from the α x = 0 case (e.g., compare the solid curve in Fig. The AB oscillations of conductance are plotted in Fig. the peaks appear when φ = π (n + 1/2), n ∈ Z (see dotted and dashed curves). In turn, the different spin-orbit interaction in the arms leads to their shift as shown by solid curve. In general, spin-orbit coupling in the system results in electron spin precession around the Rashba vector. Then, an additional phase carriers acquire in such media propagating from jth to j ′ th site Here σ = (σ x , σ y , σ z ) , τ z -the Pauli matrices acting in the spin and particle-hole space, respectively. In the presence of mirror symmetry (α x = 0 or ) the angles between the spins at the opposite ends of the SC section, Θ (S 1 (j = N 1 + 1) , S 1 (j = N 1 + N )) ≡ Θ S1,S2 , and at the edges of the device, Θ (S 1 (j = 1) , S 1 (j = 2N 1 + N )) ≡ Θ 1,2 , are the same. The latter is clearly seen in Fig. One of the main results of this study is displayed in Fig. at intermediate and high magnetic fields, respectively. To observe such a hybridization in transport the modes must have nonzero probability density at both ends of the device. In order for the leakage of Majorana modes When the in-plane magnetic field increases the probability density in the central part of the SC wire becomes nonzero at the expense of decrease of the probability density at its ends and the arms. Note that the described picture seems feasible in the modern experiments since to reach ballistic transport regime the short wires are used (∼ 0.1 -1 μm). Taking additionally into account the available proximity-induced SC gaps (∼ 0.1 -1 meV) one can conclude that the Majorana modes are able to extend over the whole structure The proposed setup can be effective in distinguishing between the nontopological quasi-Majorana state and nonlocal topological Majorana state with spatially separated Majorana modes. The former emerge in the trivial phase due to the presence of smooth electrostatic and/or SC pairing potentials around the N/S interfaces To describe analytically the found features of lowenergy interference transport let us proceed to the spinless system where the SC segment is represented by the Kitaev chain For further derivation of the conductance formula in the spinless case it is useful to separate electron and hole degrees of freedom in the normal-metal reservoir. In particular, the frequency-dependent blocks of the retarded and lesser self-energies in eji . The last relations imply Γe,h = Γ+ e,h that, in turn, results in T r σRe Σ+-Ĝa = -T r σ Σ+-Ĝr Σr Ĝa . ( Using the Keldysh equation and formula The factor 2 in the expression for current appears since both electron and hole degrees of freedom participate at transport. Next, we appeal for the particular structure of the Ĝr,a blocks. After some mathematical calculations the LAR transmission becomes where are the Fourier transforms of anomalous retarded GFs. For the sake of brevity, hereinafter the index 'r' denoting retarded character of the response is omitted. In the following we are concentrated on a study of quantum transport in the linear-response regime at the low-temperature limit. Then, the conductance is Thus, the analysis of transport features reduces to the finding of f ji . In order to solve this problem the EOM technique is utilized for the three cases As a starting point we consider the Kitaev chain at the symmetric point, t = ∆ and μ = 0, with the adjacent QDs (the symmetric Kitaev chain, SKC). In this case there are two NOMMs. The substitution of found GFs (A.5) into It is essential to notice that if φ = π (n + 1/2), n ∈ Z, the GFs have a first-order pole at ω = 0, i.e. Z = ω Z. Then, where where In other words, ω = 0 is an energy of the bound state in continuum. Taking into account the results The revealed behavior is universal as it is independent on the ratio between ε j , t j , τ j (j = 1, 2). The obtained results are confirmed by numerics. In Fig. The found features of conductance coincide with the ones for the situation when there is no QDs between the normal contact and Kitaev chain. The corresponding anomalous GF's are provided in Appendix A2. Using them the LAR-mediated transmission can be expressed as where ∆Γ = Γ 1 -Γ 2 , Γ = Γ 1 + Γ 2 . Taking into account the phase dependence of the denominator, Z, presented in the formula (A.10) the linear-response conductance is described by the expression In general, the suggested analogy with two noninteracting QDs is not complete since in our case the other eigenstates having nonzero energies are also able to contribute to the transport. For example, in the simplest situation of SKC directly coupled with the contact two Majorana double-dot molecules (consisting of γ 1B , γ 2A and γ N -1,B , γ N A , respectively) also interact with it. Then, both arms of the device include two chains characterized by opposite parity of Majorana-fermion number. Taking it into account in Appendix B we numerically analyzed the transport properties of the analogous AB interferometer containing ordinary zero-energy QDs. It is shown the result ( Hence, it becomes clear why there is no effect of nonzero ε 1 , ε 2 on the conductance features, that can be perceived as another manifestation of the Majoranamode leakage Now we focus on the SC wire in the nontrivial phase modeled by the effective Hamiltonian Ĥeff = iξb 1 b 2 /2, where ξ ∼ e -N is a measure of hybridization of the From expression (A.14) one can easily conclude that for the NOMMs (ξ = 0) the conductance at ω = 0 is equal to 2G 0 if φ = π (n + 1/2), n ∈ Z. Otherwise, it is zero, that is in complete agreement with the aboveobtained result In general situation of ε, ξ = 0 the linear-response conductance is zero. Mathematically, it means that the first-order pole of the GFs arises at ω = 0 only if cos φ = 2εξ (±2iε/Γ -1) /τ 2 . Finally, far from the symmetric point of the Kitaev model, the Majorana zero modes become to hybridize significantly. In particular, it infers that the mode, b 1 or b 2 , initially localized at one of the chain's edges shows the nonzero probability density at the opposite edge. It results in the direct coupling to both QDs with the different amplitudes proportional to τ 1,2 (u ± v) or τ 1,2 (u ∓ v) (see the dashed and dash-dotted curves in the bottom row of Fig. Taking into account the ω-dependence of the GFs' denominator (A.21) the linear-response conductance is The AB oscillations are depicted in Fig. In this study we offered a new method to examine the overlap of Majorana modes in the hybrid structure containing the SC segment between the normal wires (arms). In particular, the AB oscillations of linearresponse conductance are studied when the normal contact is tunnel coupled with both arms (the Π-shape geometry). As soon as the hybridization of Majorana modes becomes significant the AB resonances shift and the AB oscillation period doubles. The effect emerges since each of the overlapping modes interact with the contact via two arms that is supported by the numerical calculations for the initial spinful model and the analytical analysis for the spinless system including the Kitaev chain and QDs. Additionally, it is shown that if the factor of spin-orbit interaction in the arms is excluded the conductance peaks related to the perfectly delocalized Majorana bound state occur at φ = π (n + 1/2), n ∈ Z. It differs from the resonant AB phase φ = πn of the usual interferometer including two uncoupled arms with the odd number of ordinary zero-energy QDs between normal contacts (ω + iδ) d + j |d The EOM system solution makes it possible to find transmission amplitude associated with LAR processes since Thus, the following subsections present the diagonal and off-diagonal anomalous GFs. In order to treat the transport problem analytically we first address to the Kitaev model at the symmetric point, t = ∆ and μ = 0. Employing the Majorana-operator representation, a j = As a result, the EOM system (A.1) for i = 1 is Â1 x1 = B1 , where x1 = (g 11 , g 21 , f 11 , f 21 ) T . The coefficient matrix and column vector are The EOM system for i = 2 can be written in a similar manner. Their solution gives the sought anomalous GFs, where If there are no dots between the contact and Kitaev chain, then in the symmetric point one can easily write the following coefficient matrix and column vector writing the EOMs for the Majorana GFs, Â1A x1A = B1A , where x1A = (m 1A,1A , m 1B,1A , m N A,1A , m N B,1A ) T and m iA,jB = γ iA |γ jB : where Ω j = ωω j -t 2 , ω j = ω + 2iΓ j . Note that the factor 2 in B1A is caused by the nonfermionic anticommutation relations, i.e. {γ iA(B) , γ jA(B) } = 2δ ij . The three systems for the rest of Majorana GFs, i.e. m jA(B),1B , m jA(B),2A and m jA(B),2B , have similar form. Finally, taking into account the relation between the Majorana and fermionic GF's, the required anomalous GFs are Let us turn to the effective model of the Kitaev chain in the nontrivial phase which describes two Majorana modes localized at the opposite ends on the chain and weakly interacting with each other , where ξ -a hybridization parameter. Hence, the EOM technique leads to where z 1e(h) = ω 2 -ξ 2 C 1e(h) -T 1 , z 2e(h) = ω 2 -ξ 2 C 2e(h) -T 2 , T 12 = -ξτ 1 τ 2 /2, T j = ωτ 2 j /2, Z 12 = i ω 2 -ξ 2 Γ 12 e iφ /2 + T 12 . Since in the general case Â1 has no zero elements the solution of EOM system Â1 x1 = B1 is more cumbersome. We adduce it for the symmetric transport configuration when Γ 1 = Γ 2 = Γ/2, τ 1 = τ 2 = τ , ε 1 = ε 2 = ε, Table N t1 -even, N t1 -odd N t2 -odd N t2 -even N b1 -even, 1, φ = πn; 1, φ = π (n + 1/2); N b2 -odd 0, φ = πn 0, φ = π (n + 1/2) N b1 -odd, 1, φ = π (n + 1/2); 1, φ = πn; N b2 -even 0, φ = π (n + 1/2) 0, φ = πn is explained by the fact that the interaction between the normal contact and, for example, the SKC implies the coupling with not just the individual Majorana fermions γ 1A and γ N B but also with two Majorana molecules including γ 1B , γ 2A and γ N -1,B , γ N A , respectively. In the situation of the QD-SKC-QD system the separate sleeve consists of two Majoranafermion chains with two and three constituents. These chains are coupled when ε j = 0. Thus, if one wants to draw a more explicit analogy between the AB effect in the system of Majorana and fermionic QDs a top (bottom) arm in the latter has to contain two chains with N t1(b1) and N t2(b2) elements of different parity. Additionally, the phase difference of tunneling into these chains is set to π/2. It allows to show that the behavior To calculate the conductance the expression In other words, the problem is effectively reduced to the model studied in As a result, if the phase of tunneling into the arms is the same (up to the sign), i.e. the parity of N t1 and N b1 coincide, the conductance peaks occur at φ = πn -ε 2 + (A.14) + τ 2 (4ω + iΓ) ω ω 2 + i