This white paper presents a single-layer mask, found in Ref. [1] 1 , designed for fabrication of superconducting microwave resonators towards 1:1 comparisons of dielectric losses from the metal-substrate interface. Finite-element electromagnetic simulations are used to determine participation ratios of the four major regions of the on-chip devices, as well as to confirm lack of crosstalk between neighboring devices and demonstrate coupling tunability over three orders of magnitude. This mask is intended as an open-source community resource for facilitating precise and accurate comparisons of materials in the single-photon, millikelvin regime. Superconducting microwave resonators are a critical tool for materials loss characterization in superconducting quantum computing Coplanar waveguide (CPW) resonators are commonly implemented in multiqubit circuits for qubit control, readout, and qubit-qubit coupling. As they are generally patterned from the same single superconducting thin film that makes up the qubit capacitor pads, they are ideal for measuring losses of materials and interfaces that dominate qubit relaxation. At power levels near a single photon of average power and temperatures in the tens of mK, superconducting CPW resonators are sensitive to materials losses due to spurious two-level states (TLS) in on-chip amorphous dielectrics, crystal defects and impurities, and contaminants within regions in the device such as the substrate, the metal-substrate (MS) interface, the substrate-air (SA) interface, and the metal-air (MA) interface The total loss induced in a resonator is equivalent to the inverse of the internal quality factor, Q i = 1/δ. Further, the loss angle induced in a resonator due to TLS can be broken down as: where p j is the participation ratio of the j-th device region, and δ j is the TLS loss of the j-th region. Assuming each region of interest is thin enough that the electric field changes only across the surface, the participation ratio for region j of surface area S and thickness t j can be further expressed in terms of the electric field as: where E (j) is the electric field in this region, j is its relative permittivity, and U tot is the total energy density. This can be solved using finite-element fullwave driven electromagnetic simulations. The level of sensitivity to regions in the device can be tuned to an extent by modifying device geometry. Changes in the CPW gap width g, conductor width s, and trench depth and geometry determine TLS participation ratios. The gold standard for dielectric loss measurement of individual materials within a superconducting quantum device is outlined in Refs. For experiments varying the MS interface, such as those focused on substrate cleaning We hope this open-source mask This simple mask is a single-layer 7.5 mm x 7.5 mm chip design composed of eight quarter wave CPW resonators inductively coupled to a single feedline (Fig. A higher-resolution image of a single quarter wave resonator is shown in Fig. Table The inductive coupling strength is controlled by the length of the arm parallel to the feedline (the coupler). In this mask Fig. The participation ratios of the MS, SA, MA, and substrate regions of a 3 μm gap CPW resonator with 100 nm of isotropic trenching (as shown in Fig. A suggested map for wirebond location and density in presented in Fig. https://github.com/Boulder-Cryogenic-Quantum-Testbed/simple-resonator-mask