We present an analysis of the oxide trapped charge noise in MOSFETs operated at deep cryogenic temperatures. Our study involves a revised derivation of the interface trap conductance Gp and the oxide trapped charge noise SQt at the SiO2/Si MOS interface under very low temperature conditions, considering the application of Fermi-Dirac statistics. We establish a new relationship between SQt and Gp, highlighting the limitations of the Nyquist relation at such low temperatures. Additionally, we introduce a novel formula for the oxide trapped charge 1/f noise that goes beyond the classical Boltzmann expression. This formula incorporates the oxide trap density and effective temperature, taking into account degenerate statistics. Low-frequency (LF) noise has been the subject of intensive research for many decades in MOS devices. It is now well-accepted that carrier number fluctuations (CNF) resulting from electron trapping/detrapping in the oxide are the main sources of LF noise in MOSFETs In this work, we propose a revised analysis of the oxide-trapped charge noise in a MOSFET operated at deep cryogenic temperatures. To this end, we carefully reconsider the derivation of the interface trap conductance, Gp, and oxide-trapped charge noise, SQt, at the SiO2/Si MOS interface under very low-temperature conditions, where Fermi-Dirac statistics should be used. We then reformulate the relationship between the oxide-trapped charge noise, SQt, and the interface trap conductance, Gp, demonstrating the inadequacy of the Nyquist relation In this section, we first revisit the derivation of the interface trap conductance, Gp, which is associated with the dissipation resulting from electron exchange between the band and the traps. Next, we calculate the power spectral density of the trap occupancy function, which is associated with the fluctuations in the number of electrons in the traps, before establishing their relationship. We take care to perform the calculations using carrier Fermi-Dirac statistics to ensure applicability even under deep cryogenic conditions, where degenerate statistics may be relevant. The occupancy function, ft, of a single-energy interface trap interacting with the conduction band follows the Shockley-Read-Hall statistics. The time variations of ft are described by the rate equation (1) where c n is the capture rate, n s the carrier concentration and n 1 the concentration when the Fermi level E f equals the trap energy E t . In a classical inversion layer, the capture rate is related to the trap cross section  and thermal velocity v th by c n =.v th The trap occupancy function in steady state i.e. when df t /dt=0, f t0 , is therefore obtained from Eq. (1) as: where n s0 refers to the carrier concentration at equilibrium. Note that, according to Eq. ( Taking the Fourier transform of Eq. ( where Z is the angular frequency, j 2 =-1 and W=f t0 /(c n n s0 ). The single trap admittance, Y s =i s /V s ,with i s =jZ.q.f t being the net current and V s the surface potential variation, can thus be derived from Eq. (4) as in If we further assume as in However, since this expression is only valid under Boltzmann's statistics, which is not acceptable for low temperature operation, we should go one step further in the derivation with Eq. ( At this stage, it is worth noticing that Eq. ( Using the out-of-equilibrium trap occupancy function, f t =f t -f t0 , the time differential equation can be written as, ) Note that, in this formulation, df t0 /dt refers to the quasi-stationary time variation of the trap occupancy function due to the surface potential variation with time V s (t), whereas df t /dt relates to its non-stationary counterpart. Then, proceeding within the small signal analysis as in Eq. ( which provides for the single trap admittance Y s =i s /V s , Therefore, this derivation allows us to directly obtain the reduced single-trap conductance, Gp/ω, as given by Equation It is important to mention that, unlike Equation ( To evaluate the conductance of an energy continuum of states with a constant areal density, Nst (per eV per square centimeter), we follow the approach used in where W c0 =1/(c n .n s0 ) is the capture time. Interestingly, the conductance expression of Eq. ( Moreover, for an energy continuum of states also uniformly distributed in the oxide and exchanging by tunneling with the conduction band, the overall reduced conductance can be obtained by integration over the oxide depth as [21, Eq. (104)]: where N t is the volumetric oxide trap density (/eVcm 3 ) and O ox (0.1nm) the tunneling distance into the silicon oxide As can be seen in Fig. As a result, for an energy continuum of states uniformly distributed in the oxide, the reduced conductance G p /Z is flat over a wide frequency range due to the huge tunneling time constant dispersion varying from W c0 up to W c0 .exp(t ox /O ox ). We will see below that this plateau of G p /Z vs frequency will be associated to a typical 1/f spectrum region for the oxide trapped charge fluctuations. Fig. The power spectral density (PSD) of a single trap occupancy function, ft(t), can be obtained by applying the Wiener-Khintchine theorem to the auto-correlation function of ft(t), which is associated with the first-order kinetic process with a time constant, τ, as described by Equation ( where (f t ) 2 is the full variance of f t (t) random variable. According to Machlup's analysis [26, see also 27], f t (t) is a twostate process varying randomly between 0 and 1 versus time, such that (f t ) 2 =f t0 (1-f t0 ). Therefore, the PSD of f t (t) can be written as, As was suggested in earlier works which, using Eq. ( When the Boltzmann statistics applies, we have (n s0 /V s )/n s0 =q/ kT, so that Eq. ( Interestingly, this formulation corresponds to what was previously derived in Therefore, in the general case, the interface trap charge power spectral density S Qt must be calculated using Eq. ( where T eff is an effective temperature and k is the Boltzmann constant. In the case of Boltzmann's statistics, T eff reduces to T, whereas, for e.g. a fully degenerate 2D subband, T eff depends on the Fermi energy as T eff =E f /q, E f being referenced to the subband edge. For an energy continuum of states with constant areal density N st (/eVcm 2 ), using Eq. ( Similarly, for an energy continuum of states uniformly distributed in the oxide and exchanging by tunneling with the conduction band, using the approximation of Eq. ( Figure Variations of reduced conductance G p /Z with frequency f for single energy traps (dashed lines) with various occupancy function values f t0 and for an energy continuum of traps (solid line) (parameters: W c0 =50ns, O ox =0.1nm, t ox =2nm, x t =0.5t ox , T=300K, N st =10 10 /eVcm 2 ). Figure Figure మ .O ೣ ..் . (Boltzmann statistics) 