We develop an iterative, adaptive frequency sensing protocol based on Ramsey interferometry of a two-level system. Our scheme allows one to estimate unknown frequencies with a high precision from short, finite signals. It avoids several issues related to processing of decaying signals and reduces the experimental overhead related to sampling. High precision is achieved by enhancing the Ramsey sequence to prepare with high fidelity both the sensing and readout state and by using an iterative procedure built to mitigate systematic errors when estimating frequencies from Fourier transforms. Introduction -The precision of any coherent sensor, classical or quantum, is limited by the maximal measurement time-window t w over which a signal of interest can be sampled. This limitation originates from unwanted interactions of the sensor with noisy environmental degrees of freedom, which lead to decoherence and thus, to the decay of the measured signal Strategies extending the coherence time In this work, we demonstrate how to enhance the ubiquitous Ramsey interferometry of a two-level system Enhancing Ramsey interferometry is done by reducing the error in preparing both the sensing and readout states [steps (II) and (IV) in Fig. To improve frequency estimation, one needs to overcome two main shortcomings associated to discrete Fourier transforms: (FT1) Spectral leakage To mitigate systematic errors originating from (FT1) and (FT2) we develop an iterative, adaptive sensing protocol. Each interaction consists in performing Ramsey interferometry and processing the acquired signal with a window function tailored to either enhance the amplitude of the Fourier spectrum or frequency estimation. After each iteration, we use the newly found frequency estimate to update steps II, III, and IV of the Ramsey sequence [see Fig. Updating steps II and IV entails running the Magnusbased strategy for control with the new frequency estimate to enhance the frequency-sweeps used to prepare the sensing and readout state. Updating step III requires one to adjust t w to reduce the effects of spectral leakage. After just a few iterations we reach the spectral resolution allowed by the chosen, short t w and obtain a high precision frequency estimate. Model -We consider a parametrically coupled two-mode system as the coherent sensing element [see Fig. where σ j , j ∈ {x, y, z}, are Pauli matrices, ∆(t) = ω 2 (t) -ω 1 (t) is the controllable frequency difference between mode 1 and 2 [see Fig. The dynamical matrix D(t) is formally equivalent to a two-level Hamiltonian Ĥ(t) Since our goal is to develop a sensing protocol whose duration t r [see Fig. where p(δΩ) is the probability distribution of δΩ. Here, we assume p(δΩ) to be a Gaussian distribution with zero mean and standard deviation σ δΩ , In this work we choose σ δΩ = Ω 0 /10. Sensing and readout state preparation -We consider a generic frequency-sweep for the Ramsey interferometry given by [see Fig. where ∆(0) = ∆(t r ) = ∆ 0 is the initial (final) value of the frequency difference [see Fig. To prepare the sensing state a s = a 1 at t = t s and the readout state a r at t = t r (step II and IV in Figs. The alternative is to use a frequency-sweep with an adiabatic leading edge followed by a π/2 pulse [see, e.g., Ref. To design a fast, bandwidth-limited protocol yielding a high-fidelity state preparation [orange arrows in Fig. and choose a t s which respects the bandwidth limitation imposed by various experimental components including arbitrary waveform generators (AWG), filters, amplifiers, and other passive and active circuit components in a laboratory environment. This implies that the allowed maximal t s in Eq. ( For the rest of this work we consider two different modified frequency-sweeps that we label Mod1 and Mod2. The leading edges of the uncorrected (green), Mod1 (red), and Mod2 (blue) frequency-sweeps are shown in Fig. To compare the performance of the different frequencysweeps, we consider the state fidelity errors associated to the preparation of the sensing and readout state, respectively. Here j ∈ {0, 1, 2} labels the different frequency-sweeps: j = 0 is the uncorrected detuning sweep [see Eqs. ( with D j (t) given by Eq. (1). Figure Frequency estimation with trivial signal processing -Although our modified frequency-sweeps allow us to prepare the ideal sensing and readout states, they do not allow us to correctly estimate unknown frequencies from short-time signals, i.e., 2 ≤ (Ω 0 /2π)t w ≤ 4. We illustrate this in Fig. The modified frequency-sweeps (red and blue traces) lead to spectra where the global maximum (with the 0frequency peak excluded) can be more easily identified. However, the global maximum is not located at Ω/Ω 0 = 1. Our results also show that small changes in t w can result in different spectra with maxima located at very different frequencies, which obviates a correct frequency estimation. In the following, we show how an iterative procedure combining both an update on the estimate for Ω 0 and different windowing schemes Iterative, adaptive frequency estimate procedure -Windows, or tapers, are weighting functions designed to simplify the analysis of harmonic signals in the presence of noise and harmonic interference. In particular, the window functions apply selective weights to reduce spectral leakage associated with finite measurement windows In this context, the so-called Blackman-Harris window To overcome this limitation we use the iterative, adaptive sensing (IAS) protocol depicted in Fig. where Ω(m) denotes the frequency estimate obtained at iteration m and n ≥ 4 is an integer that defines how many periods are in the measurement-time window. We assume in Eq. ( We also update after each iteration the leading and trailing edge of the modified detuning-sweeps since the Magnus-based strategy for control requires one to know the parameters entering the equations of motion [see Eqs. (1) and ( A new estimate of the frequency is obtained by processing the acquired signal either with a window function tailored to either enhance the amplitude of the Fourier spectrum or frequency estimation [rectangles in Fig. w -1/2) for m ≥ 1, The other source of systematic errors come from dealing with a signal which is constructed from a finite number of sampling points (measurements) n samp (FT2). A small n samp will lead to scalloping, i.e., the n samp /2point discrete Fourier transform does not resolve the real maxima of the spectrum In Fig. To show that the choice of window for the first iteration has no influence on the results, we also plotted in Fig. Finally, we plot in Fig. which is a measure of the confidence level on the frequency estimate. More precisely, in this context, the SNR quantifies the degree of confidence we have in identifying the global maximum of the spectral density (0-frequency component excluded). Our results show that as the relative error on the frequency estimate decreases, we become more and more confident in identifying the frequency associated to the global maximum of the spectral density in spite of having a noisy signal. We have developed an iterative, adaptive sensing protocol based on enhanced Ramsey interferometry of two-level systems. Our scheme allows one to get precise estimates of an unknown frequency by considering short, finite-time signals under realistic assumptions of experimental bandwidth limitations. Specifically, our scheme avoids shortcomings both related to dealing with decaying signals and experimental constraints related to the sampling and could be implemented, e.g., in coupled mechanical oscillators The main ingredients of our method are the use of the Magnus-based strategy for control to find frequencysweeps that allow one to prepare with high fidelity both the sensing and readout state and an iterative procedure built to mitigate systematic errors when using Fourier transforms to extract frequency components. We stress that independently of how the sensing and readout state are prepare, our iterative, adaptive sensing protocol can always be applied to enhance frequency estimates. and The second step consists in introducing a control W (t) which cancels on average the spurious effects generated by V (t). Formally, this leads to a modified dynamical matrix D mod (t) = D(t) + W (t), which generates a flow Φ mod (t). The control W (t) must be chosen such that where Φ 0 (t) is the flow generated by D 0 (t) [see Eq. (B1)]. Following the procedure detailed in where ∆ even (t) and ∆ odd (t) are parametrized as finite Fourier series Here c k and d l are the free Fourier coefficients one must find in order to fulfill Eq. (B3). The number of free coefficients is set by choosing appropriate values for k max and l max , e.g., one might want to constraint bandwidth. We stress that we parametrized Eq. (B4) such that the coefficients c k and d l are the same for the leading and trailing edge of ∆ corr (t). Equations for c k and d l are found by transforming D mod (t) to the interaction picture defined by Φ 0 (t), i.e., D(t) → D mod,I (t) = Φ † 0 (t)D mod (t)Φ 0 (t) -iΦ † 0 (t) Φ0 (t). We find D mod,I (t) = V I (t) + W I (t), where and By comparing W I (t) with V I (t), we notice that the control dynamical matrix W (t) is singular Here, we look for the coefficients c k and d l which fulfilled the coupled equations 1 2 Tr where Ω (1) k (t f ) are the elements of the Magnus series generated by D mod,I (t). Since we only want to prevent (coherent) transitions on average from mode 1 to mode 2 and vice versa, we only look for the coefficients c k and d l that cancel the off-diagonal elements of the Magnus expansion up to fourth order. Since the non-linear system of equations in Eq. (B8) has in general more than one solution, one can choose the solution that minimizes the norm of the vector of free parameters, i.e., the function g = k,l (c 2 k + d 2 l ). In particular, it is numerically more efficient to directly minimize g under the constraints defined by Eq. (B8). Let us first consider a situation where one could continuously measure the signal. Since having a finite-time signal is equivalent to the pointwise multiplication of an infinite signal with a rectangular window, the Fourier transform produces a a spectrum whose value at ω = ω 0 is the sum of all the spectral contributions of the signal weighted by the spectrum of the window centered at ω 0 (convolution theorem). As a result, even a simple, single frequency spectrum appears with multiple frequency components [see Fig. The continuous lines in Fig. To minimize scalloping losses, the common practice requires one to use 0-padding [Fig. 