The superfluid weight is an important observable of superconducting materials since it is related to the London penetration depth of the Meissner effect. It can be computed from the change in the grand potential (or free energy) in response to twisted boundary conditions in a torus geometry. Here we review the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer mean-field theory emphasizing its origin as a variational approximation for the grand potential. The variational parameters are the effective fields that enter in the mean-field Hamiltonian, namely the Hartree-Fock potential and the pairing potential. The superfluid weight is usually computed by ignoring the dependence of the effective fields on the twisted boundary conditions. However, it has been pointed out in recent works that this can lead to unphysical results, particularly in the case of lattice models with flat bands. As a first result, we show that taking into account the dependence of the effective fields on the twisted boundary conditions leads in fact to the generalized random phase approximation. Our second result is providing the mean-field grand potential as an explicit function of the oneparticle density matrix. This allows us to derive the expression for the superfluid weight within the generalized random phase approximation in a transparent manner. Moreover, reformulating mean-field theory as a well-posed minimization problem in terms of the one-particle density matrix is a first step towards the application to superconducting systems of the linear scaling methods developed in the context of electronic structure theory. The most striking manifestation of superconductivity is the vanishing of electrical resistence below the critical temperature. Quantum mechanics predicts that in a perfectly crystalline solid the resistance is zero, at least at zero temperature where phononic excitations are frozen out, however this ideal situation is never realized in practice since impurities and defects in the crystal structure are present in any material. Impurities and crystalline defects, hereafter collectively called disorder, are responsible for the finite resistence in the zero temperature limit in normal metals. On the other hand, superconducting materials are perfect conductors below the critical temperature as if disorder vanished altogether. Nevertheless, disorder has a significant effect on many of the observable properties of superconductors and when increased above a certain threshold it drives a transition to the normal state, which can be metallic or even insulating The phenomenon of perfect conductivity and the electromagnetic response of supercon-ducting materials are well described by combining Maxwell's equations with the constitutive relation J = -D s A introduced by Heinz and Fritz London As explained below in Section V, the superfluid weight is obtained as a specific limit of the current-current response functions In general, one has to resort to approximations since computing exactly either the currentcurrent response function or the grand potential of a quantum many-body system is an intractable task. The standard approximation used to describe superconducting materials is mean-field theory, known also as Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) theory Typically, the mean-field approximation for D s is obtained by replacing the many-body Hamiltonian Ĥ with the mean-field Hamiltonian Ĥm.f. in the current-current response function, which can then be evaluated using Wick's theorem The problem is that the effective fields Γ i,j , ∆ i,j are obtained by minimizing the meanfield grand potential for each separate value of A, which means that they are themselves functions of A, but this dependence is usually neglected In order to derive the expression of the superfluid weight in the generalized random phase approximation (66), we start by reviewing the BCS mean-field theory of superconductivity in Section III, using as a starting point the variational principle at finite temperature. At finite temperature the variational principle is encoded in the Bogoliubov inequality (Eq. ( To derive the self-consistency equations of BCS theory in Section III, we find it convenient to perform a Legendre transform and switch from the effective fields Γ i,j , ∆ i,j , ∆ * i,j to the expectation values ĉ † i ĉj , ĉ † i ĉ † j , ĉj ĉi as the variational parameters. These are the matrix elements of the one-particle density matrix P . In particular the anomalous (not numberconserving) expectation values, ĉi ĉj and ĉ † i ĉ † j are essential to describe superconducting systems. In Section IV, we go a step further and obtain the mean-field grand potential as an explicit function of the one-particle density matrix (see Eqs. ( It turns out that the derivation of the expression for the superfluid weight in the generalized random phase approximation (66) is particularly transparent if the starting point is the mean-field potential Ω m.f. A, P (A) as a function of the one-particle density matrix, where P (A) is the density matrix which minimizes Ω m.f. (A, P ) for a given value of the constant vector potential A. This is the approach used in Section V. Equivalently, one can start from the grand potential expressed in the terms of the effective fields Ω m.f. A, Γ(A), ∆(A) , as done in Ref. The original results presented in Section IV are potentially important for another reason, namely they are a first step towards the application of linear scaling methods to superconducting systems. Linear scaling means that the computational resources (time and memory) required for the numerical solution of a problem scale linearly ∼ O(N) with the number of constituents N, for instance the lattice sites in a tight-binding model. The nu-merical solution of the mean-field problem generally scales as O(N 3 ) since it requires the full diagonalization of the mean-field Hamiltonian. This scaling severely limits the accessible system size In the field of electronic structure theory, many different approaches have been developed to improve the scaling of density functional theory and empirical tight-binding calculations. An important class of methods, known as O(N)-or linear scaling methods The basic approximation behind linear scaling methods is to neglect the matrix elements for large separation, for instance |rr ′ | > R, and thus represent P as a sparse matrix. This approximation is justified only if the decay in ( The structure of this work is as follows. In Section II, we introduce the class of lattice models we are interested in, we define the current density operator and explain how to represent twisted boundary conditions by means of a constant vector potential. The concept of gauge invariance is discussed as well. In Section III, we derive BCS mean-field theory starting from the Bogoliubov inequality to emphasize its origin as a variational approximation for the grand potential. In Section IV, we express the mean-field grand potential as an explicit function of the one-particle density matrix: the main result is given by ( Here we consider a generic tight-binding Hamiltonian with a static interaction term. More precisely, the non-interacting part of the Hamiltonian takes the form where ĉi and ĉ † i are the usual fermionic fields operators and K is the hopping matrix collecting all the hopping matrix elements (K i,j for i = j) and the on-site potential (K i,i ). Here i, j are collective indices labeling all the degrees of freedom in the model (spatial, orbital, spin, . . . ). We adopt the convention that symbols with a hat, such as Ĥfree and ĉi , denote operators in the many-body Fock space, while operators on the single-particle Hilbert space, such as the hopping matrix K, do not have hats. The interaction term is quadratic in the occupation number operators ni = ĉ † The factor 1/2 in the above equation eliminates double-counting since we require the interaction potential to be symmetric V i,j = V j,i and we also set V i,i = 0. One may consider other types of interaction terms, and we leave to the interested reader the task of extending our arguments to more general settings. The full many-body Hamiltonian is then the sum of ( Linear scaling methods take advantage of the locality of the hopping matrix (2) and of the density matrix In the following we find convenient to use the word "site"as an alternative to "degrees of freedom,"but it is understood that site i and site j may by assigned to the same lattice point r i = r j . Physically, this is the case when the two sites are in fact different electronic orbitals on the same atom or the two different spin states of the same atomic orbital. For simplicity, the geometric arrangement of the sites is given by a periodic lattice. However the Hamiltonian is not necessary periodic, in particular disorder is usually introduced as a random perturbation of the matrix K. In the case of periodic boundary conditions, the points of the lattice L are identified if they differ by integer linear combinations of two Bravais lattice vectors R 1 and R 2 (we consider only two-dimensional systems here), which define the size and shape of the finite system, called also the the "supercell."An equivalence class [r j ] obtained under this identification, that is a point on a torus, is attached to each site j. In the case of periodic boundary conditions, the distance d(i, j) and the displacement vectors r i,j are defined in the caption of Figure In realistic cases, the hopping matrix elements between atomic orbitals decrease exponentially with distance, namely K i,j ∼ e -αd(i,j) for some α > 0, therefore it is practical to consider only hopping matrices with finite range R, that is K i,j = 0 if d(i, j) > R. It is assumed in the following that the hopping matrix has a range of the order of a few lattice constants and, in the case of periodic boundary conditions, the range is much smaller than the linear size of the supercell Using the continuity equation for the occupation number operators nj , one identifies the microscopic current operator whose expectation value gives the particle current flowing from site j to site i. We set = 1 from now on. One is mainly interested in the Fourier transform of the current density, which in the long-wavelength limit (q → 0) reads For periodic boundary conditions, is the area of the supercell (for dimension d = 2) and the wavevector q belongs to the reciprocal lattice of the Bravais lattice generated by R 1 , R 2 , meaning that q • R i = 2πm i with m i an integer. The conservation of current is a consequence of the gauge symmetry of electromagnetism, which in a discrete lattice model consists in the invariance under unitary transformations Ûg acting on the fields operators as where θ j are arbitrary site-dependent phases. Some operators change form under gauge transformations ( Ĵ(q), Ĥfree ), while others do not (n j , Ĥint ). Observable quantities (expectation values) are always gauge invariant. Consider the following modified noninteracting Hamiltonian Ĥfree The Peierls phase e iqA•r i,j accounts for the presence of a constant vector potential A. The particle charge is set to q = 1 from now on. In the case of an infinitely extended system or a system with open boundary conditions, a constant vector potential is a pure gauge, which does not affect the observable properties in any way. Indeed, since r i,j = r ir j , the Hamiltonian ( . This is known as the flat torus distance. The displacement vector going from site j to site i is the vector r i,j ∈ [r ir j ] with the property that d(i, j) = |r i,j |, if this vector is unique. If there are multiple vectors with this property, the displacement vector is not defined. If d(i, j) ≪ |R 1 |, |R 2 | the displacement vector r i,j is always defined. As shown in the figure, the displacement vector from site 1 to site 2 is r 2,1 = r 2r 1 , while the one from site 3 to site 4 is . On the other hand, there is in general no analogous gauge transformation in the case of periodic boundary conditions. The reason is that even a constant vector potential amounts to nonzero magnetic fluxes through the holes of the torus in which the lattice is embedded: these fluxes are given by Φ i = A • R i with i = 1, 2. The magnetic flux in lattice models is defined up to integer multiples of the magnetic flux quantum φ 0 = 2π /q (= 2π in our units) and is invariant under gauge transformations. It follows that two Hamiltonians Ĥfree (A) and Ĥfree (A ′ ) can be mapped into each other by a gauge transformation if and only if the respective magnetic fluxes differ by an integer multiple of the magnetic flux quantum: , 2 and m i arbitrary integers. Using a gauge transformation, it can be shown that a constant vector potential is equivalent to twisted boundary conditions parametrized by the two magnetic fluxes Φ i=1,2 For our purposes, it is useful to note that the average (q = 0) current density operator for nonzero A is given by the relation This definition coincides with (6) for A = 0. The idea of mean-field theory is to approximate an interacting system by means of an effective noninteracting one. At zero temperature, this means finding among the wavefunctions that are represented as a single Slater determinant the one that minimizes the expectation value Ĥ of the many-body Hamiltonian (4). Indeed, mean-field theory is an application of the variational principle of quantum mechanics In the following, we derive the self-consistency equations of BCS mean-field theory ( Consider a generic Hamiltonian which is the sum of two parts Ĥ = Ĥ0 +λ Ĥ1 , where λ is a parameter. It is proven in Ref. Using the concavity property, it is easy to obtain the Bogoliubov inequality where ln Tr e -β Ĥ(0) and the expectation value on the right hand side is taken with respect to the Hamiltonian Ĥ0 , that is The left hand side of the inequality is the free energy of the many-body system which we would like to approximate, the right hand side is the variational mean-field free energy which needs to be minimized to obtain the best possible approximation. This is similar to the zero temperature case, in which the optimization is carried out over all possible wavefunctions of noninteracting fermions. According to the variational principle, the best wavefunction is the one with the lowest energy since any energy expectation value taken on the manybody Hamiltonian is bound to be larger than the exact ground state energy. In fact, the variational principle can be recovered from (10): in the zero temperature limit the free energy becomes the ground state energy F → E GS and where |Ψ GS,0 is the ground state of Ĥ0 (a nondegenerate ground state is assumed), thus one obtains E GS ≤ Ĥ = Ψ GS,0 | Ĥ|Ψ GS,0 . Since Ĥ0 can be an arbitrary Hamiltonian, the wavefunction |Ψ GS,0 is also arbitrary and one recovers the variational principle. This shows that the Bogoliubov inequality is the right tool to generalize the variational principle to the finite temperature case. We apply the Bogoliubov inequality with Ĥ = Ĥfree + Ĥint -μ N , where the noninteracting part Ĥfree is given by ( For the variational Hamiltonian Ĥ0 we take The coefficients Γ i,j and ∆ i,j are variational parameters with the only constraints Γ * i,j = Γ j,i , since Ĥ0 must be Hermitian, and ∆ i,j = -∆ j,i because of the fermionic anticommutation relations {ĉ † i , ĉ † j } = {ĉ i , ĉj } = 0. The last term on the right hand side of ( Since the variational Hamiltonian Ĥ0 is quadratic, the expectation value Ĥ-Ĥ0 in (10) can be evaluated using Wick's theorem The minimization of the right hand size of ( as one can show using (A1) in Appendix A. Assuming that the mapping from the effective fields to the expectation values Γ i,j , ∆ i,j , ∆ * i,j → ĉ † i ĉj , ĉ † i ĉ † j , ĉj ĉi , as given by ( The Legendre transform Ω 0 is a function of the expectation values ĉ † i ĉj , ĉ † i ĉ † j , ĉj ĉi , which are the new independent variables, while the effective fields are now dependent variables obtained as the derivatives of Ω 0 We have now reduced the problem to minimizing the function Ω m.f. ĉ † i ĉj , ĉ † i ĉ † j , ĉj ĉi on the right hand side of (10) (the mean-field grand potential), given by By setting the partial derivatives of Ω m.f. to zero and using ( These are known as the self-consistency equations of BCS mean-field theory. It is convenient at this point to define the mean-field Hamiltonian Ĥm.f. as where, as a reminder, the expectation value is taken with respect to the density matrix ρ0 = e -β Ĥ0 /Z 0 . On the other hand, Ĥm.f. and Ĥ0 differ by a constant, therefore all averages taken with respect to the statistical ensemble defined by Ĥm.f. are the same as the averages taken with respect to Ĥ0 . In other words, the two Hamiltonians give the same density matrix ρ0 = e -β Ĥm.f. / Tr e -β Ĥm.f. . For this reason, we do not introduce any new notation to indicate the averages taken with respect to Ĥm.f. . The mean-field Hamiltonian has the property that Ĥ = Ĥm.f. . Using the mean-field Hamiltonian with Ω m.f. the mean-field grand potential introduced in (17). These last two equations provide a better understanding of the finite temperature variational principle: the variational mean-field Hamiltonian Ĥm.f. is optimized so as to minimize the grand potential Ω m.f. with the only constraint being that the expectation value of the many-body Hamiltonian Ĥ computed with respect to the statistical ensemble defined by Ĥm.f. is the same as the expectation value Ĥm.f. , which is computed with the same ensemble. In the previous section, mean-field theory for superconductive systems has been formulated as the minimization of the mean-field grand potential Ω m.f. The idea of Nambu was to write the variational Hamiltonian Ĥ0 where K, ∆ and Γ are square matrices with matrix elements K i,j , ∆ i,j and Γ i,j , respectively, μ is the chemical potential and ĉ (ĉ † ) is the column (row) vector of annihilation (creation) operators ĉi (ĉ † i ). We indicate with A T the transpose of the matrix A and with v T the row vector which is the transpose of the column vector v. The single-particle Hamiltonian appearing in ( is known as the Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian together with H 0 = H † 0 . Here Σ x is a unitary matrix that acts as the σ x Pauli matrix on the particle-hole degree of freedom. The BdG Hamiltonian can be diagonalized by a unitary transformation G that respects the block structure encoded by We use the unitary transformation G to introduce new field operators di as and from From this last result, we see that the eigenvalues E i of H 0 can be interpreted as excitation energies of fermionic quasiparticles on top of the mean-field ground state. Using On the other hand, it is not difficult to prove the identity Combining this last result with (31) leads to In this way the grand potential Ω 0 has been conveniently expressed in terms of the singleparticle BdG Hamiltonian H 0 . As a consequence, ( Thus, it is clearly possible to express these expectation values in terms of the matrix elements of the single-particle operator P = (e βH 0 + 1) -1 . The eigenvalues p i of P are the occupation numbers of the eigenstates of the BdG Hamiltonian, which in the fermionic case satisfy the inequalities 0 ≤ p i ≤ 1. One can equivalently express this condition as the matrix inequalities 0 ≤ P ≤ 1, meaning that 0 ≤ ψ|P |ψ ≤ 1 for any normalized single-particle state |ψ . Moreover, P is constrained by the particle-hole symmetry of H 0 Together with P = P † this implies From ( Moreover, the relation gives explicitly the mapping ĉ † i ĉj , ĉ † i ĉ † j , ĉj ĉi → Γ i,j , ∆ i,j , ∆ * i,j , which has been used to perform the Legendre transform of the grand potential Ω 0 in In order to obtain the Legendre transform Ω 0 (P ) as an explicit function of P , we write the second term on the right hand side of (15) as i,j Therefore, by combining ( Here, we have identified the (von Neumann) entropy 2 Tr[P ln P + (1 -P ) ln(1 -P )] of a gas of noninteracting fermionic (quasi-)particles (note the factor 1/2, which is absent in the usual definition of the von Neumann entropy). Thus minimizing Ω 0 is the same as maximizing the entropy with the constraint that the expectation value of the energy (the second term in (41)) is fixed. Indeed, the inverse temperature β = (k B T ) -1 is the Lagrange multiplier corresponding to the energy constraint. In the presence of interactions, the function to be minimized is (see where V (P ) = Ĥint is the quadratic form defined as the second term in the first line. The minimization of Ω m.f. (P ) has to be carried out within the domain of single-particle operators P which satisfy the conditions 0 ≤ P ≤ 1 and the symmetry constraint It is then evident that both Ω 0 and Ω m.f. are invariant under the transformations K → K ′ = U g KU † g and The explicit form of the mean-field grand potential Ω m.f. (P ) as a function of the singleparticle density matrix P as given by ( The result in ( The key fact behind the success of linear scaling methods is that the one-particle density matrix is ranged The important problem of the localization properties of the density matrix in superconducting systems will be the subject of future studies. We note in passing that superconductivity is the manifestation of off-diagonal long range-order in the two-particle density matrix. In the case of a conventional s-wave superconductor this means ĉ † for |r ir j | → ∞ (note that we have introduced the spin here). Thus the anomalous expectation values keep track of this off-diagonal long-range order, while there is no off-diagonal long-range order in the one-particle density matrix. Any form of off-diagonal long-range order in P would hinder the application of linear scaling methods, which are based on the approximation of setting the matrix elements P i,j to zero, if d(i, j) > R for a given range R. In this Section, we present one of the main results of this work, namely we show that taking the full derivatives of the mean-field grand potential with respect to the constant vector potential A, which implements twisted boundary conditions (see Section II), leads to the superfluid weight in the generalized random phase approximation. The derivation is based on the results of the previous Section IV, in particular the explicit expression for the mean-field grand potential as a function of the one-particle density matrix ( The superfluid weight is defined in terms of a response function χ lm (q, q ′ , ω), that of the current induced in the system to linear order in the vector potential Here J(r, t) = q dω 2π J(q, ω)e i(q•r-ωt) is the current density with J(q, ω) its Fourier transform, and similarly A(q, ω) is the Fourier transform of the vector potential A(r, t). We do not assume translational invariance here, therefore the response function depends on two wavevectors (q, q ′ ). The response function is the sum of two parts χ lm = χ d lm + χ p lm , the diamagnetic response χ d lm and the paramagnetic response χ p lm , given by (in the long-wavelength limit) In the above equations Ĵl (q, t) = e i Ĥt Ĵl (q)e -i Ĥt is the l = x, y component of the current operator (6) in the Heisenberg picture, while we denote with [r i,j ] l the l component of the displacement vector r i,j , which is defined in the caption of Figure where the wavevector q ′ = q ′ m + q ′ ⊥ is decomposed into the collinear (q ′ ) and perpendicular (q ′ ⊥ ) components with respect to the m = x, y axis (m is the second index appearing in both D s,lm and χ lm and m is the unit vector along the same direction). As a consequence of gauge invariance, the alternative limit of the response function is zero The fact that these two limits do not commute is a consequence of the presence of long-range correlations in the current-current response function where Ω(A) = -β -1 ln Tr e -β Ĥ(A) , Ĥ(A) = Ĥfree (A) + Ĥint and Ĥfree (A) is given by ( Evaluating the exact response function ( The effective fields Γ and ∆ are chosen so as to minimize Ω m.f. (A, Γ, ∆) for a given value of A, therefore they become themselves functions of the vector potential. This means that the mean-field grand potential depends on A either directly through the noninteracting Hamiltonian Ĥfree (A) in In this equation and in the following, we denote with d/dA l the full derivative with respect to A, including both the direct and the indirect dependence, while the partial derivative ∂Ω m.f. A, Γ(A), ∆(A) ∂A l denotes the derivative with respect to the first argument only (direct dependence). We note that replacing the full derivative d/dA l with the partial derivative ∂/∂A l in (51), as done for instance in Ref. In Ref. Taking the total derivative with respect to A of these equations leads to implicit equations for the derivatives ∂Γ(A)/∂A and ∂∆(A)/∂A , which require only the knowledge of correlation functions at A = 0. Using this approach and the results of Ref. 21 as a starting point it is possible to arrive to our final result (66) after some cumbersome algebra. We do not present the details of the derivation here since it is simpler to use the same idea in the case where the mean-field grand potential is a function of the one-particle density matrix P (A), namely Ω m.f. (A, P (A)) in (51), as shown in the following. To simplify the notation we use a variation of the Einstein summation convention when we take derivatives with respect to the matrix elements of P . For instance we have The factor 1/2 in the last two terms takes into account the fact that the derivative with respect to [P 12 ] i,j appears twice in the summation since [P 12 ] i,j = -[P 12 ] j,i (see A usual, a complex number z = x + iy and its conjugate z . Therefore, it is clear that the derivative of each independent matrix element of P appears only once in (53). Different subscripts a, b, c, . . . added to P as in the definition (53) are used to keep track of multiple partial derivatives with respect to the matrix elements of the one-particle density matrix. The first full derivative of the mean-field grand potential is simply the average current density dΩ m.f. A, P (A)) In the second equality we have used the fact that the one-particle density matrix P (A) minimizes the mean-field grand potential for each value of A, thus the collection of first derivatives with respect to the matrix elements of P vanishes ∂Ω m.f. (A, P ) This equation is the same as (52) but with the effective fields replaced by the one-particle density matrix. The third equality in (54) is a consequence of the fact that in ( To proceed we need to express the partial derivative ∂P (A)/∂A m in terms of quantities evaluated at A = 0. To this end, we use the method proposed in Ref. The first term on the right hand side is easy to evaluate since On the other hand, we have from ( It is straightforward to evaluate the second term on the right from the definition of the quadratic form V (P ). Because of ( where in the matrix on the right hand side each entry stands for the collection of derivatives labelled by all possible site indices. Here and in the following, we denote by ∆ a = (Γ i,j , ∆ i,j , ∆ * i,j ) the collection of all independent effective fields, and we use a similar notation as in (53) Since the inverse mapping Γ i,j , ∆ i,j , ∆ * i,j → ĉ † i ĉj , ĉ † i ĉ † j , ĉj ĉi exists, we denote its Jacobian, the inverse of the matrix in (61), as ∂P a ∂∆ b and we have in our notation where δ c a is the Kronecker delta. It is also clear from ( Note that here we denote with ∂ 2 Ω 0 ∂P b ∂P a -1 the inverse of ∂ 2 Ω 0 ∂P b ∂P a as a matrix and not the inverse of a single matrix element. The relation in ( Inserting this into (56) gives our main result for the superfluid weight In the last equality we have identified the diamagnetic response function is not simply the mean-field version of the paramagnetic response where χ -1 0 (q, ω) is the density-density response function in the absence of interactions (the Lindhard response function , leads to the time-dependent Hartree-Fock approximation, which is discussed in Ref. We expect our gauge invariant result (66) to be useful to deal with the problems pointed out in Refs. 22 and 21 regarding the evaluation of the superfluid weight in multiorbital lattices. It would also be interesting to investigate whether (66) can be implemented numerically in a way which scales linearly with the system size. This would be the case if it turns out that the matrix of correlation functions ∂ 2 Ω 0 ∂∆ b ∂∆ a , or better its inverse -∂ 2 Ω 0 ∂P b ∂P a , can be approximately represented by a sparse matrix. To this end, it is important to estimate the decay behavior with distance of the elements of these matrices, as in the case of the one-particle density matrix (1), for which little is known in the case of superconductive systems. We leave the answers to these interesting questions for the future. In this work, we have begun exploring the advantages of reformulating mean-field theory for superconducting systems in terms of the one-particle density matrix. There is the promise of significant computational advantages since ( By writing the mean-field grand potential as an explicit function of the density matrix, we have also elucidated the relation between two popular methods used to study superconducting systems: the mean-field approximation and the generalized random phase approximation, which is usually considered a beyond mean-field approximation. Indeed, we have calculated the superfluid weight as the full second derivative of the grand potential and found a general and gauge invariant result (66), which differs from the standard mean-field result used in the literature (A4) (with the exception of Refs. From a numerical point of view it is an interesting question whether (66) can be used to compute the superfluid weight with a computational cost that scales linearly with the system size. This depends on whether the Jacobian matrix (61) has matrix elements that decay rapidly with distance, in the same way as the density matrix (1), another interesting and important question for the future. Finally, it would be also important to extend some of our results to include more realistic interactions, such as the retarded electron-phonon interaction, which is responsible for the formation of Cooper pairs in many superconducting materials. To this end, it could be interesting to combine, if possible, our formulation with Eliashberg theory, used for superconductors with strong electron-phonon coupling At a general level we hope that our work will stimulate the adoption of density matrixbased methods in the context of superconductivity. We apply this general result with Ĥ a generic Hamiltonian and V a generic quadratic Hamiltonian (see Using (A1) the partial derivatives of the grand potential Ω = -β -1 ln Tr e β( Ĥ+ V) can be evaluated as follows with • = Tr • e -β Ĥ /Z. By replacing the operators ĉ † i ĉj with ĉ † i ĉ † j and ĉi ĉj in the above equation, the analogous results for the derivatives with respect to ∆ i,j and ∆ * i,j are readily obtained. If the Hamiltonian Ĥ coincides with the one in Neglecting the term ∂ 2 V /∂P a ∂P b in (67) and using (A3) leads to the standard mean-field result for the superfluid weight with Ĵl def = Ĵl (q = 0). We stress that here all the expectation values are taken on the meanfield statistical ensemble. The correlation function that appears here is in principle different from the one in * 