Two-dimensional p + ip superconductors and superfluids are systems that feature chiral behavior emerging from the Cooper pairing of electrons or neutral fermionic atoms with non-zero angular momentum. Their realization has been a longstanding goal because they offer great potential utility for quantum computation and memory. However, they have so far eluded experimental observation both in solid state systems as well as in ultracold quantum gases. Here, we propose to leverage the tremendous control offered by rotating two-dimensional trapped-ion crystals in a Penning trap to simulate the dynamical phases of two-dimensional p + ip superfluids. This is accomplished by mapping the presence or absence of a Cooper pair into an effective spin-1/2 system encoded in the ions' electronic levels. We show how to infer the topological properties of the dynamical phases, and discuss the role of beyond mean-field corrections. More broadly, our work opens the door to use trapped ion systems to explore exotic models of topological superconductivity and also paves the way to generate and manipulate skyrmionic spin textures in these platforms. The observation and classification of dynamical behaviors in quantum many-body systems constitute a core milestone in quantum science. One fascinating and promising paradigm comprises the dynamical phases predicted to emerge from quenches of superconductors and superfluids Despite intensive theoretical efforts, p + ip superfluids have eluded experimental observation, with the only confirmed realization being the A-phase of 3 He, which ironically is one of the oldest-known superfluids but is also hard to control and manipulate. The realization of p + ip superfluids in ultracold fermionic quantum gases, which are currently the leading platform for quantum simulation of strongly correlated matter, has also proved to be difficult. The reason is that, in spite of all the attractive features of ultracold quantum gases, the con-trol and manipulation of p-wave interactions in these systems has remained a challenge since p-wave interactions are weak under standard conditions and require Feshbach resonances to enhance them. The latter unfortunately introduce strong three-body processes which make the gas unstable and destroy the desired pairing processes In the present work, we propose a pathway towards the observation of non-equilibrium dynamical phases of topological p+ip superfluids by using a 2D crystal of ions in a Penning trap. This platform offers a high degree of control and flexibility in state initialization, interaction control and readout, that have been previously leveraged for the sensing of weak electric fields and for the simulation of quantum magnets Our proposal takes advantage of the fact that the ion crystal in a Penning trap is rotating in the lab frame A key appeal of p + ip superfluids compared to ordinary superfluids is the possibility of featuring states with nontrivial topological order. In an ordinary superfluid or superconductor, the BCS and the BEC regimeswhich respectively favor weakly bound Cooper pairs and a Bose-Einstein Condensate of tightly bound molecules made of two fermions-are continuously connected and are only distinguished by the strength of the pairing. In contrast, the two regimes exhibit different topological behaviors in 2D p + ip superfluids, with a genuine quantum phase transition separating the topologically nontrivial BCS phase from the topologically trivial BEC phase in the equilibrium situation. This feature extends into the non-equilibrium regime, where the dynamical phases exhibit a dynamical topological quantum phase transition The Hamiltonian that governs the low energy sector of p + ip superfluids is given (setting = 1) by Here, m is the electron mass and ĉ † p , ĉp are fermionic creation and annihilation operators for a fermion with momentum p. The first term describes the single particle dispersion and the second term the attractive (G > 0, dimensionless) p-wave interactions that lead to the formation of Cooper pairs. For the case of 2D p + ip superconductors, the momentum p ≡ p x êx + p y êy is restricted to the x -y plane. This Hamiltonian assumes that Cooper pairs are only created and destroyed with zero center-ofmass momentum and neglects pair-breaking processes. Under these conditions, the low-energy physics can be mapped on to the dynamics of a collection of interacting spin-1/2 systems via the Anderson pseudospin mapping Here, the presence or absence of a Cooper pair at momentum p corresponds to the eigenstates |↑ p , |↓ p of ŝZ p with eigenvalues ±1/2 respectively, and the raising and lowering operators ŝ± p describe the creation and annihilation of this Cooper pair. In terms of the Anderson pseudospin operators, Hamiltonian (1) can be expressed as The ground state of the spin model (3) possesses the property that the spin orientation is correlated with the azimuthal angle φ p in momentum space, giving rise to chiral spin textures as depicted in Fig. The quench dynamics of p + ip superconductors were theoretically studied where p and φ p are the magnitude and azimuthal angle for the 2D momentum p. This Hamiltonian breaks time-reversal symmetry explicitly, and preferentially selects p x -ip y over p x + ip y pairing, which are degenerate in the time-reversal-invariant Hamiltonian (1). Nevertheless both Hamiltonians possess the same p + ip ground state and dynamical phases in the thermodynamic limit. Therefore, in this work, we focus on the quantum simulation of the chiral model (4). In the thermodynamic limit, where mean-field theory is exact, the dynamics can be pictured as each spin precessing about a local magnetic field: Here, ŝp is the expectation value of the spin vector at momentum p and B p is the local magnetic field with components written in terms of an order parameter Ψ given by Mean-field theory predicts the emergence of three dynamical phases when the system is initialized in its ground state and the pairing strength G is quenched. They have been classified according to the long-time behavior of |Ψ (t)| as illustrated in Fig. The topological properties of the dynamical phases are best understood in terms of a second winding number W , which can take on a non-trivial value of 1 in phases II and III. Although this quantity is formally defined in terms of retarded single-particle Green functions where Ψ ∞ is the magnitude in the limit t → ∞ and μ ∞ is a dynamical chemical potential. In a frame rotating at 2μ ∞ , the spins precess under a static effective magnetic field B p whose texture can be analogous to the spin texture in a p + ip ground state. The winding number W is computed as where Bp denotes the corresponding unit vector in the rotating frame. In particular, the Z-component of B p is given by While the spins at large momenta p → ∞ experience a field B p ≈ -(p 2 /m)ê Z that points down, the central spin at p = 0 is isolated from the other spins and experiences an effective magnetic field B 0 = 2μ ∞ êZ . Therefore, the magnetic field texture is BCS-like and topologically nontrivial (W = 1) for μ ∞ > 0 (B 0 pointing up) while it is BEC-like and topologically trivial (W = 0) for μ ∞ < 0 (B 0 pointing down). We now discuss how the spin model (3) can be simulated with ion crystals in a Penning trap, where the pseudospin-1/2 system is encoded in two long-lived hyperfine states of each trapped ion. In this trap, ions self-organize into a planar crystal with an approximate triangular lattice structure under the influence of static trapping fields In our modeling, the drumhead c.m. mode is treated quantum mechanically and described by bosonic creation and annihilation operators â † 1 , â1 . On the other hand, the planar motion is dominated by the crystal rotation, and is hence treated classically with the x j and y j coordinates of ion j undergoing uniform circular motion at radius r j from the trap center, with frequency ω r and azimuthal phase offset φ j . As a first step to realize Hamiltonian (4), we engineer a Jaynes-Cummings type interaction between each spin and the drumhead c.m. mode, with the coupling depending on the planar position of the ion as viewed in the crystal rotating frame. As we explain shortly, the Hamiltonian we engineer is given by This Hamiltonian is written in a rotated spin space Z ≡ -X, X ≡ Z, Y ≡ Y , and ŝj denotes spin operators in this rotated space. Here, rj = r j /R is a normalized radial coordinate, B 1 is a frequency controlling the dispersion of the spins, δ 1 is an effective detuning of the c.m. mode from the spins and G is a frequency controlling the spinmode coupling strength. In particular, the amplitude and phase of the coupling of spin j to the c.m. mode respectively depend on rj and φ j . Equation Subsequently, an effective spin model can be derived in the situation when δ 1 G, B 1 . Using effective Hamiltonian theory where J = G 2 /δ 1 and K = B 1 -J/N . Equation ( A second ingredient in our proposal consists of a pair of co-propagating Raman lasers that drives spin flips without coupling to the motion. We assume that the two Raman lasers have an identical but tunable beam waist w, leading to an effective two-photon Rabi frequency that is radially varying as B(r) = B 0 e -r 2 /w 2 and corresponding Hamiltonian ĤRaman,j = B(r j )ŝ X j . For w R, where R is the crystal radius, we can approximate B(r The role of the Raman drive is twofold and becomes apparent in the rotated spin space (see Appendix A). First, the spatially homogeneous drive with strength B 0 serves to break the symmetry between a Jaynes-Cummings and an anti-Jaynes-Cummings type interaction of the spins and the drumhead c.m. mode that arise due to the ODF. The Jaynes-Cummings term can then be selectively brought near resonance by an appropriate choice of the ODF beatnote frequency μ r . Second, the beam waist w serves as a control knob for tuning the single particle dispersion, i.e. B 1 = B 0 R 2 /w 2 . We note that the Raman beams can be replaced with a microwave drive that limits the tunability of B 1 but allows for a simpler implementation and reduced decoherence (see Appendix B). We present potential experimental parameters for realizing our proposal in Appendix B and study the adverse impact of off-resonant terms in Appendices C and D. Our study suggests that it is possible to operate in parameter regimes where the off-resonant terms have only a small effect. Although our study of off-resonant terms is extensive, our analysis of their impact is not exhaustive because of the sheer number of such terms. Their impact and the parameter regimes where they are negligible could potentially be explored directly on the quantum simulator. In addition, for typical operating conditions, we estimate that decoherence from off-resonant light scattering may limit the simulation time. However, we note that the relative strength of coherent interaction to decoherence can be increased, for instance, by the choice of ion species and transition, by enhancing coherent coupling via parametric amplification To observe dynamical phases generated by Hamiltonian For engineering interactions, the ODF beanote frequency μ r was tuned to couple the spins, the drumhead c.m. mode and the planar rotation. For preparing chiral initial states, we instead tune μ r to only couple the spins to the planar rotation without involving the drumhead c.m. mode. By additionally tuning the beam waist w ODF of the ODF lasers, both BCS and BEC-like initial spin textures can be prepared. The initialization Hamiltonian is of the form where Ω 0 is an effective drive strength. This Hamiltonian drives single-spin rotations where the axis of rotation for ion j depends on the azimuthal angle φ j in the rotating frame. Starting with all spins initialized in |↑ Z , setting w ODF R, and using a pulse area Ω 0 T = π results in a BCS-like spin texture [e.g. Fig. Measurement of the real and imaginary parts of the order parameter is also enabled by the Hamiltonian To demonstrate this, we first introduce site-dependent orthogonal axes, êX j = sin φ j êX -cos φ j êY , êY j = cos φ j êX + sin φ j êY , and with w ODF R, Hamiltonian ( After running the quantum simulation up to some time T , we evolve the system under ( where the approximation holds true for short rotation times. Summing over all the ions, we get where ĴZ = j ŝZ j . The imaginary part of the order parameter determines the rate of change of ĴZ (T + t) as the rotation time t is increased. This quantity is accessible by a global fluorescence measurement after applying a global π/2 pulse to rotate Z → Z. Furthermore, a phase offset of π/2 can be introduced in Hamiltonian ( Having established protocols for initializing BCS-like and BEC-like initial states, for engineering interactions, and for measuring the order parameter, we now proceed to discuss how the dynamical phases can be observed in a crystal stored in a Penning trap. Figure of K/J = 1 as in phase II. The purple lines in Fig. Importantly, the decay of the mean-field order parameter |Ψ (t)| in phases II and III is accompanied by the development of quantum correlations, which is captured in a more appropriate order parameter Ψ defined as We note that Ψ is just a measure of the interaction part of the Hamiltonian Ĥ1ch [Eq. Even though the mean-field order parameter |Ψ (t)| disappears at long times, the three phases can be distinguished in the short time dynamics of this observable. Figure In contrast to s-wave superconductors, ground states and dynamical phases of p-wave superconductors can possess nontrivial topological properties. We now discuss how the topology of the dynamical phases can be probed in the ion simulator. For this study, we use the FIG. initial spin texture shown in Fig. The preservation of the topology in the regime where the order parameter is decaying can be confirmed by measuring the so-called Cooper pair distribution function (CPDF) γ(p) Here, the overbar denotes that the spin and effective magnetic field are measured in a frame rotating at 2μ ∞ and the denominator ensures that the quantity is the direction cosine of the spin vector with respect to the local magnetic field. Figure So far, we have focused on a regime where the c.m. mode is coupled off-resonantly to the spins and can hence be adiabatically eliminated, giving rise to an effective one-channel model description in terms of the Anderson spins alone. The c.m. mode plays the role of the bosonic molecular channel in the two-channel p-wave model. By suitably tuning the ODF difference frequency μ r , a nearresonant coupling with the c.m. mode can be engineered, thereby enabling simulation of the more general two-channel Hamiltonian We have proposed a protocol to simulate the quench dynamics of p + ip superfluids using ion crystals stored in a Penning trap. By utilizing the Anderson pseudospin mapping, we make a fermionic Hamiltonian amenable to simulation using spins encoded in the internal states of ions. In this way, we not only leverage the versatile toolbox of the trapped ion platform but we also circumvent limitations that arise with direct simulations of the fermionic model using ultracold quantum gases, where p-wave superfluids have been highly elusive till date. We demonstrated how signatures of all three dynamical phases can be observed using crystals with ∼ 200 ions. In the thermodynamic limit, the 2D p + ip model becomes integrable and the dynamics is well described by mean field theory. However, beyond mean field effects kick in at finite number of fermions; the relatively small number of spins in the trapped ion crystal naturally opens the avenue to observe beyond mean-field effects in the quench dynamics of p + ip superfluids and also facilitates the emulation of small superconducting grains We showed how the topological character of the dynamical phases can be inferred via the sense of rotation of the order parameter in the complex plane. Since our proposal maps the fermionic momentum on to the real-space position of ions, the addition of site-resolved detection of spins in the trap can provide time and momentumresolved measurements of the simulated system, analogous to techniques used in solid state materials such as ARPES By tuning closer to resonance with the c.m. mode, a two-channel p-wave model can be realized and the nonzero occupation of a molecular channel can be additionally simulated and investigated. It will be interesting to explore conditions where a dynamically active molecular channel can enhance superfluidity Beyond the simulation of p + ip superconductors, trapped ions could also be used to study further exotic superconducting systems such as chiral d x 2 -y 2 + id xy superfluids Finally, we note that the fermionic statistics of the original p-wave model is not present in the corresponding spin mapping, and therefore our proposal cannot be used to produce Majorana fermions We assume that A, B 1 and expand the relevant trigonometric functions in the small angle limit. The result, correct to second order in A, B, is We express the resonance requirements as a sum of frequencies appearing in the argument of complex exponentials multiplying each interaction term. To do so, we first note that the motion along x can be written as x j = r j cos(ω r t + φ j ) = (r j /2)(e i(ωrt+φj ) + e -i(ωrt+φj ) ), while the motion along z can be expanded as This expansion assumes we have moved to an interaction picture with respect to the free phonon frequencies ω n . The homogeneous Raman drive sets a frequency B 0 for the spins as seen from Eq. (A4). Finally, the terms cos(-μ r t), sin(-μ r t) can be expanded with complex exponentials of the form e ±iμrt . For discussing the rotating wave approximations, we neglect the small contribution arising from the spatially inhomogeneous component of the Raman beams, i.e. we assume the beam waist w → ∞. We tune μ r to selectively induce a coupling between the spins (B 0 ), the drumhead c.m. mode (ω 1 ) and the planar rotation (ω r ). In particular, we adjust μ r such that B 0 -μ r + ω 1 + ω r = δ 1 . We will later consider the effect of offresonant terms using realistic experimental parameters. Then, the only near-resonant term stems from the AB sin C type term in Eq. (A6), and is of the form where rj = r j /R is the ion radius normalized to the crystal radius R (assuming a nearly circular crystal) and G is given by Here, η 1 = ∆k z /(2mω 1 ) is the Lamb-Dicke parameter for the c.m. mode. The quantity ∆k x R can be thought of as an effective Lamb-Dicke parameter for the in-plane motion. The above analysis was carried out assuming that the beam waist of the Raman lasers w → ∞. Restoring a finite w and performing a frame transformation for the c.m. mode, we arrive at the effective Hamiltonian where We now eliminate the c.m. mode from Eq. (A10) using effective Hamiltonian theory By assuming that δ j 1 are large compared to the maximum interaction strength G, a spin-spin Hamiltonian can be derived using effective Hamiltonian theory. The result is Two-dimensional crystals of 9 Be + ions are formed in the Penning trap by a combination of an electric quadrupole field providing axial confinement and a strong axial magnetic field B ≈ 4.46 T (cyclotron frequency ω c /(2π) ≈ 7.6 MHz) that aids in radial confinement. The spin-1/2 degree of freedom is encoded in two long-lived hyperfine levels of each 9 Be + ion, i.e. |↑ ≡ 2S 1/2 , 1/2 and |↓ ≡ 2S 1/2 , -1/2 . For a crystal with N = 200 ions, the crystal radius is R ∼ 100 μm. Here we consider two sets of trapping parameters. In case A, we will set the rotation frequency to ω r /(2π) = 180 kHz and choose an axial trapping frequency, which is also the drumhead c.m. frequency, to be ω 1 /(2π) = 1.59 MHz. In case B, we choose a faster rotating crystal with a higher axial trapping frequency, viz. ω r /(2π) = 900 kHz and ω 1 /(2π) = 3.42 MHz. In the following, we explicitly refer to the different cases when specifying parameters that are not the same in the two cases. While case A represents the commonly used trapping parameters, the reason we consider two sets of parameters will become clear in Appendix D, where we show that certain off-resonant terms are only negligible for the faster rotating crystal, i.e. case B. In general, both the ODF beams and the Raman beams intersect the crystal plane at a non-zero angle. However, for the quantum simulation, we require that these beams have a radially varying intensity profile in the crystal plane. This can be achieved by using laser beams with elliptical beam waists, whose cross-section in the crystal plane will have a radial intensity profile. The optical dipole force is realized using a pair of lasers that intersect the crystal at approximately equal and opposite angles relative to the crystal plane, see Fig. From Fig. The difference wavevector can then be expressed as The wavevector magnitude of each ODF laser is k ≈ 2 × 10 7 m -1 . The Lamb-Dicke parameter along the axial direction is η 1 = ∆k z l zp 1 , where ∆k z ≈ 2k sin(θ) is the difference wavevector along the z-direction and l zp 1 = /(2mω 1 ) is the zero-point motion of the c.m. mode. Here, we have neglected the small correction to ∆k z that arises from a non-zero misalignment δθ. To obtain a value η 1 , the ODF lasers must be oriented at angles ±θ with respect to the crystal plane, with θ = sin -1 (η 1 /(2kl zp 1 )). For η 1 ≈ 0.3, we find θ ≈ 23.4 • for case A and θ ≈ 35.7 • for case B. An analogous small parameter along the x-direction is given by η x = ∆k x R, where ∆k x = kδθ sin θ is the difference wavevector in the crystal plane. To obtain a value η x , the required misalignment is given by δθ = η x /(kR sin θ). For η x ≈ 0.3, we find δθ ≈ 0.017 • for case A and δθ ≈ 0.016 • for case B. We assume that δ AC /(2π) ≈ 40 kHz. Then, the interaction strength G for the two-channel model is given by By assuming a detuning of δ 1 /(2π) = 2 kHz from the c.m. mode, we can arrive at the effective one-channel model coupling strength J as In this parameter regime, the ratio δ 2 1 /G 2 ∼ 5, and therefore the simulation will have a small two-channel character to it in addition to the dominant one-channel model (see Fig. Two-photon Raman transitions between the pseudospin states can be engineered by introducing a pair of copropagating Raman lasers that couple these states to the 2P 3/2 manifold in a far detuned regime. The purpose of the Raman beams is twofold. First, the spatially homogeneous two-photon Rabi frequency B 0 breaks the symmetry between the ŝ+ and ŝterms, see Eq. (A4). We take this value to be B 0 /(2π) = 10 kHz. Second, the radially varying intensity of the Raman beams tunes the dispersion K of the spins. We estimate the scale of the required beam waist w as the value at which K ≈ J, i.e. An alternative mechanism to generate a Raman beam intensity gradient is by utilizing the Doppler shifts arising from the crystal rotation. Although the Raman beams are copropagating, their difference wavevector |∆k R | = 0 because of the frequency splitting ω s of the spin states, i.e. |∆k R | = ω s /c, where c is the speed of light in vacuum. Assuming the Raman beams are propagating in the x -z plane and make an angle θ R with the crystal plane, the Hamiltonian for a single ion interacting with the Raman beams is given by In the Doppler free case, two-photon resonance is satisfied by setting ∆ω R = ω s . In this case, transforming to a frame rotating at ω s leads to the interaction Hamiltonian ĤI R,j = The Doppler shift is time modulated because x j (t) = r j cos(ω r t + φ j ). Defining η R j = |∆k R | cos θ R r j , we can use the Jacobi-Anger expansion to write where J n (x) is the n th Bessel function of the first kind. The n = 0 term is then given by ĤI,(0) The approximation is valid for (η R j ) 2 1. To verify this, we consider the situation when the largest value of η R j occurs, i.e., when θ R = 0 and r j = R ∼ 100 μm, where R is the crystal radius. Using ω s /(2π) = 124 GHz, we estimate η R j ≈ 0.26 and (η R j ) 2 ≈ 0.067 1. The achievable value of B 1 in this case is given by where we have used B 0 /(2π) = 10 kHz. Therefore, it appears that B 1 can be partially realized even without a beam waist by simply exploiting the crystal rotation. We note that the dispersion B 1 arising from the Doppler shifts can also be achieved if Raman beams are replaced with a microwave drive that is tilted with respect to the spatial z-axis. Such an implementation may be simpler and will also eliminate off-resonant scattering from the Raman beams (see below). However, the long wavelength of microwaves precludes control of the beam waist at the 100 μm level for additional tuning of B 1 that may be required for some aspects of our proposal. We separately estimate the contributions from the ODF beams and the Raman beams and find them to be The total decoherence rate is then Γ tot /(2π) = (Γ ODF + Γ Raman )/(2π) ≈ 53 Hz. With the chosen parameters, we estimate the typical time up to which the simulation can be run as Jt ≈ J(1/Γ tot ) ∼ 7.6. As we mention in the Main Text, the ratio of the coherent interaction to the decoherence rate can be enhanced by a number of means, including choosing a different ion species and transition, enhancing coherent coupling by parametric amplification and by working at a different ODF operating point. We note that because of the multilevel structure of the electronic excited states, the full decoherence model for the ODF beams and for the Raman beams contains a number of independent decay channels with nontrivial rates and jump operators that are strongly modified by multilevel interference effects. Although we consider the full decoherence model We first consider the term of the form AB sin Cŝ - j , for which the possible arguments for the complex exponentials are (up to an overall sign, which gives the hermitian conjugate process with ŝ+ j ) We next consider the term of the form B 2 sin Cŝ - j . Here, we have Next, we consider terms of the form A 2 sin Cŝ - j . For these terms, we get Now, we consider terms of the form sin Cŝ - j . Here, the complex exponentials are simply T 41 ≡ B 0 + μ r and T 42 ≡ B 0 -μ r , which respectively evaluate to δ n + 2μ r -ω n -ω r and δ n -ω n -ω r . We now turn to the term of the form B cos Cŝ - j . Here, we have the following detunings Finally, we consider the term of the form A cos Cŝ - j . Here, we get In order to estimate these expressions, we compute the equilibrium crystal structure for cases A and B, and obtain the drumhead mode spectrum to obtain the frequencies ω n . In Table This term is of the form Ĥ4 = j δ AC 2i ŝ+ j e -i(μr+Bj )t + ŝj e -i(μr-Bj )t + h.c. (D1) Using effective Hamiltonian theory (EHT) and assuming B j μ r and B j ≈ B 0 leads to This term represents a small AC Stark shift that leads to collective spin precession at a frequency ∼ 5 Hz for case A and ∼ 0.9 Hz for case B. Hence, its effect can be considered negligible. This term is of the form Ĥ6 = j δ AC η x rj 4 ŝ+ j e -i[(μr+ωr+Bj )t+φj ] + ŝ+ j e -i[(μr-ωr+Bj )t-φj ] +ŝ - j e -i[(μr+ωr-Bj )t+φj ] + ŝj e -i[(μr-ωr-Bj )t-φj ] + h.c. (D3) Using EHT leads to This term results in a radius-dependent AC Stark shift. We estimate its maximal value by setting rj = 1, for which we find a precession frequency ∼ 0.5 Hz for case A and ∼ 0.04 Hz for case B. These are very small compared to the dispersion generated by the Raman beam waist and hence we neglect these terms. This term is of the form Ĥ5 = j,n δ AC η n M jn 2 ŝ+ j ân e -i(μr+B0+ωn)t + ŝ+ j â † n e -i(μr+B0-ωn)t +ŝ - j ân e -i(μr-B0+ωn)t + ŝj â † n e -i(μr-B0-ωn)t + h.c. (D6) For applying EHT, we evaluate the following commutators The interaction giving rise to the two-channel model is present in this second-order term and was discussed previously. Here, we estimate the contribution of other terms present in this interaction since some of them are not very far off-resonant. This term is of the form In writing the above equation, we have already ignored the terms that have exponentials containing the combination μ r + ω n . Following a calculation similar to the B cos C term, we find an effective Hamiltonian given by where the interaction matrices J 11 , J 12 have elements given by In both cases, we progressively add terms to the pure one-channel model and study their impact. We add the following terms in the specified order: Chiral spin-exchange by all modes (J12), anti-chiral spin-exchange by all modes (J11) and achiral spin-exchange by all modes (J5). Here, we start from a BCS-like initial state [top panel of Fig. The J 12 matrix now represents the chiral spin-exchange interactions arising from all drumhead modes. On the other hand, the J 11 matrix describes anti-chiral interactions mediated by these modes. We estimate the impact of these terms numerically in Fig. Our study of off-resonant interactions shows that trapping parameters can be found where the impact of these terms can be neglected for realizing the one-channel model. In the case of the two-channel model, preliminary numerical results indicate that, even in case A, the adverse impact of off-resonant terms on short timescales (Gt 30) is reduced as the c.m. mode is brought near resonance, suggesting that two-channel dynamics could be probed even with case A trapping parameters. The pure one-channel and pure two-channel model results presented in the Main Text have been computed using the case A equilibrium crystal. We have checked that all the results for the case B equilibrium crystal are qualitatively similar to the case A results when off-resonant terms are neglected. We end this section by noting that we have not extensively considered the impact of cross-talk between different terms as well as the role of terms at third and higher order in the small parameters, because of the sheer number of terms and their combinations. Their impact and the parameter regimes where they are negligible could potentially be explored directly on the quantum simulator. To obtain the mean-field equations for the two-channel model governed by Hamiltonian (A10), we additionally replace the annihilation operator â1 of the c.m. mode by a complex amplitude α 1 . The resulting equations are with Ψ = (2/N ) j rj s - j e iφj . For mean-field simulations, the above equations are numerically evolved starting from initial conditions where the c-numbers are assigned the expectation values of the corresponding quantum operators in the initial state. For finite size systems, quantum corrections to the mean-field dynamics become important. To explore their effects, we simulate the effects of the quantum noise of the initial state by evolving several trajectories under the mean-field equations starting from randomly drawn initial conditions. For the spin degrees of freedom, we first find the mean spin direction ê j in the initial state. Next, we identify two mutually orthogonal spin directions, ê⊥,1 j , ê⊥,2 j , in the plane perpendicular to the mean spin. The initial spin vector can then be written as For mean-field simulations, we set s j = 1/2, s ⊥,1 j = s ⊥,2 j = 0. To go beyond mean-field, we use the prescription of the discrete truncated Wigner approximation In the case of the two-channel model, we additionally draw the complex amplitude α 1 from the Wigner distribution of the initial state of the c.m. mode, which we always assume is the motional ground state in this work. Therefore, the real and imaginary parts of α 1 are independently drawn from a Gaussian distribution with zero mean and a variance of 1/4. In the case of a real crystal in a Penning trap, the triangular lattice is only approximate and hence every ion is typically at a slightly different radius from the trap center. This makes an exact solution of the Schrodinger equation subject to Hamiltonian (A16) exponentially hard. Therefore, in order to test the reliability of the dTWA results, we test this technique on a hypothetical ideal crystal made of M concentric rings of ions, for which an exact numerical solution to the Schrodinger equation is feasible. We assume that the number of ions N m in ring m = 1, . . . , M is given by N m = 6(m -1) + δ m,1 , which roughly mimics the lattice structure of closed-shell Penning trap crystals. Here, the first ring m = 1 is taken to be the single ion at the crystal center. For simplicity, we assume that the radius of the rings r m grows linearly with ring index m with r 1 = 0. For this model, we can define total angular momentum operators for each ring, Ĵ± For a crystal with M rings, the total number of ions is N (M ) = 1 + 3M (M -1). The computational complexity is significantly reduced in the total angular momentum picture, because, for the initial states we consider, we only need to track the fully symmetric subspace of each ring. Therefore, the number of basis states in each ring is reduced FIG. Here, we have used the ratio K/J = 1. from 2 Nm to N m + 1, thereby enabling the rapid simulation of exact dynamics for crystals with up to M = 5 rings (N (5) = 61 ions). Figure where Ω j = Ω 0 rj e -r 2 j /w 2 ODF with Ω 0 = δ AC (∆k x R)/2 and rj = r j /R. The Hamiltonian Ĥinit describes non-interacting spins each undergoing rotation under a local magnetic field. Using the local axes introduced in Eq. ( (G2) For the initialization, we assume that the beam waist of the Raman beams is much larger than the crystal radius, i.e. w R so that the dispersion arising from the spatial variation of the Raman beams can be neglected. We now describe the initialization protocols for various cases that we discuss in the Main Text. We assume that the beam waist of the ODF lasers are much larger than the crystal radius, i.e., w ODF R. Then, Ĥinit reduces to Ĥinit = Ω 0 j rj ŝY j j . We initialize all spins in |↑ Z (i.e. in the rotated spin space) by an appropriate global π/2 pulse. Setting the maximum pulse area Ω 0 T = π, the outermost spins are then rotated all the way to |↓ Z whereas the central spin is unaffected by virtue of the dependence of the Rabi frequency on rj . Data shown in Fig. We assume that w ODF < √ 2R. The radial modulation of the Rabi frequency results in a maximum Rabi frequency Ω max at radius r max , that are respectively given by Therefore, for w ODF < √ 2R, the maximum pulse area for a fixed rotation time T is experienced by a spin somewhere in the middle of the crystal. We initialize all spins in |↓ Z . For the winding number study, we set the maximum pulse area Ω max T = π and use a beam waist w ODF = 0.3R, which ensures that a large number of the outer spins are negligibly rotated. This ensures that the winding number W is reasonably quantized. Data shown in Fig. Preparing the initial state for phase III requires the presence of a sharp domain wall and an order parameter of small magnitude. To obtain the domain wall, first spins are initialized in |↓ Z (i.e. in the unrotated spin space). An optical pumping beam selectively excites spins in a central region of radius r d (chosen to be r d = R/2) to |↑ Z . A π/2 pulse about the -Y -axis then respectively converts the central and outer regions to domains of |↑ Z and |↓ Z spins (i.e. in the rotated spin space). To initialize a small order parameter, we assume w ODF = R/2 and set the maximum pulse area to be Ω max T = 0.1π, i.e. the spin rotation is through rather small angles. Furthermore, since the spins in the different domains start in opposite orientations, a partial cancellation occurs that further decreases the magnitude of the initial order parameter. Data shown in Fig. AB sin C term