Ferroelecticity, one of the keys to realize nonvolatile memories owing to the remanent electric polarization, has been an emerging phenomenon in the two-dimensional (2D) limit. Yet the demonstrations of van der Waals (vdW) memories using 2D ferroelectric materials as an ingredient are very limited. Especially, gate-tunable ferroelectric vdW memristive device, which holds promises in future neuromorphic applications, remains challenging. Here, we show a prototype gate-programmable memory by vertically assembling graphite, CuInP 2 S 6 , and MoS 2 layers into a metal-ferroelectric-semiconductor architecture. The resulted devices exhibit two-terminal switchable electro-resistance with on-off ratios exceeding 10 5 and long-term retention, akin to a conventional memristor but strongly coupled to the ferroelectric characteristics of the CuInP 2 S 6 layer. By controlling the top gate, Fermi level of MoS 2 can be set inside (outside) of its band gap to quench (enable) the memristive behaviour, yielding a three-terminal gate programmable nonvolatile vdW memory. Our findings pave the way for the engineering of ferroelectric-mediated memories in future implementations of nanoelectronics. The phenomenon of switchable electro-resistance between on and off states in a metal-insulator-metal (MIM) junction, often facilitated by the formation/deformation of conduction paths through filaments upon application of voltages Recently, routes have been developed either to boost the performance or to exploit distinct mechanisms of the memristive devices In this work, we utilize the vdW vertical assembly as a platform to devise a prototype gate-programmable memory by stacking few-layers of graphene, CuInP 2 S 6 , and MoS 2 into a metal-ferroelectric-semiconductor (M-FE-S) architecture, with the top semiconducting layer simultaneously equipped into a metal-oxide-semiconductor field effect transistor (MOS-FET). The M-FE-S devices show resistive switch with stability and on-off ratios reaching 10 5 . Interestingly, the obtained memristive characteristics can be enabled and disabled using the top gate at room temperature, and can be killed by heating the system above the ferroelectric transition Curie temperature of CuInP 2 S 6 . We attribute this phenomenon to a ferroelectric field effect at the FE-S interface. The proposed three-terminal gate programmable non-volatile vdW M-FE-S memory can, in principle, be trained into artificial synapses, shedding light on the design of ferroelectric-mediated memories in future nanoelectronics. A vdW vertical architecture illustrated in Fig. In order to effectively tune the carrier density of the semiconducting layer (few-layered MoS 2 , for example), the underneath ferroelectric layer has to be thick enough to avoid leakage and to allow a well defined chemical potential in the MoS 2 layer. It is known that ferroelectric tunnelling memory was reported recently We now characterize the two-terminal electroresistance in the as-prepared M-FE-S junctions. During the electrical measurements, the MoS 2 layer was kept grounded, while bias voltages were applied on the graphite (or few-layered graphene, FLG) layer. As shown in Fig. Interestingly, the switching voltages (about -1.0 V and +2.5 V for each polarization directions) in CuInP 2 S 6 in Fig. Moreover, since the T C of the few-layered CuInP 2 S 6 studied in this work is about 315 K, it is crucial to test the M-FE-S memristors above T C . As expected, the resistive switching of the same device is quenched when heated at 400 K, as shown in the red looped I-V curve in Fig. Performances of two-terminal electroresistances in vdW M-FE-S memristors. Figure Figure To this stage, we have demonstrated the subpart of the as-prepared vertical vdW heterojunction, i.e., the M-FE-S junction that serves as a two-terminal memristor. Now we come to the discussion of the MOS-FET equipped on the top part of the heterojunction illustrated in Fig. Three representative gate voltages were chosen to pin the Fermi level of MoS 2 at the position of inside the conduction band (C.B.), at the bottom of C.B., and in the band gap (between C. B. and the valence band, V. B.), as indicated by green, orange, and red cartoons along with corresponding dots in the field effect curve in Fig. Taking the quenched (Fig. Sample fabrication. vdW few-layers of the M-FE-S junctions were obtained by mechanically exfoliating high quality bulk crystals. The vertical assembly of vdW layered compounds were fabricated using the dry-transfer method in a nitrogen-filled glove box. Electron beam lithography was done using a Zeiss Sigma 300 SEM with an Raith Elphy Quantum graphic writer. Top gates as well as contacting electrodes were fabricated with an ebeam evaporator, with typical thicknesses of Ti/Au ∼ 5/50 nm. TEM characterizations. TEM characterizations were carried out on a double aberration corrected FEI Themis G2 60-300 electron microscope equipped with a SuperX-EDS detector and operated at 300 kV. Cross sections of as-prepared devices were made using a focused ion beam tool of FEI Helios PFIB CXe cut at 30 kV and polished at 30 and 12 kV. Morphology tests. A Bruker Dimension Icon AFM was used for thicknesses and morphology tests, as well as PFM characterizations. Optical images were collected by a Nikon LV-ND100 microscope. Electrical measurements. The high precision of current measurements of the devices were measured using a Cascade M150 probe station at room temperature, with an Angilent B1500A Semiconductor Device Parameter Analyzer. Gate voltages on the as-prepared multi-terminal memristors were fed by a Keithley 2400 source meter. During measurements, the TMD layer was kept grounded, while the V ds was applied on the graphite bottom electrode. It is noticed that if the configuration of source-drain is reversed, the I-V characteristics will be reversed accordingly (Supplementary Figure 