Gold nanospheres (Au NSs) and gold nanorods (Au NRs) are traditional noble metal plasmonic nanomaterials. Particularly, Au NRs with tunable longitudinal plasmon resonance from visible to the near infrared (NIR) range were suitable for high efficient photothermal applications due to extended light receiving range. In this work, we synthesized Au NRs and Au NSs of similar volume, and subsequently developed them into Au NR/PVDF and Au NS/PVDF nanofilm, both of which exhibited excellent solar photothermal performance evaluated by solar photothermal experiments. We found that Au NR/PVDF nanofilm showed higher solar photothermal performance than Au NS/PVDF nanofilm. Through detailed analysis, such as morphological characterization, optical measurement, and finite element method (FEM) modeling, we found that the plasmonic coupling effects inside the aggregated Au NRs nanoclusters contributed to the spectral blue-shifts and intensified photothermal performance. As compared to Au NS/PVDF nanofilms, Au NR/PVDF nanofilm exhibited higher efficient light-to-heat conversion rate, because of the extended light receiving range and high absorbance, as the result of strong plasmonic interactions inside nanoclusters, which was further validated by monochromatic laser photothermal experiments and FEM simulations. Our work proved that the Au NRs have huge potential for plasmonic solar photothermal applications, and are envisioned for novel plasmonic applications. Solar photothermal technology is a most straightforward method to obtain clean energy. = exp(-), If the gold nanoparticles were assembled into aggregated clusters, the coupled plasmonic interactions inside clusters will lead to both enhanced near-and far-field. For example, the patterned Au nanoparticle cluster arrays provides ~6 times higher Raman signal of tested bacteria species than nonpatterned nor aggregated control samples. The synthesized Au NRs and Au NSs were examined with transmission electron microscopy (TEM, jem-2100F) for morphological characterization. The averaged dimensions of Au NR were 68.9 ± 15.0 nm in length, 8.1 ± 1.0 nm in width with the aspect ratio of ~8.0. And the averaged diameter of Au NS is 18.8 ± 6.0 nm. Based on these measured dimensions, each individual Au NR and Au NS nanoparticle was estimated of approximately the similar volume as 3468.32 nm 3 and 3451.46 nm 3 , respectively. We characterized the optical properties of the synthesized colloidal Au NR and Au NS with UV-Vis-NIR spectrometer. Indicated as the black line in Figure Particularly, the NIR resonance peak showed ~4 times higher intensity than transverse band, which indicated the monodispersed colloidal Au NRs product of high quality, indicates the interband transitions of electron oscillations. The synthesized gold nanoparticles were subsequently developed into photothermal nanofilms with polyvinyl difluoride (PVDF). We chose PVDF as the medium of photothermal film due to its abundance, convenience during its molding and polymerization, as well as high melting point (up to 170 °C) and stability after curing. Shown in Figure The resulting nanofilms were shown in Figure described the absorbed energy by the Au NR/PVDF or Au NS/PVDF nanofilms, and E = Pst described the overall energy output provided by the light source (see Methods section for detailed information). The calculated light-to-heat conversion efficiency of solar photothermal and monolaser photothermal were summarized in Table Shown in Figure In this manuscript, we chemically synthesized Au NRs, and developed them into Au NR/PVDF nanofilms. Through morphological characterization and statistical analysis, we found that formed varies styles of coupled Au NR clusters in the nanofilm, which contributed to the spectral blue-shifts and boosted photothermal performance. Particularly, through quantitative analysis of nanofilm's composition, optical characteristics, and photothermal response under solar irradiation and/or under monochromatic laser illumination, we found that the as-the synthesized Au NRs formed Au NR clusters, which significantly improved the solar energy conversion rate via extending the light harvest range and nanofilm's optical density. We believe our work have demonstrated that the Au NRs have huge potential for plasmonic solar photothermal applications, and are promising for vast range of applications, such as: nanomedicine, cancer therapy, tumor imaging, solar harvesting, etc. Gold chloride hydrate, hydroquinone (AR), sodium borohydride (96 %), N,N-Dimethylformamide (DMF, AR, 96 %) were purchased from Aladdin. Hexadecyl trimethyl ammonium bromide (CTAB, AR), Trisodium citrate dehydrate (AR), Polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF, MW = 1 million) were purchased form Sinopharm Chemical Reagent. Sodium hydroxide (AR), silver nitrate solution was purchased from Macklin. Ultrapure water (18.2 MΩ cm -1 ) was produced by a Millipore water purification system. The synthesis method of Au NRs were applied as seed-mediated growth technique developed by Leonid Vigderman et al. For Au NR growth, 1 mL silver nitrate solution (0.1 M) was added into HAuCl4 solution (100 mL, 0.5 mM) with 0.1 M CTAB, and then hydroquinone aqueous solution (5 mL, 0.1 M) was added. The solution was kept for stirring at 30 °C until completely clear, then 1.5 mL of seed solution was added. The color of the growth solution gradually changed from colorless to wine red. After aging overnight, the resulting Au NRs were finally obtained after being washed repeatly by centrifugation and redispersed in water. The synthesis of Au NSs was adopted from the Turkevich method, The color changes from light yellow to dark blue and then wine-red. The solution was kept refluxed for another 30 min, and then washed with deionized water for three times and finally re-dispersed in water. Au Nanoparticles/PVDF Nanofilms Synthesis PVDF powder and DMF solution were mixed in a beaker at a mass fraction ratio of 1:10, the beaker was sealed to prevent evaporation of DMF, and the mixture was magnetically stirred overnight to ensure complete dissolving of PVDF. After centrifugation of the gold nanoparticles, the pellets were re-dispersed in 100 μL DMF with subsequent ultrasonication. 1 mL of PVDF/DMF solution and 100 μL Au/DMF were placed in a glass Petri dish. The solution was mixed via stirring and excessive air bubbles were removed. The solution was placed in a vacuum drying oven at 60 °C to remove the DMF solvent to obtain dry Au/PVDF nanofilms. The resulting Au weight concentration in the nanofilm was quantitative determined via inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) study. The optical responses of Au NR, Au NS colloidal solution, and Au/PVDF nanofilms were characterized by UV-Vis-NIR spectrometer UV-3600 (SHIMADZU). The sample spectrum was recorded at wavelength range of 400-1200 nm and slit width of 2 nm. And the recorded spectra was normalized and fitted by the Gaussian peak to determine the resonance peak and FWHM. The morphology of nanofilm characterization was performed with a field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM, SU8020, HITACHI) with the acceleration voltage of 10 kV. The nanofilm was cut into thin slices with thickness of ~50 nm with ultrathin nanoblade slicer for SEM examination. The obtained SEM images were processed by programmed Python CV codes to identify formed clusters (codes were available on https://github.com/MinXi2021/clusters_recognition_CV_codes.git). Typically, the images were firstly leveled the threshold, and then the formed clusters were identified via approximating with polygon. The size of cluster was averaged by the longitudinal axis and transverse axis of fitted curves. For solar photothermal experiment, Au/PVDF nanofilms with different concentrations of Au loaded weight concentrations were placed under a solar simulator (7IS0503A). The temperature of nanofilms were recorded by an infrared thermal imaging camera (FLIR C2) every 20 seconds with an infrared camera until the temperature change leveled off. The light intensity of the solar simulator was adjusted to a solar constant (1367 ± 7 W/m 2 ) calibrated by an optical power meter. For the study of monochromatic laser photothermal experiment, the LED laser with centered wavelength of 395 nm, 637 nm and 980 nm were applied, and the output irradiance power were adjusted to 1.8 W (with the spot of illuminated area of ~5 cm 2 ) calibrated by an optical power meter. All measurements were performed for 3 times to check the reproducibility. The heat transfer module of COMSOL Multiphysics was used to calculate photothermal response. Shown in Figure The partial differential equations Eq. 1 and Eq. 2 were solved to calculate the temperature distribution of the system. Eq. 1 describes the thermal equilibrium of the overall system, where Qr is the generated heat; ρair, ρPVDF and Cair, CPVDFn are the density and heat capacity of air and solution, respectively. = ρ C + ρ C Eq. 1 Eq. 2 describes the photothermal process, where KPVDF is the nanofilm's absorption coefficient, G is the radiation power density. = K G Eq. 2 For the calculation of cell solution's heat transfer under solar light illumination, similar to our previous study, where Ii is each processed beam's intensity (the laser input power was set as 1300 W/m 2 ), I0 is the corresponding intensity of solar spectrum, f0 is the central frequency of the beam, and σ is the standard deviation that is proportional to Di (beam diameter of 1/e 2 width) defined as σ = , and we chose σ = 0.02 for simulation. Therefore, the solar power intensity can be described as: Where ai is each approximated elemental Gaussian beam's portion of overall solar irradiance power, Ii is the elemental beam's corresponding intensity to each frequency. And partial differential equation to be solved can be rewritten as Eq. 5: = ∑ κ • a • I = ρ C + ρ C Eq. 5 Where ai can be calculated from the measured optical density of the nanofilm from Eq. 6 as: Where the absorption coefficient is described as the sum of κi, which is the optical density at each frequency. The model was meshed into ~3000 elements and the simulation performed with PARSIDO time dependent solver to reach the relative tolerance of 0.01. For the heat transfer simulation monochromatic laser illumination, monochromatic laser light sources with centered wavelength of 395 nm, 637 nm and 980 nm were approximately described as Gaussian beams. Since σ of monochromatic laser beam is usually larger than 0.02, we choose σ = 0.02 to describe the laser intensity with Gaussian fit. The laser input power was set as 18000 W/m 2 . The photothermal conversion efficiency under simulated solar irradiation can be obtained from the following equation: η = ∑ m C , (T -T )/Pst Eq. 7 where mi, Cp,i are the mass(mAu/PVDF ~ 0.2g) and heat capacity (Cp,Au = 0.13 J‧g -1 ‧K -1 ), Cp,PVDF = 1.17 J‧g -1 ‧K - 1 ) of Au and PVDF, respectively, Tn is the highest temperature, T0 is the initial temperature, P is the solar irradiation power(~ 1300 W/m 2 ), s is the film area(~ 6 cm 2 ), and t is the irradiation time. The photothermal conversion efficiency of Au/PVDF films under laser irradiation was calculated by the energy balance function. ∑ m C , = Q -Q Eq. 8 