In a dipole or in a quadrupole accelerator magnet, the displacement of the coil turns induced by the electromagnetic forces can cause quenches limiting the magnet performance. For this reason, an azimuthal preload is applied to avoid azimuthal movements of the coil up to the required operational current. However, several tests showed that accelerator magnets can operate with a partial preload, i.e. that coil unloading during the ramp does not prevent reaching higher currents. This issue is particularly relevant for Nb3Sn magnets, where the loads applied to the Nb3Sn filaments can reach the degradation limits of critical current. In order to investigate the impact of coil preload on the quench performance, the MQXFS6 short model quadrupole for the High Luminosity Upgrade was tested under an azimuthal preload at 80% of the short sample current, reaching 93% of short sample current at 1.9 K. The preload was then released to 60%, still showing ability to operate in the range of 80-85% of short sample current as required by HL-LHC project. With this lower preload, the ability of going above 90% of short sample was lost, and a significant training appeared above 85%. When the preload was restored to the original 80% value, the magnet reached with few quenches 95% of short sample (13.4 T peak field). Magnetic measurements confirm the larger movement of the coil in the case with lower preload, and agree with finite element simulations. N a dipole or quadrupole accelerator magnet the electromagnetic forces in the coil are directed towards the mid plane and radially outwards (see Fig. superconducting coil should be compressed ("preloaded") during assembly to avoid pole detachment during operational conditions. This principle was used in the LHC dipoles (see Ref. The MQXF quadrupole for the High Luminosity Upgrade for the LHC has a 150 mm wide aperture and 11.4 T peak field in the conductor at the nominal gradient of 132.6 T/m, required for operating the LHC at 7 TeV. Operation at 7.5 TeV (called ultimate performance) is also considered to prove the operational margin of the magnet, that corresponds to a gradient of 142.1 T/m, a current of 17.5 kA and a peak field of 12.2 T. The magnet design relies on Nb3Sn conductor, and is based on the concepts and technologies developed in 2003-2013 LHC Accelerator Research and Development Program (LARP) In the following subsections we will outline the main features of the design (see Fig. All the coils were produced using the 2 nd generation cable with a keystone angle of 0.4° MQXF coils produce a 132.6 T/m nominal gradient in a 150 mm aperture. Coil cross section is optimized for stress distribution among layers and field quality. Each coil is a double layer wound around a Ti alloy pole (Ti6Al4V), with 22 turns in the inner layer and 24 turns in the outer layer. Coil fabrication is based on the wind-and-react technology where the superconducting phase is formed after winding and during coil heat treatment. To accommodate the dimensional changes of the conductor during heat treatment, the cavity of the curing, reaction and impregnation tooling is designed accounting for 4.5 % cable expansion in thickness and 1.2 % in width MQXF relies on a system of water-pressurized bladders and keys to apply a partial pre-stress to the coils and to pre-tension the aluminum shell (Al-7075) during loading at room temperature The axial preload is given via aluminium rods and end plates; the specification is to have a preload to compensate 100% of the axial forces induced during powering at nominal current (~1.2 MN, see Table MQXFS6 is the fifth of the short model magnets, used to validate the design and performance in the first phase of the project The second assembly MQXFS6b aimed at evaluating the performance after the coil replacement and was assembled following the nominal target of ~80 MPa pole azimuthal stress after loading, and ~110 MPa at 1.9 K (i.e. preload at 80% of short sample). The next iteration (MQXFS6c) was to assemble the magnet with the minimum preload, which corresponds to a coil pole compression of ~30 MPa at room temperature after loading, and ~60 MPa at room temperature: this results in an azimuthal preload at 1.9 K corresponding to 60% of short sample. Lower preload was not possible due to the risk of damaging the magnet during handling operations. In Fig. As the current increases, the electromagnetic forces gradually pull the coil away from the pole. In Fig. As shown in Fig. After the decrease of preload, MQXFS6c had a first quench at 82% of short sample, whereas the first quench in MQXFS6b was at 87% of short sample: this indicates that pre-load at 60% of short sample (as used in MQXFS6c) increases training for currents larger than 80% of short sample. After 6 quenches, the magnet reached 85% of short sample, demonstrating that this target of the HL-LHC project can be reached with half of the nominal preload. After 20 quenches, the magnet reached 89% of short sample at 1.9 K. This suggests that the operational region of 90-95% of short sample is not accessible or requires much longer training when the lower preload of MQXF6c is used. At 4.5 K, the performance is very close to MQXFS6b. The magnet showed excellent memory after thermal cycle despite the lower preload, showing that the training was not finished, and reaching after thermal cycle 90% of the short sample limit at 1.9 K. After an increase of the azimuthal pre-load, back to the level of MQXFS6b, MQXFS6d went back with one quench to the record current in MQXF magnets of 19.57 kA, i.e., 95 % of the short sample limit at 1.9 K and 13.4 T peak field. A few notes about quench location: 70% of the quenches started in coils 203 and 204 (35% each coil), whereas only 30% of the quenches started in coils 210 and 212 (approx. 15% each coil). Most of the quenches started in the straight section of the inner layer pole turn, with only 3 quenches starting in the midplane block of the inner layer, 1 quench in the outer layer and 3 quenches in the transition from the inner to the outer layer. The level of pre-stress does not have an impact on the quench location. Due to the lower pre-load in MQXFS6c, in the presence of electromagnetic forces the pole turn is expected to detach more than in MQXFS6b and move towards the mid-plane with a wider amplitude. This is inducing a variation of b6 that can be measured using rotating coils. We recall that the field quality in a quadrupole is described on terms of multipoles according to B y + iB x = B 2 ⋅ 10 -4 ∑(b n + ia n ) ( x + iy R ref ) n-1 where Bx and By are the field components in Cartesian coordinates, B2 is the reference field, and bn and an are the normalized harmonics coefficients at the references radius Rref (50 mm for MQXF). A simple analytical estimate proves that this effect is well above the sensitivity of a magnetic measurement (order of 0.1 units of b6). Assuming that the coil is a sector coil with an inner radius r and coil width w, the impact of a variation of the coil pole angle for a sector quadrupole pole is For MQXF, the aperture radius r is 75 mm and the coil width w is 36 mm: therefore, 0.1 mm displacement on the pole gives 1.1 mrad variation of the pole angle and a variation of b6 of 1.65 units. Since the difference on coil pre-stress at 1.9 K in MQXFS6b and MQXFS6c is ~45 MPa, assuming a coil elastic modulus of ~20 GPa and an infinitely rigid structure, the angle of the pole θ0 shall vary of 1.2 mrad, corresponding to 0.110 mm pole displacement and 1.8 units of b6, i.e. well above the sensitivity of the magnetic measurement system. To have a precise estimate of the coil displacement during powering, the results of the 2-D finite element model in ANSYS were exported to the 2-D magnetic model implemented in ROXIE, to assess the effects of coil deformation on field quality. The displacement map corresponds to the state of the coil after cool-down and powering at different current levels. The computed displacements in ANSYS were applied to every strand of the magnetic model. The computation gives a difference in the azimuthal displacement during powering between the two assemblies of 0.03-0.04 mm, which is about one third of the analytical estimation assuming an infinitely rigid structure. In Fig. In this paper we present an experimental verification of the influence of coil preload on magnet performance for the specific case of the Nb3Sn quadrupole short model developed in the framework of the HL-LHC project. The required level of preload for an accelerator magnet is debated in the community since many years. Even though the paradigm of the full preload is used as a guideline for most of the magnet designs, experience showed that the magnets can operate at currents sizably larger than the values corresponding to the pole unload. MQXF magnet is based on a bladder and key structure that allows to vary the preload without a full disassembly, and a control of the level of preload in the range of ±10 MPa. In our experiment, we started with coils preloaded to compensate the electromagnetic forces arising at nominal current in HL-LHC (~80 MPa at room temperature, ~110 MPA at 1.9 K), corresponding to 80% of short sample (MQXFS6b). As expected, the magnet was able to operate to much higher currents, and reached 93% of short sample at 1.9 K. We then applied the preload required for 60% of short sample (~30 MPa at room temperature, ~60 MPa at 1.9 K): the magnet was still able to operate at 80% of short sample without retraining, but maximum current reached after a long training was 90% of short sample. The magnet was then warmed up and preloaded with the previous target, recovering 95% of short sample with one quench. The experiment proves that (i) a preload to 60% of short sample allows operating the magnet at 85% of short sample without significant training and (ii) a preload at 80% of short sample allows to expand the operational field of the magnet from 90% to 95% of short sample current, and to reduce the training. The lower preload corresponds to a 0.040 mm larger detachment of the coil from the pole, as it is measured indirectly via the imperfections of the magnetic field, in agreement with finite element simulations. 1 Measured in extracted samples reacted with the coil. Specification values include 5 % of the strand current density degradation due to cabling.