Output power of resonant-tunneling-diode (RTD) terahertz (THz) emitters can be modulated by the bias modulation similar to a semiconductor laser. This property is useful for applications of the THz waves to wireless communications and radars. In this paper, we theoretically analyze the modulation-frequency dependence of the output response using an equivalent circuit of the RTD-THz oscillator. It is shown that there exists an intrinsic cutoff frequency of modulation in RTD, which is independent of the external circuit that supplies the modulation signal to the oscillator. This cutoff frequency is determined by the time constant given by the capacitance of RTD divided by the absolute value of negative differential conductance minus loss conductance of the oscillator, and is about 100 GHz for typical RTD-THz oscillators. We also analyze the effect of external feedback injection on the modulation characteristics. If the period of the modulation frequency is equal to an integral multiple of the round-trip time of the feedback, a dip or peak occurs in the modulation response of the output, depending on whether the THz carrier components in the output and the feedback are in phase or out of phase. We also discuss the possibility of increase in cutoff frequency by the feedback with short round-trip time. The terahertz (THz) band with a frequency of about 0.1 to several THz is expected to have various applications, such as imaging, analysis in chemistry and biotechnology, and communication Resonant tunneling diode (RTD) is also one candidate for room-temperature THz sources In the THz sources using RTD oscillators, the THz output is easily modulated by superimposing a signal on the bias voltage Figure First, the modulation response in the case without feedback injection is analyzed, based on the equivalent circuit of the RTD oscillator shown in Fig. The relation between I and V is approximated by The first and second terms on the right-hand side of Eq. ( V cos ω t φ . 17 From Eq. ( At ω ω , the modulation response decreases to 1 √2 ⁄ of that at ω → 0. As seen from Eq. ( , which is the slope of the output power with respect to bias voltage in Fig. The modulation component of the output power vanishes at V V (the center of the NDC region in Fig. ), as seen from Eq. ( In the above analysis, the modulation component V t of the oscillation voltage was first calculated, and then the modulation component P t of the output power was calculated using V t . It is also possible to directly obtain P t by finding a differential equation for the output power P first. Since this method complicates the mathematical procedure in the analysis for the case with feedback injection described later, the above method is used throughout this paper. The cutoff frequency of modulation is roughly estimated as follows, assuming the same parameter values as those in Ref. In the reported experiments experimentally. The intrinsic cutoff frequency of modulation will appear by improvements in the external circuit for the modulation signal. For the analysis of the modulation characteristics with feedback injection, we consider a system shown in Fig. The equivalent circuit of Fig. The equivalent circuit in Fig. The basic equation is obtained by adding a term of the feedback injection to the right-hand side of Eq. (3) as Same as the case without feedback, the bias voltage is modulated as in Eq. ( The output power radiated from the window in Fig. The first term in the right-hand side of Eq. ( The second term in the right-hand side of Eq. ( The feedback injection changes the frequency dependence and magnitude of the modulation response. The magnitude of the modulation response is different from Eq. ( Figure The result in Fig. (24), while the latter decreases P . The characteristics of Fig. In the numerical example given in the previous section, G ω C ⁄ ≃ 0.32. For the curve with G ω C ⁄ close to this value in Fig. ) is large and √R cos ω τ is negative with large absolute value, the oscillation does not occur, and there is no solution for V in Eq. ( Figure As shown in Fig. FIG. When cos ω τ is positive, dips occur periodically at modulation frequencies equal to an integral multiple of 1 τ ⁄ , and when cos ω τ is negative, these dips change to peaks. These results are also understood from the second term of Eq. ( The modulation response changing periodically with the phase of the feedback wave has the same origin as that for the mode locking of a laser, although the analysis in this paper using a linear approximation of small signal modulation is not applicable to pulse generation in the mode locking including a nonlinear effect. The measured result of the modulation response similar to the above theoretical result has been reported Although various factors such as impedance matching between RTD and external circuit can be considered in the periodic structure of the measured result, the feedback injection can also be one of the causes. Figure Frequency dependence of modulation response normalized by the result at R 0 and ω → 0. As shown in Fig. The modulation characteristics of the RTD-THz oscillator was analyzed using an equivalent circuit. It was shown that there exists an intrinsic cutoff frequency of modulation in RTD, which is independent of the external circuit that supplies the modulation signal to the oscillator. This cutoff frequency is determined by the time constant given by the capacitance of RTD divided by the absolute value of negative differential conductance minus loss conductance of the oscillator, and is about 100 GHz for typical RTD-THz oscillators. The effect of external feedback injection on the modulation characteristics was also analyzed. If the period of the modulation frequency is equal to an integral multiple of the round-trip time of the feedback, a dip or peak occurs in the modulation response of the output, depending on whether the THz carrier components in the output and the feedback are in phase or out of phase. The feedback injection adversely affects the modulation characteristics if the reflection point is at a distance sufficiently longer than the wavelength of the modulation frequency, but may also have a possibility of flattening the frequency response of the modulation if the distance to the reflection point is comparable to or less than the wavelength of the cutoff frequency. The first and second derivatives of Eq. ( dV dt Equation ( S-1-B. The case with feedback injection (Eqs. ( Substituting Eq. ( Equation (20) in the paper is obtained from Eqs. (S-7) and (S-9), and Eq. ( The analysis for large reflectivity at the window is shown here. Although the basic features of the effect of the feedback injection are well expressed in the analysis with R ≪1 in the paper, precise analysis without limit for the reflectivity may be necessary for some actual cases as well as for checking the accuracy of the approximation method. For a large reflectivity, Eq. (S-10) in Supplementary material S-II must be used instead of Eq. (S-11). Equation (S-10) is transformed as follows. The equivalent circuit is expressed as Equation (S-16) gives the exact change in oscillation angular frequency due to feedback injection for the case without modulation, and it reduces to Eq. (20) in the paper if R ≪ 1. ⁄ , S 20 and the voltage amplitude V and the phase φ in the modulation component V t V cos ω t φ are obtained from Eq. (S-19) as E. Wasige, European Microwave Week, Madrid, Spain (Sept. 2018), WTh04-03.