In this work, we report the broad-band ferromagnetic resonance spectroscopy of EuSn2As2 single crystals at different temperatures in combination with magnetization measurements and structural characterization. We observe conventional collective acoustic resonance mode of the A-type antiferromagnetic spin-flop phase in the Eu sub-lattice, and its transition to the paramagnetic resonance above the ordering temperature. Furthermore, we observe reproducibly additional well-defined spectral line. The origin of the additional line remains unclear. However, its temperature dependence attributes it to magnetism in the Eu sub-lattice. In recent years EuSn 2 As 2 compound has been of a high research interest due to its intrinsic topological and magnetic properties In general, electronic and magnetic properties of EuSn 2 As 2 compound are well studied. Yet, unresolved phenomena remain. Previous studies demonstrate features in magnetization curves The EuSn 2 As 2 single crystals were synthesized from homogeneous SnAs (99.99% Sn + 99.9999% As) precursor and elemental Eu (99.95%) in stoichiometric molar ratio (2:1) using the self-flux method, similar to our previous works FIG. Visually, as-synthesized bulk EuSn 2 As 2 crystals demonstrate well-defined layered structure and their pliability for cleavage and exfoliation along the layering direction only. The XRD studies confirm alignment of ab crystal planes within the structural layers, and orientation of the c crystal axis across the layers. The obtained lattice parameters are a, b = 4.189 Åand c = 26.463 Å. The SEM and EDX studies confirm stoichiometric composition (Eu 19.8 ± 0.5 at.%, Sn 39.7 ± 0.2 at.%, As 40.5 ± 0.3 at.%) and homogeneity of synthesized single crystals. The EBSD studies confirm local crystal orientation of synthesized samples. Details of XRD and SEM studies can be found in supplementary. Samples for magnetization measurements and FMR spectroscopy were obtained by cleavage of as-synthesized bulk crystals. Cleaved EuSn 2 As 2 samples were of a plate shape having few mm in size along ab crystal planes, and from about 100 μm thick along the c crystal axis, which ensures the well-defined thin-film geometry of samples with determined crystal orientation. Magnetization measurements of cleaved EuSn 2 As 2 samples were performed using the vibrating-sample magnetometer (VSM) Quantum Design PPMS-9. The broadband ferromagnetic resonance (FMR) spectroscopy was performed using the VNA-FMR flip-chip approach Figure The dependence of magnetization on magnetic field follows the textbook M (H) dependence for the A-type easyplane antiferromagnet where (e ix , e iy , e iz ) is the unit vector of ferromagnetic moment of the Eu atomic layer in spherical coordinates e = sin θ cos φx+sin θ sin φŷ+cos θẑ, ẑ axis is aligned with c crystal axis in Fig. the dependence of the spin-flop angle on the magnetic field for two sub-lattice configuration are cos φ = H/H ab s and cos θ = H/H c s , where φ is the azimuthal angle in ab plane in respect to direction of H when H is in-plane, and θ is the polar angle in respect to c axis when H is out-of-plane. These relations imply the linear dependence of magnetization on the magnetic field M (H) up to the saturation field, which is observed in Fig. However, magnetization measurements in Fig. Figure while at T T c the paramagnetic resonance line of a thin-film sample obeys where χ(T, H) is the residual susceptibility. The evolution of FMR spectrum with temperature is analysed as follows. In accordance with Eqs. 2 and 3 the A-line at T < T c and the spectral line at T > T c are modelled with the linear function 2πf r = Aμ 0 H (see Fig. In general, several possible origins can be proposed for appearance of the additional line. First, the straightforward possibility of phase inhomogeneity can be considered and is ruled out by reproducible XRD and SEM studies. Next, the resonance process in a domain structure can be suggested, such as breathers in striped domain structures As an alternative, we speculate that magnetic defects, i.g., magnetic point defects In conclusion, in this work we report the broadband ferromagnetic resonance spectroscopy study of EuSn 2 As 2 2 single crystals in combination with magnetization measurements and structural analysis. At temperatures above the antiferromagnetic ordering temperature of Eu sub-lattice the spectrum shows a conventional paramagnetic resonance line. At temperatures below the ordering temperature the spectrum shows the acoustic mode of the A-type antiferromagnetic spin-flop phase. Also, the spectrum reveals reproducibly additional resonance line. The origin of additional line remains unclear, possible conventional explanations fail. However, the characteristic temperature of this line matches the antiferromagnetic ordering temperature of the Eu sublattice, which attributes this line to magnetism in Eu sub-lattice. As a probable origin we suggest that additional line is a signature of some magnetic defects, which are intrinsic for the self-flux growth process of EuSn 2 As 2 2 compound. This work was supported by the Russian Science Foundation and by the Ministry of Science and Higher Education of the Russian Federation.