Providing an accurate, representative sample of mass flux across large open areas for atmospheric studies or the extreme conditions of a hypersonic engine is challenging for traditional intrusive or point-based sensors. Here, we demonstrate that laser absorption spectroscopy with mode-locked frequency combs can simultaneously measure all of the components of mass flux (velocity, temperature, pressure, and species mole fraction) with low uncertainty, spatial resolution corresponding to the laser line of sight, and no supplemental sensor readings. The low uncertainty is provided by the broad spectral bandwidth, high resolution, and extremely well-known and controlled frequency axis of stabilized, mode-locked frequency combs. We demonstrate these capabilities using dual frequency comb spectroscopy (DCS) in the isolator of a ground-test supersonic propulsion engine at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base. The mass flux measurements are consistent within 3.6% of the facility-level engine air supply values. A vertical scan of the laser beams in the isolator measures the spatially resolved mass flux, which is compared with computational fluid dynamics simulations. A rigorous uncertainty analysis demonstrates a instrument uncertainty of ~0.4%, and total uncertainty (including non-instrument sources) of ~7% for mass flux measurements. These measurements demonstrate DCS with mode-locked frequency combs as a low-uncertainty mass flux sensor for a variety of applications. 1. Accurate measurements of gaseous mass flux, the total flow rate of molecules through a volume, are essential to many research fields. For example, species mass flux measurements have been used to study greenhouse gas emissions of cities and arctic environments The broad optical bandwidth of the combs enables measurement of a multitude of absorption features whose relative intensity collectively define the temperature of the gas. The optical bandwidth also enables accurate measurement of the gas composition, including the potential to resolve multiple gas species at once. We use frequency combs to measure the mass flux in a direct-connect, ground-test, dualmode ramjet propulsion system at the Air Force Research Laboratory. Scramjets/ramjets are air-breathing engines which typically operate at speeds above Mach 5. While short duration scramjet flights have been demonstrated via programs such as X-51 We determine the air mass flux with low uncertainty by measuring velocity, temperature, pressure, and species mole fraction through absorption spectroscopy of hundreds of water vapor quantum transitions in the 6880 -7186 cm -1 spectral region (1392 -1453 nm) with ~46,000 optical frequencies (comb teeth) of a stabilized all-fiber mode-locked dual frequency comb spectrometer. We take several measurements at varying flow conditions at the centerline of the dual-mode ramjet. This choice of facility allows for comparisons to both computational fluid dynamics (CFD) calculations and upstream facility flow rate measurements which are expected to have high accuracy as the facility is a closed, direct-connect system. Additionally, we perform a vertical scan at a single flow condition to within 1 mm from the wall to provide a mass flux spatial profile. The measured flow properties and resulting air mass flux results are compared to facility measurements and computational fluid dynamics (CFD) calculations across a range of flow conditions. Through a detailed analysis, we estimate 0.4% instrument uncertainty in the measured mass flux. Additional systematic uncertainties bring the overall uncertainty to ~7%, largely due to uncertainty in the absorption model that is used to interpret the instrument measurements (and which can be improved in the future). This is the first demonstration of dual comb absorption spectroscopy (DCS) measurements of air mass flux, and the first demonstration of DCS in a hypersonic aeropropulsion environment. Our results demonstrate the potential of broadband dual-comb spectroscopy for accurate, precise, and nonintrusive mass flux measurements in high-speed flows. While the DCS system used here is tailored for water-air mass flux and is thus based on H2O absorption in the near-infrared spectral region, the mode-locked frequency comb spectral range can be tailored to be applicable to other gas mixtures and encompass measurements of more species relevant to greenhouse gas monitoring and combustion Mass flux is the product of the velocity (U) and density (ρ) in a flow. If we assume that the composition of the gas besides H2O (the molecular absorption target for the present measurement) is dry air, we can determine the density via the ideal gas law using temperature, pressure, and H2O mole fraction and ultimately calculate mass flux with the following equation: Here MH2O and Mair are the molar masses of water and dry-air, and R is the gas constant. The rest of the terms: pressure (P), temperature (T), H2O mole fraction (χ H2O ), and velocity (U), can be extracted from laser absorption spectra measured with an appropriate optical configuration and laser. DCS (and laser absorption spectroscopy in general) measures laser absorption at frequencies resonant with the rovibrational quantum state transitions of a constituent molecule in a gas sample or flow. Figure Mode-locked frequency comb lasers have emerged as powerful sources for absorption spectroscopy where f 0 is the carrier envelope offset frequency, n is the comb tooth number, and f rep is the pulse repetition rate of the laser. Thus, the absolute frequency of each individual comb tooth is set with only two degrees of freedom (f rep and f 0 ). These parameters can be precisely measured and controlled (as described below) to create a near-perfect optical ruler with which to measure the position, shape, and magnitude of absorption features. A key challenge in spectroscopy with frequency combs is preserving the resolution and tight control of the fine comb tooth lines in the detection of the absorption information contained in the thousands of individual optical frequencies after they have traveled through the environment of interest. We address this challenge using dual comb spectroscopy (DCS), in which two frequency combs are coherently locked to one another with slightly different comb tooth spacing. The comb tooth spacing is set so that successive pairs of teeth from the two combs have a unique frequency offset from each other that gives rise to a unique heterodyne beat signal at the difference frequency between the teeth. Thus when the combs are interfered on a photodetector, we down-convert pairs of comb teeth from their optical frequencies to corresponding heterodyne beat signals at easily detectable radio frequencies The frequency combs used here are Erbium-doped, polarization-maintaining-fiber based frequency combs with a pulse repetition rate of 200 MHz Using this stabilization approach, the quality of the optical ruler for measuring the absorption spectrum is set by the stability and accuracy of the frequency reference for the frequency counters, and the amount of drift in f rep allowed by the CW laser feedback. In this study the frequency reference is a simple ovenized quartz oscillator (Wenzel 501-27514-21) with a relative frequency accuracy of 1.5 ppm. The CW laser digital feedback loop allows a drift in f rep of less than 25 ppb. Thus, the frequency reference is the limiting factor in the ultimate accuracy of the comb tooth frequencies. Still, the 1.5 ppm relative accuracy of the frequency reference enables the spacing of the comb teeth to be known to within ~300 Hz (1.0 × 10 -8 cm -1 ) at all times and the absolute position of teeth to within 300 MHz (0.011 cm-1). This leads to low instrument uncertainty, as described later. If further accuracy is required the frequency reference can be replaced with a GPS-disciplined oscillator which has a relative accuracy of 10 ppt, and the feedback to the CW laser can be improved by switching to a highspeed analog control feedback on the CW laser to stabilize f rep . With the dual-comb spectrometer employed in this study, we achieve ~300 cm -1 optical bandwidth encompassing hundreds of H2O absorption features with a spectral point spacing of 0.0067 cm -1 . These mode-locked dual frequency comb spectroscopy performance metrics thus blend broad bandwidth with very high resolution and frequency referencing that far exceeds most traditional absorption techniques. For example, a TDLAS measurement with a 15 cm etalon reference would need real-time knowledge and control of the etalon length to 225 nm to achieve the frequency referencing performance of the dual comb. DCS also allows for fast acquisition. In this work, each spectrum is acquired in 0.7 ms, and the stability of the lasers allow for long averaging times to optimize SNR and precision as needed (in this case 60 s of data is averaged to reach <0.33% precision across all measurements). The DCS performance characteristics relate directly to low instrument uncertainty for each of the measured components of mass flux. We define instrument uncertainty to be the fundamental limit of the measurement uncertainty imparted by the stability and accuracy of the DCS. For velocity measurements, the absolute frequency error of the frequency combs cancel in the crossed beam configuration (see Supplement 1 Sec. 1), and only uncertainty in the comb teeth spacing imparts an instrument uncertainty. As stated above, this is controlled to 0.00015%, and sets the lower limit of achievable uncertainty in the measurement of velocity. The uncertainty of the comb tooth spacing also defines the lower limit of the achievable instrument uncertainty for pressure measurements (which are based on the relative width of the measured absorption features). We found that for pressure, temperature, and species mole fraction retrievals, uncertainty in the frequency axis also leads to additional error during the fit of the absorption model to the measurement due to correlation between the parameters (since all are retrieved simultaneously). As described in Supplement 1 Sec. 3.1 these uncertainties are still very low; 0.012% for pressure, 0.015% for species mole fraction, and 0.0042% for temperature. While difficult to quantify, the DCS bandwidth, resolution, and lack of instrument lineshape (distortion) also help reduce uncertainty in the measurement Altogether, mode-locked DCS is therefore well-suited for mass flux measurements due to the low levels of uncertainty that are achievable through the quality of the optical spectrum reference, its broad bandwidth and high resolution, and point spacing accuracy. We describe later that background absorption, noise, absorption model error, laser angle uncertainty, and other systematic uncertainties outside of the DCS instrument itself increase the overall uncertainty. However, many of these systematic uncertainties can continue to be improved through changes to the optical setup and better absorption models. We demonstrate dual comb mass flux sensing in a continuous-flow, direct-connect, supersonic combustion research facility at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base The isolator of a direct-connect test facility is ideal for this initial demonstration because the mass flux can be determined with reasonable accuracy based on the test facility air flow measurements (all of the air flow from the facility compressors are directed through the test article in a direct-connect facility). The test article is 10.2 cm wide, 3.8 cm tall, and 61 cm long with optical access via 2.1-cm-thick quartz windows. See Supplement 1 Sec. 4 for a more detailed description of the dual-mode ramjet test model. We place the dual-comb spectrometer in a control room adjacent to the test cell. A coupler combines light from each of the two combs and sends the combined light onto two separate single-mode fiber paths. The light from each path then passes through free-space optical filters and back into single-mode fiber for transmission to the test cell. In the test cell, the light is collimated and passed through the isolator windows. We set both optical paths parallel to the bottom of the isolator. Using high precision rotation mounts we angle one beam in an upstreampropagating direction and the other in a downstream-propagating direction (hereafter referred to as the upstream and downstream beam respectively) at angles of 35° and -35° (±0.25°, see Supplement 1, Sec. 3.3) respectively from the normal of the isolator windows, as shown in Figure We obtain interferograms resulting in spectra between 6880 -7186 cm -1 (1392 -1453 nm) using 46,000 comb teeth (each with ~25 kHz linewidth) at a rate of 1.4 kHz (Figure The mass flux measurement is localized to the vertical and axial (streamwise) location of the crossed lasers. For the rectangular isolator duct, we can assume a symmetrical flow along the transverse axis meaning the crossed beams are able to represent a transverse-averaged slab with a 7 cm streamwise due to the angling of the lasers and a 1 mm height resolution corresponding to the beam diameter. In this study, we demonstrate spatially resolved measurements in the vertical direction by scanning the crossed beams vertically. The flow conditions tested here were designed to be simple (i.e. no distortion generator or isolator shock train), so that the DCS measurements could be readily compared with area-normalized facility mass flow rate measurements and CFD calculations. This resulted in minimal gradients along the axial direction of the isolator. Future measurements of more complex conditions could include translation of the laser beams in the axial direction to achieve a 2D measurement of the flowfield. In the first test configuration, we perform measurements at the centerline of the isolator (19 mm from the bottom) while the facility parameters are varied to produce different velocity, temperature, and pressure conditions (tabulated in Supplement 1 Sec. 5). The DCS measurement results for velocity, temperature, pressure, χ H2O , and the consequent total mass flux calculations are shown in Figure The simple flow conditions in this study feature a uniform core flow with relatively small boundary layers. Thus, a centerline measurement can be reasonably compared against areanormalized facility mass flow rate measurements. We chose a direct-connect facility (where the entire mass flow of the facility compressors must pass through the engine) so that the compressor mass flux could serve as a direct comparison with the measurements. The facility (c) mass flow rate measurements are taken with flow meters upstream of the isolator which are expected to have low uncertainties. We normalize the flow rate with the isolator cross-sectional area to provide a facility-derived mass flux, which is shown in Figure The facility measurements only enable mass flux comparisons, so we use a 3D CFD flow solution for comparison with the other measured parameters (velocity, temperature, species mole fraction and pressure). The simulations are performed in CFD++ (Metacomp Technologies, Inc.) based on a full 3D Reynolds-Averaged Navier Stokes approach with the two-equation cubic k -ε turbulence model and an isothermal wall condition. To compare the CFD and DCS values, we simulate a line-of-sight absorption measurement through the CFD at the same location as the real-world measurement In the second measurement configuration, we scan the crossed beams vertically from the centerline to within 1 mm of the bottom wall while the isolator flow is maintained at one condition. Figure Figure Figure The DCS instrument is capable of low uncertainty measurements of multiple flow parameters, as described earlier. However, it is important to consider all potential sources of uncertainty to estimate the total uncertainty of the measurements. We identify the sources of uncertainty to be the DCS instrument accuracy, DCS instrument precision, beam angle, background subtraction, and database. The contribution of each source is described in detail in Supplement 1 Sec. 3. Table The DCS instrument accuracy corresponds to uncertainty stemming from the DCS instrument itself (accuracy and stability of the frequency point spacing and the bandwidth of the system as discussed in Section 2). The DCS instrument precision is the scatter in results due to the noise in the spectrum at 60s of averaging time (absorbance noise ≈ 0.003). We find the scatter by calculating the Allan deviation as shown for velocity in Figure Uncertainty directly from the DCS instrument (the DCS instrument accuracy and precision) is only ~0.4% at 60s of averaging across all measurements. As the primary uncertainty contribution is from precision, this can be improved with longer averaging times, as the Allan deviation shown in Figure Despite their importance to many atmospheric and industrial applications, direct measurements of mass flux are extremely challenging in large-scale open environments and environments with extreme flow phenomena because it is difficult to simultaneously and nonintrusively measure all of the components of mass flux (i.e. velocity, temperature, pressure, and mixture composition). Here, we demonstrate non-intrusive, absolute measurements of mass flux in such environments by leveraging the unique properties of stabilized, mode-locked frequency combs. In particular, we demonstrate the measurement technique in a supersonic flow environment where the non-intrusive nature of the sensor survives the high temperatures and flow velocities, and the spatial resolution can help with the presence of variable pressure, shock waves, and boundary layers. Other laser absorption techniques have been used for a variety of prior measurements in aerospace environments. TDLAS has been used to measure velocity, temperature, or other individual components of mass flux in shock tubes, wind tunnels, and ramjet test models with high resolution, fast acquisition data The ability to localize the pressure, temperature, mole fraction, velocity, and mass flux to the line-of-sight of the laser beam is promising for environments with spatially varying conditions, such as among the boundary layers and pressure shocks that occur in and around hypersonic vehicles. The vertical scan results presented in this paper demonstrate the capability of DCS to measure the spatial variation in the mass flux near the wall of the scramjet isolator. Future measurements could traverse oblique shock trains, incorporating local laser-based pressure measurements as done in this study rather than potentially non-representative facility wall pressure measurements. The ability to scan a line-of-sight mass flux measurement through spatially varying conditions can be broadened to other open-area measurements of interest. For example, DCS has been demonstrated for long-distance measurements of trace gases Overall, this demonstration of DCS mass flux sensing with low uncertainty across a difficult suite of flow conditions suggest that DCS is an accurate and multi-faceted sensor with applications across many different environments.