Space-charge-limited current (SCLC) measurements are used to estimate charge carrier mobilities and electronic trap densities of semiconductors by analysing the current densityvoltage (JV) relationship for unipolar devices predicted by the Mott-Gurney (MG) law. However, the interpretation of SCLC measurements for metal-halide perovskites is problematic due to mobile ionic defects which redistribute to screen electrostatic fields in devices during measurements. To overcome this, an SCLC measurement protocol was recently suggested that minimises ionic charge redistribution by probing the current during millisecond voltage pulses superimposed on a background bias. Here, we use drift-diffusion simulations with mobile ions to assess the validity of the MG law for analysing both the standard and new protocol JV measurements. We simulated idealised perovskite devices with differing mobile ion densities and compared them with simulations and measurements of devices with typical contact materials. We found the validity region for the MG law is limited to perovskites with mobile ion densities lower than the device's equilibrium charge carrier density (<10 17 cm -3 for 400 nm thick methylammonium lead iodide films) and contacts with injection/extraction barriers ≤ 0.1 eV. The latter limitation can be partially overcome by increasing the device thickness, whereas the former limitation cannot. This restricts the range of perovskite layer compositions and viable contact materials that can be reliably analysed with the MG law. Approaches such as estimating trap densities from the apparent voltage onset to trap-free SCLC regime should also be critically reviewed since they rely on the same potentially invalid assumptions as the MG law. Our results demonstrate that extracting meaningful and accurate values for metal halide perovskite material properties from SCLC maybe challenging, or often not possible. Metal halide perovskite materials are of considerable interest for applications including solar cells In principle, the JV curve of a semiconducting layer sandwiched between symmetrical and Ohmic contacts demonstrates SCLC beyond a voltage threshold, this SCLC region of the curve is known as the Mott-Gurney drift regime. JV curves are generally measured by stepping sequentially (sweeping) through an increasing or decreasing series of applied voltages, V, at some rate while recording the resulting current density between electrical contacts, J(V). SCLC analysis usually involves determining the log-log gradient of the measured JV curve as it varies with voltage, g(V) = dlog(J)/dlog(V), to identify the exponent of the power-law relationship J ∝ V g . Voltage regions where g(V) ≈ 2 are identified and analysed using the Mott-Gurney (MG) law με r ε 0 V 2 L 3 However, the application of the MG law and its associated analyses on metal halide perovskite materials is further confounded the presence of high concentrations of mobile ionic defects within the crystal lattice. These ions redistribute in response to varying internal electric fields during measurements In this article, we show that applying the MG law to JV measurements of mixed electronicionic conducting materials such as metal halide perovskites is only valid under specific measurement conditions and when the electronic charge density is significantly greater than the mobile ionic charge density in the device at equilibrium (herein, 'equilibrium' is defined as the condition where no (net) energy or mass flows in or out of the defined system). For the typical class of materials and devices of interest to the perovskite community it is difficult to ensure these conditions are met, hence limiting the utility of the MG law and associated techniques in this context. We demonstrate these findings by presenting simulations of JV measurements of 'ideal' thin-film devices (which are not necessarily always possible to make) over a large voltage range (which is experimentally impractical) and by contrasting them to experimental results from real thin-film devices and corresponding simulations of them. This is done for two SCLC measurement techniques: (i) JV sweeps performed by incrementally stepping the applied voltage with time at a fixed rate and (ii) the so-called "pulsed-voltage" method where voltages are applied in very short pulses, probing the device in a quasi-fixed state. Noting the discrepancy between the ideal simulations and the experimental results, an analysis revealing the validity regime for the MG law is provided. The effects of increasing perovskite layer thickness on these validity limits are also investigated. The consequences of this validity regime and the machanisms at play have important implications for any JV measurement of perovskite single-carrier devices. The derivation of the Mott-Gurney law requires two assumptions: i) that the spatial variation of the internal electric field is governed only by injected majority electronic charge (the majority charge carrier here is holes) with no contribution from other charged species, and ii) that the electronic current is dominated by drift. While the first assumption should be valid in an ideal device at reasonably high voltages, a high density of mobile ionic charge, which might be expected in metal halide perovskites, is likely to invalidate this assumption since we expect the ionic charge to dominate the electric field profile in a device. The electric field profile, E, can be determined from Gauss' law which is related to the spatially varying distribution of charge. If the electronic charge in the perovskite is dominated by free holes of concentration, p, and the perovskite also contains a mobile cationic charge species with concentration, c, compensated for by an equally and oppositely charged, uniformly distributed static anionic species, with concentration a, then at steady-state: Where x refers to the position along the one dimensional space of the perovskite layer and q is the elementary charge. The corresponding steady state drift current density, J, through the device will be given by: J = qμ p p(x)E(x) The MG law also assumes that JV measurements are made on semiconducting layers interfaced with Ohmic electrical contacts. Ohmic contacts maximise the concentration of electronic charge in the device at equilibrium and minimise any barriers to electronic charge injection, assuming all other variables (contact area, interfacial surface/dipole states etc.) are equal. We define an ideal Ohmic contact as one with no workfunction offset (φ offset = 0 eV): where EBE is either Ec or Ev, which are the conduction and valence band edge energies of the semiconductor, respectively, and φ m is the workfunction of the metallic contact. The convention we use here is to discuss the smallest offset of the two according to the contact selectivity of carrier species in the unipolar devices. Variation of φ offset impacts the charge carrier density in the device. In an out-of-thermal-equilibrium semiconductor with quasifermi levels E Fn and E Fp and with effective density of states N c and N v for electrons and holes respectively, the Blakemore approximation To investigate the consequences of mobile ionic charge for the application of the MG law and its associated analyses we present drift-diffusion simulations (using our modelling package, Driftfusion The example simulated JV curves for forward (from 0 to 500 V) and reverse (from 500 to 0 V) voltage sweeps at different scan rates in figure We now consider experimentally measured JV curves of perovskite hole only devices. Figures The ionic drift during the JV scans in figure Comparing the experimental and simulation results in figure Given the strong effect from mobile ions during the JV measurements and simulations, on both in the magnitude and shape of the JV curves, and the differences in JV hysteresis at different scan rates, it is clear that more sophisticated ways of measuring SCLC in perovskites must be employed. In the following section we investigate a recently developed pulsed voltage SCLC method and the limits of its applicability. An in-depth explanation of the technique is provided in the methods section. Recently, Duijnstee et al. published an approach for measuring JV curves without significantly altering the distribution of ions during the scan Figures The equilibrium distribution of the ionic charge has a significant effect on the simulated JV curves. As electronic charge redistributes to align the Fermi level in the perovskite layer with the contact workfunctions at the interfaces, the ionic charge redistributes too-it contributes significantly to the space-charge layers at the interface(s) in the same way as electronic charge; either by accumulating or depleting. This not only reduces the density of electronic charge at the interfaces when compared to a semiconductor with no mobile ionic charge, but also modifies the energetic landscape at the interfaces by locally increasing the charge density, reducing the space-charge layer thickness and, in turn, modifying the electric field in the space-charge region. The simulated electric field and electrostatic potential profiles of devices at equilibrium and at 75 V during a JV scan with frozen ions are shown in figures S3 and S4 respectively. These show significant contribution of the ionic charge to the potential distribution and electric field distributions of the bulk and at the interface, even when the ions are spatially fixed during the simulated JV scan. Figures Altogether, the simulation and experimental results in figure While experimental results of the pulsed voltage method on a thin-film single-carrier device did not yield correct mobilities, the SCLC analysis of simulated JV curves for ideal devices with lower concentrations of 'frozen' mobile ions (figures 3a) yielded mobilities close to what was expected (the input mobilty). We will now investigate the validity region for SCLC measurements for which the application of the MG law could meaningfully be applied in the frozen ion regime. D. Is there a region of validity for SCLC measurements of metal halide perovskites? In order to determine a region of validity for using the MG law for analysing SCLC measurements, a parameter search is conducted: a series of simulations of the same ideal device shown previously where the contact workfunctions are varied symmetrically, i.e., the workfunctions of both contacts are always equal and while φ offset is increased, and the ionic density is varied. As before, JV measurements from 0 to 500 V with the ionic charge frozen in their equilibrium distribution are simulated. The maximum g(V) in the JV is found (depending on the simulated device this peak could occur anywhere in the range) and the voltage and current density at which this maximum occurs are used to calculate the mobility using the MG law. For our simulation results, this process selects for the calculated mobility in the JV curve closest to the set mobility (20 cm 2 V -1 s -1 ). If a region of the JV curve does not fall within J ∝ V 2±0.2 , i.e., 1.8 < g(V) < 2.2 (as depicted in figure We also extended investigations into studying thicker devices (1 μm and 100 μm) undergoing JV scans up to 1500 V (shown in figures S8a and S9a-c respectively) revealing that the constraints on φ offset can be stretched by having a thicker device; the region of validity in figure Based on the observation that the region of validity for SCLC measurements depends on φ offset and the ion density, and by noting that φ offset is related to electronic charge carrier density (equation 5), we conclude that the relative density of the ionic to electronic charge must be substantial. A refined limit of these relative densities is given below. Fig. The explanation of the observation of ion density limiting g(V) in a device even when it is static during the JV scan is shown in figure The results are for points at 0 V and 100 V (to represent an arbitrary point along the JV curve) during the same set of JV simulations (results at 20 V are given in figure To demonstrate the implications of this claim, we can estimate an upper limit to the electron charge carrier density in a perovskite device with ideal Ohmic contacts at equilibrium and compare this to likely concentrations of ionic charge in perovskites. We take the density of free electrons expected when the Fermi level reaches the perovskite conduction band edge as this upper limit for the average concentration at equilibrium (n0). Details of this estimation are shown in the supplementary material. We obtain an approximate upper limit of n 0 ≤ 2 × 10 18 cm -3 for MAPbI3. We note that the effective mass of holes in these materials is similar to or higher than that of electrons (0.29m e The purple trace in figure We now comment on the constraints implied by our limit 5c̅ < n ̅. Such Ohmic contacts would be very hard to find because of MAPbI3's E c ≈ -3.8 eV and E v ≈ -5.4 eV. Examples of feasible metallic contacts for thin film devices are platinum and calcium. None of the metals commonly used for solar cell research are viable. As demonstrated earlier in the text, the constraints on φ offset can be stretched by increasing device thickness and, therefore, gold and aluminium (giving φ offset ≈ 0.3 eV) may work for very thick devices. Unfortunately, the thicker the device, the higher the voltage required to reach the MG regime (this is the example shown in figure The density of mobile ionic charge in metal halide perovskites is quoted as high as 10 18 -10 19 cm -3 in some theoretical models and experimental results Finally, we note that the estimated mobilities in large portions of the red shaded box of figure We conclude that even measurement techniques that do not allow the ionic charge to move and that only probe electronic responses to applied voltage do not guarantee the applicability of analytical SCLC theory to the results. In its equilibrium position, increasing the mobile ionic charge increases the amount of electronic charge in the device but decreases the amount of injected charge which results in the MG regime not being reached and/or the wrong mobilities being calculated. The ionic charge accumulates at the interfaces as part of the space-charge regions that are normally formed at equilibrium, increasing the space-charge density and decreasing the width of the space-charge regions. This alters the local electric field in the space-charge regions. We have identified the controlling factor impacting the MG law's applicability as the relative densities of the ionic and electronic charge in the device, namely the ionic charge density needs to be at least five times lower than the electronic charge density at equilibrium. If this condition is met by achieving sufficiently Ohmic contacts on a device with low ion densities (< 5 times electronic charge density), the ionic charge has little effect on any JV measurement so there is no need to modify the standard measurement procedure (with pulsed voltages, for example). The limits on contact energetics can be stretched by increasing perovskite layer thickness. Unfortunately, very thick devices (>> 1μm) require applied voltages with which it is experimentally inaccessible to reach the MG regime. Other features in real devices, including trap statesand interfacial states, can affect SCLC measurements. The precise nature and origin of electronic trap states in metal halide perovskites are still unclear and varies significantly between perovskite compositions; thus trap states are currently not well accounted for when modelling perovskite devices and analysing measurements of them. It is also challenging to find electrode materials that lead to ideal Ohmic contacts and the density of ionic charge (particularly for polycrystalline thin films) is difficult to control and likely to be too high. We, therefore, suggest that it is difficult to make a single-carrier thinfolm perovskite device that can be analysed using the MG law and its associated analyses. We demonstrated this through our own set of experimental results and recommend that metal halide perovskite devices should only be analysed with the MG law and associated techniques when the mobile ion density and contact energetics (workfunction offset) fit within the limits outlined by this work. The measurement scheme is indicated in the inset of figure 2a which shows the device held at a pre-bias voltage, Vpre-bias, for a long time (in this work V pre-bias = 0). Subsequently, a very short voltage pulse is applied, during which the current is measured, before returning to Vpre-bias. This process is repeated for a series of voltage pulses. The pulse duration (tpulse) was set to 500 μs and the pre-bias time (tbias) to 600 s. To extract the current density due to each voltage pulse, a linear fit to the current density transient for 50 μs < t probe < 250 μs was performed and, by extrapolation, a value for the instantaneous current density at t pulse = 0 s was found (see Figure Device simulations are carried out using the open-source simulation code Driftfusion. This code allows for the simulation of semiconductors with electronic and ionic conduction. Details of the code, reasoning for the choices made in its construction and its capabilities can be found in Calado et al. Finding the device's equilibrium condition -This process is outlined in Calado et al. For the entire device (multi-layered) simulations (in the figures 2d-f and figures 4d-f) the initial conditions are different in that the electronic carrier densities are set to the equilibrium densities of the individual layers (defined by the set fermi level/doping density). This ensures the boundary conditions are satisfied. The equilibrium solution process is the same as for single layer devices. Distribution function -A common distribution function used for drift-diffusion modelling of semiconducting devices is the Boltzmann approximation, which approximates Fermi-Dirac statistics, allowing for solutions for the charge carrier densities to be more easily obtained. This approximation is only valid when difference between the charge carrier's energy and the Fermi level is ≫ k B T. In some of the devices in this work this is no longer the case, so the distribution function is changed to the Blakemore approximation ITO/PolyTPD/PFN-P2/MAPbI3/PTAA/Au/SiO2 All materials were purchased from Sigma Aldrich unless otherwise stated and used as received. ITO substrates were etched using Zn and 4 M HCl, and cleaned by sonication in dilute Hellmanex with boiling DI water for 15 minutes, rinsed with boiling DI water, sonicated in DI water, rinsed with acetone and sonicated in IPA. Substrates were dried with N2 and UV ozone cleaned for 15 minutes. All fabrication was in a N2 glovebox with continuous purging. PolyTPD (Ossila) solution (1.5 mg ml -1 in dichlorobenzene) was spincoated at 6000 rpm for 30 s (acceleration 2000 rpm s -1 ) followed by annealing at 100 °C for 10 minutes. Next PFN-P2 (1-Material, 0.5 mg ml -1 in methanol) was coated at 5000 rpm for 20 s (dynamic dispense). Acetonitrile:methylamine MAPbI3 solution was prepared following the procedure by Noel et al. Fig. Fig. Derivations of this form are very common in many semiconductor textbooks and lecture series, the derivation used here is some arbitrary combination of many of them. In a device with ideal ohmic contacts the work function energies of the contacts are aligned with the conduction band (electron affinity) or valence band (ionization potential) energies of the Fig. An example of current transients at four separate probe voltages (two negative and two positive). The dotted lines represent the linear fits to the data at times immediately after the capacitive response. The instantaneous current density is then inferred from the linear fit at t = 0 s. semiconductor. Under these circumstances the maximum density of electrons or holes in the semiconductor can be estimated by finding the density when the Fermi level (EF) is at the conduction or valence band edge. The electron density in a semiconducting material can be calculated from the integral: n 0 = ∫ g(E)F(E)dE ∞ E c where m* is the effective mass of the electron and ħ is the reduced Planck's constant. The occupancy factor is given by the Fermi-Dirac distribution (since Boltzmann statistics do not apply for (E -E F ) ≤ k B T), F(E) = 1 1+e (E-E F ) k B T 