The link between the metamagnetic transition and novel spin-triplet superconductivity of UTe 2 was discussed thermodynamically through magnetostriction measurements in a pulsed-magnetic field. We revealed a discontinuous magnetostriction across the metamagnetic transition at μ 0 H m ≈ 35 T for the applied magnetic fields along the crystallographic b axis in the orthorhombic structure. The resultanting volume magnetostriction of ∆V/V ≈ -5.9 × 10 -4 gives the initial pressure dependence of H m by employing the Clausius-Clapeyron's equation, which agrees with previous pressure experiments. Further, significant anisotropic magnetostriction (AMS), derived by subtracting the averaged linear magnetostriction, was revealed. Contrary to the weakly field-dependent AMS along the a axis, those along the b and c axes show strong field dependences with a similar magnitude but with opposite signs, indicating its lattice instability. The relationship between characteristic energy scales of magnetic fields and temperatures was discussed in terms of the Grüneisen parameters compared to the other f -electron systems. The volume shrinkage in UTe 2 at H m , contrary to the volume expansion in typical heavy fermion metamagnets, pushes to invoke the link with the valence instability related to the itinerant-localized dual nature of the U magnetism. Unconventional superconductivity of UTe 2 (space group: Immm) below T sc = 1.6-2.0 K is a promising candidate for a spin-triplet state. Another remarkable feature in UTe 2 is an intermediate valence state at ambient pressure revealed by uranium L 3 xray absorption near-edge spectroscopy (XANES) In this study, we measure the linear magnetostriction 35) of UTe 2 along all the principal axes for H || b and estimate the resultant volume magnetostriction. As expected from thermodynamic relations, a sharp step-like volume shrinkage across H m is clearly observed. Using the magnetostriction data, we discuss the metamagnetism from the thermodynamic point of view and a possible link to the valence instability at H m at ambient pressure. Single crystals of UTe 2 were grown using the chemical vapor transport method. Figure First, we estimated the volume magnetostriction and compared it with the reported pressure measurements. %"''"()"* 787 %0%!(*%3 %"+"% 9 %","% 9 !"#$ Clapeyron's equation, ∂μ 0 H m ∂p = ∆V ∆M , ∂μ 0 H m ∂p ≈ -11.0 T/GPa is obtained as the initial slope of H m as a function of pressure. Here, we used the reported molar volume V mol ≈ 5.22 × 10 -5 m 3 /mol at 2.7 K. Using the magnetostriction and magnetization results, we can also derive the pressure dependence of the magnetic susceptibility by employing Maxwell's relation, . In a Pauli paramagnetic system, the magnetic susceptibility χ ≡ dM/dμ 0 H at low temperature is nearly constant. Thus, the pressure derivative of the susceptibility is obtained as where C v is the magnetovolume coupling constant, which is obtained by As shown in Fig. .,/0 $ eraged lattice change expected for the isotropic case. These facts indicate the lattice instability in the bc plane, which may be responsible for the field-induced SC phases around H m with rotating the field direction between b and c axis. where S v is a coefficient of the H 2 -term of ∆V/V, B = 57 GPa the bulk modulus, 50) and χ ′ = ∂χ/∂T . For H || b, more generally in Pauli paramagnets at low temperatures, there is less temperature dependence of χ. Thus, neglecting the second term of Eq. ( To further address the influence of the metamagnetic transition on the electronic properties, we discuss Γ T above H m . We estimate the volume thermal expansion using magnetostriction results at T ini = 1.4 and 4.2 K, as shown in Fig. We discuss a possible link of the metamagnetic transition to the valence instability. As shown in Fig. The observed metamagnetic behaviors can be naturally understood on the basis of the so-called itinerant-localized duality model for the 5 f 3 -based heavy fermion system, in which the 5 f 2 -electron state with the less hybridization between conduction and f electrons behaves as localized with the 5 f 2 crystalline electric field level scheme, while the 5 f 1 -electron state with the larger hybridization behaves as itinerant. Indeed, in the case of UPd 2 Al 3 (a 5 f 3 -based heavy fermion system), this physical picture was shown to work quite well. In summary, we demonstrated the magnetostriction measurements of UTe 2 for H || b. A clear drop in the volume magnetostriction accompanied by the first-order metamagnetic transition was observed, which satisfactorily agrees with the pressure dependence of H m . Significant anisotropic linear magnetostriction was also revealed; that for the a axis is almost identical to the averaged volume magnetostriction, while those for the b and c axes show larger magnetostriction with a similar magnitude but with opposite sign. This anisotropy indicates lattice instability within the bc plane, which may trigger the field-reinforced/reentrant superconductivity. Through the Grüneisen parameter analyses, we discussed the relation between characteristic energy scales in temperatures and fields. A possible link of the metamagnetic transition to a valence instability is considerable on the basis of the dual nature of the itinerant-localized 5 f electrons. This suggests the lowand high-field electronic and magnetic properties are crucially governed by different interactions. The magnetic field dependence of the duality deserved to be clarified. We compare the pressure dependence of the magnetic susceptibility χ for H || b determined thermodynamically and experimentally. Figure "#$$#% "$7$#""""$-)$ 