Quasi-one-dimensional iron chalcogenides possess various magnetic states depending on the lattice distortion, electronic correlations, and presence of defects. We present neutron diffraction and inelastic neutron scattering experiments on the spin ladder compound BaFe 2-δ S1.5Se1.5 with ∼6% iron vacancies. The data reveal that long-range magnetic order is absent, while the characteristic magnetic excitations that correspond to both the stripe-and block-type antiferromagnetic correlations are observed. First-principles calculations support the existence of both stripe and block-type antiferromagnetic short-range order in the experimental sample. The disappearance of long-range magnetic order may be due to the competition between these two magnetic orders, which is greatly enhanced for a certain concentration of iron vacancies, which we calculate to be about 6%, consistent with the measured iron vacancy concentration. Our results highlight how iron vacancies in the iron-based spin ladder system strongly influence the magnetic ground state. The mechanism of high-temperature superconductivity (SC) has remained a puzzle since the initial discovery of copper-based high-temperature superconductors The two end members of the BaFe 2 S 3-x Se x phase diagram possess distinct crystal and magnetic structures. BaFe 2 S 3 crystallizes into an orthorhombic structure with space group Cmcm, as shown in Fig. Anderson localization induced by the S and Se substitution is suggested to be crucial for the appearance of superconductivity in the 1D ladder system In this paper, we investigate the magnetic order and spin dynamics of BaFe 2-δ S 1.5 Se 1.5 with 6% Fe vacancies. Neutron powder diffraction (NPD) measurements demonstrate that no long-range magnetic order develops, although short-range block AF correlations are observed at low temperature. Inelastic neutron scattering (INS) reveals the existence of both block-and stripe-type magnetic excitations, indicative of competition between these two types of magnetic orders. Using density functional theory (DFT), we calculated the magnetic ground state of BaFe 2-δ S 1.5 Se 1.5 for a range of iron vacancy concentrations. We find that a paramagnetic ground state can be ruled out for iron vacancy concentrations below 10%. The calculated ground state for the vacancyfree compound is the block AF state, in agreement with experiments Single crystals with a nominal composition of BaFe 2 S 1.5 Se 1.5 were grown by the Bridgman method First-principles calculations were carried out with the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP), based on density functional theory , where the lattice constants and refined structural parameters are listed in Table To gain more insight into the short range magnetic structure, we conducted neutron diffraction measurements on a single crystal sample. The data shown in Fig. To investigate the magnetic correlations present at low temperature, we conducted INS measurements on the same powder sample. Figures Using a classical Heisenberg model, we can describe the magnetic interactions in BaFe 1.89 S 1.5 Se 1.5 with the magnetic Hamiltonian where the sum runs over magnetic atoms in the compound and J ij are exchange integrals between Fe spins S i and S j . To describe correctly the magnetic configurations of this system, both intraladder and interladder interactions should be considered. Here, we include 12 nonequivalent exchange interactions with bond lengths less than 7 Å, labeled J 1 through J 12 , which we illustrate in Fig. With the calculated magnetic exchange integrals, we can simulate the spin wave spectra in linear spin wave theory using the SpinW software package To explore the effect of iron vacancies on the magnetic properties, we performed DFT calculations for BaFe 2-δ S 1.5 Se 1.5 in the paramagnetic (PM) phase, block AF phase, and stripe AF phase with varying amounts of iron vacancies. First, we must define an appropriate model for the PM phase. Here we employed the magnetic sampling method (MSM). Within the Heisenberg model, a PM phase can be modeled by averaging multiple spin configurations in such a way that individual exchange interactions cancel, i.e., φ = k S i (k) • S j (k) = 0, where k denotes the spin configuration. This MSM method has been reliably used to model the PM phase of ZnCr 2 O 4 46 and CaBaCo 4 O 7 Having verified our model for the PM phase, we then calculated the total magnetic energy of BaFe 2-δ S 1.5 Se 1.5 in the block AF, stripe AF, and PM phases as a function of iron vacancy concentration. Our theoretical calcula- tions involve comparisons of energies alone. There is no entropy; that is, the calculations correspond to T = 0 even for the PM phase. Figure In summary, we have measured the short range magnetic order and spin excitation spectrum of coexisting short-range stripe and block AF order in the quasi-onedimensional BaFe 1.89 S 1.5 Se 1.5 . The iron vacancies are implicated in the lack of long-range magnetic order in the ground state and the existence of both stripe-and blocktype excitation modes. First-principles calculations have confirmed the competition between stripe and block AF order, with maximum concentration expected around an iron vacancy concentration of ∼6%, very close to the actual composition of the sample used in the present work. Using the calculated exchange interaction parameters, the simulated spin wave spectra match the measured results well. Our findings highlight the unusual sensitivity of the magnetic ground state to the presence of iron vacancies in the quasi-1D spin ladder system BaFe 2 (S,Se) 3 . These results are expected to be relevant to other pressure-induced superconductors in the family of quasi-1D iron pnictide and selenide systems. * The authors contributed equally to this work. † caok7@mail.sysu.edu.cn ‡ wangmeng5@mail.sysu.edu.cn