The need of surface-localized thermal processing is strongly increasing especially w.r.t three-dimensionally (3D) integrated electrical devices. UV laser annealing (UV-LA) technology well addresses this challenge. Particularly UV-LA can reduce resistivity by enlarging metallic grains in lines or thin films, irradiating only the interconnects for short timescales. However, the risk of failure in electrical performance must be correctly managed, and that of UV-LA has not been deeply studied yet. In this work microsecond-scale UV-LA is applied on a stack comparable to an interconnect structure (dielectric/Cu/Ta/SiO2/Si) in either melt or sub-melt regime for grain growth. The failure modes such as (i) Cu diffusion into SiO2, (ii) O incorporation into Cu, and (iii) intermixing between Cu and Ta are investigated. Recently, UV-LA has started to be applied in advanced interconnects so that the line resistivity can be reduced thanks to short-timescale high-temperature processing With UV-LA, two different regimes are possible: (I) melt and (II) sub-melt. The melt regime is interesting because it may allow huge grain growth from liquid metals. Indeed, we already demonstrated micrometer-scale grain growth in blanket Cu thin films Nevertheless, the risk of failure in electrical performance must be correctly assessed also in the sub-melt regime. Possible failure modes are (i) Cu diffusion into SiO2, (ii) O incorporation into Cu, and (iii) intermixing between Cu and Ta. To investigate them, in this work, microsecond-scale UV-LA is applied to a stack of dielectric/Cu/Ta/SiO2/Si in either melt or sub-melt regime for grain growth. A 47-nm-thick sputtered-Cu was deposited on a 11 nm Ta/100 nm SiO2/Si stack. A 7-nm-thick Si-based dielectric capping layer was deposited by plasma deposition at 100 °C for 10 s. Microsecond-scale UV-LA was performed at room temperature (RT) under a N2 flow. Fig. Firstly, Cu diffusion into SiO2 was investigated. Fig. Secondly, O incorporation into the Cu layer was investigated. Fig. Thirdly, intermixing between the Cu and Ta layers was investigated. Fig. The dielectric/Cu/Ta/SiO2/Si structure processed by microsecond UV-LA was deeply investigated to assess the risk of failure in electronic performance. The results clearly showed that it is possible to achieve a resistivity improvement in the sub-melt regime (Process A) without any drawback such as the Cu diffusion into SiO2, the O diffusion from SiO2 to Cu, and the inter-diffusion or interface roughening occurring at the Cu/Ta interface. Replacing Ta with a more thermally stable material in contact with Cu will help to extend a UV-LA process window in Cu-based BEOL interconnects. © 2022 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.