Free-space circularly polarized light (CPL) detection, requiring polarizers and waveplates, has been well established, while such spatial degree of freedom is unfortunately absent in integrated on-chip optoelectronics. So far, those reported filterless CPL photodetectors suffer from the intrinsic small discrimination ratio, vulnerability to the non-CPL field components, and low responsivity. Here, we report a distinct paradigm of geometric photodetectors in mid-infrared exhibiting colossal discrimination ratio, close-to-perfect CPL-specific response, a zero-bias responsivity of 392 V/W at room temperature, and a detectivity of ellipticity down to 0.03 o Hz -1/2 . Our approach employs plasmonic nanostructures array with judiciously designed symmetry, assisted by graphene ribbons to electrically read their near-field optical information. This geometry-empowered recipe for infrared photodetectors provides a robust, direct, strict, and high-quality solution to onchip filterless CPL detection and unlocks new opportunities for integrated functional optoelectronic devices. Polarization, as another dimension of light beyond the intensity and wavelength, plays a pivotal and ubiquitous role in various optical technologies Practically speaking, an effective monolithic CPL detector ought to meet the following three criteria: (i) the left-handed and right-handed CPL can be well discriminated , with the R0,1,2,3 as the respective responsivities to the four Stoke parameters, S0,1,2,3 (see supplementary note S1 for detailed discussion). Note that S0, S1, S2, and S3 represent the intensity of light, two linearly polarized components, and the circularly polarized light component, respectively A perfect CPL photodetector should follow: meaning that R3 dominates in the photoresponse over R0,1,2. Notably, the above equation also indicates that LCP (S3 = -1) and RCP (S3 = 1) light will lead to opposite photoresponse so that they can be markedly discriminated by the photovoltage sign regardless of their intensities. The concept of such an ideal CPL-specific detector can be better visualized in the Poincaré sphere, as shown in Fig. In this study, we showcase how the symmetry and geometry of plasmonic nanostructures array, as well as patterned graphene ribbons, come into a synergetic play to enable an on-chip specific detection of CPL with a colossal discrimination ratio, immunity to non-CPL field components, and high responsivity. Our contribution is three-fold: first, we reveal that the vectorial photoresponse generated from achiral structures could reach a symmetry-protected infinite discrimination ratio, gph, thereby superior to the existing works based on circular dichroism whose gph is naturally constrained below one Figure The methodology of our experiment is depicted in Fig. In our experiments, we always use the open-circuit voltages as the photoresponse unless otherwise stated. Figure The design principle of our proposed plasmonic nanostructures is illustrated in Fig. To implement the vectorial photoresponse with colossal gph, we turn to study the near-field of nanophotonic structures. Recent works have revealed a giant chirality "hidden" in the near-field profile of mirror-symmetric achiral nanostructures via cathodoluminescence microscopy, which originates from the interference of multiple modes We further optimize the geometric parameters of the plasmonic nanostructures by numerically calculating the CPL-sensitive Jx (see Fig. To better illustrate our design principle, we plot the simulated absorption spectra, near-field profile, and the resulting CPL-sensitive photoresponse of the optimized geometry obtained in Fig 2b . The achiral nanoantenna identically absorbs the LCP and RCP light, thereby showing no circular dichroism (Figure Moving forward, the second criterion requires our device to be specific to CPL, namely, immune against both unpolarized and linearly polarized light. By analyzing the simulated polarization dependence of the Jx (Fig. To address the above bottleneck, we propose the geometric arrangement of nanostructures to realize a buildup in CPL response and cancellation in the linearly polarized light, which is inspired by the geometric metasurfaces where the nanostructures are rotated in a non-uniform manner to accumulate different geometric phases for the selective steering of polarization states We turn to the third criterion: high-responsivity CPL detector. Graphene has long been mentioned for its low photoresponse efficiency due to its semi-metallic nature Intuitively, the ubiquitous graphene sheet could form a short circuit around the nanostructures, reducing the external output. Closer scrutiny reveals that our design only requires a small graphene area to convert the optical near-field to voltages and convey the electrical signals to the external circuit. Therefore, we may play with the geometry of the graphene layer to increase the photoresponse. As shown in Fig. Our experimental results show that the photoresponse of the ribbons device is five times large as the sheet device, while the two devices have the same device area (Fig. Without applying any bias, our device then has no dark current and hence very low noise level. The dark noise density of the ribbons device is down to 10 nV Hz -1/2 at working frequencies above 100 Hz, approaching its Johnson noise limit (Fig. We further characterize the time response of the ribbon device. Figure We then measured the I-V characteristics of our device. As shown in Fig. The hole mobility of our ribbon device was extracted to be 2446 cm 2 V -1 s -1 . The peak responsivity of the four-column device reaches 98 V/W at the gate voltage of 180 V, corresponding to a responsivity of 392 V/W in the single-column nanostructures. We also found that the photoresponse will be slightly saturated at high incident power due to the screening effect (Fig. This work conceptualizes and demonstrates geometry-empowered monolithic CPL-specific photodetectors with colossal discrimination ratio, immunity to non-CPL field components, and high responsivity, setting a benchmark for future integrated on-chip polarimeters. We reveal the importance of geometry in integrated photodetectors for both novel functionality and high responsivity. Although the bipolar CPL-specific detection has been reported in photogalvanic effect Besides, our demonstrated gate tunability is also a unique advantage, which is unavailable in conventional bulky materials. In the viewpoint of symmetry, the sign of photoresponse in our device can be flipped by the reversal of either parity (LCP to RCP), charge (holes to electrons), or time (momentum of charges). Since the near field of resonant nanostructures could display more information on the various attributes of light than the far-field scattering Simulation. The near field profile and absorption of our designed nanostructures were simulated with the finite difference time domain method (FDTD Solutions package from Lumerical Inc). The modeling of near field-driven photocurrents in graphene was implemented by our Python codes which solve the Navier-Stokes equations. Device fabrication. We started the fabrication from a thermally oxidized (~ 285 nm) highly resistive Si wafer (10 kcm, Nova electronic materials). Few-layer graphene flakes were mechanically exfoliated from natural graphite (NGS Naturgraphit) onto the wafer and identified with an optical microscope. Metallic alignment markers were fabricated with electron-beam lithography (EBL, JBX-6300FS, Jeol), Ebeam evaporation of 3/20nm Ti/Au (AJA international inc.), and liftoff in hot acetone at 65 o C for 1 hour. The recipe of our EBL process is spin-coating of PMMA 495k A5 at 4000 rpm; baking at 180 o C for 2 mins; exposure dose of 1300 C/cm 2 ; development in MIBK: IPA=1:3 for 30 s and rinse in IPA for 30 s; drying with a nitrogen gun. After that, we patterned the graphene sheet to desired shapes such as ring, half ring, L-shaped cascaded devices, and ribbons, using a second EBL and oxygen plasma etching (20 sccm O2, 20W, 20 s, VITA, Femto Science Inc). The samples were then annealed at 300 o C for 6 hours in Ar/H2 atmosphere to remove the resist residues. Afterward, plasmonic nanostructures and contact electrodes were patterned on graphene flakes by a third EBL with an alignment accuracy of about 100 nm, followed by thermal deposition (5/60 nm Pd/Au, Kurt J. Lesker company) and liftoff in hot acetone at 65 o C for 1 hour. A fourth EBL and thermal deposition (5/80 nm Cr/Au) were used to fabricate the large electrodes for probing and wire bonding. Finally, we deposit a thin 12 nm thick Al2O3 to encapsulate the device, which consists of two steps: firstly, the deposition of 2 nm metal Al with a high-vacuum Ebeam evaporator which will be then quickly oxidized to form uniform Al2O3 film on graphene; secondly, the deposition of 10 nm Al2O3 with ALD. The Al2O3 layer helps reduce the doping level of the graphene device and hence increases the responsivity. The existence of the thin Al2O3 layer does not affect our probing (5 m radius tip) and wire bonding.