A Kerr-nonlinear parametric oscillator (KPO) is one of the promising devices to realize qubits for universal quantum computing. The KPO can stabilize two coherent states with opposite phases, yielding a quantum superposition called a Schrödinger cat state. Universal quantum computing with KPOs requires three kinds of quantum gates: Rz, Rx, and Rzz gates. We theoretically propose a twoqubit gate Rzz for highly detuned KPOs. In the proposed scheme, we add a parametric drive for the first KPO. This leads to the Rzz gate based on the driving of the second KPO depending on the first-KPO state, which we call "conditional driving." First, we perform simulations using a conventional KPO Hamiltonian derived from a superconducting-circuit model under some approximations and evaluate the gate fidelity. Next, we also perform numerical simulations of the two-qubit gate using the superconducting-circuit model without the approximations. The simulation results indicate that the conditional-driving gates can be implemented with high fidelity (> 99.9%) for rotation angles required for universality. Superconducting circuits (SCs) are considered as a promising platform for implementing practical quantum computation Moreover, a charge-based superconducting qubit robust against stray electric field noise was proposed As a further development, a parametric oscillator formed by nonlinear LC circuits whose Kerr nonlinearity is larger than the single-photon loss rate has been interested as a qubit, which is called a Kerr-nonlinear parametric oscillator (KPO) Although Kerr-nonlinear oscillators with/without parametric drive were theoretically studied more than two decades ago A KPO can stabilize a quantum superposition of coherent states with opposite phase In this paper, we theoretically propose a two-qubit gate for highly detuned KPOs coupled with a fixed coupling rate. During idle time, the coupling between the KPOs is effectively turned off because of the large detuning between the KPOs. To perform a two-qubit gate, we add a parametric drive for the first KPO, the frequency of which is set to the sum of the KPO frequencies. This leads to the generation of photons with the second-KPO frequency through a three-wave mixing process in the first KPO, resulting in the driving of the second KPO depending on the first-KPO state, which we call "conditional driving." The conditional driving is physically similar to the previously demonstrated cat-quadrature readout for a KPO We propose a SC model of two coupled KPOs for the R zz gate and derive a simple model from the SC model under some approximations. Using these models, we show that high gate fidelity (> 99.9 %) can be achieved for rotation angles required for universal quantum computing. FIG. This paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we propose a two-qubit gate for highly detuned KPOs and show a SC for that. For simplicity, we start with the explanation of a single KPO and derive a conventional KPO Hamiltonian, which we call a simple model, from the SC model under some approximations. Next, we explain a SC model of the two-qubit gate for two coupled KPOs and derive a simple model under the same approximations. In Sec. III, using the simple and SC models, we demonstrate numerically that the R zz gate can be implemented with high fidelity. In Sec. IV, we investigate the effect of single-photon loss for the gate fidelity. Finally, we conclude this paper in Sec. V. A. We propose the R zz gate for highly detuned KPOs. The proposed SC is shown in Fig. Single KPO Before discussing two KPOs, we explain the single-KPO case for simplicity. We also derive a simple model under some approximations, which is useful for parameter setting. The SC of a KPO in Fig. where ω p is the parametric pump frequency (ω p = 2ω 1 in Fig. where ω 1 , n and φ are defined as where ẼJ (= E J cos θ 0 ) is the effective Josephson energy. Assuming a sufficiently small pump amplitude (δ p 1) and performing the rotating-wave approximation (RWA) in a rotating frame of half the pump frequency ω p /2 and in the transmon limit (E C /E J 1), we obtain the Hamiltonian in the simple model as where ∆ ( ω 1 -ω p /2) is the detuning, and the Kerr coefficient K and the parametric pump amplitude P are defined by With the small amplitude the both models [Eqs. ( In this work, we set θ 0 = π/4 and ∆ = 0. The Hamiltonian in Eq. ( We calculate the difference in average photon number between the SC and simple models for a single KPO. In Eq. ( Figure The SC model of the two coupled KPOs shown in Fig. where Ĥj is the Hamiltonian of KPOj (j = 1, 2), δ j and ω pj are the parametric pump amplitude and frequency, respectively, for KPOj, E C0 is the charging energy for the coupling capacitor, δ g is the amplitude of the gate pulse defined as where p g0 and T g denote the peak value of the gate pulse and the gate time, respectively, and β is a parameter determining the rise time of the gate pulse. The Hamiltonian of the simple model is derived in a similar manner to the single-KPO case (See Appendix A for details): where g is a coupling constant (see Appendix A for its definition), ∆ 12 = ω 1 -ω 2 , K and P are given in the same manner as Eq. ( When ∆ 12 is sufficiently larger than any other parameters, the effect of ĤI can be regarded as zero, since the factor e -i∆12t oscillates very fast. By the gate pulse described by Ĥg , the parametric oscillation amplitudes of KPO1 become ±α 1 = ± [P + p g (t)e i∆12t ]/K. The second term with fast phase rotation corresponds to photons of ω 2 generated by the difference frequency generation (three-wave mixing) in KPO1. This term cancels out the phase factor in ĤI , resulting in turning on the coupling between the two KPOs. This is a mathematical explanation of the conditional driving. Thus, the R zz gate can be performed by the conditional driving induced by the gate pulse. Rzz GATE SIMULATIONS In this section, we show the simulation results of the R zz gate using both the simple and SC models. Using the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( where |±α are coherent states with α = P/K. We set the initial and ideal final state as where N 0 and N 1 are normalization factors, and ) Here we have introduced another rotating frame with the time-evolution operator Û0 (t) without the gate pulse (δ g = 0) Hence we define the rotation angle of the R zz gate as Θ = θ 2 -θ 1 , where θ 1 and θ 2 are the arguments of α 1 and α 2 , respectively. The gate fidelity of the R zz gate is thus defined by Figure SC model Next, we perform numerical simulations using the SC model. Using the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( Finally, we study the effect of single-photon loss of KPOs, using the simple model. Taking the effect into account, the time evolution of the density operator ρ can be written by the following master equation: where γ is the single-photon loss rate (T -1 1 ) of KPOs. We evaluate the error rates of the R zz gate by solving the master equation with decay time T 1 = γ -1 from 1 μs to 1 ms. Figure The decay time in a recent experiment In this paper, we have proposed the conditional-driving gate, which is an R zz gate using conditional driving for highly detuned KPOs. We have also proposed a SC composed of two transmons with a dc-SQUID array (KPOs) coupled with a capacitor. Using the simple and SC models of the proposed SC, we have numerically demonstrated that the R zz gate can be performed with high fidelity (> 99.9%) for rotation angles required for universal quantum computing. We have also examined the effect of single-photon loss. The result suggests that the error probability below 0.1% will require a decay time of longer than 500 μs, which seems challenging but is expected to be realized in the future, suggested by recent experimental advances In the case of the difference-frequancy drive, the Hamiltonian in the SC model is also given by Eq. ( 