We report enhanced nonlinear optics in nanowires, waveguides, and ring resonators by introducing layered two-dimensional (2D) graphene oxide (GO) films through experimental demonstration. The GO films are integrated on silicon-on-insulator nanowires (SOI), high index doped silica glass, and silicon nitride (SiN) waveguides and microring resonators (MRRs), to demonstrate an improved optical nonlinearity including Kerr nonlinearity and four-wave mixing (FWM). By using a largearea, transfer-free, layer-by-layer GO coating method with photolithography and lift-off processes, we integrate GO films on these complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS)-compatible devices. For SOI nanowires, significant spectral broadening of optical pulses in GO-coated SOI nanowires induced by self-phase modulation (SPM) is observed, achieving a high spectral broadening factor of 4.34 for a device with a patterned film including 10 layers of GO. A significant enhancement in the nonlinear figure of merit (FOM) for silicon nanowires by a factor of 20 is also achieved, resulting in a FOM > 5. For Hydex and SiN waveguides, enhanced FWM in the GO-coated waveguides is achieved, where conversion efficiency (CE) enhancements of up to 6.9 dB and 9.1 dB relative to the uncoated waveguides. For MRRs, an increase of up to ~10.3 dB in the FWM CE is achieved due to the resonant enhancement effect. These results reveal the strong potential of GO films to improve the nonlinear optics of nanowires, waveguides, and ring resonators. The 3 rd order nonlinear optical response has found wide ranging applications in telecommunications, metrology, astronomy, ultrafast optics, quantum photonics, and many other areas While silicon-on-insulator nanowires (SOI) has shown itself to be a leading platform for integrated photonic devices, it suffers from strong two-photon absorption (TPA) at near-infrared wavelengths, which greatly limits the nonlinear performance Figure Figures Figure For the integrated waveguide coated with 1 to 5 layers of GO, zoom-in spectra of the generated idlers for the same pump power coupled to the waveguide (~22 dBm) are shown in Figure Figure Figure Figure We demonstrate enhanced nonlinear optics including Kerr nonlinearity and FWM in nanowires, waveguides, and ring resonators incorporated with layered GO films. We achieve precise control of the placement, thickness, and length of the GO films using layer-by-layer coating of GO films followed by photolithography and lift-off. Owing to the strong mode overlap between the platforms and the highly nonlinear GO films, we achieve a high nonlinear parameter of GO coated SOI nanowires up to 16 times and an improved nonlinear FOM of up to a factor of 20. Also, we obtain a significant improvement