We report the design and performance of a cryogen-free, pulse-tube refrigerator (PTR)-based scanning probe microscopy (SPM) system capable of operating at the base temperature of near 5 K. We achieve this by combining a home-made interface design between the PTR cold head and the SPM head, with an automatic gas-handling system. The interface design isolates the PTR vibrations by a combination of polytetrafluoroethylene and stainless-steel bellows, and by placing the SPM head on a passive vibration isolation table via two cold stages that are connected to thermal radiation shields using copper heat links. The gas-handling system regulates the helium heat-exchange gas pressures, facilitating both the cool down to and the maintenance of the base temperature. We discuss the effects of each component using measured vibration, current-noise, temperature, and pressure data. We demonstrate that our SPM system performance is comparable to known liquid-helium-based systems with the measurements of the superconducting gap spectrum of Pb, atomic-resolution scanning tunneling microscopy image and quasiparticle interference pattern of Au(111) surface, and non-contact atomic force microscopy image of NaCl(100) surface. Without the need for cryogen refills, the current SPM system enables uninterrupted low-temperature measurements. Scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) and atomic force microscopy (AFM) are powerful analytical techniques that probe surface phenomena down to the atomic scale for a wide range of materials and experimental conditions In the past decades, the severe shortage of helium In this paper, we present a cryogen-free ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) SPM system capable of operating at the base temperature of near 5 K using an integrated pulse-tube refrigerator (PTR). We achieve this by combining a home-made interface between the PTR cold head and the SPM head with a new automatic gas-handling system. The home-made interface is designed to suppress resonant coupling of the mechanical vibrations from the PTR to the SPM. The gas-handling system automatically regulates the pressure of helium heat-exchange gas to cool the cryostat down to and keep the cryostat at the base temperature. We discuss the effects of vibration isolation using systematic vibration noise measurements. We demonstrate the performance of the cryogen-free SPM by measuring the superconducting gap of a Pb surface, by performing STM experiments on a Au(111) surface, and by performing non-contact AFM experiments on a NaCl(100) surface. We show that both the base temperature and the data quality from our cryogen-free SPM system are comparable to conventional liquid-helium-based SPM systems. 082B2S, Sumitomo Heavy Industries, Japan) consists of a water-cooled compressor (F-70LP, Sumitomo Heavy Industries), a valve unit, and a cold head attached to two cooling stages (referred to as 1st and 2nd cooling stages in Fig. The cold head is attached at the top of the observation chamber using polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) bellows to suppress vibration transmissions to the chamber (Fig. The space enclosed by the cold head, the PTFE bellows, and the cryostat (area indicated by the arrow labeled "He heat-exchange gas" in Fig. The pressure of helium heat-exchange gas during cooling is automatically controlled by the gashandling system which will be described in detail later. We note that this design is suitable for the baking of the observation chamber because components that are not heat-resistant (i.e., the cold head, the two cooling stages, and the PTFE bellows and O-rings) can be easily removed. Next, we discuss the setup of the SPM head. The SPM head is surrounded by two layers of thermal radiation shields (Fig. The SPM head is mounted on two cold stages. Figure The copper heat links connecting the inner shield and the 5 K stage are composed of twenty-four copper cables each braded from 1,600 copper wires (φ = 0.05 mm, L = 45 mm for each wire). The total cross-sectional area of the heat links is ∼ 75 mm 2 . The 5 K and 60 K stages are supported by a carbon and an alumina fiber-reinforced plastic (FRP) cylinder, respectively (Fig. The SPM head is further vibrationally isolated by an eddy current damper using four stainlesssteel springs and eight samarium-cobalt (SmCo) magnets as shown in Fig. The SPM head is built according to the UNISOKU USM1300 system, with some component modifications to increase rigidity. The sample XY stage and the prism in the Z stage for tip coarse approach, both moved by stick and slip motion of shear piezo stacks, are made of sapphire, also for rigidity We use home-made vacuum-insulated cables as reported by Mykkänen et al. The regulation of the helium heat-exchange gas pressure in the cryostat is important to both the cooling down to and the keeping of a stable base temperature. To this end, we have developed an automatic bimodal helium gas-handling system based on the programmable logic controller [Figs. As P cryo drops with temperature, helium gas must be added to the cryostat to prevent the cooling rate from slowing down. The threshold pressure that triggers the helium-gas addition is set to the empirically chosen 10 kPa lower than atmospheric pressure (P cryo < -10 kPa). When the condition P cryo < -10 kPa is met, the program opens the solenoid valves in Fig. After completion of the cool-down mode, the program switches to the maintenance mode to keep T 2nd ≤ 5 K. Figure Upon starting the helium-gas addition, the program evaluates when to stop the addition. For this 8 purpose, we set three following conditions: P cryo > +8 kPa, T 2nd > 30 K, and P cryo > P vapor (T 2nd ) [Fig. The base temperature fluctuates over a 24-hr period depending on room temperature, typically in the range of 100 mK at the SPM head. We minimize this temperature fluctuation using a feedback-controlled heater attached to the SPM stage. As shown in Fig. The interface structure connecting the PTR and the SPM head in Fig. To analyze the vibration transmissions, we measure the vibration velocity spectra along the x, y and z direction on the valve unit (A), the cold head (B), the supporting frame (C) and the vibration isolation table (D) during PTR operation (see Fig. We first compare the vibration spectra acquired at the valve unit and the cold head (light-solid and dotted lines in Fig. We attribute these peaks to characteristic vibration modes of the cold head. Next, we discuss the effects of the PTFE bellows by comparing the vibration spectra acquired at the supporting frame with those at the cold head (dashed and dotted lines in Fig. The PTFE bellows are clearly effective at suppressing the noise peak at 2 Hz in all directions; in particular, the vibration noise spectra at the frame show no peak at 2 Hz in the y and z directions FIG. [Fig. Next, we compare the vibration spectra acquired at the vibration isolation table with those at the frame (dark-solid and dashed lines in Fig. We examine this effect by comparing noise spectra at the vibration isolation table with the PTR turned on and off (solid and dotted lines in Fig. We also compare the vibration noise spectra at the vibration isolation table with those of a liquid-helium-based SPM system (USM1300, UNISOKU) placed next to the cryogen-free SPM system (solid and dashed lines in Fig. To demonstrate the effects of vibration isolation on practical SPM measurements, we measure the tunneling-current noise spectra using a commercial current preamplifier (10 9 V/A, DLPCA-200, Femto Messtechnik GmbH, Germany), and a Nanonis SPM controller. to the small capacitance afforded by the short length (50 cm) of the cable. This latter feature is advantageous for tunneling spectroscopy measurements using a lock-in amplifier. We also show in Fig. In the tunneling condition, a broad peak appears near 2 Hz, originating from the vibrations from both the PTR and the vibration isolation table. Several peak structures near 10, 15 and 30 Hz are attributed to the vibration isolation table as identified in Fig. From the above discussions, we believe that a different relative configuration between the PTR and the SPM system may improve the noise level in the tunneling condition. In the current configuration shown in Fig. Next, we demonstrate the non-contact AFM measurements on a NaCl(100) surface using the qPlus sensor Finally, we demonstrate the quasiparticle interference (QPI) imaging of a Au(111) surface. using a lock-in amplifier at ∼ 13 min imaging time. We use Fourier analysis to identify QPI signals appearing at scattering wave q vectors. The Fourier-transformed dI/dV image in Fig. This work reports the design of a cryogen-free, PTR-based UHV SPM system capable of operating at the base temperature of ∼ 5 K. We achieve this by combining a home-made interface design between the PTR cold head and the SPM head with an automatic gas-handling system: while the interface design enhances both vibration isolation and cooling capability, the gas-handling system facilitates both the cool down to and the maintenance of the base temperature. Our report provides both the detailed information on the vibration isolation structures, and the corresponding vibration noise measurements. Our SPM data show comparable quality with those acquired by conventional cryogen-cooled instruments. Our work demonstrates the possibility for achieving delicate low-temperature measurements without cryogenic liquids.