Opto-spintronics is an emerging field where ultra-thin magnetic-semiconductors having high spin-valley coupling play an important role. Here, we demonstrate substitutional vanadium (V) doping in MoS 2 lattice in different extent, leading to the coexistence of photoluminescence (PL), valleypolarization (~32%), and valley splitting (~28 meV shift in PL with helicity + and -of light excitation). A large V doping causes semiconductor to metal transition in MoS 2 but with medium level causing the existence of photoluminescence with high spin polarization. The ambipolar nature of medium level V doped MoS 2 is shown here indicating its potential as an opto-electronic material. The presence of V-dopants and their different level of content are proven by both spectroscopic and microscopic methods.A detailed temperature and power dependent photoluminescence studies along with density functional theory-based calculations in support unravels the emergence of the co-existence of spin-valley coupling and photoluminescence. This study shows the potential of doping MoS 2 for deriving new materials for next generation room temperature opto-spintronics. Developing magnetically ordered semiconductors is highly demanding for next generation spintronic devices VMS monolayers are synthesized using a CVD technique and have been characterized by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). The transport properties of V-doped MS areconducted to understand the p doping of V atoms with varying V concentration. Effects of doping on the work function and carrier density are also studied using transport measurements. Low-temperature photoluminescence (PL) study of the VMS reveals the formation of a new excitonic state (V-peak) at ~ 850 nm. A detailed temperature and power-dependent PL study is conducted to understand the origin of this new state. Experimental observations are further verified using density functional theory (DFT) based first principal calculations. The valley-polarization in VMS is verified using polarization selective PL experiments explained in the later part. Result and discussion: Monolayer VMS and MS were grown using a home-built CVD method, as explained in the experimental section and supplementary information,Figure Figure modes at 384 cm -1 and 401 cm -1 , respectively. Raman peaks are LO and ZO branches at the M point, respectively. where I(A 1g ) and I(LA) are the intensity of A 1g mode and LA(M) mode. C(A 1g ) is the proportionality constant which is 0.59 nm 2 for A 1g mode. These dopant amounts are further confirmed with scanning transmission electron microscope (STEM) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) based analyses. The effect of V doping on the chemical bonding of MoS 2 is further understood by comparing the XPS of MS with VMS. The survey spectrum of VMS-M shows the presence of V, Mo, and S in VMS, as shown in Figure This shows that the V doping is lowering the Fermi level of MS towards the valence band causing p doping in MS. Figure The effect of V doping is further understood by top-gated field effect transistor (FET) measurements. The measurements are performed using ionic liquid Diethylmethyl (2methoxyethyl) ammonium bis (trifluoromethylsulfonyl) imide (DEME-TFSI) as dielectric material. The transfer characteristics of MS, VMS-L, VMS-M and VMS-H are shown in Figure where C ox is the parallel plate capacitance of dielectric, ΔV gs = V gs -V th (V gs is any voltage in On state) and e is the elementary charge, 1.602 x 10 -19 C. At V gs =1.5 V, n 2D of electrons comes out to be 7.2x10 Effect of V doping on the work function of MS can be seen by calculating it using formula for change in work function ( ): 48 where and are work functions of VMS and MS respectively. n 2D is the carrier density extracted from FET measurements of MS and VMS as discussed above. The calculated for VMS-L and VMS-M is ~105 meV and ~826 meV respectively. The calculation shows that the fermi level shifts significantly with V doping. This observation matches well with our DFT based theoretical values where changes ~720 meV for ~4% V doping (discussed in experimental methods in details). The slope of the linear region of the transfer curve was then used to calculate the mobility of electrons and holes with the formula: where, μ is the mobility for an electron or hole, L and W are the length and width of the channel device respectively. C is the gate capacitance per unit area (7.2 μFcm -2 ) and is the slope of the transfer curve. The temperature dependent resistivity was also calculated for MS and VMS L/M/H in high temperature range (300-473 K). All the systems are found to have thermally activated transport. The transport measurements show that the V doping not only tune the electrical properties of MS but at the same time it can change its behaviour from n-type to ambipolar to metallic material. One of the main and interesting aspects of V doping is its ability to induce magnetism in MS which has already been mentioned in many theoretical reports. Existence of spin polarisation at the Fermi level indicates the presence of ferromagnetism in VMS, as seen in V doped WS 2 and WSe 2 . In our experimental results, we find a significant PL in case of both VMS-L andVMS-M. Helicity dependent PL measurements were performed using 532 nm laser, quarter waveplate and a half waveplate. The polarization in PL is calculated using the formula: where I + and I -are the intensity of the PL with excitation (right circular, say) and (left circular) helicity light. The P comes out to be ~9% for pristine MS (Figure Both peaks are found to be Arrhenius in nature, which activates below a certain temperature. The S peak starts to appear at ~ -80 o C while the V peak starts to appear at ~-40 o C as shown in Figure The power-dependent PL for VMS is carried out where V peak increases monotonically with laser power as shown in Figure The contribution of RIPL from A and B excitonic peaks increases continuously with laser power while for S and V peaks,it decreases as the laser power increases (see Figure To further confirm that the origin of the V peak is different from the S v or S 2v vacancies, sulfur annealing carried out in both MS and VMS at 200 0 C for 1 hour and the PL spectra after annealing are shown in Figure Here, we showed the possibilities of the existence of photoluminescence and spin polarization at room temperature by substitutional vanadium (V) doping of MoS 2 monolayers (VMS). It is demonstrated that the variation in the extent of V doping in MoS 2 can transform it from semiconducting (1%, VSM-L) to metallic (9%, VSM-H) in nature. The ambipolar nature of VMS -Mis shown using ionic liquid assisted top gating-based FET measurements, and the electron and hole mobilities of VMS are calculated as 26 cm 2 V -1 s -1 and 17 cm 2 V -1 s -1 , respectively. The coexistence of PL, valley polarizations(~32%), and valley splitting (28 meV shift in PL with helicity + and -of light) have been shown for VMS while valley splitting is not seen in pristine MoS 2 . A new excitonic peak at ~850 nm has also been observed at low temperature PL measurements and it has been identified due to the V-states present near the valence band. The origin of this PL is further confirmed with DFT based calculations and a detailed band structure analysis. This controlled V-doping along with a detailed spectroscopic, microscopic, and transport measurements establish VMS as an important material for optospintronics and establishes the possibilities of engineering TMDs at room temperature for resulting such potential materials. MS and VMS Synthesis: VMS synthesis was carried out using CVD assisted method having quartz tube of length ~ 120 cm and inner diameter ~ 5cm. A schematic of the synthesis method is shown in the supporting information, Figure In order to ensure the absence of sulfur vacancies in MS and VMS grown via the abovementioned process, further annealing of the samples with sulfur was also carried out. Sulfur annealing was carried out at 180 o C with a nitrogen flow rate of 100 sccm for 60 minutes. Transmission electron microscopy measurements: High-resolution scanning transmission electron microscopy (HRSTEM) analyses have been conducted in a probe-corrected Thermo Fisher Scientific Titan microscope, operated at 120 keV, fitted with a X-FEG® gun and Csprobe corrector (CESCOR from CEOS GmbH) and a convergence angle of 25 mrad. An Oxford Instruments Ultim X-MaxN 100TLE detector was used for energy-dispersive X-Ray spectroscopy (EDX) analysis. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS): XPS data was recorded on a Kratos Axis Supra spectrometer equipped with a monochromated Al Kα X-ray source using an analyzer pass energy of 160 eV for survey spectra and 20 eV for the core level spectra. Spectra were recorded by setting the instrument to the hybrid lens mode and the slot mode providing approximately a 700 x 300 μm 2 analysis area using charge neutralization. Low-temperature Raman and PL measurements: Low-temperature Raman and PL spectroscopic studies were carried out using a low temperature liquid nitrogen setup (Linkham cell HSF-600). The Raman studies (using Renishaw inVia Raman spectrometer) are conducted using 532 nm laser excitation and PL studies using the Raman spectrometer are conducted with 633 nm excitation. The PL measurements are taken from Room temperature to -196 o C, where the spectrum at each temperature of both heating and cooling are verified. In order to conduct polarization dependent PL measurements,the vertically polarized 532 nm laser light is passed through a quarter wave plate and a half waveplate. Transport Measurements: Devices were fabricated using Laser lithography. The metal deposition for the devices was done using thermal evaporator. Finally, the devices are developed in acetone with mild sonication. All measurements were done in ambient environment with Keithley 2450 source meter. DFT Studies: First principle DFT-based calculations were carried out using QUANTUM ESPRESSO 6.8 package with a plane-wave basis set (50-Ry cutoff) and norm-conserving pseudopotentials. The exchange-correlation energy of electrons was approximated with a local density approximation and a parametrized functional of Perdew and Zunger. A vacuum of ∼20 Å was added, separating adjacent periodic images along the z-direction. The lattice parameter of monolayer MoS2 unit cell was optimized to 3.1667 Å using Brillouin zone sampling of 12 x 12 x 1. Further, lattice vibrational modes of the unit cell were calculated using uniform grids (nq1, nq2, q3), where n = 4. Further structures of MoS 2 were simulated using a 6x6 periodic supercell with different levels of V doping and S vacancies, where integrations over the Brillouin zone was sampled with uniform 2 × 2 × 1. 