After almost twenty years of intense work on the celebrated LaAlO 3 /SrTiO 3 system, the recent discovery of a superconducting two-dimensional electron gases (2-DEG) in (111)-oriented KTaO 3 -based heterostructures injects new momentum to the field of oxides interfaces. However, while both interfaces share common properties, experiments also suggest important differences between the two systems. Here, we report gate tunable superconductivity in 2-DEGs generated at the surface of a (111)-oriented KTaO 3 crystal by the simple sputtering of a thin Al layer. We use microwave transport to show that (111)-KTaO 3 2-DEGs exhibit a node-less superconducting order parameter with a gap value significantly larger than expected within a simple BCS weak-coupling limit model. Consistent with the two-dimensional nature of superconductivity, we evidence a well-defined Berezinsky-Kosterlitz-Thouless type of transition, which was not reported on SrTiO 3 -based interfaces. Our finding offers innovative perspectives for fundamental science but also for device applications in a variety of fields such as spin-orbitronics and topological electronics. Potassium tantalate KTaO 3 is a band insulator with a 3.6 eV gap that retains a cubic perovskite structure down to the lowest temperature In conventional superconductors, well described by the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) theory, the superconducting transition is controlled by the breaking of Cooper pairs as the temperature exceeds the energy scale set by the superconducting gap. However, in two-dimensional superconductors the superfluid stiffness, i.e. the energy associated with the phase rigidity of the superconducting condensate, can be comparable to the pairing energy, allowing for a T c suppression driven by the loss of phase coherence. In this case, the transition is expected to belong to the Berezinsky-Kosterlitz-Thouless (BKT) universality class, where the transition is controlled by the unbiding of topological vortex-antivortex pairs Here, we show that a 2-DEG can be generated at the surface of a (111)-oriented KTaO 3 crystal simply by sputtering a very thin Al layer. The deposition of Al leads to the reduction of Ta ions as evidenced by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and leads to the formation of an interfacial gate tunable superconducting 2-DEG. We use resonant microwave transport to measure the complex conductivity of the 2-DEG and extract the temperature dependent superfluid stiffness. The superconducting 2-DEG exhibits a node-less order parameter with a gap value significantly larger than expected within a simple BCS weak-coupling limit model and the superconducting transition follows the Berezinsky-Kosterlitz-Thouless model, which was not observed on SrTiO 3 -based interfaces. substrates at a temperature between 550 • C and 600 • C. The preparation process is detailed in the Methods section. Prior to deposition, we measured the in-situ X-ray photoelectron spectra (XPS) of the Ta 4f valence state (Fig. n 2D [10 13 .cm -2 ] [K] Fig. Although KTaO 3 is a quantum paraelectric material like SrTiO 3 , its permittivity is reduced by a factor five as compared to SrTiO 3 making electric field effect less efficient in a back-gating configuration n 2D [10 13 .cm n 2D 2.2× 10 13 e -• cm -2 , which is not sufficient to explain the modulation of the normal resistance by more than one order of magnitude. This indicates that the gate voltage not only controls the carrier density, but also modifies deeply the electronic properties of the 2-DEG, in particular the electronic mobility, in agreement with previous reports We further investigated the superconducting KTaO 3 2-DEG by measuring its superfluid stiffness J s , which is the energy scale associated with the phase rigidity of the superconducting condensate. J s is related to the imaginary part of the complex conductivity σ(ω) = σ 1 (ω) -iσ 2 (ω) of the superconductor that accounts for the transport of Cooper pairs at finite frequency ω. This is a direct probe of the superconducting order parameter that provides important information on the nature of the superconducting state. In the low frequency limit, hω ∆, a superconductor displays an inductive response to an ac electrical current and σ 2 (ω)= 1 L k ω , where L k is the kinetic inductance of the superconductor that diverges at T c where h is the reduced Planck constant and e is the electron charge. We used resonant microwave transport to extract L k below T c and determine the superfluid stiffness of sample D as a function of temperature. The method, which was successfully applied to superconducting SrTiO 3 -based interfaces, is illustrated in Fig. , includes the contribution of a SMD inductor (L 1 ) and the contribution of the kinetic inductance L k of the superconducting 2-DEG below T c . Finally, a SMD resistor R 1 imposes that the dissipative part of the circuit impedance remains close to 50 Ω in the entire temperature range, ensuring a good impedance matching with the microwave circuitry. The circuit resonates at the frequency ω 0 = 1 √ LtotC KTO , which is accessed by measuring the reflection coefficient of the sample circuit Γ(ω) = A in A out = Z(ω)-Z 0 Z(ω)+Z 0 . The resonance manifests itself as a peak in the real part of the circuit impedance, Z(ω), accompanied by a π phase shift The flattening of the J exp curve below 1 K indicates a fully gapped behavior, i.e. an absence of nodes in the order parameter. The purpled dashed line (J BCS ) shows an attempt to fit the experimental curve with a standard BCS expression J BCS s (T )/J s (0) = (∆(T )/∆(0)) tanh(∆(T )/k B T ) The superfluid density of the 2-DEG can be directly deduced from the stiffness through the formula n s = 4m h2 J s , where m is the effective mass of superconducting electrons. In the case of (111)-KTaO 3 2-DEGs, the conduction band is derived from the bulk J = 3/2 states with a Fermi Surface formed by an hexagonal contour inside a sixfold symmetric star-shaped contour Considering an average effective mass m 0.5m 0 , the corresponding superfluid density n s extracted from J exp s is n s 1.8 × 10 12 e -.cm -2 , which is about 2.5% of the total carrier density (n 2D = 7.5 × 10 13 e -.cm -2 for sample D). This very low ratio is comparable with previous findings in LaAlO 3 /SrTiO 3 interfaces The reduced dimensionality and the suppression of the energy scale associated with the stiffness represent the prerequisite to observe BKT In practice, the experimental observation of the BKT transition in real superconductors is more subtle. Indeed, in thin films the suppression of n s (and then J s ) with disorder comes along with an increasing inhomogeneity of the SC background, that is predicted to smear out the discontinuous superfluid-density jump Within the BKT approach, the effect of vortex-like topological excitations provides an additional suppression of J s with respect to the BCS dependence discussed above, driven only by quasiparticle The reflection coefficient at the circuit sample Γ(ω) = A out A in is extracted from the measurement as described in Although KTaO 3 and SrTiO 3 have many common properties, the superconducting phases of their interfacial 2-DEG exhibit noticeable differences. Whereas a pure BCS weak-coupling limit with ∆(0)/k B T c 1.76 provides a very good description of superconductivity in SrTiO 3 -based interfaces STEM characterization. STEM-HAADF and STEM-EELS measurements have been done at 100keV using a Cs corrected Nion STEM microscope and a Gatan modified EELS spectrometer equipped with a MerlinEM detector. Theoretical analysis of J s (T ). In order to account for vortex excitations we solved the BKT RG equations where = ln(a/ξ 0 ) is the RG-scaled lattice spacing with respect to the coherence length ξ 0 , that controls the vortex sizes and appears as a short-scale cut-off for the theory. The initial values at = 0 are set by the BCS fitting J BCS (T ) of J exp s , and the renormalized stiffness is given by the largescale behavior, J s = (k B T /π)K( → ∞). The ratio μ/J s = 0.87, similar to the one found in other conventional superconductors A sinh b √ t where t = (T -T BKT )/T BKT , and we set A = 2.5 and b = 0.27, consistent with the theoretical estimate of b 0.2 that we obtain from the value of μ Finally, to account for the possible inhomogeneity of the sample we consider the extension of the previous method to the case where the overall complex conductivity of the sample is computed in the self-consistent effective-medium approximation Here σ i (ω) denotes the complex conductivity of a local superconducting puddle with stiffness J i and local T i c , that are taken with a Gaussian distribution P i with variance σ G centered around the BCS fit of J exp s . For each realization J i we then compute the J s,i from the solution of the BKT equations ( X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was measured using a nonmonochromatized Mg K α source (hν = 1253.6 eV) in an Omicron NanoTechnology GmbH system