We investigate the competition between acoustic-phonon-mediated superconductivity and the long-range Coulomb interaction in moiréless graphene multilayers, specifically, Bernal bilayer graphene, rhombohedral trilayer graphene, and ABCA-stacked tetralayer graphene. In these graphene multilayers, the acoustic phonons can realize, through electron-phonon coupling, both spin-singlet and spin-triplet pairings, and the intra-sublattice pairings (s-wave spin-singlet and f -wave spin-triplet) are the dominant channels. Our theory naturally explains the distinct recent experimental findings in Bernal bilayer graphene and rhombohedral trilayer graphene, and we further predict the existence of superconductivity in ABCA tetralayer graphene arising from electron-phonon interactions. In particular, we demonstrate that the acoustic-phonon-mediated superconductivity prevails over a wide range of doping in rhombohedral trilayer graphene and ABCA tetralayer graphene while superconductivity exists only in a narrow range of doping near the Van Hove singularity in Bernal bilayer graphene. Key features of our theory are the inclusion of realistic band structures with the appropriate Van Hove singularities and Coulomb repulsion effects (the so-called "μ * effect") opposing the phonon-induced superconducting pairing. We also discuss how intervalley scatterings can suppress the spin-triplet spin-polarized superconductivity. Our work provides detailed prediction based on electron-acoustic-phonon-interaction-induced graphene superconductivity, which should be investigated in future experiments. Superconductivity is a prominent and extensivelystudied quantum many-body phenomenon because of its fundamental importance, widespread occurrence in nature, and technological applications. One of the most active contemporary research directions in condensed matter physics is the superconductivity in magic-angle moiré graphene systems including magic-angle twisted bilayer graphene Twisting or a moiré flatband or magic angle, however, is not an essential condition for superconductivity in graphene-based materials as rhombohedral trilayer graphene (RTG) Before discussing a potential universal mechanism, it is important to emphasize that superconductivity in graphene-based materials is distinct from other systems (e.g., conventional metals) because of the val-ley and sublattice degrees of freedom. For example, electron-acoustic-phonon coupling in graphene has an enlarged SU (2) × SU (2) symmetry due to the approximate valley symmetry In this work, we investigate in considerable details the acoustic-phonon-mediated superconductivity in moiréless graphene multilayers including BBG, RTG, and (the experimentally not-yet-studied, and thus, we are making a prediction) ABCA stacked tetralayer graphene The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In Sec. II, we introduce the k • p band model, the electron-acoustic- phonon coupling, and the Coulomb interaction. We discuss how to incorporate Coulomb repulsion in the theory of acoustic-phonon-mediated graphene superconductivity and present a simplified approach in Sec. III. In Sec. IV, the main numerical results are presented and discussed in the context of experimental results. We conclude with a brief discussion in Sec. V. Appendices A-F complement the main text by providing various technical details used in our work. Superconductivity is crucially dependent on density of states (DOS) and microscopic interactions (e.g., electronphonon, electron-electron). In this section, we discuss the single-particle band structures, and interactions used in this work. We focus on untwisted moiréless pristine BBG, RTG, and ABCA-stacked tetralayer graphene. We are interested, following the experimental systems, in the low-doping graphene multilayers in the presence of a displacement field, which induces a tunable band gap at the charge neutrality point. The single-particle bands near the K and -K valleys can be described by k • p band models. Generally, the single-particle Hamiltonian is described by where ĥn,τ=± (k) is a 2n × 2n low-energy Hamiltonian near the ±K valley, n ≥ 2 is the number of layers, 1s is the identity matrix in the spin space, and Ψn,τ (k) is a 4n-component column vector with a valley quantum number τ , made of the fermionic annihilation operator ψ τ σls with sublattice σ, spin s, and layer l. In this work, we consider BBG (n = 2), RTG (n = 3), and ABCA tetralayer graphene (n = 4). The low-energy bands of the graphene multilayer systems here have large probability on the A sites of the top layer (1A) and B sites of the bottom layer (nB). This property arises from the interlayer nearest-neighbor tunnelings which tend to form dimerized bonds as illustrated in Fig. where 2∆ 1 corresponds to the energy difference between two low-energy sites induced by the displacement field, , v 0 is the graphene velocity, and γ 1 corresponds to the interlayer dimerization energy. The effective energy bands are described by near the band edge (±∆ 1 ). Based on this heuristic estimate, we expect that the DOS gets larger for a higher layer number (n). More careful analysis should include additional hopping terms and crystal fields, which might substantially alter the results, such as inducing VHS away from band edges. Regardless of the detail, the low-energy bands are approximately layer and sublattice polarized. As a result, the superconducting states with intralayer intersublattice pairings should be generically suppressed in the low-energy bands because one of the sublattices in each layer has higher energy. To obtain the low-energy band structure, we formally diagonalize the Hamiltonian in Eq. (1) as follows: 0 . For a given EF , we determine ne based on the DOS profiles illustrated here. ∆1 is a band parameter (defined in Appendix A) which can be tuned by a displacement field. the DOS in BBG is much smaller than the DOS in RTG and ABCA tetralayer graphene. The differences in DOS imply that the screened Coulomb interaction might show different behavior since screening depends crucially on the DOS, as will be discussed in detail later. In graphene multilayers, the electron-optical-phonon couplings where a q is the phonon annihilation operator with momentum q, ω q = v ph |q| is the acoustic phonon dispersion, and v ph is the sound velocity. For simplicity, we consider that the acoustic phonon modes are layer decoupled, i.e., the same as that in monolayer graphene where ê * q = ê-q is the polarization vector, ρ m is the mass density of monolayer graphene, D is the deformation potential, A is the area of the 2D system, ω q = v ph |q| is the acoustic phonon dispersion, and nl (-q) = k τ,σ,s ψ † τ,l,σ,s (k)ψ τ,l,σ,s (k -q). In addition to electron-acoustic-phonon couplings, the electrons are directly interacting via Coulomb repulsion, which is an important factor in determining the existence of superconductivity, because no superconductivity would be possible if the repulsive Coulomb coupling overwhelms the attractive interaction induced by acoustic phonons in the associated pairing channel. We focus on the long-range component of the instantaneous Coulomb interaction, described by where V C (q) encodes the Coulomb potential and nl (q) = k τ,σ,s ψ † τ,l,σ,s (k)ψ τ,l,σ,s (k + q). The long-range Coulomb potential given by Eq. ( In the experiments, the graphene multilayer system is sandwiched between two metallic plates which screen the Coulomb interaction. After solving the electrostatic problem using the image charge approximations, we obtain where is the dimensionless average background lattice dielectric constant and d is the distance between the 2D system and the metallic plates. In addition to the gate screening, the large DOS in graphene multilayers (Fig. where ρ(E F ) is the total DOS at Fermi energy. The Thomas-Fermi approximation is the static limit of the random phase approximation, which is exact under the well-controlled limits of high density and/or many fermion flavors. When V C (q)ρ(E F ) 1, V TF (q; E F ) ≈ 1/ρ(E F ), which is independent of and d (simply because, in this large DOS limit, the screening by the carriers themselves dominate). In graphene multilayers discussed here, the intraband process is the dominating mechanism for the screening of Coulomb repulsion. We will discuss the interplay between phonon-mediated pairings and screened Coulomb repulsion next. To achieve a more quantitative understanding, it is customary to apply the Eliashberg theory In the rest of this section, we present a simplified treatment without carrying out intensive numerics, incorporating both the acoustic-phonon attraction and Coulomb repulsion, to solve for superconductivity in moiréless graphene multilayers. (The full numerical solution is presented in Appendix D.) We first discuss the effective BCS interaction and examine the retardation effect by comparing the phonon velocity with the estimated Fermi velocity, Then, we review the Eliashberg theory and present a simplified mean-field approach. We support our results by solving the Eliashberg theory numerically in Appendix D and Fig. Electrons near the Fermi surface can attract each other via a phonon-mediated interaction. Such an attractive interaction can overcome the repulsive Coulomb repulsion and create Cooper pairs. This is the central idea of the BCS theory. To derive the phonon-mediated attraction, we start with the electron-phonon couplings [given by Eq. ( where ν n is the Matsubara frequency, V g (ν n , q) = g is the phonon-mediated dynamical potential, ω q = v s |q|, v s is the sound velocity, and g = D 2 /(ρ m v 2 s ) is the strength of phonon-mediated attraction. The overall minus sign indicates the effective attraction mediated by acoustic phonons, and the effective attraction has an SU (2) × SU (2) symmetry, resulting in a singlet-triplet degeneracy in the pairing. To estimate g 0 , we use D = 30 eV, ρ m = 7.6 × 10 -8 g/cm 2 [15, 16], and v s = 2 × 10 6 cm/s. We obtain g ≈ 474 meV•nm 2 To simplify the calculations, we adopt the single-band approximation to where the Fermi energy E F lies. This is a valid approximation keeping only the band because low-energy bands of the graphene multilayers are separated by a gap ∼ 2|∆ 1 | due to the applied displacement field, and the high energy bands are also away by at least ∼ 100 meV. The BCS channel of the phonon-mediated interaction [Eq. ( where b is the index of the projected band, c τ bs,k , cτbs,k are the Grassmann variables representing the fermionic fields, k = (ω n , k) denotes the frequency-momentum index, and g (k, k ) is the phonon-mediated BCS attractive potential after the single-band projection. Before we proceed, it is worthwhile discussing the pairing symmetry in the low-energy bands of graphene multilayers. We consider only the intervalley Cooper pairs here because E τ,b (k) = E τ,b (-k) generically suppresses the intravalley superconductivity In fact, s-wave spin-singlet and f -wave spin-triplet pairings are degenerate due to the SU (2) × SU (2) symmetry in the acoustic-phonon-mediated attraction. In the standard BCS approximation, the frequency dependence is suppressed completely. As such, k,k . With the mean-field approximation, we derive the linearized gap equation as follows: where k B is the Boltzmann constant, E F is the Fermi energy, and the superconducting order parameter is defined by The transition temperature T c is determined by the highest T such that Eq. ( The validity of BCS theory relies on the retardation effect, indicating that phonon velocity is smaller than electron velocity. In such a case, the Migdal theorem applies, and vertex corrections can be ignored. However, the graphene multilayer systems contain VHS in the low energy bands, which can result in a small Fermi velocity, and our theory incorporating the Migdal theorem would break down for v s exceeding the Femi velocity. To check this, we estimate the average Fermi velocity, vF = 2 |n e |/( √ πρ), where n e is the carrier density and ρ is the total DOS (incorporating spin and valley, assuming unpolarized states). In Fig. We numerically solve Eq. ( in Eq. ( To investigate the interplay between phonon-mediated attraction and direct Coulomb repulsion, the frequency dependence, which is ignored in BCS theory, should be taken into account. We review the celebrated Eliashberg theory We focus on T ≈ T c where the order parameter is infinitesimal. In such a situation, the Eliashberg self energy FIG. is determined by where iΞ +s (k) is the Eliashberg self energy of valley +K, spin s, TF (k, k ), and TF (k, k ) denotes Eq. ( where we have ignored the infinitesimal |∆ ss (k)| term in the denominator. To simply the calculations, we set Z k = 1 and ignore χ k . Equation ( This approximation is valid in the weak electron-phonon coupling limit, which certainly applied to the multilayer graphene systems under consideration in the current work. Our qualitative results do not rely on this assumption. Note that Eq. ( Solving the integral equation defined by Eq. ( where If we assume that the high frequency (|ω n | > ω c ) gap function does not depend on ω n , i.e., ∆ reduces to two coupled equations as follows: Formally, one can eliminate ∆ ∞ (k) and derive an effective gap equation where χC (k, k ) encodes the Coulomb repulsion after integrating out the high frequency degrees of freedom. Note that χ ph (k, k ) is unchanged during this process as χ ph (k, k ) = 0 in the high frequency regime. The renormalization from the high energy states can also reduce the Coulomb repulsion in the BCS channel, which we treat by solving the ladder self-consistent equation where Ẽq = E + (q) -E F , Ṽ is the renormalized interaction, and V is the bare interaction. This is equivalent to deriving χC in Eq. ( where Γ(E F ; ω c ; Λ) encodes the renormalization from the energies satisfying and Λ is the energy cutoff. We discuss how to numerically evaluate Γ for arbitrary band structures in Appendix D. If we assume a constant DOS (ρ 0 ), the well-established μ * formula where μ * = U R (E F )ρ 0 and μ = U 0 (E F )ρ 0 are the dimensionless renormalized and bare interaction, respectively. To achieve superconductivity, the phonon-mediated attraction must be stronger than the renormalized Coulomb repulsion in the low-energy regime so that effective Cooper pairing may occur, which then condense into the symmetry-broken superconducting BCS ground state. Equation ( where In Eq. ( on DOS in the graphene multilayer. For BBG, g * is positive only in the vicinity of VHS, indicating that superconductivity is most likely found near VHS It is interesting to ask whether tuning gate distance (2d) or dielectric constant ( ) can considerably modify g * . For most doping n e , g * is not sensitive to d or because the large DOS strongly screens the Coulomb interaction (and, therefore, any additional screening by the gate and the background dielectric constant is quantitatively unimportant). For the regime where g * ≤ 0.2eV.nm 2 , we find that smaller d (for d < 5nm) and larger can considerably increase g * , implying an enhancement in T c . We note that g * is not sensitive to d for d > 5nm. Similar conclusions were reported previously for RTG In this section, we present our numerical results for superconducting T c incorporating Coulomb repulsion. The T c is obtained by solving Eq. ( We first discuss how the superconductivity arises from four-fold degenerate unpolarized normal states. As we discussed in the previous section, g * remains positive, indicating attractive interaction, for a wide range of doping in all three systems. In Fig. For spin-polarized (two-fold degenerate) normal states, ρ(E F ) is half of the value of an unpolarized state at the same E F , so the intraband screening is weaker, resulting in a smaller g * . We plot T c as a function of n e with varied ∆ 1 for RTG and ABCA tetralayer graphene in Fig. Based on the acoustic-phonon mechanism, suppressing Coulomb repulsion will boost T c because of the enhanced effective attraction near the Fermi surface. This can be achieved by decreasing the gate distance (2d) and increasing the effective dielectric constant ( ). The main question is the amount of quantitative change in T c . In our previous work on BBG In the RTG experiment, both spin-singlet (coined SC1) and non-spin-singlet (coined SC2) superconducting states were observed Based on our theory with g = g 0 = 474 meV•nm 2 , we cannot reproduce observable T c in SC1 (n e ≈ -1.9 × 10 12 cm -2 ) or SC2 regime (n e ≈ -0.5 × 10 12 cm -2 ). This is a quantitative issue because the value of g is not precisely known since the deformation potential coupling is often unknown We study acoustic-phonon-mediated superconductivity in untwisted graphene multilayers-BBG, RTG, and ABCA tetralayer graphene including effects of direct Coulomb repulsion. The SU (2) × SU (2) symmetric acoustic-phonon-mediated attraction naturally favors intrasublattice pairings in untwisted graphene multilayers, making s-wave spin-singlet and f -wave spin-triplet pair-FIG. ings dominant and degenerate. We develop a simplified, but quantitatively predictive, theory incorporating both phonon-mediated attraction and direct Coulomb repulsion. Within the mean-field approximation, we reproduce the recently experimentally-observed superconductivity phenomenology in BBG and RTG, and we further predict the existence of superconductivity in ABCA tetralayer graphene, which should be experimentally investigated. Our theory captures the qualitative and semiquantitative features of the experiments To understand why and how the acoustic-phonon mechanism can explain the BBG In the BBG experiment, a sufficiently large in-plane magnetic field, which suppresses a competing order, is required to observe superconductivity In the RTG experiment, superconductivity is observed away from VHS without a magnetic field, and spinsinglet (spin-triplet) superconductivity emerges from unpolarzied normal states (spin-polarized normal states) An interesting question is whether the predicted superconductivity is robust against disorder or scatterings introduced at the sample boundary (e.g., Refs. 2πB c,⊥ ≈ 0.57μm (using B c,⊥ = 1mT). The distance between nearby contacts is around 2μm, which is not significantly larger than the coherence lengths, suggesting that scatterings at boundary might affect the superconductivity. Assuming an intervalley scattering time τ s and following Ref. where ∆ is the pairing potential without intervalley scatterings and C is a constant encoding the average over Fermi surface and DOS at E F . Equation Since the pairing glue comes from phonons in our theory, suppressing Coulomb repulsion (i.e., increasing or decreasing d) generically enhances superconducting T c . As we discussed in Secs. III C and IV C, changing and d might not result in significantly different T c in RTG because the Coulomb repulsion is in the strong screening regime. In particular, the gate distance dependence is quite weak for d > 5nm. (A similar conclusion was drawn in Ref. Another important question is whether the electronphonon coupling constant is correctly estimated in our theory as the deformation potential D is not precisely known One important consequence of strong electron-acoustic phonon coupling is that the finite-temperature resistivity should develop a linear-in-T resistivity for T > T onset and a T 4 resistivity for T < T onset Finally, we comment on the universal theory of superconductivity in graphene-based materials (including twisted and untwisted materials). It is likely that the electron-acoustic-phonon mechanism accounts for superconductivity in all graphene-based materials provided that acoustic phonons can explain the distinct superconductivity phenomenology in BBG where Π k = τ k x + ik y (τ = 1, -1 for valleys K and 2 γ j a 0 , γ j is the bare hopping matrix element, and a 0 = 0.246nm is the lattice constant of graphene. The basis of ĥτ (k) is (1A,3B,1B,2A,2B,3A). Note that the first two elements, 1A and 3B, are the low-energy sites as discussed in the main text. We use the same parameters in Ref. Building on the k • p band model for RTG The parameters in ĥ(4) τ (k) are the same as the band parameters in RTG. The basis of the matrix is (1A,1B,2A,2B,3A,3B,4A,4B). The hole-doping low-energy band is qualitatively similar to RTG while the electron-doping low-energy band is distinct from RTG or BBG, i.e., it manifest only one Fermi pocket (instead of three) for a given valley and spin. The k • p band structure here is qualitatively similar to the rhombohedral graphite system (C4) In S I , only the intra-valley u channel and the inter-valley BCS channel are included. We note that the band projection matrix elements are the same for the intra-valley u-channel and the inter-valley BCS channel. This choice of interaction terms allows us to derive Eliashberg equations straightforwardly. To decouple interactions, we introduce Hubbard-Stratonovich field, and S I becomes where we have introduced Ξ τ s , ∆ ss , and ∆ss for decoupling the intra-valley u-channel and the inter-valley BCS channel, respectively. Altogether with S 0 term, we can express our theory in terms of a BdG form. We focus on the pairing channel ∆ ss in the following. where Then, we formally integrate out the Grassmann variable in the imaginary-time path integral and construct a free energy density, given by Now, we are in the position to derive the self-consistent equations. We perform functional derivative of F with respect to Ξ +s (k), Ξ -s (k), and ∆ ss (k) and obtain saddle point equations as follows: Without loss of generality, we can parametrize the self energies as follows: where Z k is the wavefunction renormalization and χ k contributes to the dispersion renormalization as well as the quasiparticle life time. where ∆ k is the pairing potential. Note that the spin indices are suppressed in the above expression because spins are polarized to the same direction. The system obeys the spinless time-reversal symmetry. As a consequence, E + (k) = E -(-k) is satisfied. Although the untwisted graphene multilayer systems are clean, the intervalley scatterings (with large momentum transfer) can take place at the sample boundary. In principle, one can study superconductivity with an open boundary condition that exactly facilitates intervalley scattering at the sample termination. However, this is a complicated task as one has to check multiple configurations of the terminated boundary where V k,k encodes the intervalley scatterings. Note that the spinless time-reversal symmetry gives rise to a condition that V k,k = V * -k,-k . We can extract the mean intervalley scattering τ s within the Born approximation, where we have averaged over k for k on the Fermi surface. To incorporate the intervalley scattering to superconductivity, we treat V perturbatively at second order and construct renormalized Gorkov Green functions as follows: To simplify the expression of the self energy, we adopt a number of approximations used in Ref. where 1κ is an identity matrix on the Nambu space, and κ x,y,z represents the Pauli matrices in the Nambu space, κ ± = (κ x ± iκ y )/2, and In the above expression, α 0 and α 1 are constants encoding the structure of V k,k . With the approximations stated above, one can easily show that α 0 = 1. If we further impose that V k,k k ∈k F = 0 ("statistical valley symmetry"), α 1 = 1 would be obtained. Now, we are in the position to derive the reduction of pairing potential (corresponding to the quasiparticle excitation energy) in the presence of intervalley scatterings. Following Ref. The quasiparticle excitation energy ω equals to the magnitude of the pairing potential in the presence of intervalley scattering, as described by Eq. ( 