Single crystals of Ce-doped (La,Pr)OBiS 2 superconductors, multinary rare-earth elements substituted ROBiS 2 , were successfully grown. The grown crystals typically had a size of 1-2 mm and a plate-like shape with a well-developed c-plane. The c-axis lattice constants of the obtained (La,Ce,Pr)OBiS 2 single crystals were approximately 13.6-13.7 Å, and the superconducting transition temperature was 1.23-2.18 K. Valence fluctuations of Ce and Pr were detected through X-ray absorption spectroscopy analysis. In contrast to (Ce,Pr)OBiS 2 and (La,Ce)OBiS 2 , the superconducting transition temperature of (La,Ce,Pr)OBiS 2 increased with increasing concentrations of the tetravalent state at the R-site. Layered superconductors, such as cuprate In this paper, we successfully grew F-free (La,Ce,Pr)OBiS 2 and (La,Pr)OBiS 2 single crystals using a CsCl and a KCl flux, respectively. Hereafter, we denote binary and ternary ROBiS 2 by the number of R elements: binary-(La,Ce)ObiS 2 , (Ce,Pr)ObiS 2 , and (La,Pr)OBiS 2 ; ternary-(La,Ce,Pr)OBiS 2 . The obtained ternary single crystals of (La,Ce,Pr)OBiS 2 were characterized by X-ray absorption fine structure (XAFS) spectroscopy for the Ce and Pr valence and the electrical transport properties down to approximately 0.2 K. The properties of the ternary (La,Ce,Pr)OBiS 2 were investigated in comparison with those of binary ROBiS 2 systems-namely, (La,Ce)OBiS 2 , (Ce,Pr)OBiS 2 , and (La,Pr)OBiS 2 . The relationship between the R-site valence state and the superconducting transition temperature (T c ) for (La,Ce,Pr)OBiS 2 was observed using the single crystals obtained. (La,Ce,Pr)OBiS 2 and (La,Pr)OBiS 2 single crystals were grown through a high-temperature flux method The compositional ratio of the single crystals was evaluated by energy-dispersive X-ray spectrometry (EDS) (Bruker, Quantax 70) associated with the observation of the microstructure using a scanning electron microscope (SEM) (Hitachi High-Technologies, TM3030). The obtained compositional values were normalized using La+Ce+Pr = 1.00, with the Bi and S values measured to a precision of two decimal places. The identification and evaluation of the orientation of the grown crystals were performed with X-ray diffraction (XRD) using Rigaku MultiFlex with Cu Kα radiation. The superconducting transition temperature (T c ) with zero resistivity was determined by the resistivity-temperature (ρ-T) characteristics. The ρ-T characteristics were measured using the standard four-probe method with a constant current density (J) mode and a physical property measurement system (Quantum Design; PPMS DynaCool). The electrical terminals were fabricated with Ag paste. The ρ-T characteristics in the temperature range 0.2-15 K were measured with an adiabatic demagnetization refrigerator (ADR) option for PPMS. The magnetic field for the operation of the ADR, 3 T at 1.9 K, was applied and subsequently removed. The temperature of the sample consequently decreased to approximately 0.2 K. The measurement of the ρ-T characteristics was begun at the lowest temperature (~0.2 K), which was spontaneously increased to 15 K. The valence state of the rare-earth elements (Ce, Pr) in the grown crystals was estimated using X-ray absorption fine structure (XAFS) spectroscopy analysis with an Aichi XAS beamline and synchrotron X-ray radiation (BL5S1 and BL11S2). For the XAFS spectroscopy sample, the obtained single crystals were ground, mixed with boron nitride (BN) powder, and pressed into a pellet with a diameter of 4 or 10 mm. Figure Figure The analyzed atomic ratios of rare-earth elements in the grown (La,Ce,Pr)OBiS 2 and (La,Pr)OBiS 2 single crystals did not correspond precisely to the nominal compositions. The nominal compositions and the analyzed averaging compositions of the rare-earth elements are shown in Table Figure Therefore, the Ce 4+ peaks became lower relative to those of samples #1 and #4. On the other hand, the Pr L 3 -edge of those single crystals exhibited a peak at approximately 5966 eV, which was assigned to the trivalent electronic configuration (Pr 3+ ) Moreover, the tetravalent electronic configuration (Pr 4+ ) showed a peak at approximately 5978 eV in Pr 6 O 11 (La,Ce,Pr)OBiS 2 and (La,Pr)OBiS 2 single crystals were successfully grown using a CsCl and a KCl flux, respectively. The superconducting transition temperature of the grown (La,Ce,Pr)OBiS 2 single crystals was 1.23-2.18 K. (La,Pr)OBiS 2 single crystals exhibited no superconductivity down to 0.2 K. The requirement of Ce substitution was revealed for the induction of superconductivity in binary and ternary ROBiS 2 . In the (La,Ce,Pr)OBiS 2 and (La,Pr)OBiS 2 single crystals, the Ce valence fluctuation was much larger than that of Pr, except for particular samples. For the ternary ROBiS 2 (R=La+Ce+Pr) single crystals, the superconducting transition temperature increased with increasing concentrations of the tetravalent state (R 4+ ) at the R-site, but the binary ROBiS 2 (R=La+Ce, Ce+Pr, La+Pr) showed no such correlation. According to the investigation of the mean R-site ionic radius, these superconducting transition temperature behaviors were found to be similar to the trend of the chemical pressure effect at the R-site. The superconducting transition temperature of ROBiS 2 (R=La, Ce, Pr) did not show a simple dependence on the carrier concentration of the tetravalent state (R 4+ ) at the R-site, but it may be easy to tune by varying the mean R-site ionic radius. Figure 5 (Color online)