While silicon photonics has leveraged the nanofabrication tools and techniques from the microelectronics industry, it has also inherited the metrological methods from the same. Photonics fabrication is inherently different from microelectronics in its intrinsic sensitivity to 3D shape and geometry, especially in a high-index contrast platform like silicon-on-insulator. In this work, we show that electrical resistance measurements can in principle be used to infer the geometry of such nanophotonic structures and reconstruct the micro-loading curves of foundry etch processes. We implement our ideas to infer 3D geometries from a standard silicon photonics foundry and discuss some of the potential sources of error that need to be calibrated out to improve the reconstruction accuracy. In the past decade, foundry silicon photonics has successfully leveraged complementary metal oxide semiconductor (CMOS) technology to revolutionize modern optics with a wide-ranging impact on diverse areas, spanning telecommunications Accuracy in feature dimensions and their repeatability across a wafer are the two key limiting factors contributing to the overall design yield of any fabrication process. In a photonics foundry, a number of copies of the same device are usually made to estimate the fabrication variations so that appropriate measures such as thermal tuning can be implemented to compensate for arXiv:2204.03591v1 [physics.optics] 7 Apr 2022 manufacturing errors In current foundry processes, at the mask level a metrology box (of area ≈ 1 mm 2 ) is usually drawn on each mask layer of the device to evaluate errors in the etch depth using ellipsometry after each subsequent process step. Since the sensitivity of ellipsometry is limited by the available spot size, it can not provide an accurate estimate for small (sub-micron) and closely spaced features such as grating couplers and ring resonators, where the gap between a bus waveguide and the ring is ≈ 200 nm. Therefore, SEMs are commonly used for assessing the surface profile of these devices. Both the (partial) etch depth and sidewall angle profiles of the patterned structures are estimated from a focused ion beam (FIB) cross-section of the sample using a critical dimension SEM (CD-SEM). In practice, one needs to be careful in relying on SEM metrology of device cross-sections as it is sensitive to various parameters like edge effects, sample charging, beam parameters, tool calibration and the electron beam-specimen interaction In this work, we use the geometrical dependence of electrical resistance measurements to infer the shapes of foundry-patterned nanophotonic devices. In particular, we show that differential resistance measurements can eliminate many of the systematic sources of error and uniquely serve as a probe of the geometrical shape of the patterned device. To the best of our knowledge, we believe this is the first attempt to use precision electrical measurements as a non-destructive probe for 3D nanofabrication metrology and process control, especially for integrated photonics. With that in mind, we also list some other sources of error that need to be calibrated out to improve the overall accuracy of our method. Consider a standard single mode p-doped SOI rib waveguide with the total thickness, H = 220 nm and etch depth, h = 70 nm. Grating-like structures are designed with various periods (Λ) and lengths (L g ) and implemented in an active silicon photonics foundry platform, detailed further in Section 3. The main goal of our work is to try and infer the partial etch depth (h) and sidewall angle (θ) of a fabricated device through a non-destructive electrical measurement. The devices are designed to have a nominal etch depth of 70 nm independent of Λ, but due to the micro-loading effect discussed above, the etch depth depends (quite strongly) on Λ and we would like to reconstruct this dependence from electrical measurements of the device resistance. Our main insight is that device resistance is usually determined by geometry, and in the right operating regime, this relationship can be inverted to reconstruct the geometry of a fabricated device. An SOI photonics process provides a good test platform for these ideas because the current flow is limited to the silicon device layer and it is the silicon layer geometry that we are primarily interested in reconstructing. Both the partial etch depth (h) and the side wall angle (θ) can be estimated by measuring the device resistance in both parallel (R | | ) and perpendicular (R ⊥ ) directions, with respect to the patterned gratings, as shown in the microscope image of a representative fabricated device in Fig. where where FF is the grating fill fraction, as measured from a top view optical microscope or SEM image. Each device has N grating elements, denoted by N Λ which is given by: We define the number of periods in the mask N pd as follows: with the factor of 2 accounting for the unit cell being half the period. When the resistance measurement is performed along the parallel direction (R | | ) as shown in Fig. The resistance asymmetry (ΔR) is then defined as: Ideally, two equations are obtained with three unknowns h, w and θ given that H = 220 nm. The width of the fabricated structures (w), or more precisely the fill fraction (FF), can be obtained non-destructively from an optical microscope or SEM inspection. Therefore, in practice it requires solving two unknowns h and θ, which can be done uniquely for each device. Using ΔR to estimate the geometry relies on some key underlying assumptions that we will revisit later in this work. We assume that the (top and bottom) oxide resistivity is infinite and all the current flows through the silicon device layer. We further assume that the sample resistivity (ρ) is independent of geometry. More precisely (ρ ⊥ = ρ | | ). We also assume that ρ is independent of the grating length. In particular, there are no shadowing and edge effects during the ion implantation process. We assume that the contact resistance is identical in the two directions, and therefore cancels out for ΔR. Finally, we assume that the silicon layer is doped sufficiently high so that the metal-semiconductor contact is ohmic in nature and the current flows uniformly through the device cross-section. While some of these assumptions might appear a bit idealized, we show below that there is an operating regime in which they are broadly satisfied, and device resistance can be used to infer geometry. A representative device typically consists of partially etched gratings on a 220 nm silicon device layer, with a rib height of 70 nm, defined by the grating etch step in an active 220 nm silicon photonics foundry process The measured difference in resistance in perpendicular and parallel direction (ΔR), is plotted in Fig. While there is some residual device to device fluctuation, from the measurements of different grating lengths, we can infer that the ΔR monontonically increases with period and gets less steeper as we move towards longer periods. This is clearest to observe in the case of the 60 μm long devices, shown in Fig. While the data in Fig. One way to understand the inferred ρ(L g ) is to realize that our theoretical model only estimates the geometrical component of resistance (R geom ). More generally, the resistance of the device in either the parallel or perpendicular orientation can be written as: where R cont act is the contact resistance at the metal semiconductor interface and R inter f ace is the interface resistance between the contact region and cross-section of the gratings itself in both parallel and perpendicular directions. Inferring geometry from a resistance asymmetry is only valid if R geom R cont act , R inter f ace . In addition, we have implicitly assumed that the R cont act and R inter f ace are nominally identical in the parallel and perpendicular orientations, and therefore cancel out in a ΔR measurement. While this is mostly true for R cont act due to symmetry, the R inter f ace could be (and most likely is) slightly different in the two orientations giving rise to a systematic error. This is due to the fact that along the parallel direction of measurement, the interface between the contact pad and the grating is along the length of a grating element, while for the perpendicular direction, it is along the width of the grating elements and hence is more likely to get affected by the cross-section of the gratings or R geom . To probe this, we can plot the individual R | | and R ⊥ values for a given period as a function of grating length (L g ). Both the R cont act and R inter f ace values reduce as L g is increased while the R geom is unaffected by a change in L g (see eqns 6-7). One can then use this to estimate the nominal L g where the sample resistance is dominated by the geometrical resistance and therefore, ΔR can be While in this work, we have clearly demonstrated that resistance asymmetries can be used to reconstruct the etch micro-loading curves of foundry processes, there are still some sources of error that need to be addressed to enhance the reconstruction accuracy. As discussed in the previous section, the accuracy improves as the R geom dominates the measured resistance, and the 60 μm long devices were pretty much at the limit where acceptable reconstruction was feasible. Working with longer devices L g ≈ 100 μm would reduce the reconstruction error due to the residual contact and interface resistances. Similarly, working with longer period ( > 2 μm) devices will help elucidate the spread in resistance across different grating periods and allow us to trace back the etch parameter reconstruction for shorter period devices. A second issue that needs to be addressed is the observed device to device variation (see outliers indicated in Fig. Our method, relying on a subtraction, explicitly assumes that the contacts are as close to identical, post annealing, but empirically we have found this not to be the case, as indicated by the outlier data devices which were located right next to perfectly functioning contacts. In general, we find that outlier values of ΔR correspond to bare R | | and R ⊥ values that are nominally greater, and this is usually a clear signature that something other than the R geom is dominating. In the SI, section S3, Fig. Given the complexity of a silicon photonic actives process, there will inevitably be some sources of error. The key question is how far can these errors be calibrated out. One of the main issues we had in these first generation devices was a lack of independent measurement of ρ. This could have been simply achieved by having an unetched silicon block (no gratings patterned) in the same geometry and verifying that the R | | and R ⊥ were identical (the difference bounds our error). A lot of the other systematic effects (contact resistance variation, micro-doping, dopant non-uniformity with thickness) can be eliminated through statistics. The micro-doping and shadowing effects can be removed, for instance, by having gratings at various in-plane orientations. Note that while averaging ΔR across multiple identical device datasets can in principle reduce fluctuations, it is valid only if the bare R | | and R ⊥ values are comparable, as discussed further in the SI, section S4. Moving forward, this method can be extended in several directions. Generalizing a resistance asymmetry to an impedance asymmetry would allow this method to be extended to non-conductive photonics platforms like silicon nitride, although this would involve significant added complexity due to the need to account for fringing fields In this work, we have used electrical resistance asymmetries (ΔR) to extract the geometry of Si nano gratings by using a two probe electrical resistance measurement. ΔR monotonically increases with respect to grating periods and tends to saturate at longer periods (Λ > 1.5 μm) which is attributed to the micro-loading effect of the dry etching process. We have used this method to demonstrate the reconstruction of a foundry etch micro-loading curve. This was confirmed with FIB cross-section of the devices. It was found that the side-wall angle had relatively little effect on the ΔR, whereas it is extremely sensitive to both etch depth and fill factor. Both R | | and R ⊥ decreases with grating lengths and starts to saturates for lengths where R geom R cont act , R inter f ace , which is found to be 60 μm set by the foundry process used in this research. Operating in this geometrical resistance dominated regime is critical for this method to work. Some sources of error, mainly resistance fluctation between nominally identical devices, need to be addressed to improve the overall reconstruction accuracy and make this method suitable for nanofabrication metrology. We would like to thank the European Research Council (ERC-StG SBS 3-5, 758843) and the UK Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EP/V052179/1) for funding support. Nanofabrication was carried out using equipment funded by an EPSRC captial equipment grant (EP/N015126/1). The foundry chip fabrication was carried out as part of the Cornerstone project, funded by UK EPSRC (EP/L021129/1).