of freedom in photo-excited semiconductors has remained a long-standing challenge and is critical for understanding the light-induced physical behavior of materials under extreme non-equilibrium conditions. Here, by monitoring the evolution of the wave-vector resolved ultrafast electron diffraction intensity following above-bandgap photo-excitation, we obtain a direct visual of the structural dynamics in monocrystalline 2D perovskites. Analysis reveals a surprising, light-induced ultrafast lattice ordering resulting from a strong interaction between hot-carriers and the perovskite lattice, which induces an in-plane octahedra rotation, towards a more symmetric phase. Correlated ultrafast spectroscopy performed at the same carrier density as ultrafast electron diffraction reveals that the creation of a hot and dense electron-hole plasma triggers lattice ordering at short timescales by modulating the crystal cohesive energy. Finally, we show that the interaction between the carrier gas and the lattice can be altered by tailoring the rigidity of the 2D perovskite by choosing the appropriate organic spacer layer. Organic-inorganic (hybrid) two-dimensional (2D) halide perovskites are constructed by a superlattice of interlocking organic and inorganic nanometer-thick layers and have demonstrated unique and non-classical behaviors and are being extensively explored for a wide range of technologies such as photovoltaics, photodetectors, photocatalysts, light emitting diodes, lasers, and quantum emitters. Here we report the first direct measurement of structural dynamics in 2D perovskites obtained by monitoring the change in the ultrafast femtosecond electron diffraction (UED) after optical excitation. This technique enables a time-resolved structural evolution of the 2D perovskites by tracking the changes in the diffraction pattern, thus providing a direct visualization of lattice response during carrier cooling. Detailed analysis of the Bragg peak intensities and temporal signatures reveals a non-classical light-induced lattice ordering at early times (≤1 ps), which is attributed to the light-induced in-plane rotation of the perovskite octahedra from a distorted toward a symmetrical phase. Complementary transient absorption measurements further reveal a high excitation regime (beyond Mott transition), The UED experiments are performed in a pump-probe setup in which sub-micron thick 2D hybrid perovskite single crystals are photoexcited with a 75-fs pulse laser and the structural dynamics are probed with a pulsed electron beam with 150 fs temporal width after specific delay times (t) (Fig. The Bragg peaks that show a detectable increase in their intensity after light excitation are (400), (040), and (220) (Fig. We note that opposite to our results, classical semiconductors (such as Si and GaAs), including inorganic 2D materials (for example, transition metal dichalcogenides such as MoS2 and MoSe2), exhibit in most cases a decrease in Bragg peak intensities after photoexcitation. Qualitative analysis of the diffraction peaks in Fig. However, because the Debye-Waller effect scales with a |q| 2 dependence, it dominates and thus neutralizes the effect of ordering for the higher order Bragg peaks. We note that the response of {110} peaks are partially blocked by the direct electron beam filter, resulting a lower-than expected intensity increase in Fig. Therefore, these observations support the hypothesis that the light-induced ordering in DJ n=2, is due to the collective lattice reorganization that reduces the octahedral rotations (Fig. Next, in order to gain a deeper insight into the time evolution of the light-induced structural dynamics in 2D hybrid perovskites, we performed a full analysis (up to 100 ps) of the timedependent intensity changes of the diffraction images after optical excitation. The time traces of the two Bragg peaks {400} and {530} are displayed in Fig. Compared between short-time (t=2ps) and long-time delays (t=65ps), the regions in-between the Bragg peaks spots appear redder as most of the Bragg peaks intensifies toward a negative response. The evolution of the integrated diffuse scattering intensities yields an average increase with ~0.5% (Fig. To further quantify the different types of lattice dynamics, we fit each Bragg peak intensity curve with a single exponential function, yielding a rise-time constant τ and relative intensity change Δ = (I -I 0 )/I 0 , where I0 and I correspond to the diffraction intensity at rest and after delay time t, respectively. Here, the parameter Δ represents the total peak intensity change due to carrierlattice interactions and τ the time to achieve 1/e intensity change as shown in Fig. Indeed, differential calorimetry measurements on DJ n=2 single crystals do not show any evidence of a temperature-induced phase transition above ambient temperature toward a perfectly ordered phase (Fig. In order to gain a complete picture of energy transfer and understand the structural dynamics observed in UED measurements, we performed transient absorption (TA) measurements in the same temporal window with the similar excitation fluences as the UED experiments on DJ n=2 crystal, (SI discussion 5 and Methods). By monitoring the transmission variations following above-band optical pump et 3.1eV, we estimated the evolution of effective temperature (T c ) of hot-carrier gas, by fitting the high-energy tail near the band edge with the Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution. (analysis details in supplementary discussion 5 and Fig. To elucidate the microscopic origin of ultrafast lattice ordering, and how the role of photoexcited carriers in activating the reduction of antiferro-distortion, we performed an in-depth analysis of the excitation regime (electron-hole pair plasma vs exciton gas) of DJ n=2 samples in UED. In order to achieve this, we followed the seminal analysis proposed by Schmitt-Rink, Chemla and Miller for excitonic non-linear optical effects in 2D semiconductors. Finally, in order to understand if the mechanism of light-induced transformation is generally applicable to the other 2D perovskites with different organic cations and structural phases, we perform UED experiments on three other hybrid 2D perovskites: 4AMP-MA2Pb3I10 (DJ n=3) exhibiting the same composition as DJ n=2 but a thicker perovskite layer, BA2MAPb2I7 (RP n=2) of Ruddlesden-Popper (RP) phase type with same perovskite layer as DJ n=2 but different spacer organic cations (with BA butylammonium), and BA2MA3Pb4I13 (RP n=4) with a different perovskite layer and spacer organic cations. The structures of these 2D perovskites are illustrated in Fig. However, in sharp contrast to the DJ case, all the observed Bragg peaks in RP n=2 and n=4 yield a global decrease in intensity. Furthermore, comparison of the histograms of the time constant τ for DJ n=2, DJ n=3, and RP n=4 (Fig. As similarly observed in DJ n=2, an increased diffuse scattering at longer time scales (Fig. These results demonstrate that there is a fundamental difference in the mechanism of carrier-lattice coupling and structural dynamics between the DJ and RP 2D perovskite phases, which implies that the competing mechanism of ultrafast lattice ordering during an antiferrodistortive phase transformation is mitigated in the RP phase. As described in Fig. Thus, in summary, our work elucidates that the photoexcited carrier relaxation depends on a competition between: i) a fast lattice ordering induced by hot electron-hole plasma, which strongly modulates the crystal cohesive energy by reducing the lattice antiferro-distortions; and ii) more classical ones related to a decay toward the low-energy part of the vibrational density of states. The strongly contrasting behaviors observed by changing the interlayer cations and thereby the structural phase of 2D perovskites demonstrates that UED measurements can be further extended systematically to the study of different perovskite compounds, such as organic cations and halides, providing an ideal platform of controlling structure-energy dissipation channels in organic-inorganic materials relevant for a wide range of novel applications including hot-carrier photovoltaics and photocatalysis and ultrafast optical communication devices. The materials used for 2D perovskites (DJ and RP) precursors were purchased from Sigma Aldrich, including methylamine hydrochloride (MACl), lead oxide (PbO), 4-aminomethyl piperidine (4AMP), butylamine (BA), Hypophosphorous acid (H3PO2), and hydroiodic (HI). Methylamine iodide (MAI) was purchased from Greatcell Solar. Single Crystal Synthesis: BA n=2,4 perovskites solution was synthesized by adopting the previously reported procedure, using 0.4 times the scale. Crystal Exfoliation and Transfer: Large-flake single-crystal perovskites were mechanically exfoliated and then transferred onto 100 × 100μm TEM transmission window with silicon nitride membranes. All samples were prepared and sealed in Argon gas until UED measurements. A comparison of diffraction images between first and last scans suggests no new peaks showing, confirming no degradation during measurement period (Fig. Optical absorbance: The optical absorbance of the single crystals was determined based on confocal microscopy, by focusing a broad-spectrum white light beam (Thorlabs SOLIS-3C) into a 50um spot and measuring the transmission spectrum through a TEM window. The spectrum was acquired using a spectrometer (Andor Kymera 328i) and CCD (Andor iDus 416). Differential scanning calorimetry was performed from room temperature to 150°C with a ramp rate of 15°C/min. The heat capacity of the sample was calculated from the heat flow (W/g) and was calibrated using a sapphire sample as a reference. UED experiments were performed at SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory. Electrons were accelerated to 3.7 MeV by Klystron with ~150fs temporal width. Normal incident pulses were diffracted by the sample in transmission geometry on TEM transmission window, and diffracted intensities were captured by EMCCD. The electron pules were synchronized with a laser beam (3.1eV, ~75fs) at the frequency of 180Hz, with temporal delay typically from -20ps to 100ps. The delay time was tuned by adjusting the relative path length difference using a delay stage. To reduce the confounding effect of mechanical shift and possible crystal structural change during time evolution (~hrs.), the sequence of stage locations was configured randomly during each scan. Each typical UED run contained 20~30 pump-probe scans and each diffraction image was averaged over ~ 8000 shots to reduce statistical fluctuations. The Bragg peaks of the measured samples (DJ n=2, DJ n=3, RP n=2 and RP n=4) were indexed by comparing the diffraction patterns with the simulated diffraction images calculated via SingleCrystal software (http://crystalmaker.com/singlecrystal/), using structure files (.cif) from Mao et al. Where Δ stands for intensity change (%), τ for time constant (ps), and t0 for time zero offset (calibrated by the response of bismuth crystal and fixed globally). Fitting results were plotted in Transient absorption (TA) experiments for 2D perovskites were done by using a 400 nm pump laser and a supercontinuum white light probe laser ranging from 450 to 750 nm. The pump laser was obtained from a 2 nd harmonic generator (Ultrafast System) derived by a fundamental 60 fspulsed laser (Coherent, Inc.) at 800 nm with a repetition rate of 1 kHz. The 1 kHz pump laser passed through a chopper to yield a 500 Hz frequency. The pump fluence was controlled within 0.1~0.75 mJ/cm 2 . The supercontinuum white light laser was generated by introducing the fundamental laser into a nonlinear crystal, CaF2 (Ultrafast System). Pump and probe laser pulses were temporally and spatially overlapped and focused on the 2D perovskites. 2D perovskites were performed in ambient air condition with DJ n=2 sample sealed in ~50nm thick PMMA. Phonon modes simulation: these were based on periodic Density Functional Theory (DFT) calculations, performed within Linear Combination of Atomic Orbital (LCAO) formalism, as implemented in the CRYSTAL17 code. Electron diffraction simulation: snapshots of the crystalline structure as distorted along all the computed normal modes were then provided as crystallographic information files (.cif) and used to simulate electron diffraction intensities using SingleCrystal software. The simulated 2D patterns intensity distribution along qx and qy directions, which is different with Fig. as sketched in Fig. A. Phase transition from thermal lattice heating. One of the possible mechanisms that induces the collective lattice ordering in DJ perovskites is the thermally induced phase transition from local lattice heating. To investigate the thermal response of DJ n=2 crystals, we first estimate the temperature jump induced by the laser pump, then using the differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and temperature dependent XRD results to exclude the possible phase transition effect. a. Estimation of temperature jump. The local lattice temperature increase is estimated by total input pump energy and samples' specific heat. For DJ n=2 crystals, a carrier density of 2.5×10 13 cm -2 corresponds to a bulk carrier concentration of n=1.4×10 20 cm -3 , which induces total energy into the lattice: The mole of the DJ n=2 crystal is calculated from crystal structure (4 molecules per unit cell): The specific heat of DJ n=2 at ~300K is estimated from DSC measurement, as shown in Fig. And the corresponding estimated temperature jump is: Here we focus on the in-plane Bragg peaks, primarily related to the edges and diagonal of the perovskite octahedral, which is our main focus in-plane diffraction patterns in DJ n=2. Fig. respectively. As we can see, both (220) and (400) peaks exhibit slight intensity decrease, which is contradictory with the UED response. Besides the intensity variations from observed from temperature XRD, we also observed a global peak shifting (upto 0.15%, Fig. However, this behavior of Bragg peaks shifting is not resolved in the UED. We attribute the absence of thermal expansion signature in UED diffraction patterns to the low q resolution of the UED measurements (~0.17Å -1 ). B. Multiple scattering effect. Another possible mechanism would be the possible multiple scattering effect in single-crystalline samples, as reported by Vallejo et al using keV electron beams. Where V is the volume of the unit cell, θ B is Bragg angle, λ is electron wavelength, and F g is the structure factor at diffraction vector g. The calculation of V, λ, and θ B is straightforward. For high energy electrons θ B is fairly close to 0, since the electron wavelength λ is much smaller than lattice spacing (θ B =0. The atomic scattering factor is a function of scattering vector s (s = sin θ /λ). and a common approximation is fitted with the following formula The coefficients of a j , b j for each atoms are listed in Table Based on the information above, we have estimated the extinction distance for Si under 100keV and DJ n=2 perovskites under 3.7MeV, which are given by: The calculation of Si is close to the value reported in the literature (75.7 nm) 