AgF 2 has been proposed as a cuprate analogue which requires strong correlation and marked covalence. On the other hand, fluorides are usually quite ionic and 4d transition metals tend to be less correlated than their 3d counterparts which calls for further scrutiny. We combine valence band photoemission and Auger-Meitner spectroscopy of AgF and AgF 2 together with computations in small clusters to estimate values of the Ag 4d Coulomb interaction U 4d and charge-transfer energy ∆ pd . Based on these values AgF 2 can be classified as a charge-transfer correlated insulator according to the Zaanen-Sawatzky-Allen classification scheme. Thus, we confirm that the material is a cuprate analogue from the point of view of correlations suggesting that it should become a high-temperature superconductor if metallization is achieved by doping. We present also a computation of the Hubbard U in density functional "+U " methods and discuss its relation to the Hubbard U in spectroscopies. Since the discovery of high-T c superconductivity in copper oxides there has been intense efforts to find compounds with similar characteristics but different ions Another interesting nearest neighbor of Cu in the periodic table is Ag; however, it has long been known that the charge-transfer gap in AgO is formally negative To further determine the relevant electronic parameters of AgF 2 , here we present a high energy spectroscopy study combining valence band x-ray photoemission spectroscopy (XPS) of AgF 2 (d To determine the on-site repulsion directly from spectroscopic information one needs to access an excited state with two holes on the transition metal (d 8 ). This is naturally achieved in closed shell systems such as AgF by Auger-Meitner spectroscopy Experimental Setup. X-ray photoelectron spectra were measured using a custom-designed system made by SPECS (Berlin) with a loadlock connected to MBraun LABSTAR glovebox filled with Ar (monitored O 2 and H 2 O levels, typically < 0.5 ppm). The spectra presented in this paper were recorded with the Al-Kα line (1486.74 eV, resolution 0.25 eV) at 32 mA emission current and 12.5 kV anode bias (400 W). A single crystal quartz mirror monochromator, the Phoibos 100 hemispherical analyser (100 mm mean radius) and a delayline electron detection system (DLD 3636) were used for the measurements. Powder samples were loaded in a holder provided by SPECS via a glove box in argon atmosphere. The AgF 2 samples were sputtered with Ar+ ions at 6 mA and 2 keV for 30 min before spectra acquisition. An electron flood gun FG 15/40 was used for the charge compensation of the AgF 2 samples. More details can be found in Ref. 17. For the cluster simulations we considered a central Ag atom and 6 surrounding F atoms. Figure Here, d † ν creates a hole in the 4d orbitals while P † ν creates a hole in symmetry adapted combinations of F p-orbitals. ν labels orbitals and spin quantum numbers. T ν pd are hybridization matrix elements between the localized dorbitals and the symmetry adapted P -orbitals. The procedure to define the symmetry adapted orbitals for AgF 2 [Fig. 1(b)] is explained in Ref. 14. Despite the low local C i symmetry, the hybridization matrix elements with the P -orbitals were found in density functional theory (DFT) The diagonal energies ε ν d and ε ν P from DFT are shown in Table with the next shell of atoms which is not present in the cluster. Second, one expects that crystal field parameters will be more affected by self-interaction corrections than hybridization matrix elements. Indeed, crystal field splittings in DFT tend to be significantly smaller than in more accurate quantum chemistry methods For AgF, the definition of the symmetry adapted orbitals is standard. The F-Ag hopping matrix element, With these settings a total of 20 electrons can be accommodated in the clusters for both fluorides. Stoichiometric AgF and AgF 2 correspond to configurations with zero (N = 20 electrons) and one hole respectively (N = 19). We define the charge-transfer energy as the energy cost ∆ pd = E(d 10 L) -E(d 9 ) for T ν pd = 0 with L denoting a hole in the ligand. The energies E are averages of the corresponding multiplets including the diagonal energies ε ν d and ε ν P . When referring to the Hubbard U -repulsion it is important to specify which Hubbard interaction is meant. In the two-hole subspace U (dd) is a 45 × 45 matrix representing Coulomb repulsion on Ag. From the trace we can define the average interaction U dd = F 0 -2(F 2 +F 4 )/63, with F k being the Slater-Condon integrals. Another important matrix elements is the intra-orbital repulsion 49 where the symetry in parenthesis correspond to the d 8 state. The Auger process is dominated by a 1 G final state 6 so it is useful to define also U ( 1 G) = F 0 + (36F 2 + F 4 )/441. F 2 , F 4 represent high multipole Coulomb interaction matrix elements and are weakly screened in solids. They can be obtained from other compounds with Ag 2+ ions. We took F 2 = 8.19 eV and F 4 = 6.80 eV from Ref. 6. On the other hand, F 0 is strongly screened in an environmental dependent manner Onsite F and inter-site Ag-F Coulomb repulsions can also be large in this system as F orbitals are more localized than O orbitals, so they were explicitly retained instead of absorbing them at a mean-field level as it is often done in cuprates. The repulsion in a single fluorine is described by an U (pp) matrix. For simplicity we retained only one parameter, the monopole term of U The valence band photoemission spectroscopy of AgF and AgF 2 was computed in terms of the one hole spectral function of the cluster projected on d or P states, A d/P (ω). This should be weighted with the atomic cross section ratios which were taken from Ref. 28 (divided by the number of electrons in the shell). In the case of the Al-Kα source used in the present study, one obtains r = σ(F2p)/σ(Ag4d) = 0.05. Because the number of F per Ag is different in the cluster and the bulk compound an additional correction is needed. In the ionic limit, the total integrated F pspectral weight per Ag atom corresponds to 12 states per AgF 2 and 6 states for AgF. Instead, in the clusters those weights are 10 in both cases corresponding to 10 filled F orbitals. To take this into account, we computed the photoemission intensity as I = A d (ω) + r(12/10)A P (ω) for AgF 2 and I = A d (ω)+r(6/10)A P (ω) for AgF. In practice due to the smallness of r the intensity is dominated by the silver response. Following Ref. 29 we assumed that the Auger-Meitner spectra is dominated by the two-hole spectral function in the singlet channel We start discussing the valence band photoemission spectra of AgF, which is shown in Fig. The above experiment sets the stage for Auger-Meitner M N N spectroscopy (hereafter Auger spectroscopy) in AgF which is well suited to probe two-hole interactions in silver The green line in Fig. A more accurate value of the silver onsite repulsion can be obtained with the cluster computation which is shown in the main panel of Fig. In both silver compounds the Hubbard repulsion is much smaller than for a free Ag 2+ ion [U ( 1 G) = 14.8 eV] due to the strong screening by the environment AgF 2 Valence band XPS spectra of AgF2. The green line is the experimental result and the black line is the result of the cluster computation with the crystal field parameters of Table than O 2-and the Ag-F distance is 2.468 Å, larger than the Ag-O bond length of 2.05 Å. Since the decrease in the on-site interaction is proportional to the polarizability of the environment and decreases with the metal-ligand distance to the fourth power, we conclude that both effects lead to less screening (larger repulsion) on the fluoride. On the other hand, Ag 2 O is linearly coordinated with 2 O 2-while AgF is octahedrally coordinated with 6 F -, which may partially compensate this effect. Clearly, the reduced screening prevails so the U ( 1 G) value is significantly larger in AgF than in Ag 2 O. This is smaller than U ( 1 G) = 9.2 eV, the value found 29 in closed shell Cu 2 O but it is still sizable. We now turn to the valence band photoemission spectra of AgF 2 . For an N -electron system with groundstate energy E 0 (N ), photoemission probes the manybody states with N -1 electrons which in our case is the Hilbert space spanned by the d 8 , d 9 L and d 10 L 2 configurations. We will discus two possible theoretical scenarios which are plausible at present: one using the DFT crystal fields yielding a weakly bound Zhang-Rice (ZR) state The experimental spectra is shown in green in Fig. As will be shown below, the narrow theoretical peak (black line) with smaller binding energy (3.6 eV) corresponds to the ZR state In order to characterize the excited states, figure One particle spectral function projected on the different orbitals symmetries of the cluster for the same parameters as Fig. by d 8 and d 9 L configurations while n d n p projects on the d 9 L subspace. Clearly, these two expectation values take integer values in these subspaces: , Therefore, for general states the expectation values and completeness characterize the probability of the three possible configurations. For example a state with n d ≈ 1 may indicate a d 9 L state or an equally mixed d 8 and d 10 L 2 configuration. The n d n p correlator allows to distinguish among these two possibilities or intermediate situations. We use red and blue in Fig. The main peak in the XPS experiment [see Fig. Figure In general the relative weight of the shoulder with respect to the main peak decreases increasing U pp , thus the fitting improves for U pp = 10 eV. However the effect is rather small as d 10 L 2 configurations do not appear directly in the spectrum; as a consequence this method lacks sensitivity to determine U pp . One can obtain a similar result increasing ∆ pd beyond 4 eV. These values, however would be in strong contradiction to the RIXS and optical experiments of Ref. 14. To illustrate the sensitivity of U 4d and ∆ pd to the choice of diagonal energies representing fluorine states we show the spectra with an ad hoc set of crystal fields. Namely we replace the values in Table I by e ν P = 1.5, -1.5, -1.5, 0.75 and 0.75 (all values in eV) for ν = z 2 , x 2 -y 2 , xy, xz and yz respectively. Furthermore, following Refs. 6, 21, and 29 we neglect the crystal field on silver ( ν d = 0). In this case we find that a good fit can be obtained with U 4d = 8.2 eV and ∆ pd = 3.5 eV. The fit of the main shoulder is improved but there is still substantial spectral weight in the second shoulder which is not seen in the experiment. Now the ZR singlet is well separated from the rest of the spectra justifying the subsection title. From Figs. Since the present parameter set has larger U 4d and smaller ∆ pd the highest energy state in the removal spectra near 16.5 eV now has a significant component with the two holes in the x 2 -y 2 orbital (cf. Figs. In the previous case of small crystal fields parameters, the spectra of the different symmetries (except x 2 -y 2 ) resemble each other (cf. Fig. One particle spectral function projected on the different orbitals symmetry of the cluster for the same parameters of Fig. A recent RIXS study 14 has found a set of dd transitions laying between 1.4 eV and 2.7 eV, very similar to the ones observed previously in cuprates. To explain the dd transitions and a parallel optical study, similar cluster computations were performed but using a model that neglected U pp and U pd . Fitting the optical and the RIXS spectra required using different parameters for optics and RIXS. A 20% increase of T pd with respect to the DFT value and a quite small value of the charge-transfer parameter, ∆ = 1.29 eV, were required to match the dd transitions. On the other hand, optical excitations required a much larger value of the charge-transfer parameter, ∆ = 2.8 eV. It was argued that the difference could be explained taking into account U pd ∼ 1.5 eV in an effective manner. Unfortunately the large number of free parameters does not allow for a systematic fit of U pd , hence we fixed it to a value close to the one in Ref. 14. From Table The optical experiments of Ref. 14 in powder samples did not allow to determine the gap unambiguously. A peak value was reported at 3.4 eV but the onset of the non excitonic charge-transfer absorption was estimated around 2.2 eV. Such value, however, depends on assumptions about the powder average and the role of disorder on the measurements and should be taken with a grain of salt. The fundamental gap for the parameters studied is shown in Table Until now we have obtained estimates of the intraorbital Hubbard U 4d interaction in fluorides from spectroscopic experiments. Since the work of Anisimov and collaborators Setting T ν pd = 0 and taking the d shell as an example one can quite generally define: where the notation emphasises that the d 8 state should be a singlet with both holes on the same orbital. Assuming DFT provides accurate total energies at integer occupations it is reasonable to estimate the physical U 4d using the above formula in a DFT computation in which the d shell occupancy is constrained at n = 8, 9, 10 and the hybridization is suppressed. Indeed, this kind of computation was done even before the DFT+U methodology was proposed We have computed the Hubbard U parameters both for Ag and F using the linear response approach of CDG as implemented in VASP software package. We obtained U * (Ag) = 5.31eV and U * (F) = 11.18eV. The value for Ag is smaller than U 4d = 7 ∼ 8 eV obtained from the spectroscopic data while the value for F is probably larger than the physical one. These disagreements are not uncommon. For example, for NiO Ref 44 finds U * (Ni) = 4.6eV, while the spectroscopic value We have presented a high energy spectroscopy study complemented with cluster computations to determine the degree of correlations in silver fluorides and their similarities and/or differences with cuprates. DFT computations predict very similar p -d hopping matrix elements in the two compounds (c.f. Table. III). Many important differences in electronic parameters can be traced back to the different size of the orbitals: Ag 2+ is larger than Cu 2+ while F -is smaller than O 2-. The ion polarizability scales with the ionic volume, while the on-site Coulomb repulsion decreases with the size. For the more localized fluorine p-orbitals we expect larger U pp and smaller p -p hybridization and ligand polarizability in the silver fluoride. For d orbitals the roles are interchanged and we expect smaller bare on-site interaction which is compensated by smaller screening by the ligands. Our computations for closed shell AgF are in good agreement with the experiment. Using valence band photoemission and Auger spectroscopy we were able to estimate the Hubbard Coulomb repulsion among two holes on the same orbital to be U 4d = 7.7 eV. As expected, this is smaller than the same quantity in cuprates which is partially compensated by the screening effect. For valence band photoemission of AgF 2 the situation is more complicated. The spectra shows a peak and a shoulder. This resembles the spectra observed in cuprates which, however, show also high binding energy satellites at a distance of 7 ∼ 8 eV from the main peak. Unfortunately, such satellites -which in cuprates are related to d 8 states -are not seen here, hampering a direct determination of U 4d in AgF 2 . Due to the large number of parameters and the small number of observed features a systematic fit was not possible. Thus, we considered two possible scenarios; a weakly bound and a strongly bound ZR singlet, that allowed to constrain the parameters U 4d and ∆ pd and provide a reasonable range of possible values. Table III compares the parameters found for AgF 2 and CuO. In both considered scenarios, the charge transfer energy is somewhat larger and the Coulomb repulsion is smaller than in cuprates. However, in both scenarios the Coulomb repulsion dominates and the material can be classified as a charge transfer insulator according to the ZSA scheme. The value found for ∆ pd = 1.2 eV in AgF is considerably smaller than in AgF 2 . In both materials we defined ∆ pd as the energy cost of the ionic transition d 9 → d 10 L. The difference in ∆ pd can be understood considering the ionic potential. The energy of the hole in the silver site is decreased the shorter the distance to the negatively charged fluorines. On the contrary, the energy of the hole on the ligand increases shortening the distance with the positively charged silver. Thus the increase of the charge transfer energy can be attributed in part to elementary electrostatic considerations and to the decrease of the Ag-F distance when going from AgF (2.47 A) The weakly bound scenario used to explain the photoemission experiment in AgF 2 predicts a small energy difference between a high-spin d 8 state and a low-spin ZR singlet. It is worth mentioning that in DFT doped holes on AgF 2 planes form both low-spin 53 and highspin The puzzling absence of d 8 satellites in the valence band photoemission spectrum can be due to overlap with other bands which strongly broaden these states. In cuprates it has been demonstrated that the photoemission intensity of these features can be strongly enhanced by tuning the photon energy to be resonant with the core 3p threshold excitation 55 (74 eV) and the core 2p threshold 56 (931 eV). It would be highly desirable to perform similar experiments in AgF 2 . A good candidate could be the 4p edge (56 eV) which shows 6 a weak resonance in Ag 2 O. The photon energy used in this study (Al-Kα) makes the spectra to be dominated by the d-weight. It would be very interesting to repeat the experiment with other light sources which are sensitive to the p spectral weight like He I and He II lines [σ(F 2p)/σ(Ag4d) = 0.84, 0.34 respectively]. This would allow to identify the structures predicted in the inset of Figs. In general, the fit of the photoemission data in AgF 2 requires a larger charge-transfer energy than the one suggested by the analysis of dd transitions in AgF 2 ; on the other hand, analysis of optics data yield a similar value to the one found here. RIXS analysis of single crystal data would be highly desirable to identify the symmetry of the different dd transitions and can serve to better constrain the crystal field splittings. Our results confirm that AgF 2 is a correlated insulator of charge-transfer type just as the insulating parent compounds of high-T c superconductors. It appears to have a degree of covalency similar to cuprates and a somewhat smaller Coulomb repulsion on the transition metal ion. The repulsion on the ligand is expected to be larger than in cuprates. This, however, has a minor role in the low energy physics, as the probability of two holes to be on the same ligand is anyway small. The similarity with cuprates suggests that AgF 2 can become the corner stone of a new family of high-T c superconductors. with the energy of the closed shell given by a direct and exchange contribution which can be put in the familiar form, with N s = 6, the number of spin-orbitals in a p-shell. After normal ordering one obtains single particle contributions defined by, Neglecting irrelevant terms, the final form of the interaction reads as Eq. ( Appendix B: Core-hole spectra and two-hole binding energies in Auger In a two-step description of the Auger process, the initial state consists in a core hole-state, followed by the decay of a valence electron and the emission of a second valence electron ending in a state with two valence holes. For AgF the initial core hole can be in a 3d 3/2 (M 4) or a 3d 5/2 state (M 5) which are separated by the spin-orbit splitting ∆ SO = 6.0 eV as revealed by the core level spectra shown in Fig. * 