Inversion and time reversal are essential symmetries for the structure of Cooper pairs in superconductors. The loss of one or both leads to modifications to this structure and can change the properties of the superconducting phases in profound ways. Lacking inversion, superconductivity in noncentrosymmetric materials has become an important topic, in particular, in the context of topological superconductivity as well as unusual magnetic and magneto-electric properties. Recently, crystal structures with local, but not global inversion-symmetry breaking have attracted attention, as superconductivity can exhibit phenomena not naively expected in centrosymmetric materials. After introducing the concept of locally noncentrosymmetric crystals and different material realizations, we discuss consequences of such local symmetry breaking on the classification, the expected and, in parts, already observed phenomenology of unconventional superconductivity, and possible topological superconducting phases. The importance of time-reversal and inversion symmetry for superconductivity was realized early on: These two symmetries guarantee the degeneracy of electrons at the Fermi level with opposite momentum and thus, a weak-coupling instability towards superconductivity While time-reversal symmetry and inversion allow for superconducting instabilities, breaking or the absence of these symmetries has direct consequences for the superconducting state. Indeed, removing time-reversal symmetry by an external magnetic field, magnetic impurities, or (ferro-) magnetic order substantially weakens or even suppresses superconductivity in the spin-singlet channel. Together with the clear distinction of even and odd superconducting order parameters in systems with inversion, the response to a magnetic field thus allows to distinguish spin-singlet and spin-triplet superconductors, an important interplay of the two symmetries. Breaking of inversion, or rather superconductivity in a crystal without a center of inversion, has attracted much interest since the discovery of superconductivity in the noncentrosymmetric CePt3Si in 2004 1. The unusual response of even conventional superconductors to magnetic fields Initial investigations into local inversion-symmetry breaking were motivated by asking whether the above features associated with noncentrosymmetric superconductors could be observed when inversion symmetry is globally restored but locally broken. The importance of local symmetry breaking has a long history in condensed matter physics. In particular, novel phenomena can emerge for the situation, where symmetries are broken locally in a sublattice, such that the symmetry breaking can be undone by interchange of the sublattices. Indeed, Baltensperger and Straessler demonstrated in 1962 that spin-singlet superconductivity and antiferromagnetism can coexist for an appropriate pair structure Similarly, a crystal structure can locally have a reduced symmetry. While taking the local crystal symmetry into account for the description of localized magnetic moments goes back to Dzyaloshinsky and Moriya In this review, we discuss consequences of the local breaking of inversion symmetry on superconductivity. After a general discussion of the symmetry of crystal lattices, we discuss several classes exemplifying how inversion can be broken locally. We then review the consequences of local inversion-symmetry breaking on the normal-state microscopic Hamiltonian, the classification of the superconducting order parameter, and the physical consequences on the superconducting state-emphasizing similarities and differences with respect to globally inversion-symmetry-broken (noncentrosymmetric) superconductors. Finally, we conclude with a discussion of peculiarities of these systems going beyond the phenomena known from noncentrosymmetric superconductors and routes to enhance the role of local inversion-symmetry breaking. For a crystal lattice, the spatial symmetry transformations, namely point group and translation symmetries, that map all atomic sites of the crystal onto themselves form a group, the space group. For non-magnetic crystals, there are 230 distinct space groups. The pure translations form the translation group and encode the periodicity of the lattice with respect to a unit cell. Point group operations include rotations, mirror operations, and combinations thereof, such as inversion While the crystal is mapped onto itself under all elements of the point group, the environment of a generic atomic site in the lattice is in general less symmetric. All symmetrydistinct sites in the unit cell, captured by the concept of Wyckoff positions, have their own symmetry group, the so-called site symmetry group. The site symmetry group is a subgroup of the point group with transformations that leave the specific site invariant. Consequently, we can construct a sublattice from such sites with lower symmetry, such that this sublattice lacks symmetries of the full crystal structure, such as inversion. When a crystal structure comprises two sublattices that lack inversion symmetry but the point group of the crystal contains inversion symmetry (which exchanges the sublattices), we call such crystal structures locally noncentrosymmetric. If for some reason the sublattices related by inversion symmetry are only weakly coupled, in other words there is a natural separation of the sublattices, it can be instructive to discuss the individual sublattices and their symmetry first, before combining the sublattices into the full crystal structure. Consequently, the resultant physics will be reminiscent of two copies of a noncentrosymmetric material-in the spintronics community this led to the notion of 'hidden spin-polarization' Figure For concreteness, we discuss in this review systems with point group G involving two sublattices A and B, denoted by orange and blue in the examples of Figure We discuss here three main classes of crystal structures with examples in Table A second class comprises crystal lattices, where the individual layers possess an in-plane mirror, but lack a C2 rotation symmetry with axis perpendicular to the plane. Again, the sublattices A and B are the two layers in the unit cell. Here, famous examples are the hexagonal SrPtAs A third class that is worthwhile mentioning are materials with inversion-related A and B sublattices, but these sublattices are strongly coupled. While such materials do not typically reveal the physics more commonly associated with local inversion-symmetry-broken superconductivity (which will be discussed later), they do reveal interesting physical properties that are a consequence of this sublattice structure. The first example of this type is the iron-based superconductors (Fe-based SC), where the sublattices are the A and B sublattices of the bipartition of the square lattice, each individually lacking inversion due to the out-of-plane positions of the As or Se atoms. A single layer of this class is illustrated in Figure Before discussing superconductivity, it is worthwhile to address the consequences of local inversion-symmetry breaking for the normal state of electrons. For this purpose, we formulate a tight-binding Hamiltonian, which can be written in momentum space as with the momentum k. The creation and annihilation operators C † k and C k are spinors containing all local degrees of freedom such as sublattice, spin, or atomic orbitals and H k , correspondingly, has matrix form. A generic Hamiltonian can be constructed noting that it has to transform as a scalar under all point group operations of the crystal lattice g ∈ Gthe pure translations have been taken care of by working in momentum space. Concretely, we require for where U k (g) is the representation of g on the space of local degrees of freedom and D(g) denotes the corresponding transformation of the (momentum) vectors. Finally, the Hamiltonian is constrained by time-reversal symmetry T . We can construct the Hamiltonian by working in the sublattice basis { C A k , C B k } and introducing Pauli matrices τ i with i = 1, 2, 3 and identity τ 0 acting on this space. In this basis, H k has a tensor-product structure, with ν = 0, 1, 2, 3. To gain an understanding of the physical significance of the τ matrices, let us initially consider the Hamiltonian in a single sublattice, for example sublattice A Comparison of inversion-symmetric layer, a layer with Rashba spin-orbit coupling, and a staggered-Rashba system. For the single layer with Rashba ASOC, the spin winds around the Fermi surface as denoted by the blue and red band. While the two bands shown for the locally-noncentrosymmetric system are two-fold degenerate, the spin and momentum are locked as in the Rasbha system when considering the layer-resolved spectral density, see bottom right. and, for simplicity, restrict to one atomic orbital. The generalization to more degrees of freedom is straight forward. As an illustrative example, we consider the case of a stack of square lattices, such that G = D 4h and GA = C4v. We separate this single-sublattice Hamiltonian into two parts, which we denote by H G k and H G A k . The first one contains all the terms generically allowed in a system with point group G, thus containing all the (spin-independent) hopping terms of the square lattice leading to a dispersion k , while the second one contains all additional terms that are allowed for point group GA. Importantly, this second term contains an anti-symmetric spin-orbit coupling (ASOC) of Rashba type λ k • σ with λ k = -λ -k . This term lifts the spin degeneracy of the bands with two split bands ξ k,± = k ± | λ k | in the simplest case. The standard Rashba-type ASOC leads to the well-known spin splitting pattern as depicted in the top row of Figure Intuitively, ASOC due to the local lack of inversion symmetry can be attributed to a polar environment within the sublattice. This environment yields λ k • σ through the relativistic magnetic field experience by a moving electron in the corresponding electric field, where v k is the electron velocity. The lack of an in-plane mirror Mz on a square lattice, for instance, leads to the generic form λ k = λ(-sin ky, sin kx, 0) ⊥ ẑ, while λ k ẑ appears for missing C2 symmetry as in SrPtAs or 2H-TMDs. Note beyond this symmetry based intuitive picture, we can also construct H G A k straightforwardly within a tight-binding picture taking the appropriate atomic spin-orbit coupling, hopping integrals, and orbital hybridizations into account Including both sublattices, we find that in Equation 3 H 0 k = H G k with all terms scalar under G, while H G A k changes sign between the two sublattices and is associated with τ 3 , in other words having odd parity. This latter term includes the ASOC. The remaining two components are intersublattice coupling terms and typically do not include any relevant ASOC. The Hamiltonian that connects the two sublattices symmetrically, H 1 k , has to be a scalar with respect to G. The Hamiltonian H 2 k connecting the sublattices is a scalar in GA, but not in G. As will become apparent later, the consequences of local inversion-symmetry breaking are strongest when the energy scales of the intrasublattice term H 3 k are larger than those of the intersublattice terms H 1 k and H 2 k . From a symmetry perspective, the tensor-product structure of the single-particle Hamiltonian in Equation 3 allows for a classification by means of irreducible representations of G as the decomposition of product representations R ⊗ R with R the irreducible representation corresponding to τ a The two-sublattice system has both global inversion I and TRS T . The combined symmetry T I is an antiunitary symmetry that satisfies (T I) 2 = -1, implying that at each momentum k, there is a two-fold Kramer's degeneracy which is often labelled as pseudospin. For a simple tight-binding model with In general, the pseudospin does not transform as usual spin-1/2 under rotations. However, it is often possible to find eigenstates of the Bloch Hamiltonian |ψ k,α that transform under a rotation g as |ψ k,α → U α,β (g)|ψ D(g) k,β with U (g) a usual SU (2) spin rotation matrix. We call such a pseudospin basis a manifestly covariant Bloch basis (MCBB) To classify the superconducting order parameters with respect to the point group of the lattice (28), we work with a Bogolyubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian such that the transformation properties of the order parameter are given by the respective eigenvalue of the order parameter. We can use the sublattice basis introduced in the previous section to classify gap functions of the form (18) with the spin-singlet component ψν ( k) and spin-triplet component dν ( k) classified according to the irreducible representations of G. For the full classification of the gap functions, we use the same scheme as for the Hamiltonian, namely that they transform as R ⊗ R with R the irreducible representation of τ ν , either A1g or Γ . Importantly, since the crystal lattice possesses global inversion symmetry, the superconducting order parameters can be classified as even and odd under inversion. Finally, note that the Pauli principle has to be satisfied, requiring that ν = 0, 1, 3 ("triplet in sublattice index") for an even spin-singlet, ψ(-k) = ψ( k), and odd spin-triplet, d(-k) = -d( k), function, whereas ν = 2 ("singlet in sublattice index") for odd spin-singlet and even spin-triplet order parameters. It is instructive to again look at a single sublattice first. For the individual sublattice, the lack of a center of inversion leads to a mixing of even and odd pairing channels, such that a general gap function defined on sublattice , where the direction of the spin-triplet component d k λ k is fixed by the spinorbit field Note that similar to the situation of global inversion-symmetry breaking, the direction of the d vector for intrasublattice pairing is fixed, although the energy required to rotate the d vector decreases with increasing intersublattice coupling Within the Ginzburg-Landau formalism, the structure of the even and odd order parameters in Equations 6 and 7 can be accounted for by introducing even-and odd-parity orderparameter components on each sublattice. In the following, we again focus on the example of layers with broken inversion symmetry and denote by η l,j (r) the locally even (l = e) and odd (l = o) components in layer j and r is the in-plane coordinate, such that the general order parameter is written as Ψ(r, j) = (ηe,j(r), ηo,j(r)). The free-energy density for a single layer j has the form where, neglecting gradient terms and external fields for now, f 4 . Furthermore, there is a coupling of the even and odd components due to the inversion-symmetry breaking, f (j) eo = j /2(ηe,j(r)ηo,j(r) * +c.c.), with j = (-1) j capturing the staggered nature of the inversion-symmetry breaking. Depending on which order parameter has the higher critical temperature, a l (T ) = a l,0 (T -T c,l ), the full system chooses one of the two solutions, an even and an odd one with Ψeven(r, j) = (ηe, (-1) j ηo) and Ψ odd (r, j) = ((-1) j ηe, ηo). The subleading order changes sign from sublattice to sublattice as expected. This sign-change, however, costs energy which we can introduce as a Josephson coupling between the sublattices, 9. For simplicity, we parametrize the Josephson coupling by a single parameter J, but in general the coupling strength can depend on the respective order-parameter component. In the Ginzburg-Landau formulation, /J thus takes the role of the dimensionless parameter that measures the importance of noncentrosymmetricity. We now discuss the physical consequences of local inversion-symmetry breaking on superconductivity. In Sections 3.1 to 3.4, we begin by addressing how the physics of global inversion-symmetry breaking, enumerated in the Introduction, is changed when inversion symmetry is restored globally. In Section 4, we further discuss new phenomena in locally inversion-symmetry-broken superconductors. A striking property seen in noncentrosymmetric superconductors such as CeIrSi3 and CeRhSi3 is the enormous upper critical field for field directions perpendicular to the basal plane, which is not a mirror plane, exceeding the paramagnetic limit by far 3.1.1. Spin Susceptibilities. In noncentrosymmetric materials, the Rashba-like ASOC directly affects the structure of the spin susceptibility in the normal state: While the susceptibility in a system without spin-orbit coupling is given by the so-called Pauli susceptibility, which is an intraband response and proportional to the density of states at the Fermi level, ρ( F), the ASOC will introduce an interband, or so-called van Vleck contribution for fields perpendicular to λ k . The diagonal susceptibility for fields along the normal vector n then reads with λ k = λ k /| λ k | the unit vector in the direction of the spin-orbit field; the Pauli contribution χP( k, α) ∝ ∂ ξ nF(ξ k,α ) = S α k , given by the spectral density of band α; the van Vleck contribution χvV( k) ∝ (nF(ξ k,+ )-nF(ξ k,-))/(ξ k,+ -ξ k,-); and the Fermi distribution function nF(ξ). As a consequence, a single layer with Rashba ASOC has a susceptibility that is purely van Vleck for out-of-plane fields, while the (1H) TMDs have a pure van Vleck susceptibility for in-plane fields. With the van Vleck contribution not depending on states at the Fermi level, the additional structure of the susceptibility is crucial in the superconducting state, where the Fermi surface is gapped out. In particular, when the spin-orbit energy scale is much bigger than the superconducting energy scale, χvV( k) is unaffected by superconductivity, leading to a residual non-zero spin susceptibility in the superconducting state-even for primarily spin-singlet superconductors. To elucidate the fate of the residual spin susceptibility in the superconducting state when inversion symmetry is restored globally, a calculation based on the sublattice Hamiltonian of Equation 3 yields for fields along n for the simplest case of a single-orbital model Here, ( ̃ k There is still a van Vleck contribution, although its relative importance is reduced by the intersublattice coupling. Consequently, in the superconducting state the residual susceptibility, again given by the van Vleck contribution, survives even for a conventional spin-singlet pairing state but is suppressed by the intersublattice coupling. A simple understanding of this result follows from projecting a Zeeman magnetic field i Hiσi onto the pseudospin basis that describes a single band. This projection between spin σi and pseudospin si takes the general form and the field direction experienced by the pseudospin is not generally the same as the applied field direction of the Zeeman field. The Zeeman field experienced along direction n, which is given by is thus in general less than the applied magnetic field and corresponds to the prefactor of the Pauli susceptibility in Equation In addition to the van Vleck contribution, for odd-parity superconductors there is another well-known source for a residual susceptibility. In particular, odd-parity superconductors are typically described by a vector d( k), see Equation 3.1.2. Large Pauli limiting fields. Upper critical fields exceeding the expected Pauli limiting fields have indeed been observed in several of the systems introduced in Section 2, most strikingly in bilayer NbSe2 realizing a 2H polytype A magnetic field coupling to the electrons' spins through a Zeeman term lifts the degeneracy between states with opposite momentum and spin and hence, suppresses superconductivity. Put differently, the superconducting state cannot be polarized and as such cannot optimize the magnetic energy. Once this magnetic energy is of the order of the condensation energy, the system gains energy entering the normal state, thus leading to the paramagnetic limiting field Hp(T ) ∼ kBTc/ χ n -χ sc (T ). For a conventional superconductor with a pure Pauli susceptibility, in other words χ n = μ 2 B ρ( F) and χ sc (T = 0) = 0, this yields Hp ∼ ∆/μB known as the Clogston-Chandrasekhar limit While large orbital upper critical fields follow from very short coherence lengths not uncommon for unconventional superconductors, spin-orbit coupling has a profound effect on the paramagnetic critical field through its change to the spin susceptibility both in the normal and the superconducting state as discussed above When the two inversion-symmetry related sublattices are weakly coupled, it is natural to assign a superconducting order parameter to each sublattice. Assuming only spin-singlet even-parity pairing within the planes, the even-and odd-parity states of Equations 6 and 7 should be nearly degenerate. This near degeneracy allows us to use symmetry-breaking fields, for example magnetic fields, to control which pairing state appears. This possibility was first discussed in the context of two weakly coupled CeCoIn5 layers Remarkably, in CeRh2As2 a field-induced phase transition that strongly resembles that predicted for bilayer CeCoIn5 has been observed For an intuitive microscopic picture of the field-induced transition, it helps to rewrite the nearly degenerate even-and odd-parity states in the pseudospin basis. Starting in the sublattice basis, the even-parity state takes the form ∆ even = ∆e(iσ y ) ⊗ τ 0 , while the odd-parity state takes the form ∆ odd . = ∆o(iσ y ) ⊗ τ Phase diagram for B ẑ with even-parity low-field and odd-parity high-field phases adapted from λ k = λ(-sin ky, sin kx, 0), we find ∆ even → ∆eis y 14. ∆ odd → λ(sin kxs y -sin kys x ) These expressions immediately reveal the physics of the phase diagram for fields along the z axis: Since the d vector for ∆o is purely in plane, it is not suppressed by a field along the z axis, while ∆e is, such that the field can enable the transition. In addition, notice that the magnitude of the prefactor multiplying ∆o in the pseudospin basis is generally less than one, implying the Tc for the odd-parity state will be suppressed relative to that of the even-parity state. Furthermore, notice that this magnitude becomes one when 1 k = 2 k = 0. In this limit, the Tc for the even-and odd-parity cases become degenerate, as intuitively expected in the limit in which the two sublattices are uncoupled. This illustrates again the importance of having the spin-orbit energy scales larger than the intersublattice coupling to reveal the physics of local inversion-symmetry breaking. 3.2.2. Ginzburg-Landau description of field-induced even-to odd-parity transitions. We can phenomenologically study the B -T phase diagram by introducing the vector potential A and associated magnetic field B = ∇ × A to the free-energy density introduced in Equations 8 and 9. The magnetic field couples, on the one hand, directly via a Pauli-limiting term, here only to the even spin-singlet component. On the other hand, the vector potential enters through minimal coupling to the orbital part, such that the full free-energy density for a single layer reads Here, D = [-i ∇ + 2eA/c] is the in-plane component of the covariant derivative, χ n the normal-state spin susceptibility, and d a coupling constant. While only the even inplane component is directly paramagnetically limited, both solutions are limited through the parity mixing within the plane. Finally, for a field B ẑ, the magnetic field reduces the critical temperature linearly through orbital effects. The resulting phase diagram with a field-induced first-order transition is shown in Figure ]. Without the linear coupling between ηe and ηo in each layer, the system can gain energy for b3 > 0 by entering a TRS-breaking state (ηe, ±iηo) right at Tc. The physical reason for such a solution is that the system can gain condensation energy by avoiding gap nodes. As a consequence, the first-order line is split up into two second-order transitions, a generic feature observed, for example, in UPt3 with n ∈ Z and φ ∈ [0, 2π). However, such a solution can become stable only at T * < Tc and does not remove the first-order transition. Magnetic fields applied in plane to mirror-symmetry-broken superconductors, such as CeRhSi3 (9), the LAO/STO interface For this purpose, we work with a Ginzburg-Landau description and restrict ourselves to the case of thin layers and ignore the in-plane modulations of the vector potential. Furthermore, we consider a single order parameter Ψ(r, j) = ηe,j(r) = ηj(r), as the additional spin-triplet component considered for out-of-plane fields is now also Pauli limited and hence, not favorable. Again, we start from a single layer for an in-plane field B ⊥ ẑ. In analogy to the Rashba ASOC, there is a Lifshitz invariant in the free energy (88) For the individual layer with broken mirror symmetry, or equivalently in the limit J → 0, this Lifshitz invariant leads to the helical phase, with an order parameter ηj(r) = η0 exp(iqj • q max r T=T c Phase diagram for in-plane fields with a high-field complex stripe phase found with the Ginzburg-Landau free energy in Equation For finite Josephson coupling J between the layers, the alternating sign of qj leads to phase frustration, which competes with the magnetic energy gained for finite q. To see this, we make the ansatz ηj(r) = η0(e iq j •r + δe -iq j •r ) with qj = (-1) j q and η0 and δ are treated as variational parameters. After integration over the in-plane coordinate and summation over all layers, the free energy reads where we have already used the minimizing q = 2εm(ẑ × B)(1 -δ 2 )/(1 + δ 2 ). From Equation Figure Fully-gapped superconducting phases can be classified according to the ten-fold way While the topological invariants can, in principle, be calculated explicitly, for an inversion symmetric system, IH k I -1 = H -k , topological superconducting phases can also be inversion-symmetry indicated. First discussed in the context of superconductivity in Cu-doped Bi2Se3 by Fu and Berg Inversion symmetry indicators can be generalized to higher-order topological superconductivity (99, 100, 101). While first-order topology is associated through the bulk-boundary correspondence with topological surface states, higherorder topological states are connected to topological hinge and corner states, respectively. Specifically, we can define the invariant κ dD = 1 2 α (n + Γα -n - Γα ), where now, n ± Γα counts the number of occupied bands at Γα, which are even (+) and odd (-) under inversion, respectively. This indicator is a Z8 quantity in d = 3 dimensions that in addition to first-order topology with κ3D odd, can indicate second-order (κ3D = ±2) and third-order topology (κ3D = 4). In addition to topology protected by inversion symmetry, also a mirror symmetry such as present in Figure The mirror symmetric systems thus fall into a Z×Z classification in accordance with the K-theory for noninteracting systems (103). However, the classification is reduced by interactions, as shown for one-dimensional superconductors (104) and multi-layer systems (105). In the latter, the Z × Z classification is reduced to a Z × Z8 classification, indicating that the topological phases with a mirror Chern number of 8Z are fragile against interactions. This reduction of topology could be observed in the odd-parity d-wave superconducting phase for quad-layer systems, as the mirror Chern number is predicted to be νM = 8 (105). Even when no in-plane mirror symmetry exists, such as is the case in the nonsymmorphic CeRh2As2 crystal structure, a topological crystalline phase can be defined: For the glideplane invariant subspaces, in other words for kz = 0 or π, we can define a 1D invariant for the special direction kx + ky = 0, which is a strong topological index based on the K-theory classification (106). For CeRh2As2, this could result in a topologically non-trivial phase with zero-energy bound states for appropriate crystal terminations (82). 3.4.2. Spontaneous TRS breaking and Weyl superconductivity. The staggered-Rashba systems with four-fold rotation axis are not expected to break time-reversal symmetry spontaneously similar to the globally mirror-symmetry-broken systems (107). However, no such restrictions exist for systems with six-fold symmetry and, in particular, the C2-lacking hexagonal superconductors. For both SrPtAs and 4Hb-TaS2, time-reversal-symmetry breaking was indeed found upon entering the superconducting phase in μSR experiments A key ingredient to observing the novel physics of locally noncentrosymmetric superconductors is ensuring that the ASOC is larger than the intersublattice coupling. Earlier works suggested that this could be implemented by constructing appropriate heterostructures. More recently, a similar strategy has been adopted to create clean crystalline materials. In one example, Ba6Nb11S28 (41), spacer layers have successfully been added between layers of NbS2 to form an ideal quasi-two-dimensional material in which ASOC is enhanced. Another approach is to generate ASOC through internal degrees of freedom with opposite inversion symmetry. An example in this case is monolayer WTe2, in which a large ASOC is generated by coupling Te p and W d-orbitals (110) which accounts for the large observed in-plane upper critical field. Another strategy to enhance the ASOC is to exploit nonsymmorphic space groups. Indeed, such space groups even allow for new aspects of locally noncentrosymmetric superconductors to be revealed. As illustrated in Figure Apart from a vanishing intersublattice coupling, the nonsymmorphic space groups result in unusual properties in the Bloch wave functions. In particular, the space-group symmetries cause a Möbius structure in the Brillouin zone, in the sense that the Bloch wave functions show a 4π periodicity, instead of the usual 2π periodicity. As a consequence, the topological phases of insulators/semiconductors/superconductors are enriched (106), as discussed for CeRh2As2 in Sec. 3.4.1 as well as for UPt3 One final promising direction is the novel role of spin-fluctuations in locally noncentrosymmetric crystals in stabilizing unconventional superconducting states. One material that illustrates this is nonsymmorphic Sr2IrO4, where intersublattice spin-singlet superconductivity is suppressed by the ASOC Fischer et al. www.annualreviews.org • Locally Noncentrosymmetric Superconductors Fischer et al. Fischer et al. This property implicitly assumes that a MCBB pseudospin basis can be found www.annualreviews.org • Locally Noncentrosymmetric Superconductors Fischer et al. Fischer et al. 