We derive an analytical model for the power transfer in a magnetoelectric film bulk acoustic resonator consisting of a piezoelectric-magnetostrictive bilayer. The model describes the dynamic magnetostrictive influence on the elastodynamics via an effective frequency-dependent stiffness constant. This allows for the calculation of both the magnetic and elastic power absorption in the resonator as well as of its energy efficiency when such a resonator is considered as a magnetic transducer. The model is then applied to example systems consisting of piezoelectric ScAlN and magnetostrictive CoFeB, Ni, or Terfenol-D layers. In recent years, there has been an increasing interest in magnetoelectric transducers that efficiently convert electrical signals to magnetic excitations and vice versa. Especially in the emerging field of magnonics, 1-4 which uses spin waves as information carriers, magnetoelectric transducers are thought to be critical elements to enable ultralow-power data processing. In addition, SAW devices are difficult to scale to nm dimensions, which are required for scaled spintronic applications. In this work, we present a theory that describes the magnetoelastic coupling and the power flow in a piezoelectric-magnetostrictive thin bilayer FBAR at concurring mechanical and magnetic resonances. Analytical expressions for both the elastic and magnetic power losses as well as the power transfer into the magnetic domain allow for a discussion of the transducer efficiency. Finally, a case study illustrates the influence of the material and dimensional parameters on the transducer performance. The studied structure consists of a piezoelectric-magnetostrictive bilayer with thickness d + t, as depicted in Fig. There are several different configurations for the direction of magnetization and applied electric field. Some configurations give only weak second order coupling between the elastic and magnetic domain, whereas others have strong first order coupling. In this paper, we study the case where the electric field is applied laterally along the x-direction parallel to the static magnetization, as illustrated in Fig. FIG. In this section, the differential equations describing the dynamics inside the piezoelectric and magnetostrictive medium are derived. Subsequently, the boundary conditions are specified and an overall solution of the boundary value problem is presented. This solution will be used to calculate the magnetic and elastic power absorption as well as the transducer efficiency in the following sections. The constitutive relations in the piezoelectric medium are given by Here, σ ij is the stress tensor and c E ijkl the stiffness tensor under constant electric field. S ij is the strain tensor and e kij the piezoelectric coefficient tensor (with unit C/m 2 ). E i is the electric field, D i the electric displacement, and ε S ij the permittivity tensor under constant strain. For a lateral electric field in the x-direction and a piezoelectric medium with tetragonal or hexagonal crystal symmetry (e.g., ScAlN used in the case study), the piezoelectrically induced displacement is parallel to the electric field direction and thus also along the xdirection. with c E 55 the shear stiffness constant under constant electric field, e 15 the piezoelectric coupling constant, and E x the applied electric field. In the following, the indices will be omitted and replaced by the superscript p for variables in the piezoelectric and m for variables in the magnetostrictive medium. The elastodynamic equation of motion for the piezoelectric layer is then given by with ρ p the mass density of the piezoelectric medium, u p ≡ u x the displacement, and f p el the elastic body force given by Substituting this expression into the equation of motion in Eq. ( with phase velocity v p = c p ρ p and dispersion relation ω = v p k. Mechanical losses in the piezoelectric medium can be incorporated by a complex stiffness constant c p = c p r + ic p i . The real part of the stiffness constant determines the wavelength of the acoustic wave and its dispersion relation, whereas the complex part describes the its damping. For acoustic excitations, especially in FBARs, the imaginary part is typically several orders of magnitude lower than the real part. When losses are considered, the wavenumber becomes a complex quantity and is then given by As a result, also the phase velocity becomes complex and can be written as v p = v p r + iv p i . The root of a complex number is given by with r the modulus of the complex number. Then, with c p i c p r , the effective complex wavenumber can be rewritten as with In a magnetostrictive layer, there is an additional magnetoelastic body force f mel in addition to the elastic body force f m el . Hence, the elastodynamic equation of motion inside the magnetostrictive layer becomes As above, the elastic body force is given by with c m 0 the stiffness constant of the magnetostrictive material in absence of magnetoelastic coupling. The magnetoelastic body force is given by (see appendix A) Here, B 1 and B 2 are the magnetoelastic coupling constants of the medium and M S is the saturation magnetization. Considering only nonzero magnetization gradients along the film thickness in the z-direction, i.e. only ∂m ∂z = 0, leads to Furthermore, in the linear magnetic regime, i.e. for M y , M z M S and M x ≈ M S , second order terms in the magnetization can be neglected. This results in with B ≡ B 2 . Assuming that the magnetostrictive layer is much thinner than the acoustic wavelength, the linearized Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert (LLG) equation can be used to express the dynamic magnetization in the magnetostrictive layer at angular frequency ω as a function of the shear strain (see appendix B) Here, ω y = ω 0 + iωα and ω z = ω 0 + ω M + iωα, with ω 0 = μγH 0 and ω M = μγM S . γ is the gyromagnetic ratio, α is the Gilbert damping parameter, μ the permeability, and M S the saturation magnetization of the magnetostrictive material. H 0 is the external applied magnetic field. Substituting this into the magnetoelastic body force leads to Substituting the body forces, i.e. Eqs. ( with the phase velocity v m = c m t ρ m and an effective stiffness of While the intrinsic mechanical stiffness constant c m 0 is frequency independent, the magnetic contribution c m B is complex and frequency dependent. Moreover, Eq. (22) indicates that c m B has the same frequency response as the dynamic magnetic susceptibility. Thus, the magnetic contribution to the effective stiffness allows for the treatment of the magnetostrictive system as a regular lossy elastic medium with a complex and frequency dependent stiffness. To understand the additional magnetic loss mechanism in more detail, the complex effective stiffness can be explicitly divided into real and imaginary parts as c m ≡ c m r + ic m i . Assuming weak magnetic Gilbert damping, i.e. α 1, the real and imaginary part of the effective stiffness become respectively (see appendix B) and with ω m res = √ ω y ω z = ω 0 (ω 0 + ω M ) the magnetic resonance frequency. For "conventional" ferromagnetic materials (e.g. transition metals or ferrites), the magnetic contribution c m B to the stiffness is typically much smaller than c m 0 . Therefore, the real part of the magnetic contribution can be neglected, and c m r ≈ c m 0 . Similarly, the modulus of the effective stiffness can be approximated by Furthermore, similar to the imaginary part of the dynamic magnetic susceptibility, also the imaginary part of the stiffness c m i reaches its maximum at the magnetic resonance frequency ω m r . This maximum is given by Analogous to a lossy piezoelectric medium, the complex stiffness of the magnetostrictive medium also results in complex wavenumbers given by with and C. Solution of the boundary value problem As shown above, the dynamic response of the displacement is described by wave equations in both the piezoelectric and magnetostrictive layers. Hence, a wave ansatz can be used in both layers as a solution to the equations of motion ( Following Eq. (3), the total stress in the piezoelectric layer then becomes = ic p t k p A 1 e ik p z -A 2 e -ik p z -eE . Inside the magnetostrictive layer, the displacement and strain ansatzes are given by Analogous to the total body force, the total stress in the magnetostrictive layer has both elastic and magnetoelastic contributions. The magnetoelastic stress tensor is derived in Appendix A. Considering both contributions, the total stress becomes The boundary conditions impose zero stress at the top surface, continuity of displacement and stress at the interface between the piezoelectric and magnetostrictive layers, and zero stress at the bottom surface, i.e. These four conditions can be used to find expressions for the four constants A 1 to A 4 . Inserting these expressions into Eqs. ( whereas in the magnetostrictive layer, the strain is given by Equation ( with the strain denominator D(ω) given by Note that the strain in both layers is a complex number since both the stiffness and wavenumber are complex quantities in this model. The strain in the magnetostrictive layer results in a dynamic magnetoelastic field, which in turn induces magnetization dynamics. Hence, a part of the total input energy is transferred into the magnetic domain. The power transfer density into the magnetic system, originating from the magnetoelastic field, is given by Considering the magnetization as in Eq. ( The power density can again be separated into real and imaginary parts, i.e. p(z) ≡ p r (z) + ip i (z), in an analogous way as the effective magnetostrictive stiffness. The power absorption corresponds to the real part of the power density whereas the reactive power oscillation corresponds to the imaginary part of the power density. The total power absorption is obtained by integrating the real part of the power density over the magnetic volume. The power per unit area then becomes Using Eq. ( Note that this expression has a strong frequency dependence because of the resonant behavior of both the magnetic and elastic systems. The frequency behavior of the magnetic system is captured in the imaginary part of the stiffness constant, c m i (ω), whereas the frequency behavior of the elastic system is contained in the strain magnitude factor S m k (ω), defined in Eq. (44). At ferromagnetic resonance, the power absorption per unit area is given by Equation ( The maximum power transfer into the magnetic domain is achieved when the elastic resonance coincides with the ferromagnetic resonance, i.e. when both c m i (ω) and S m k (ω) peak at the same frequency. However, it is difficult to tune the elastic resonance frequency without changing the dimensions of the structure. By contrast, the magnetic resonance frequency can be easily tuned by applying an external magnetic field H 0 . In the following, we derive an approximate expression for the external field to achieve concurring resonances of both the elastic and magnetic systems. This expression can e.g. be used to devise approximate optimal conditions for experimental realizations. Without losses, the strain denominator D(ω) in Eq. ( For a thin magnetostrictive layer, i.e. for t d, the solution of this equation, i.e. the elastic resonance frequency, can be approximated by with n the mode number. This corresponds to the mechanical resonance frequency of a single piezoelectric layer of thickness d + t. Maximal power transfer can be obtained by tuning the ferromagnetic resonance frequency via the external magnetic field to coincide with the mechanical resonance frequency. The condition for concurrent resonance is The (real) magnetic field that leads to a ferromagnetic resonance frequency satisfying Eq. ( Hence, from this expression, it can be seen that bilayers consisting of magnetostrictive materials with larger saturation magnetization and piezoelectric materials with larger group velocities require a larger external applied magnetic field to obtain concurrent mechanical and ferromagnetic resonances. In the previous section, we have derived expressions for the power transfer due to excitation of magnetization dynamics inside the magnetostrictive layer induced by the dynamic displacement. Below, we address the viscoelastic power loss inside the resonator. The generic expression for the elastic power density is In the geometry discussed in this work, only the shear strain S xz = S zx contributes to the mechanical energy in the resonator. For systems with tetragonal or hexagonal crystal symmetry, the power density contained in the shear strain becomes Similar to the magnetic power, the power per unit area is obtained by integration over the resonator thickness, leading to Here, the approximation in Eq. ( As for the magnetic power absorption, the elastic power loss depends on the square of the applied electric field and the piezoelectric constant, i.e. P el ∝ e 2 E 2 . Since other parameters also influence the strain magnitude, again, no simple relations with the power loss can be established. In this case, numerical calculations are required, e.g. to better understand the influence of material parameters or resonator thickness. When the resonator is used as a magnetoelectric transducer to excite magnetization dynamics from electric signals, the power transfer efficiency in the magnetic domain is a key performance parameter. The total power delivered to the system can be partitioned into three main parts: the reactive power, the elastic power loss, and the magnetic power absorption. The reactive part corresponds to the power that resonantly oscillates inside the transducer. This power is not lost and needs to be supplied only during the transient regime of the resonator before a steady state is reached. By contrast, the elastic and magnetic power losses can be used to describe a transducer efficiency. In an ideal magnetoelectric transducer, losses occur mainly in the magnetic subsystem, while elastic losses can be considered as parasitic and need to be minimized. Note that the elastic losses mainly occur in the piezoelectric medium as its volume is much larger than the magnetostrictive volume. By comparing mechanical and magnetic losses, the magnetic transduction efficiency of the magnetoelectric resonator can be determined with P m and P el given by Eqs. ( The efficiency represents the fraction of the active power in the resonator that is converted into magnetic excitations. Note that this efficiency is different from the absolute power dissipated in the magnetic subsystem. Certain parameters affect both the efficiency as well as the total magnetically dissipated power and therefore, the efficiency can increase in certain cases whereas the total magnetically dissipated power decreases. This will be discussed further in the case study below. Equations ( As an illustration of the above model and to gain more quantitative insight in the expected behavior of magnetoelectric resonators, we study in this section a concrete system based on hexagonal ScAlN as the base piezoelectric material. As mentioned above, the magnetic resonance frequency can be tuned by an external magnetic field H 0 (see Eq. ( The effective stiffness c m of the magnetostrictive layer depends solely on material parameters and is not influenced by device dimensions. Nevertheless, the dimensional parameters influence the strain amplitude and the volume integration and thus modify power transfers and transducer efficiency. To illustrate this dimensional influence, the magnetic and elastic power loss per area and squared electric field, i.e. P m /E 2 and P el /E 2 , have been calculated for the three considered materials (CoFeB, Ni, and Terfenol-D) as a function of magnetostrictive layer thickness t. The results are shown in Figs. The data show that, for all materials, the elastic power gradually decreases with magnetostrictive layer thickness, whereas the magnetic power possesses a maximum at a finite thickness. This general behavior can be explained by the variation of the strain amplitude near resonance since strain plays a key role in both the magnetic as well as the elastic power loss. At resonance, the strain amplitude peaks when the real part of the strain denominator becomes zero, i.e. D r (ω r ) = 0, and it becomes limited only by the imaginary part of the strain denominator, which reflects the losses in the system, i.e. S(ω r ) ∝ 1/D i . In a magnetoelastic resonator, both elastic and magnetic losses contribute to the imaginary part of the strain denominator. When magnetic losses are low, the imaginary part of the strain denominator as well as the strain amplitude are determined by elastic losses. This means that the strain amplitude is mainly determined by the properties of the piezoelectric layer and not by the magnetic material properties. By contrast, for high magnetic losses, the strain denominator and the strain amplitude are strongly influenced by the magnetic layer properties. For thin magnetostrictive layers, the magnetic power loss in the resonator is low compared to the elastic power loss due to a small magnetic volume. This means that the magnetic con- tribution to the strain denominator can be neglected in this case, resulting in large strain amplitudes and large elastic power absorption. For t = 0, the elastic power dissipation reaches a maximum as the mechanical resonance is not perturbed by an additional magnetostrictive layer. When the magnetic layer thickness increases, the magnetostrictive (magnetic) volume increases and thus also the magnetic power absorption. When the magnetic power reaches a similar magnitude as the elastic power loss, the magnetic contribution to the strain denominator cannot be neglected anymore, which results in even stronger decreasing strain amplitude and therefore in decreasing elastic power. At one point, this decreasing strain amplitude also affects the magnetic power and offsets the effect of an increasing magnetic volume, leading to a peak in the magnetic power at finite t. A comparison of the results for the three materials suggests that the peak occurs at smaller thicknesses for stronger magnetostriction. The difference between the materials can be understood from the imaginary part of the effective stiffness c m i that determines how much power can be absorbed for a given strain amplitude. Fig. Figure Based on the above discussion, we can define a figure of merit (FoM) for the magnetostrictive materials in a magnetoelectric resonator. According to Eq. ( Materials with a higher FoM dissipate more magnetic power and reach higher efficiencies η for a specific magnetic layer thickness t. To illustrate this, the external magnetic field for matched ferromagnetic and elastic resonances, the resonance frequency, the magnetic and elastic power absorption, the magnetic transduction efficiency, and the FoM have been calculated for 20 nm thick CoFeB, Ni, and Terfenol-D layers. The results are summarized in Tab. II. From this table, it can be seen that the resonance frequency for the three materials is roughly the same and the magnetic transduction efficiency correlates positively with the FoM. The highest efficiency and FoM is obtained for Terfenol-D because of its high magnetoelastic coupling constant. The FoM gives insight into the efficiency but does not explain the absolute power absorption. To better understand the absolute power absorption, the influence of the material parameters needs to be further investigated. This will be the topic of the following sections. Between the different magnetostrictive materials (see Tab. I), the mass density ρ m , the stiffness c m , and the saturation magnetization M S only differ by a rather small factor < 3 and thus have minor influence on relative power absorption of the different materials. On the other hand, the magnetoelastic coupling constant B and the Gilbert damping constant α can differ by more than an order of amplitude and are thus expected to have a considerable influence on power absorption. Hence, we will focus on these parameters in the following. Beyond the influence of material parameters, we note that also the total resonator thickness (dominated by the piezoelectric thickness) plays a role. A thinner resonator leads to a higher mechanical resonance frequency as well as to, due to frequency matching, higher H 0 . This strongly affects the magnetic power absorption (see Eq. ( In this section, we investigate the effect of the magnetoelastic coupling constant B on the power absorption in the resonator. In this and the following section, the magnetic layer thickness has been set to 20 nm. To isolate the effect of B, all other materials parameters have been fixed to those of CoFeB. We note again that in all cases, Q = 1000. Figure At higher B values between 2 and about 20 MJ/m 3 , the magnetic and elastic power losses reach similar magnitudes (yellow shaded region in Fig. In the third regime for B 20 MJ/m 3 shaded region in Fig. In addition to the decoupling between the layers, high B values also lead to a splitting of the resonance frequency, as shown by Fig. In the above discussion, we have assumed CoFeB material parameters throughout, except for B, which was varied. To see whether the above behavior is universal or depends critically on material properties, we have also calculated the dependence of magnetic (P m ) and elastic (P el ) power losses as well as of the magnetic transduction efficiency η on B for Ni and Terfenol-D material properties. The results are shown in Fig. Different material parameters mainly lead to two effects: (i) a moderate shift of the B onset values of the different regimes, with Terfenol-D requiring slightly higher B to reach regimes 2 and 3; and (ii) an increased depth of the minimum of magnetic and elastic power loss at the onset of regime 3 for Terfenol-D. This indicates that the above dependence of magnetic and elastic power losses on B is rather generic and does not depend critically on material parameters. It is worth noting that the maximum magnetic transduction efficiency η is reached for similar B values for all three sets of material parameters. However, some small differences exist and Ni material parameters (especially the low M S ) can compensate (partially) for the lower B with respect to Terfenol-D (see also Tab II). We now turn to the impact of the Gilbert damping constant α of the magnetostrictive material. As in beginning of the previous section, we fix all material parameters to those of CoFeB, except for α, which is varied. In general, α has the opposite effect as that of the magnetoelastic coupling constant B, since the imaginary part of the stiffness constant is inversely proportional to α, i.e. P m ∝ c m i ∝ B 2 /α. As a consequence, the dependences of the magnetic (P m ) and elastic (P el ) power losses on α in Fig. In addition to the power loss amplitude, the magnetic damping also influences the resonance width of the system. In regime C, where the elastic losses are dominant, the strain denominator and thus the resonance width is determined by the piezoelectric layer properties, in particular by the mechanical Q-factor of the resonator in absence of magnetoelastic coupling. However, in regimes and B, the magnetic contribution cannot be neglected, and the resonance width converges to the resonance width of the magnetic system, determined by the magnetic damping constant. As in the previous section, calculations for different sets of material parameters (with the exception of α, which is varied) corresponding to CoFeB, Ni, and Terfenol-D indicate that this behavior is generic (see Fig. The results are depicted in Fig. For even larger Q-values, the magnetic and elastic power losses become similar in magnitude. In this regime, the strain amplitude is not only determined by the Q-factor since the magnetic contribution to the strain denominator cannot be neglected anymore. At the high- est Q-factors, the magnetic loss dominates the strain denominator, and the amplitude depends solely on the magnetic layer properties and not on the Q-factor anymore. As a result, in this regime, further increasing Q does not influence the strain anymore, and the magnetic power loss is saturating. On the other hand, the elastic power loss still depends on the Q-factor via the complex stiffness and thus continues to decrease with increasing Q. This behavior explains the peaking elastic power loss vs. Q. As above, the behavior is generic and does not qualitatively depend on the magnetostrictive material properties. The resulting magnetic transduction efficiency η is depicted as a function of Q in Fig. Since the magnetic power absorption increases rapidly with Q whereas the elastic power absorption increases more slowly or even decreases, the efficiency increases with Q and subsequently saturates at unity. Note that η can reach high values for Ni and Terfenol-D even at comparatively low Q-factors in the range of 100 or even below. In this work, we have derived an analytical model for the power transfer in a magnetoelectric resonator consisting of a piezoelectric-magnetostrictive bilayer. The differential equations describing the dynamics for both layers were derived and solved for free boundary conditions. The general solution was presented and utilized to derive expressions for both the magnetic and elastic power absorption inside the device as a function of frequency, device dimensions, and material parameters. Based on the power absorption expressions, the magnetic transduction efficiency was determined. The magnetic power absorption strongly depended on the complex part of the effective stiffness that captures the influence of the dynamic magnetization on the elastodynamics. Besides the effective stiffness, both the magnetic and elastic power absorption were found to strongly depend on the strain inside the device. In the second part of the work, a case study based on an example bilayer structure (200 nm ScAlN, 20 nm CoFeB, Ni, or Terfenol-D) has been used to illustrate the influence of dimensional and material parameters on magnetic and elastic power losses and the transducer efficiency. Different regimes could be identified that depend on the ratio between the magnetic and elastic power losses. For dominant elastic losses, it was found that the piezoelectric layer parameters determine the transducer efficiency, mainly via the mechanical Q-factor of the resonator. By contrast, when the magnetic losses were dominant, the magnetostrictive and magnetic material parameters (B, α) determined the power losses and the transducer efficiency. The model also allowed for the definition of a figure of merit for magnetostrictive materials that was correlated to the magnetic transduction efficiency. The results further indicated that large magnetic transduction efficiencies close to 100% can be obtained in such magnetoelectric transducers when Q-factors on the order of 1000 can be reached. Nonetheless, efficiencies of several 10% can already be obtained even for Q ∼ 10 to 100 for 20 nm thick Ni or Terfenol-D magnetostrictive layers. Even higher efficiencies can be achieved for thicker films. By comparison, magnetic transduction efficiencies are lower for CoFeB due to a combination of weak magnetostriction and large saturation magnetization, despite low Gilbert damping. Together with the favorable scaling behavior, i.e. an area-independent efficiency (as long as edge and corner effects can be neglected), the high calculated efficiencies confirm the promise of magnetoelectric resonators as magnetic transducers to excite ferromagnetic resonance or spin waves In this appendix, the amplitude of the magnetization dynamics is determined as a function of the strain amplitude. The action of the strain onto the magnetization is captured by the magnetoelastic field, which is given by For the considered geometry and configuration, only the shear strain S xz = S zx is present, which results in Below, the subscripts are removed to improve readability, i.e. B 2 ≡ B and S m zx ≡ S m . The other contributions to the effective magnetic field include the exchange field, the demagnetization field, and the external applied field H 0 . However, assuming that the magnetic layer is much thinner than the acoustic wavelength, i.e. k m t 1, there is only a weak strain gradient along the magnetic layer thickness. Hence, the magnetic excitations can be considered as a uniform along the magnetostrictive film thickness with very weak magnetization variation in this direction. This allows for the neglection of the exchange interaction. The demagnetization field can then be approximated by Adding the external, demagnetization, and magnetoelastic fields results in the effective field These equations can be rewritten to find the relations between the magnetization components and the strain S m (B8) with ω y = ω 0 + iωα and ω z = ω 0 + ω M + iωα. Assuming that α 1, we can write with ω 2 r = ω 0 (ω 0 + ω M ) the magnetic resonance frequency. Note that the dynamic magnetization has the same weak thickness variation as the strain S m (z).