We present a micro-mechanical terahertz (THz) detector fabricated on a silicon on insulator (SOI) substrate and operating at room-temperature. The device is based on a U-shaped cantilever of micrometric size, on top of which two aluminum half-wave dipole antennas are deposited. This produces an absorption extending over the ∼ 2 -3.5THz frequency range. Due to the different thermal expansion coefficients of silicon and aluminum, the absorbed radiation induces a deformation of the cantilever, which is read out optically using a 1.5 μm laser diode. By illuminating the detector with an amplitude modulated, 2.5 THz quantum cascade laser, we obtain, at room-temperature and atmospheric pressure, a responsivity of ∼1.5 × 10 8 pm W -1 for the fundamental mechanical bending mode of the cantilever. This yields an noise-equivalent-power of 20 nW/ √ Hz at 2.5THz. Finally, the low mechanical quality factor of the mode grants a broad frequency response of approximately 150kHz bandwidth, with a response time of ∼2.5 μs. In the THz range, the fastest room-temperature commercial detectors are Schottky diodes, providing bandwidths of several tens of GHz and noise-equivalent-powers (NEPs) < 100pW/Hz 1/2 up to ∼ 2 5THz. 1 At higher THz frequencies the only available options are pyroelectric detectors or thermopiles, featuring NEPs of 1 -10nW/Hz 1/2 , and response times of ∼ 10 -100ms. 2, In 2008, the first THz imaging based on a thermal MEMS array was demonstrated. As we shall see below, the sensitivity of the MEMS detector Let's consider an incident THz beam, with a power modulated at a frequency ω: P T Hz = P 0 T Hz (1 + cos(ωt))/2. The photo-thermal responsivity of the device (in units of m/W) associated to the n-th mechanical mode of the cantilever can be written as: with In Eq. 1, n is the mode number, z(ω) is the cantilever outof-plane displacement, and F ph is the photo-thermal force per unit incident power, P 0 T Hz , induced by the amplitude modulated THz wave. Y (ω) takes into account the process of heat diffusion through the cantilever, and behaves as a 1st order low-pass filter with a characteristic time constant τ. Finally, H n (ω) is the transfer function of the mechanical mode with resonant frequency ω n and effective mass m e f f ,n . Since the structure cannot be considered as a simple beam, it is not trivial to theoretically derive τ. However, from a transient simulation using CST Microwave Studio ® , the time needed to reach steady state is found to be of approximately 15 μs. Under ideal operation, the noise floor of the THz optomechanical detector is limited by the thermal, or brownian motion, of the cantilever at the operating temperature T . The noise power spectral density (PSD) of the n th mechanical mode (in units of m 2 /Hz) is given by: 19 where k B is the Boltzmann constant. From Eqs.1-4, we finally obtain the expression of the NEP: From Eqs.1 and 5 we find that exploiting a cantilever with a high mechanical Q-factor leads to an increase of responsivity and a reduction of P NEP . At the same time, a high Q-factor will entail, through the mechanical mode transfer function (Eq.3), a detector's frequency response with a narrow band centered around ω n , generally resulting in significant signal distortion (of e.g. a THz wave with an arbitrarily time-varying envelope), which can be unpractical for applications. A commercial THz time domain spectroscopy (TDS) system in transmission geometry was used to quantify the absorption of the double-dipole antenna. To this end, sets of square matrices of 2.5mm side were fabricated by repeating periodically the detector element of Fig. the antenna effective area (A e f f ) and the surface (S = p 2 ) of the unit cell of the matrix of detectors. In the inset of Fig. The measured thermal noise PSD of the MEMS detector (QCL switched off) is displayed in Fig. The orange solid-line in Fig. To measure the detector's frequency response, the QCL beam was collimated and focused on the cantilever using two parabolic mirrors and a hemispherical Si-lens, of 0.65 numerical aperture, in contact with the back of the substrate (Fig. The experimental responsivity spectrum in units of V/W and pm/W (using the calibration of the thermal noise), measured with a modulated incident power of 100μW , is shown in Fig. We note that the relatively low Q-factor grants a a rather broad response function, with a ratio of 2.9 between the peak responsivity ( f 1 = 101 kHz) and the value at dc (see also Fig. In the inset of Fig. In conclusion, we have designed and characterised a micromechanical THz detector, covering the 2-3.5THz spectral range, and fabricated on a SOI platform. The device exploits the thermal excitation of the fundamental mechanical mode of a U-shaped Si cantilever, on top of which are deposited two half-dipole antennas resonating at 3THz. The measured P NEP is in the 10-30 nW/Hz 1/2 range, i.e. comparable to Ref. [15] and to that of commercially available thermopiles and pyroelectric detectors with ms response times. Compared to Ref. [15], thanks to a significantly lower mechanical quality factor (6 vs 100), we obtain a broader frequency response, extending from dc to 150kHz, with a peak at ∼ 100kHz, and a response time of ∼ 2.5μs. Reducing further the Q-factor and/or increasing the resonant mode frequency would allow an even flatter response. Future work will focus on the demonstration of detectors based on shorter antennas, for operation in the 4-7 THz range. Secondly, we plan to take advantage of the fabrication capabilities offered by the chosen SOI-photonic platform to implement an integrated photonic readout. 