Strongly charged head-to-head (H2H) domain walls (DWs) that are purposely engineered along the [110] crystallographic orientation into ferroelectric BaTiO 3 single crystals have been proposed as novel 2-dimensional electron gases (2DEGs) due to their significant domain wall conductivity (DWC). Here, we quantify these 2DEG properties through dedicated Hall-transport measurements in van-der-Pauw 4-point geometry at room temperature, finding the electron mobility to reach around 400 cm 2 (Vs) -1 , while the 2-dimensional charge density amounts to 7×10 3 cm -2 . We underline the necessity to take account of thermal and geometrical-misalignment offset voltages by evaluating the Hall resistance under magnetic-field sweeps, since otherwise dramatic errors of several hundred percent in the derived mobility and charge density values can occur. Apart from the specific characterization of the conducting BaTiO 3 DW, we propose the method as an easy and fast way to quantitatively characterize ferroic conducting DWs, complementary to previously proposed scanning-probe-based Hall-potential analyses. Pauw method, barium titanate, 2-dimensional electron gas Within the vast flurry of interest in various 2dimensional (2D) electronic systems, which are key elements of contemporary and upcoming nanoelectronic device concepts, domain walls (DWs) in ferroelectrics as potentially versatile functional elements have experienced concerted research activities for the recent decade, which is documented with an increasing number of reviews. Up to now, the determination of quantitative transport parameters, such as carrier densities and mobilities, has been realized only in a few exemplary cases. In this context, especially the analysis of the Hall-effect of DWconfined charge carriers in the improper ferroelectrics YbMnO 3 and ErMnO 3 was shown to be an invaluable tool, as reported in the two pioneering works of Campbell et al. In the present study, an undoped (110) BaTiO 3 crystal, 5×5×0.5 mm 3 in size, underwent a so-called frustrative-poling process -for more details refer to the Supplementary Material -resulting in planar head-to-head (H2H) and tail-to-tail (T2T) 90 ̊DWs, As a precondition for any electrical characterization, four 8-nm-thick chromium electrodes were vapor-deposited under high-vacuum conditions (base pressure: 10 -6 mbar) using a shadow mask. The electrode geometries and positions with respect to the crystal and DW orientations are shown in fig. Prior to any magnetic-field-dependent investigations, the conductivity of the H2H domain wall was investigated by acquiring currentvoltage characteristics along both diagonal directions, i.e., between contacts 2-3 and 1-4 in the ±50-V range [cf. sketch in fig. As a first rough test for the existence of a Lorentz force (and thus any Hall effect at all), the angle dependence of a presumed Hall voltage, i.e., U 23 , was determined by rotating the DW plane by distinct angles φ in a fixed magnetic field of 400 mT. Thereby, φ denotes the angle between the B-field vector and the normal voltage and should theoretically follow a cosine function due to the vector product nature of the Lorentz force. As seen from fig. However, before we straightly continue with any further and more elaborate experimental results, let us first consider the Hall effect in its simplest form, i.e., assuming (i) the current being established by electrons as majority charge carriers (due to their superior mobility as compared to holes at the one hand and the positive bound charges at a H2H-DW requiring negative screening charges at the other hand with B being the absolute value of the magnetic field, I the current driven through the conducting layer (here: I = I 14 ), q the elementary charge, d the layer thickness in magneticfield direction (here: the DW thickness), n the three-dimensional charge carrier density, while r stands for the so-called Hall factor, which depends on the internal scattering mechanisms and lies typically between 0.5 and 2. Since the latter is not exactly known here, it is -as a common practice -assumed to be unity, For the calculation of the Hall mobility μ of the majority charge carriers, we employ the relation: There, R s is the sheet resistance of the DW, which is obtained by solving van der Pauw's equation numerically: (4) For that, R 13,42 = U 42 /I 13 and R 34,21 = U 21 /I 34 have to be determined from corresponding current injection and voltage measurements between the respective contacts [cf. fig. However, the applicability of eq. ( There, U 0 represents a current-independent thermal offset voltage, which can become significant already for small temperature differences between the contacts, while α is a geometrical factor originating from non-perfect sample and contact symmetries. The latter effect leads to a current-dependent misalignment voltage α • I • R s . Measuring U m under forward and reverse current, makes it possible to get rid of that constant thermal offset according to while the misalignment problem is typically circumvented by acquiring U * at two opposite B-fields yielding: However, an even more elaborate correction scheme, as discussed by Werner, 13 can be realized by sweeping the magnetic field, in order to fit U H (B), or analogously, R h (B) linearly and extract n 2D from the slope b = (q •n 2D ) -1 according to a repositioned eq. ( Taking the above theoretical considerations into account, we acquired the voltage U 23 at six different B-field strengths between 330 mT and 420 mT for both directions of the mea-suring current and the magnetic field, respectively, resulting in four times six points of raw data. The respective Hall resistances (R h = U m /I 14 = U 23 /I 14 in this case) are plotted in fig. From the slope of this characteristic curve, a 2-dimensional charge carrier density n 2D of (7.2±1.4)×10 3 cm -2 can be derived [eq. ( Finally, we provide an estimation of the 3dimensional Hall charge carrier density n. By assuming the charged-domain-wall width d to be in the range DWs exhibiting sharp DWs down to seven unit cells -are assumed as the lower limit for d, the corresponding 3D charge densities would be by a factor of 1000 higher, i.e., in the 10 12 cm -3 range. However, this issue remains speculative and the quantitative values for μ and n 2D are the virtually robust output of the present study. In summary, an elaborate approach to quantify electrical transport parameters of conducting ferroic domain walls that penetrate the whole crystal volume, based on Hall-effect measurements has been demonstrated. In particular, the well-established van-der-Pauw technique was adopted in the way that domain walls were electrically contacted by four vapordeposited electrodes, two on each crystal surface. The Hall resistance R h as a function of the magnetic field B was recorded exemplarily as a proof-of concept in a straight highly conductive 90 ̊-head-to-head domain wall in (110) BaTiO 3 . The charge carrier (electron) density in two dimensions n 2D was calculated from the slope of the offset-corrected R h -vs.-B characteristics. Moreover, the sheet resistance R s was determined according to van der Pauw's classical technique, and in turn the Hall mobility μ derived, which appeared to be competitive with other 2D electronic systems. After having shown the feasibility of the technique for this single model DW in BaTiO 3 , the methodology should be extended to other model ferroelectric materials with stable CDWs such as is LiNbO 3 . Notably, the present approach allows for correcting both temperature and size effects of the electrodes occurring herein. As an outlook beyond the present work, technical refinements employing (i) lithographically defined electrode structures, which potentially provide higher compliance with part of the vander-Pauw restrictions on the one hand, and (ii) a further in-depth analysis of the whole resistivity tensor of the DW at zero field and in higher magnetic fields of several Tesla on the other hand, will be in focus for the future. Thereby, special attention should be laid on the the magnetoresistive (MR) response, since first test experiments showed a huge MR in 1-4 direction (SI-fig. Acknowledgement This work was financially support by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) through the joint DFG-ANR project TOP-ELEC (EN 434/41-1 and ANR-18-CE92-0052-1), the CRC 1415 (ID: 417590517), the FOR 5044 (ID: 426703838, http://www.for5044.de), as well as through the Würzburg-Dresden Cluster of Excellence on "Complexity and Topology in Quantum Matter" -ct.qmat (EXC 2147, ID: 39085490). Moreover, we acknowledge the support from the Czech Grant Agency (GACR project No. 20 For convenience, the Supporting Information is appended directly at the end of the document in the arXiv preprint version, including a more detailed decsription of the material and the methodology, further electrical-characterization data, as well as considerations on error propagation. 2 and 3. The measurement times and sampling rates were the same as used above when determining the sheet resistance. An electromagnet, able to create magnetic fields ranging up to 420 mT, was used with the sample mounted onto a rotational table, allowing to cover an angular range between 0 ̊-180 ̊. Note that the measurements were -rather unusual for Hall effect experiments -conducted by applying a voltage between two of the electrodes (1, 4), resulting in a current. A voltage source was used instead of a current source to ensure the samples' stability by not exceeding certain critical voltage thresholds that might initiate DW motion. The current direction was changed by changing the sign of the applied voltage. Table 