Room temperature superconductivity is a dream that mankind has been chasing for a century. In recent years, the synthesis of H3S, LaH10 and C-S-H system has gradually made this dream a reality. But the extreme pressures required for the metallization of hydrogen-based superconductors limit their applications. In this work, we design a series of high temperature superconductors that can be stable at moderate pressures by incorporating heavy rare earth elements Yb/Lu into sodalitelike clathrate hydrides. In particular, the critical temperatures of Y3LuH24, YLuH12 and YLu3H24 are 283 K, 275 K and 288 K, respectively, which are close to or have reached room temperature, and the required pressure for stabilization of these hydrides is about 120 GPa which is significantly lower than that of reported room temperature superconductors. Our work provides an effective method for the rational design of low-pressure stabilized hydrogen-based superconductors with high-Tc and will stimulate further experimental exploration. Since H. K. Onnes observed superconductivity in Hg in 1911, room-temperature superconductivity has been a long-sought dream and a field of intensive research. E. Winger and H. B. Huntington theoretically predicted in 1935 that solid metal hydrogen can be obtained under high pressure conditions By incorporating other elements to create a "chemical pre-compression" effect on hydrogen, hydrogen-rich compounds can be metallized at much lower pressures than pure hydrogen The clathrate hydrides have attracted extensive attention due to their outstanding superconducting. Clathrate hexahydrides Im-3m-XH6 (X = Mg, Ca, Sc, Y, La, Tm, Yb, Lu) are widespread in alkaline earth and rare earth metal superhydrides. Incorporating a new element into binary hydrides to form ternary hydrides is an important way to improve the superconducting transition temperature or reduce the superconducting phase stable pressure. In 2019, Li2MgH16 with the highest Tc to date (473 K at 250 GPa), was designed by introducing extra electrons (Li element) to fill the antibonding orbital of the H2 molecular units of MgH16 The focus of hydrogen-based superconductor research is not simply the pursuit of high-temperature superconductivity or low stable pressure. A good superconductor should achieve a good balance between the pressure required for stability and the critical temperature. The next challenge is to achieve room-temperature superconductivity at significantly low pressures even ambient pressure. Recently, clathrate superhydrides (La,Y)6,10 with a maximum critical temperature Tc of 253 K has been experimental synthesized without increasing pressure So, in the present work, we chose heavy rare earth element Yb/Lu doped clathrate hexahydrides to make a step in this goal. A serial of ternary hydrides AxByH6(x+y) (A=Ca, Y, Sc, B=Yb, Lu, and A=Yb, B=Lu, x, y = 1, 2, 3) with high Tc at moderate pressure were found, in which the radii of element A is similar with element B. Among them, the critical temperatures of Y3LuH24, YLuH12 and YLu3H24 are 283 K at 120 GPa, 275 K 140 GPa and 288 K at 110 GPa, respectively, which are close to or have reached room temperature. The discovery of YLu3H24 shows that roomtemperature superconductivity is possible in hydrogen-based superconductors at moderate pressure. We first performed an extensive variable composition structure searches of ternary hydrides Ca-Lu-H, Y-Lu-H and Yb-Lu-H under high pressure. Six sodalite-like clathrate structures AxByH6(x+y) (A=Ca, Y and Yb, B=Lu, x, y = 1, 2, 3) were found in our structure searches, including Pm-3m and Fd-3m of ABH12 In order to extend the study to more ternary hydride systems, we substitute the metal elements in these six structures. The properties of clathrate structure can be further improved by choosing a suitable "pre-compressor" element. As discussed above, at least one of them is heavy rare earth element Yb/Lu, and the other element has similar radii with Yb/Lu, including K, Mg, Ca, Sr, Sc, Y, La. We calculated the phonon dispersion for all possible components in the pressure range of 50-200 GPa and finally determined that 36 sodalite-like clathrate hexahydrides can be dynamically stable in seven ternary hydride systems, including Ca-Lu-H, Ca-Yb-H, Y-Lu-H, Y-Yb-H, Sc-Lu-H, Sc-Yb-H and Yb-Lu-H (see Fig. Figure The focus of hydrogen-based superconductor research is not simply the pursuit of high-temperature superconductivity, after the realization of room-temperature superconductivity. A good superconductor should achieve a good balance between the pressure required for stability and the critical temperature. Therefore, we use a figure of merit S In addition to H, f electrons also have an important impact on superconductivity, especially in Yb-containing structures. Note that the 4f orbitals associated with the Yb atom form a set of localized bands that appear about 1 eV below the Fermi level (see Fig. In addition, YLu3H24 can exhibit 288 K room temperature superconductivity is also related to the flat band near the Fermi surface along the W-K direction, as shown in Fig In conclusion, the incorporation of heavy rare earth elements Yb/Lu is an effective method to tune the superconducting transition temperature and the required pressure for stabilization of sodalite-like clathrate hydrides. In particular, the introduction of Lu element can further improve Tc while keeping the low-pressure stability. The three most prominent compounds Y3LuH24 (283 K at 120 GPa), YLuH12 (275 K 140 GPa) and YLu3H24 (288 K at 110 GPa) exhibit room temperature superconductivity at much lower pressure than that of room temperature superconductors, such as C-S-H, YH10 and CaBeH8. The enhancement of Tc is achieved by adjusting the H-H bond length to affect the hydrogen vibrational frequency and thereby enhance the electron-phonon coupling. Achieving room-temperature superconductivity at moderate pressure of 100 GPa would represent a major breakthrough in the field of high-temperature superconductivity. High-pressure structure searches were performed using the ab initio random structure searching (AIRSS) technique Considering the results of pseudo-potential detection for Yb-H and Lu-H in previous work The Quantum-ESPRESSO package Tc can be estimated by the McMillan equation where λ and ωlog are the electron-phonon coupling constant and the logarithmic-averaged phonon frequency, respectively, and μ * is the Coulomb pseudopotential, for which we use the widely accepted range of 0.1-0. The parameter ω denotes the phonon frequency, and α 2 F(ω) is the Eliashberg spectral function where εn,k is the energy of the bare electronic Bloch state, εF is the Fermi energy, and g mn ν (k, q) is the electron-phonon matrix element. When the value of λ larger than 1.3, strong-coupling corrections begin to appear. Therefore, P. B. Allen and R. C. Dynes use two separate correction factors (f 1 and f 2 ) to describe these two effects. Then we can further obtain the Allen-Dynes-modified McMillan equation √ω n ′2 +Δ 2 (iω n ′ ) n ′ × [λ(ω n -ω n ′ ) -N F μ * ]δ(ε) (10) Table 