Magic-angle twisted bilayer graphene displays at different fillings of the four flat bands lying around the charge neutrality point a wealth of notable phases that include magnetic Chern insulators, whose magnetization is mostly of orbital nature, and contiguous superconducting domes. Such rich phase diagram is here explained through the positive interplay of Coulomb repulsion and the electron coupling to a twofold optical mode that corresponds to Kekulé distortions localized into the small AA stacked regions of the moiré supercells. A static distortion stabilizes, at any integer filling of the flat bands, valence-bond insulators that carry finite Chern number away from charge neutrality. Similarly, a dynamic distortion that resonates between the two lattice vibrations leads to resonatingvalence-bond topological insulators with built-in chiral d-wave pairs that have finite Chern number equal to the angular momentum, and thus are prone to turn superconducting upon doping away from integer filling. However, systematic theoretical studies of the lattice contribution to the phase diagram of TBLG are lacking. Atomic relaxation in magic angle twisted bilayer graphene (TBLG) is responsible The major importance of the electron-phonon coupling also emerged from Ref. Indeed, Ref. Before discussing our findings, we believe worth placing them within the general context of correlation effects in graphene. We recall that interaction strength in graphene is sizeable but yet not enough to stabilise a correlated insulator at charge neutrality That is precisely what we find within Hartree-Fock approximation. We hereafter denote such space-selective Kekulé distortion at the zone-center of the moiré Brillouin zone a static Kekulé valence bond (S-KVB) distortion. The corresponding S-KVB insulator at charge neutrality seeds the cascade of symmetry-breaking meanfield insulating states at all other integer fillings. Since the AA regions are quite far apart from each other, as testified by the tiny dispersion of the A 1 and B 1 modes in TBLG We consider two AA stacked graphene layers, and rotate around the perpendicular axis layer 1 by +θ/2 and layer 2 by -θ/2, at magic angle θ = 1.08 • . We describe the band structure through the Bistritzer-MacDonald continuum model where Q = Q a ⊕ Q b , and, in the zero-angle approximation Hereafter, the Pauli matrices τ a and σ a , a = 0, 1, 2, 3, act on the valley and sublattice indices, respectively, q i , i = 1, 2, 3, are defined in Fig. Tj (u 0 , u 1 ) e -i 2π 3 σ3 , j = 1, 2 . (3) Setting as unit length the moiré primitive lattice vector for a twist angle of 1.08 • , we fix v F = 40 meV, u 0 = 76.1 meV and u 1 = 103.1 meV. The charge density operators ρ (q + G) of each layer = 1, 2 are diagonal in sublattice and valley indices, and read, for q ∈ RBZ, and thus the Coulomb repulsion can be written as with N the number of supercells, Ω c the area of each supercell, U 11 (q) = U 22 (q) and U 12 (q) = U 21 (q) the intra-and inter-layer Fourier transforms of the interaction e 2 /r screened by the high-frequency dielectric constant ∞ = 9 of graphene, and by the presence of a dual metal gate where ω 0 1360 cm -1 is the phonon frequency, neglecting its very weak dispersion with (8) Ti (g 0 , g 1 ) are the same as in Eq. ( We perform an all-band Hartree-Fock calculation, thus embracing the full complexity of the band structure and the effects of remote bands on symmetry breaking states. Moreover, we take into account the full momentum dependence of the Fock term, which ensures robust numerical results. We start analysing the interplay between Coulomb interaction (5) and phonon-mediated attraction (6) at charge neutrality, ν = 0, where there is consensus which breaks time-reversal symmetry, T ∼ τ 1 σ 1 K with K the complex conjugation, and valley U v (1) symmetry, with generator τ 3 , but is invariant under T τ 3 . Moreover, it breaks the C 2x ∼ σ 1 twofold rotation, while is invariant under the generalised We note that the order parameter (9) commutes with the Chern number per spin σ 3 which breaks U v (1), while it is invariant under C 2x , T , and the twofold rotation In Fig. For integer fillings away from charge neutrality, the sole U v (1) symmetry-breaking static Kekulé distortion cannot stabilise mean-field insulators, due to the T C 2z protection of the Dirac cones. Therefore additional symmetries must be broken. We can already anticipate how that occurs by noticing that Jahn-Teller coupling is akin in-verted Hund's rules In the opposite case, K-IVC state would be stable at charge neutrality, and Coulomb exchange should presumably realise conventional Hund's rules, and, therefore, at first lift spin-degeneracy to make high-spin states. That would, e.g., lead to spin S = 1 non-topological insulators at ν = ±2 Hartree-Fock results. Panel a: Hartree-Fock energies of the K-IVC and S-KVB variational wavefunctions at charge neutrality, ν = 0, characterised, respectively, by the order parameters Eq. ( Hartree-Fock is only able to describe static Kekulé distortions, and predicts tiny atomic displacement because of the large phonon frequency compared to the narrow insulating gaps that are opened. Since the A 1 and B 1 moiré optical phonon dispersions in momentum space are negligible, around four orders of magnitude less than the center-of-mass frequency where |BCS is the BCS wavefunction for the flat bands, and P G (ν) the Gutzwiller projector onto the configurations where each supercell is strictly occupied by 4 + ν flat-band electrons. Since our goal is just to infer physical features of the resonating counterparts of the S-KVB mean-field insulating states, we shall not attempt to optimise the ansatz wavefunction , and ψ 22 d 2 (k) (f ). These wavefunction are almost odd under P, which implies ψ 11 i (k) -ψ 22 i (-k) and ψ 12 i (k) ψ 12 i (-k). Panels g-h: probability distribution of the complex d1 + id2 combination, eigenstate of C3z with eigenvalue e -i2π/3 . The orthogonal combination d1 -id2, eigenstate of C3z with complex conjugate eigenvalue, has right the same probability distribution. For that, we first project H P (6) onto the eigenoperators Ψ k,σ,η,n and Ψ † k,σ,η,n of the flat bands, n = 1 the lower and n = 2 the upper, for each valley η = ±1, as previously done for the Coulomb interaction The diagonal basis corresponds to the pair creation operators with eigenvalues -g λ i and normalised eigenvectors ψ nm i (k). The transformation rules of ψ nm i (k) under the symmetry transformations are thoroughly discussed in the Section 5 of Supplementary Material By construction, the lowest-energy pair-eigenstate is the one with the largest λ i . We find that the largest eigenvalue λ s = 2.33 is non-degenerate and its eigenvector, i.e., the pair wavefunction, transforms like the totally symmetric irreducible representation of D 6 , which is alike an s-wave Cooper pair. The next largest eigenvalue λ d = 1.79 is doubly degenerate, and the corresponding pair wavefunctions transform like the two-dimensional irreducible representation of D 6 even under C 2z , alike a d-wave Cooper pair. However, we have so far just considered the phononmediated attraction that, unsurprisingly, favours the swave pairing channel. That result may change taking into account also the Coulomb repulsion H C in Eq. ( √ 2 ∼ Y 2±2 do have finite Chern number C = ±2, the same value of the angular momentum, see Section 6 of Supplementary Material Therefore, under the above assumptions, and, at first instance, neglecting the flat band dispersion, R-KVB insulators can be stabilised at all integer fillings ν. These are described by the projected BCS wavefunctions, see Eq. ( where, by definition, the 'vacuum' |0 is the ground state state at ν = -4 with all bands below the flat ones occupied, and n ± ≥ 0 are the numbers of d ± pairs per unit cell. The filling factor is simply ν = -4 + n + + n -. Whenever n + = n -, the projected wavefunction ( The surprisingly rich phase diagram of magic-angle twisted bilayer graphene, which includes topological and non-topological correlated insulators 