The aim of this Tutorial is to give a pedagogical introduction into realizations of Majorana fermions, usually termed as Majorana bound states (MBS), in condensed matter systems with magnetic textures. We begin by considering the Kitaev chain model of 'spinless' fermions and show how two 'half' fermions can appear at chain ends due to interactions. By considering this model and its two-dimensional generalization, we emphasize intricate relation between topological superconductivity and possible realizations of MBS. We further discuss how 'spinless' fermions can be realized in more physical systems, e.g., by employing the spin-momentum locking. Next, we demonstrate how magnetic textures can be used to induce synthetic or fictitious spin-orbit interactions, and, thus, stabilize MBS. We describe a general approach that works for arbitrary textures and apply it to skyrmions. We show how MBS can be stabilized by elongated skyrmions, certain higher order skyrmions, and chains of skyrmions. We also discuss how braiding operations can be performed with MBS stabilized on magnetic skyrmions. This Tutorial is aimed at students at graduate level. The idea of Ettore Majorana 1 that a fermion can be its own antiparticle found applications in high energy physics in proposals suggesting existence of Majorana fermions. Condensed matter systems comprised of large number of constituents with interactions can exhibit emergent excitations similar to Majorana fermions. The above platforms often do not address the main challenge of finding unquestionable experimental proofs of MBS existence. The difficulty arises due to the fact that experimental signatures of MBS Stabilization of MBS with chiral magnetic textures such as skyrmions can be particularly beneficial due to robustness associated with topological protection of skyrmions. In many proposals, MBS are stabilized in 1D or quasi-1D geometries at domain walls between topological and trivial regions. Moving domain walls then leads to a natural way of braiding MBS; however, effective braiding can be also achieved without physically moving MBS via tunable couplings between MBS and measurements. Step 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step (a) Step 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4 γ 2 is adiabatically placed in the initial position of mode γ 3 . As the four MBS are fermion-like quasiparticles, they can be described by standard anticommutation relations, i.e., in the language of second quantized creation and annihilation operators, {γ i , γ † j } = 2δ i j where it is convenient to renormalize operators by introducing additional 2 in the right hand side. Taking into account the fact that these quasiparticles are their own antiparticles, we also have a relation γ i = γ † i (as such, unlike fermionic operators, MBS operators obey With such notations, it is not hard to check that the braiding exchange operation between MBS i and j can be expressed by the unitary operator Ûi j = (1 + γ i γ j )/ √ 2. 104 Alternatively, we can write the transformation of MBS operators under braiding, γ i → γ j and γ j → -γ i . Following a different braiding order, we can adiabatically guide the degenerate ground state of our system into different many-body states with the same energy, as follows from the commutator Ûi j , Ûjk = γ i γ k . In a different language, braiding operations correspond to quantum gates performed on an array of MBS. For detailed discussions of quantum computations relying on braiding operations with MBS see Refs. [4, 105, and 106]. The Tutorial is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we discuss a simple model, usually referred to as the Kitaev chain model of 'spinless' fermions, realizing two MBS at its ends. By considering this model and its two-dimensional generalization, we emphasize the intricate relation between topological superconductivity and possible realizations of MBS in a pedagogical way. We show that in the topological superconduct- The presence of the origin outside or inside of the loop distinguishes the trivial and topological phases. A strong pairing phase corresponding to trivial superconductor is realized when |μ| > t. A weak pairing phase corresponding to topological superconductor is realized when |μ| < t. ing state electrons effectively split into two 'half' fermions, which can form MBS when spatially separated. We further discuss how 'spinless' fermions can be realized in more physical systems, e.g., by employing the spin-momentum locking. We describe a well known realization based on a semiconductor nanowire with strong spin-orbit coupling proximized with an s-wave superconductor. By using a local unitary transformation, we show that spin-orbit interaction can be replaced by the synthetic or fictitious spin-orbit interaction induced by a texture of magnetic moments. This shows a potential utility of chiral magnetic textures, such as skyrmions, for realizations of MBS. In Sec. III, we describe the model of a 2DEG that forms at the interface between an s-wave superconductor and a chiral ferromagnet hosting a magnetic texture, with interface induced Rashba spin-orbit coupling and subject to an external magnetic field. We discuss the conditions to obtain elongated skyrmions, as well as the advantages and limitations of using such skyrmions to stabilize MBS. In Sec. IV, we numerically study the formation of MBS using three different magnetic textures: an elongated skyrmion, a chain of circular skyrmions, and a skyrmion with high (> 1) azimuthal and radial magnetization flips. The elongated skyrmion and the skyrmion chain both effectively realize a quantum wire with localized MBS forming at their ends, whereas the skyrmion with high winding numbers leads to a single localized MBS at its core and a delocalized MBS outside. In Sec. V, we outline methods to realize quantum operations through braiding of the MBS for elongated skyrmions and the skyrmion chain. Sec. VI concludes the tutorial with a summary and an outlook of future directions. In this section, we review basic ideas that led to proposals of MBS in condensed matter systems. Superconductors described by Bogoliubov de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonians appear to be useful for realizing MBS described by operators 3. The Majorana operator representation of the fermion chain. For |μ| > t, the pairing of odd bonds dominates leading to a trivial superconductor state without MBS. For |μ| < t, the pairing of even bonds dominates leading to a topological superconductor state with MBS at the ends of the chain. with the property γ i = γ † i due to the particle-hole symmetry. However, a usual s-wave superconductor cannot be used for realizing MBS due to the presence of spin index in BdG transformation, as in this case the particle-hole symmetry does not guarantee the presence of MBS at zero energy. A spinless pwave superconductor circumvents this problem. A model of spinless p-wave superconductor can be realized in a chain of N spinless fermions described by the Hamiltonian where t is the parameter describing hopping, ∆ describes the superconducting pairing, and μ is the chemical potential. After applying the Fourier transform to Eq. ( where H BdG (k) = d(k) • τ, τ is a vector of Pauli matrices describing the particle-hole sector, and d(k) = (0, ∆ sin k, -t cos kμ). By plotting the vector d(k) in the yz plane as k sweeps over the entire Brillouin zone, we can distinguish a trivial and topological supeconductor phases. As shown in Fig. which can be interpreted as the real and imaginary parts of the electron annihilation operator. The new operators satisfy the k E FIG. anticommutation relations of Majorana operators, In terms of Majorana operators, the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( An easy way to see the appearance of MBS is by limiting the consideration to the case ∆ = t/2. Up to an unimportant constant, we obtain the Hamiltonian with two types of pairing terms, by using the Majorana operator representation of the fermion chain. We observe that for |μ| > t the pairing of odd bonds in Eq. ( where δ x and δ y describe bonds along the x-axis and y-axis, respectively. After applying the Fourier transform to Eq. ( we obtain the bulk Bogoliubov-de Gennes Hamiltonian where H BdG (k) = d(k) • τ, τ is a vector of Pauli matrices describing the particle-hole sector, and d(k) = (∆ sin k x , ∆ sin k y , -t(cos k x + cos k y ) -μ). The vector d(k)/| d(k)| maps the Brillouin zone of the two-dimensional lattice to the 2-sphere of the three-component unit vector, which can be described by the homotopy group π 2 (S 2 ) and topological invariant Z. To realize MBS, we have assumed the presence of spinless fermions and superconducting pairing. As p-wave superconductors are rare, one may need to resort to heterostructures for practical realizations of MBS. To achieve superconducting pairing, one can use an ordinary s-wave superconductor proximized with non-superconducting system. 111 Furthermore, the spin degree of freedom has to be frozen in non-superconducting system, which can be achieved in the presence of strong spin-orbit interaction and spin-momentum locking. To this end, MBS have been predicted at edges or surfaces of topological insulators proximized with superconductors where m * is the effective mass, α is the strength of the spinorbit interaction, σ i are Pauli matrices describing the spin, and b describes an applied magnetic field along the x-axis, see Fig. with where ∆ describes the superconducting pairing. The Hamiltonian in Eq. ( The Hamiltonian in Eq. ( We note that many proposals of topological superconductors in heterostructures rely on the superconducting proximity. In this section, we describe how a general magnetic texture can affect two-dimensional electron gas (2DEG) in proximity to s-wave superconductor. We show how such a system can form regions with topological superconductivity. We consider a 2DEG that is formed between an s-wave superconductor and a ferromagnet (in principle, it can also be a ferrimagnet or an antiferromagnet) hosting a non-uniform magnetic texture in the presence of an applied uniform magnetic field B perpendicular to its plane. A sketch of possible device geometry is shown in Fig. with the single-particle Hamiltonian H 0 of the 2DEG given by resulting in acting on the Nambu spinor Above, m * and g * are the effective mass and g-factors, p = -ih∇, α R is the strength of the Rashba spin-orbit coupling (SOC) caused by the broken inversion symmetry, μ is the chemical potential and μ B is the Bohr magneton. ∆e iφ is the mean-field superconducting pairing potential ψ † ↑ ψ † ↓ induced in the 2DEG by the superconductor, and as such, is weaker compared to its value within the bulk superconductor. At any given point in the plane, the orientation of the magnetic texture is given by the unit vector n = n(x, y), and J denotes the strength of the exchange field induced by the proximity of the ferromagnet which favors the alignment of the spins in the 2DEG with the magnetic texture. Finally, τ i and σ i are Pauli matrices acting on the particle-hole and spin spaces respectively, and e z is the unit vector along the z-axis. The same model also applies to a proximitized semiconductor wire covered by the ferromagnet. where R m (α) is a matrix that rotates along the m-axis by α and M = |M |. By using the local unitary transformation H BdG → UH BdG U † -ihU∂ t U † with U = e +iσ y M θ /2 e +iσ z M φ /2 , which undoes the R i rotations at each point in space and time by taking M back to e z , we obtain The su( with i ∈ {x, y} appears as a result of the position and time dependence of the unitary U, which yields the covariant derivative that is linear in momentum can be interpreted as a new type of SOC, which is necessary for stabilization of MBS. provided that M is sufficiently smooth. An equivalent expression was previously derived for a rotationally symmetric 2D magnetic texture in Ref. [31]. The contour E g = 0 determines the topological region In this section, we describe topological magnetic textures, skyrmions, and show how such textures can be used for stabilizing MBS. We also discuss advantages of skyrmions for MBS manipulation. For more detailed discussion of skyrmions, we refer reader to recent reviews. The topological charge describes how many times magnetic moments wrap around a unit sphere in the mapping in Fig. Here DMI is described by a tensor D i j = (D j ) i , A denotes the strength of the ferromagnetic exchange strength, s /2 is the the effective uniaxial anisotropy with contributions from magnetocrystalline anisotropy, μ 0 H describes externally applied magnetic field along z-axis, and n is a unit vector along the magnetization direction. DMI originates in the spin-orbit interaction, and its form is determined by the symmetries, including crystal structure and structural symmetries of the multilayer system. where γ is the helicity, σ determines the degree of elongation, and A(y) is a step function that modulates the strength of exchange, evaluating to 1 in the region W /2 < y < W + W /2 containing ferromagnet and 0 outside, see Fig. We numerically solve the 2D time-independent BdG equation, H BdG Ψ n = E n Ψ n , for a fixed magnetic texture, neglecting any backaction of the superconductor on the magnet, using Mathematica's NDEigensystem function with Dirichlet boundary condition Ψ n (x b , y b ) = 0, where (x b , y b ) ∈ Ω and Ω is the boundary contour. We set the rectangular region containing the 2DEG as x ∈ [0, 2W /σ ], y ∈ [0, 2W ]. In our calculations, we write the Hamiltonian in units of the pairing potential strength ∆, and define the dimensionless tunable pa- with t = h2 /2m * a 2 ∆, αR = α R /ha∆, x = x/a, ỹ = y/a, and we take the effective mass m * = 0.1m e , where m e is the electron mass, a = 10nm, W /a = 60 and ∆ = 0.25meV, unless stated otherwise. We first solve this BdG equation using an elongated skyrmion with R y c /a = 5 and γ = 0 or π/2, with and without the extrinsic Rashba SOC, and also explore the effects of α R and the role of helicity γ. The corresponding magnetic texture for γ = 0 is shown in Fig. We first analyze the case without extrinsic Rashba SOC ( αR = 0) using a skyrmion with γ = 0. In the first three panels of Fig. The last panel of Fig. The equivalent results for αR = 1 (corresponding to α R = 2.5meV nm) are shown in Fig. Finally, we remark that a scaling relation , which can be used to fine-tune the parameters in the presence of experimental constraints. MBS can also be stabilized with a chain of common circular skyrmions with σ = 1. To demonstrate this, we consider a chain of 11 circular skyrmions with core radius R c /a = 5 and helicity γ = 0, interleaved with a spacing of d/a ≈ 13 (the distance between the centers of two neighboring skyrmions is δ = 20a) as shown in Fig. Due to the repulsive forces between skyrmions, which decay roughly exponentially as a function of the separation distance, 172 the skyrmions may tend to spread out. The equilibrium point at which skyrmion dynamics due to repulsive forces stops can correspond to a ratio δ /(2 × 0.7R c ) ≈ 1.25, 173 however, it is also possible to use geometric constrictions or applied forces to enforce an inter-skyrmion distance. Another alternative could be to use ferrimagnets or antiferromagnets, which in turn would allow a tighter packing. Similar results were initially demonstrated with antiferromagnetic skyrmions in Ref. [37] without extrinsic SOC and a gap of (E 1 -E 0 )/∆ = 0.0016, where usage of antiferromagnet naturally allows small distances between skyrmions. Although a single circular skyrmion commonly realized in chiral magnets with DMI cannot be used to stabilize MBS, where r is the radial distance from the center of the skyrmion. The topological charge of such skyrmions is given by Using the parameters: m * = m e , ∆ = 0.5meV, μ = 0, B = 0, J = 1.72meV, α R = 0, a = 5nm (which approximate the parameters used in Ref. [31]), we solve the BdG equation in a circular region with radius 200a, using a skyrmion with parameters: R/a = 3.5, R 0 = 0, vorticity V = 2, and P = 25. The resulting probability density and low-energy spectrum are shown in Fig. In this section, we outline several braiding protocols for MBS localized on skyrmions. A combination of these protocols can allow a realization of initialization, fusion, and braiding of MBS, as required for realizations of MBS signatures relying on non-Abelian statistics. Logical operations on topological qubits can be realized through braiding operations, which rely on the non-Abelian statistics of MBS. A typical braiding of MBS is illustrated in Fig. Here, E M (assumed to be E J ) and U k ∈ [U min ,U max ] are the tunneling and Coulomb energies, and the phase differences α i j are α J /E C has an exponential dependence on flux Φ i , allowing tunability U max U min required to turn the interaction on and off. For simplicity, it is also assumed that E M U k such that the three modes at the junction fuse into a single one γ 0 ≡ (γ 1 + γ 2 + γ 3 )/ √ 3 and we end up with four useful modes γ 1 , γ 2 , γ 3 and γ 0 , whose interactions can be turned on and off with U k . The assumption E M U k is not essential and simply allows to visualize the braiding procedure better. The braiding operation is realized by changing U k , which results in the adiabatic time-evolution of the Heisenberg picture operators γ i → Û † γ i Û where the adiabatic braiding operator is given by 177,178 Since [ Û(i j) , Û( jk) ] = γ i γ k = 0, this braiding operation can be used to construct nontrivial quantum gates in an array of such MBS. The adiabatic sequence for braiding γ 2 and γ 3 is given as follows. The braiding operation in Eq. ( For example, the following sequence leads to the braiding of the modes γ i and γ j , provided that all measurements yield +1. The sequence is aborted and restarted if any of the measurements is -1. Braiding of MBS can be also performed by motion of chains of skyrmions with MBS localized at the ends of chains, see Fig. Step 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4 Step 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4 realize braiding through a topological region, as in Fig. In the case of MBS bound to vortices (see Fig. In this tutorial, we have given a pedagogical review of ideas that may lead to realizations of MBS in systems with mag-netic textures. We have shown how the Kitaev model of 'spinless' fermions can be realized by employing the spinmomentum locking due to spin-orbit interaction. As the synthetic or fictitious spin-orbit interactions can be induced by a texture of magnetic moments, we have emphasized a potential utility of chiral magnetic textures for realizations of MBS. In our discussions, we have concentrated on skyrmions as these are well studied magnetic textures that can be easily manipulated using spintronics methods. The most common skyrmions are of Bloch or Néel type. Skyrmions can be realized with different shapes, helicities, and vorticities, e.g., antiskyrmions. Skyrmions with charge larger than 1 have also been predicted 176 and can be of use for stabilizing MBS. As experimental signatures of MBS relying on measurements of zero-bias conductance peaks often allow for an alternative explanation involving Andreev bound states or Yu-Shiba-Rusinov states, 