Ferrocene, since its discovery in 1951, has been extensively exploited as a redox probe in a variety of processes ranging from solution chemistry, medicinal chemistry, supramolecular chemistry, surface chemistry to solid-state molecular electronic and spintronic circuit elements to unravel electrochemical charge-transfer dynamics. Ferrocene represents an extremely chemically and thermally stable, and highly reproducible redox probe that undergoes reversible one-electron oxidation and reduction occurring at the interfaces of electrode/ferrocene solution in response to applied anodic and cathodic potentials, respectively. It has been almost 70 years after its discovery and has become one of the most widely studied and model organometallic compounds not only for probing electrochemical charge-transfer process but also as molecular building blocks for the synthesis of chiral organometallic catalysts, potential drug candidates, polymeric compounds, electrochemical sensors, to name a few. Ferrocene and its derivatives have been a breakthrough in many aspects due to its versatile reactivity, fascinating chemical structures, unconventional metal-ligand coordination, and the magic number of electrons (18 e -). The present review discusses the recent progress made towards ferrocene-containing molecular systems exploited for redox reactions, surface attachment, spindependent electrochemical process to probe spin polarization, photo-electrochemistry, and integration into prototype molecular electronic devices. Overall, the present reviews demonstrate a piece of collective information about the recent advancements made towards the ferrocene and its derivatives that have been utilized as iconic redox markers. Fisher and Wilkinson received the Nobel prize in Chemistry for their pioneering work on 'sandwich organometallic compounds' back in 1973.[1] However, the journey of ferrocene chemistry was started independently by In cyclic voltammetry (CV), we typically use a three-electrode set-up, working electrode (WE), reference electrode (RE), and counter electrode (CE). Working electrode carries all redox processes of our interests, mainly occurs at the electrode-electrolyte interface. Whereas reference electrode is used as a reference point with respect to we measure applied potential to the working electrode and counter electrode completes the circuit, i.e., current flows from working to counter electrode. Ferrocene can easily be functionalized on one or both Cp rings with the same or different substituents. Such functionalization does not affect electrochemical reversibility, or structural motif but this does affect its redox potential. For instance, substituting ferrocene with an electron-withdrawing group increases the oxidation potential, whereas electron-donating group decreases. Monomeric zinc ferrocene carboxylate (Zn(FcCOO)(3,5-dmp)2Cl) complex also exhibited one-electron redox reaction with a half-potential, E1/2 at 442.5 mV, which was shifted towards more negative as compared to ferrocene, due to the electron-withdrawing nature of the carboxylate and the coordination bond between the carboxylate and Zn 2+ ions. The effect of the magnetic field in electrochemistry is a well-celebrated topic. Ferrocene has been the subject of focal point to investigate on-surface electrochemistry which is mainly governed by diffusionless charge-transfer process. Many strategies have been utilized to make on-surface assemblies where Fc or its derivatives are attached. For instance, Darwish and co-workers reported covalently bonded monolayers using S-Si interactions and successfully fabricated Fc-containing thin film in much milder conditions. [60] Spontaneous grafting was performed by dipping Si-H electrode in the acetonitrile solution of 11 or 12. electrochemically grafted SAMs 11 using potential 0.8 V (black line) and at 0.9 V (red line). Reproduced with permission from Ref. To have a clearer view about presence of O2, an argon bubbled solution of 11 was used to see if SAMs formation takes place. Cyclic voltammograms support the fact that presence of oxygen is necessary. Conversion of thiol into disulfide basically reduced the monolayer formation time in ambient conditions from 24 h to 1 h. A comparative study performed by preparing monolayer of 11 on Si and Au both revealed that to reach comparable surface monolayer coverage, Au needed 2 h more than the Si-surface. This study could be extremely helpful in preparation of protein functionalized Si-surfaces. SAMs on semiconducting surface such as on Si also functions as a protecting layer which stops the reoxidation process of freshly prepared Si-H surface. For this reason, after removal of the insulating oxide layer from Si-surface the SAMs formation needs to be established rapidly while maintaining the oxygen free condition. However, studies have shown that even in highly dense alkyne-based SAMs the coverage area is up to 60-65% and therefore nearly 35% area remains prone to reoxidation allowing growth of insulating oxide regions on the surface. Fact that surface coverage area decrease is caused by oxidation and not due to ferrocene decomposition, was investigate by performing control experiment. Reproduced with permission from Ref. Fontanesi and co-workers prepared ferrocene monolayers using -OH group of a Fc-derivative that was covalently grafted on H-terminated Si(111) surface (Fig. Taherinia prepared a range of ferrocene terminated SAMs on a gold surface by varying oligophenyleneimine spacers and investigated the interfacial electron transfer kinetics (Fig. [67] CV measurements showed that when dilution was 50 mol % the peaks became sharper compared to SAMs prepared with no diluent (Fig. and diluent spacer (NH2(CH2)nOH, n=6 & 12). Comparative studies revealed that similar length diluents cause significant reduction in ferrocene attachments probably due to steric hindrance in amidation, and also results in much less non-Faradic current densities. Additionally, they prepared SAMs in which defect sites were blocked by electrodeposition of ZnO (Fig. Systems in which charge transfer could be triggered by light absorption are of special interest. One of the major areas where such materials find application is the field of solar cells. Ferrocene-based complexes have been employed in dye sensitized solar cells (DSSC) and their ability as sensitizer in TiO2 based solar cells been investigated in past. Dai group prepared a similar cluster functionalized with multiferroic units, [Ti6O6(O i Pr)6(O2CFc)6] and compared its potential as electrochemical sensor for sugar reduction using generated photocurrent. Ferrocene-BODIPY dyads did exhibit one electron reversible oxidation. Observed instability in Fc-BODIPY is different from previous observations on similar system as in those cases Fc moiety was the cause, however, in present system it is BODIPY site that is decomposing. This study eliminates the existing doubts about Fc-BODIPY dyads and indicates that the either conjugation between two redox sites should be broken or αposition of BODIPY should be modified in order to elevate the energy of the LUMO and thereby stop the ground state electron transfer. Sun and co-workers employed ferrocene as volatile solid additive and explored a new way to optimize the bulk heterojunction (BHJ) morphology in organic solar cells (OSC). Over the last few years, the scientific community have developed an intricate understanding of the correlation between chemical and electronic parameters of molecular electronic devices. Trans-Fc-SAMs were irradiated using 340 nm wavelength light, and current density was measured before and after illuminating for 40 minutes (Fig. [106] Ferrocene attached to a pyrene containing conjugated molecular platform (Py-Fc) exhibited a bistable switching operation with long retention time. The sweep-mode I-V measurements confirmed the FLASH binary propertied of the device. The switching time of the fabricated device was determined to be 20 μs and even after 10 3 cycles, no signs of fatigue was observed. The device reproducibility was confirmed by testing fifty units that further confirmed the suitability of Py-Fc based device to be used for binary flash storage purposes. SAMs tunnel junction using Au and single layer graphene electrodes (Fig. However, upon addition of reducing agent, the curve restores its shape to becoming almost identical to initial stage. This could be reversibly switched between oxidized and reduced states. Nijhuis and co-workers investigated the ferrocene/EGaIn-based molecular tunnel junctions to unravel information about energy level alignment. Ferrocene remained a structural puzzle for some time after its discovery in 1951. It took no time to realize the capabilities of this newly found aromatic system and indeed ferrocene was extensively studied for its catalytic activity along with its redox properties. Ferrocene being the first sandwiched-type structure, pioneered a new era of organometallic complexes known as "metallocenes". Some of the ferrocene's unique features such great stability in ambient conditions, benign nature and ease of functionalization made it to be used as a molecular scaffold to create new molecules for very diverse applications ranging from materials science to biomedical chemistry. In materials chemistry ferrocene is used a standard in electrochemical measurements. The excellent reversible redox propertied exhibited by ferrocene have made it as one of the most widely used building block in stimuli-responsive systems. Ferrocene combined with optically active systems results in interesting photoelectric effects. Redox properties offered by ferrocene has also been used in preparing dye-sensitized solar cells and a large number of molecular electronics-based devices. In recent past, ferrocene has been studied for its medicinal properties as well. The range of applications and variety of materials that could be obtained using ferrocene is vast. It is very correct to say that ferrocene as a redox marker holds huge potentials in designing exciting new materials for future applications in devices and biomedicine. After almost seventy-five years of its discovery, research activity around ferrocene is still very active as can be seen from huge number of reports published every year. Ferrocene is a potent molecular building block and a prospective structural unit.