For decades, the difficulty of tackling a strong coupling model with a perturbative approach remained regardless of numerous inquiries. In the current work, a typical mean field theory procedure transforms a strong coupling Hamiltonian into a weak one, which can be solved within a perturbative approach. The Hamiltonian of 2-dimensional free electron gas with Hubbard on-site interaction is calculated as a test of the new procedure. Consequently, the spectral characteristics of the cuprates "peak-dip-hump" are reproduced. The result is compared with the past theoretical investigations, e.g., quantum Monte Carlo method, density matrix renormalization group, tensor network methods, etc., which agree well with the spectral curve. The microscopic mechanism of hightemperature superconductivity has been a heated debate since its discovery in the 1970s. The Hubbard electron-electron on-site interaction is expected to be the critical ingredient for developing high-temperature superconducting theories In the 90s, the perturbative approach was extended to the intermediate-strong coupling regime of the Hubbard model by estimating as many diagrammatic terms as possible. Despite the efforts invested in the issues, the results show uncertainty in explaining the experiments. Subsequently, the QMC method was applied to solve the Hubbard model at half-filling, and the sign problem was absent By contrast, the variations of the doping and temperature in cuprates exhibit rich physics in the phase diagrams and microscopic mechanisms. For example, electron doping can drive the symmetry of the superconducting order parameter from d-wave to s-wave One of the purposes of the paper is to establish an alternative approach to find the solution arXiv:2205.03964v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 8 May 2022 to the two-dimensional electron system model with the Hubbard-U term. The mean-field theory (MFT) holds when the value of expectations is larger than the fluctuations in the weak coupling limit and the intermediate-strong coupling limit. The philosophy of our procedure is to transform the strong coupling model into a weak coupling model with the mean-field theory and then apply the perturbative approach to the weak coupling model. The first step is to manually select the proper terms with large expectation values and small fluctuations. Secondly, replace the two operators in the two-body strong-coupling interaction term with thermal expectation and neglect its fluctuations. Consequently, the strong coupling model is transformed into a weak coupling one through the operations, which is solvable with the standard perturbative approach. Therefore, this procedure is called the MFT+perturbation approach. Then we calculate the 2D electron gas with Hubbard on-site interaction by the MFT+perturbation approach. The calculated spectral curve agrees qualitatively with the previous calculation methods. In addition, the new approach can capture the "peak-dip-hump" characteristic in cuprates, which is missing in the previous research. The calculated decay rate of the quasiparticles also qualitatively coincides with Norman's theory In our recent works 2425 , the MFT+Perturbation approach is applied to the 2D electron system at strontium titanate and lanthanum aluminate interface (STO/LAO). The results are consistent with the scanning tunneling spectroscopy, singleelectron transistor, and Josephson junction experiments. The STO/LAO interface also shows s-wave unconventional superconductivity. In the paper, we adopted the same Fermi energy, effective mass, etc., as the physical quantities of the STO/LAO interface. The system studied in the paper is 2D electron gas with Hubbard on-site interaction, while at the STO/LAO interface, we employed the boson-fermion model. The difference is that the former is gapless at the Fermi level, forbidding the number parity effects, which were first discovered in the single-electron transistor made of aluminum The paper has four sections. Section I introduces the model of the 2D electron gas with Hubbard on-site interactions. The MFT+Perturbation approach is presented in Section II. The quasiparticle decay rate and density of state are calculated, and the relations with previous works are shown in Section III. We sum up the paper and draw our conclusion in Section IV. The kinetic term of the 2D electron gas is assumed to show a quadratic dispersion. Therefore the Hamiltonian of the 2D electron gas is where e k = 2 k 2 2m * -μ. μ is the chemical potential. is the reduced Planck constant. m * is the effective mass of the electrons. ĉ † i,σ (ĉ i,σ ) is the creation (annihilation) operator of the electrons with momentum k and spin σ. The electron gas has a Hubbard on-site interaction where U is the strength of the on-site interaction and niσ = ĉ † iσ ĉiσ . ĉ † k,σ (ĉ k,σ ) is the creation (annihilation) operator of the electrons with spin σ at the lattice site i. The interaction in momentum space is where N is the number of the lattice. The total Hamiltonian is The Hamiltonian Ĥ is the same as the BCS Hamiltonian when the momentum q = 0. Hence, the Hamiltonian is the extended BCS Hamiltonian. The extra momentum q enables the two scattered electrons to have a finite momentum. The terms with q = 0 are neglected in the random phase approximation (RPA). In our approach, these terms will produce the decay rate of the quasiparticles and affect the density of states. In this sense, our approach is beyond the RPA. The terms with q = 0 are viewed as a perturbation to the BCS Hamiltonian. The first step of our approach is to linearize the BCS Hamiltonian with MFT. The transformed kinetic Hamiltonian is The perturbative terms with q = 0 can be reexpressed by the annihilation (creation) operators of the quasiparticles γk0 , γk1 , γ † k0 , γ † k1 . The results contain γγγγ, γ † γγγ, γ † γ † γγ, γ † γ † γ † γ and γ † γ † γ † γ † . For simplicity, it is assumed that the amplitude u k v k above Fermi level. The Hubbard term will have the form U N uuuuγ † γ † γγ. Notice that the value of u k is within a small interval ( 1 2 , 1) and varies slowly with the increase of |k|. As a resullt, u k can be absorbed by the interaction potential U , and U N uuuu becames U T . In physics, it means that the quasiparticles are subjected to the on-site interaction with a smaller corrected interaction potential compared with the electrons. The transformed Hamiltonian is where The larger terms with q = 0 have been diagonalized into the kinetic part ĤK . Therefore the interaction part can be viewed as a perturbative term. Within the perturbation approach, the first and second order diagrams are calculated. In contrast, the self-energies of the first order are real and can be absorbed by the chemical potential and effective mass. As a result, this part has been neglected. The values of the second order self-energies are small. Nevertheless, only one of the second order self-energies can produce imaginary terms. As we later proved, this term is critical to obtain the "peak-diphump" characteristics. The second order selfenergy is The decay rate of quasiparticles can be obtained by calculaing the imaginary part of the self-energy with analytical continuation Γ = ImΣ(k, iω → ω + iη + ). The real part of the self-energy is small and can be neglected. Concequently, the Green's function of the fermionic quasiparticles is The perturbation approach can be applied in the case that < ĤK > < ĤV >. In RPA, the terms with q = 0 are neglected, which produces the Van Hove singularity in the density of states. As a supplement to RPA, the extra terms can induce the decay rate of quasiparticles, the broadening of Van Hove singularity, and the "peak-dip-hump" characteristic. The decay rate of quasiparticles is calculated from Eq. 8 (see details in Appendix A ) In Fig The result is plotted in Figure We solve the two-dimensional electron gas model with the Hubbard on-site interactions employing the MFT+perturbation method. Our approach can capture the "peak-dip-hump" characteristic in cuprates, Kagome superconductors, etc. Moreover, it is shown that the electron system with Hubbard-interaction-induced superconductivity is unlikely to show even-odd effects. The renormalization group approach also adopted the MFT to linearize the Hubbard term, and it focuses more on the evaluation of the superconducting gap and the related phase transition . Our MFT+perturbation approach mainly investigates the spectral properties of electron systems, which can provide a supplement to the renormalization group approach. The recent efforts in formulating the nonequilibrium quantum system focus on photoninduced enhancement in superconducting correlations. The exact diagonalization method is one of the main tools, while it is shown that the size effect will incur dramatic changes Starting from Eq. 11, the residue theorem can be applied to obtain the analytical form of the density of states. For simplicity, the chemical potential is neglected. Two solutions of the momentum k are in the right upper half-plane of the complex plane of k, which will be counted. where θ = Arctan b a , R = √ a 2 + b 2 . For the second case, For the third case, For the fourth case, After applying Jordan's lemma and the residue theorem, we obtain the density of states, for case one, )). (B9) For case two, )). (B10) For case three, )). (B11) For case four, )). (B12)