The Eilenberger-Larkin-Ovchinnikov-Eliashberg quasiclassical theory of superconductivity is a powerful method enabling studies of a wide range of equilibrium and non-equilibrium phenomena in conventional and unconventional superconductors. We introduce here a finite element method, based on a discontinuous Galerkin approach, to self-consistently solve the underlying transport equations for general device geometries, arbitrary mean free path and symmetry of the superconducting order parameter. We present results on i) the influence of scalar impurity scattering on phase crystals in d-wave superconducting grains at low temperatures and ii) the current flow and focusing in d-wave superconducting weak links, modeling recent experimental realizations of grooved hightemperature superconducting Dayem bridges. The high adaptability of this finite element method for quasiclassical theory paves the way for future investigations of superconducting devices and new physical phenomena in unconventional superconductors. This paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we review the underlying equations of the quasiclassical theory of superconductivity and present the reformulation in terms of a discontinous Galerkin method. This is followed by results on two example problems in Sec. III. Firstly, we investigate the effect of scalar impurites on phase crystals in a closed system. Secondly, we model a current biased superconducting Dayem bridge as an example for current flow and focusing in a geometry with open boundaries. We conclude with an outlook on possible further applications of the method in Sec. IV. The core of the quasiclassical theory of superconductivity is the Eilenberger equation, for the quasiclassical Green's function ǧ(p F , R, ε) together with a normalization condition (2) The above form is for the time-independent steady state that we assume in this paper. In this case, the propagators only depend on momentum direction on the Fermi surface, p F , spatial coordinate, R, and energy, ε. In Eq. ( The quasiclassical theory of superconductivity Such a FEM offers several advantages over finite difference methods used in the past For dirty conventional superconductors, where the mean free path is much shorter than the superconducting coherence length ξ 0 , the diffusive approximation due to Usadel is valid. An implementation of a FEM for the underlying Usadel diffusion equations has been reported where the spectrum of the system is determined by the retarded (advanced) component ĝR (ĝ A ), while information about the occupation of states is contained in the Keldysh component ĝK . All three components are in turn matrices in Nambu space that we will detail below. To shorten the notation, we often drop the explicit dependences on p F , R, and ε. The selfenergy matrix ȟ has the same form as ǧ in Keldysh space with the Nambuspace components This set of equations was first derived by Eilenberger where G R ≡ (1 -γ R γR ) -1 and F R ≡ G R γ R . The expression for the advanced element ĝA is analogous to ĝR . The Keldysh component also involves the distribution functions x and x, Generally all elements of ĝR,A,K are matrices in a space of internal degrees of freedom such as spin, but in the following we assume a spin-singlet superconductor for simplicity. Then, γ can be written as γ = γ singlet iσ 2 -where γ singlet is a scalar function and σ 2 is the second Pauli matrix in spin space -while x is proportional to the unit matrix in spin space. One central symmetry of the theory is particle-hole conjugation, expressed as Starting from Eq. ( Equations for the remaining amplitudes γR/A and distribution x can be obtained via the tilde symmetry in Eq. Along such a trajectory, Eq. ( After solving Eq. ( where ȟmf is the mean-field order parameter, given by Here, η d is the basis function for the respective orderparameter symmetry. For the d x 2 -y 2 order parameter, which we will consider in this paper, we can choose η d = cos [2 (φ F -α)] where the angle α specifies the misalignment of the main crystal axis to the geometric axis. The self-energy ȟs describes scalar impurity scattering. Assuming an average dilute impurity concentration n i , the impurity self-energy is found from the t-matrix equation in the non-crossing approximation For scattering that is isotropic in momentum space with an s-wave scattering potential u 0 the elements of ť satisfy the equations The two parameters of the model, the isotropic impurity potential u 0 and impurity concentration n i , can equivalently be written as a scattering energy Γ u = n imp /πN F and a scattering phase shift, δ 0 = arctan(πN F u 0 ). They can be combined into Γ ≡ Γ u sin 2 δ 0 , the so-called pair-breaking energy, which determines the normal-state mean free path = v F /(2Γ). We restrict ourselves here to the weak-scattering Born limit, or the opposite strong-scattering unitary limit, Solving Eqs. ( which determines the full density of states, Here, N F is the normal-state density of states per spin at the Fermi level. The charge current density is obtained via We use j 0 = ev F N F k B T c as the unit for charge current. If both the system and all connected reservoirs are in equilibrium the Keldysh Green's function at temperature By replacing the energy ε with imaginary-axis Matsubara frequencies iε n = iπk B T (2n + 1) in Eq. ( Self-consistent numerical solutions of Eqs. ( In contrast, the steps cannot be made commensurate with the self-energy grid for all momentum orientations at once in two or three dimensions, as sketched Fig. Here, we describe an alternative solution strategy that relies on a finite element method, more specifically a discontinuous Galerkin method. The solution to the differential equation is then defined on the same grid as the self-energies which avoids grid interpolation. The underlying assumption of finite element methods is that a given geometry can be decomposed into a collection of elements or cells, as indicated in Fig. We start from Eq. ( Multiplying both sides by a, for now unspecified, test function φ(R) ≡ φ, and integrating over the entire domain Ω gives We now assume to have a triangulation T , meaning a collection of triangles T j that satisfy Ω = ∪ Tj ∈T T j . The integration is then split into a sum of integrals over each triangle, Performing a partial integration on the first term on the left hand side in Eq. ( where n j is the outer normal for ∂Ω j , the boundary of a given cell. For triangular cells each element boundary ∂Ω j consists of three edges. Each edge, in turn, is either part of the geometric boundary ∂Ω, or part of the collection of internal edges τ . The geometric boundary 1 2 3. Sketch of two neighboring cells, 1 and 2, with the shared edge in between them. The two normal vectors n1 and n2 to the shared edge are chosen such that they are pointing out of their respective cell. The red dots indicate nodes that are involved in a surface integral over the edge, the orange dot is a node that does not contribute. The displacements of the dots from the actual nodal points of the cells are introduced only to illustrate the DG method. ∂Ω can be further decomposed into the inflow boundary ∂Ω -and the outflow boundary ∂Ω + , defined via The three sets are sketched in Fig. where the summations on the right-hand side are over individual edges rather than closed boundaries of each triangle. The different brackets in the first term on the right-hand side denote the jump [. . . ] and average {. . . } of a function over an edge shared by two cells 1 and 2. They are defined for vectors a and scalars φ as with the index denoting the value in the respective cell, and the outward-pointing normal vector n i in each of the two cells, see Fig. Lastly, we note that for the imaginary-frequency Matsubara coherence function γ M , the propagation directions and flow boundaries correspond to the one for γ R (γ A ) for positive (negative) Matsubara poles. As discussed in literature The upwind value enforces a propagation of the function values across cell edges in the transport direction v F , corresponding to the propagation along trajectories in the stepping method. A corresponding downwind value with swapped signs in the inequalities in Eq. ( The final weak form for the retarded function γ R thus becomes Eq. ( where f does not depend on the unknown function γ while L does. In the FEM language, L is the bilinear form and f the linear form of the weak formulation of Eq. ( Using this cell-wise basis we can write where a j,i are expansion coefficients or weights. The function values on the nodes then fully determine a j,i and by Eq. ( We expand the self-energies in the same basis with weights ∆ j,i and Σ j,i , while the test function φ used in Eq. ( Inserting Eq. ( where i = 1, . . . , N is an index over the all N nodes in our domain. In two dimensions, a triangulation with N T triangles and N j nodes per cell will have a total number of N = N T N j nodes. Here, the tensor Q ijk is due to the quadratic term γ ∆γ in Eq. ( where again i = 1, . . . , N as in Eq. ( Starting from a guess a 0 , one iterates the solution vector via Newton steps a n+1 = a n + (δa) n , where (δa) n is the solution to a linear equation system obtained by combining all J ij (a n , φ)(δa j ) n = -r i (a n , φ) for i = 1, . . . , N . As outlined in Sect. II C, the weak form in Eq. ( We treat the entire boundary ∂Ω, including the inflow boundary, as a collection of planar interfaces of finite length. Scattering at such atomically sharp interfaces cannot be described within quasiclassical theory itself, the theory has to be supplemented by external boundary conditions. Using scattering theory, such conditions have been derived for specularly scattering interfaces where R and D are, respectively, the reflectivity and transmittivity of the interface satisfying R + D = 1. The boundary condition for γ R B is then of the form where γ R in,i=1,2 are the incoming function inside and outside the system. Within the FEM nomenclature such FIG. boundary conditions are referred to as Dirichlet boundary conditions. In a discontinuous Galerkin method, they are weakly enforced through the last term on the righthand side in Eq. At a fully reflective segment, R = 1, specular scattering relates the outgoing function for an angle φ F to the function incoming from within the system for a different angle φ F . On a boundary segment with an outwardpointing normal n that spans an angle β n to the x-axis, we find This relation holds in systems with a two-dimensional Fermi surface where the orientation of v F can be parametrized by one scalar parameter only. In three dimensions an analogous relation for two scalar parameters has to be used. The weak form in Eq. ( Starting from a bulk guess as an incoming function, we use the incoming functions at an iteration n to obtain the outgoing function in the next, n + 1, iteration. At a fully transparent segment, D = 1, the outgoing function solely depends an incoming function from a reservoir that is not directly simulated. This reservoir can for example be a superconducting contact, or a normal-metal reservoir. We model both cases by associating a virtual "reservoir" point with each node on the given boundary segment, see Fig. We model a superconducting contact by using a bulk coherence function γ bulk as the incoming coherence function from the reservoir. On each virtual point, the order parameter and superfluid momentum p S are then iterated such that we enforce a certain current density across the respective boundary segment. In the case of a normal-metal reservoir, a voltage bias (temperature bias) can be modelled by fixed electrochemical potential (temperature) of the reservoir so no update is required. This induces a nonequilibrium occupation at the system edge that propagates in the system. For further details, we refer to our recent publications on nonequilibrium setups in (quasi) one-dimensional models A weak form for the non-equilibrium distribution x can be obtained in a largely identical procedure as outlined for the coherence amplitude γ in Sect. II C. After partial integration over the term containing the derivative v F • ∇x of splitting of the resulting boundary integrals has to be performed. The specification of boundary values and flow direction for x (x) then follows that of γ R (γ A ). The main difference to the coherence amplitude is that Eq. ( A self-consistent solution of the Eilenberger equation requires an iterative procedure of solving the underlying transport equation followed by an update of all selfenergies. In equilibrium, this leads to the following recipe for the retarded functions: 1. Provide a current guess of all self-energies in ĥR , see Eq. ( 2. Find weak solutions γ R w to Eq. ( 3. Update all self-energies through Eqs. ( 4. Update all boundary values γ R B and γR B as described in Section II D Non-equilibrium situations also require weak solutions x w and xw and updates of the Keldysh self-energies ĥK . The above procedure has to be repeated until a self-consistent solution is found, signalized for example by convergence of the self-energies up to a desired accuracy. Only then is charge-current conservation guaranteed everywhere in the system. For a given guess of all self-energies, the solution of Eq. ( The solutions for all energies ε and angles φ F only need to be combined to obtain a new guess of the self-energies. For the FEM solution step we use the open-source package Gridap To illustrate the strategies and the advantages of solving the Riccati equations with a FEM together with the self-consistency equations for the order parameter and scalar impurity self-energies, we present two examples. Both involve two-dimensional d-wave superconductors modeling for instance a single superconducting plane of a high-temperature superconductor. The first example is a closed system, a square island (see Fig. Consider the square d-wave superconducting island in Fig. In both cases, larger impurity concentrations suppress the current flow up to a critical value Γ * at which the phase crystal is no longer energetically favorable and a uniform superconducting state is formed instead. Examples of current flow patterns for two temperatures, T = 0.03T c and T = 0.07T c , in the unitary limit for a larger value of the impurity concentration is shown in Fig. As a measure of the total amount of current flow in the system we use the integrated quantity This average measure depends on temperature, impurity concentration, and type of impurities (Born or unitary), as summarized in Fig. As an example of an open system with current flow we consider a d-wave superconducting bridge, inspired by recent experimental realizations of Dayem bridges In the results presented here we use x center = 45ξ 0 , at the center of the channel, and w Groove = √ 0.2ξ 0 . With these parameters the impurity concentration has a smooth Gaussian profile over a characteristic scale of The integrated current incoming at the left edge and through the dashed line parallel to the y axis on the right edge has to be conserved. roughly 10ξ 0 around x 0 . For impurity concentrations, we choose Γ 0 = 5•10 -4 πk B T c and Γ peak = 0.05πk B T c , corresponding to a normal-state mean free path of 0 = 2000ξ 0 and peak = 20ξ 0 , respectively. Unless noted otherwise, all results below are for a temperature of T = 0.7T c . The reduced mean free path in the groove results in a suppression of the order parameter by around twenty percent in the dirty region in the center of the channel already in equilibrium, as compared to the case without an impurity concentration profile, see in Fig. We now enforce a constant boundary current density of j x = j b = 0.01j 0 at the left and right edges of the system. Upon a self-consistent calculation, the current that is flowing in the x direction from the left reservoir gets spatially focused to flow into the narrow channel. By integration of Eq. ( where C is a closed contour within our system and int C the enclosed area. An example for such a contour is shown in Fig. Since no current can flow out of the reflective walls, the integrated current flow through the left and right contour edge, indicated as dashed lines in Fig. A self-consistent result of the spatially redistributed current flow is shown Fig. along a line cut in the x direction for constant y = W l /2, in the middle of the channel. Both quantities are shown in Fig. Beyond the highest boundary current j b > 0.025j 0 superconductivity breaks down locally in the channel in the sense that the order parameter is locally suppressed to zero during the self-consistency iteration. After that we find no self-consistent stationary solution for the order parameter in the weak link. In this paper, we have presented a reformulation of Eilenberger's quasiclassical theory of superconductivity terms of a discontinuous Galerkin method. We applied the method, firstly, to study the influence of scalar impurity scattering on phase crystals in d-wave superconductors, and, secondly, to investigate the current flow through a geometric constriction in the form of a Dayem bridge. In the first case, we find that scalar impurity scattering suppresses the spontaneous flow patterns of phase crystals. As a result the average flow gets suppressed compared to a clean d-wave superconductor and the characteristic temperature T * , where the phase crystal is destroyed, is reduced. For the same impurity concentration the spontaneous flow is lower for impurities in the Born limit compared to the limit of unitary scattering. We attribute this to the increased broadening of the surface Andreev bound states in the Born limit which makes spontaneous flow energetically less favourable. Our second example shows the strength of the FEM method in the application to open superconducting systems in the presence of current flow. Generally, the constriction in the Dayem bridge geometry leads to a increased phase gradient in the narrow channel. In the case of a grooved Dayem bridge, the reduced mean free path in the Groove requires a strong increase in the phase gradient within the groove region in order to carry the same current. As a result, the groove can lead to a quick suppression of superconductivity with increasing current although the flow itself is non-dissipative. The method presented here gives a powerful and versatile numerical technique to study conventional and unconventional superconductors with arbitrary mean free path in two-and three-dimensional geometries. The adaptability of a FEM to arbitrary geometries allows the investigation of realistic device geometries and experimental setups. An extension to the case of full spinstructure of the quasiclassical propagators follows identical steps as discussed here and would allow to study for example the effects of spin-orbit interactions and other unconventional superconductors. Another extension, relevant for, e.g., the situation in the Dayem bridge when we can not find self-consistent stationary solutions at high imposed currents, would be to include time-dependence. We thank J. Wiman and O. Shevtsov for early discussions on the possibility of applying the finite element method within quasiclassical theory, and acknowledge the Swedish research council for financial support. The computations were enabled by resources provided by the Swedish National Infrastructure for Computing (SNIC) at NSC partially funded by the Swedish Research Council through grant agreement no. 2018-05973. To benchmark the numerical performance of the DG method presented in this paper, we use a simple example in one dimension. Specifically, we assume a clean system Addtionally, the expected error scaling for 1/N (dotted) and 1/N 2 (dashed). with an order-parameter profile of the form where ∆ 0 = 1.5k B T c , x mid = 7.5ξ 0 , and let x ∈ [0, 15ξ 0 ]. This profile is similar to that close to a fully reflective, pair-breaking interface to a d-wave superconductor. For this scenario, we compare 1. the "stepping"method, see Sect. II B, 2. an implicit midpoint method, a well-known finitedifference scheme, see also Appendix C in Ref. 3. the DG method presented here, for different order k of the approximating polynomials. In all cases, we assume a uniform grid of N points (or nodes), which gives rise to a step size or cell size h = L/N = 15ξ 0 /N . As a starting value, we assume γ(x = 0) = 0 at the start of the trajectory. In the absence of an analytic solution for the orderparameter profile in Eq. (48), we take the numerical solution of the stepping method for a very dense grid, using N max = 51200 points, as the reference solution. As a measure of the numerical error, we use the summed difference where we choose the x i such that they are included in the grid for all values of N . A plot of the error scaling as function of N , normalized to δγ(N min ) the error for the grid with the lowest number of points N min = 25, is shown in Fig. The computational time needed to solve this example in one dimension scales linearly with the number of nodes N and is thus of the same order of magnitude for all presented methods. In two dimensions, the midpoint method should scale as N 2 on a square geometry while the equivalent FEM is predicted to scale as N d 2 , where d is the so-called band width of entries around the diagonal 