In this paper, the design, realization, and demonstration of a broadband millimeter-wave imaging system based on the synthetic aperture radar technique (SAR) are discussed. The proposed system, operating within the frequency range of 25.3-30.8 GHz, consists of a tapered slot antenna as the transmitter and two halfcircle antennas as the receivers. The size of the antenna is 19.5 × 8 mm with a maximum gain of 8.5 dB. The transmitter and the receiver antennas are printed on the same board. This feature leads to a highly compact and flexible configuration, enabling the applicability of the proposed imaging system in the handheld devices. Furthermore, it significantly reduces the fabrication cost of the system. The proposed broadband imaging system, being capable of performing 3D real-time imaging with high resolutions, can be easily calibrated for each frequency within the desired range. By performing 3D imaging from metallic objects with different shapes, we experimentally demonstrate the high performance of the proposed system, which offers great potentialities for a broad range of applications such as security, medical diagnostic, concealed object detection, to name a few. Millimeter-wave spectrum, spanning the frequency range of 30-300 GHz, has many unique properties, making it suitable for a large variety of applications. In particular, the electromagnetic waves within this frequency range can penetrate through the thin layers of dielectric materials Among the different techniques proposed for millimeter-wave imaging, the so-called synthetic aperture radar (SAR) method To be able to use SAR-based imaging systems in handheld structures, it is important to reduce their size and wight as much as possible. Mono-static millimeter wave imaging systems represent an appropriate platform to reduce the bulkiness of the associated structure, compared to their bi-static and multi-static counterparts. In a mono-static imaging system, one single antenna is used both as the transmitter and the receiver, enabling miniaturization. Despite this advantage, mono-static imaging systems suffer from the difficulties in the calibration process. More specifically, to properly implement a mono-static system, it is required to calibrate the system to a phase reference. For single frequency systems, the calibration can be readily accomplished, since the associated phase error is the same for all points of the synthetic aperture, whereas for a broadband system, the corresponding phase error is not the same for all frequencies. As a result, the calibration must be done for all frequencies individually. This renders the calibration process extremely challenging. Nevertheless, in In this paper, we demonstrate a wideband millimeter wave imaging system designed based on the SAR technique. The calibration of the proposed system is accomplished by sampling the transmitted signal in the receiver antenna as a reference. Since the receiver and transmitter antennas are printed on the same board, the proposed imaging system is highly compact, enabling portability. The antenna element of the structure is optimally designed such that the transmitter antenna operates in a wide range of frequency with high levels of matching. The proposed millimeter wave imaging system can have a large variety of applications such as nondestructive testing of structures In this section, we describe the principle of the proposed imaging system. The goal is to realize a millimeter-wave imaging system that reconstructs the 2D or 3D image of a target object. The proposed imaging system is based on sending a millimeterwave signal to the object, and analyzing the corresponding reflected signal. Fig. According to the plane-wave expansion method, the received field by the receiver antennas (H(x , y ), which is called the hologram) is expressed as where (x , y , 0) and (x, y, z 0 ) correspond to the locations of the antenna and the target, respectively, and k 0 is the free space wave-number. Moreover, f (x, y) corresponds to the image of the object. In addition, r is The aim of this imaging system is to reconstruct the image of the object f (x, y). For this purpose, we decompose the exponential term in (1), which represents a spherical wave, into a superposition of plane-waves as follows where By replacing (3) in (1), one obtains in which the inner double integral represents the 2D Fourier transform of f (x, y), i.e. by multiplying both sides of ( f (x, y) can then be expressed according to the following equation F 2D , and F -1 2D denote the 2D Fourier transform and inverse Fourier transform, respectively. In the proposed system, the outputs of the diodes correspond to the real part of H(x , y ). Here, we prove the possibility of performing imaging using the real part of the hologram. We can rewrite the real part of the hologram as in which H(x , y ) is the hologram. Based on the first term on the right side of (8), one can obtain the image of the object at z = z 0 using the following formula Likewise, the second term corresponds to the image of the object z = -z 0 according to the following equation This proves that, by using the real part of the hologram, we can reconstruct the image at z = z 0 . A key part of a millimeter wave imaging system is the antenna element. The antenna parameters such as the size of the antenna must be designed in a way that the image can be reconstructed using the GSAFT algorithm, which was described before. Fig. Two receiver antennas are placed symmetrically at the radiating end of the transmitter, maintaining the radiation pattern of the antenna element symmetric and enabling a denser spatial sampling. Each receiver is composed of a Schottky detector diode (Skyworks SMS7621-060) and a half-circle antenna surrounding the diode. The role of the half-circle antenna is to enhance the coupling to the diode. The reason for choosing half-circle type antenna is its larger electrical length compared to other elements with the same area. The output of the Schottky diode is a real-valued DC voltage, based on which the phase and the amplitude of the reflected electric field are extracted. This voltage is generated by down-mixing the field scattered from the transmitter and the associated reflected field. To characterize the performance of the diodes, we measured the output voltage of one diode as a function of the input power of the transmitter antenna. The associated measurement results are shown in Fig. To analyze the information received by the antennas, we designed a controller shown in Fig. To verify the performance of the proposed imaging system, we used a metallic gun model as the target object. Fig. We designed and experimentally demonstrated a wideband millimeter wave imaging system based on SAR technique. By performing measurements, we showed that the proposed imaging system was capable of reconstructing three-dimensional images of arbitrary shaped objects. Compared to traditional microwave imaging systems in which the transmitter and receiver antennas are often printed on two different boards, both transmitter and receiver antennas of our proposed system were printed on the same board. This provides us with a unique opportunity to tackle the problem of phase referencing for different frequencies. The proposed imaging system has potential applications in security scanning, non-destructive sensing, spectroscopy, and medical screening. By substituting the single element antenna of our proposed structure with a linear array, one can benefit from the advantages of electrical scanning. 1. 