Defects play a crucial role in the physical properties of crystals, whether for classical or quantum systems. For example, in photonic/phononic crystals, defects can serve as precise guidance and localization of classical electromagnetic or mechanical waves. Rainbow concentrating, a recently proposed exotic wave localization [Phys. Rev. Lett. 126, 113902 (2021)] exploits defects to enable the collection and frequency routing of weak signals in real space. In this paper, using a solid-state phononic crystal (PnC) plate, we experimentally verify this phenomenon by deliberately infusing a homogeneous graded dislocation, i.e., a line defect, into the PnC. Two PnCs separated by the defect will breed deterministic interface states along with the defect, offering rainbow trapping and concentrating for elastic waves. Our PnC-based rainbow trappers and concentrators are scalable and configurable, promising for advancing applications like energy harvesting, information processing, and acoustofluidic manipulating. Accurately guiding and trapping waves, whether in electromagnetics For the 2D (plate-like) elastic system, however, the development of this effect/function is relatively lagging behind. In a 2D elastic system, despite a variety of proposed rainbow trappers so far, all these solutions require relatively complex technical means (either manipulating the thickness of the plate In this paper, based on a 2D PnC plate, we experimentally realized both the elastic rainbow trapping and concentrating. By infusing a homogeneous dislocation, i.e., a line defect, into the PnC, two separated PnCs will have distinct Zak phases, leading to deterministic interface states along with the defect. Different translations can modulate the group velocity of these interface states, offering the verification of rainbow trapping and concentrating for elastic waves. All these PnC-based rainbow trappers and concentrators are convenient to design and configurable. By setting different degrees of defect gradient, both mode volume and frequency spacing of adjacent rainbow modes are adjustable. Our elastic rainbow PnC is designed from a plate with mounted columns in a 2D square lattice, as illustrated in Fig. If the columns are mounted on only one side of the plate, the plate's mirror symmetry along its center plane will be broken, leading to ubiquitous hybridization of the extensional and shear horizontal (SH) modes and out-of-plane flexural modes. For the convenience of this study, we chose to have the same columns on both sides of the plate. In this plate PnC, the pure out-of-plane modes are now independent (decoupled) from the others Next, we apply a 2D translation vector ξ = (ξx, ξy) to all the columns of the PnC, parallel to the plate surface. This translation vector can be regarded as a synthetic dimension, which, together with the Bloch wave vector k =(kx, ky), forms a four-dimensional parameter space (ξx, ξy, kx, ky). Because the four parameters are all periodic, the periodic gauge can be imposed on eigenstates, which is |ψn(ξx+a, ξy, kx, ky)˃ = |ψn(ξx, ξy+a, kx, ky)˃ = |ψn(ξx, ξy, kx+2πa, ky)˃ = |ψn(kx, ξy, kx, ky+2πa)˃ = |ψn(ξx, ξy, kx, ky)˃, where |ψn(ξx, ξy, kx, ky)˃ denotes the eigen Bloch state with parameter (ξx, ξy, kx, ky) and band number n. If we spatially divide the 2D PnC into two continuous parts and apply different translation vectors to them respectively, two domains will be formed in this PnC, accompanied by the appearance of a 1D domain boundary. As shown in Fig. The Zak phase distinction between two domains guarantees deterministic interface states, proven extensively in electromagnetic Note that these interface states are submerged into the bulk when there is no complete bandgap (see SI Moreover, if the y (x) components of the translation vector of the two domains are set to negative (consistent), i.e., ξL = (ξx, ξy) and ξR = (ξx, -ξy), no interface states can be constructed (see SI Fig. The interface states' operation bandwidth and group velocities can be tuned by the translational vector ξ. Fig. Rainbow trapping is a phenomenon in which states with different frequency components are dispersed and trapped at different spatial locations In the experiment, we fabricated a PnC containing one boundary with gradually-tuned ξx from 0.1a to 0.16a, as the sample shown in Fig. When the source was placed at the port where ξx=0.1a, as frequency increases, the distance the elastic waves travel along the boundary (and eventually stop caused by the zero-group velocity) is reduced. In this case, since the nearsource boundary (ξx=0.1a) only supports elastic waves with frequencies from ~73.5 kHz to ~82 kHz, only waves in this frequency range can propagate along the boundary. As the wave propagates, ξx gets larger; thus, the supported frequency range gets narrower. For the elastic wave in lower frequency, e.g., 73.5 kHz, it can travel through the entire gradually-tuned boundary. By contrast, the elastic wave in higher frequency, e.g., 78.5 kHz, can only travel a short distance before being forced to stop. The experimental results and analysis match the calculation in Fig. The rainbow trapping would be different when the source was placed at the port where ξx=0.16a. In this case, since the near-source boundary (ξx=0.16a) only support elastic wave with frequencies from ~70 kHz to ~73.5 kHz, only waves in this frequency range can propagate along the boundary. Only the elastic wave in higher frequency, e.g., 73.2 kHz, can travel through the entire gradually-tuned boundary. Simulation is performed for this scenario, as shown in Fig. In both scenarios, when elastic waves of different frequencies are dispersed in the gradually-tuned boundary, they will resonant where they stop, simply owning to their group velocity being reduced to zero at the location. Additionally, this elastic rainbow trapping applies not only to the flexural modes we demonstrate here but also to the in-plane modes. Within the complete in-plane modes bandgap, as shown in Fig. As recently proposed In the rainbow trapping experiment, if we construct a boundary with ξx ranging from ξ1 to ξ2 (ξ1 < ξ2), elastic resonances of frequencies ranging from fξ2 to fξ1 may all be supported in the boundary but at different locations, where fξ2 (fξ1) is the minimum (maximum) frequency of the boundary states in the case of ξ2 (ξ1). Since the elastic waves need to enter the boundary through the two ports (either one), this forces all ξ in the interval from the entrance port to the resonant position to support the resonant frequency (at the resonant position). However, if the elastic waves do not need to reach the resonant positions along the boundary, the operation bandwidth of the whole device will be greatly broadened. This idea also inspired us to realize an elastic rainbow concentrator/resonator. Our proposed elastic rainbow concentrator is demonstrated using another PnC, containing one boundary with a more significant gradually-tuned ξx from 0.06a to 0.22a, as the sample shown in Fig. In this configuration, since the PnC is not thick enough to fully support its bandgap, rainbow resonant states can be excited by elastic waves that do not propagate along the boundary. Experimentally, a row of broadband longitudinal transducers, analogous to a plane wave source for the elastic waves, was placed on the side of the PnC. Thus, the plane elastic waves pumped by the transducers are incident on the PnC perpendicular to the boundary direction. The scanning laser vibrometer records how the resonant modes are excited at different frequencies. Fig. Displacement field distributions of the resonant states at different frequencies are measured, as shown in Fig. In our elastic rainbow concentrator, the number of the resonant states in the boundary is determined by the number of different ξx. If the value range of ξx is determined, e.g., from 0.06a to 0.22a in our last experiment, the smaller the Δξx between each adjacent layer will result in more resonant states in the same fixed frequency range. Figs. 5(a) and 5(b) show two PnC similar to the one in Fig. The Δξx between each adjacent layer in the two samples is 0.01a and 0.02a, respectively. According to eigenvalue calculations shown in Figs. Displacement field distributions of the resonant states in the two cases are shown in the insets of the figures. As the frequency separation between the resonant states increases, their mode volumes decrease approximately linearly. In the PnC of Fig. Clearly, by designing different ranges and gradients of ξx for the boundary of the PnC, the frequency range, number, and mode volume of the rainbow resonant states can be effectively tuned. It provides a high degree of freedom for elastic wave manipulation and is promising for applications, e.g., acoustofluidics, elastic energy harvesting, and spatial wave switch This paper verifies a recently proposed exotic wave localization experimentally, i.e., rainbow concentrating, exemplarily on an elastic system. We demonstrate that by bringing homogeneous dislocation, i.e., a line defect, into a plate PnC, two separated PnCs will have distinct Zak phases due to different directional translations, leading to deterministic interface states along with the defect. Different translations can modulate the group velocity of these interface states. Thus, we could delicate rainbow trapping and rainbow concentrating for elastic waves. Compared with previous theoretical approaches, the elastic rainbow effect realized by our present method is simple and configurable, not only for design but also for practical sample implementation and miniaturization. This work undoubtedly provides diversity for the precise manipulation of elastic waves in both frequency and spatial domains. It is promising for applications, e.g., nondestructive evaluation 