We develop a stochastic path-integral approach for predicting the superconducting transition temperatures of anharmonic solids. By defining generalized Bloch basis, we generalize the formalism of the stochastic path-integral approach, which is originally developed for liquid systems. We implement the formalism for ab initio calculations using the projector augmented-wave method, and apply the implementation to estimate the superconducting transition temperatures of metallic deuterium and hydrogen sulfide. For metallic deuterium, which is approximately harmonic, our result coincides well with that obtained from the standard approach based on the harmonic approximation and the density functional perturbation theory. For hydrogen sulfide, we find that anharmonicity strongly suppresses the predicted superconducting transition temperature. Compared to the selfconsistent harmonic approximation approach, our approach yields a transition temperature closer to the experimentally observed one. Atomic vibrations mediate attractive interactions between electrons, and induce superconductivity in solids. For most solids, harmonic description of atomic vibrations is satisfactory A well-established non-perturbative approach for dealing with these effects is the stochastic self-consistent harmonic approximation (SSCHA) Recently, Liu et al. proposed a stochastic pathintegral approach (SPIA) for predicting T c of metallic liquids In this paper, we extend the approach for anharmonic solids. In a solid, the continuous translational invariance breaks down. Electrons experience a periodical crystal potential which gives rise to Bloch states, between which Cooper pairing occurs. As a result, physical quantities like effective interactions need to be expanded in the Bloch states instead of plane waves as in liquids. To this end, we define generalized Bloch states for an anharmonic solid by introducing an effective Hamiltonian, and generalize the formalism of SPIA accordingly. We implement the formalism by using the PAW method. A number of issues associated with the implementation, such as transformations of spherical waves at different cen-ters and the over-sampling in a time-domain, are also solved. As tests, we apply the implementation to metallic deuterium, which is approximately harmonic, and hydrogen sulfide H 3 S, which is strongly anharmonic. For the former, our results coincide well with those obtained from the conventional approach based on the harmonic approximation and DFPT. For the latter, we find that anharmonic effects strongly suppress predicted T c . Compared with the SSCHA approach, our approach yields T c closer to the experimentally observed one. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we develop the formalism of the SPIA for solids. We then discuss our ab initio implementation of the formalism using the PAW method in Sec. III A. In Sec. IV and V we apply the implementation to metallic deuterium D and hydrogen sulfide H 3 S, and compare results with previous calculations and experiments. Finally, we summarize our results in Sec. VI. Miscellaneous details of the theory and tests are presented in Appendices. The SPIA is a non-perturbative approach for predicting T c of EPC-induced superconductors To determine the T matrix for a given ion configuration R(τ ), we first determine the Green's function Ĝ[R(τ )] of an electron subjected to an ionic field with respect to the ion configuration The average Green's function Ĝ describes how electrons propagate. It is natural to define a set of generalized Bloch modes which can propagate in the system without being scattered (but may be damped). It means that the set of the generalized Bloch modes should approximately diagonalize Ĝ. In ordinary solids, Bloch states are determined by assuming that all ions are fixed at their equilibrium positions. However, for anharmonic solids, the vibrating amplitudes of ions can be large, and the effective crystal potential experienced by electrons may deviate significantly from the one generated by fixed ions. In this case, we can define an effective Hamiltonian Ĥeff = -2 Ĝ-1 + h.c. . The Hamiltonian reduces to the ordinary Bloch Hamiltonian for harmonic solids. For anharmonic or superionic solids, Ĥeff provides a generalized Hamiltonian from which one can determine generalized Bloch states. Using them as basis, Ĝ is diagonal approximately: where 1 ≡ (nk, ω j ) denotes the index of the generalized Bloch states, including a quasi-wave-vector k, a band index n and the Fermion Matsubara frequency ω j With the generalized Bloch states as basis, the effective interaction Ŵ can be determined by solving the Bethe-Salpeter equation where Γ 11 ′ is the fluctuation of the scattering T matrices: The derivation of the equation is identical to that presented in Ref. with ωnk (j) = ω j -Im Σ(nk, iω j )/ , j ∈ Z, and Im Σ is the imaginary part of the self energy induced by EPC and can be determined by applying the generalized optical theorem It is usually satisfactory to apply the isotropic approximation when solving Eq. ( There may be cases for which the isotropic approximation is not satisfactory. It is well known that MgB 2 is a multi-gap superconductor, the pairing amplitude of which depends on the band index n In this section, we discuss the implementation of the formalism developed in the last section using the PAW method. An implementation for liquids using the same method is presented in Ref. 17. Here, we discuss issues specific to an implementation for solids. The Green's function Ĝ[R(τ )] is a central quantity in our formalism. In this subsection, we discuss its evaluation using the PAW method. The PAW method is an efficient method for determining electron states in DFT calculations with where |φ a i (R a ) and | φa i (R a ) denote the i-th AE and PS partial waves around ion a, respectively, and pa i (R a )| is the projector function which is bi-orthonormal to PS partial waves. We note that the transformation operator depends on the ion positions R ≡ {R a }. In Ref. 17, it is shown that the Green's function, under the quasi-static approximation where Ĥ(R) is the Hamiltonian matrix in the PS space for a static ion configuration R, and is the overlap matrix between PS waves. For a solid, it is more convenient and efficient to work completely in a PS space. However, a PS space changes when ions move. To this end, we define a common PS space which is associated with the equilibrium ionic configuration R (0) . We have the relation where ψ ( ψ) and ψ ′ ( ψ′ ) are two states in the AE (common PS) space, and we define an overlap matrix: To evaluate the overlap matrix Ŝ(R, R (0) ), we substitute Eq. ( where we define a set of coefficients which is the overlap between partial waves defined for two different centers. The coefficients can be evaluated numerically (see Appendix A). We note that for consistency and accuracy, we also need to use Eq. ( In PIMD simulations, one discretizes the time domain to a finite number of beads. The bead number is chosen by requiring that the maximum Matsubara frequency πN b k B T is much larger than vibration frequencies, so that the imaginary-time evolution of ions can be correctly sampled. The finite number of beads introduce discretization errors when we perform Fourier transformations, making the determination of high-frequency components of effective interaction inaccurate. This is the case for the determination of the EPC parameters λ(m), which are inputs of the linearized Eliashberg equation, and directly determine T c . In theory, one expects that m 2 λ(m) approaches to a constant when the Bosonic Matsubara frequency ν m = 2πm/ β is much larger than the Debye frequency of phonons. The asymptotic behavior is useful for determining an average phonon frequency which also enters the Eliashberg equation by correcting the Morel Andersen pseudopotential μ * One way to solve the issue is to perform an extrapolation to the infinite-N b limit. This is to view Ŵ (ν m ) or λ(m) as a function of the bead number N b , and calculate the correct values of the quantities by extrapolating N b to infinity. We test the method for various model harmonic systems. Each model consists of several harmonic λ(m) obtained by applying the extrapolation approach as well as the oversampling approach with different interpolation methods: without oversampling, linear interpolation and spline interpolation. In the inset, we show the asymptotic behavior of m 2 λ(m). The exact result is also shown. The results are for a model system with six harmonic modes of frequencies ω/kB = {3000K, 2300K, 2000K, 1500K, 1300K, 500K} and |g| 2 = {1.6, 1.2, 2.5, 1.5, 1, 0.5} at T = 190 K. Extrapolation is performed from values solved with five bead numbers N b = {8, 12, 16, 24, 32}. Oversampling is performed from values solved with a single bead number N b = 16. oscillators with different frequencies, and the effective interaction is determined by W (τ ) = l |g l | 2 D l (τ ), where D l (τ ) is the Green's function of the l-th harmonic mode, and |g l | 2 denotes the EPC strength of the mode. The model can be solved using different bead numbers, and then be extrapolated. In Fig. However, the extrapolation method requires multiple PIMD simulations with different numbers of beads. For our calculation based on the first-principles method, it is too expensive, and may not be feasible for complex materials with large unit cells (e.g. H 3 S). We thus seek for alternative methods which are less demanding in computational resources. An alternative method we develop is based on oversampling in the time domain. We expect that the effective interaction Ŵ (τ ) is a smooth function of the imaginary time τ . While a PIMD simulations only determines the values of Ŵ (τ ) for a discrete set of the imaginary time employing an interpolation method. The over-sampled data is then Fourier transformed to obtain frequency components of the effective interaction and λ(m). We find that resulting λ(m) does have the correct asymptotic behavior, and converges reasonably well to the exact result, as shown in Fig. An obvious freedom of the approach is the choice of the interpolation method. To see which method is optimal for our purpose, we again test our oversampling procedure for model harmonic systems. Effective interactions of the models are oversampled, and compared with the exact result. In Fig. The extrapolation and oversampling methods developed above are based on harmonic models. In practice, we find that these methods also apply well for anharmonic solids investigated in this study. This is tested in Appendix B by applying both the extrapolation and the oversampling approach to calculate λ(m) in the anharmonic solid H 3 S. We find both the approaches yield the correct asymptotic behavior of λ(m). Results obtained by the two different approaches coincide well. Considering that the oversampling approach is much less demanding for computational resources, we choose to use the approach in our study. To determine T c , one needs to find the temperature at which a non-negative eigenvalue ρ of the Eliashberg equation ( We basically assume that vibrational properties remain unchanged within a small temperature range. Therefore, the effective pairing interaction is nearly temperature independent and close to the one we calculate. In this case, EPC parameters for different temperatures can be determined by a single frequency-dependent function Λ(ν): where ν m (T ) ≡ 2mπk B T / is the Bosonic Matsubara frequency at temperature T . By calculating λ(m, T 0 ) at a given temperature T 0 , we can construct an interpolation formula for Λ(ν). λ(m, T ) at other temperatures can then be inferred from Eq. ( Metallic hydrogen is long believed to be a candidate of high-T c superconductors because of its high vibrational frequencies and strong EPC Here, we choose to study metallic deuterium, which is still a solid at T c because quantum fluctuations are suppressed by the heavier mass of deuterium atoms We calculate deuterium with the structure of I4 1 /amd space group at 500 GPa. Structure parameters of metal-lic hydrogen are used Sampled ionic configurations are analyzed using our implementation in MATLAB. The program can be found in Ref. Harmonic calculations are performed with DFPT [3] implemented in the QUANTUM ESPRESSO package The EPC parameters λ(m) are calculated using both the SPIA and the harmonic approach, and shown in Fig. two calculations coincide rather well. To explain the small quantitative differences (∼ 7%), we also calculate the parameters for tritium, which has heavier mass. We find that the differences are further reduced (to ∼ 3%). This suggests the small differences could be due to small residual effects of anharmonicity, or vertex corrections (∝ m e /M ion ∼ 1.6% for deuterium and ∼ 1.3% for tritium) ignored in the harmonic calculation. The SPIA and harmonic calculations actually coincide well to details. To see this, we define the q-resolved EPC parameters λ q : where q is the wave-vector of phonons mediating the effective interaction. In Fig. the confidence that the SPIA approach is properly implemented. With the EPC parameters, we can estimate T c by solving the linearized Eliashberg equation Hydrogen sulfide is the first high-T c conventional superconductor ever discovered The structure parameters of H 3 S are adopted from Ref. Harmonic calculations are also performed in the same way as in solid deuterium. The ion-electron interaction are described using ultrasoft pseudopotential generated by A. Dal Corso using the code SSSP. An energy cutoff of 80 Ry is used to expand the wave functions. A 24 × 24×24 k-mesh is used for calculating phonon frequencies. EPC matrix elements on the 6 × 6 × 6 q-grid are used to calculate EPC parameters, and a 0.02-Ry Gaussian smearing is used for Fermi-surface summation. In the simulation of hydrogen sulfide, we apply the non-diagonal-supercell technique to improve the efficiency of sampling the quasi-wave-vector q of phonons To apply the technique for the PIMD simulations, we treat a regular 3 × 3 × 3 supercell as the "primitive cell" for constructing non-diagonal supercells. The PIMD simulations are then preformed in supercells containing two 3 × 3 × 3 "primitive cells". In this way, we can sample all points in the irreducible part of a 6 × × 6 q-grid by simulating in two non-diagonal supercells. We test the technique in Appendix D. We find that smaller non-diagonal supercells can indeed well reproduce results of a full supercell. We determine the EPC parameters of H 3 S, shown in Fig. To see the effect of band renormalization in the generalized Bloch basis, we also preform the calculation using the regular Bloch basis. The result is also shown in Table II, denote as SPIA-0. Band structures and density of states (DOS) with and without the renormalization are shown in Fig. In summary, we develop a stochastic path integral approach for treating effects of anharmonicity and quantum fluctuations on superconductivity in anharmonic solids. The formalism of SPIA is extended for solids by defining generalized Bloch basis. We implement the approach in DFT calculations using the PAW method. Issues associated with the implementation are solved. We find that our approach can well reproduce results of a harmonic solid (metallic deuterium), and predict T c closer to the experimentally observed one than the SSCHA approach for an anharmonic solid (hydrogen sulfide). vectors d ≡ ∆R = d ŷ along the y-axis: where Y lm is the spherical harmonics of the real form. Using the list of the overlap values, we can set up an interpolation function for determining overlaps of arbitrary distances. For two centers with the displacement vector not along the y-axis, we can determine the overlap by applying a rotational transformation. To do that, we make use of the transformation of a spherical harmonics under a rotation: We can choose a (θ ′ , φ ′ ) frame which transforms the displacement vector between the two centers in the (θ, φ) frame Transformation matrices for l > 1 can be obtained by applying a recursion relation The overlap for an arbitrary displacement vector d can then be obtained by applying the transformation with R ij ≡ R li mimj δ li,lj . Appendix B: Extrapolation and oversampling of effective interactions in H3S In this Appendix, we test the extrapolation method and the oversampling method developed in Sec. III B for the anharmonic solid H 3 S. We perform simulations in a 3 × 3 × 3 supercell at 190K, with bead numbers N b = 8, 16, 24 and 32, and calculate λ N b (m) on a 8 × 8 × 8 kgrid of the supercell. In all simulations, a time length of 3.5 ps with a 1.0 fs time step is used. First, we apply the extrapolation method. Results are shown in Fig. * = 0.12 is used when determining Tc.