We are witnessing a great transition towards a society powered by renewable energies to meet the ever-stringent climate target. Hydrogen, as an energy carrier, will play a key role in building a climate-neutral society. Although liquid hydrogen is essential for hydrogen storage and transportation, liquefying hydrogen is costly with the conventional methods based on Joule-Thomas effect. As an emerging technology which is potentially more efficient, magnetocaloric hydrogen liquefaction can be a "game-changer". In this work, we have investigated the rareearth-based Laves phases RAl2 and RNi2 for magnetocaloric hydrogen liquefaction. We have noticed an unaddressed feature that the magnetocaloric effect of second-order magnetocaloric materials can become "giant" near the hydrogen boiling point. This feature indicates strong correlations, down to the boiling point of hydrogen, among the three important quantities of the magnetocaloric effect: the maximum magnetic entropy change ΔS m max , the maximum adiabatic temperature change ΔT ad max , and the Curie temperature T C . Via a comprehensive literature review, we interpret the correlations for a rare-earth intermetallic series as two trends: (1) ΔS m max increases with decreasing TC; (2) ΔT ad max decreases near room temperature with decreasing T C but increases at cryogenic temperatures. Moreover, we have developed a meanfield approach to describe these two trends theoretically. The dependence of ΔS m max and ΔT ad max on T C revealed in this work helps researchers quickly anticipate the magnetocaloric performance of rare-earth-based compounds, guiding material design and accelerating the discoveries of magnetocaloric materials for hydrogen liquefaction. The European Union has set a target of being climate-neutral by 2050an economy with netzero greenhouse-gas emissions Figure Hydrogen can be stored and transported efficiently in its liquid state Discovered by Weiss and Picard In the case of magnetocaloric liquefaction of hydrogen, the gaseous hydrogen needs to be cooled down from around room temperature to its boiling point of about 20 K From our study on rare-earth Laves phases RAl2 and RNi2 (R: Gd, Tb, Dy, Ho, Er), we discovered a noticeable, but unaddressed feature for the rare-earth magnetocaloric materials: maximum magnetocaloric effect is much stronger near the boiling point of hydrogen. In this work, we achieved a fully reversible value of ΔT ad max directly measured under pulsed fields in HoNi2: 5.7 K at 15 K in fields of 2 T. In even lower temperature, even larger values of ΔT ad max indirectly measured were reported: 6.2 K at around 4.4 K in fields of 1 T for TmCoSi In this article, we raise a question with a great importance for material design: how do ΔS m max and ΔT ad max correlate with T C , particularly in the vicinity of hydrogen boiling point? In the present work, we use the heavy rare-earth -based Laves phases RAl2 and RNi2 as an example to study the correlations among ΔS m max , ΔT ad max and T C because of the chemical and physical similarities of these heavy rare-earth elements To answer the above proposed question, we divide our study into three. First, we look at the rare-earth-based Laves phases RAl2 and RNi2, where we observe a noticeable, but unaddressed feature that maximum magnetocaloric effect is much stronger near the boiling point of hydrogen. Next, we summarize two trends for a rare-earth-based intermetallic series via the experimental work on the rare-earth-based Laves phases and a comprehensive literature review: (1) ΔS m max increases with decreasing TC; (2) ΔT ad max decreases near room temperature with decreasing T C but increases at cryogenic temperatures. In the third part we develop a meanfield approach, with RNi2 and RAl2 as examples, that provides a theoretical explanation for these two trends. The dependence of ΔS m max and ΔT ad max on T C described in this work not only explains why a second-order magnetocaloric material can have a "giant" magnetocaloric effect near hydrogen boiling point, but also helps us quickly anticipate the magnetocaloric performance of rare-earth-based compounds, guiding material design and accelerating the discoveries of magnetocaloric materials for hydrogen liquefaction. We arc melted the HoAl2 and GdNi2 samples as well as the other RNi2 and RAl2 samples that had 3% excess of rare-earth elements. X-ray powder diffraction data were collected on a powder diffractometer (Stadi P, Stoe&Cie GmbH) equipped with a Ge Figure where μ B is the Bohr magneton, k B is the Boltzmann constant, M R is the molecular mass, N A is the Avogadro constant, and α is the slope of μ 0 χ -1 vs. T , where μ 0 is the vacuum permeability and χ is the magnetic susceptibility. In Figure These observations point to a close correlation between the maximum magnetocaloric effect and the T C , while, at least for RNi2 (excluding ErNi2) and RAl2 series, a larger magnetocaloric effect is always observed at lower temperatures. But is this just coincidence, or a genuine feature of rare-earth-based magnetocaloric materials? In the search for answer, in the next section we review the literature on rare-earth-based magnetocaloric materials from nearroom temperature down to 20 K. 3. Summarizing two trends from literature review Figure Large magnetic entropy changes occur below 140 K, exceeding that of the benchmark polycrystalline Gd with a value of about 10 J kg -1 K -1 In the inset in Figure Magnetic entropy changes in fields of 5 and 2 T as a function of Curie temperature for heavy rare-earth-based magnetocaloric mateials, the inset shows the mangetic entropy changes in 5 T for the light rare-earth-based magnetocaloric materials. Data for RAl2 and RNi2 are from our work, the other data are collected from literature In contrast to the numerous data on the magnetic entropy change available in the literature, there are only limited data on the adiabatic temperature change in the range below 100 K, measured either indirectly or directly. In this study we measured the ΔT ad of RAl2 and RNi2 directly in pulsed magnetic fields. The results are plotted in Figure Like in Figure The two trends can now help us to make a quick assessment of the magnetocaloric effect in rare-earth-based alloys. For example, HoB2 which has the largest magnetic entropy change in Figure The first trend could also have been applied to anticipate the performance of HoB2. Knowing that HoB2 has a Curie temperature of 15 K and that TbB2 The magnetocaloric effect is influenced by many factors, such as microstructure, stoichiometry, order of the phase transition, magnetic moment, and the sweep rate of the field where . N M is the number of "magnetic atoms", B J (x) is the Brillouin function, J is the total angular momentum, μ is the atomic magnetic moment, T C is the Curie temperature, μ 0 is the vacuum permeability, and k B is the Boltzmann constant. Gottschall et al. already demonstrated that this equation is applicable to a single crystal of Gd in pulsed fields up to 62 T The adiabatic temperature change ΔT ad is obtained by constructing the total entropy S(H, T) curves as a function of H and T where T D is the Debye temperature, N is the total number of atoms, and x = ħω/k B T where ħ is the reduced Planck constant and ω is the circular frequency of the phonons. The integration of C V gives the lattice entropy The total entropy S(H, T) curves are constructed by summing S m and S l . The adiabatic temperature change is then given by ΔT ad (T I , H I → H F ) = T F (S F , H F ) -T I (S I , H I ), where T I and T F are the initial and final temperatures, H I and H F are the initial and final magnetic fields, and S I and S F are the initial and final total entropies with S I = S F The results for ΔS m calculated with equation ( However, ErNi2 with a T c of about 6 K deviates from the T C -2/3 line significantly. Although its effective magnetic moment is calculated to be 9.47 μ B , which is close to the average of 9.85 μ B , this deviation suggests that there are specific factors beyond this mean-field approach below 10 K. The abnormal variation trend of ΔS m max among the RNi2 series shown in the present work is in accordance with Ref. where n is defined as the relative position of the rare-earth element in the rare-earth series. The volumetric lattice heat capacities of the RAl2 at their Curie temperatures are then estimated using the estimated Debye temperatures. As seen from Figure Moreover, the sharp change in the lattice heat capacity leads to an increase of ΔT ad max with respect to the decreasing T C in the low-temperature range. This mean-field approach could be further developed to explore the field dependence of these two trends. In addition, the crystalline electric fields and the interactions between two different rare-earth ions when substitution is applied need to be considered if we are to perform the more accurate modeling Our study of the Laves phases RAl2 and RNi2 (excluding ErNi2) revealed that both their ΔS m max and ΔT ad max increase with decreasing T C . We then reviewed the literature for the quantities ΔS m max , ΔT ad max , and T C of rare-earth-based magnetocaloric materials, on the basis of which we summarized two trends for a intermetallic series: (1) ΔS m max increases with decreasing T C ; (2) ΔT ad max decreases with decreasing T C from room temperature, but then increases at cryogenic temperatures. Importantly, we discovered a noticeable, but unaddressed feature for the rare- earth-based magnetocaloric materials that magnetocaloric effect can be much stronger near 20 K, the boiling point of hydrogen. We developed a mean-field approach to interpretate the correlations among ΔS m max , ΔT ad max , and T C . The results provide support: we observed an increasing ΔS m max with decreasing T C and the non-monotonic dependence of ΔT ad max on T C . The dependence of ΔS m max can be approximated to a simple form of ΔS m max ∝ T C -2/3 , a negative exponential function that undergoes an ever-sharper increase towards an ever lower T C . This gives a mathematical explanation as to why ΔS m can exhibit large values around 20 K. In addition, by taking advantage of the similarities of the rare-earth elements, we examined this relationship using the Laves phases RNi2 and RAl2. By combining the Debye model with the mean-field model, we show that the difference between the lattice heat capacity at cryogenic temperatures and that near room temperature is the key to understanding the non-monotonic dependence of ΔT ad max on T C . The dependence of ΔS m and ΔT ad on T C investigated here will help researchers to rapidly predict magnetocaloric properties, particularly for rare-earth-based magnetocaloric materials. It also helps researchers understand better how temperature acts on magnetocaloric effect, which not only can help design alloys for magnetocaloric liquefaction of hydrogen and other industrial gases, but also can benefit the search for new magnetocaloric materials. Compounds