Semiconductor/superconductor hybrids exhibit a range of phenomena that can be exploited for the study of novel physics and the development of new technologies. Understanding the origin the energy spectrum of such hybrids is therefore a crucial goal. Here, we study Josephson junctions defined by shadow epitaxy on InAsSb/Al nanowires. The devices exhibit gate-tunable supercurrents at low temperatures and multiple Andreev reflections (MARs) at finite voltage bias. Under microwave irradiation, photon assisted tunneling (PAT) of MARs produces characteristic oscillating 1 Traditional Josephson junctions (JJ) A characteristic feature which could distinguish MAR processes and their orders is the transferred charge: The n th -order process, dominating at V sd = 2∆/ne, transfers a charge q n = ne across the junction. InAsSb nanowires (NWs) were grown by molecular beam epitaxy following the procedure of Ref. The remaining series resistance -likely dominated by the contacts -∼ 3 kΩ, was identified as a constant off-set in the supercurrent regime and was subtracted in the following. Measurements were performed in a dilution refrigerator with a base temperature of 15 mK and microwave radiation was coupled to the device by a coaxial line with ∼ 12 mm of the inner conductor left exposed and situated ∼ 5 mm above the sample. Figure The aperiodic oscillations in I sw (V G ) appearing in addition to the overall gate-dependence is attributed to universal conductance fluctuations in R N (V G ). Therefore no data is obtained with V below this value, and this region is greyed-out in Fig. V rms app = 0. The structure emerging from V = 0 V -i.e., when the JJ carries a supercurrent -is due to Shapiro steps 1,49 caused by phase-locking between the microwave field and the superconducting phase difference across the JJ leading to at step-wise increase of V in units of hf /(2e). In Supporting Fig. The remaining V-shaped structures in Fig. Instead, we attribute the structures to photon assisted tunneling. In general, for any two terminal device absorbing radiation at frequency f , charges can absorb/emit photons and thereby gain energy ±lhf and tunnel across the junction -here h is the Planck constant and l = 0, ±1, ±2, . . .. Thus, at finite irradiation amplitude, the current at the dc voltage V is related to the dc current in the absence of irradiation, I 0 , at V ± hf l/e. For smooth I 0 (V ), this has no consequence, however, non-linearities in I 0 (V ) will repeat at finite radiation amplitude as sidebands with an intensity modulated by the radiation amplitude. In the simplest case where the radiation field on the sample is sinusoidal, V abs = V pp abs • sin(2πf t), the current at finite radiation amplitude is given by the Tien-Gordon equation: 34 where J l (x) is the l th Bessel function. The amplitude of each sideband oscillates with increasing V pp abs according to J 2 l (Supporting Fig. The modulation period of the features associated with the n = 1, 2, 3 order MARs can be clearly resolved and as highlighted by the black arrows, the modulation period is not the same for each 'V'-fan but rather decreases with decreasing bias. This is inconsistent with the conventional Tien-Gordon model described above which predicts the same characteristic pattern evolving from all non-linearities in I 0 . Instead, as discussed in the introduction, the pattern in Fig. In conclusion, we have studied the finite-bias sub-gap structure in epitaxial InAsSb/Al JJs under microwave radiation. We showed that the microwave response provides a sensitive probe of the transmitted charge q = ne up to order n = 3 -i.e. a MAR process including two Andreev reflections. The modulation period was found to decrease with increasing MAR order, and the dependence of the sideband spacings on the radiation amplitude agrees quantitatively with the expectation that each order transmits n electrons across the junction. A simulation based on a modified version of the Tien-Gordon equation was found to accu-rately reproduce the measurements. We expect the effect to be observable in non-epitaxially matched hybrids, albeit likely with less sharp features than observed here, 