Abstract-This paper presents a bulk acoustic wave (BAW) resonator with complementary switchable operation in the first and second thickness extensional modes (TE1 and TE2) at 7.04 GHz and 13.4 GHz. Two ferroelectric scandium-aluminum nitride (Sc0.28Al0.72N) layers are alternatively stacked with three molybdenum electrodes, creating a laminated BAW resonator with independent switchability of polarization in constituent transducers. This enables intrinsic switchability of the resonator in TE1 and TE2 modes, when the ferroelectric Sc0.28Al0.72N layers are poled in the same or opposite directions, respectively. A generalized analytical proof of complementary switchable operation, extended to laminated BAW resonators consisting of arbitrary number of ScxAl1-xN layers, is presented. For the demonstrated prototype, electromechanical coupling coefficients (k t 2 ) of 10.1% and 10.7%, and quality factors (Q) of 115 and 151, are measured for TE1 and TE2 modes, respectively, when the resonator is configured in corresponding operation states. Besides showing intrinsically configurable operation in super-highfrequency regime with high k t 2 and Q , laminated Sc0.28Al0.72N BAW resonator exhibits repeatable operation under switching cycles. Index Terms-Scandium aluminum nitride; ferroelectric; intrinsic switchability; complementary switchable; periodically polled; BAW resonator, super-high frequency. ith the exponential increase in wireless data traffic, adaptive spectrum allocation becomes increasingly vital to avoid congestion and interference. Realization of adaptive spectrum allocation in wireless systems requires reconfigurable spectral processors that enable dynamic control over pass-and stop-bands at the radio frequency front-end (RFFE) Currently, the integrated RF duplexers and filters are created using aluminum nitride (AlN) surface and bulk acoustic wave (S/BAW) resonators. High quality-factor (Q) AlN BAW and SAW filter technologies with frequencies as high as 6 GHz are extensively adopted in RFFE of modern wireless systems Alternative acoustic resonator technologies were proposed to achieve intrinsic configurability based on the use of perovskite ferroelectric and paraelectric transducers The recent discovery of ferroelectricity in scandium-doped aluminum nitride films (ScxAl1-xN) is poised to surpass the limitations of perovskites and enable intrinsically configurable resonators with extreme scaling to super-high-frequency regime (SHF: 3-30 GHz) Efficient excitation of acoustic resonance modes in piezoelectric transducers require harmonic alignment of mechanical stress profile and applied electric field. In conventional thickness-mode BAW resonators, the electric field is applied uniformly across the piezoelectric film thickness through the top and bottom metal electrodes. This architecture limits the electrically excitable acoustic modes to odd thickness-extensional and thickness-shear harmonics. Further, the k t 2 of the higher-order odd modes decreases, proportional to the mode number, due to the excessive charge cancellation across the transducer thickness. The laminated BAW resonator is created from alternative stacking of N ScxAl1-xN films with N + 1 metal layers (integer N ≥ 1). This structure enables creation of a resonator with a single RF port and N isolated DC ports for independent polarization control of ScxAl1-xN films. Figure Reversing polarization direction, by applying lowfrequency switching pulses Assuming infinitesimally thin metal electrodes, the modeshape function of the M th thickness-extensional BAW mode (TEM) in the lamination of N ScxAl1-xN layers with thickness of H is formulated by the normalized z -axis strain ε zz,M (z) as: . Considering the linear dependence of the effective longitudinal piezoelectric coefficient (e 33,eff ) in ScxAl1-xN on its instantaneous polarization (P inst ), the electric displacement (D z,M ) across the laminated stack is derived as: D z,M (z) = e 33 P inst (z)ε zz,M (z) (2). Here, e 33 is the longitudinal piezoelectric constant for a perfectly metal-polar (M-polar) ScxAl1-xN film. The motional charge per unit area (Q m,M ) is derived from: Here, P inst,i is P inst in the i th ScxAl1-xN layer. Using Eq. ( Here, c 33 is the z-axis elastic constant of ScxAl1-xN, and C 0 is the laminate capacitance per unit area: where ε 33 is the z-axis dielectric constant. Considering Eq. ( Opting for uniform polarization direction in all ScxAl1-xN layers results in the highest k t 2 for the TE1 mode when inserting P inst,i = ±1 in Eq. ( ε 33 c 33 In this operation state, the motional charge of the TEN mode (Q m,N ) is nulled considering: This results in a k t 2 of 0 for the TEN mode. Besides the TE1 mode, it should be noted that higher odd harmonics (i.e., M = 2a + 1; a is a positive integer) can also be excited in this operation state. However, the k t 2 of these harmonics is significantly lower than the TE1 mode and is derived using Eq. ( . These harmonics may appear as spurious bands, when the resonator is used for spectral processing in RFFE. Considering the low k t 2 and distant location in frequency spectrum, these spurious bands can be concealed by proper filter design. On the other hand, opting for alternating polarization switching of the layers in laminate (i.e., State 2: P inst,i = (-1) i ) results in perfectly constructive accumulation of motional charge for the TEN mode considering: In this operation state, the motional charge, Q m,1 , for the TE1 mode is derived as: ) N i=1 Replacing TE1 mode z-axis strain ε zz,1 and using auxiliary variable ẑ= NH -z, Eq. ( Inserting Eq. ( This proves the complementary operation of the resonator in TE1 and TEN modes, when the stack polarization is configured in uniform (State 1) or alternating (State 2) states, respectively. In this paper, laminated ScxAl1-xN BAW resonators with N = 2 layers and complementary switchable operation in TE1 and TE2 modes is demonstrated. It should also be noted that in State 2, besides the TEN mode, only higher-order harmonics with M = N(2a + 1) can be excited. The k t 2 of these modes is derived using Eq. ( The complementary operation principle is schematically demonstrated in Fig. In presence of electrodes with finite thicknesses, the operation of laminated ScxAl1-xN BAW resonator can be modeled using the Mason's waveguide approach β i = (2πf) √c 33,i ρ i ⁄ ⁄ The configurable operation of the resonator is modeled using the polarization-dependent piezoelectric coefficient (i.e., e 33,eff,i = e 33 P inst,i ) for the transformers representing electromechanical transduction (η i ) and in ScxAl1-xN layers as: η i = e 33 P inst,i ε 33 ⁄ Finally, the static capacitors per unit area corresponding to each ScxAl1-xN layers is derived as: C 0 = ε 33 d i ⁄ Figure The frequency ratio of TE1 and TE2 modes for this structure is 1.92. This ratio can be accurately controlled by changing the thickness or material of the middle electrode layer. Figure Figure Figure To evaluate the crystal quality and degree of c-axis orientation, X-ray omega scans (i.e., rocking curves) are performed after deposition of each Sc0.28Al0.72N layer on patterned Mo electrodes. Full-width-half-maximums (FWHM) of 2.33° and 2.64° are measured for (002) Sc0.28Al0.72N after deposition of the first and second Sc0.28Al0.72N layers, respectively. The higher FWHM measured after the deposition of second layer may correspond to slight shift in diffraction peak angle due to the different residual stress in top and bottom Sc0.28Al0.72N films. After deposition of the second Sc0.28Al0.72N layer and the third Mo layer, the top electrodes are patterned using a similar etch process as bottom and middle Mo layers, but with photoresist mask created in contact mode lithography, to achieve straight walls. Following deposition of the transducer stack, the Sc0.28Al0.72N layers are etched using a timed chlorinehydrogen (Cl2-H2) based recipe in RIE ICP system to reach bottom and middle Mo electrodes. Next, 500nm-thick platinum (Pt) layer is deposited and patterned using lift-off to create routing lines and pads. The resonator lateral geometry is then patterned using silicon-dioxide hard-mask and BCl3 recipe in ICP RIE. Finally, the resonators are released by deep-reactive-ion-etching of Si handle layer from the backside of the substrate. Figure Laminated Sc0.28Al0.72N BAW resonators are measured to characterize their switching behavior and RF characteristics. Ferroelectric polarization hysteresis and switching behavior of the constituent Sc0.28Al0.72N layers are characterized using a Radiant PiezoMEMS ferroelectric tester. Resonator RF performance is measured using Keysight N5222A PNA vector network analyzer (VNA), along with short-open-load-through (SOLT) calibration procedure enabled by the designated kits. The resonator nonlinearity is measured using two Keysight N5173B signal generators for two-tone input signal excitation and a Keysight N9010A signal analyzer, with a 20dB ± 1.2dB attenuator, for harmonic detection. Finally, the temperature characteristic of frequency is extracted by measuring resonator in a temperature-controlled Semi-Probe PSL4 RF probe station. The polarization hysteresis loop of the 150nm-thick Sc0.28Al0.72N layers in the laminate is measured by driving the ferroelectric film using 20kHz bipolar triangular signals with 80V amplitude and measuring instantaneous current. film with similar Sc content and compressive residual stress The resonator admittance is extracted from the measured reflection coefficient (i.e., S11). Figure Here f s and f p are the series and parallel resonance frequencies and φ Y is admittance phase. In State 1, TE1 operates at 7.04 GHz with a Q of 115 and k t 2 of 10.1%. In State 2, TE2 operates at 13.4 GHz with a Q of 151 and k t 2 of 10.7%. The performance retention of the resonator is measured under 50 switching cycles. Figure The nonlinearity of laminated Sc0.28Al0.72N BAW resonator is measured using two tones with 10MHz frequency offset. Figure 