The consequences of varying the rare-earth element in the superconducting infinite-layer nickelates have been much debated. Here we show striking differences in the magnitude and anisotropy of the superconducting upper critical field across the La-, Pr-, and Nd-nickelates. These distinctions originate from the 4f electron characteristics of the rare-earth ions in the lattice: they are absent for La 3+ , nonmagnetic for the Pr 3+ singlet ground state, and magnetic for the Nd 3+ Kramer's doublet. The unique polar and azimuthal angle-dependent magnetoresistance found in the Nd-nickelates can be understood to arise from the magnetic contribution of the Nd 3+ 4f moments. In the absence of rare-earth effects, we find that the nickelates broadly violate the Pauli limit. Such robust and tunable superconductivity suggests potential in future high-field applications. Following the initial discovery of superconductivity in Nd0.8Sr0.2NiO2 Figure For a superconductor in the dirty limit, which describes the nickelates ), Hc2^ μ 1/x0 μ Δ0 μ Tc0 . Here 0 1 is the magnetic flux quantum and Δ0 the superconducting gap. As for Hc2||, the observed (1-T/Tc0) 1/2 temperature dependence indicates dominant paramagnetic de-pairing near Tc0 To probe the origin of this striking variation in Hc2, we measure in detail the magnetoresistance as a function of the polar (B) and azimuthal (0) angle of the applied magnetic field direction, as illustrated in Fig. In sharp contrast, the Nd-nickelates show qualitatively distinct magnetoresistance. The orientation of the B-dependence is opposite to that of La-/Pr-nickelates and other layered superconductors,i.e. superconductivity is more suppressed by an in-plane magnetic field, indicating a complete reversal of the superconducting anisotropy. Furthermore, a striking clover-leaf 0-dependence is observed for Nd. As shown in fig. How can we understand this clear difference between the Nd-nickelates versus the La-/Prnickelates? In all cases the in-plane lattice parameters are clamped to that of the SrTiO3 substrate, while the c-axis variations reflect the R-site ionic radii (1-3): La 3+ is the largest, ~4.5% larger than the closely similar Pr 3+ and Nd 3+ (within 1.5% of each other) To examine this, we use theoretical approaches including ab initio density functional theory (DFT) calculations Following these CEF considerations, we can construct a simple model that quantitatively describes all of the angular magnetoresistance data, based on the assumption that the Nd 4f moment contributes purely to the background magnetization and magnetic permeability of the lattice. For the B-dependent magnetoresistance, all of the nickelates have in common anisotropic orbital depairing (AOD; Fig. The temperature-dependent balance of this competition (Fig. Here C is a constant, and M DEF and M GHI are the temperature-and magnetic-field-dependent coefficients of the two functional forms (fig. As for the 0-dependent magnetoresistance, we see a competition between a 2-fold symmetric (C2) 0-dependence and a 4-fold symmetric (C4) 0-dependence (Fig. Here C, 0 "# , and 0 "T are constants, and M "# and M "T are the temperature-and magnetic-fielddependent coefficients (fig. The extracted coefficients M DEF , M GHI , M "# , and M "T exhibit peaks in magnetic field for a given constant temperature (fig. The pair-breaking framework of superconductivity is useful to discuss these observations. To leading order, the external magnetic field suppresses superconductivity through either orbital or paramagnetic de-pairing In contrast, neither de-pairing effect has intrinsic 0-dependence, and both would faithfully exhibit the structure of the local magnetic field. Therefore, the clover leaf pattern is a direct manifestation of the 0-dependence of the local magnetic field intensity, particularly since M "T is consistently an order of magnitude larger than M "# where it is observed (fig. With these developments, we finally return to the significant differences in Hc2 across R-variants shown in Fig. in their absence, Hc2/Tc0 is highest for La. Pr is intermediate, consistent with the contribution of a Pr 3+ 4f moment induced by magnetic field. Thus we see that the underlying intrinsic behavior of Hc2 appears to be similar across the infinite-layer nickelates, once the additional suppression due to the R-site magnetism has been taken into account. This leads to the conclusion that the conventional weak-coupling Pauli limit ! "# = 1.86 X Y1 (30) is broadly exceeded. Although the (Nd,Sr)NiO2 samples obey this limit (Fig. While the magnitude of Hc2 presents an important question for future research, we discuss potentially relevant scenarios. We observe that the angular magnetoresistance in the Nd-nickelates can be fully captured by considering only the 4f moment contribution to the background magnetization and magnetic permeability. However, it is important to note that this does not preclude other contributions from the hybridization between the R 5d and the Ni 3d orbitals -in the presence of finite spin-orbit coupling, multi-orbital mixing could enhance Hc2. Perhaps the most straightforward explanation is that the experimentally observed Tc0 via transport occurs in the presence of significant phase fluctuations/disorder and does not reflect the pairing scale Δ0. Indeed, tunneling spectroscopy indicates a large Δ0 to Tc0 ratio, although surface effects and variations remain to be clarified During the preparation of this manuscript, we became aware of two reports on Hc2 in La-nickelates The reported anomalous angular magnetoresistance is seen in all 16 measured Nd-nickelate samples and absent in all 7 measured La-and Pr-nickelates. We show the temperature and field dependence of the angular magnetoresistance of additional representative nickelate samples of all three R-variants in figs. S3 to S5. While there are sample to sample variations, the overall angular magnetoresistance behavior and doping evolution are qualitatively consistent. For example, while only two of the three x = 0.225 samples exhibit higher resistance at q = 0, the substantial impact of the EMP effect is evident in all three samples. The same fittings for the qand f-dependence (Eqs. 1 and 2 of the main text) are shown as black dashed lines. In contrast, the La-and Prnickelates all follow the expected AOD dominant q-dependence and the vortex-driven C2 fdependence. Anomalous qand f-dependent magnetoresistance features have been seen in cuprate superconductors, and attributed to the angular dependence of the vortex pinning mechanisms x, a four-fold clover leaf pattern has been observed, which is attributed to the additional vortex pinning from orthorhombic domain boundaries Crystal field calculations of rare-earth 4f moments We investigate the crystal field splitting of the 4f levels through numerical calculations. We treat the static tetragonal crystal field as a perturbation Hamiltonian, described as: calculation, we adopt the point charge approximation, as we are primarily interested in the energy hierarchy of the split levels To obtain the electron density distributions, we implement density functional theory (DFT) calculations with Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (26) exchange-correlation functional using the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) As discussed in the main text, the C2 symmetric f-dependent magnetoresistance seen in all nickelate samples can be attributed to vortex dynamics induced by the measurement current, while the C4 symmetric response is attributed to the Nd 4f electrons in the underlying tetragonal crystal symmetry. Therefore, we expect the C2 symmetric response to rotate with the current direction and the C4 symmetric response to remain locked onto the crystalline axes. We perform such a test on a Nd0.8Sr0.2NiO2 and a Pr0. 'figure-of-eight'-shaped pattern is seen as doping is increased. Such an enhancement of the magnetic response of the 4f moments might seem counterintuitive, given the substitution of nonmagnetic Sr 2+ into the Nd 3+ lattice. However, in the case of antiferromagnetism, non-magnetic defects can amplify the suppression of superconductivity by magnetic ordering 