Ultra-broadband imaging devices with high performance are in great demand for a variety of technological applications, including imaging, remote sensing, and communications. An ultrabroadband up-converter is realized based on a p-GaAs homojunction interfacial workfunction internal photoemission (HIWIP) detector-light emitting diode (LED) device. The device demonstrates an ultra-broad response ranging from visible to terahertz (THz) with good reproducibility. The peak responsivity in the mid-infrared (MIR) region is 140 mA/W at 10.5 m. The HIWIP-LED shows enormous potential for ultra-broadband up-conversion covering all infrared atmospheric windows, as well as the THz region, and the pixelless imaging of the MIR spot from CO2 laser is further demonstrated. In addition,the proposed up-converter also performs as a near-infrared and visible detector under zero bias by using a bi-functional LED. Thanks to its ultra-wide response, the HIWIP-LED up-converter has great promise for stable, high-performance ultra-broadband pixelless imaging and multi-functional analysis systems. Developing efficient ultra-broadband imaging systems, particularly for the mid-infrared (MIR)and terahertz (THz) ranges, where the fundamental molecular vibration fingerprint region is located, is of great interest due to the huge potential in a variety of applications such as astronomy, environmental monitoring, health, national security, and chemical diagnostics Graphene has shown a broad absorption spectrum spanning from the ultraviolet to the midinfrared Semiconductor-based IR and THz photodetectors, on the other hand, are more advanced in the fabrication process and have proved their applicability in imaging systems. As a representative, quantum well infrared photodetectors (QWIPs) show the potential in MIR and FIR detection because of the high sensitivity, fast response speed, and high damage threshold. Imaging systems based on the pixel-based arrays (e.g., linear array and focal plane array (FPA)) are widely used today. Although QWIP-FPA has shown great success in MIR imaging, this strategy is difficult to extend to THz imaging To solve the problems, the notion of pixelless imaging based on semiconductor up-conversion is presented. The main idea is to design an up-conversion device that can convert low-energy photons to high-energy photons, allowing THz imaging to be transformed into well-studied near-infrared imaging. The up-conversion device in this imaging strategy is an entire large-size imaging cell. The detecting part of the up-conversion device receives and transmits the original picture, then the light-emitting diode (LED) part restores the image and emits near-infrared light, which is eventually 'seen' by a Si charge coupled device (CCD). As a result, there is no requirement for a connection between the device and the readout circuit, which effectively eliminates the thermal mismatch problem. It has been reported that a QWP-LED-based up-conversion device has successfully realized THz imaging, demonstrating the enormous potential of applying photon-type-detector-based up-conversion devices to THz imaging However, the polarization selection rule in QWIP requires the detector to adopt a 45° edge coupled geometry to realize the optical coupling, which may naturally induce image distortion and stretching. Although using grating geometry to achieve normal incidence is a feasible alternative, the wavelength dependence of diffraction implies that grating detectors are not suitable for broadband detection. To avoid these problems, GaAs-based homojunction interfacial workfunction internal photoemission (HIWIP) detectors have recently been introduced into the THz imaging system In comparison to the QWP-LED, the HIWIP-LED has a broadband response (4.2 THz-20 THz) in the THz region and a low optimized NEP of 29.1 pW/Hz 1/2 , indicating that it might be used in a wider range of applications. The ability of photodetectors to achieve broadband response is a distinctive feature brought by free-carrier absorption. However, this capability has been underestimated in previous studies, which focused only on a certain interval In this work, we demonstrated the potential application of the HIWIP-LED in ultra-broadband detection and imaging. The p-GaAs HIWIP-LED up-converter shows an ultra-broadband response from the visible to THz (150 cm -1 ) region, which is much broader than the bandwidth of 2D materialbased photodetectors. The HIWIP detector part was well measured and shows high performance in the IR region. We also demonstrated a strong up-conversion signal of the HIWIP-LED up-converter in the MIR region (@10.6 m) and successfully realized the MIR imaging of a CO2 laser spot. Finally, it is found very interesting that the HIWIP-LED up-converter can also respond to the near-infrared and visible light at room temperature under zero bias, which originates from the interband transition of GaAs in the LED part. The schematic of the up-conversion device is shown in Fig. The photocurrent spectrum of the HIWIP-LED sample on an ultra-broad range from 150 cm -1 to 5000 cm -1 , covering the THz and MIR range, is shown in Fig. The broad-range response in the MIR region is due to the free-carriers absorption (FCA), while the peaks at 709 cm -1 (14.1 m), 952 cm -1 (10.5 m), 1316 cm -1 (7.6 m), and 3030 cm -1 (3.3 m) are produced by inter-valence-band-absorption (IVBA) including the hole transitions from the light/heavy-hole band to the spin-orbit split-off band and from heavy-hole band to light-hole band The responsivity of the HIWIP-LED sample under different biases at 4.2 K is shown in Fig. The biases are chosen to be higher than the turn-on voltage (1.4 V) of LED. The responsivity shows an evident dependence on the bias voltage, which increases significantly with increasing bias. The responsivity achieves a maximum of 0.14 A/W at ~ 952 cm -1 (10.5 m) when the bias is 1.842 V. The noise of the sample is evaluated using the dark current measured at 4.2 K. The noise equivalent power (NEP) is calculated using the evaluated noise and the responsivity obtained under different biases. We evaluate the overall NEP of the united imaging system consisting of the HIWIP-LED up-converter and the Si CCD. According to a developed noise theory of the up-conversion detectors While the dark current of the commercial Si CCD can be suppressed to an extremely low level, the last term can also be neglected. The evaluated NEP is shown in Fig. The LED part in the HIWIP-LED sample is specially designed to operate at low temperatures. It consists of two AlGaAs/GaAs heterojunctions and a 9 nm In0.1Ga0.9As quantum well sandwiched between them. The AlGaAs/GaAs heterojunction between the In0.1Ga0.9As quantum well and the HIWIP part is designed to be intrinsic to avoid lateral diffusion of the photo-excited carriers. The luminescence spectrum measurement of the LED part shows two peaks located at 873 nm and 889 nm, both of which are caused by recombination from the combined states both in conduction bands and valence bands in the In0.1Ga0.9As quantum well The optical setup of the up-conversion measurement is shown in Fig. The up-conversion efficiency is the intrinsic property of the HIWIP-LED sample, therefore, we find that the efficiency hardly changes as the incident power increases, as shown in Fig. The imaging of the laser spot with a wavelength of 10.6 m has been achieved. The schematic diagram of the optical setup for imaging is shown in Fig. Therefore, the laser beam is first focused by a ZnSe lens with a focal length of 63.5 mm and then passes through a KRS5 window with a transmissivity of 74% at 10.6 m to reach the surface of the HIWIP part of the sample. The image of the laser spot is restored by the LED part and transmitted as an NIR image. Two K9 glass lenses are used to refocus the image onto the CCD so that the up-conversion image can be detected and recorded by the computer. The photo of the same laser spot is taken by a commercial thermal imaging camera (NEC corporation IRV-T0831C) at the same position (Fig. Due to the high resolution of the commercial Si CCD, the picture taken by the up-conversion system shows a much higher resolution than the commercial camera. The resolution can also be further improved by optimizing the up-converter or the optical path of the imaging system. In addition to the up-conversion function, it is found interesting that the device also shows a response to visible and NIR light at room temperature. We measured the spectra of the HIWIP-LED sample in the NIR region. Fig. The photoresponse spectra in Fig. The spike appearing at the onset of the GaAs absorption (peak position at 12220 cm -1 ) is caused by exciton-exciton interaction in GaAs/AlGaAs structure The photocurrent decreases substantially after the HIWIP-LED starts to emit light (> 0.8 V) due to the growth of the recombination rate of the carriers in the In0.1Ga0.9As quantum well, as shown in Fig. The results demonstrate that the LED part can work as a bi-functional device with the flexibility to switch between emitter and NIR detector by simply changing the bias voltage. More importantly, the response and EL spectra induced by the quantum well show a large overlap, which indicates that the bi-functional LED part would be able to detect the light emitted by an identical device. With the advancement of the semiconductor manufacturing process, similar designs can be applied in various areas like integrated sensing We demonstrated a novel ultra-broadband up-conversion photon-type HIWIP-LED imaging device, which can respond to the radiation from visible to THz region. The responsivity achieves a maximum of 0.14 A/W. The IR up-conversion imaging is realized with a CO2 laser with a peak wavelength of 10.6 m. The maximum up-conversion efficiency is 0.0034%, which can be further improved by enhancing the light extraction efficiency. The image of the laser spot taken by the upconversion united system is compared with the image taken by a commercial camera. The up-converter shows higher image quality, which can be further improved by optimizing the up-converter and the optical path. In addition to the up-conversion function, the HIWIP-LED also shows a response to the NIR and visible light at a wavenumber greater than 10200 cm -1 at room temperature, indicating the potential bi-functional usage of the proposed up-conversion device. The HIWIP-LED up-conversion device shows unique advantages to be used in future ultrabroadband imaging systems. First, the united structure of the HIWIP-LED enables a cost-saving fabrication by avoiding the need for extra integrated circuits. Second, the ultra-wide response allows it to be used for versatile analysis, which is useful for systems requiring cost-efficient and compact design like remote sensing and astronomy observations. In addition, the up-converter itself could be looked upon as an ultra-broadband detector covering the whole infrared detection span from visible to THz, indicating that it has great prospects for application in spectrometers if the operating temperature of the device is further increased by designing an appropriate surface structure to enhance optical coupling at a later stage. The implementation of the ultra-broadband up-conversion devices based on p-GaAs semiconductor HIWIP-LED structure has laid the foundation for the optimal design of photon-type up-conversion devices in the future. Nowadays, GaAs-based photon-type detectors still need to be operated under liquid helium temperature. Finding an effective way to raise the operating temperature is a major direction for future designs. More importantly, the GaAs-based photon-type detectors have great potential for high-speed detection. Therefore, HIWIP-LED is also a strong contender for future high-speed ultra-broadband imaging systems. The HIWIP-LED up-converter consists of a p-GaAs HIWIP detector and an AlGaAs/GaAs/ In0.1Ga0.9As quantum well LED directly grown on 600 m thick semi-insulating GaAs substrates. The HIWIP detector consists of a 20-period homojunction structure, each period containing a 150 Å p-GaAs emitter layer with a doping concentration of 8×10 18 cm -3 and an 800 Å undoped GaAs barrier layer. The LED part consists of two AlGaAs/GaAs(800 Å/400 Å) heterojunctions and a 90 Å thick In0.1Ga0.9As quantum well layer sandwiched between them, which is specially designed for operation at liquid helium temperatures. The upper AlGaAs/GaAs heterojunction is highly doped with Si to a concentration of 2.5×10 18 cm -3 , forming a p-n junction in the LED part. The HIWIP detector and LED are located between a p-GaAs bottom contact with a doping concentration of 3×10 18 cm -3 and an n-GaAs top contact with a doping concentration of 2.5×10 18 cm -3 . The up-conversion devices were prepared by etching 1×1 mm 2 mesas using a wet etching technique. Then the Ti\Pt\Au layer (for p-type contact) and Pb\Ge\ Ti\Pt\Au layer (for n-type contact) were evaporated onto the bottom contact layer and the top contact layer, respectively, to ensure good ohmic contact. The size of the window reserved for the LED light output on the top contact layer is 860 m×860 m. The samples are mounted on 14 pin packages for electrical and optical measurements. The photocurrent spectrums were measured on a Fourier transform infrared spectrometer (Brucker VERTEX 80 IFS 66v/s). The device chosen in the experiment has an active area of 860 m×860 m. The spectra on THz/MIR/NIR region were measured with an HDPE window, a KRS5 window, and a quartz window respectively. The responsivity spectra were measured using a calibrated blackbody (Infrared Systems Development Corporation IR-564/301), a low noise current preamplifier (Model SR570), and a lockin amplifier (Model SR830). In the up-conversion experiments, the photoemission spectra of the LED are measured by a fiber spectrometer (Ocean optics QE65PRO). The photoemission power of the LED was measured by Thorlabs S130C large area Si slim photodiode. The HIWIP-LED was fixed on the sample holder of the cryostat, which was vacuumed to ~1×10 -5 mbar and cooled to the liquid helium temperature. The device was irradiated with 10.6 m light emitted by a CO2 laser. The laser passed through two KRS5 windows and illuminated the active region of the device. The up-conversion device converts the MIR light to NIR light, which passed through the quartz windows on the other side of the cryostat and is detected by a fiber probe or Si photodiode set close to the window. For the imaging, the diameter of the original laser spot is 4 mm, which is too large for the imaging on a single HIWIP-LED window (860 m×860 m). Therefore, the laser beam is first focused by a ZnSe lens with a focal length of 63.5 mm and then passes through a KRS5 window to reach the surface of the HIWIP part of the sample. The image of the laser spot is restored by the LED part and is transmitted as NIR light. Two K9 glass lenses are used to refocus the image onto the CCD (iKon-M 934 BR-DD) so that the up-conversion image can be detected and recorded by the computer.