The orthorhombic compound AuSn4 is compositionally similar to the Dirac node arc semimetal PtSn4. AuSn4 is, contrary to PtSn4, superconducting with a critical temperature of Tc = 2.35 K. Recent measurements present indications for quasi two-dimensional superconducting behavior in AuSn4. Here we present measurements of the superconducting density of states and the band structure of AuSn4 through Scanning Tunneling Microscopy (STM) and Angular Resolved Photoemission Spectroscopy (ARPES). The superconducting gap values in different portions of the Fermi surface are spread around ∆0 = 0.4 meV, which is close to but somewhat larger than ∆ = 1.76kBTc expected from BCS theory. We observe superconducting features in the tunneling conductance at the surface up to temperatures about 20% larger than bulk Tc. The band structure calculated with Density Functional Theory (DFT) follows well the results of ARPES. The crystal structure presents two possible stackings of Sn layers, giving two nearly degenerate polytypes. This makes AuSn4 a rather unique case with a three dimensional electronic band structure but properties ressembling those of low dimensional layered compounds. Topological insulators host interesting surface states with nontrivial electronic properties, such as dissipationless charge and spin transport along surface channels Often, semimetals with potentially topological crossings in the bandstructure also present a huge magnetoresistance (MR) Here we analyze the normal state and superconducting properties of AuSn 4 . We grow single crystals of AuSn 4 and characterize them using X-ray diffraction and resistivity. We measure the superconducting properties with scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) and the electronic band structure with angular resolved photoemission (ARPES). The superconducting density of states shows a well opened superconducting gap which remains above the bulk T c . The band structure obtained by ARPES is succesfully compared to Density Functional Theory (DFT) calculations. We discuss the structural properties of AuSn 4 and their influence on the observed electronic behavior. Single crystals of AuSn 4 were grown using excess Sn flux ) and Sn (Goodfellow 99.995%) with the proportion 88:12 -Sn:Au. The Au-Sn mixture was introduced in a fritted crucible set To measure the resistivity, we attached four gold wires using silver epoxy to an in-plane shaped sample. In Fig. To perform the STM measurements we used the STM and the cryogenic movable sample holder described in Ref. The ARPES experiments were performed using tunable vacuum ultraviolet (VUV) laser ARPES spectrometer that consists of a Scienta DA30 electron analyzer, picosecond Ti:Sapphire oscillator and fourth-harmonic generator Results were obtained at a temperature of 10.5 K and were reproduced on several different single crystals. We carried out DFT calculations of the bulk electronic band structure as implemented in the Quantum ESPRESSO package We used the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) and the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) functional to describe the exchange-correlation energy A. Scanning tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy. We show in Fig. The tunneling conductance vs bias voltage obtained at different positions is shown in Fig. , where E is the energy, and f (E) the Fermi function. We seek at each temperature the N (E) that best fits the experiment, showing the corresponding σ(V ) at each temperature as a black line in Fig. . The quasiparticle peaks are broad and there is a large density of states down to energies well below the position of the quasiparticle peaks. Note that N (E) has a feature inside the quasiparticle peaks (see Figs. ). This provides the distribution γ i (∆ i ). The resulting γ i vs ∆ i is shown in Fig. Density Funcional Theory (DFT) calculations. In Fig. . There is also a large hole band about 0.1 eV below the Fermi level. When moving k z towards Γ, the hole band vanishes and large electron Fermi surfaces take the lead (Fig. The main features are mostly found in ARPES as well as in DFT calculations (right panels of Fig. At the Γ point (Fig. The influence of stacking faults in the T c has been reported in other layered materials. For example, the layered diantimonide LaSb 2 shows a very large resistive superconducting transition and the T c observed at the surface is larger than the temperature at which the resistivity drops to zero Thus, the presence of intrinsic stacking faults in AuSn 4 can explain an increase of T c by nearly 20% close to the surface, leading to the observation of superconductivity in the tunneling conductance above the T c from the resistive transition. Furthermore, we can associate the dependence of the density of states as a function of the position to spatial inhomogeneities of the superconducting properties along the b-axis, perpendicular to the surface. On the other hand, the coincidence between ARPES results and DFT calculations (presenting the surface projection of the band structure of the #68 space group, see Fig. We should remind the involved length scales in different measurements. At the photon energy used to collect the ARPES data, the photoelectron escape depth is of about 30 Å. Therefore the ARPES signal shows the band structure several unit cells close to the surface. Nevertheless, the influence of stacking faults might well extend over a larger scale. The superconducting density of states measured with STM provides an average over distances of order of the coherence length, which is of about 75 nm The polytypism of AuSn 4 has also consequences that go beyond the pure electronic properties. It has been shown that the layered properties of AuSn 4 play a significant role in the embrittlement of Sn based soldering alloys. Indeed, the recent thrust in developing lead-free solders has led to a close re-analysis of phase diagrams of Sn with other elements In summary, we have grown and characterized single crystals of the superconductor AuSn 4 . From local Scanning Tunneling conductance measurements we find superconductivity above the bulk T c . ARPES provides an intricate band structure. We discuss the role of polytypism in the electronic and superconducting properties of AuSn 4 . Polytypism usually appears in quasi two-dimensional superconductors. AuSn 4 has however a strongly three-dimensional Fermi surface, suggesting that polytypic stacking faults are relevant to better understand the properties of this system, which is a rather unique example of a three dimensional compound presenting properties characteristic of quasi two-dimensional systems. The crystal structure of AuSn 4 has been measured using powder X-ray diffraction. All available X-ray scattering data are compatible with both the #68 centrosymmetric space group Ccca and #41 noncentrosymmetric space group Aba2 To describe with more detail the atomic positions in the two possible space groups, we have computed the atomic positions using the same coordinate frame (Fig. As we see in Fig. A better insight is won when looking at each layer from the top (Fig. From this representation of the atomic positions, we see that AuSn 4 has two polytypes. The difference between #68 and #41 amounts to a different stacking of Sn layers. The computed difference in energy of atomic positions in both structures is of 0.0165 meV per atom, favoring the #68 space group. In the relaxed state we find that a = 0.6567 nm and c = 0.6561 nm in the #68 space group and a = 0.65124 nm and b = 0.65680 nm in the #41 space group. From such a small difference between #68 and #41, we also see that AuSn 4 in the #68 space group is prone to present intrinsic stacking faults consisting of different Sn arrangements within layers. We compare the ARPES results with calculations of the band structure in the #41 space group in Fig. We now discuss the surface band structure. To obtain the surface band structure of AuSn 4 in the space groups #41 and #68, we constructed maximally localized Wannier functions (MLWFs) For the #41 space group, the result is in Fig. The bulk band structure including SOC was calculated using VASP Our calculations show that the AuSn 4 Fermi surface is different from the Fermi surface obtained in PtSn 4 . The latter is formed by three small pockets and only one large Fermi surface sheet In Fig. The MR changes as a function of temperature. At temperatures below 20 K we observe a slight downward curvature below about 2 T. Above 2 T, we obseve a linear increase up to 14 T without any sign for saturation. Above 20 K we observe that the MR is significantly reduced and the magnetic field dependence approaches the quadratic behavior observed in simple metals for the whole field range. We provide Kohler's plot in Figure The MR in AuSn 4 is large, but considerably smaller than the MR of PtSn 4 and PdSn 4 The two-band model assumes that there is no anisotropy in the Fermi surface, and that all electron or hole-like carriers have the same mobility. Within this model, the MR would show a close to a B 2 behavior or be saturated at high field depending on the level of the electron/hole compensation. Neither of the two cases can explain the non-saturating linear MR observed here. The inset of Fig. where n e (n h ) and μ e (μ h ) are electron (hole) concentration and mobility We can also consider other sources for a nonsaturating MR, such as a linearly dispersing portion of the bandstructure, charge density waves, open orbits or disorder 