The accurate measurement of complex liquid permittivity in a frequency range provides important information on liquid properties in comparison to single frequency permittivity investigations. The multifrequency microwave characterization technique based on a single quartz whispering-gallery-mode (WGM) resonator with a microfluidic chip are proposed, developed, and demonstrated. This technique allows the complex permittivity of small volumes of liquid to be measured at six resonant frequencies in the 30-40 GHz frequency range. The calibration is performed by simulating the measurement cell and by plotting the calibration nomogram charts for all six investigated frequencies. The novel approach is applied in studies of the complex permittivity of the L-lysine in water solutions. The results open up possibilities to investigate the complex permittivity of biological liquids at several frequencies and to further develop the microwave dielectrometry of small liquid volumes in a certain frequency range using the quasi-optical nature of a single high-Q WGM resonator. HE investigation of liquids is important in many areas of science and technology. One of the main characteristics of liquids is complex permittivity, which allows the liquid to be identified, the concentration of the substance in a water solution to be determined, and different processes to be investigated, for instance. Liquid permittivity measurement techniques can be divided into two subgroups: resonance and non-resonance techniques. Resonance techniques are developed on the basis of utilizing different resonant structures with a small amount of a liquid, which results in a change of the resonant characteristics of the whole structure transmission/reflection characteristics of the structure. Resonance techniques are more sensitive than non-resonance ones. However, as a rule, they are applied to measure liquids at a single frequency, while non-resonance techniques allow measurements in a certain, sometimes wide, frequency range The dielectric whispering-gallery-mode (WGM) resonatorbased microwave technique demonstrates high sensitivity and accuracy for the characterization of a liquid being tested However, the frequency dependence of the permittivity liquid often provides additional information, such as the identification of the liquid under investigation and an understanding of the relaxation mechanisms. Usually, such measurements are performed using a non-resonant technique In this paper, we present the results of the development of a single WGM resonator with microfluidic chip for measurements at six resonant frequencies (resonant modes) without need for the coupling to be tuned. We show that in the case of using WGM resonators fabricated from crystal quartz material, it is possible to perform investigations for a number of modes with spacing of about 2 GHz. The resonance structure was modeled using the COMSOL Multiphysics software The measurement technique was developed based on experience and the results obtained using dielectric WGM resonators with microfluidic chip (MFC) and capillary. It was successfully used for complex liquid permittivity measurements at a single resonant frequency The resonator technique is developed on the basis of the WGM resonator fabricated from single crystal quartz material with MFC (Fig. The S21 response was recorded by the 8722C network analyzer for a number of resonance modes. The measurements were performed using six modes HEm 1 1, where m=12, 13, 14, 15, 16, and 17, which correspond to frequencies of about 30.16 GHz, 31.99 GHz, 33.83 GHz, 35.66 GHz, 37.5 GHz, and 39.34 GHz respectively. The modes were identified by investigating the bare resonator in The investigation of complex liquid permittivity for a number of frequencies/modes without changing the coupling is fast and convenient. Extracting the Q factor and resonance frequency using common methods such as the Lorentzian fit and the -3 dB level method is only accurate for symmetrical resonance frequency responses. Unfortunately, it is not possible to tune the coupling to reach all six resonances so that it is symmetrical. It is difficult to perform even for two resonance modes. Controlling the coupling using some mechanical elements driven outside the isolating box or, in particular, its opening requires too much time (comparable to the measurement time and sometimes even greater). In this respect, instead of fitting using the Lorentzian method, we suggest using the coupled modes parameter extraction approach where Gs is the real number, 1 is the phase difference, A1 is the real coefficient, Q1 is the quality factor, f1 is the resonance frequency, and f is the current frequency. The responses of the measurement cell with the channel filled by 1 mol/l lysine in water solutions are shown in Fig. Using this procedure allows us to perform measurements of a liquid to be tested on six modes without needing to tune the coupling. We extracted the resonant parameters of six modes in a frequency range of about 10 GHz using the above-described fitting approach. The fitting procedure was realized using Python code. It should be noted that as a material used to produce the resonator, single crystal quartz not only offers higher measurement accuracy and sensitivity compared to a sapphire resonator, but also a weaker dependence of the coupling coefficient of transmission lines with a resonator due to the noticeably lower value of the real part of the quartz permittivity ( 4) compared to sapphire ( 10). The latter contributes to the development and implementation of the multi-resonance measurement technique based on WGM resonators. The simulations of the measurement cell were performed by COMSOL Multiphysics The first step of the simulation was to investigate the bare (without the plastic layer) quartz resonator. The properties of single crystal quartz as an anisotropic material are described by a diagonal tensor as follows: , where ε ⟂ , ε ∥ , tan δ ⟂ , and tan δ ∥ are the tensor components that describe the permittivity and loss tangent of quartz in two directions: perpendicular and parallel to the crystal axis c, respectively. A preliminary calculation of the bare resonator characteristics was presented in In order to take crystal quartz permittivity dependence into account and hence to improve the measurement accuracy, the permittivity values obtained in The same approach, in combination with linear approximation, was applied to parameters of the plastic using the model with the air-filled microfluidic channel. The parameters of the microfluidic channel have little effect on the resonator characteristics in the case of air filling. The permittivity and loss tangent values for different modes are shown in Fig. A comparison of the simulated values using the abovementioned plastic permittivity data and measured spectrum of the quartz resonator with air-filled microfluidic channel is shown in TABLE II. For the calibration of the microwave setup, operating on six different modes, a procedure similar to the one previously suggested for investigations with a single Lorentzian-shaped mode The nomogram charts were obtained for all six measurement modes [Fig. The complex permittivity data for each concentration of Llysine solution (red point) can be obtained from the chart using the graphical method. To extract the permittivity quickly, the Python code was written to obtain the value from linear equations from the four points that are closest to the experimental ones when combined. The results of the complex permittivity investigation of lysine in water solution (17.3 mmol/l, 26.0 mmol/l, 39.0 mmol/l, 58.5 mmol/l, 87.8 mmol/l, 131.7 mmol/l, 197.5 mmol/l, and 296.3 mmol/l) as a function of frequency are shown in Fig. The real part of permittivity dependence on frequency decreases monotonically with decreasing frequency for all of the investigated concentrations [Fig. The reliability of the investigation of the HE15 1 1 mode (35.6 GHz) was demonstrated by the measurements of known liquids like methanol, ethanol, propanol, and glucose aqueous solutions in The microfluidic chip, which was identical to the MFC used in for the real part of permittivity is equal to 0.014, 0.013, 0.016, 0.018, 0.017, and 0.02; for the imaginary part of permittivity, it is equal to 0.01, 0.009, 0.006, 0.005, 0.005, and 0.008 for modes where m=12, 13, 14, 15, 16, and 17 respectively. It should be emphasized that despite the fact that the MFC dimensions were optimized exclusively for an investigation at a frequency of about 35.5 GHz, the investigation results of lysine in water solutions for the other five frequencies also show high sensitivity. In this work, the advanced technique based on a single WGM dielectric resonator with microfluidic chip to measure complex liquid permittivity at multiple frequencies was developed and demonstrated using the quasi-optical nature of the resonators. The sensor fabricated on the basis of crystal quartz material allows measurements to be performed at six discrete frequencies in the frequency range from 30 GHz to 40 GHz without changing the coupling. We demonstrate that the number of discrete measurement frequencies and their spacing can be tuned by changing the resonator dimensions. Sensor calibration was performed for each of the six modes. The resonance parameters measured for all symmetrical and nonsymmetrical resonance responses were obtained using the coupled mode resonator fit. The complex permittivities of Llysine solutions were obtained in a relatively wide frequency range of 10 GHz. The obtained results demonstrate a high level of accuracy and open up the possibilities for investigating biological liquids through the developed resonant method in a wide frequency range.