The advent of novel nonlinear materials has stirred unprecedented interest in exploring the use of temporal inhomogeneities to achieve novel forms of wave control, amidst the greater vision of engineering metamaterials across both space and time. When the properties of an unbounded medium are abruptly switched in time, propagating waves are efficiently converted to different frequencies, and partially coupled to their back-propagating phase-conjugate partners, through a process called time-reversal. However, in realistic materials the switching time is necessarily finite, playing a central role in the resulting temporal scattering features. By identifying and leveraging the crucial role of electromagnetic momentum conservation in timereversal processes, here we develop a very general analytical formalism to quantify timereversal due to temporal inhomogeneities of arbitrary profile. Finally, we deploy our analytic theory to develop a formalism, analogous to spatial tapering theory, that enables the tailoring of a desired time-reversal spectral response, demonstrating its use for the realization of broadband frequency converters and filters. Scattering is a key feature of wave propagation, occurring ubiquitously at the spatial interface between two media with different properties. It consists in the generation of reflected waves in the originating medium, and transmitted waves into the second medium. The temporal analogue of a spatial interface arises when the properties of an unbounded medium are abruptly and uniformly switched in time, and the associated phenomena have been attracting significant recent interest across various wave platforms Most research work in this area has so far been assuming that time interfaces are abrupt, i.e., that the time required to switch the material properties is negligible compared to the wave dynamics. However, in any realistic scenario the material response cannot be considered instantaneous, and in several instances the finite width of a temporal interface may become comparable with the period of the propagating signals, especially as we operate at higher frequencies. In addition, more interesting phenomena are observed at time interfaces involving a large contrast of the material properties before and after the switching event, and a tradeoff between permittivity contrast and switching speed is naturally expected We are commonly used to writing Maxwell's equations in the frequency domain by assuming a harmonic time dependence, since in static linear media frequency is conserved across spatial interfaces. At time interfaces, on the contrary, spatial momentum is conserved and not frequency, therefore it is convenient to consider spatially harmonic ikz e fields in space, where k is the wavenumber and z is the propagation coordinate. Under this assumption, the displacement field D and magnetic induction B in a generally time-varying homogeneous medium obey at any point in space the temporal analogue of the telegrapher's equations: where R and T are the scattering coefficients respectively associated with the backward (time-reversed) and forward waves generated at the time interface, and 0 ( ) is the wave impedance. We can invert Eq. ( Using this result, we can derive a general solution for ( ) as a function of an arbitrary timemodulation profile of the material properties. Dividing the first of Eq. ( Combining ( . Eq. ( . The general solution is which defines the ratio / R T of time-reversed over transmitted signals in time for arbitrary variations of the material properties through ( ) In contrast with the case of a spatial interface, here we are concerned with the ratio / R T ρ = because at time-interfaces the energy is not conserved, so T and R can both become arbitrarily large , respectively. Conservation of momentum therefore requires As a result, whilst T and R can both change arbitrarily, their difference must remain constant. Note that we made no assumption here on the temporal variation ( ) 0 Z t , so this result holds for any form of temporal switching as long as it is carried uniformly across the spatial extent of the wave. Combining this result with Eq. (3) yields where 2 ρ is the ratio ( ) at the end of the switching process. In the case of a step-like switching profile of permittivity, modeled as a sigmoid function with rise time τ of the form , and a static permeability 1 μ = , the phase in Eq. ( Re ω →∞ R ) wave at the end of the modulation process. In order to be able to demonstrate the sharpstep case with high accuracy, the results in this figure are computed numerically using the routine in is the final angular frequency. The most evident effect of a slower transition is the amplitude decrease of the timereversed wave, while the frequency-converted transmitted wave is preserved. In the sharp-step limit 0 τ → , forward and backward waves have exactly opposite phases (assuming 2 1 ε ε > , equal otherwise), implying that the beating amplitude of the instantaneous displacement field intensity oscillates between the intensity of the original incoming wave and the total sum of the forward and backward waves. As the rise time increases, the phase difference is smaller, and the standing wave ratio is correspondingly reduced. Phenomenologically, the coupling to negative frequencies is controlled by the Fourier spectrum of the permittivity variation profile, whose bandwidth needs to be large enough to bridge the frequency gap ω ∆ between the input frequency [Fig. following Eq. ( Our analytical formulation yields a particularly interesting result in the isorefractive scenario, i.e., as we vary the impedance 0 Z but not γ . Such a scenario may be envisioned, for instance, if we vary in time the distance between two parallel plates for transverse electromagnetic wave propagation. In this case, the frequency of the wave remains constant through the temporal transition, and ( ) 2 t t ω Φ = in Eq. ( which can be inverted to yield Eq. ( ρ ω where A quantifies the bandwidth , and the special function ( , ) x y φ is defined in In this work, we introduced a rigorous and general analytic formulation to model temporal scattering for arbitrary switching profiles of homogeneous media, and deployed it to investigate the interplay between the finite timescale of a continuous time-switching process and the temporal variations of the impinging wave. As an application, we demonstrated how the profile of temporal switching can be tailored to control the temporal reflection in order to maximize the efficiency of time-reversal processes in ultrafast modulation setups at any frequency. Amidst the current multidisciplinary interest in exploiting mixing processes in time varying media, our findings outline the importance of considering, and possibly controlling, the switching speed and its temporal profile: the consecutive accumulation of reflection amplitude and phase throughout a continuous switching process can dictate whether time-reversal will be maximized or suppressed. Our findings set the stage for future investigations of time-reversal, frequency conversion and mixing in photonics, electromagnetics, acoustics and other wave systems undergoing temporal switching of arbitrary form, with relevant implications also in the growing area of Floquet condensed matter. where a ω is the initial frequency of the wave at case without loss of generality. We can therefore solve Eq. (0.1) efficiently as a pair of coupled ODEs for the displacement field (0) D and its time-derivative (1) via any common ODE solver, subject to the continuity conditions for (0) D and (1) D (note that the latter condition is equivalent to the continuity of the magnetic field B ) (0) ( ) j j j j j j j j i t i t j j j i t i t j j j j The derivative of the sigmoidal permittivity profile A perfect antireflection temporal coating is realized, following 