Considering evolution of rotation sensing and timing applications realized in Micro-electromechanical systems (MEMS), flexural mode resonant shapes are outperformed by bulk acoustic wave (BAW) counterparts by achieving higher frequencies with both electrostatic and piezoelectric transduction. Within the 1-30 MHz range, which hosts BAW gyroscopes and timing references, piezoelectric and electrostatic MEMS have similar transduction efficiency. Although, when designed intelligently, electrostatic transduction allows self-alignment between electrodes and the resonator for various BAW modes, misalignment is inevitable regarding piezoelectric transduction of BAW modes that require electrode patterning. In this paper transverse piezoelectric actuation of [011] oriented single crystal lead magnesium niobate-lead titanate (PMN-PT) thin film disks is shown to excite the tangential mode and family of elliptical compound resonant modes, utilizing a self-aligned and unpatterned electrode that spans the entire disk surface. The resonant mode coupling is achieved employing a unique property of [011] PMN-PT, where the in-plane piezoelectric coefficients have opposite sign. Fabricating 1-port disk transducers, RF reflection measurements are performed that demonstrate the compound mode family shapes in 1-30 MHz range. Independent verification of mode transduction is achieved using in-plane displacement measurements with Polytec's Laser Doppler Vibrometer (LDV). While tangential mode achieves 40 o /sec dithering rate at 335 kHz resonant frequency, the n=2 wine-glass mode achieves 11.46 nm tip displacement at 1 8.42 MHz resonant frequency on a radius of 60 μm disk resonator in air. A single electrode resonator that can excite both tangential and wine-glass modes with such metrics lays the foundation for a BAW MEMS gyroscope with a built-in primary calibration stage. Contour-mode bulk acoustic wave resonators have gained attention in the past decade due to their ability to beat the limitations of flexural mode resonators (such as low Q and low resonance frequency) for various application domains from RF filters to gyroscopes. Considering disk structures, displacement profiles of all contour vibrations of circular plates have been reported In conventional piezoelectric MEMS materials such as aluminium nitride (AlN), or lead zirconium titanate (PZT), when a disk resonator is designed with unpatterned electrodes as shown in Figure In this paper, we demonstrate efficient transduction of compound modes as well as the tangential mode in a piezoelectric disk resonator by a single self-aligned electrode utilizing the inplane anisotropy of [011] lead magnesium niobate-lead titanate (PMN-PT). We extensively report on transduction of n = 2 wine-glass mode (WGM) because it is of particular interest for gyroscopy. In addition, we measure and optically verify the tangential mode transduction. The tangential mode is isochoric with no out-of-plane-displacement, which is an attractive feature for MEMS clocks, resonant sensors, and an integrated calibration stage for gyroscopes. Lead magnesium niobate-lead titanate (PMN-PT) PMN-PT is a relaxor type ferroelectric material, discovered in 1997. It quickly became popular in various applications due to its superior piezoelectric constant and high coupling coefficient values as well as its ability to be grown in single crystal form Correspondingly, WGM shape is realized without the need for segmented electrodes (as shown in Figure In order to investigate the transverse actuation of modes of interest and their operation of frequency, finite element analysis (FEA) modeling of the disk resonators is performed using the COMSOL piezoelectric module. Adopting the material properties of [011] PMN-PT with d 31 and d 32 opposite signs Single-crystal PMN-PT film samples with 6μm-thickness developed by iBule Photonics are bonded to silicon carrier wafers as schematically shown in Figure Device Design and Characterization Considering the most important geometric factor that determines the resonant frequency, namely radius of the disk, we designed disk resonators that have resonance frequency around 10MHz for wine-glass mode with radii (r d in Figure Electrical RF reflection (S 11 ) measurements are performed on fabricated 1-port devices in air after the release step using Ground-Signal-Ground (GSG) pads as schematically shown in Figure We perform an independent verification of the mode shapes using a Laser Doppler Vibrometer (LDV). LDV videos of the tangential mode and n=2,3 WGM are provided in supplementary material (Supplementary Video 1,2, and 3 respectively). Cartesian grids (as opposed to polar distribution of data points) are employed for scanning the top surface of the resonators in order to establish equal spacing between data points and eliminate any possible spatial aliasing and geometrical biasing of the circular scanned space. Snapshots of the measured WGM are shown in Figure We record the Y-displacement at two locations on the disk for the n=2 WGM. At Location-2, (denoted with a red-circle) which is the edge of the disk we measured a displacement of 11.46 nm in the Y-direction for an excitation amplitude of 1V as shown in Figure We also measured the tangential mode using LDV. Snapshots of a single oscillation cycle is provided in Figure We achieved transverse actuation of tangential and compound mode family resonant shapes on a piezoelectric disk resonator using a self-aligned single-electrode exploiting the unique in-plane anisotropy of [011] oriented single crystal PMN-PT. We developed a wafer-scale fabrication procedure involving a combination of wet etching and ion milling of PMN-PT films that is thickness non-uniformity tolerant and capable of producing a vertical side-wall profile with CHISEL technique. Considering gyroscope applications of the n=2 WGM, tip displacement of 11.46 nm is measured in LDV with 1V amplitude actuation signal. The self-aligned feature of this actuator can be attractive for quadrature-error free gyroscopes Device fabrication Single crystal [011] c PMN-PT thin film samples (20 mm x 21 mm and approximately 6 μm-thick) are provided by iBule Photonics as attached to silicon substrate by means of epoxy application between the film and the silicon substrate. The schematic cross-section of the layer stack is depicted in Figure Electrical and Optical Measurement Setup S 11 measurements are performed using a groundsignal-ground (GSG) probe along with a network analyzer upon following a standard Short Open and Load (SOL) calibration protocol on an appropriate calibration substrate. Samples are wirebonded to a fan-out PCB that allows coaxial connector connectivity for excitation for LDV measurements, which are performed using Polytec MSA 100-3D. Surface modifications were implemented using photoresist patterns to enable lateral displacement detection with enhanced diffuse scattering of the laser from the top electrode surface, which otherwise provided only specular re-flection due to the smoothness of the top electrode surface. 