Automatic reconfiguration of optical filters is the key to novel flexible RF photonic receivers and Software Defined Radios (SDRs). Although silicon photonics (SiP) is a promising technology platform to realize such receivers, process variations and lack of in-situ tuning capability limits the adoption of SiP filters in widely-tunable RF photonic receivers. To address this issue, this work presents a first 'in-situ' automatic reconfiguration algorithm and demonstrates a software configurable integrated optical filter that can be reconfigured on-the-fly based on user specifications. The presented reconfiguration scheme avoids the use of expensive and bulky equipment such as Optical Vector Network Analyzer (OVNA), does not use simulation data for reconfiguration, reduces the total number of thermo-optic tuning elements required and eliminates several time consuming configuration steps as in the prior art. This makes this filter ideal in a real world scenario where user specifies the filter center frequency, bandwidth, required rejection & filter type (Butterworth, Chebyshev, etc.) and the filter is automatically configured regardless of process, voltage & temperature (PVT) variations. We fabricated our design in AIM Photonics' Active SiP process and have demonstrated our reconfiguration algorithm for a second-order filter with 3dB bandwidth of 3 GHz, 2.2 dB insertion loss and >30 dB out-of-band rejection using only two reference laser wavelength settings. Since the filter photonic integrated circuit (PIC) is fabricated using a CMOS-compatible SiP foundry, the design is manufacturable with repeatable and scalable performance suited for its integration with electronics to realize complex chip-scale RF photonic systems. I NTEGRATED radio-frequency (RF) photonics is rapidly emerging as a technology enabler of demanding application scenarios which require capabilities beyond those of traditional electronic systems. These capabilities include ultra-wide bandwidth, exceptional low latency, long-distance routing and immunity to electromagnetic interference (EMI) Traditionally, RF photonic systems have been implemented using discrete and bulky photonic components that are power inefficient, expensive and most importantly, are not amenable to integration of complex systems. Silicon Photonics, on the other hand, leverages the unique capabilities of photonic signal processing while takes full advantage of the mature CMOSlike fabrication processes developed by the semiconductor industry Reconfiguration and tuning of integrated optical filters has been pursued in the literature. In ref. The fundamental novelty of this work is that it achieves a truly in-situ automatic optical filter reconfiguration solution that has been experimentally demonstrated using a CMOScompatible silicon-on-insulator (SOI) photonic process. We present an algorithm different from the one in ref. The schematic of the second-order filter topology used in this work is shown in Fig. As mentioned earlier, the three tunable couplers used in the RF photonic filter are realized using 2 × 2 analog MZI switches. The coupling matrix, C, for these switches is expressed as Here, +φ A0 is the common-mode phase shift, 2φ D = φ U -φ L is the differential phase shift, and k and t are the cross and through optical power coupling coefficients respectively. The additional phase φ A0 = 2πc∆τ neffλ is due to the propagation delay, ∆τ , in the switch due to its physical length. Here, n eff is the effective index. Moreover, φ U and φ L , are the phase shifts induced in the upper and lower arm microheaters in the switch respectively. By tuning φ D , we obtain the power cross-coupling coefficient and the through-coupling coefficient, t = sin 2 (2φ D ). The (cross-)coupling coefficient k is tuned by applying microheater electrical power, P c , to one of the two microheaters in the switch (i.e. φ U = 2φ D and φ L = 0). This implies the common-mode phase shift is given by Also, in Eq. 4, φ 0 represents the random phase offset in the switch and γ is a proportionality constant relating the applied power to the thermo-optic phase-shifter. The z-domain through (all-pass) and drop (bandpass) transfer functions of a single ring in the filter seen in Fig. where k m = 0.01 and t m = 0.99 are the cross-and throughcoupling coefficients for the 1% monitor, and a = e -αL < 1 is the loss factor in the ring and L is the ring length. Here, α = 10 2-αw 20 , where the single-mode SOI waveguide loss α w is 2-2.5dB/cm A desired filter polynomial, G(z), can be synthesized using the coupled all-pass decomposition (APD) method by employing sum and difference of two all-pass filters (APF), A 1 and A 2 , as For even-order filters, we have A 2 (z) = A * 1 (z * ) In our notation, k n and φ n are the power coupling coefficient and phase shift in the n th ring, k bc and t bc = 1 -k bc are the back-coupler cross and through coupling coefficients, and φ q,ps is the quadrature phase shift. Filter design starts with the synthesis of a polynomial, G(z), for the specified filter type and specifications. Then the denominators of the coupled all-pass polynomials, D 1,2 (z), corresponding to G(z), and constant phase β were obtained using the tf2ca function in MatlabTM. Then numerators were obtained using N 1 (z) = fliplr(D * 1 (z)) and N 2 (z) = fliplr(D * 2 (z)). This yielded the two all-pass transfer functions Next, the all-pass transfer functions A 1,2 (z) are mapped to the (cascade of) ring resonators in the upper and lower arms. If the roots of denominators D 1 (z), i.e. the poles of A 1 (z), are p n , then the cross-coupling coefficients are determined using The quadrature phase shift for the upper arm is obtained as φ q,ps = βn φ n . The lower arm coupling coefficients are identical to those of the upper arm, and φ n and φ q,ps are of opposite sign, representing the conjugate APF responses. In this work, we used a 2 nd -order Butterworth response with a normalized cutoff frequency of ω n = 0.13. The synthesized filter coefficients for the filter specifications are listed in Table The filter was designed and fabricated in AIM Photonics foundry's 300mm Active Photonics process The filter was simulated using Lumerical Interconnect The filter layout was compacted as much as possible to share the photonic chip with other RF photonic circuits. The rings were routed in a compact serpentine fashion with a 30μm bend radius for lower loss and reflections. The resulting total physical length of the rings were ∼2200μm each, with a corresponding free-spectral range (FSR) of around 31GHz. The monitor taps were realized using 1% and 10% couplers, Ge waveguide detectors and waveguide terminations. The filter die micrograph is shown in Fig. The fabricated PIC die was polished down to 150μm and packaged in a chip-on-bard (COB) assembly as shown in Fig. The electrical pads were placed on two rows on the East edge of the PIC which were wire-bonded with two rows of PCB pads. The optical monitors were connected to the on-board transimpedance amplifiers (TIAs), whose outputs were interfaced with commercial off the shelf (COTS) 16bit analog-to-digital converters (ADCs) using a ribbon cable. These pads provide 16-bit digital-to-analog converters (DACs) interfaces to the microheaters. All the DACs and ADCs communicate via SPI interface with a microcontroller, which provides a software abstraction to the algorithm code. The operating voltage range of the microheaters is from 0 to 5V and requires a power of P π ≈ 30mW for an optical phase shift of π. These voltage ranges are CMOS-compatible and the microheater driver circuits can be implemented using stacked high-voltage I/O transistors with a 5V supply voltage in 65nm CMOS (or similar) process technology To reconfigure the SiP filter, device parameters such as the coupling ratio of the tunable couplers (k n ) and the ring phase bias (φ n ) for the selected center wavelength (λ c ) need to be configured. Here, n = 1, 2, . . . N stands for the ring number. These parameters are controlled by the DAC voltage (or power). Due to PVT variations in the photonic chip, there is a significant variation in the response of the tunable couplers and the phase shifters with respect to the applied power. Thus, no two couplers (or phase shifters) produce the same coupling (phase shift) for a given applied DAC voltage. The phase shift, φ n , produced by the microheaters linearly depends upon the applied electrical power, P n , as However, the microheater resistance, R, exhibits nonlinearity due to self-heating. Thus, applied electrical power has a nontrivial nonlinear dependence on the applied DAC voltage, R . This P n vs v n characteristics must also be extracted so that we can accurately configure component parameters on the chip using the DACs. This necessitates an one-time in-situ pre-characterization of each of these components, and subsequently the configuration of them, as they are used. In this section, we provide algorithms for these precharacterization routines and configuration. Each of these component characterization have two steps-Part I and II. The first part, Part I, for either k n or φ n extraction represents the component pre-characterization phase. On the other hand, during the automatic reconfiguration phase, this pre-characterized data is used for in-situ estimation and configuration of k n and φ n parameters in the on-chip filter. Part II algorithms for both k n and φ n represent these in-situ estimation and configuration. It is important to note that Part I is a one-time operation and does not need to be repeated again as long as the filter ambient temperature is kept the same as the filter pre-characterization temperature. This is ensured by using the TEC setup seen in Fig. During the initial pre-characterization routine, Algorithm 1 is executed for each of the n rings in the filter. Here, to be able to configure the desired coupling ratio (k n ) of the tunable coupler of the n th ring, the wavelength response of the ring drop-port is recorded (using the monitor PDs) for a range of coupler input voltages (v n,c ). From this data, the voltage (v n,cm ) corresponding to the maximum coupling ratio (k n,max ) is recorded. The maximum coupling is identified by observing the quality factor (Q) of the ring drop-port resonance. Optical cavity dynamics dictate that as coupling ratio approaches unity, ring Q decreases Utilizing this data rather than simply relying on the quadratic relationship between voltage and power 1: Input: kn ← User specifies the desired coupling coefficient 2: procedure ccoeff(n, λc, kn) 3: Set laser wavelength at λc 4: Get n th Ring drop-port response, f (vn,c) 5: v n,c0 , P n,c0 ← Find vn,c, Pn,c for zero coupling from min(f (vn,c)) 6: Fit kn vs Pn,c in Eq. 4 using (P n,c0 , 0) & (P n,c0 +Pn,c π , kn,max) data points 7: P * n,c ← Find power for kn from the above curve-fit 8: v * n,c ← Find voltage corresponding to P * n,c from vn,c vs Pn,c data 9: Return n th coupler DC bias, v * n,c 10: End procedure Now we describe the one-time pre-characterization routine (i.e. Algorithm 3) for the ring phase bias. First, all the rings except for the n th ring are detached from the filter by setting their corresponding couplers to zero-coupling. This ensures that the cross-port of the filter only shows the resonance response of the n th ring. Then, the voltage (v n,rπ ) required for a π phase shift in the ring microheater was extracted by monitoring the cross port of the filter and shifting the resonance by full FSR (corresponding to 2π phase-shift in the ring) for the applied voltage. Afterwards, the power (P n,r ) delivered to n th ring heater at different v n,r is recorded using the SMU and P n,rπ is obtained. As mentioned before, utilizing v n,r vs P n,r data ensures that the algorithm is insensitive to the process-dependent electrical nonlinearity of the on-chip microheaters. 1: Start 2: Set v i,c ← Find v i,c0 for all couplers except when i = n 3: Get filter bar-port response, f (λ, vn,r) 4: vn,r π , Pn,r π ← Find vn,r, Pn,r for π phase-shift, obtained using a full-FSR sweep 5: Save Pn,r π 6: Save vn,r vs Pn,r data 7: End During the automatic calibration routine in Algorithm 4, pre-characterized P n,rπ , and v n,r vs P n,r characteristics of the ring microheater is utilized. Then, from the phase-shift desired by the user, φ n , the required microheater power change, ∆P n,r , is estimated using Eq. 9 as Meanwhile, the voltage (v n,res ) for which the n th ring resonance is aligned with λ c is obtained by sweeping the ring microheater voltage (v n,r ) and finding the maximum drop port response. From this data, the power (P n,res ) at which ring resonance is aligned with λ c is obtained. Then, the power (P * n,r ) required to set the ring at desired φ n is estimated as P * n,r = P n,res +∆P n,r and the corresponding ring microheater voltage (v * n,r ) is applied. The filter tuning algorithm (Algorithm 5) starts off with the user specifying the desired filter specifications. The APD Algorithm 4 Ring phase extraction (Part II) 1: Input: φn ← User specifies the desired ring phase 2: procedure ringbias(n, λc, φn) 3: ∆Pn,r ← φnPn,r π π Set laser wavelength at λc 5: Get n th Ring drop-port response, f (vn,r) 6: vn,res, Pn,res← Find vn,r, Pn,r for max(f (vn,r)) resonance 7: P * n,r ← Pn,res + ∆Pn,r 8: v * n,r ← Find voltage for P * n,r from the vn,r vs Pn,r data 9: Return n th ring heater DC bias vn,res & v * n,r 10: End procedure filter synthesis algorithm To improve the out-of-band rejection of the filter, we maximize the 10% monitor tap placed at the cross-port of the filter at λ r by tuning the MZI quadrature-phase-shifter (Q-PS) and the back-coupler (B-C). Here, λ r is the wavelength where a null in the filter response can be enforced. However, the out-of-band-rejection calibration via Q-PS and B-C microheaters shifts the resonance of the previously tuned rings, thus altering the center wavelength (or frequency) of the filter response. To perform center-wavelength correction, rings, Q-PS and B-C are tuned subsequently and several iterations of tuning (n rings, Q-PS and B-C) are needed to reach the thermal steady-state of the PIC. When the required voltage stimulus is stabilized within a tolerance range (indicating a thermal steady-state), the filter tuning is complete. It's important to note that the coupling ratio of the tunable couplers are relatively stable in presence of thermal perturbation. This is due to the fact that thermal perturbation coming from other microheaters affect both microheaters of the tunable couplers almost equally, thus inducing a 'commonmode' phase shift that does not alter the coupling ratios which only depends upon the differential phase (φ D ). Therefore, it is not required to include ring coupler tuning inside the iteration loop, which in turn speeds up the reconfiguration process. Another key aspect of this algorithm is that it precludes the use of 'outer ring' for out-of-band rejection in To demonstrate the functionality and efficacy of the proposed reconfiguration algorithm, the 2 nd -order Butterworth filter was experimentally reconfigured using the coefficients Algorithm 5 N th Order Filter reconfiguration Algorithm 1: Start 2: Get Filter specifications (Type, Order, BW, Rejection, λc, λr) from the user 3: kn, φn, φq,ps ← APD filter synthesis using the specifications 4: Set n = 1 5: while n ≤ N do 6: Invoke [v * n,c ] = ccoeff(n, λc, kn) routine 7: Set v * n,c ← DC bias of n th coupler 8: Set n = n + 1 9: end while 10: Set n = 1 11: while err j ≥ tol j do 12: while err i ≥ tol i do 13: while n ≤ N do 14: Invoke [vn,res, v * n,r ] = ringbias(n, λc, φn) 15: Set vn,res ← DC bias for n th ring resonance 16: Set n = n + 1 17: end while 18: Calculate err i 19: end while 20: Set v * n,r ← DC bias of n th ring 21: Set Laser wavelength at λr 22: Get filter cross-port PD response, f (vq,ps) 23: vq,psm ← Find vq,ps for maxf (vq,ps) 24: Set DC bias of the arm phase shifter at vq,psm 25: Get filter cross-port PD response, Set DC bias of back-end tunable coupler at v b,cm 28: Calculate err j 29: end while 30: End from Table The experimentally measured response of the filter at different stages of reconfiguration is illustrated in Fig. Since DACs set the microheater voltages (or power), the convergence of the tuning algorithm can be observed in the settling of the DAC output voltages. In Fig. Fig. strate such capability, we reconfigured the filter at 5 different center frequencies (λ c ) with 0.05nm (∼6.25 GHz) spacing as shown in Fig. In Table This work presented a robust silicon photonic filter for RF photonic applications with an improved reconfiguration algorithm that is insensitive to PVT variations. By utilizing proposed in-situ configuration algorithm with simpler precharacterization steps (i.e. without requiring an OVNA), we have experimentally shown that the filter can be configured to any desired center frequency, bandwidth and rejection as This Work Ref. [7] Ref. [10] Ref. Ring (n) kn φn φq,ps 1 (UR) 0.4385 -0.2969 Top: -1.6137 2 (LR) 0.4385 0.2969 Bot: 1.6137 th iteration of maximizing 10% monitor tap output by tuning Quadrature phase-shifter (Q-PS). Jn n th iteration of maximizing 10% monitor tap output by tuning Back-coupler (B-C). per