We use the idea of the Wigner probability distribution (WPD) in a reduced scattering phase space (RPS) for the elastic scattering cross-section, with the help of a Tight-Binding (TB) numerical procedure allowing us to consider the anisotropic quantum effects, to phenomenologically predict several phases in these two novel unconventional superconductors. Unlike our previous works with pieces of evidences that these two compounds are in the unitary strong scattering regime and that superconductivity is suppressed by the atoms of strontium in both materials, several phases are built. In the case of the strontium-substituted lanthanum cuprate, it was found three phases from one family of Wigner probabilistic distributions, one corresponding to the antiferromagnetic compound La 2 CuO 4 another one which consists of a coalescing metallic phase for very lightly doped La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 , and finally a strong self-consistent dependent strange metal phase with optimal levels of doping. In the case of a triplet superconductor strontium ruthenate, three phases can be differentiated from two families of Wigner distribution probabilities, one family of WDP with point nodes where Cooper pairs and dressed scattered normal quasiparticles are mixed for the whole range of frequencies and which correspond to a FS γ-flat-sheet in the ground metallic state, and two phases from another WPD family, where, in one of then, the Miyake-Narikiyo quasinodal tiny gap model allows the unique presence of Cooper pairs in a tiny interval of frequencies near the superconducting transition T C , the other phase corresponds to the mixed phase with Cooper pairs and dressed by stoichiometric strontium non-magnetic atoms, where strong self-consistent effects are noticeable. This approach allows comparing experimental results for samples in both compounds with numerical analysis studies. The reduced phase space (RPS) is a physical selfconsistent distribution probability space obtained from the real and imaginary parts of the elastic scattering crosssection. It serves in physical phenomena where the unitary strong scattering regime takes place, such as in some unconventional superconductors, and where the mean quasiparticles free path can be approximate the following way: ∼ ∼ ∼ 1. In addition, the imaginary and real part of the elastic scattering cross-section, resembles the "Phase Space Distribution in Quantum-Mechanics" introduced by Wigner in 1932 The idea of using the tight-binding methodology The first experiments investigating the influence of transition metal impurities in HTSCs, showed that nonmagnetic disorder suppress superconductivity On the other hand, in La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 , the superconducting gap corresponds to a paired singlet scalar state ∆ = ∆with line nodal behavior. The order parameter on the Fermi surface corresponding to the one-dimensional irreducible representation B 1g of the tetragonal point symmetry group D 4h In addition, the other superconductor we address in this work concerns the family of ruthenates, particularly the unconventional triplet strontium ruthenate superconductor with multi-sheet (α, β and γ) FS For both set of parameters Δ . , = Δ / . , , with the vector / . , = [ sin + 3 sin )4̂ and Δ . = 1.0 meV, since there are experimental reports which estimated the value of Δ . to be less than 1 meV in impurity samples The nine points where the order parameter (OP) / . , has zeros are, 4 points symmetrically distributed in the {10} and {01} planes at k-points (0,±π) and (±π,0), 4 points symmetrically distributed in the {11} planes at kpoints (±π,±π), and 1 point in the {00} plane at k-point (0,0). Following group theory considerations, the imaginary OP has two components that belong to the irreducible representation E 2u of the tetragonal point group D 4h . It corresponds to a triplet odd paired state / . -, -= -/ . , with the basic functions sin and sin and Ginzburg-Landau coefficients 1, 3) The computational and mathematical details of the algorithm were tested and reported for an isotropic Fermi surface and its corresponding order parameter in the previous work Figure Since our primary goal is to visualize and describe briefly some properties of the three family of Wigner probabilistic distributions, we ought to emphasize that the whole analysis relays on the calculation of the function Where the real part is given by 8 ω 6 9 , and the imaginary part is given by : ω 6 Γ ; < 6 . The structure of this paper is as follows. In section 2, we present the first family of Wigner probabilistic distribution as a function of the impurity disorder concentration Γ , in the unitary limit for strontium-substituted lanthanum cuprate and present a table with the phases found by us in a recent work The three families of Wigner distribution probabilities are in the unitary limit for the superconducting doped strontiumsubstituted lanthanum cuprate For reviews on whether a gap with nodes can explain experimental data on anisotropic HTSCs and triplet superconductors, please see the anisotropic Fermi liquid formulation by MB Walker For a comprehensive monograph on the self-consistent disorder problem in metals and alloys, see the book by I. M. Lifshitz, S. A. Gredeskul and L. A. Pastur In this section, we present and visualize three phases in the compound La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 in agreement with experiments of Dalakova and collaborators previously cited. The phases were built upon several plots for the pair points ( 8(9 ), : (9 )) obtained from the elastic scattering cross-section. Since the calculation is in the unitary scattering limit, the peak at zero frequencies will coexist for all phases, contrasting its zero frequency value and the width of the Wigner probabilistic distribution as a function of the non-magnetic disorder concentration Γ . The prediction of the constant lifetime from the scattering cross-section was inferred in In this section, we present and visualize one phase in Sr 2 RuO 4 . This phase was built by setting up to the ground state of the triplet superconductor, tuning the TB parameter |! | = 0.04 MeV, for the FS γ-sheet in Sr 2 RuO 4 with several plots with pair of points ( R(9), I( The calculation in the unitary scattering limit for stoichiometric Sr, the width at zero frequencies will be stronger than for the doped LaCuO ceramic The point nodes behavior corresponds to a FS γ-flat sheet in the metallic ground state, and the gap touches the FS in 4 points symmetrically distributed in the {10} and {01} planes at k-points (0, ±π) and (±π,0), see This section presents and visualizes another two phases in Sr 2 RuO 4 . These phases were built by going to the state with quasi-point nodes of the Miyake Narikiyo model, making the tight-binding parameter |! | = 0.4 meV corresponding to the same order of magnitude that the hoping parameter "t" for the FS γ-sheet shown in Figure Each WPD family has several plots with pairs ( R(9 ), I( We think that, further computational studies with advanced computer high performance tools using the the tigh-binding approach of Prof. Harrison Table The present work aimed to investigate and summarize the behavior of the elastic scattering cross-section for two unconventional superconductors, the singlet strontiumsubstituted lanthanum cuprate and the triplet strontium ruthenate as a function of the concentration of non-magnetic disorder in a self-consistent tight-binding approach as summarized in Figure The use of self-consistent energy analysis for ω 6 ω + 3 0 ) in Planck units proves to be very useful (ħ = k B = c = 1) for realistic 2D anisotropic unconventional superconductors with line nodes, quasi-point nodes and points nodes to compare with experiments, since it outputs several families of Wigner distribution probabilities that help to differentiate numerically a set of phases in these two compounds. Some interesting physical properties such as coalescence for very low amount of non-magnetic dirt, and pure Bose supercarriers and mixed dressed scattered quasiparticles with Cooper pairs phases can be phenomenological differentiate in this study in the strong scattering unitary regime This approach resembles the findings of the liquid isotope 3 He in the 1970s Particularly we would like to emphasize that the supercoducting triplet phase of strontium ruthenate with quasi-point nodes has several wonderful similarities with the supercoducting A phase of the liquid isotope 3 He, where in both cases, an external field is able to split the time reversal symmetry of a single phase due to symmetry breaking external field effects, a wonderful and unique physical effect manifested at macroscopic level In addition, the TB Fermi surface parameters and value gap consistent with experimental ARPES data gives a better insight into the experimental problem by opening a classical window to the quantum phenomena in these two superconductors, despite one is a HTCS ceramic and the other is a low temperature superconductor, the approach representation through the WPD analysis becomes a very useful tool in this both cases. Further studies following this approach include the flat FS case for HTSC and other line nodes OP in unconventional superconductors. Figure The use of the reduced scattering space (RPS) for dressed by nonmagnetic impurities quasiparticles as a function of the disorder and strength parameters Γ and c, seems to be a powerful tool when it is combined with the analysis of the elastic cross-section in unconventional superconductors. An RPS self-consistent analysis of the elastic cross-section allows the identification of different phases, such as the metallic coalescent phase with an almost constant lifetime in HTSC, the strange metallic phase with a strong selfconsistent dependence on previous energy values, or the tiny gap inhomogeneous phase. In addition, the irreducible representation of some points crystal groups combined with a few TB parameters provide useful insights in these types of studies, therefore it is advisable to test other irreducible representations and other TB parameters for other unconventional superconductors, such as different HTSC or heavy fermions. It could help to explain some of the physical properties of these alloys. Finally, the study of flat band materials as we did for Sr 2 RuO 4 will occupy definitely in oncoming years a new topic for computational material design, please see the book by J. Shaginyan and M. Amusia 