A large number of novel two-dimensional (2D) materials are constantly discovered and deposed into the databases. Consolidate implementation of machine learning algorithms and densityfunctional theory (DFT)-based predictions have allowed creating several databases containing an unimaginable amount of 2D samples. The next step in this chain, the investigation leads to a comprehensive study of the functionality of the invented materials. In this work, a family of transition metal dichlorides has been screened out for systematical investigation of their structural stability, fundamental properties, structural defects, and environmental stability via DFT-based calculations. The work highlights the importance of using the potential of the invented materials and proposes a comprehensive characterization of a new family of 2D materials. More than a decade has passed since the era of 2D materials' has begun and the research effort around their discovery and applications continues unabated. A promising path to identify an application protentional of the 2D species from the said databases is to study an individual family of 2D compounds with similar chemical forms. Van der Waals layered transition metal dichlorides (MCl2) are starting to be available, 21 while being found in databases. The present work is dedicated to a DFT simulation-based systematic search of all possible existing materials in a family of 2D MCl2. Their structural and thermodynamical stabilities are determined by means of phonon dispersion analysis and ab initio molecular dynamic (AIMD) simulations. The characteristic features of screened-out 2D MCl2 are further analyzed to obtain comprehensive knowledge on their electronic and mechanical properties. Point defects formation and surface activity of the 2D MCl2towards environmental molecules are considered to facilitate their experimental observation and enlarge the area of their possible applications. The unit cell structure of monolayer of MCl2 (Figure The top and side views of the unitcell of 2D MCl2 are shown in Figure The calculated spatial dependencies of Young's modulus, shear modulus, and Poisson's ratio of 2D FeCl2 are presented in Figure The calculated Eform of the considered defects in 2D MCl2 is presented in Table To facilitate experimental identification of point defects in 2D MCl2 the simulated scanning tunnelling microscopy (STM) images are obtained for perfect and defect-containing 2D MCl2. A constant height mode characterization method is used in all cases. The STM images of the perfect and defect-containing 2D FeCl2 are presented in Figure In summary, in this work following a sequential search over existing 2D materials databases and the subsequent systematic screening of possible atomic combinations, a new family of 2D MCl2, consisting of 2D FeCl2, 2D CdCl2, 2D MnCl2, 2D NiCl2, 2D VCl2, and 2D ZnCl2, has been identified. DFT-based simulation has been implemented to prove the structural stability of the screened-out materials and systematically study their fundamental properties and structural changes under certain conditions, such as presence of point defects and moisture environment. It is shown that 2D MCl2's, due to their electronic and mechanical properties versatile candidacies in the in the semiconductor industry, while the defect-related and ambient stabilities demonstrate their durability and manipulation feasibilities. Particularly, 2D MnCl2, 2D NiCl2, and 2D ZnCl2 due to their high WF values can be used in carrier transport nanoelectronic devices, while high Young's modulus and shear modulus of 2D FeCl2 and 2D NiCl2 make them good candidates for straintronic devices. All calculations were performed using the plane-wave method as implemented in the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP). The finite displacement approach as implemented in the Phonopy code 