Topological Insulators (TIs) are unique materials where insulating bulk hosts linearly dispersing surface states protected by the Time-Reversal Symmetry (TRS). These states lead to dissipationless current flow, which makes this class of materials highly promising for spintronic applications. Here, we predict new TIs via high-throughput screening by employing state-of-the-art first-principles based methodologies, viz., Density Functional Theory (DFT) and many-body perturbation theory (G 0 W 0 ) combined with Spin-Orbit Coupling (SOC). For this, we take a well-known 3D TI, TlBiSe 2 and perform complete substitution with suitable materials at different sites to check if the obtained isostructural materials exhibit topological properties. Subsequently, we scan these materials based on SOC-induced parity inversion at Time-Reversal Invariant Momenta (TRIM). Later, to confirm the topological nature of selected materials, we plot their surface states along with calculation of Z 2 invariants. Our results show that GaBiSe 2 is a Strong Topological Insulator (STI). Besides, we report six Weak Topological Insulators (WTIs) viz. PbBiSe 2 , SnBiSe 2 , SbBiSe 2 , Bi 2 Se 2 , TlSnSe 2 and PbSbSe 2 . We have further verified that all the reported TIs are dynamically stable showing all real phonon modes of vibration. Since the discovery of Topological Insulators (TIs) about a decade ago, there has been an enormous increase in interest towards topological condensed matter systems A necessary condition for the appearance of these states is the inversion of bands, which takes place at the Time-Reversal Invariant Momenta (TRIM) in the bulk Brillouin Zone (BZ) First-principles calculations led to the prediction of a large number of 2D and 3D TIs Among the various well established families of 3D TIs, Bi 2 Se 3 and Bi 2 Te 3 have been most widely studied for investigating topological states and their properties Motivated with this idea, in this letter, we have explored the possibility of having new materials belonging to same class of ternary chalcogenides via a thorough isostructural substitutions. First, we have performed substitution at suitable sites of TlBiSe 2 and scanned for those materials whose band structure shows band inversion at odd/even number of TRIMs. After that, to determine the accurate band gap of TlBiSe 2 , we have employed various exchange-correlation (ε xc ) functionals viz., PBE+SOC, HSE06+SOC, G 0 W 0 @PBE+SOC and G 0 W 0 @HSE06+SOC. The band gap obtained from G 0 W 0 @PBE+SOC functional is in close agreement with the experimental value. Therefore, we have further calculated the band gap of all materials using G 0 W 0 @PBE+SOC. Subsequently, we have examined the potential materials for their dynamical stability. The stable ma-terials are then characterised as STI/WTI depending on whether they show odd/even number of surface states, respectively. To confirm their topological nature, we have also calculated the Z 2 topological invariants. TlBiSe 2 belongs to the Tl-family of compounds having a rhombohedral crystal structure with space group R 3m However, it has been found that if even number of band inversions occur in the first quadrant, but if one or more BZ sides possess odd number of band inversions, then a WTI can be obtained The presence of band inversion on inclusion of SOC is a telltale signature of possibility of non-trivial phase. However, an inverted band structure cannot be considered as a sole criterion to assure the existence of a non-trivial phase. Therefore, further analysis is required to establish its topological nature. Previous studies have reported that non-trivial band topology generates metallic surface states which are the hallmark of TIs show a single surface state protected by TRS at the Γ point in the projected 2D BZ. Alongside, we have calculated the topological invariant, ν 0 , which comes out to be 1, confirming that TlBiSe 2 is a STI. Following this, we have explored GaBiSe 2 for topological properties. In this case, the p orbitals of Bi/Se and sp orbitals of Ga are considered in constructing the tight-binding Hamiltonian. A single Dirac cone protected by TRS has been observed for (111) surface (see Figure Afterwards, we have performed surface band structure calculation for PbBiSe 2 . We have ob- tained even (two) number of surface states lying at Γ and M (see Figure These materials belong to the class of Z 2 WTI. Nowadays, WTIs are also getting attention as it has been found that their surface states are robust against imperfections, owing to the delocalization of surface electrons In summary, we have performed isostructural substitutions of materials based on SOC-induced parity inversion in the band structure. Using first-principles based methodologies, viz., PBE, HSE06, and many-body perturbation theory (G 0 W 0 ), we have systematically studied the electronic structure of topological materials belonging to R 3m space group. The band gap calculated using G 0 W 0 @PBE+SOC is in close agreement with the experimental value. We have revealed that GaBiSe 2 is a STI as its surface accommodates a single crossing at the Γ point. PbBiSe The calculations are performed using DFT 