Recently, electrides have received increasing attention due to their multifunctional properties as superconducting, catalytic, insulating, and electrode materials, with potential to offer other performance and possess novel physical states. This work uncovers that Li5N as an electride possess four novel physical states simultaneously: electride state, super-coordinated state, superconducting state, and superionic state. By obtaining high-pressure phase diagrams of the Li-N system at 150-350 GPa using a crystal structure search algorithm, we find that Li5N can remain stable as P6/mmm structure and has a 14-fold super-coordination number, as verified by Bader charge and electron localization function analysis. Its superconducting transition temperature reaches the highest at 150 GPa (Tc = 48.97 K). Besides, Li5N exhibits the superionic state at 3000 K, in which N atoms act like solid, while some Li atoms flow like liquid. The above results are further verified at a macroscopic level by using deep learning potential molecular dynamics simulations. As a special class of compounds They are also divided into ambient-pressure electrides and high-pressure electrides depending on the environmental pressure. For electrides at ambient-pressure, such as C12A7:(e -) Considering that high-pressure electrides are often consist of alkaline earth and non-metallic elements A crystal structure search for LixN (x=1-9) at 150-350 GPa pressure using 1-3 times the molecular formula is performed using the particle swarm algorithm based CALYPSO software Although scientists have made structural predictions for N-Li compounds from 0-100 GPa, only Li3N2 33 has been found to behave as electride at 30 GPa, Li4N 34 as a metastable electride at atmospheric pressure, and LiN5 35 as a high energy density material. However, whether there are more novel states in other Li-N compounds at higher pressures remains unknown. In order to explore the possibility of Li-N forming stable compounds in the higher pressure interval, the enthalpy for each crystal is calculated to obtain the convex-hull diagram with ZPE correction at 150-350 GPa and the phase diagram of the stable components (Figure where H is the enthalpy of the most stable structure of certain compositions at the given pressure In addition to the thermodynamic stability, the stability of lattice dynamics of the crystal is also necessary to be satisfied. The phonon density of states (PHDOS) of Li5N at 150-350 GPa reveals (Figure Since the interstitial electron can be viewed as a quasi-atom, it must interact with other atoms in the system. ISQ mainly occupies the energy band in the interval (0,-3) (Figure The calculated EPC properties at different pressures reveal that the largest EPC coefficient (λ=1.39) at 150 GPa is very close to the superconductor Li3S (λ=1.43) where ωlog is the log-averaged phonon frequency, μ* is the Coulomb pseudopotential (μ* = 0.1) and λ is the EPC constant. Its Tc (150 GPa, Tc=48.97 K) exceeds Li6P 9 (270 GPa, Tc=39.3 K), which is also an electride. The superconducting critical temperature of Li5N decreases with increasing pressure, in contrast to the response of the other electride superconductor Li6C Interestingly, a few Li atoms flow in chains and behave more like liquids, suggesting the presence of a superionic state 50 in Li5N. The observation is verified by the calculated MSD, where the MSD of N remains almost constant (kN ≈ 0), while the MSD of Li continues to increase (kLi ≈ 0). Compared to other compounds that exhibit superionic states at about 1000 K Based on this consideration, we use deep learning to train new interatomic potential functions to scale up the AIMD system (360 atoms, 8 ps) to an actual condition (6000 atoms, 800 ps). It can be seen that the coefficient of determination (R 2 ) of the test set is very close to 1, demonstrating that the deep network exhibits strong generalization capabilities (Figure In this work, the potential stable structures of the Li-N system at high pressures of 150-350 GPa are investigated using crystal structure search algorithms combined with first-principles calculations, and the high-pressure phase diagrams of Li2N, Li3N, and Li5N are determined. Li5N can persist as a P6/mmm structure and forms a 14-fold coordinated electride, which exhibits metallicity and superconductivity at 150 GPa. It has the largest Tc among all known electrides (48.97 K). Its Tc decreases with increasing pressure, and ISQ plays a significant role in maintaining the metallicity of Li5N. In addition, the compound also exhibits a superionic state at temperature of 3000K, where the N immobile while some Li atoms flow like liquid. The superionic states at the macroscopic scale are further verified by performing DPMD simulations. Togo, A. & Tanaka, I. First principles phonon calculations in materials science. Scripta Materialia 108, 1-5