A new solution strategy for quadratic eigenvalue problems, and the derivatives of the eigenvalues, is proposed, by combining the generalized reduction method with dual numbers. To demonstrate the method, we use the quadratic eigenvalue problem encountered in the semi-analytical finite element method (SAFE) as a guiding example. The SAFE method is designed to calculate the spectrum of Lamb wave phase, group and energy velocities in (visco)elastic orthotropic media, over a wide frequency range. It was found that the new approach essentially doubles the computational speed and efficiency, without sacrificing accuracy. Solving quadratic eigenvalue problems commonly leads to numerical instabilities, and is computationally inefficient. In the literature, there are certain numerical solution strategies to linearize the polynomial eigenvalue problems to increase the computational efficiency, without sacrificing accuracy As our guiding example, we consider simulations of guided waves using the semi analytical finite element (SAFE) approach. Guided waves are generally employed for SHM and ultrasonic inspection applications, owing to the fact that these types of waves can travel over long distances As a guiding example for the implementation of GRAD, the quadratic eigenvalue problem of the SAFE method is considered; although the method can be extended to higher-order polynomial eigenvalue problems, or other quadratic eigenvalue problems such as Legendre polynomials where u (x, t) = u 0 exp[ikx -iωt] is a plane wave with initial displacement vector u 0 , the K j are stiffness matrices, M is mass matrix, k is the wavenumber (k = 2π/λ, with λ the wavelength), and ω is the angular frequency (ω = 2π f , with f the frequency). In this equation, we are not exclusively interested in the solutions for k, which would give us the allowable phase velocities at a certain frequency and thus the dispersion curves, but also in ∂ω/∂k, the group velocity of the modes. While there are several existing techniques to solve for k The most straightforward solution strategy is to first linearize Eq. 1 using the generalized reduction method As Eq. 1 and Eq. 2 are equivalent, the eigenvalues k are identical for both. Therefore, the eigenvalues of Eq. 1 can be obtained by finding the eigenvalues of the matrix A(ω), which can be found using conventional methods. However, we are not only interested in the eigenvalues k, but also wish to simultaneously obtain ∂k/∂ω. In order to calculate the latter, dual numbers are used. Dual numbers rose to prominence in the realm of automatic differentiation ( It follows that Du[A(ω + ε)] = A ′ (ω), where Du selects the dual part. Assuming the matrix A = A(ω) is diagonalizable as A = vΛv -1 , where v = [v 1 , v 2 . . . , v n ] is a square matrix whose columns are the linearly independent eigenvectors v i , and Λ i j (ω) = k i (ω)δ i j is the diagonal matrix containing the eigenvalues, we define the vector of eigenvalues as ì k (ω) = diag(Λ(ω)). Then the derivatives of the eigenvalues are given by Since A ′ (ω) = Du[A(ω + ε)], these derivatives can be computed with machine precision, provided A(ω + ε) can be evaluated. In general this can be done using an automatic differentiation library This enables us to find k ′ j = ∂k j /∂ω using Eq. 4, after which the corresponding group velocity ∂ω/∂k j is 1/k ′ j . As previously mentioned in the literature However, the eigenvectors A(ω), as defined in Eq. 2, are v j = [ u j ik j u j ] T . This allows Eq. 6 to be further simplified to where 2 ) K 3 . Note that the energy velocity exactly reverts to the group velocity in the case of undamped wave propagation. To validate the proposed group and energy velocity computation model, a numerical study is conducted for which the GRAD results are compared with the conventional SAFE software GUIGUW A novel solution strategy for the computation of eigenvalues and their derivatives in quadratic eigenvalue problems was presented. The presented strategy first linearizes the eigenvalue problem with the generalized reduction method, after which the derivatives of the eigenvalues are obtained by using dual numbers. This method was then used to calculate Lamb wave phase, group and energy velocities in the SAFE method. The proposed GRAD method can also be applied to different methods, such as Legendre polynomials, higher order shear deformation theory, etc. The introduced concepts roughly doubled the computational speed and efficiency in comparison with the semi analytical finite element method, and can be used for similar polynomial eigenvalue problems in the domain of complex wave propagation.