In this work, we demonstrate atomic-layer-deposited (ALD) singlechannel indium oxide (In2O3) gate-all-around (GAA) nanoribbon FETs in a back-end-of-line (BEOL) compatible process. A maximum onstate current (ION) of 19.3 mA/μm (near 20 mA/μm) is achieved in an In2O3 GAA nanoribbon FET with a channel thickness (TIO) of 3.1 nm, channel length (Lch) of 40 nm, channel width (Wch) of 30 nm and dielectric HfO2 of 5 nm. The record high drain current obtained from an In2O3 FET is about one order of magnitude higher than any conventional single-channel semiconductor FETs. This extraordinary drain current and its related on-state performance demonstrate ALD In2O3 is a promising oxide semiconductor channel with great opportunities in BEOL compatible monolithic 3D integration. Amorphous oxide semiconductors are widely investigated and applied as thin-film transistor channels for display applications In this work, for the first time, scaled single-channel In2O3 nanoribbon FETs with GAA structure are fabricated under BEOL conditions. ION is enhanced to 4.3 mA/μm for a channel length (Lch) of 40 nm compared to previous bottom or top-gated ALD In2O3 FETs. To resolve the self-heating issue due to the ultrahigh current in the ultrathin channel, the channel width (Wch) is further scaled from 1 μm to 30 nm. The self-heating effect is mitigated significantly after nanoribbon scaling as confirmed by a high-resolution thermo-reflectance (TR) imaging experiment and thermal simulation. A maximum ION of 19.3 mA/μm is observed in the 30 nm wide nanoribbon FET by pulsed I-V measurements, which further lowers the self-heating effect. This extraordinary drain current density is the highest ever obtained from a single-channel transistor. Experiments Fig. Fig. Channel width scaling of the ribbon is also investigated. Fig. A high-resolution TR measurement is conducted to quantitatively investigate the self-heating effect To further probe the potential of the device performance, a pulsed I-V measurement is implemented. A data averaging time of 500 ns, VGS and VDS pulse width of 1 μs and pulse period of 100 ms are set to minimize the self-heating effect and improve device reliability. Fig. In summary, single-channel In2O3 GAA nanoribbon FETs are demonstrated in a BEOL compatible process. A record high ION of 19.3 mA/μm is achieved through channel width scaling and improved heat dissipation in small devices. This work demonstrates the great potential of ALD In2O3 as a novel channel material in monolithic 3D integration. The work is supported by SRC nCore IMPACT, DARPA/SRC JUMP ASCENT, AFOSR, NSERC and Compute Canada. In,O,H