In most naturally occurring superconductors, electrons with opposite spins are paired up to form Cooper pairs. This includes both conventional s-wave superconductors such as aluminum as well as high-Tc, d-wave superconductors. Materials with intrinsic p-wave superconductivity, hosting Cooper pairs made of equal-spin electrons, have not been conclusively identified, nor synthesized, despite promising progress Fig. To probe spin pairing, one can split up a Cooper pair, separate the two electrons and measure their spins. The process to split a Cooper pair is known as crossed Andreev reflection (CAR) Following the approach of previous Cooper pair splitting studies The device and the measurement setup are illustrated in Figure In Figure Spin-degenerate orbital levels can each be occupied with two electrons with opposite spins. Figure Note that SOC in InSb is known to not lift this blockade At finite magnetic field B, the four charge degeneracies in Figure To quantify the observation that CAR is anti-correlated with the spin alignment of the QDs, we perform a spin correlation analysis show two QD spins are anti-correlated by a factor of -0.86 for CAR signals when pairing is singlet, the highest reported to date. When we apply B ⊥ B SO , in a classical analogy, the spin-orbit interaction leads to spin precession about the B SO axis in the hybrid section while the QDs remain approximately polarized along B To further investigate the field-angle dependence, we measure CAR and ECT while rotating |B| = 100 mT in the plane of the substrate, see Figure For this measurement, we apply a ±100 μV bias voltage only on one side of the device while keeping the other bias zero. This allows us to measure both CAR and ECT without changing the applied biases, as can be understood from the same basic principles outlined in Figure The superconducting pairing in the hybrid segment itself is predicted to hold a triplet component due to SOC as well Finally, we remark that the role of the middle Al-InSb hybrid segment of our devices in electron transport has not been discussed in this work. Figure In conclusion, we have measured CAR and ECT in an N-QD-S-QD-N device with and without spin filtering. For well-defined, specific settings consistent with our expectations, we observe Cooper pair splitting for equal spin states in the QD probes. These observations are consistent with the presence of a triplet component in the superconducting pairing in the proximitized nanowires, which is one of the building blocks for a topological superconducting phase 6 Methods The main device, A, and the measurement setup are illustrated in Figure Our hybrid-nanowire devices are fabricated on pre-patterned substrates, following the shadow-wall lithography technique described in Refs • angle before capping it with 20 nm evaporated AlOx. For Device B, the same recipe was used with the exception that no Pt coating was deposited. Details of the surface treatment of the nanowires, the growth conditions of the superconductor, the thickness calibration of the Pt coating and the ex-situ fabrication of the ohmic contacts can be found in Ref The tuning of our device, in particular the QDs, is done as follows. First, we form a single barrier between N and S by applying a low voltage on the gate closest to S on each side. We then perform local and non-local tunnel spectroscopy of the hybrid segment and locate a V PG range in which a hard gap is observed at low energies and extended Andreev bound states are observed at high energy (see Figure Fitting the data in Figure Another source for SOC in our Device A could come from the Pt sub-atomic top layer, although we have not found evidence for this in previous studies Note that the spin-orbit scattering in Pt is isotropic and cannot give rise to the angular magnetic field dependence. Nevertheless, we have reproduced all the CAR and ECT observations in a second device (Device B) where the Pt layer was not included (Figures Raw data presented in this work and the processing/plotting codes are available at https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5774827. No good data could be obtained for the y direction and the spin-down ground state. dI/dV in all panels is calculated by taking the numerical derivative after applying a Savitzky-Golay filter of window length 5 and polynomial order 1 to the measured current. The measurements shown here were conducted using different QD orbitals than those used in Figures V LD (mV) V LD (mV) V LD (mV) InSb nanowire QDs have anisotropic g-factors We present here the theoretical model of the experimental data presented in this work. Details of the model can be found in the parallel theory work In the Main Text, the resonant current flowing through the N-QD-S-QD-N hybrid system is measured. Such CAR and ECT resonant currents have the forms respectively. Here Γ DL is the total QD-N coupling strength, i.e. sum of left-QD-left-N coupling and right-QD-right-N coupling. Γ CAR and Γ ECT are the effective CAR and ECT coupling between the two QDs. These couplings depend on the properties of the middle hybrid segment and on the spin polarization in the QDs, but do not depend on the energies of the QDs. Thus in the (ε l , ε r )-plane, the resonant current assumes a Lorentzian shape with the broadening being Γ DL and reaching the maximum value along ε l = ±ε r for ECT and CAR, respectively. Thereby the maximum current for CAR and ECT are where a = CAR or ECT Fitting the correlated currents in Figure The Bogoliubov-de-Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian for the one-dimensional semiconductor-superconductor hybrid nanowire is where Ψ ] ⊺ is the Nambu spinor, τ α and σ α are Pauli matrices acting on the Nambu and spin space, L is the length of the hybrid nanowire, m * is the effective mass of InSb, μ is the chemical potential, α R is the strength of Rashba spin-orbit coupling, E Z is half Zeeman spin splitting, θ is the angle between the spin-orbit field and the Zeeman field, and ∆ ind is the induced superconducting pairing strength in the nanowire. In the limit of confinement in all three dimensions as is the case with Device A, ∆ ind can be read as the lowest energy that the discrete superconducting-semiconducting hybrid states reach. We define the direction of the Zeeman field to be always along σ z , thus it is the spin-orbit field that rotates in our reference frame. The tunneling Hamiltonian between the hybrid nanowire and the QDs is where d r,σ and d l,η are the annihilation operators of the spin-polarized state in QD-l and QD-r. Here we assume that the single-electron tunneling is spin-conserving, and that there is a single QD level with a particular spin polarization (along σ z ) near the Fermi energy of the normal QDs. That is, the dot state in the left QD has spin-σ and that in the right QD has spin-η. In the tunneling limit, i.e., t l,r ≪ ∆ ind , the effective CAR or ECT tunneling between the two dots is well described by the second-order virtual process ⟨H T H -1 0 H T ⟩ where ⟨•⟩ denotes the ground state of the hybrid nanowire. For example, the effective CAR coupling between spin-η state in QD-l and spin-σ state in QD-r is Γ CAR,ησ = t l t r ⟨c † η (0)H -1 where [u m↑ (x), u m↓ (x), v m↑ (x), v m↓ (x)] ⊺ is the Bogoliubov wavefunction of the m-th eigenstate with excitation energy E m > 0. Thereby for the resonant current flowing through the normal QDs with particular spin polarizations, we have Similarly, for the ECT current, we have and For the numerical simulation, we first discretize the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( The physical parameters we choose for the BdG Hamiltonian in Eq. The main use of the numerical simulations is to compare with the measured up-up/up-down CAR amplitudes to obtain an estimation of the SOC strength α R . Ref where k so = mα R /ħ 2 and L is device length. This expression is insensitive to microscopic details of the wavefunction in the hybrid produced by varying chemical potential, disorder and inhomogeneous α R . It depends only on the nanowire length and the averaged spin-orbit length. The ratio is no greater than one and reaches the maximum when the nanowire length is a half-integer multiple of the spin-orbit length. As we can see in Figure 