Heteroepitaxy of functional thin films on singlecrystal substrates is one of the most general themes in electronic materials research. Here, we propose an algorithm based on image processing for the rapid simulation of heteroepitaxial relationships. The superposition and rotation of various lattice plane images of the film and substrate, which were automatically generated from the crystal structure, rapidly verified all domain matching patterns. Furthermore, the comprehensive validation allowed us to discuss domain matching from multiple perspectives, such as mismatch, matching period, and density of matching lattice points. Therefore, the proposed algorithm will contribute to materials informatics, streamlining a wide range of materials research for functional thin films. Many functional thin films that sustain current electronics have been obtained using heteroepitaxy on singlecrystal substrates. Because lattice matching is the key to the epitaxial growth of high-quality functional thin films, selecting substrates and their crystal orientations is important. Determining the DM between materials with different crystal structures requires the examination of many patterns with different crystal orientations and integer multiples of the lattice constants and rotations. The manual simulation of DM for a single material requires significant effort. Therefore, in many cases, the DM is inductively derived from the experimental results. This approach is laborintensive and also leads to missing the best material selection. Therefore, various methods have been proposed to predict DM from crystal structures (such as Zur and McGill's lattice-matching algorithm). Figure We used the method shown in Algorithm 1 to perform an image-processing-based DM search. The generated_lat-tice_image is a function that generates a lattice image (Image), considering the lattice constants L, Miller indexes m S and m F , size of the lattice points (point_size) k, width W, and height H of the generated image as variables. The subscripts S and F represent the substrate and film, respectively. The pixel value for drawing lattice points was set to 1, and 0 otherwise. Using this setup, A can be quickly obtained by simply computing the direct product of the images and summing them. The DM verification assumes that one point of the smallest parallelograms in the DM region (DM cell) is correctly placed because the degree of DM (e.g., the size of the DM cell and lattice misalignment) can be determined by the placement of the remaining three points. Therefore, one lattice point was always set at the center of the image. The rotate _image function rotates the input image by an angle θ from the image center. Image Fθ is the film lattice image Image F rotated by an angle θ by rotate_image. For each combination of lattice planes, A is a function of the angle θ and conditions under which the lattice image is generated, namely, k, W, and H. The overlapping regions of lattice points in this operation can be created if k is sufficiently large. When W and H are large, the lattice consistency can be verified for long periods, and when k is small, the tolerance for considering coincident lattice points can be tightened. Thus, DM can be verified from multiple angles according to the objective by adjusting the parameters. This algorithm was used to determine the combination of m and θ, θ max when A attained its maximum value. This search is simple and involves only three For loops. Because there is no complex calculation process in between, the DM of the substrate and film can be rapidly simulated. Using Ge and FeGe as examples, we examined the DM and verified the effectiveness of the proposed method. For the Ge(100)//FeGe(111) and Ge(110)//FeGe(100) combinations, symmetries can be observed at θ and 90° -θ, which are because of the inversion and four-fold symmetry of the two-dimensional lattice. Among these, the Ge(110)/FeGe(110) combination with θ = 35.2° yielded the largest A(θ) = 2511 px. Figures Table We constructed an algorithm based on image processing to simulate the heteroepitaxial relationship between the film and substrate. The superposition and rotation of the various lattice plane images of the film and substrate, which were generated automatically from the crystal structure, verified the entire DM pattern. For example, when analyzing the low-order crystal planes in Ge and FeGe, 8100 cases for DM were verified in only 86 s. Furthermore, its comprehensive verification allowed a multifaceted evaluation of DM: Ge(110)//FeGe(110) yielded the largest lattice point matching and smallest matching period, whereas Ge(110)//FeGe(100) exhibited the smallest mismatch. The proposed algorithm is expected to aid substrate material exploration and interpretation of experimental results in the heteroepitaxial growth of functional thin films, and therefore, significantly streamline the research and development of electronic materials. The Python program is available at https://github.com/narishiro/lattice_matching. It comprises three cells: (i) Import & Functions, (ii) Lattice and (iii) Matching. The Import & Functions define the functions necessary for Algorithm 1. The parameters k, W, and H are also defined in this cell. The lattice constants of the substrate and film in the dictionary crystal are entered in the Lattice cell. The simulate_matching function in Matching can be executed to automatically try various crystal orientations and rotation angles to obtain the best DM pattern. The calculation results are stored in variable-out. In addition, cv2.imshow can be used to illustrate the matching relationship between lattices.