We theoretically study the contribution of superconducting fluctuation to extrinsic spin Hall effects in two-and three-dimensional electron gas and intrinsic spin Hall effects in two-dimensional electron gas with Rashba-type spin-orbit interaction. The Aslamazov-Larkin, Density-of-States, Maki-Thompson terms have logarithmic divergence ln in the limit = (T -Tc)/Tc → +0 in twodimensional systems for both extrinsic and intrinsic spin Hall effects except the Maki-Thompson terms in extrinsic effect, which are proportional to ( -γφ) -1 ln with a cutoff γφ in two-dimensional systems. We found that the fluctuation effects on the extrinsic spin Hall effect have an opposite sign to that in the normal state, while those on the intrinsic spin Hall effect have the same sign. Spin current has opened a new venue to manipulate condensed matter systems. Spin transport experiments were firstly conducted by Tedrow and Meservey Those issues in spin transport have been addressed not only in normal metals but in superconductors Fluctuation effects on transport properties above the superconducting transition temperature T c were firstly studied by Aslamazov and Larkin In this paper, we discuss the fluctuation effects on the spin Hall effect in superconductors above T c in the absence of magnetic fields with the lowest order processes of the fluctuation propagator. We study the extrinsic spin Hall effect in the two and three-dimensional electron gas by incorporating the superconducting fluctuations in the model used by Tse and Das Sarma Our main results are summarized as follows: • Extrinsic spin Hall effect in two dimensional electron gas [Sec. III]: In the presence of the side jump process, the DOS terms contribute dominantly and suppress the spin Hall conductivity in the normal state. They have a logarithmic divergence ln(1/ ) in the limit = (T -T c )/T c → +0. In the presence of the skew scattering process, either the DOS terms or the MT terms contribute dominantly and suppress the spin Hall conductivity in the normal state, depending on the relative ratio between three dimensionless parameters: , the phase-breaking parameter γ φ , and T τ / with the impurity scattering time τ . The DOS terms have the logarithmic divergence ln(1/ ) while the MT terms are proportional to (γ φ ) -1 ln(1/ ). The results are summarized in Tables I and II in Sec. V. • Extrinsic spin Hall effect in three-dimensional electron gas [Sec. III]: In the presence of the side jump process, the AL, DOS, and MT terms have no singularity concerning . The DOS terms contribute dominantly and suppress the spin Hall conductivity in the normal state. In the presence of the skew scattering process, the MT terms are proportional to ( 1/2 + γ 1/2 φ ) -1 while the AL and DOS terms have no singularity. The MT terms thus contribute dominantly and suppress the spin Hall conductivity in the normal state. • Intrinsic spin Hall effect in Rashba model [Sec. IV]: The AL, DOS, and MT terms have logarithmic divergence ln(1/ ) with the coefficients of the same order. The sum of these contributions has the same sign as the spin Hall conductivity in the normal state and enhances the spin Hall conductivity. The results are summarized in Tables III in Sec. V. The rest of the present paper is organized as follows. The next section summarizes the extrinsic and intrinsic spin Hall effect in the normal state and fluctuation propagator. In Sec. III, we address the fluctuation effects on extrinsic spin Hall effects in the presence of side jump and skew scattering processes in two-and three-dimensional electron gas. In Sec. IV, we discuss the fluctuation effects on intrinsic spin Hall effects in two-dimensional electron gas with Rashba spin-orbit interaction. In Sec. V, we discuss singularity near T c and magnitude of fluctuation contribution in AL, DOS, and MT terms. We also raise several issues to be addressed in the future. In Sec. VI, we conclude the present study. We defer the details of derivation in Secs. III and IV to supplemental materials. We list the symbols used in the main text and supplemental materials in the appendix. Throughout this paper, we set the Boltzmann constant to be unity (i.e., k B = 1) and take the electric charge of the carriers to be negative (-e < 0). In this section, we summarize the extrinsic spin Hall effect in the two-dimensional and three-dimensional electron gas following We start with the following single-particle Hamiltonian: which consists of the kinetic energy H 0 , the spin-orbit interaction H SO and the potential energy due to impurities V. V(r) can be written as V(r) = i V single (r -R i ), where V single (r) is a potential energy of single impurity and R i is the position of the i-th impurity. In Eq. ( The random average of the impurity potential is given by where n i is the density of impurities and v 0 is the uniform component of the Fourier transform of V single (r) The single-particle charge current is given by We define the single-particle spin current by Each term in the Hamiltonian Eq. ( in terms of the creation ψ † kα and annihilation ψ kα operators of one-particle state with the wavevector k and zcomponent of spin α =↑, ↓. The symbol V denotes the volume of the system. The spin current density is written in terms of the field operators ψ † α (r), ψ α (r) in the second quantized form as and the uniform component of the Fourier transform of Eq. ( ≡j (1) s + j (2) s + j (3) s . The charge current density is written in the second quantized form as The uniform component of the Fourier transform of charge current density, which we denote by j c , is given by ≡j (1) c + j (2) c + j (3) c . We consider the spin current density against the uniform electric field with the use of the Kubo formula. The random average of the impurity potential Eq. ( in the Fourier space. The spin Hall coefficient (spin Hall conductivity) σ xy defined through j sμ = ν σ μν E ν with electric field E can be obtained as where u is the imaginary time and ω λ = 2πT λ (λ ∈ Z) is the Bosonic Matsubara frequency. In the Feynman diagrams contributing to σ xy in the normal state, the spin-orbit interaction enters predominantly through either side jump (Figs. The quantities assigned to the vertices and the dotted line are inscribed in the Figures. The solid line in the Figures corresponds to the free electron propagator Here ε n = 2πT (n + 1/2) is the fermionic Matsubara frequency, ε k = 2 k 2 /(2m) and μ, respectively, the kinetic energy and chemical potential of free electron. The mean free time τ is given by sx and j with the density of states N (0) per spin at the Fermi surface in the normal state. The dotted lines represent the random average of the impurity potentials, and the cross marks represent spin-orbit interactions. Following the standard procedures, we can obtain spin Hall conductivity in the normal state with D = 2, 3. We summarize the earlier results on intrinsic spin Hall effect developed by Sinova et al. The Hamiltonian of the two-dimensional electron gas (2DEG) with Rashba-type spin-orbit interaction is written as , where the region of 2DEG is taken to be xy plane, which is perpendicular to the unit vector ẑ parallel to z-axis. I, σ = t (σ x , σ y , σ z ) are, respectively, the 2 by 2 unit matrix and the Pauli matrices in the spin space. The symbol λ represents the coupling parameter of spin-orbit interaction, which is different from λ 0 used in extrinsic Hall effect. The eigenvalues of this Hamiltonian H are given by The eigenvectors are given by in spin space. Let ψ kσ be the Fourier transform of the field operator ψ σ (r) for annihilation of particle at the position r with z-component of spin σ. This operator ψ kσ is expanded in terms of the annihilation operator c pα of the eigenstate of the Hamiltonian with spin state |χ α (p) for α = ± as We define the spin current density as J s = -(e/4){σ z , u} in the same way as (3) but differently from Sinova et al.( which is followed by The uniform component of the Fourier transform of Eq. ( which is rewritten as The charge current density j c is given by the sum of the free electron part due to the kinetic energy and that due to the spin-orbit interaction H SO . We focus on the latter, which we denote by j SO c (r). The spin orbit interaction H SO is written in the form of the second quantization we obtain The uniform component of the Fourier transform of j SO c (r) is given by By adding the part j (1) c due to kinetic energy, the uniform component of the Fourier transform of j c (r) is given by The y-component of j c is expressed in terms of creation/annihilation operator of the energy eigenstates as Figure in terms of the green function FIG. With use of Eq. ( in the case where λk F ε F . Note that σ xy (0, ω → 0) does not depend on λ. Exceptional simplicity of this model, viz, combination of parabolic band dispersion and linear momentum dependence of the spin-orbit interaction makes the spin Hall conductivity vanish in the presence of spin-conserving impurities, even in the limit of weak scatterers In this subsection, we give an overview of Cooperon and superconducting fluctuations, following the description in reference in order to take account of the three types of the superconducting fluctuation effect. We define the Cooperon and fluctuation propagator of superconductivity in this subsection. The shaded region represents the Cooperon C(q, ε 1 , ε 2 ), which is defined through the recursive relation or graphically by Fig. From this expression, we see that C(q, ε 1 , ε 2 ) becomes small unless is satisfied. The condition (18) reduces to FIG. This implies that the integral region with q is practically reduced to the region where the condition ( Explicit expression for L(q, iΩ k ) is given by where we have introduced the coherence length ξ SC and diffusion constant D Here the di-Gamma function ψ(z) n+z + ln n c ] and n-th order derivative of ψ(z), which we denote by ψ (n) (z) (polyGamma function) are introduced. The coherence length reduces to in the dirty and clean limits, respectively. Near and above the superconducting transition temperature T c , we take account of the superconducting fluctuation via three types of the process; Aslamazov-Larkin (AL) term, the Maki-Thompson (MT) term, and the density of states (DOS) term. Those are known to be the most diverging in the electric conductivity when T → T c + 0. FIG. In this section, we consider the Hamiltonian H = H 0 + H SO + V + H int , which is the sum of Eq. (1) and Eq. The O(ω) contributions in Eq. ( 3. Perform integrals in the expressions for B c and B s with respect to internal wave vectors k 1 , k 2 • • • . 4. Transform the sum with Ω k to contour integral. 5. Expand the resultant expression with respect to ω after analytic continuation iω ν → ω. 6. Retain the most singular terms in the limit of → 0. 7. Perform summation in B c (q, ω, Ω), B s (q, ω, Ω) with respect to internal frequencies ε n and ε m . 8. Integrate the resultant expression with respect to q. The details of calculation along these procedures are given in Supplemental materials. Here we outline the flow of calculations. After Step 3, the response function reduces to After Steps 4 and 5, we find that Here After Step 7, we obtain the expressions for d dx [B s2 (-x, x) + B s2 (0, x)] x=0 and B c2 (0, 0) in terms of /τ and T . After Step 8, we obtain for D = 2 and Finally, the resultant expression for the AL term of the spin Hall conductivity in the side jump process is given by For D = 2, the ratio of fluctuation conductivity to that in the normal state is given by with use of Eq. The expression for the AL term of the spin Hall conductivity in the skew scattering process is given by In the dirty limit(T τ 1) in D = 2 systems, Eq. ( with use of Eqs. The DOS terms for the spin Hall conductivity are calculated in a way similar to those for electric conductivity. The procedure to calculate the spin Hall conductivity is given below. 1. List the relevant diagrams (Fig. Put Ω k = 0 in all quantities and q = 0 in all but L(q, iΩ k ). 3. Perform integration with respect to internal wave vectors k 1 , k 2 • • • with use of residue theorem. 4. Reduce the sum with ε n in the polygamma functions. 5. Expand the resultant expression with respect to ω after analytic continuation iω ν → ω. 6. Perform integration in L(q, 0) with respect to q. The details of calculations are given in Supplemental material. However, we here briefly outline the analysis. Figure Here we introduce the notations I j (q, ε n , Ω k , ω ν ) with j = a, b, c, d, which we define as the integration of the product of the Green functions obtained in the diagram j, where ξ i ≡ 2 k 2 i 2m -μ. For example, the expression for I a (q, ε n , Ω k , ω ν ) is given by We retain the term with Ω k = 0, which yields the most diverging contribution with respect to . We further retain q-dependence only in L(q, 0). With these simplification, Eq. ( FIG. The part Σ DOS-SJ xy (0, 0, ω) yields ω-linear term while the part q L(q, 0) in Eq. ( Putting the above results, we arrive at the expression for the DOS terms for extrinsic spin Hall conductivity with the side jump process, For D = 2, the ratio of the spin Hall conductivity to that in the normal state is FIG. in the dirty limit and T ε F T τ ln 1 in the clean limit. The opposite sign between the DOS terms and the spin Hall conductivity in the normal state is consistent with the suppression of the density of state by the superconducting fluctuation. The expression for the DOS term of the spin Hall conductivity in the skew scattering process is given by For D = 2, the ratio of the spin Hall conductivity to that in the normal state is in the dirty limit and T ε F T τ ln 1 in the clean limit. We notice again the opposite sign between the DOS terms and the spin Hall conductivity in the normal state. The MT terms are calculated similarly to those for DOS terms. The procedure to calculate the MT terms is given below. We note that the MT terms with the side jump process turn out to vanish in a way similar to that for the MT terms in the extrinsic anomalous Hall effect 1. List the relevant diagrams (Fig. 3. Perform integration with respect to internal wave vectors k 1 , k 2 • • • with use of the residue theorem. 4. Perform summation over ε n . 5. Expand the resultant expression with respect to ω after analytic continuation iω ν → ω. 6. Separate regular part and anomalous part. All factors in the former is regular but L(q, 0) is regular in the limit of q → 0 while the anomalous part contains singular factor in addition to L(q, 0). 7. Integrate the regular part with q after setting q → 0 in all quantities but L(q, 0). 8. Integrate the anomalous part with q after introducing a phase-breaking relaxation time τ φ to cutoff IR divergence. The details of the calculation is available in the supplemental material. The diagrams of the MT terms with skew scattering are shown in Fig. the sum of the integral of product of Green functions . The calculation is similar to that in the DOS terms but we have to separate Σ MT-SS xy in the regular part and anomalous part Σ MT-SS(reg) as for the MT terms in the electric conductivity. As for the regular part, we can proceed in a way similar to that in the DOS terms and obtain As for the anomalous part, on the other hand, we introduce the phase breaking time τ φ to cut-off the IR divergence as in the case of electric conductivity in the dirty limit and in the clean limit. We first rewrite the two-body interaction with use of Eq. ( Figure This expression does not depend on the internal wave numbers and spins for summation over loops because those dependencies are canceled. Similar cancellation occurs even in the diagrams containing more than two H int , and those diagrams depend only on the left-most and right-most wavenumber and spins. Consequently, the summation over the series of diagrams can be carried out in a way similar to that for superconductors without spin-orbit interaction shown in Fig. where we introduce the notations We find that P αβ (q, ε 1 , ε 2 ) is written as which becomes when λp F μ as We thus see that With use of this expression, Π(q, Ω k ) becomes The transition temperature T c is determined by the condition that L(q = 0, With use of the relation we obtain Here we introduce the coherence length in the presence of intrinsic spin-orbit interaction through the relation which becomes because we assume that μ λk F . With use of Eq. ( where L(q, iΩ k ) is the fluctuation propagator without the spin-orbit interaction, which coincides with Eq. ( where T c0 is the transition temperature for λ = 0. From Eq. ( The diagram for AL terms is shown in Fig. which reduces, when λk F T , to The DOS term and MT terms in intrinsic spin Hall effects are calculated in a way similar to those in extrinsic spin Hall effect, but there are no anomalous terms in MT terms for intrinsic spin Hall effect, and thus the cutoff is not necessary to be introduced. See the subsections III B and III C, where the procedures to calculate the DOS and MT terms are given. The diagram for the DOS term in intrinsic spin Hall effect is shown in Fig. Figure for λk F T . The diagram for the MT term in intrinsic spin Hall effect is shown in Fig. In tables I, II, III, we note two properties common in extrinsic and intrinsic effects. One is that the singularity in the AL terms is ln(1/ ), which is weaker than the power-law singularity in the AL terms in electric conductivity. The power-counting argument is given in V B. As another point, we notice that all contributions contain the factor 1/ε F , which weakens the fluctuation effect. The origin of this factor is discussed in V C. First, we discuss the extrinsic case. In tables I and II, we see that there are three energy scales; ε F , T , /τ . We summarize the dominant contribution in tables IV and V. In the dirty limit, the DOS terms with the side jump process is dominant when σ magnitude of T τ / and 1/(γ φ ). Both in the dirty and clean limits, dominant contributions have signs opposite to that in the normal state. We give an estimate of dominant contribution in fluctuation effect based on the parameters for Nb and clean Al when γ φ 1 in figures 20 and 21. We have assumed in these estimations γ φ independent of temperature but in reality importance of temperature-dependence in γ φ 1 has been pointed out Fluctuation effects on intrinsic spin Hall conductivity except for DOS term has the same sign as that in the normal state, in contrast to the extrinsic case. In ref. B. Power-counting of singularity in the limit → 0 We first consider the origin of the singularity near → +0 by power counting argument. After that, we discuss the physical implication of this result. Before considering the singularity of AL terms in the spin Hall conductivity, we first review the origin of the . In contrast to spin Hall conductivity, the spin current vertex B s does not appear. The charge current vertex in the zero frequency limit B c (0, 0) is nonzero. We can thus replace B c (iΩ k , iω ν ) by B c (0, 0) and obtain in order to extract the most diverging contribution → 0. Note that ω-linear term comes from the fluctuation part, and Ω-derivative of the fluctuation part appears in the last line. We count the power of in Eq. The fluctuation propagator L is appreciable when Ω/T 1, where we can replace coth(Ω/2T ) ≈ (Ω/2T ) -1 thus coth(Ω/2T ) yields a factor of -1 . Consequently, we see that σ AL xx ∝ D/2-2 . We turn to the AL terms in spin Hall conductivity. In the zero frequency limit, B s (0, 0) = 0 and the dominant contribution comes from the ω-linear in B s (iΩ k , iω ν ) and we obtain where the derivative of L does not appear but that of B s does. B s is regular in ω and thus derivative B s does not yield any power of -1 . As a result, σ AL xy ∝ 0 . The power-counting argument does not distinguish ln from 0 and thus this argument correctly accounts for singularity of σ AL xy . Next, we discuss the power of in the DOS terms and the MT terms. It suffices to consider the contribution from Ω k = 0 in electric conductivity and spin Hall conductivity. Consequently, the singularities in both quantities are the same. The power of comes only from q L(q, 0) in the DOS terms(for extrinsic and intrinsic cases) and the MT terms for intrinsic case and the regular part of the MT terms for extrinsic case. L ∝ -1 , q ∝ dqq D-1 ∝ D/2 and thus ∝ ln(1/ ). The power of comes only from q L(q, 0)(γ φξ 2 SC q 2 ) -1 in anomalous part of the MT terms for extrinsic case. We have seen that the AL terms in spin Hall conductivity have weaker singularity than the AL terms in electric conductivity. The AL terms in electric conductivity represent the effect of transport carried by the dynamically fluctuating Cooper-pairs Singularity in the DOS terms in spin Hall conductivity is the same as that in electric conductivity. This can be understood by recalling that the DOS terms represent the quasiparticle contribution. In this process, spin/charge is carried by quasiparticles. The presence of the fluctuating Cooper-pairs suppresses the density of states of the quasiparticles above the transition temperature In this subsection, we discuss the other factor than -dependence in spin Hall conductivity. In tables I, II, and III, we notice the factor ε -1 F in all cases. This factor reduces the effects of fluctuation on spin Hall conductivity. We will inspect the origin of this factor by counting the power of k F in the expressions for spin Hall conductivity normalized by that in the normal state. The charge current vertex and spin current vertex together yield k 2 F in the AL terms in the presence of side jump, and they do k 4 F in the AL terms in the presence of skew scattering. Expansion of Green function with respect to q gives k 2 F . The sum of the product of the fluctuation propagators yields q q 2 L 2 (q, 0) ∝ ξ . Those factors amount to k 0 F in D = 2 for side jump and k 2 F for skew scattering. In the normal state, neither the factor k 2 F stemming from expansion of green function nor k coming from the sum with respect to q exist. Consequently, the spin Hall conductivity in the normal state has one power of ε F larger than the fluctuation conductivity in the AL terms in D = 2. In the DOS terms and the MT terms, we do not expand the green function concerning q and thus the power of k F coming from the spin current vertex and charge current vertex factor is the same as that in the normal state. In the DOS terms and the MT terms, the sum of fluctuation propagator yields q L(q, 0) ∝ ξ -D SC ∝ k -D F . By the last factor, the spin Hall conductivity in the normal state has a multiplicative factor ε F , compared to the fluctuation conductivity in the DOS terms and MT terms. Namely, the integral q <ξ -1 SC q 2 L 2 (q, 0) or q <ξ -1 SC L(q, 0) yields factor 1/ξ SC and reduces magnitude of the spin Hall conductivity. The small phase volume of q restricted by the condition q < ξ -1 SC or the support of L(q, 0) implies that a limited number of electrons can contribute to the fluctuation part of the spin Hall conductivity. This fact reflects in additional factor ε -1 F in fluctuation conductivity, compared to spin Hall conductivity in the normal state. As mentioned in Sec. I, it is known that there is connection between extrinsic spin Hall effect and extrinsic anomalous Hall effect The uniform component of the spin and charge current density operator can be written as Eqs. ( From the above discussion, we can rewrite the results in this paper to the results in Besides, diagram containing more fluctuation propagators have more factor of ε -1 F as mentioned in the last of V C. Li and Levchenko calculated the diagrams that contain more fluctuation propagators than diagrams in this paper and showed that these contributions have the factor of ε -2 F (see Table As we are motivated in the present study, the experiments by Jeon et al. Spin injection from magnets to metals can be driven by electromagnetic field (spin pumping) or thermal gradient at the interface (spin-Seebeck effect). While both subjects for superconductors have been addressed within the mean field theory Charge imbalance is another issue to be addressed. In nonequilibrium steady states in superconductors, quasiparticle density can deviate from equilibrium value, and excess or depletion of quasiparticle density is compensated by that of Cooper-pairs by charge neutrality condition. Spatial variation of Cooper-pair density (and hence that of the chemical potential of Cooper-pairs) induces the electric field so that electrochemical potential for Cooper-pairs is spatially uniform. The inverse spin Hall voltage measured in experiments in The spin Hall effect in the normal state in Nb has been attributed to intrinsic effect In this paper, we theoretically study the effects of superconducting fluctuations on extrinsic spin Hall effects in two-and three-dimensional electron gas and intrinsic spin Hall effects in the two-dimensional Rashba model. The AL, DOS, MT terms have logarithmic divergence ln in the limit = (T -T c )/T c → +0 in two-dimensional systems for both extrinsic and intrinsic spin Hall effects except the MT terms in extrinsic effect, which are proportional to (γ φ ) -1 ln with a cutoff γ φ in two-dimensional systems. The fluctuation correction to the extrinsic spin Hall effect has an opposite sign to that in the normal state and suppresses the spin Hall effect. The correction to the intrinsic spin Hall effect has the same sign as that in the normal state and thus enhances the spin Hall effect. The study of fluctuation effects on spin injection to superconductors based on more realistic models as well as the simple models is an important issue in the future. μ: chemical potential unless it is used as the superscript/subscript. , where V single (r) is potential of single impurity and R i is position of impurities. n i : density of impurities. A: vector potential. e: electric charge unit, e > 0. σ: the Pauli matrices. σ = t (σ x , σ y , σ z ). λ 0 : coupling constant of spin-orbit interaction in extrinsic spin Hall effect. λ: coupling constant of spin-orbit interaction in intrinsic spin Hall effect. λ is different from λ 0 for extrinsic spin Hall effect. m: electron mass. ẑ: unit vector along z-direction. ψ σ (r): annihilation operator of electron with z-component of spin σ. ψ σk : Fourier transform of ψ σ (r). c kα : annihilation operator of one-particle state with wavenumber k in the band α. It is defined by Eq. (13). ε n : Fermionic Matsubara frequency. ε n ≡ (2n + 1)πT (n ∈ Z). ω n : Bosonic Matsubara frequency (external frequency). ω n ≡ 2nπT (n ∈ Z). Ω n : Bosonic Matsubara frequency (internal frequency). Ω n ≡ 2nπT (n ∈ Z). Φ μν (q, iω ν ): spin current-charge current response function with the wavevector q and frequency, iω ν carried by an external field. G α (k, iε n ): green function, which is defined by Eq. ( τ : impurity scattering time. L(q, iΩ k ): propagator of superconducting fluctuation, fluctuation propagator. C(q, ε 1 , ε 2 ): Cooperon. ω D : Debye frequency. • • • F.S. : angular average over the fermi surface. The n-th order derivative of ψ(z) is denoted by ψ (n) (z), which is called polyGamma function. √ with the coherence length ξ(T ) in Ginzburg-Landau theory. In the present paper, we call ξ SC coherence length. It is defined by Eq. ( D: diffusion constant defined by Eq. ( B(q, iΩ k , iω ν ): triangular part containing spin current/charge current vertex. τ φ : phase-breaking time, which is necessary to introduce as a cutoff for extrinsic spin Hall effect in two-dimension systems as well as for electric conductivity. γ φ : dimensionless parameter for phase breaking γ φ ≡ π /8T τ φ . ζ s : D N (0). [1] P. M. Tedrow and R. Meservey, Spin-Dependent Tunneling into Ferromagnetic Nickel, Phys. Rev. Lett. Figure Let B a,b,c s (q, iΩ k , iω ν ), respectively, be the triangular parts in the spin current side in Figs. 1(a), (b) and (c) and B s (q, iΩ k , iω ν ) be the weighted sum of them, i. e., B s (q, iΩ k , iω ν ) = 2B a s (q, iΩ k , iω ν ) + 2B b s (q, iΩ k , iω ν ) + B c s (q, iΩ k , iω ν ). We also denote the triangular part in the charge current side by B c (q, iΩ k , iω ν ), which is common to Figure The expressions for B a,b,c s (q, iΩ k , iω ν ) and B c (q, iΩ k , iω ν ) are given by FIG. and As in the case of calculation of electric conductivity, we expand the Green function in the side of spin current vertex as that the wavevector k 2 stemming from the external product in the H SO is squared and the integral with k 2 does not vanish. Similarly, we expand G(qk, iΩ kiε m ) in the side of charge current vertex so that the wavevector k y is squared. With this consideration, we expand B a,b,c s and B c with q up to the first order as and Here we introduce the following notations: We then rewrite the response function as with We first perform the ξ integral for I and then will perform the ξ 1 , ξ 2 integrals for I a,b,c . The ξ integral for I is considered separately according to the distribution of the poles, which is shown in Fig. Here the symbol i ○ in the equation is unity when ε n ∈ i ○ and zero otherwise. For example, when 1 (Ω k ≤ -ω ν ), In terms of this notation, B c (iΩ k , iω ν ) can be written as After the analytic continuation iΩ k → Ω, B c1 becomes a regular function of Ω for Im This becomes regular function for This is a regular function for Im[Ω] ≥ 0 after analytic continuation iΩ k → Ω. We next calculate I a,b,c . After the integrals with ξ 1 and ξ 2 , they become With use of this result, we obtain B a s becomes It then follows that From these expressions, we see that B a,b,c s become regular functions of Ω for the regions 1 , 2 , 3 , respectively, after analytic continuation iΩ k → Ω. We immediately notice from these expressions that With the use of results in the previous two subsections, we can single out the term diverging in the limit of → 0 in Eq.( We then expand it ω after analytical continuation iω ν → ω ≈ 0. From - + O(ω 2 ). 6. Step6: Retaining the diverging term in the limit → +0 We find that Eqs. ( Note that the divergence in the limit → 0 comes from the points Ω k = 0 and Ω k = -ω ν . In the case of AL term of electric conductivity, these contributions are completely canceled out by taking an integration path properly (refer to the derivation of Eq. ( Performing the sum over ε n in B s2 and B c2 , we can express Eq. ( B c2 (0, 0) can be reduced from Eq. ( 8. Step8: Sum over q The remaining part to be calculated in Eq. ( for D = 2 and Here the cutoff q < ξ -1 SC is introduced. Substituting Eqs. ( 10. Behaviours of Eqs. ( This subsection supplements the argument in Step 6, where we assume that Eqs. ( We first consider Eq. ( with use of partial integral. We will see, immediately below, that B c2 (Ω, 0) is an even function of Ω while B s2 (Ω, 0) is odd. We see that B c2 (Ω, 0) is an even function of Ω from the last line of the following expressions: Next we see that B s2 (Ω, 0) is odd from the following expressions: Further we note that both L A (q, Ω)L R (q, Ω) and d dΩ coth(Ω/2T ) are even functions of Ω and thus the integrand in Eq. ( Next we consider Eqs. converges when = 0. In the expressions for B c and B s in the limit of iω ν → 0, Ω k dependence enters only through the form of 2ε n +sign(ε ). We sum them with ε n after the partial fraction decomposition and find that the resultant expression is linear combination of For m = 0, the Ω k -dependences in all partial fractions enter through the form of ψ( ), which is bounded from above as and it thus suffices to find the upper bound for m ≥ 1. We have the upper bound for x ≥ 1 2 , a ≥ 0, m ≥ 1 by With use of it, we find that the expression for m, l ≥ 1, a, b = 0 or 4πT τ does not diverge when = 0 in the following calculation: The quantities B s3 , B c3 are the sum of terms such as ψ (m) ( 1 2 + |Ω k |/4πT + a) and thus Eq. ( The expression for the spin Hall conductivity via the AL terms with a skew scattering is similar to that via the AL terms with a side jump. We thus briefly explain the derivation in the present case, emphasizing the difference from the previous case. Here B c (q, iΩ k , iω ν ) has been defined by Eq. ( × (Product of the Green functions). As in the AL terms with side jump process, nonzero contribution with the lowest order of q comes from expansion of the Green function the side of the spin current vertex so that k 2 coming from the external product in H SO is to be squared with k 2 • q. With this consideration, we expand B s with q up to the first order as The response function is then written as The quantity B c (iΩ k , iω ν ) has been defined in Eq. (3) with Eq. ( where represent the contribution from the diagram (a), (b), (c) and (d). In Eqs. ( First we note that I a = 0 because at least one integral among the dξ 1 , dξ 2 , and dξ 3 vanishes for all regions Performing the integrals, I b can be written as with use of The quantity I c becomes The ξ 1 integral and the ξ 2 integral in I d are the same as those in I b . The ξ 3 integral is given by from which, from which it follows that for 1 , 2 , and 3 , Next we consider B c s (iΩ k , iω ν ), which is written as which we write down for 1 , 2 , and 3 as Both B b s and B c s become analytic functions for the regions 1 , 2 , 3 after analytical continuation iΩ k → Ω. In the present case, the relation We can proceed from step 4 to step 6 in the same way as those in the case of the AL terms with side jump process. We then obtain the expression corresponding to (13) as Step7: Sum over εn and Step8: Sum over q Performing summation ( from which, we rewrite a factor in Eq. ( The sum over q in Eq. ( Now we are ready to write down the expression for the spin Hall conductivity. Substituting Eqs. ( × (the product of the Green function contained in the diagram ) where the notations are introduced. Setting Ω k = 0 in all quantities and q = 0 in all but L(q, iΩ k ) In the following, we retain the term with Ω k = 0, which is most diverging with respect to . We also set q = 0 in I a,b,c,d because only the q-dependence in L(q, iΩ k ) is important. The expressions for I a,b,c,d depend on the location of Ω k and ω ν , as shown in Fig. FIG. Substituting these expressions into Eq. ( ψ (1) 1 2 . Analytic continuation iω ν → ω and expansion with ω up to the first order are followed by 6. Step6: Sum over q The remaining factor to be considered is q L(q, 0), which becomes 7. Step7: Expression for spin Hall conductivity Putting Eqs. ( • We first note that the diagrams with impurity vertex only in one-side of the particle line (e.g. Fig. 1y appears and the integrals with k 1x or k 1y vanish. • We note that diagrams contribute only when H SO is on the line with one impurity vertex in the lowest order contribution with respect to q (see Fig. • The diagram reflected with vertical line contributes equally to the original diagram (See. Fig. in (a), (c), (e), (f) and Thus, diagrams (c), (e), and (f) have the same coefficient as (a) while those (b) and (d) have minus the coefficient in (a). The DOS terms with skew scattering process for σ DOS-SS xy is thus given by FIG. 2. Step2: Setting Ω k = 0 in all quantities and q = 0 in all but L(q, iΩ k ) Setting Ω k = 0 in all quantities and q = 0 in all but L(q, iΩ k ), Eq. ( Here we introduce I a,b,c,d,e,f as Performing the integral with ξ 1 , ξ 2 , ξ 3 , we obtain 4. Step4: Sum over εn Performing the sum over ε n , we obtain After analytic continuation iω ν → ω ≈ 0 and expansion with ω, we obtain 6. Step6: Sum over q and Step7: Expression for spin Hall conductivity With use of Eqs.( 2. Step2: Setting Ω k = 0 in all quantities and q = 0 in Green functions We set Ω k = 0 for all quantities and set q = 0 for Green functions, Φ MT-SJ-a xy and Φ MT-SJ-b xy reduce to with The ξ 1 integrals for I a and I b are performed separately for the three cases of distribution of the poles shown in Fig. i.e. I a + I b = 0. We thus see that the MT terms with side jump process vanish in total. Figure We see that (b) is different from (a) only in the arguments of Green functions. In the diagram (c), the vector product part k 2 × k 1 is minus that in (a). However, the summation over spin index recovers the same coefficient as (a), including the sign. Thus, we first perform the integral of the product of the Green function with ξ 1 and ξ 2 for (a), (b), and (c), and then sum them up. The resultant expression for Φ MT-SS xy is given by where we introduce the notations The ξ 2 , ξ 3 integrals of I a + I b in the present case are the same as the ξ 1 , ξ 2 integrals of I a + I b in the MT terms with side jump process and thus it vanishes. The ξ 1 integral and the ξ 2 integral in I c are performed, considering the distribution of the poles, which are shown in Fig. We note that the sum over n < -ν and that over n ≥ 0 cancel with each other; the sum over n < -ν becomes which is minus the contribution from n ≥ 0. The sum over -ν ≤ n < 0 becomes Analytic continuation iω ν → ω, the resultant expression is written in terms of polyGamma function as We introduce the notations for the regular part and the anomalous part. In the response function we consider q L(q, 0)Σ MT-SS(reg) and q L(q, 0)Σ MT-SS(an) , separately. 6. Step7: Regular part in MT term of spin Hall conductivity In the regular part, Σ MT-SS(reg) has no q-dependence and thus q L(q, 0)Σ MT-SS(reg) =Σ MT-SS(reg) q L(q, 0) . We then obtain In the anomalous part, we introduce the phase-breaking time τ φ as a cutoff in Σ MT-SS(an) and obtain q L(q, 0)Σ MT-SS(an) = ω π 3 τ 2 4T 2 1 N (0) q <ξ -1 q,Ω k L(q, iΩ k )L(q, iΩ kiω ν ) With use of q , we expand the Green function with q, We then reduce the expression for Φ AL xy (0, iω ν ) as We consider the ξ-integral in I αβ The ξ-integral in I αβ is considered separately for the four cases of the distribution of the poles (see Fig. Further we sum over ε n , which yields the expression in terms of the polygamma function. Next we sum over Ω k , separating the sum into three regions shown in Fig. where the upper (lower) sign in the symbol ± is for i = 1 (i = 3). With this result and the fact that Eq. ( T Ω k L(q, iΩ k )L(q, iΩ kiω ν )B c (iΩ k , iω ν )B s (iΩ k , iω ν ) = T 2 L R (q, iω )L(q, 0)B c2 (iω ν , iω ν )B s2 (iω ν , iω ν ) + T 2 L(q, 0)L A (q, -iω ν )B c2 (0, iω ν )B s2 (0, iω ν ) L R (q, Ω)L A (q, Ωiω ν )B c2 (Ω, iω ν )B s2 (Ω, iω ν ) -L R (q, Ω + iω ν )L A (q, Ω)B c2 (Ω + iω ν , iω ν )B s2 (Ω + iω ν , iω ν ) + ω • T + ω • T +O(ω 2 ). We note that Eqs. ( +(regular terms in the limit → 0) + O(ω 2 ). We calculate each factor in Eq. FIG. Step8: Sum over q The part related to q is written with use of Eq. ( 8. Step9: Expression for spin Hall conductivity Putting Eqs. 2. Step2: Setting Ω k = 0 in all quantities and q = 0 in all but L(q, iΩ k ) In the following, we set Ω k = 0 and retain the q-dependence only in L(q, 0). The response function 