The superfluid properties of attractive Hubbard model in dice lattice are investigated. It is found that three superfluid order parameters increase as the interaction increases. When the filling factor falls into the flat band, due to the infinite large density of states, the resultant superfluid order parameters are proportional to interaction strength, which is in striking contrast with the exponentially small counterparts in usual superfluid (or superconductor). When the interaction is weak, and the filling factor is near the bottom of the lowest band (or the top of highest band), the superfluid density is determined by the effective mass of the lowest (or highest) single-particle band. When the interaction is strong and filling factor is small, the superfluid density is inversely proportional to interaction strength, which is related to effective mass of tightly bound pairs. In the strong interaction limit and finite filling, the asymptotic behaviors of superfluid density can be captured by a parabolic function of filling factor. Furthermore, when the filling is in flat band, the superfluid density shows a logarithmic singularity as the interaction approaches zero. In addition, there exist three undamped collective modes for strong interactions. The lowest excitation is gapless phonon, which is characterized by the total density oscillations. The two others are gapped Leggett modes, which correspond relative density fluctuations between sublattices. The collective modes are also reflected in the two-particle spectral functions by sharp peaks. Furthermore, it is found that the two-particle spectral functions satisfy an exact sum-rule, which is directly related to the filling factor (or density of particle). The sum-rule of the spectral functions may be useful to distinguish between the hole-doped and particle-doped superfluid (superconductor) in experiments. The superfluid properties in a multi-band (or multi-component) system have been attracting a great interests For a single flat band system, due to the divergence of effective mass A flat band can appear in dice (T 3 ) lattices, similar as graphene, which also has the honeycomb lattice structure (see Fig. Although the superfluid density in three band Lieb lattices has been studied In this work, we study the superfluid properties and collective modes of attractive Hubbard model in dice lattices. It is found that the flat band has important influences on the superfluid order parameters and superfluid density. In addition, there exists three collective modes, one of that is the gapless phonon mode, the other two are gapped Leggett modes. The collective modes can be reflected by sharp peaks in two-particle spectral functions. Furthermore, an exact sum-rule of spectral functions is derived, which may be useful to distinguish between the hole-doped and particle-doped superfluid (or superconductor) in experiments. The structure of dice lattices is depicted in Fig. where μ describes the chemical potential. In the following, we would use i to label the unit cell. The creation operators for three sub-lattices are represented by ψ † iA , ψ † iB and ψ † iC , respectively. n iσ = ψ † iσ ψ iσ is the particle number operator. Under periodic boundary condition , using a Fourier transform, it is convenient to obtain the non-interacting Hamiltonian where , and k = (k x , k y ). The two dimensional vectors a δ are shown in Fig. It is worth noting that an important role played by particle-hole symmetry in this model. Similarly as Haldane-Hubbard model where ε i = 1 for the A and C sublattices, and for the B sublattices ε i = -1, the hopping term in Hamiltonian Eq.( It indicates that, at half-filling (n = 3), the chemical potential is exactly zero. Furthermore, we will see that all the other physical quantities, e.g., superfluid order parameters, superfluid density, etc., are also symmetrical with respect to the halffilling n = 3 (see Fig. When the filling factor approaches zero, the order parameters decrease to zero. The fully occupied case (n = 6) is equivalent to completely empty (n = 0) case due to the particle-hole symmetry. With the increasing of filling factor n, the ∆ i gets larger. However, when the filling factor is in between the lowest band and the middle flat band, the order parameter gets a dip due to the small density of states near the Dirac points [especially for weakly interacting cases in panel (a) of Fig. The interaction effects amplified by band flatness can give rise to Wigner-crystal state The superfluid density can be calculated with phase twist method where Ω is thermodynamical potential (per unit cell) in grand canonical ensemble. Similarly as the Haldane model The superfluid density ρ s is plotted as a function of filling factor for different interactions in panel (b) of Fig. where m * = √ 2/(3t) is the effective mass near the bottom of lowest band, which is determined by the single-particle energy band structure, and does not depend on interaction strength U. The superfluid density is proportional to filling factor (or particle density) and inversely proportional to the effective mass of energy band Differently from order parameters, when interaction U/t ≫ 1, the superfluid density remains finite. In such case, the superfluid consists of tightly bound pairs. Two bound pairs could not occupy a same lattice site due to the constraint of exclusive principle of fermions. So the pairs can be viewed as hard-core bosons, which is BEC limit of fermion superfluid. When the number of the effective hard-core bosons is small n ≪ 1 (dilute gas limit), the superfluid density is determined by the effective mass of tightly bound pairs, i.e., where n ′ = n/2 is filling factor of effective hard core bosons and m ′ * = U/(16t 2 ) is its effective mass, which is determined by the dispersion of two-particle bound state energy (Note m ′ * = 2m * due to the coupling of between the motions of center of mass and relative motion of two particles in lattice For intermediate filling factor (e.g, n = 3 in flat band), it is found that the superfluid density approaches zero as U → 0. Once the interaction is turned on, the superfluid density grows rapidly [see panel (a) of Fig. as U → 0 with two constants a ≃ 0.4077 and b = 9.822 for half filling n = 3 [see panel (a) in Fig. , it is found that the superfluid density mainly arises from matrix elements of current operator between the flat band and other bands near the Dirac points (the off-diagonal part). Furthermore, the contribution near the Dirac points can be approximated by where A, B, a and b are four constants. A similar logarithmic singularity of superfluid density also appear in the Mielke checkerboard lattices With the increasing of interaction, the superfluid density reaches its maximum values at U ≃ 3.7t [see panel (a) in Fig. Consequently, the superfluid density The asymptotic results Eqs. ( In this section, we would present Gaussian fluctuation method The order parameters can be decomposed as mean-field part and fluctuation, i.e., ∆ i = ∆ i + δ ∆ i with i = 1, 2, ...m, and m is the number of order parameters. The partition function can be written as where S 0 is the mean-field contribution and the Gaussian fluctuation part (see the Methods) with pairing fluctuation fields η where is matrix element of Nambu-Gorkov Green function. The collective modes are given by zeros of determinant Det|M(q, iω n → ω + i0 + )| = 0. As q → 0, the gapless collective mode is the Anderson-Bogoliubov phonon, which characterizes the density oscillations of superfluid. The gapped ones are Leggett modes, which correspond relative oscillations of densities of different sublattices The two-particle normal (anomalous) Green function matrix elements are defined as 47 where ω n0 = E n -E 0 , E n and |n are eigenvalues and eigenstates of Hamiltonian, respectively. ∆ iq is pairing fluctuation operator of superfluid order parameters [see Eq.( The two-particle spectral functions can be expressed in terms of the Green functions as 57 where 0 + denotes a positive infinitesimal number. In addition, in the presence of inversion symmetry, the superfluid density can be also related to the pairing fluctuation matrix M 47 ρ s =lim q→0 4 q 2 (∆ t * , ∆ t ). where (I) m×m is a m × m identity matrix, ∆ = (∆ 1 , ∆ 2 , ..., ∆ m ) t , and (...) t denotes matrix transpose. In dice lattice case, the number of order parameters m = 3 and we identify Fig. The two-particle spectral functions of a general superfluid state can be also defined as where ω n0 = E n -E 0 , E n and |n are eigenvalues and eigenstates of Hamiltonian, respectively. ∆ αβ q is pairing fluctuation operator of superfluid order parameters, i.e., where ψ αk+q fermion field operator for single particle state α in momentum space, which satisfies anti-commutation relation The two-particle normal (anomalous) Green functions can be expressed in terms of spectral functions, i.e., 7/19 The spectral functions of q = 0.5, 1.5, 2.5 and 3.5 are plotted in blue, green, red and black lines, respectively. The sharp peaks in spectral functions correspond the collective modes. In order to get the spectral functions numerically, we take 0 + = 0.02 in Eq. (19). Similarly as single-particle spectral function Taking the diagonal elements (γ = α; δ = β ), where N cell is the number of unit cells, N α is the particle number of α-th component. In our dice lattice case, there exist three order parameters and they can be identified as where indices i, j = A, B,C, particle number of i-th sublattice N i = N i↑ + N i↓ . If we take the diagonal elements of A i j and sum over i, then we get a much more useful sum-rule where total particle number N = N A + N B + N c and filling factor n = N/N cell . It should be emphasized that the above sum-rule of spectral functions is exact, which does not depend on what state the system is. One can use the above sum-rule to check the calculations of various theories. The above Eq. (28) shows that the integral of spectral functions is proportional to filling factor n -3 (relative to the half filling). If the filling factor is half filling (n -3 = 0), the integral of spectral functions is exactly zero. While when filling factor is larger (smaller) than half-filling [particle (hole)-doped case], the integral of spectral functions is negative (positive). Our numerical calculations verify the above observations. For example, when the filling is half-filling (n = 3), we see that the spectral functions are odd functions of frequency and the integral of spectral functions vanishes exactly [see panels (c)(d) of Fig. In addition, for a fixed q, when ω approaches some non-degenerate collective modes (e.g., phonon or Leggett modes), from the definition Eq.( where |n = |q is wave function of the collective mode, ω n0 is its excitation energy. As a result of that, when ω ≃ ω n0 , the heights of peaks of two-particle spectral functions near the collective mode should satisfy a relation, i.e., |A i, j (q, ω)| 2 = A i,i (q, ω)A j, j (q, ω). When q is small (q → 0), the matrix elements of two-particle Green functions of zero frequency ω = 0 are proportional to product of two order parameters, namely where ] ≃ 1/(q 2 ρ s ) > 0 is a real number and θq the phase operator are also proportional to product of superfluid order parameters, i.e., where are two real number, which are approximately equal as q → 0. Our numerical calculations indeed verify Eq.( In conclusion, we investigate the superfluid properties of attractive Hubbard model in dice lattice. The order parameters and superfluid density as functions of filling factors and interactions are analyzed in great detail. We emphasize the important roles of effective masses in the understanding of the asymptotic behaviors of superfluid density, especially for small filling factor. When both the filling factor and interaction are small, the superfluid density is given by the effective mass of single particle energy band. When interaction is strong, the superfluid density is inversely proportional to interaction, which is also related to effective mass of tightly bound pairs. At strong interaction limit, the asymptotic behavior of superfluid density is captured by a parabola function of filling factor. In addition, the flat band has significant influences on superfluidity. To be specific, the infinite large density of states of flat band results in a linear interaction-dependence of superfluid order parameters. When interaction is weak, the existences of Dirac points and vanishingly small order parameters cause a logarithmic singularity of superfluid density. Due to the existence of three order parameters, there are three collective modes, i.e., one is the gapless phonon, which corresponds to total density oscillations; the others are gapped Leggett modes, which are characterized by the relative density oscillations between different sublattices. It is found that the undamped Leggett modes can exist in strong interaction cases. In addition, the collective modes can be reflected by sharp peaks in the two-particle spectral functions. The behaviors of two-particle spectral functions near the phonon modes are also analyzed in detail. In addition, an exact sum-rule of spectral functions is derived. For theoretical aspects, the sum-rule can be used to check the various theoretical calculations. In experiments, the sum-rule of the spectral functions may be useful to distinguish between the hole-doped and particle-doped superfluid (or superconductor). The Hamiltonian Eq.( which The Bogoliubov transformation of above equation is readily carried out to obtain the eigenenergies E 1,2,3+(-) (k), where E n-(k) = -E n+ (-k) < 0 and 1, 2, 3 represent three branches of energy. The thermodynamic potential per unit cell in the ground state is where N cell is the number of unit cells. The order parameters (or pairing gaps) and chemical potential can be obtained by solving ∂ Ω/∂ ∆ A,B,C = 0, and n = -∂ Ω/∂ μ consistently. In the whole paper, we set t = 1 as the energy unit and lattice spacing a = 1. For dice lattices, the superfluid order parameters for three sublattices are Using the mean-field decoupling, the BdG Hamiltonian is where and where the particle and hole part Hamiltonian are and respectively. The above BdG matrix can be diagonalized, e.g., where quasi-particle energy E n+ (k) = E n (k)) > 0 and E n-(k) = -E n+ (-k) < 0 due to particle-hole symmetry of the Bogoliubov-de Gennes Hamiltonian. For three band dice lattices, the indices n = 1, 2, 3. Eigen-states |n+, k and |n-, k ("quasi-particle basis") can be also written as where |ps, k and |ht, k are eigen-states of particle and hole part Hamiltonian, respectively, i.e, They are also the "energy band basis" for single-particle Hamiltonian. Then W + and W -are transformation matrices between the above two sets of basis. Due to the time reversal symmetry in dice lattices, The thermodynamic potential per unit cell is where N cell is the number of unit cells. The constant Cons = -3μ The superfluid density can be obtained with phase twist method. Assuming the superfluid order parameters undergo a phase variation, e.g, △(r) → ∆(r)e 2iq•r , the superfluid density tensor ρ si j can be written as where Ω(q) is thermodynamical potential. In the presence of phase twist, the BdG Hamiltonian (after applying a gauge transformation) becomes where After diagonalizing the above BdG matrix, we can get the eigen-energies E n+ (k, q) and E n-(k, q). The thermodynamical potential becomes In addition, if a Hamiltonian H, its eigen-states |n and eigen-energies E n depend on parameters k and q, they should satisfy Due to n| ∂ 2 H BdG (k,q) |n for the BdG matrix H BdG (k, q), so the superfluid density can be written as where we use H to denote the BdG matrix H BdG (k, q). |m+ ≡ |m+, k, q (|n-≡ |n-, k, q ) and E m+ ≡ E m+ (k, q)[E n-≡ E n-(k, q)] are eigen-states and eigen-energies of Hamiltonian H BdG (k, q). The first term of superfluid depends on the second derivative ∂ 2 E n- ∂ k i ∂ k j , it would vanish. Because quasi-particle energy E n-(k x , k y ) is a periodic function of k x , the summation over k can be transformed into an integral. An integral of a derivative of periodic function over a period is zero. So the superfluid density is |n- When q → 0, and Using the energy-band basis, the superfluid density When interaction U → ∞, the chemical potential μ ∝ U and the order parameters ∆ A ≃ ∆ B ≃ ∆ C ∝ U, which corresponds to the uniform pairing case In addition, the particle-hole symmetry of BdG matrix implies that the transformation matrices satisfy When U → ∞, the order parameter and chemical potential where n is filling factor (particle number per unit cell). In addition, the quasi-particle energies satisfy where ε n (k) ≃ -μ as U → ∞. The superfluid density is reduced to where |n ≡ |n, k is energy band basis, and h(k) is single-particle Hamiltonian [ Eq.( where is a rank-two tensor, which only depends on single-particle Hamiltonian. For dice lattices in our work, S i j = 6t 2 δ i j . So the asymptotic formula for superfluid density (particle number per unit cell) is obtained (U → ∞) To investigate the collective modes, it is very convenient to formulate the theory with functional integration. The partition function of grand canonical ensemble is written as functional integral of Grassman fields ψ and ψ where we have the action S given by where the inverse temperature β = 1/T . In this paper, we will only focus on the properties at zero temperature and will take β → ∞ at the end. By introducing the Hubbard-Stratanovich fields ∆ iA(B,C) for sub-lattice A(B,C) as usual, we have and the effective action is given by In the following, we will use the subscribe i 1 , and i ′ 1 [(i 2 , i ′ 2 )/(i 3 , i ′ 3 )] to denote the positions of sub-lattices A [B/C] unless stated otherwise. With the basis ψ = [ ψi 1 A↑ , ψi 2 B↑ , ψi 3 C↑ ; ψ i 1 A↓ , ψ i 2 B↓ , ψ i 3 C↓ ], the inverse Nambu-Gorkov Green function G -1 takes following form where The functional integral is quadratic with respect to ψ fields, we can integrate it out Further assuming ∆ iA , ∆ iB and ∆ iC can be written as ∆ iA (τ) = ∆ A + δ ∆ iA (τ), ∆ iB (τ) = ∆ B + δ ∆ iB (τ) and ∆ iC (τ) = ∆ C + δ ∆ iC (τ), where ∆ A(B/C) are not dependent on spatial and time variables. It is convenient to write the G -1 in momentum and Matsubara frequency spaces, i.e., where and where we introduce δ (k Expanding action S ∆ to second order of δ ∆ , one gets the thermodynamic potential Z ≈ e -S 0 D ηq Dη q e -δ S , where S 0 is the action from the mean-field contribution and q = δ k. The linear terms vanish due to the mean-field (saddlepoint) equations. The fluctuation contribution is where ηq = [∆ * A (q, iω n ), ∆ * B (q, iω n ), ∆ * C (q, iω n ); ∆ A (-q, -iω n ), ∆ B (-q, -iω n ), ∆ C (-q, -iω n )] and the fluctuation matrix M is given by where the number of order parameters m = 3 and Green function G 0 i j (k, iω n ′ ) = ([iω n ′ -H BdG (k)] -1 ) i j is matrix element of Nambu-Gorkov Green function. The collective modes are given by zeroes of determinant Det|M(q, iω n → ω + i0 + )| = 0. /SrlrO 3 /SrTiO 3 ) in the (111) direction