In classification tasks, it is crucial to meaningfully exploit the information contained in data. While much of the work in addressing these tasks is devoted to building complex algorithmic infrastructures to process inputs in a black-box fashion, less is known about how to exploit the various facets of the data, before inputting this into an algorithm. Here, we focus on this latter perspective, by proposing a physics-inspired dynamical system that adapts Optimal Transport principles to effectively leverage color distributions of images. Our dynamics regulates immiscible fluxes of colors traveling on a network built from images. Instead of aggregating colors together, it treats them as different commodities that interact with a shared capacity on edges. The resulting optimal flows can then be fed into standard classifiers to distinguish images in different classes. We show how our method can outperform competing approaches on image classification tasks in datasets where color information matters. Optimal Transport (OT) is a powerful method for computing the distance between two data distributions. This problem has a cross-disciplinary domain of applications, ranging from logistic and route optimization Colored images, originally encoded into three-dimensional histograms-with one dimension per color channel-are often compressed into lower dimensional data using feature extraction algorithms Given two m, n-dimensional probability vectors g, h, and a positive-valued ground cost matrix C, the goal of a standard-unicommodity-OT problem is to find an Optimal Transport path P satisfying the conservation constraints j P ij = g i ∀i and i P ij = h j ∀j, while minimizing J(g, h) = ij P ij C ij . Entries P ij can be interpreted as the mass transported from g i to h j when paying a cost C ij , while J , i.e. J evaluated at P , encodes the minimum effort needed to transport g to h. Notably, if all entries C ij are distances between i and j, then J is the W 1 distance between g and h (see Interpreting colors as mass traveling along a network built from images' pixels (as we define in details below), unicommodity OT could be used to capture the similarity between grayscale images. However, it may not be ideal for colored images, when color information matters. The limitation of unicommodity OT in Section II A is that it does not fully capture the variety of information contained in different color channels, as it is not able to distinguish them. Motivated by this, we tackle this challenge and move beyond this standard setting by incorporating insights from the dynamics of immiscible flows in physics. Specifically, we treat the different pixels' color channels as mass of different types that do not mix, but rather travel and interact on the same network infrastructure, while optimizing a unique cost function. By assuming capacitated edges with conductivities that are proportional to the amount of mass traveling through an edge, we can define a set of ODEs that regulate fluxes and conductivities. These are optimally distributed along a network to better account for color information, while satisfying physical conservation laws. Similar ideas have been successfully used to route different types of passengers in transportation networks Formally, we couple together histograms of M = 3 color channels, the commodities, indexed with a = 1, . . . , M . We define g a , h a as m, n-dimensional probability vectors of mass of type a. More compactly, we define the matrix G with entries G ia = g a i (resp. H for h), each containing the intensity of color channel a in pixel i of the first (resp. second) image. These regulate the sources and sinks of mass in our setting. We then enforce conservation of mass for each commodity index a: i g a i = j h a j . This ensures that all the color mass in the first image should be accounted for in the second one, and viceversa, and this should be valid for each mass type. Moreover, we define the set Π(G, H), containing (m × n × M )-dimensional tensors P with entries P a ij , being transport paths between g a and h a . These regulate how fluxes of colors of different types travel along a network. We enforce interaction between transport paths for different commodities by introducing a shared cost: where is the 2-norm of the vector P ij = P 1 ij , . . . , P M ij and 0 < Γ < 4/3 is a regularization parameter. We take Γ > 0 since a negative exponent would favor the proliferation of loops with infinite mass ( Notice that for M = 1 and Γ = 1, we recover the standard unicommodity OT setup. The problem in Eq. ( Noticeably, J Γ is a quantity that takes into account all the different mass types, and the OT paths P are found through a unique optimization problem. We emphasize that this is fundamentally different from solving M independent unicommodity problems, where different types of mass are not coupled together as in our setting, and then combining their optimal costs to estimate images' similarity. Estimating J Γ (G, H) gives directly a quantitative and principled measure of the similarity between two images G and H. The lower this cost, the higher the similarity of the two images. While this is valid also for the unicommodity cost in Section II A, the difference here is that we account differently for the color information as we distinguish different colors via the M -dimensional vector P ij . The cost in Eq. ( Having introduced the main ideas and intuitions, we now explain in details how to adapt the OT formalism to images. Specifically, we introduce an auxiliary bipartite network K m,n (V 1 , V 2 , E 12 ), being the first building block of the network where the OT problem is solved. A visual representation of this is shown in Fig. where the vector v i = (x i , y i ) contains the horizontal and vertical coordinates of pixel i of Image 1 (similarly v j for Image 2). The quantity θ ∈ [0, 1] is an hyperparameter that is given in input and can be chosen with cross-validation. It acts as a weight for a convex combination between the Euclidean distance between pixels and the difference in their color intensities, following the intuition in These are substituted by m + n transshipment edges e ∈ E , each of cost τ /2, connected to one unique auxiliary vertex u 1 . Thresholding the cost decreases significantly the computational complexity of OT, making it linear with the number of nodes Furthermore, we relax conservation of mass by allowing i G ia = j H ja . The excess of mass m a = j H jai G ia is assigned to a second auxiliary node, u 2 . We connect it to the network with n additional transshipment edges e ∈ E , each penalizing the total cost by c = max ij C ij /2. This construction improves classification when the histograms' total mass largely differs Overall we obtain a network K with nodes and edges E = E 12 ∪ E , i.e. the original bipartite graph K m,n , together with the auxiliary transshipment links and nodes. Note that in its entirety the system is isolated, i.e. the total mass is conserved. See Supplementary Material for a detailed description of the OT setup. Given this auxiliary graph, the OT problem is then solved by injecting in nodes i ∈ V 1 the color mass contained in Image 1, as specified by G, and extracting it in nodes j ∈ V 2 of Image 2, as specified by H. This is done by transporting mass using either (i) an edge in E 12 , or (ii) a transshipment one in E . In the following Section we describe how this problem is solved mathematically. We solve the OT problem by proposing the following ODEs controlling mass transportation: ) which constitute the pivotal equations of our model. Here we introduce the shared conductivities x e ≥ 0, and define ] is an hyperparameter that needs to be chosen before solving Eqs. ( The feedback mechanism of Eq. ( This also highlights another physical interpretation: by interpreting the φ a i as pressure potentials, the fluxes are seen to arise from a difference in pressure between two nodes, as in hydraulic or electrical networks. Crucially, this allocation is governed by one unique conductivity for all commodities, whose dynamics depends on the 2-norm over a of differences of potentials, as in Eq. ( In the case of only one commodity (M = 1), variants of this dynamics have been used to model transport optimization in various physical systems The salient result of our construction is that asymptotic trajectories of Eqs. ( In principle, our multicommodity method has a computational complexity of order O(M |V | 2 ) for complete transport network topologies, i.e., when edges in the transport network K are assigned to all pixels' pairs. Nonetheless, we decrease substantially this complexity by sparsifying the graph with the trimming procedure of We provide empirical evidence that our multicommodity dynamics outperforms competing OT algorithms on classification tasks. As anticipated above, we use the OT optimal cost J Γ as a measure of similarity between two images, and perform supervised classification with a k-nearest neighbor (k-NN) classifier as in We compare classification accuracy of our model against: (i) Sinkhorn algorithm In addition, analyzing results in more detail, we first observe that on JF30 all methods perform best when θ = 0.25, i.e., 25% percent of the information used to build C comes from colors. This trend does not recur on FD, where both dynamics favor θ = 0 (Euclidean C). Hence, our model is able to leverage color information via the multicommodity OT dynamical formulation. Second, on JF30 both dynamics perform best with τ = 0.125, contrarily to Sinkhorn-based methods that prefer τ = 0.05. Thus, Sinkhorn's classification accuracy is negatively affected both by low τ -many edges of the transport network are cut, and by τ large-noisy color information is used to build C. We do not observe this behavior in our model, where trimming less edges is advantageous. All optimal values of τ are lower on FD, since color distributions of this dataset are naturally light-tailed (See Supplementary Material). Lastly, we investigate the interplay between θ and β. We notice that θ = 0 (FD) corresponds to higher β = 1.5. Instead, for larger θ = 0.25 (JF30), the model prefers lower β (β = 1, 1.25 for the multicommodity and the unicommodity dynamics, respectively). In the former case (θ = 0, C ij is the Euclidean distance), the cost is equal to zero for pixels with the same locations. Thus, consolidation of transport paths-large β-is favored on cheap links. Instead, increasing θ leads to more edges with comparable costs as colors distribute smoothly over images. In this second scenario, better performance is achieved with distributed transport paths, i.e. lower β (See Supplementary Material). We assess the effectiveness of our method against benchmarks by comparing the sensitivity of our multicommodity dynamics and that of Sinkhorn algorithm on the colored JF30 dataset. Specifically, we set all algorithms' parameters to their best configurations, as shown in Table where TP(c) is the true positives rate, i.e. the number of images in c that are correctly classified; FN(c) is the false negative rate, i.e. the number of c-samples that are assigned a label different than c. Hence, Eq. ( To further assess the importance of leveraging color information we conduct three different experiments where we highlight, both qualitatively and quantitatively, various performance differences between the unicommodity and the multicommodity approaches. As the two share the same principled dynamics based on OT, with the main difference being that multicommodity does not compress the color information, we can use this analysis to better understand how fully exploiting the color information drives better classification. Sinkhorn RGB (red triangles). Markers are sorted in descending order of S, regardless the method. Background colors are blue, red, and gray, when S is higher for the multicommodity method, Sinkhorn, or none of them, respectively. In green we plot frequency bars for all classes in the test set. Experiment 1: landscape of optimal cost. Here we focus on a qualitative comparison between the cost landscapes obtained with the two approaches. We consider the example of an individual image taken from the test set of FD and we plot the landscape of optimal costs J Γ when comparing it against the train set. Results for the multicommodity dynamics (M = 3), and for the unicommodity dynamics (M = 1) on grayscale images are in Fig. Experiment 2: controlling for shape. We further mark this tendency with a second experiment where we select a subset of FD composed of images belonging to three classes of fruits that have similar shapes but different colors: red apples, orange apricots, yellow melons. As we expect shape to be less informative than colors in this custom set, we can assess the extent to which color plays a crucial role in the classification process. Specifically, the test set is made of three random samples each drawn from one of these classes (top row of the rightmost panel) in Fig. Experiment 3: when shape matters. Having shown results on a custom dataset where shape was controlled to matter less, we now do the opposite and select a dataset where this feature should be more informative. The goal is to assess whether a multicommodity approach helps in this case as well, as its main input information may not be as relevant anymore. Specifically, we select as a test sample a cherry, whose form is arguably distinguishable from that of many other fruits in the dataset. One can expect that comparing it against the train set of FD will result in having both unicommodity and multicommodity dynamics able to assign low J Γ to train cherries, and higher costs to other fruits. This intuition is confirmed by results in Fig. We propose a physics-informed multicommodity OT formulation for effectively using color information to improve image classification. We model colors as immiscible flows traveling on a capacitated network, and propose equations for its dynamics, with the goal of optimizing flow distribution on edges. Color flows are regulated by a shared conductivity, and minimize a unique cost function. Thresholding the ground cost as in We outperform other OT-based approaches as the Sinkhorn algorithm on two datasets where color matters. Our model also assigns lower cost to correctly classified images than its unicommodity counterpart, and it is more robust on datasets where items have similar shape, and thus color information is distinctly relevant. We note that, for some datasets, color information may not matter, as when another type of information (e.g. shape) has stronger discriminative power. However, while we focused here on different color channels as the different commodities in our formulation, the ideas of this paper can be extended to scenarios where other relevant information can be distinguished into different types. For instance, one could combine several features together, e.g. colors, contours and objects' orientations, when available. Our model can be further improved. While it uses the thresholding of Our main goal is to frame an image classification task into that of finding optimal flows of mass of different types in networks built from images. We follow physics principles to assess whether using colors as immiscible flows can give an advantage compared to other standard OT-based methods that do not incorporate such insights. The increased classification performance observed in our experiments stimulates the integration of similar ideas into deep network architectures To facilitate practitioners using our algorithms, we make our Python code publicly available Alessandro Lonardi, 1, * Diego Baptista, 1, † and Caterina De Bacco Here, we extensively explain the procedure used for constructing the transport network K. All the essential steps are schematically drawn in Fig. Step 1. Initially, a pair of images (Image 1, Image 2), is given as a couple of multidimensional arrays of dimensions (w i , h i , M = 3), with i = 1, 2. We denote with w images' widths and with h their heights. The third dimension has size M = 3, and corresponds to the three RGB color channels. We then assign a cost to each edge of this graph using both information given by pixels' locations, and by images' colors. In particular, we define: contributes with colors to edges' costs. We model the effect of colors taking, in Eq. ( Step 2. Once Step 1 is complete, and a cost C e is assigned to each edge of the complete bipartite graph between the two images, we implement a trimming procedure similar to that of There are several benefits in thresholding for the cost: (i) from a purely intuitive standpoint, humans perceive distances as saturated distances Step 3. The last step required to obtain K is the introduction of a second auxiliary node, u 2 , together with its edges, to relax mass balance. In detail, in a standard OT setting i G ia = j H ja = Λ a > 0 holds ∀a = 1, . . . , M , i.e., two histograms to be transported belong to the same simplex of mass Λ a > 0. We relax this constraint permitting i G ia = j H ja and penalizing Eq. ( The intuition of Eq. (S4) is that the OT problem is penalized proportionally to the net difference between the inflowing and the outflowing mass. Hence, two images whose colors strongly differ return a higher cost and, in a supervised classification task, are less likely to be assigned the same label. We fix α = 1/2 as in This penalization can be translated to the transport network with the addition of n links, costing c = α max e∈E12 C e = max e∈E12 C e /2, connected to u 2 . The excess of mass m a = j H jai G ia given by each commodity is injected u 2 to guarantee that the whole system is isolated. With this expedient one recovers exactly the relaxed OT formulation in Eq. (S4). In fact, all the transport paths that not flow into one of the n nodes of Image 2 penalize the cost by traversing the edges connected to u 2 . From conservation of mass one can see that these transport paths satisfy Thus, summing over a and j returns exactly aj P a ju2 = || j H ji G i || 1 , with the 1-norm taken over the commodities. This is precisely the penalization we introduced in Eq. (S4). With the following derivations (similar to More in detail, we first demonstrate the equivalence between stationary solutions of the multicommodity dynamics and minimizers of the multicommodity OT problem introducing a second accessory minimization problem. Stationary solutions are proven to be asymptotes of Eq. (4) (main text) only afterwards, with the introduction of a Lyapunov functional for the multicommodity dynamics. Initially, we observe that stationary solutions of the multicommodity dynamics satisfy the relation that one can derive setting the left hand side of Eq. ( To complete the mapping between the multicommodity dynamics and the minization setup, we show that the space of transport tensors Π(G, H) is exactly the same space defined by Eq. (S7). This can be seen with the following chain of equalities: Here we take the difference between the OT constraints of Π(G, H) in Eq. (S13), we then use the definition of S in Eq. (S14), and compact the plus and minus signs using the signed incidence matrix B in Eq. (S15). This allows us to recover Kirchhoff's law as formulated in Eq. (S7) and Eq. (3) (main text). We complete our discussion introducing the Lyapunov functional for Eq. ( and it is a multicommodity generalization of that originally introduced in With the equality satisfied if and only if x(t) is a stationary point of Eq. ( We claim that This equality can be retrieved differentiating both sides of Eq. ( Then, multiplying Eq. (S20) by φ a i and summing over i one gets further summing over a yields where in the left hand side of Eq. (S22) we used Eq. ( where we used P a e = x e (φ a i -φ a j )/C e , for e = (i, j). This allows us to conclude. In summary, we showed that the multicommodity dynamics admits a well-defined Lyapunov functional, which is equivalent to the sum of a dissipation and an infrastructure cost. These two contributions, which are jointly minimized by Eq. ( Lastly, we remark the effect of γ (resp. β) on the minimization problem. In the setting where γ > 1 (β < 1) the functional L γ is convex, with one unique minimizer. For γ < 1 (β > 1) the functional landscape becomes rugged and strongly non-convex, with multiple minimizers each correspondent to a local minima of the cost. Hence, in this second scenario, running Eq. ( We perform a 4-fold cross validation on both parameters used for the construction of the ground cost, θ and τ , and on algorithms' regularization parameters, β and ε. We briefly summarize it in this section. The JF30 Dataset Results are shown in Fig. Remarkably, τ also has an impact on the classification accuracy of our algorithms: the larger we set its value to be-thus trimming less edges from the transport network-the more accurate the classification becomes. This behavior is evidently different for Sinkhorn algorithm, as explained here below. Cross-validation of Sinkhorn algorithm is taken a step further. Motivated by the classification accuracy drop observed in Fig. As for Sinkhorn RGB, we fix the trimming threshold at the two ends of the plateau in Fig. Here, we describe in detail the experimental setup designed for the Fruit Dataset (FD) The elements of both datasets are processed in the following way. First, each image is coarsened with an average pooling, the only input needed for this step is the size of the square mask, ms. Its stride is in fact set to stride = ms, and the padding to pad = 0. All images were conveniently trimmed so that both their widths and heights are divisible by the pooling mask size. We set ms = 40 for JF30, and ms = 30 for FD. Furthermore, we smooth the images using a Gaussian filter on each color channel, with standard deviation σ = 0.5. Moreover, to convert colored images into grayscale ones, which are given as input to Sinkhorn GS and to our unicommodity dynamics (M = 1), we preproces them as follows. Let (R, G, B), be the three color channels composing each pixel of a colored image, these are converted into a unique channel (its grayscale counterpart), whose intensity I is calculated with the weighted sum I = 0.2125R + 0.7154G + 0.0721B. The weights correspond to those used by cathode-ray tube (CRT) phosphors as they are more suitable to represent human perception of red, green and blue than equally valued weights As shown in Table In our experiments, we compare the multicommodity and unicommodity dynamics against Sinkhorn algorithm, popularized by the seminal work of Here transport paths P , which generally lie in the polyhedral set described by the constraints j P ij = g i ∀i and i P ij = h j ∀j, are smoothed by the entropy h(P ). This trick makes the optimization problem strictly convex, and permits to solve it with a very efficient matrix scaling algorithm-Sinkhorn's fixed point iteration. We generalize the problem in Eq. (S28) in order to take in account transport tensors, G and H, which carry information of multiple color channels, and transport paths P . In detail, we propose the following minimization problem for each commodity-color channel-a, min This allows to efficiently compute, using Sinkhorn's scaling, an Optimal Transport path P a opt for each commodity, together with its correspondent optimal cost J a sink,opt = J a sink | P a =P a opt . Finally, the Optimal Transport cost for colored images is calculated as J RGB sink,opt = (1/3) a=1 J a sink . In this section we discuss the effect that the parameters θ, τ , and β have one the OT setup. First, we explain the experiment in Fig. The two tensors enter in Eq. ( Notice that for θ = 0 all costs are symmetric. Indeed in this case C ij = min{Y ij , τ }, with Y that is containing the Euclidean distances between pixels' coordinates, i.e. Eq. (S2). Here, decreasing the trimming threshold τ progressively sparsifies the banded matrices drawn in the first column of Fig. To further expand this discussion, we design a second experiment, schematically represented in Fig. Depending on the values of θ, the ground cost C is either symmetric (θ = 0), and computed only using pixels' coordinates, or strongly irregular (θ = 0.75), since colors of images are taken into account. In the first case, the transport network connecting the images has also a symmetric structure. Here, elements along the diagonal of the cost-correspondent to horizontal edges connecting orange and blue nodes with the same index-are much cheaper than all the other entries. This is due to the fact that the Euclidean distance between two pixels with the same position is zero (practically set to a safety default value = 10 -5 ). Conversely, in the second case, introducing colors in the ground cost translates into having higher values along the diagonal elements of C. Here, colors-which distribute more smoothly on images-smooth out the cost as well, whose entries are more homogeneous. As shown in Fig. Lastly, we remark that transport paths do not pass through any transshipment edge (colored in brown in Fig. Considerable effort has been spent to reduce the high complexity burden of OT problems. The O(|V | 2 /ε 3 ) baseline of Sinkhorn algorithm In principle, our multicommodity method has a computational complexity of order O(M |V | 2 ) for complete transport graph topologies, i.e., when edges in the transport network K are assigned to all pixels' pairs. Nonetheless, we achieve a substantial decrease in complexity by sparsifying the graph with the trimming procedure of Additionally, it is shown We compare the runtime performances of the multicommodity dynamics of Eqs. ( All codes are executed on 20 pairs of images, randomly sampled from the Jena Flowers 30 Dataset Results are shown in Fig. Observing Fig. taking values S a u1 = 0 and S a u2 = m a on the auxiliary nodes. With L ij [x] = e (x e /C e )B ie B 1 