The recent discovery of room temperature intrinsic single-photon emitters in silicon nitride (SiN) 1 provides the unique opportunity for seamless monolithic integration of quantum light sources with the well-established SiN photonic platform. In this work, we develop a novel approach to realize planar waveguides made of low-autofluorescing SiN with intrinsic quantum emitters and demonstrate the single-photon emission coupling into the waveguide mode. The observed emission coupling from these emitters is found to be in line with numerical simulations. The coupling of the single-photon emission to a waveguide mode is confirmed by second-order autocorrelation measurements of light outcoupled off the photonic chip by grating couplers. Fitting the second-order autocorrelation histogram yields gg (2) (0) = 0.35 ± 0.12 without spectral filtering or background correction with an outcoupled photon rate of 10 4 counts per second. This demonstrates the first successful coupling of photons from intrinsic single-photon emitters in SiN to monolithically integrated waveguides made of the same material. The results of our work pave the way toward the realization of scalable, technology-ready quantum photonic integrated circuitry efficiently interfaced with solid-state quantum emitters. Photonic quantum systems employ photons to encode and transmit quantum information and distribute quantum entanglement through interaction with other photons and various stationary qubits. Solid-state quantum emitters are fundamental resources for photon-based quantum information technologies. They can serve as on-demand singlephoton sources, components of atomic memories, quantum repeaters, and quantum sensors The possibility to integrate quantum emitters with QPICs critically depends on the properties of the host materials. The variety of well-established solid-state quantum emitters includes III-V semiconductor quantum dots (QDs) Currently, most developed, technology-driven material platforms for integrated photonics include: silicon on insulator (SOI), silicon nitride (SiN), lithium niobate (LiNbO3), and aluminum nitride (AlN) Consequently, particular attention has been paid to engineering intrinsic or directly embedded quantum emitters in material platforms most suitable for the realization of QPICs. Such intrinsic quantum emitters have been discovered in gallium nitride Our group has recently discovered bright, stable, linearly polarized, and high-purity sources of single-photon emission in nitrogen-rich SiN operating at room temperature Here we report on the development of low-autofluorescence SiN planar waveguides containing intrinsic singlephoton sources recently discovered in our previous work Utilizing the previously developed fabrication approach, we grow a material stack with low-autofluorescing SiN containing intrinsic quantum emitters The waveguides were designed and simulated with a commercial Maxwell solver. The dipole orientation for all simulations was taken in plane of the substrate and orthogonal to the waveguide axis. Such dipole orientation was selected as an optimal one for the coupling to the fundamental waveguide mode. However, in the experiment we do not control the dipole orientation. From the previous work, we expect the quantum emitters to be located at the interface between SiO2 and SiN layers The photophysical properties of quantum emitters in SiN samples were characterized before waveguide fabrication using our custom-made scanning confocal microscope equipped with a Hanbury-Brown-Twiss (HBT) setup (see Methods for details). The observed emitters exhibit properties in line with those previously reported After fabrication, the samples with waveguides were characterized with our confocal microscope addressing individual waveguide-coupled quantum emitters. Figure With the selected quantum emitter, we explored different excitation-detection schemes for addressing individual emitters embedded in a SiN waveguide. First, we probed the emitter in a conventional confocal measurement scheme, where the PL signal is collected directly from the excitation spot (Fig. Next, we used a scheme with excitation and detection spots decoupled. For the selected emitter, we coupled the laser light to the waveguide through the grating coupler and collected the PL signal outcoupled to the far-field directly from the emitter as shown schematically in Fig. Finally, we studied coupling of single-photon emission from a quantum emitter to the waveguide mode. For this purpose, we again used the decoupled excitation and detection scheme, but with the emitter excited directly and the emission coupled to a waveguide and collected remotely from one of the grating couplers as shown in Fig. Figure In this work, we demonstrated first-time realization of low-autofluorescence SiN waveguides with intrinsic singlephoton emitters that preserve their photophysical characteristics after all of the processing steps. The developed SiN waveguides utilize technology-ready material platform and feature native quantum emitters thus promising to enable much anticipated realization of scalable QPICs with a seamless integration of single photon sources. Notably, the discovered emitters in SiN provide a practical alternative to the previously reported complex, multi-materials integration schemes of single photon emitters with the SiN platform. The proposed integrated quantum emitters in SiN offer a great potential to enable a low-loss and scalable quantum photonic platform that is mature in terms of planar fabrication, quality control, and integration. Our findings call for further studies of SiN quantum emitters aimed at gaining a deeper understanding of their nature, properties control, devising schemes for site-controlled fabrication, and their scalable integration with on-chip quantum photonic circuitry. Sample growth and emitters activation. The samples with SiN quantum emitters were prepared following the fabrication procedure developed in our previous work Waveguide design and fabrication. All waveguides and outcouplers were designed and simulated with a commercial Maxwell solver (Lumerical) using the 3D finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) method. The waveguide dimensions were found to be 250 nm tall by 600 nm wide such that it supports the fundamental waveguide mode at the given emission wavelength. These dimensions were found assuming a refractive index 1.7 and the central wavelength of 600 nm. The quantum emitter is modeled with an electric dipole polarized in plane of the substrate perpendicular to the propagation axis. Since the dipole is not in a homogenous medium, the simulated coupling efficiencies β were normalized with corresponding Purcell factor. Outcoupled field was calculated from a flux through a horizontal plane placed 1 μm above the grating outcoupler. Outcoupling efficiency η is defined as the ratio of Poynting vector flux through this plane to the fundamental waveguide mode energy. A large array of waveguides was fabricated on a single substrate to increase the odds of creating a waveguide with an optimally oriented emitter for efficient coupling. The design of waveguides was patterned into an electron beam resist (ZEP520A) via electron beam lithography and etched using inductively coupled plasma (ICP) reactive ion etching (RIE). Following development of the resist layer, a 20nm chrome film was evaporated onto the sample and lifted off to form a hardmask. The silicon nitride layer was then etched by ICP RIE. The chrome hard mask was then chemically removed using chrome etch (KMG CR-16). The high density of quantum emitters in the original SiN ensured the integration of at least few emitters in each waveguide without any special alignment procedures. Photoluminescence measurements. The optical characterization of SiN waveguide-integrated quantum emitters was performed at room temperature. We used a custommade scanning confocal microscope based on a commercial inverted microscope body (Ti-U, Nikon). The microscope was equipped with a 100 μm pinhole and a 100x air objective with a numerical aperture of 0.90 (Nikon). We estimate that the laser pump spot size on the sample was around 1 μm. The confocal scanning was performed with the objective mounted on a piezo stage (P-561, Physik Instrumente) driven by a controller (E-712, Physik Instrumente) and interfaced with LabVIEW (National Instruments). We used a 200-mW continuous wave 532 nm diode-pumped solidstate laser (Lambda beam PB 532-200 DPSS, RGB Photonics) for the optical excitation of emitters. The excitation light and photoluminescence (PL) signal were uncoupled by a 550 nm long-pass dichroic mirror (DMLP550, Thorlabs). The remaining pump power was further suppressed by a 550 nm long-pass filter (FEL0550, Thorlabs) installed in front of detectors. We acquired the emission with an avalanche detector with 69% quantum efficiency at 650 nm (SPCM-AQRH, Excelitas) for single-photon detection during scanning. To reveal the quantum nature of the emitters, second order autocorrelation function gg Supporting Information. Polarization dependent laser coupling to a waveguide, additional CCD images of single-photon emitters integrated in SiN waveguides. This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.