We offer new high-performance label-free electrochemical impedimetric DNA sensors of nonfaradaic type. The DNA sensors based on a platform of crystalline carbon nanotube (CNT) arrays are fabricated by the Langmuir-Blodgett (LB) deposition technique. The CNT arrays are suspended on a nanoporous anodic alumina (aluminium oxide, AOA) support. Single-stranded (ss) 19-and 20-base oligonucleotides and double-stranded (ds) nucleotide sequences were used as probes for chosen molecular target -human KRAS (Kirsten Rat Sarcoma viral oncogene homolog) gene. Genomic deoxyribonucleic acids (DNAs) were isolated from placenta of healthy donors and FFPE (formalin-fixed, paraffinembedded) samples of tumor tissue. Raman spectral analysis and electrochemical dielectric spectroscopy were used to sequence the target DNAs. The optical and electrochemical detection (variants of DNA sequencing) were based on a screening effect that grows after the DNA homoduplex formation. We demonstrated that such technologies are very sensitive and allow to detect attomolar DNA concentrations and less. As result, the KRAS exon 2, codon 12, c.35G>A mutation was successfully discriminated in human genomic DNA isolated from FFPE colorectal cancer tumor tissue samples. The modern approaches to tumor therapy cannot exist without high-quality molecular diagnostics. Currently, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has approved dozens of molecular tests aimed at choosing targeted therapy for tumors of various nosological forms: colorectal cancer, breast cancer, lung cancer, etc. Graphene materials and, in particularly, rolled atomically-thin carbon layers called carbon nanotubes are promising materials for development of high performance electrochemical and optical transducers of DNA-hybridization signals. The transducers operating on plasmon resonance effects in the nanomaterials are capable to perform the nucleotide sequencing of samples with ultralow DNA-target concentrations: attomoles and less However, the electrical and optical properties of nanostructured graphene-like materials strongly depend on accidental environmental impurities that leads to wide spread of characteristics of the graphene-based devices. Moreover, when scattering and obliquely tunneling through the environmental defects the graphene charge carriers can be confined as Klein resonances Immobilization of DNA on the graphene surface or using of high-conductive oligomer improve electrical transport along DNA (see The homoduplex formation can be indicated through emerging transition from the fully ordered double-helix state of ssDNA probe-ssDNA target duplexes to the metastable state of the complexes at the temperature increase. Although the extended linear conformation of the probe and target ssDNA molecules entering the homoduplex remains in the metastable state, the molecules separate from each other in a diffusion process because they are not linked by hydrogen bonds and, correspondingly, almost do not interact with each other. As a result, a helix-coil transition happens at the temperature alternation. The melting of long dsDNA at temperature increase is a phase transition of the first order When creating a network the complexification between highly-ordered carbon-nanotube arrays and dsDNA target molecules do not impair but improve the ability of the FWCNT arrays to screen electric fields In the paper we intend to discriminate a mutation status of KRAS gene. When activated, a KRAS protein is involved in the dephosphorylation of guanosine triphosphate (GTP) to guanosine diphosphate (GDP), after which KRAS is turned off. KRAS-gene single base mutations called single-oligonucleotide polymorphysms (SNPs) most often occur in exon 2, codon 12 of the KRAS gene with the nucleotide change c.35G>A (substitution, position 35, G→A) resulting in the amino acid change p.G12D (substitution -missense, position 12, Gly12Asp (G→D)) We offer to detect the genotype on a change of the degree of shielding by a sensor electrode coating in a result of the DNA homoduplex formation on the FWCNT which surface was decorated by conducting oligomers of thiophene-pyrrole series entering cyclic organometallic complexes. The screening efficiency for the network created by linkage of hybrids between the homoduplexes and decorated CNTs grows but a transfer of electrons along the organometallic complexes is broken because when penetrating through nanocavities of the nanocyclic compound the target DNA disturbs perfect location of S atoms in the thiophene groups relative to the nitrogen atoms of the pyrrole groups A goal of the paper is to develop a high-performance low-temperature PCR-free electrochemical sensor for KRAS c.35G>A, p.G12D genotyping in FFPE tumor samples. The sensor operates on screening near-electrode double layer by crystalline FWCNT arrays. We shall show that depositing oligonucleotides of several types on the electrode surface one gets an EIS DNA chip for discriminating between two alleles of KRAS-oncogene. The KRAS-oncogene sequencing will be verified by a DNA-melting control. Genotyping was performed in placental DNA, nuclear DNA of C6-line rat glioma cells, and tumor DNA denoted by dsDNA pl , dsDNA C6 , and dsDNA CRC , respectively. The following SNP: c.35G>A site, p.G12D, located in the second exon of the human KRAS gene (NCBI/Gene KRAS genomic DNA sequence NC 000012.12; NCBI/Gene KRAS mRNA var d sequence NM 001369787.1), was used as a molecular target. Clinical samples were collected at the N. N. Alexandrov National Cancer Center of Belarus. The study included 10 FFPE samples obtained from patients with advanced colon cancer. For isolation, 2-3 sections of the paraffin block were used. Deparaffinization was performed with xylene followed by washing with ethanol (95%). Total DNA isolation was performed using the QIAamp DNA FFPE Tissue Kit (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer's protocol. The C6-line rat glioma cells were cultured in standard conditions. The native dsDNA pl was isolated from placenta tissue of healthy donors. RNA and proteins contents in the high purity dsDNA pl and dsDNA C6 (1.03 mg/ml in 10 -5 M Na 2 CO 3 buffer medium) were less that 0.1 % (optical density ratio D 260 /D 230 = 2.378 and D 260 /D 280 = 1.866, respectively). The single stranded 19-and 20-base oligonucleotides, short primers KRAS w and KRAS m , and two doublestranded (toehold exchange) probes, P3/W3 and ssDNA lp /ssDNA W m , were utilized as DNA probes (see Table The toehold exchange probes were fabricated by annealing the protector P3 or ssDNA lp strands mixed in the ratio 2:1 with the complementary W3 or ssDNA W m strands, respectively, in TE buffer at 37 ± 0.1 • C. The 35base oligonucleotides denoted by "N3" and "M3" in Table A DNA chip was fabricated with the two oligonucleotides: KRAS m and P3/W3, or P3/W3 and 25-base guanine oligonucleotide (polyG), or KRAS w and ssDNA lp /ssDNA W m . The hybridization reaction lasted 30 minutes. All DNA probes were purchased from "Primetech ALC" (Minsk, Belarus). The carboxylated and stearic-acid-functionalized FWCNTs under 2.5 nm in diameter have been decorated by the cyclic complexes (Fe(II)DTP) of Ce and/or high-spin octahedral Fe(II) with 3-hexadecyl-2,5-di(2-thienyl)-1H-pyrrole (H-DTP, H-dithienylpyrrole) ligands B. Methods By employing the LB technique monomolecular crystalline DNA-FWCNT hybrid layers (DNA-FWCNT hybrid crystalline monolayers) were fabricated by compressing two-dimensional gas of inverse stearic-acid micelles with the carboxylated FWCNTs and DNA probe molecules inside. The hexane solution of the micellar DNA-FWCNT hybrids was prelimenary dropped on deionized-water surface. Then the two DNA-FWCNT hybrid LB-monolayers were formed and deposited onto surface of interdigital electrode structures which were isolated by nanoporous AOA, 10-nm pore diameter. Preliminary, five iron-containing LB-monolayers consisting of the cyclic complex (Fe(II)DTP) of octahedral high spin Fe(II) with DTP ligands were formed. The FWCNTs were decorated by the nanocyclic organometallic LBcomplexes. The FWCNT LB-arrays decorated by the dithienylpyrrole complexes of octahedral high spin Fe(II) host spin-polarized graphene charge carriers Electrochemical impedance measurements EIS measurements have been made with a BORDO-322 digital oscilloscope (UniTechProm, Minsk, Belarus) which provides automatic measurements and mathematical signal processing (fast Fourier transforms) of harmonic electrical signals. Interdigital electrode structures deposited on a glass-ceramic support (pyroceramics) are utilized. N e pairs, N e = 20 of the aluminium electrodes are arranged in an Archimedes-type spiral configuration. Every such pair is an "open type" capacitor. To record DNA-hybridization signals a transducer sensitive layer was formed on the surface of the electrode structures in a following way. The oligonucleotide sequences-FWCNT hybrid LB-arrays decorated by the LB-films of the nanocyclic organometallic complexes were deposited on the interdigital structure of aluminium electrodes, on the surface of which the nanoporous anodic alumina layer were previously formed. To excite harmonic auto-oscillations of electric current (charge-discharge (charging) processes in capacitors), the planar capacitive sensor of interdigital-type was connected as the capacitance, C, into the relaxation resistancecapacitance (RC) oscillator (self-excited RC-oscillator) The Bode plots were recorded in the deionized water. Spectral studies in visible range were carried out using a confocal micro-Raman spectrometer Nanofinder HE ("LOTIS-TII", Tokyo, Japan-Belarus) on lasers operating at wavelengths of 473 (DPSS laser), and 532 (DPSS laser) nm with power in the range from 0.0001 to 20 mW. The spectra were recorded in the back-scattering geometry under a × 50 objective at room (RT) temperature. The size for the optical image is of 7 × 7 μm, vertical spatial resolution 150 nm, spectral resolution is of up to 0.01 nm. A prominent CNT radial breathing mode (RBM) of 298 cm -1 is featured in Raman spectra of the transducer DNA-CNT hybrid layer (see Figs. where C env quantifies the environmental effect on the RBM frequency, d t is a diameter of single walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs). We estimate approximately the C env at zero in the case of the isolated original carboxylated few-walled CNTs. The CNT diameter is estimated at 0.761 nm for the RBM of 298.28 cm -1 . CNTs with such diameter are single-walled ones. Using the following formula the PI molecules intercalate into the DNA molecule. It is used to indicate the presence of DNA. As Fig. Comparing the DNA Raman spectra shown in Fig. The topologically-nontrivial graphene charge carriers are vortex and antivortex Majorana excitations (modes) or their cores in the graphene electron density The low intensity of the DNA Raman peaks in the broken (crumpled) LB-monolayer is due to the fact that the isolated hybrid structural defects play the role of disorderly-arranged impurities residing in the Klein-resonance superlattice. To satisfy a Pauli exclusion principle, the graphene pseudo-Majorana fermion pairs occupy higher electronic impurity levels and, correspondingly, prevent electrons of the aromatic molecular groups from passing to these high-energy levels. This phenomena is called a fluorescence quenching in the graphene plane. In this case the number of negative (positive) charge carriers prevails over the number of positive (negative) charge carriers in graphene. As a result, the Dirac K(K ) point of the graphene Brillouin zone turns out to be electrically charged. Oscillations of C nuclei near the charged Dirac K(K ) point originate the D Raman peak because the charged K(K ) point plays the role of an electronic term. If the Raman peak intensity is high enough, for example, as in the Raman spectra shown in Fig. DNA Raman spectra are strongly affected by deprotonation. Due to the latter Raman spectral bands of DNA are widened even for a dry DNA sample (see the Raman spectrum of the dry dsDNA pl deposited on pure Si support in Fig. Raman spectra for the micellar dsDNA pl dropped on a Si surface hydrophilized by the H-DTP molecules are significantly widened in comparison with the spectra of the micellar DNAs deposited on the non-modified Si surface (compare the two Raman spectra "1" and "2" shown in Fig. Electrophysical properties of the ultra-thin LB-films were studied by means of the impedance spectroscopy methods as a variation in dielectric polarization of a near-electrode Helmholtz double electrically charged layer formed at the interface between a surface of the fabricated electrochemical sensor and water. The non-faradaic impedimetric sensor operates on surface-polarization-decreasing effects which are originated by the conducting ultra-thin LB-films when shielding the near-electrode Helmholtz layer. A scheme of the sensor operation is presented in Fig. The dielectric losses due to the dielectric-polarization relaxation process occur in a frequency range where the sensor capacitance C falls down. The is the imaginary part of the complex dielectric permittivity: = + i , and, correspondingly, presents a resistivity because Here σ is the conductivity, is the dielectric permittivity, ω is the cyclic frequency, 0 is the electric constant. It follows from the last equation and Eq. III.3 that But, an energy CV 2 /2 stored at (released from) the capacitance C is determined by the following expression: CV 2 /2 ∼ I ch V . Substituting the expression (III.5) for the I ch into the expression for the energy one can assume that ∼ 1/C. The signal power W recorded by the Fourier analyzer is proportional to the real part of the complex dielectric permittivity because W is the stored energy determined by the following equation: W ∼ D × H with the electric displacement vector D = E, where E and H are electric and magnetic fields vectors, respectively. Let us suppose that N dipole-polarization processes proceed inside the Helmholtz layer emerging near the N electrode pairs. It signifies that an equivalent circuit diagram of both the capacitor-charging (capacitor-discharging) and polarization processes consists of (N + 1) RC circuits. The equivalent circuit of the sensor presents in Fig. R ns then the forced oscillations with a frequency ν ns are generated in the properly measuring R ns C ns circuit. Thus, the dependence of 1/C on W will present N Cole-Cole plots and one Nyquist impedance plot for parallel connection of the capacitor to the instrument resistor R ns (see Fig. The charge density of the graphene monolayers deposited on the interdigital electrode structure in deionized water can be indirectly resonantly swung by the low-frequency resonant decay of the hydrated ion complexes, which are in an excited state, and subsequent association of the ions OH -and H + into water molecules. Meanwhile, emitting electromagnetic quanta the water molecules pass to a low-lying state. The electromagnetic field excites the graphenecharge-density oscillations. Resonating with dipole moments of the hydrated complexes of the near electrode double charged layer, the graphene plasmon oscillations decay the hydrated complexes in the Helmholtz double layer and, correspondingly, screen effectively the electrodes Dielectric spectra of the AOA isolating layer, Fe(II)DTP LB-film, and FWCNT LB-arrays under investigation are shown in Fig. The Z W impedance element is created by the diffusion layer in which the electrochemical reactions with a mass transfer proceed due to electrochemical reactions. The impedance measurements for the metal-containing dithinylpyrrole LB-films entering the Helmholtz double layer indicate the depressed semi-circle with the Warburg diffusion tail in the Cole-Cole plot of the dielectric spectrum "2" shown in Fig. In Now, let us study a toehold exchange reaction between the dsDNA "P3/W3" and the ssDNA "N3" proceeds in the DNA chip. The formation of the P3/N3 homoduplex in the result of the toehold exchange reaction between the dsDNA "P3/W3" and the ssDNA "N3" is detected as an rise of the dielectric losses, 1/C. When hybridizing the toehold DNA probes the N3 ssDNA target in the temperature range from RT to 34 • C because the dielectric-loss spectral peak grows in this temperature range due to increasing the electrode shielding degree by the sensing covering after the homoduplex formation as Fig. The Bode peak intensities vary weakly for the temperatures of A similar stepwise drop of the dielectric losses, but on a smaller scale, is observed at 50 • C because the intensity of the Bode plot peak at 50 • C drops significantly more than the intensities of the nearby Bode plots for the following temperatures: 36, 38, and 40 • C. Such universal scaling dielectric losses behavior allows us suggest that the systems undergoes a first-order phase transition. Thus the existence of the temperature scaling indicates that the process of dsDNA dissociation on the surface proceeds similarly to a phase transition of the first order. The DNA-melting temperature T m is indicated as the temperature at which the effect of the electrode-electricfield screening disappear. The dielectric losses increase with the increase in temperature up to the temperature of 34 Sensitivity of label-free electrochemical impedimetric DNA-chip. As one can see in Fig. When adding the single-mismatched target ssDNA "M3" increases the sensor capacity C significantly that is stipulated by the bulk charge density increase. The large bulk charge density appears because the non-specific links between the non-complementary target and probe DNA molecules and, as a result, gapping between the DNA probe and target that leads to dipole polarization and ionization of the sugar phosphate backbone. After washing of the P3/M3 heteroduplexes, the capacity of the sensor returns to its pre-hybridization value. It signifies that the heteroduplexes do not penetrate into the nanopores and are held on the sensor surface by electrostatic forces if there is no first-order phase transition. Correspondingly, the heteroduplexes are easily washed away because of the weakness of the electrostatic forces. So, a network is created by linking together FWCNTs through dsDNA homoduplexes that results in the increase of sensor-shielding degree. Forming a high-conducting network of CNTs linked by DNA molecules the complexification of highly-ordered CNT arrays with DNA does not impair but vice versa improves the ability of the CNT arrays to screen electromagnetic FIG. A perfect network of DNA-CNT hybrids is formed by links between the KRAS m -dsDNA C6 -CNT hybrids but not by links between the KRAS w -dsDNA C6 -CNT hybrids because the intensity of the Raman D-peak is significantly less for the KRAS m -dsDNA C6 duplexes (compare Raman spectra in light-and dark-blue lines in Fig. Thus, creating the network the homoduplexes link the FWCNT together so that the degree of ordering of the micellar DNA-CNT hybrids increases after hybridization. The micellar genotyping on the plasmon-resonance effect is performed in a following way. One detects a light scattering enhancement in duplexes between the target and probe DNAs and subsequently a dependence of this enhancement on the DNA-CNT hybrid type is analyzed. The plasmon resonance as well as the screening effect occurs at high enough density of the charge carriers in the graphene valleys K, K . As the non-specific linked target DNA is kept on a long enough distance from the micelles surface, the light scattering in the non-complementary hybridized target DNA is not quenched because no transitions of the graphene charge carriers to non-occupied impurity energy levels occur. The higher intensity of the DNA Raman bands for the KRAS w probe-target DNA duplexes hybridized with FWCNTs in comparison with the intensity of the Raman spectrum of the micelles with the original DNA testifies the FWCNT-enhanced light scattering for the DNA (compare black and green curves in Fig. The intensity of the micellar DNA C6 -FWCNT-hybrid Raman bands for the homoduplexes, dsDNA C6 -KRAS m , of the target dsDNA C6 with the mutant-type probe, KRAS m , are less than for the heteroduplexes, dsDNA C6 -KRAS w , of the target dsDNA C6 with the single-base mismatched oligonucleotide (as one can see from comparison between the Raman spectra in red and green lines in Fig. We present a micellar genotyping electrochemical technology to discriminate a single nucleotide mutation in the KRAS gene (2 exon, 12 codon, G/A). To recognize the mutant and wild alleles, it was necessary to use two sensors. The wild-type allele detection probe was placed on the surface of the first sensor. The probe for detection of the mutant type allele was located on the surface of the second sensor. This technology is based on the screening effect leading to that the capacity values for a wide frequency range decrease as a result of the complementary hybridization between the target and the probe DNA sequences. The degree of sensor electrodes shielding increases after complementary hybridization between the wild-type dsDNA pl and KRAS w probe. At that time the capacity of sensor decreases accordingly to its Bode plots for different dsDNA pl concentrations (see Fig. Thus, the sequencing method has allowed us to diagnose allele SNP of the KRAS-oncogene in the genome of the colorectal cancer tissue. It testifies allele SNP of KRAS-oncogene in the genome of the colorectal cancer tissue. To study the selectivity of the DNA nanosensor a DNA chip has been designed. Two probes, the KRAS w -CNT LB-hybrids and the 47-base oligonucleotide toehold probes of mutant type presented in Table Thus, DNA molecules being non-specific bonded with DNA probes are easily washed and do not contribute in the transducer response. V. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION So, the experimental studies performed have revealed that no hybrid formation can occur due to the stacking interactions between π(p z ) electrons of carbon nanotubes and DNA molecules only. The observed CNT-enhanced scattering of light in dsDNA and shielding effects of DNA hybridization are explained by the topologically non-trivial Majorana nature of the graphene charge carriers. the graphene topologically non-trivial charge carriers they transit to DNA non-occupied energy levels. The stacking π -π interaction can be originated by the Klein resonances which are created by Klein-tunneling graphene topologically non-trivial charge carriers and subsequently transit to DNA non-occupied energy levels. The conservation law of topological charge forbids annihilation between the pseudo-Majorana graphene charge carriers and the DNA charge carriers. It signifies that a lifetime of the pseudo-Majorana particles on the overlying impurity DNA levels is long. The graphene charge carriers excited to the impurity energy levels do not annihilate with electrons or holes of the impurity because their statistics is non-Abelian. The disappearance (quenching) of the light scattering stems from the non-Abelian statistics owing to impossibility to excite DNA electrons on the overlying levels due to the Pauli exclusion principle. Sharp decrease of the intensity of the CNT Raman bands up to it fully disappearing occurs in strong electrical fields of superlattices formed by the DNA-CNT hybrids. Meanwhile, the scattering of light in the aromatic molecular DNA groups residing away from the graphene plane is enhanced because the light is scattered on intensive graphenecharge-density oscillations emerging in resonance with low-intensity vibrations of the aromatic molecular groups. The conducting properties of the DNA transducer are improved at the complementary hybridization. The screening of the light scattering by the homoduplex-CNT hybrids is so amazingly effective that the incident electromagnetic quanta do not reach and, accordingly, do not excite the DNA vibration with subsequent generation of the CNT plasma oscillations at eigenfrequencies of DNA vibrations. The DNA-CNT hybrid high-ordered coverings effectively shield near-electrode double charged layers. The new high-performance DNA nanosensor which operation is based on a difference in efficiency of the shielding by the ssDNA-CNT hybrid networks before hybridization and dsDNA-CNT networks forming after complementary hybridization have been developed to genotype DNA sequences from fragmented FFPE nucleic acid samples with limit detection up to attomolar concentrations. Finalizing, dielectric and Raman spectral studies of DNA hybridization on surface of metallic single-walled carbon nanotubes decorated by organometallic compound and suspended on nanopores have been performed. It has been shown that self-redox activity of the carboxylated CNTs decorated by the nanocyclic organometallic complexes can be used to discriminate single-nucleotide polymorphism of colorectal tumor genome. We offer the two DNA-sequencing methods based on shielding effects or enhancement of light scattering by DNA-single-walled metallic carbon nanotube hybrids. Both the high-performance genotyping assays operate at room temperature. The impedimetric DNA sensors of non-faradaic type based on the screening effect can be more sensitive than the Raman optical transducer based on the quenching effect due to liability of the Raman transducer parameters to environmental influence. Our high performance DNA sensor will be at an advantage over the plasmon-resonance sequencer when performing single-molecule allele discrimination of the genome of metastatic tumor cells at early and first stages of cancer.