A quantum spin liquid (QSL) would be an exotic stage for superconductivity. A promising candidate for a doped QSL is the organic triangular-lattice system, κ-(BEDT-TTF) 4 Hg 2.89 Br 8 , which hosts a non-Fermi liquid and magnetism of a QSL nature and shows superconductivity upon cooling. Here, we report that its superfluid density is anomalously reduced, indicating the existence of substantial incoherent spectral weight and weak superconducting phase stiffness. Moreover, the ratio of the superconducting transition temperature to the nominal Fermi temperature is as large as 0.1, orders of magnitude beyond typical BCS values. These observations in a system free from competing orders that complicate the similar issue in underdoped cuprates give a clue to the enigmatic missing superfluid density in doped Mott insulators. The superfluid density, a spectral weight contributing to superconducting condensates, determines the fundamental nature of superconductivity, such as phase stiffness has recently arisen as a promising doped QSL candidate. The present work experimentally investigates the nature of superconductivity that emerges in this system in terms of the superfluid density, which is a key parameter to elucidate the possible unconventionality of pairing. κ-HgBr has a quasi-two-dimensional structure with insulating and conducting layers alternately stacked, and both layers have monoclinic sublattices Several experiments indicate that κ-HgBr is a hole-doped version of the QSL candidate, κ-(BEDT-TTF) 2 Cu 2 (CN) 3 , hosting a similar triangular lattice and comparable or larger electron correlation The superfluid density ns of such unconventional condensates is of profound interest. The present work investigates n s in this doped spin liquid candidate. We evaluated the n s value by measuring the in-plane magnetic penetration depth, λ , whose inverse square is related to n s as 1/λ 2 = μ 0 n s e 2 /m * (μ 0 : magnetic permeability, n s : superfluid density, e: elementary charge, m * : effective mass). Among several experimental ways to estimate the λ value, we employed a method to evaluate it from the magnetization curve, as decribed later. The magnetization was measured with Quantum Design SQUID magnetometers (MPMS-XL and MPMS-5S), where a crystal was fixed to a plastic-straw sample holder with a Kapton film. The net sample magnetization was obtained as the difference between the magnetizations with and without the sample. The sample used in the present work is a rhombic single crystal with diagonal lengths of ∼2 and ∼2.3 mm, a thickness of ∼0.5 mm and a weight of ∼3 mg. To date, the difficulty in obtaining crystals showing bulk superconductivity at ambient pressure has prohibited experimental access at ambient pressure λ can be deduced from the field dependence of the magnetization, M(H), in the reversible field region under a magnetic field applied perpendicular to the layers. The M(H) for strong type II superconductors with κ = λ /ξ ≫ 1 (ξ ; the in-plane superconducting coherence length) is expressed by for a field range of H c1⊥ ≪ H irr < H ≪ H c2⊥ (H irr : irreversible magnetic field above which the magnetization is reversible, H c2⊥ : perpendicular upper critical field, φ 0 : flux quantum, α: core contribution factor, β: a constant of the order of unity) and 2(b) shows the M(H) curve of κ-HgBr at 1.8 K along with that of the half-filled system κ-Br at 5 K (the same reduced temperature, T /T c ∼0.42) for comparison. κ-HgBr exhibits a peak in M(H) at H p = 30 Oe and reversible behavior above H irr = 300 Oe; both the H p and H irr values are approximately an order of magnitude below those in κ-Br Magnetization curves above H irr at several temperatures are shown in Fig. T (the highest field studied) by the Nernst effect, which is susceptible to vortex liquidity The superfluid density is related to the phase stiffness, which is expressed as 2 d/4μ 0 e 2 λ 2 (d: interlayer distance) and yields approximately 4 K in κ-HgBr. This value is considerably smaller than the values of the BCS case, typically 10 4 -10 5 K [1]. As the phase stiffness measures the macroscopic phase coherence in energy, this small value in κ-HgBr is consistent with the previously observed field resilience and strong fluctuations in superconductivity As seen above, the superfluid density takes a reduced value as if only the doped carriers condense into the superconducting state. Such behavior is reminiscent of underdoped cuprates, in which the normal-state carrier density 