Room temperature detection of molecular vibrations in the mid-infrared (MIR, λ=3-30μm) has numerous applications including real-time gas sensing, chemical reactivity, medical imaging, astronomical surveys, and quantum communication 1,2 . However, MIR detection is severely hindered by thermal noise, hence current technologies rely on energy-intensive cooled semiconductor detectors (mercury cadmium telluride, MCT) Atomic bonds possess MIR resonances corresponding to vibrational transitions between states. While these are thermally populated at room temperature, electronic states with transition energies in the visible have negligible thermal occupation. Detection of visible light is efficient down to the single photon level, but detection of MIR photons remains challenging. However, these states can interact together. Quantum systems in which such vibrations are coupled to electronic transitions have proved fertile for quantum manipulation, for instance using trapped ions which are entangled through their vibrational motions in a trap Demonstrations of MIR upconversion detection predominantly use parametric mixing in nonlinear crystals In our MIR detection scheme, the molecule is now primed with continuous-wave (CW) pumping (λ pump ≥750nm) at energies below the MB absorption band, so no PL is observed (Fig. At room temperature, vibrational decays (10 -12 s) are thousand-fold faster than electronic decays (10 -9 s), limiting the normal transduction efficiency of isolated molecules to <10 To construct such small nanocavities with double resonances tuned to visible/MIR and containing molecules precisely oriented along the optical field, we use bottom-up nanoassembly. Monodisperse silver-coated glass microspheres (AgMS) are drop-cast onto a thin (10nm) foil of flat Au with molecular emitters sandwiched in the gap formed between them (Fig. The molecular dye MB is assembled into the nanogaps using the host-guest chemistry of macrocyclic cucurbit [7]uril (CB) molecules. CB provides a hydrophobic environment which isolates individual MB molecules and improves their photostability Assembling MSoF nanocavities on thin (200 μm) silicon substrates allows MIR light to couple from the underside while simultaneously visible pumping from the top side (Fig. To demonstrate the generality of this aS-PL scheme, MSoF systems are similarly assembled with rhodamine B molecules in the gap (Supplementary information, Fig. The current MIR detection limit is quantified through the observed power dependence (Fig. From the noise floor of 100 dark counts/s (which drops significantly when spectrally-integrating onto silicon detectors) we easily measure average MIR powers of 2.5nW/μm 2 using 80μW/μm 2 of pump for the MSoF cavities. This corresponds to a noise equivalent power (NEP) of 31nW/Hz 1/2 which, accounting for the <0.1% MIR coupling efficiency, implies achievable NEP below 30pW/Hz 1/2 , better than available thermopiles and close to state-of-the-art MCT cooled detectors. One source of noise is set by fluctuations in the ERS background emission due to the unstable gold nanostructure within the gap, and can be suppressed by increasing the separation of λ PL and λ pump . Additional opportunities are to explore upconverted MIR from C-H bond vibrations at λ MIR =3.3μm or overtones of water in the range λ MIR =1-2μm. The aS-PL transduction of MIR light has a unique advantage in the extremely fast rise time of detected PL. Using time-correlated single-photon lock-in methods As a final demonstration that this MIR detector can observe single molecules, the pump is increased to 0.5mW/μm 2 . At this power, the light inside the nanocavity acts to transiently pull single metal atom protrusions out of the facets. These generate a picocavity In summary, we demonstrate a unique way to optically read-out molecular vibrations down to the single-molecule level. method unambiguously shows vibration-mediated upconversion of MIR to visible light through antiStokes photoluminescence. The detector bandwidth (>GHz), room temperature (or other) operation, straightforward large-scale and broad MIR tuneability with potential for THz detection make this a promising scheme. Future experiments will explore MIR multiplexing, capability of using many types of dye molecules as well as solid-state emitters (such as PbS quantum dots), alternate types of MIR resonators, and LED pumping. This demonstration opens unique possibilities not just for molecular spectroscopy and sensing but has wide implications in quantum preparation of vibrational states for mode-selective chemistry and nano-optics. Sample preparation. To prepare the thin mirror, we deposit 10nm of Au onto clean Si membranes of 200μm thickness with a deposition rate of 0.5 Å/s (Moorfield nanoPVD-T15A thermal evaporator). The Au-coated substrates are dipped into 0.1 mM MB-CB solution for 12h resulting in a self-assembled monolayer of MB-CB on the gold. For Ag MSoF optical cavities, 4μm diameter silver-coated microspheres (Cospheric) dispersed in ethanol are deposited directly onto the MB-CB assembled Au-coated Si substrates. The deposition time is kept below 90s, resulting in well-dispersed AgMSs. Lastly, the samples are rinsed thoroughly with ethanol to remove any unbound AgMSs. Infrared microscopy. FTIR reflection spectra on individual MSoF cavities are recorded using a Shimadzu AIM-9000 FTIR microscope, equipped with liquid-nitrogen-cooled MCT detector and Cassegrain 15X objective with 0.5 NA. The spectra are referenced to a clean gold mirror. Experimental setup. All SERS and aS-PL spectroscopy measurements are performed in a custom-built dual-channel microscope. A tunable CW TiS laser is used as the pump, which is spectrally filtered using an angle-tuned 785nm cleanup filter. The laser is focused into the sample with a 0.9NA objective lens with 150μW/μm 2 average power on the sample (where not otherwise noted). The back-scattered light is collected from the sample objective and is filtered with two angle-tuned notch filters before routing it to a Shamrock i303 spectrograph a Newton EMCCD (Andor). For imaging, the reflected light collected through the same objective lens is directed to a camera (Lumenera Infinity3-1). For the MIR light source, a LaserTune IR source (Block) with wavelength range of 5.4 13μm is used (1635 -780 cm -1 ) with a maximum average output of 500 μW (~2x4 beam, collimated) with <5% duty cycle. The pump (MIR light) is co-aligned with the probe (visible light) using a 0.5 NA Cassegrain objective lens. The modulation of pump laser is synced with the QCL using an acousto-optical-modulator and function generator. The sample is placed on a fully automated motorized stage (Prior Scientific H101) which is controlled with code written in Python. For single-photon time-correlated measurements, arrival times of all photons at the detector (Micro Photon Devices PDM PD-100-CTD) and reference signals (MIR laser trigger) are continuously recorded by time-to-digital converters on a field-programmable gate array board. Comparing the photon timestamps with the reference signal allows recreating the periodic perturbation of the SERS signal by the MIR laser in time, integrated over millions of modulation cycles. This single-photon lock-in detection scheme is described in more detail elsewhere 