We analytically and numerically study the direct soliton generation in a cw-pumped doubly resonant degenerate optical parametric oscillator via pump frequency scanning. By means of bifurcation and linear stability analysis of the homogeneous solutions, we discriminate distinctive soliton forming mechanisms and corresponding dynamics, depending on pump and signal group velocity dispersions (GVDs). To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study regarding the dynamics of pure quadratic solitons. In addition, we discuss how to extend soliton existing regime and easily access quadratic soliton by introducing modulation instabilities through the adjustment of pump and signal GVDs. Our study will benefit the theoretical cavity design and experimental realization for pure quadratic solitons. Optical parametric oscillator (OPO) is intrinsically broadband and tunable and it extends the optical frequency comb (OFC) technology to otherwise inaccessible wavelengths in the mid-infrared (MIR) molecular fingerprinting spectral regime Although the existence of pure quadratic soliton has been theoretically and numerically predicted in both degenerate OPOs (DOPOs) Here, we theoretically and numerically study the direct soliton generation in a cw-pumped doubly resonant DOPO (DR-DOPO) via pump frequency tuning. By means of bifurcation and linear stability analysis of the homogeneous solutions, we discriminate distinctive soliton forming mechanisms and corresponding dynamics, depending on the pump and signal group velocity dispersions (GVDs). To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study regarding the dynamics of pure quadratic solitons. In addition, we discuss how to extend soliton existing regime and easily access quadratic soliton by introducing modulation instabilities through the adjustment of pump and signal GVDs. Beyond the DR-DOPOs, the analysis can be expanded to other high-Q cavities with dominant χ (2) nonlinearity. Our study will benefit the theoretical cavity design and experimental realization for pure quadratic solitons. The field evolution in the retarded time frame through a cw-pumped DR-DOPO obeys the coupled equations and the boundary conditions: where A is the signal field envelope, B is the pump field envelope, Bin is the cw pump, 1,2 c  are the propagation losses per unit length, Δk is the wave-vector mismatch, Δk ' is the GVM, and is the monolithic cavity length, θ1,2 are the coupler transmission coefficients and δ1,2 are the pump-resonance and signal-resonance phase detuning, respectively. κ is the normalized second-order nonlinearity coupling coefficient. Higher-order dispersion and nonlinearity are both neglected for simplicity. Under the mean-field and good cavity approximations, the coupledwave equations with boundary conditions can be simplified into a single mean-field equation for the signal field where t is the "slow time" that describes the envelope evolution over successive round-trips, t R is the roundtrip time, τ is the "fast time". is the effective third-order nonlinearity and the describes the dispersion of the effective third-order nonlinearity Here, Ω is the offset angular frequency with respect to the signal resonance frequency. α1,2 are the total linear cavity loss for the signal and pump laser, ξ=ΔkL/2 is the wave-vector mismatch parameter and ρ is the phase-sensitive parametric pump driving term. We consider a cw-pumped, group-velocity-matched (Δk ' =0) and perfectly-phase-matched (ξ=0) DR-DOPO made of monolithic PPLN microring, with a 28-μm 2 mode area, a 1-mm cavity length, a 1262-nm cw pump wavelength, and a 2524-nm signal center wavelength, which can be readily achieved in the real-world parameters The bifurcation behaviors are investigated for two cases with different pump GVDs of 163 fs 2 /mm and -163 fs 2 /mm, as shown in Fig. while the homogeneous solutions exhibit MI gain for positive real part of the eigenvalues: , Pin=|Bin| 2 is the input pump power and |A0| 2 is the power of non-zero solution. The system exhibits two tilted bistable regimes for both cases [Fig. For the second case of pump GVD '' 2 k =-163 fs 2 /mm, MI starts close to the resonance peak [red point in Fig. As for the dynamics in Fig. . If pump GVD is much larger than 163 fs 2 /mm, the soliton existing regime will become narrower and eventually disappear. (ii) to sustain topological soliton formation, the group velocity difference of the two domain walls depends on the detuning and should be limited in a small value around the Maxwell point We also study the system dynamical behavior by repeating 50 times frequency tuning process and record the intra-cavity average power traces, as shown in Fig. The soliton number difference for the two cases can be directly attributed to the different soliton formation mechanisms: one from domain wall locking and the other from MI. Since the first case of pump GVD '' 2 k =163 fs 2 /mm experiences no MI, topological soliton generation through domain wall locking, requires at least two components out of phase in the beginning, which strongly depends on the stochastic process from noise. In order to achieve soliton generation at each scan and avoid cw state, MI should be introduced in the soliton existing regime, i. e., changing from topological soliton to a non-topological one. Therefore, the MI starting point is important, which can be conveniently adjusted in the design phase, by controlling pump and signal GVDs through dispersion engineering. As shown in Fig. Disclosures. The authors declare no conflicts of interest.