Selective single beam tweezers open tremendous perspectives in microfluidics and microbiology for the micromanipulation, assembly and mechanical properties testing of microparticles, cells and microorganisms. In optics, single beam optical tweezers rely on tightly focused laser beams, generating a three-dimensional (3D) trap at the focal point. In acoustics, 3D traps have so-far only been reported experimentally with specific wavefields called acoustical vortices. Indeed, many types of particles are expelled (not attracted to) the center of a focused beam. Yet the trapping capabilities of focused beams have so-far only been partially explored. In this paper, we explore numerically with an angular spectrum code the trapping capabilities of focused beams on a wide range of parameters (size over wavelength ratio and type of particles). We demonstrate (i) that 3D trapping of particles, droplets and microorganisms more compressible than the surrounding fluid is possible in and beyond Rayleigh regime (e.g. polydimethylsiloxane, olive oil, benzene, and lipid sphere) and (ii) that 2D trapping (without axial trap) of particles with positive contrast factor can be achieved by using the particles resonances. 3D microparticle trapping with single beam optical tweezers was demonstrated by Ashkin et al. in 1986 with a focused laser beam under the condition that the particle refractive index is higher than that of the surrounding fluid medium In acoustics the first to consider focused beams to trap object was Wu in 1991 Experimentally, 3D trapping against gravity of particles denser and stiffer than the surrounding phase with single beam has only been demonstrated with specific wavefields called focused acoustical vortices Yet, (i) as discussed in the first paragraph, tweezers based on focused beams would have many advantages in terms of simplicity, selectivity and trapping force compared to their vortex counterparts and (ii) their trapping capabilities has only been partially explored. In this paper, we investigate numerically with an angular spectrum code It was shown recently by our team that complex high frequency acoustic fields such as focused acoustical vortices can be synthesized by using active holograms based on InterDigitated Transducers n a l Y t W c m N 8 e 7 u i U N 2 P 0 5 z n n Q P q q 6 t e p x s 1 a p n 5 l R F 7 G H f R z S P E 9 Q x y U a a G n v R z z h 2 b q w Q i u z 8 s 9 U q 2 A 0 u / i 2 r I c P X 3 S P f w = = < / l a t e x i t > FIG. the electrode hologram which activate the piezoelectric substrate. The advantage of this method is that the transducers are flat, transparent, miniaturizable, and can produce high frequency signals to trap small particles and can be adapted to synthesize arbitrary wavefields. The simulations of this paper are conducted with realistic fields, produced by binary phase holograms designed to produce focused beams at 40 MHz (which corresponds to a wavelength of λ ≈ 37.5 μm in water). The design of the electrodes are simply obtained by taking the intersection of a converging focused beam with a source plane (see Fig. where p 0 is the wave amplitude, k = ω/c the wavenumber, c the sound speed, and t the time. The equiphase surfaces hence simply correspond to: where C is a constant, n an arbitrary integer and the time t can be chosen arbitrarily and is hence chosen as t = 0 in the following calculation. To obtain the intersection of these equiphase spherical surfaces with the source plane, we must introduce the cylindrical coordinates (R, φ, z), take z as a constant z = h in equations Note that the arbitrary constant C must be chosen so that C > kh and that each value of n corresponds to a set of two electrodes. Hence the aperture of the transducer can be fixed by setting the maximum value N of n, with n ∈ [0, N ]. Here, N was chosen to obtain an aperture angle of ≈ 60 • for a focal depth of h =1 mm. The two set of electrodes are represented on Fig. The next step is to compute the radiation force that would be exerted on a particle depending on its position, size and composition. Different analytical formulations of the radiation force exerted by an arbitrary acoustic field on an arbitrary spherical particles have been derived by Silva where Note that here the partial wave coefficients A m n reduce to A n owing to the spherical shape of the particle. The radiation force for general shapes can be obtained from Eq. ( When the particles are much smaller that the wavelength, i.e. in the Rayleigh regime, the radiation force formulas for spherical particles in Eq. ( where V 0 = 4/3 πa 3 is the volume of the spherical shape with the particle radius a, f 1 and f 2 are the monopolar and dipolar acoustic contrast factors, p and v are the complex pressure and velocity of the incident acoustic fields, "Re" and "Im" designate respectively the real and imaginary part of a complex number, and the supercript " * " stands for the complex conjugate. The first term in the curly braces of Eq. ( the so-called Gor'kov potential. The remaining terms correspond to the scattering force F scat contributions. Note that for a standing wave, the 2 nd and 3 rd terms vanish, while for a plane progressive wave, the Gor'kov gradient force vanish since |p| 2 and |v| 2 are homogeneous. Also, as can been seen from this formula the gradient force is proportional to O((ka) 3 ), while the scattering force is proportional to O((ka) 6 ), so that the gradient forces are generally dominant (if they do not vanish) over the scattering force in the Rayleigh regime. In the expression of the gradient force, the first term is proportional to the monopolar acoustic contrast factor f 1 = (1 -κ p /κ 0 ) and the acoustic potential energy density E p = |p| 2 /2ρ 0 c 2 0 , with κ p /κ 0 the compress-ibility contrast between the particle and surrounding fluid. Hence this term is related to the relative compression/expansion of the particle compared to the surrounding fluid. Particles less compressible than the surrounding fluid f 1 > 0 (respectively more compressible, f 1 < 0) are hence pushed by this term toward the pressure amplitude minima (respectively maxima) of a wavefield in the Rayleigh regime. The second term of the gradient force is proportional to the dipolar acoustic contrast factor f 2 = 3(ρ p -ρ 0 )/(2ρ p + ρ 0 ) and the kinetic energy density E k = ρ 0 |v| 2 /2, with ρ p / ρ 0 the density contrast between the particle and the surrounding fluid. Hence this term is related to the particle back and forth relative translation compared to the surrounding fluid. Particles denser than the surrounding fluid, i.e. with f 2 > 0 (respectively less dense, f 2 < 0) are pushed by this term toward velocity amplitude maxima (respectively minima). If both the density and compressibility differ and for standing wavefields (wherein the pressure antinodes coincide to velocity nodes) it is convenient to introduce the so-called acoustic contrast factor Φ SW ( whose sign indicates whether particle migrate toward pressure nodes or antinodes. Particle with positive contrast factor Φ SW > 0 (e.g., most solid particles and typical cells) get trapped at the pressure nodes, while particles with negative contrast factor Φ SW < 0, (e.g. certain liquids droplets) get trapped at the pressure antinodes. However, such analysis with the contrast factor is only valid for standing waves in the Rayleigh regime, since (i) for more complex wavefields the pressure maxima (minima) do not necessarily coincide with the velocity minima (maxima) (see e.g. In this paper, we consider many different types of particles and droplets suspended in water, whose properties are summarized in table I, insonified by the one-sided focused beam represented on Fig. 3D TRAPPING WITH A FOCUSED-BEAM ACOUSTICAL TWEEZERS. In this section, we will study two groups of typical particles, which are commonly used in trapping experiments: one group [Pyrex, Polystyrene (PS), and Polyethylene (PE)] consists of materials less compressible (f 1 > 0) and denser (f 2 > 0) than the surrounding medium, the other [Olive oil, Benzene, and Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS)] uses materials more compressible (f 1 < 0) and generally lighter (f 2 < 0), except for PDMS, whose density is slightly higher than that of water. The detailed acoustic parameters used for the simulations are listed in Table The most common elastic particles used experimentally, namely Pyrex, Polystyrene (PS), and PolyEthylene (PE) belong to this category, as well as most typical human cells In this section we consider microparticles of 1 μm in radius made of three different kinds of materials (Pyrex, PS, and PE) and insonified by the acoustic field introduced in Sec. II, with a wavelength over particle size ratio a/λ ≈ 0.03 1. The axial radiation force F z and lateral radiation force F x (represented in Fig. x (μm) x (μm) x (μm) of the gradient force, (ii) with the generalized Gor'kov theory All these figures show that these types of particles are expelled both laterally and axially from the center of the focused beam. Indeed, the center of the focused beam is both a pressure and velocity magnitude maximum. Since f 1 > 0 and f 2 > 0, the monopolar (potential energy) and the dipolar (kinetic energy) contributions of the gradient force will push respectively the particle away from the beam center and toward the beam center respectively. But since (i) the compressibility contrast is larger than the density contrast for these particles leading to f 1 > f 2 , and (ii) the gradients of the potential energy are stronger than the gradient of the kinetic energy (as discussed previously), the monopolar force is dominant and pushes the particles away from the beam center. Spherical particles constitute some cavities for the wave. Hence, the particles exhibit some resonances when the wavelength of the particle approaches the size of the particle, leading to directional scattering patterns. These resonances play a fundamental role on the radiation force beyond Rayleigh regime. Hence, it is vital to determine the resonance frequencies of the particle depending on their composition to analyse the results. The resonance scattering theory developed by Flax et al. has been widely used in the literature to isolate the scattering resonances and can predict the correct magnitude of the scattering coefficients. However, they cannot predict the useful phase information where A n = (s n -1)/2 and A b n are the total and background partial wave coefficients respectively. For elastic materials, a background scattering from a rigid particle with the same size can be used with the scattering coefficients given in Appendix A 1 to only keep the contribution of the particle resonance. The scattering coefficients for the total (elastic resonance and rigid background) scattering are given in Appendix A 4. This method works quite well for dense metal materials, for example, the tungsten carbide with very sharp peaks of resonance As shown in Sec. IV A 1 for the considered particles, there is no trapping in neither the axial nor the lateral directions in the Rayleigh regime. Here, we study the trapping possibility for these particles beyond Rayleigh regime based on the angular spectrum method. To obtain a 3D trap, restoring forces (pushing the particle toward the beam center) are required in both axial and lateral directions, which means that the radiation forces should be negative when the particle is slightly displaced along z or x axis (z > 0, x > 0) and positive when the particle is slightly displaced in the other directions (z < 0, x < 0). Of course the magnitude of the restoring force depends on the exact location of the particle. For simplicity and efficiency, we first calculate the axial and lateral radiation force as a function of the particle size ratios a/λ = [0, 3] at the fixed positions (x s , z s ) = (0, 30) μm and (x s , z s ) = (8, 0) μm respectively (see Fig. there is some lateral restoring force. To further demonstrate the 2D lateral trapping ability, three typical sizes of each particle are selected which have positive axial forces and negative lateral forces (corresponding to the star, rectangle and triangles marks on the graphs (a,b,c). The axial radiation forces versus z on the beam axis are plotted in the second row (d,e,f), and the lateral forces versus x at the focal plane (z = 0) are given in the third row (g,h,i). It is clearly shown that the axial radiation forces is always positive, which will push the particles outside of the focus, hence confirming that there is no axial trapping whatever the position of the particle. The lateral force however is positive for x < 0 and positive for x > 0 confirming that the lateral trapping ability at these specific ratios of particle size over wavelength. Our calculations show that Pyrex, PS and PE particles are always expelled from the focal point in the Rayleigh regime. Beyond Rayleigh regime, only lateral trapping of these particles is possible at some specific particle size over wavelength ratios, close to some of the particle resonances. The particle is however always pushed in the axial direction by the radiation force. The second group of materials (Olive oil, Benzene, Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS)) considered in this section are more compressible (f 1 < 0) and generally lighter (f 2 < 0) than the surrounding water, except from PDMS which is slightly heavier than water. The same analysis as in section IV A 1 is conducted here for this new group of materials. Again the gradient force dominates, so that Gor'kov expression is sufficient to estimate the force in the Rayleigh regime. The results represented on Fig. FIG. lar term to the gradient force dominates and hence the droplet is pushed toward the focal point, leading to 3D trapping of the particle. This is clearly seen on the representation of the Gor'kov potential U (columns 2 and 3 of Fig. Again it is interesting to localize the particle and droplet resonances before studying their ability to get trapped by a focused beam beyond the Rayleigh regime. Since the acoustic impedance of the considered particles and water are close, as shown in Table x (μm) sizes of PDMS spheres are not easy to determine and not discussed here. Order n = 1 n = 2 n = 3 n = 4 n = 5 n = 6 Olive oil 0.247 0.400 0.545 0.685 0.824 0.961 Benzene 0.180 0.295 0.404 0.510 0.616 0.721 The angular spectrum method is applied to compute the 3D radiation forces for the more compressible particles beyond the Rayleigh regime. The axial and lateral forces versus the particle size ratios a/λ are given in Fig. considered (see Appendix B). This is due to the fact that PDMS strongly absorbs the wave leading to scattering forces which push the particle in the wave propagation direction. So far, only levitation of these particle in the regime a/λ ∈ [0.26 0.52] has been reported The results of this subsection suggest the existence of 3D radiation trap for PDMS particles and Olive Oil and Benezene droplets at the center of one-sided focused beams both in the Rayleigh regime and beyond Rayleigh regime at specific frequencies. The manipulation of biological microorganisms such as cells is of primary interest for applications. Here we review the abilities of focused beams to trap two types of biological particles, namely typical human cells and lipid cells. The density and and compressibility of typical human cells are taken from Ref. The first experiments of single beam trapping with acoustical tweezers based on focused beams were conducted by Lee et al. for the oleic acid lipid droplets and in this work only lateral 2D trapping was reported. The typical density of lipid cells are [910-1010] kg/m 3 FIG. Our results suggest (i) the possibility to trap typical human cells in 2D, while 3D trapping might be possible only for specific cells with large density and compressibility, and (ii) to trap lipid cell in 3D in Mie and geometric optics regimes at specific frequencies. Compared to their focused vortex counterpart, single beam acoustical tweezers based on focused beams have several advantages, such as easier synthesis, higher expected selectivity and forces due to stronger gradients, no repulsive ring surrounding the trapped particle, which complexifies particle assembly The scattering from a soft sphere can be considered as the background contribution of a bubble in liquid with the impedance smaller than that of the surrounding medium. The scattering coefficients of a soft sphere are s n = -h (2) n (ka)/h (1) n (ka), (A2) 3. Fluid (liquid and air) sphere In an ideal fluid sphere, only the longitudinal wave exists (no transverse wave). A parameter D n is introduced for convenience with the relation to the scattering coefficients given by s n = -D * n /D n For an elastic sphere, there are both longitudinal and transverse components of elastic waves with their sound speed c l and c t , and wavenumber k l = (c/c l )k and k t = (c/c t )k, respectively. The density of the elastic sphere is ρ e . It is convenient to define the dimensionless frequency in the fluid medium of longitudinal wave in the elastic sphere x l = k l a, and of transverse wave x t = k t a. A coefficient is introduced as N = n(n + 1) for convenience. The scattering coefficients can be obtained by where the symbol '||' is the determinant of the matrices D * n and D n . Note that for an elastic shell, the explicit elements of D n are given in Ref. The scattering coefficients s n of a viscoleastic shell filled with fluid can be obtained based on the Kelvin-Voigt linear viscoelastic model n (x) , (A5) Here, the time harmonics e -iωt is applied so that the Hankel function of the first kind should be used. The explicit elements of F n are given in detail in Appendix A of Ref. The Kelvin-Voigt linear viscoelastic model 