By classical and path-integral molecular dynamics simulations, we study the pressure-temperature (P -T ) phase diagram of LaH10 to clarify the impact of temperature and atomic zero-point motions. We calculate the XRD pattern and analyze the space group of the crystal structures. For 125 GPa ≤ P ≤ 150 GPa and T = 300 K, we show that a highly symmetric F m 3m structure, for which superconductivity is particularly favored, is stabilized only by the temperature effect. On the other hand, for T = 200 K, the interplay between the temperature and quantum effects is crucial to realize the F m 3m structure. For P =100 GPa and T =300 K, we find that the system is close to the critical point of the structural phase transition between the F m 3m structure and those with lower symmetries. In his seminal paper of 1968, Ashcroft proposed that metallic hydrogen under extremely high pressure will exhibit superconductivity at very high temperatures due to its strong electron-phonon coupling and high phonon frequencies 1 . However, the experimental realization of metallic hydrogen turned out to be a formidable challenge, and it has been a holy grail in the field of high-pressure experiments While there have been many reports on the discovery of high T c hydride superconductors so far For this issue, there are two effects that should be considered seriously but are neglected in standard calculations based on density functional theory (DFT). One is the effect of quantum fluctuations of hydrogen nuclei, and the other is that of finite temperature. While the former has been shown to stabilize the F m 3m structure For the effect of finite temperature, hydrogen diffusion has been investigated in several studies. While hydrogen atoms can diffuse in the clathrate superhydride Li 2 MgH 16 even at low temperature To elucidate the finite-T effect on the crystal structure, in the present study, we perform a molecular dynamics (MD) calculation for LaH 10 and analyze the symmetry of the crystal structure at thermodynamic equilibrium. When the quantum effect of hydrogen nuclei is neglected, we show that the F m 3m structure is stable even at P =125∼150 GPa if the temperature is higher than 300 K. We then take account of the quantum effect by a calculation based on the path integral molecular dynamics (PIMD) In order to obtain a thermodynamically stable crystal structures considering the quantum nuclear effect at finite temperature, we performed PIMD simulations. We combined the PIMD and DFT, which is called ab initio PIMD. In this section, we review the scheme of PIMD and explain the simulation details. Let us consider a N -body Hamiltonian with a potential V arXiv:2205.06524v2 [cond-mat.supr-con] 28 May 2022 given as where p i , m i and r i are the momentum, mass, and position of the i-th particle, respectively. The partition function of this system can be written as where β = 1/k B T and k B is the Boltzmann constant. By using the Suzuki-Trotter decomposition, this partition function can be written as We see that the original N body quantum partition function can be regarded as a N P b body classical partition function where the potential is given as We performed PIMD simulation In the MD calculation, we move the ions following the electronic potential in the real space. At each step, the resulting dependence of the Gibbs free energy at (P, T ) = (150 GPa, 300 K) and (150 GPa, 200 K). The last 250 fs of the simulation are divided into ten bins for 200 K. Then, the average and standard deviation of the sum of the energy and the P V term for each bin are calculated. For 300 K, we took 750 fs for the MD calculation to reduce the error. Regarding the entropy term, we evaluated it from the velocity of each atom For n avg , we took a thousand to several ten thousand steps. We then compared the X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of F (n 0 , n 0 + n avg ) with several different n 0 and n avg . The crystal structure is in thermodynamic equilibrium when only minor differences in XRD patterns are observed. We did not observe the hydrogen diffusion discussed in Ref. 49, because the temperatures in our calculations are much lower than that in the previous study where the hydrogen diffusion occurs. On top of the XRD simulation, we determine the space group of the obtained averaged crystal structures to discuss the symmetry of the crystals. We used VESTA Let us first look at the calculated crystal structure of LaH 10 obtained from classical MD simulation. In Fig. In Fig. In Fig. Let us now move on to the space group analysis using the pymatgen module. In Table 0.08 0.12 0.16 100 GPa 300 K P 21 Comparing Figs. Let us next move on to the space group analysis for the structures obtained by the PIMD simulation. The XRD patterns for the structure at (P, T ) = (100 GPa, 300 K), (125 GPa, 200 K), and (150 GPa, 200 K) show single peak at 2θ = 6.5 • . The space group analysis in Table I also shows that all of these structures belong to the space group of F m 3m for symprec=0.16. However, the crystal structure at (P, T ) = (100 GPa, 300 K) is classified as P 2 1 /m for smaller values of symprec, meaning that the stochastic error is sensitively detected. This suggests that the point (P, T ) = (100 GPa, 300 K) resides close to the border of the F m 3m phase. It should be noted that there is recently an experimental report indicating that the necessary pressure to stabilize the F m 3m phase is lower than previously believed, which is consistent with the present calculation Lastly, we compare the results of the MD and PIMD calculations. Given that the results for (P, T ) = (125 GPa, 200 K) and (150 GPa, 200 K) are C2/m or R 3m (F m 3m) in the classical MD (PIMD) calculation, we can say that the F m 3m structure is stabilized by the quantum effect at temperature lower than 200 K when P = 125 ∼ 150 GPa. This observation is consistent with the previous report based on the selfconsistent harmonic approximation We investigated the temperature and quantum effect on the crystal structure of LaH 10 . By classical MD and PIMD simulations, we determined the most stable crystal structures for 100 GPa ≤ P ≤ 150 GPa and T = 200 and 300 K. To analyze the symmetry of the calculated crystal structures, we calculated the XRD patterns and performed space group analysis. For 125 GPa and 150 GPa, we have shown that a temperature of 300 K has a crucial impact on stabilizing the symmetric F m 3m structure, which favors superconductivity. While the F m 3m structure does not survive only by the temperature effect at 200 K, if we consider the quantum effect, the F m 3m structure becomes the most stable structure. We also found that the point of (P, T ) = (100 GPa, 300 K) locates close to the phase boundary between the F m 3m phase and those with lower symmetries. N. W. Ashcroft, Physical Review Letters 21, 1748 (1968).