Reciprocity is a fundamental principle follows the time reversal symmetry of physics. However, many practical applications require breaking time reversal symmetry, hence, are called nonreciprocal. This article aims at discussing time reversal symmetry, developing fundamental building block to achieve nonreciprocity leading to robust analytical model to explain electromagnetic rotation upon propagation through nonreciprocal medium. Detailed mathematical derivation is presented for Faraday and Kerr rotation in the presence of external bias which breaks time reversal symmetry and leads to achieve nonreciprocal system. We validate our proposed model for conventional conditions and we compute the Faraday and Kerr rotation from a reported article using our proposed mathematical model and observed excellent agreement. Physics, the science of nature, in which wave-matter interaction plays a pivotal role paves the foundation of many innovative branches leading to novel applications. In classical electromagnetism a system can be subdivided into two broad categories based on its interaction with electromagnetic wave: reciprocal and non-reciprocal. A system is called reciprocal when transmission between transmitter and receiver are identical in both forward and reverse directions. Reciprocity principle in two ports linear circuits can be represented as V 1 I 1 = V 2 I 2 where voltage V 1 applied to first port create current I 2 to second port in the same circuit and similarly, voltage V 2 applied to second branch create current I 1 in the first branch In our daily life applications most of the devices such as antenna, electrical circuits, and components are reciprocal. However, reciprocity not only imposes stringent restrictions on how the devices will operate, but also nonreciprocal system offers unique features that will lead to plethora of new applications. Non reciprocity can be achieved by breaking time reversal symmetry. As an example nonreciprocal components such as gyrators, isolators, and circulators, are very important now-a-days because of their novel application oriented features The paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we provide insight to the mechanism of EM nonreciprocity and various polarization rotation, in Section III we provide details on the step-by-step analytical approach of modelling Faraday and Kerr rotation. Non-reciprocity is the building block of various advanced scientific concepts specially in the area of condensed matter physics, optics, electromagnetism and electronics, and quantum mechanics which host advanced phenomena and applications. One of the key performance indicator is polarization rotation and this can be defined as the rotation of the orientation of the plane of polarization about the microwave/optical axis of linearly polarized wave as it moves through certain materials. Material properties and the bias condition plays a pivotal role in achieving specific types of rotation. The concept of electromagnetic reciprocity is closely related to that of the time-reversal symmetry of Maxwell's equations. Mathematically, from Fig. where in Eq. 1, time reversal is defined by the operator T. A process like Fig. Based on the above Fig. The fundamental concept of time reversal symmetry and asymmetry provides the required foundation for reciprocity and nonreciprocity In presence of external or internal bias (in the non-linear case), time-reversal symmetry can be broken. The physical quantities involved in the laws of physics denoted as f (t) may be either time-reversal symmetric or time-reversal antisymmetric and can be represented as where "+" corresponds to time-reversal symmetry, or even time-reversal parity, and "-" corresponds to time-reversal antisymmetry, or odd time-reversal parity An electromagnetic wave consists of a coupled oscillating electric field and magnetic field which are always perpendicular to each other and by convention, the "polarization" of electromagnetic waves refers to the direction of the electric field. In linear polarization, the fields oscillate in a single direction. In circular or elliptical polarization, the fields rotate at a constant rate in a plane as the wave travels. This wave can be decomposed into two orthogonal polarization states (right handed and left handed). A linear-polarized wave can be decomposed into two circularly-polarized waves, one right-hand circularly polarized (RHCP), and another left-hand circularlypolarized (LHCP). When a circular polarized wave propagates in a birefringent media, RHCP and LHCP waves propagate with different speeds. After propagating, when viewed as a linearly-polarized wave (recombining the RHCP and LHCP components), this difference causes the linear-polarized wave to have it's polarization plane rotate as they reflect from the anisotropic media which is known as optical or Kerr rotation. The type of the media those experience these specific phenomenon are circularly birefringent and examples are sugar solutions, proteins, nucleic acids, amino acids, lipids, DNA, vitamins, hormones, and natural substances where, l is the medium length, λ is the wavelength , n 1 and n 2 are refractive indices defined as n 1 = ε 1 ε 0 and n 2 = ε 2 ε 0 . Electromagnetic chirality is closely related to the mirror asymmetry, polarization rotation, and magneto-electric coupling where Here, n defines refractive index of the medium and K 0 represents the free space wave number. Ferromagnetic materials exhibit non-reciprocal gyrotropic response when they are biased with a static magnetic field. Besides, we have discussed in an earlier section that the permeability tensor of the ferrite has off-diagonal components, therefore, gyrotropic response of the magnetized ferrite is evident. This can be easily understood by considering the constitutive relation B = -→ μ • H, where the x component of magnetic flux density has contribution both from x and y component of the magnetic field intensity. In addition, from the reciprocity theorem where (.) T is the Hermitian operator, -→ ζ and -→ ξ are electricmagnetic and magneto-electric coupling tensors, respectively. Figure Figure In this section, we will develop a robust mathematical modelling to represent polarization rotation for a combination of isotropic and anisotropic media shown in Fig. Maxwell's equations in frequency domain in the p-th medium (p = 1,2,3) can be written as where μ(p) and ε(p) are tensors, E p and H p are the corresponding electric and magnetic field in the pth medium and k is the wave vector. We introduce K as the tensor that satisfies the below relation where matrix form of tensor K for pth medium can be represented as Therefore, wave equation can be represented in a combined form as For normal incidence, k x = k (p) y = 0, therefore, the Eq. 15 can be written in eigen value form as follows where refractive index, n (p) is defined as and, x,x = μ p y,x ε p y,xε p x,x μ p y,y , M x,y = μ p y,x ε p y,yμ p y,y ε p x,y , (18) M The following requirement is required to be satisfied x,x M and the following eigen-vectors with the coefficient s j being given as We, hereafter, assume medium 1 and 3 are isotropic (gyrotropic with no off-diagonal element) i.e. x,y = -μ and we also assume that medium 2 is gyrotropic x,y = -ε (2) x,x = μ (2) x,y = -μ y,x = -iμ g = 0. (25) Therefore, and so the eigen values reduce to The refractive index of each medium is given as x,x ε (1) x,x , (2) x,x + is j M (2) x,y ) x,y , (30) x,x ε where, n defines the refractive index, superscript and subscript describe the medium of wave propagation and LHCP/RHCP in anistropic media respectively. Furthermore, the eigen-vector corresponding to gyrotropic medium take the following simplified form The eigen-vectors for gyrotropic medium correspond to left handed circularly polarized (LHCP) wave and right handed circularly polarized (RHCP) wave. Here, we adopt, j = , labels instead of j = 1, 2. Since the eigen-vectors given by Eq. 32 from a complete set in two dimensional space, the electromagnetic field in all three media can be expressed as a linear combination of these eigen-vectors as they represents the amplitudes of the propagating waves inside the medium. In appendix A, E field is shown at various medium where medium 1 and medium 3 are isotropic medium and medium 2 is gyrotropic. Therefore during propagation, EM wave will exhibit phase difference, different refractive indices and different impedances for RHCP and LHCP waves. By following the similar approach described in the previous section, wave equation can be represented as where we introduced Ê = êx -iê y √ 2 , Ê = êx +iê y √ 2 and êz × Ê j = -is j Ê j as identities. Here, s = 1 and s = -1 and Eq. 33 can be reduced to Similarly magnetic field in pth medium can be represented in a combined form p, j is the impedance of the p-th medium experienced by the j-th plane wave ( j = , ) with, Z 0 = μ 0 ε 0 = 377Ω, impedance of the free space. In previous section we have described electric and magnetic field and based on the mathematical modelling developed for E and H field reflection and transmission coefficient will be described here. Medium 1 (Isotropic) to medium 2 (Gyrotropic). Incident and reflected wave can be represented as for the medium 1 where p = 1-3 defines the layer number. where superscript "+" or "-" defines incident or reflected wave. By following the continuity equation and boundary condition at various medium interface, the magnetic field corresponding to the incident, reflected, and transmitted fields are given as where denotes the relative impedance of the p-th isotropic medium (p = 1,3) and is defined as follows Similarly, magnetic field can be represented for every medium as where p = 1-3 defines the layer number. Medium 3 is assumed as no reflection for simplicity. Therefore, there will be no reflected wave for that medium. Due to the orthogonality of the left-hand and right hand eigen vector, i.e., Ên • Ê * m = δ n,m for n, m = , , the preceding vector equations can be expressed in terms of the scalar equations and by following some algebraic calculation leads us to the following expression where E field can be represented in terms of medium 1 and medium 3 at z = d interface as below. where (2) j ) exp( iωdn (2) j ) exp(-iωdn (2) j c ) Comparing the preceding equation with the definition of transmission tensor yields, where ) exp( iωdn (2) j ) exp(-iωdn with δ n,m and t c n,m respectively denoting the Kronecker delta function and components of the transmission tensor in LHCP-RHCP basis set, i.e. Therefore, transmission tensor is represented as The components of transmission tensor can be represented in cartesian coordinates as t n,n ên êm ≡ t x,x t x,y t y,x t y,y . In order to obtain the components of the transmission tensor in Cartesian coordinates, Ê and Ê should be substituted with their Cartesian representation Therefore, the components of the transmission tensor in Cartesian coordinates are given as Similarly, reflection tensor can be obtained as with r c n,m denoting the components of the reflection tensor in LHCP-RHCP basis set as The components of reflection tensor can be represented in Cartesian coordinates as r n,m ên êm ≡ r x,x r x,y r y,x r y,y . The transmission and reflection tensor can be expressed in terms of θ m which is the polarization angle of the linearly polarized plane wave at z = 0 After some calculation steps and algebraic steps, Transmission tensor components for a thin slab, i.e., θ )θ m , (54) Writing impedance of the media in terms of permitivity and permeability x,x μ x,x 1 + which is inline with the known matched conditions. Furthermore, to validate the robustness of the model we consider a simple middle layer, i.e. no gyrotropy behaviour in medium. After some trigonometric and algebraic simplification the co-polarized reflection coefficient can be simplified into below conventional form where Γ is the reflection coefficient defines the ratio between reflected and incident wave. In the next step we will try to reproduce an already published artificial metasurface developed by Kodera et al. E field and H field in various medium: In medium 1 (isotropic), i.e., -∞ < z < 0, the forward and backward propagating waves are described by and in medium 2 (anisotropic), i.e., 0 < z < d, the forward and backward propagating waves are described by Ê exp ∓ iωzn c , (81) and in medium 3 (isotropic), i.e., d < z < ∞ the forward propagating waves are described by