The presence of a bias field, encoding some information about the target state, can enhance the performance of quantum optimization methods. Here we investigate the effect of such a bias field on the outcome of quantum annealing sampling, at the example of the exact cover problem. The sampling is carried out on a D-Wave machine, and different bias configurations are benchmarked against the unbiased sampling procedure. It is found that the biased annealing algorithm works particularly well for larger problem sizes, where the Hamming distance between bias and target configuration becomes less important. This work motivates future research efforts for finding good bias configurations, either on the quantum machine itself, or in a hybrid fashion via classical algorithms. Quantum annealing is a computational strategy for solving complex optimization problems on a programmable quantum device Adiabatic state preparation, the key element of the AQA algorithm, is routinely performed in the context of quantum simulation, see for instance Ref. From the point of view of practical implementation, QAS has been more relevant than AQA. In particular, there exists a programmable quantum device which allows to carry out QAS operations with thousands of qubits, produced and commercialized by the D-Wave company In the present manuscript, we consider biased annealing as another QAS strategy. In the context of AQS, this strategy has been proposed in Ref. Specifically, we have performed biased QAS for an NP-hard optimization problem (exact cover), using the same small instances (up to N = 14 spins) as in the theoretical work from Ref. The paper is organized as follows: In Section II, we describe the nature of optimization problem (Section II A), and the biased sampling algorithm used to solve it (Section II B). In Section III, we present our results, with the most relevant information being presented in Fig. We study random instances of the exact cover problem. Choosing σ z i as the computational basis for every spin/qubit i, the cost function of the problem is given as the following Ising Hamiltonian: At this point, we keep the Hamiltonian dimensionless, but we will specify units of energy below. The problem instance is defined through the set of clauses C. Each clause consists of three numbers between 1 and N , denoted by C(1), C(2), C(3), which choose three out of the N spins. A spin configuration in which two of the three spins point upwards (σ z = +1) and one spin points downwards (σ z = -1) has a cost function value h C = 0 with respect to this clause. The configuration is said to fulfill this clause. The goal of the problem is to find the configuration which fulfills simultaneously as many clauses as possible. From randomly generated problem instances, we have selected only those instances which have exactly one configuration fulfilling all clauses, as these instances are particularly hard-to-solve, cf. Ref. When the so-defined Ising problem is implemented on the D-Wave machine, the device's operating system Ocean automatically scales the parameters J ij and h i in such a way that ensures that they remain within, and fully exploit, the accessible parameter range. On the D-Wave 2000Q device used in this study, the parameter ranges are . The corresponding frequency units are specified by the annealing schedule, see below. To encode the problem Hamiltonian on the chimera geometry of the D-Wave 2000Q device, a minor embedding procedure is carried out For the solution of the optimization problem via QAS we define a homogeneous driver Hamiltonian H drive = i σ x i , which does not commute with H P , as well as a longitudinal bias Hamiltonian H bias = i μ i σ z i . This bias term energetically favors the spin configuration where σ z i = sign(μ i ) for all i, and therefore, if sign(μ i ) agrees with the solution of H P in all or many values of i, the presence such a bias Hamiltonian enhances the annealer's success rate. In the AQA version of biased annealing, as described in Ref. In the beginning (at t = 0), A(0) B(0), whereas at the end of the annealing, at time t = τ , B has exponentially decreased to B(τ ) → 0, and A has grown to A(τ ) ≈ B(0). The explicit schedules A(t) and B(t) are shown in Fig. From the perspective of AQA, it is an advantage to include the bias field in the driver, because with this choice, the adiabatic theorem still can guarantee that the annealer ends up in the ground of H P , even for a bad choice of μ i . On the other hand, for the QAS method, the adiabatic theorem is irrelevant. Including the bias field into the problem part of the Hamiltonian is, first and foremost, motivated by practical considerations. Although the D-wave allows to control the time dependence of the coupling terms (i.e. the terms of type J ij σ z i σ z j ) and the longitudinal fields (i.e. the terms of type h i σ z i ) independently from each other through the function h_gain_schedule, we cannot independently control the problem and the bias Hamiltonians, because both parts contribute to the longitudinal terms. However, from the point of view of QAS, the presence of even a bad bias term at the end of the sampling dynamics is harmless, because at that stage of the annealing schedule, the quantum fluctuations are too weak to produce significant changes anymore. What matters instead is to have, at intermediate times before the sampler starts freezing, the combined presence of all three terms H drive , H bias , and H P . To this end, it does not matter whether (H drive + H bias ) or (H bias + H P ) are controlled jointly. We have performed QAS for the exact cover problem, as specified in the previous section, for problem instances denoted (N, α), where N defines the number of spins/qubits, and α is an index for each of the random instances. We consider sizes between N = 8 to N = 26, and for each size, we consider N α = 100 random instances, that is, α ∈ [1, 100]. From the solution of the problem Hamiltonian, which in our case are a priori known and which we denote by {s i }, we have constructed bias fields {μ i }, such that the Hamming distance d = i |μ i -s i | between bias and target is fixed. For every instance and for each value of d, we perform N anneal = 30 anneals, and we count the number of times N success in which the final measurement outcome agrees with the target config- uration. Then, the corresponding success probability p (N,α) (d) = N success /N anneal is averaged over all instances of a given size, p N (d) = α p (N,α) (d)/N α , and the result is plotted in Fig. As expected, the obtained data provides evidence that any of the chosen bias fields enhances the performance of the annealer. Importantly, the enhancement becomes more significant as the system size is increased. To some extent, this behavior is also expected from the study of the biased AQA In Fig. We also note that, if the annealing time τ was the only time scale in the annealing protocol, increasing τ would, for all N , increase the average time-to-solution, because the best ratios between average success probability over τ are achieved at τ = 1μs. However, since most of the computational time is actually spent by the programming of the annealer rather than by the annealing procedure itself, the best choice of τ is not obvious from these numbers alone, and it can actually be beneficial to choose a larger value of τ . For producing the improvements via bias fields which have been demonstrated in the previous Section, strategies to choose good bias fields are needed. This choice requires some knowledge about the target state, which here we have assumed to be given a priori. In practice, though, this might not be the case. A strategy to find good bias configurations had been proposed in Ref. While the iterative scheme is appealing because it can be carried out entirely on a quantum device, future research shall also explore the possibility of determining good bias fields through classical algorithms, e.g. through variations of the simulated annealing algorithm 