Ti2O3 exhibits a unique metal-insulator transition (MIT) at approximately 450 K over a wide temperature range of ~ 150 K. This broad MIT accompanied by lattice deformation differs from the sharp MITs observed in most other transition-metal oxides. A long-standing issue is determining the role of electron-electron correlation in the electronic structure and MIT of Ti2O3. However, the lack of information about the band structure of Ti2O3 has hindered investigating the origin of its unusual physical properties. Here, we report the electronic band structure of "insulating" Ti2O3 films with slight hole doping by angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES). ARPES showed clear band dispersion on the surface of single-crystalline epitaxial films. The experimentally obtained band structures were compared with band-structure calculation results based on density functional theory (DFT) with generalized gradient approximation + U correction. The obtained band structures are in good agreement with the DFT calculations at U = 2.2 eV, suggesting that electron-electron correlation plays an important role in the electronic structure of Ti2O3. Furthermore, the detailed analyses with varying U suggest that the origin of the characteristic MIT in Ti2O3 is a semimetal-semimetal or semimetalsemiconductor transition caused by changes in the Fermi surface due to lattice deformation. Ti2O3, which has a corundum-type crystal structure, exhibits a unique metal-insulator transition (MIT). The bulk Ti2O3 is a nonmagnetic insulator with a small bandgap energy of approximately 100 meV Over the past few decades, the MIT mechanism has been experimentally and theoretically investigated . The most relevant phenomenon in this mechanism is the overlap of the a1g and eg π bands due to the Ti-Ti distance modulations along the c-axis of the crystal lattice The Ti2O3 energy diagram describes its electronic structures and reveals the close connection between the MIT and c/a ratio. In fact, the a-axis and c-axis lattice constants of bulk Ti2O3 vary significantly with temperature, and the c/a ratio increases from 2.648 to 2.701 in the range of 373 to 553 K across the MIT Furthermore, the comparison between the ARPES results and DFT + U calculations with varying U and c/a ratio suggests important implications regarding the origin of the characteristic MIT in Ti2O3; the MIT is a semimetal-semimetal or semimetal-semiconductor transition caused by changes in the FS due to lattice deformation. Epitaxial Ti2O3 films with a thickness of approximately 100 nm were grown on α-Al2O3 (0001) substrates by laser MBE. A sintered TiOx pellet was used as the ablation target After growth, the films were transferred in vacuo to the photoemission chamber using a mobile vacuum-transfer vessel to reduce surface contamination and additional oxidation. During transportation, the samples were under an ultrahigh vacuum below 5.0 × 10 -10 Torr. Photoemission spectroscopy (PES) and ARPES were conducted at the BL-2A MUSASHI beamline of the Photon Factory, KEK. The PES spectra were recorded at 100 K using a VG-Scienta SES-2002 analyzer with total energy resolutions of 250 and 500 meV at photon energies (hν) of 800 and 1486 eV, respectively. In the ARPES experiments in the SX region of hν = 300-640 eV, the energy and angular resolutions were set to approximately 150-250 meV and 0.25°, respectively. The ARPES experiments were also conducted at 100 K in the p-polarization geometry The surface structure and cleanliness of the vacuum-transferred films were examined by lowenergy electron diffraction (LEED) and core-level photoemission measurements immediately before the ARPES measurements. The LEED pattern of the films showed six sharp diffraction spots on a low background, as shown in Fig. Before discussing the ARPES results, we provide evidence for the fact that the properties of Ti2O3 are retained in the surface region of the films accessible for SX-ARPES Therefore, the existence of the multiplet structures demonstrates the formation of Ti 3+ -Ti 3+ dimers even in the surface region of the Ti2O3 films. The Ti 3+ (3d 1 ) states in the Ti2O3 films are also confirmed by the valence-band spectrum (Fig. To investigate the band structure near EF in more detail, we compared the experimental band structure with the DFT calculation based on the GGA + U approximation using the reasonable parameters consistent with the experimental facts Note that the band dispersion of U = 0 eV is almost identical to that previously reported As can be seen in Fig. In contrast to U = 2.2 eV, there is less agreement between the experiment and calculation at U = 0 eV. In particular, a significant discrepancy is observed in the a1g-derived bands along the A-H direction (Fig. The disagreement between the experiment and calculation at U = 0 eV likely originates from the difference in the energy levels of the a1g and eg π states. For the band dispersions in the DFT + U calculations with varying U (see Figs. an unusually short Ti-Ti distance of less than 2.2 Å was required to form the insulating ground state in Ti2O3 without U Finally, we discuss the possible origin of the MIT in Ti2O3. From the band structure shown in Fig. In general, for such a small carrier system, the influence of the electron-electron correlation on phase-transition phenomena is not significantly large remains almost unchanged with x, even though the carrier density changes notably; consequently, the ground state changes from insulator at x = 0 to metal at x = 0.06 To investigate the electronic band structure near EF of Ti2O3, we performed SX-ARPES on single-crystalline epitaxial Ti2O3 films grown on α-Al2O3 substrates. Using well-defined surfaces of the epitaxial films, we clearly observed the electronic band structure of Ti2O3. The Ti 3d-derived band forms an open hole FS with a triangular-pyramidal vase shape along the G-A line in the hexagonal BZ, which is in line with the previous transport measurements. We also found the highly dispersive eg π -and a1g-derived bands centered at the G and A points, respectively. The observed band structures were compared with the band-structure calculations based on DFT with GGA + U correction. Detailed analysis with varying U revealed that the obtained band structure is well-described by the DFT calculation at U = 2.2 eV. These results suggest that the electron-electron correlation plays an important role in describing the overall electronic structure of Ti2O3. Nevertheless, the influence of electron-electron correlation on the quantum phase transition in Ti2O3 is considered to be weak owing to its low carrier density. Therefore, the ARPES and DFT calculation results presented here have important implications regarding the origin of the characteristic MIT in Ti2O3; the MIT is a semimetal-semimetal or semimetalsemiconductor transition caused by changes in the FS topology due to lattice deformation. A ceramic target for laser ablation with a nominal composition of Ti2O3 was prepared using a solid-state reaction method. Ti (3N purity) and TiO2 (4N purity) powders with a molar ratio of 1:3 were mixed and then pelletized. The pellet was sintered at 1100°C for 12 h with continuous Ar/H2 gas flow (0.5 L/min) to achieve a highly reductive atmosphere in which the Ti2O3 phase could be stabilized. The a-axis lattice constant of the Ti2O3 films was determined from the reciprocal space map shown in Fig. Temperature dependence of resistivity (ρ-T) for the present Ti2O3 films. The ρ-T curves of the Ti2O3 bulk single crystals Band-structure calculations based on DFT were conducted using the QUANTUM ESPRESSO software The Ti and O atomic positions were optimized by the Monkhorst-Pack scheme using a 6 × 6 × 6 k-point grid in a self-consistent scheme. In the self-consistent calculation, the lattice constants were fixed as the experimental values (a = 5.102 Å, c = 13.80 Å; see Fig. The possible magnetic ground states of Ti2O3 were estimated from DFT + U calculations. Here, the calculations were performed assuming non-magnetic [corresponding to paramagnetic (PM)], antiferromagnetic (AFM), and ferromagnetic (FM) ground states while fixing the lattice parameters (c/a = 2.70) and U value (U = 2.2 eV). The results are summarized in Table The AFM states were most stable in Ti2O3, which indicates that the AFM ground state is predicted in Ti2O3 within the framework of the DFT + U approximation. The local moment of Ti ions was ± 0.43 μB/Ti in the AFM states and 1.00 μB/Ti in the most unstable FM states. The total energy difference between the PM and AFM states in Ti2O3 is considerably smaller than that between the AFM and FM states. Therefore, we have adopted the calculations for the PM ground states in Ti2O3 on the basis of the experimental fact Local magnetic moment and difference in total energy relative to the ground state for paramagnetic (PM), ferromagnetic (FM), and antiferromagnetic (AFM) Ti2O3 with c/a = 2.70 obtained from the DFT + U calculation (U = 2.2 eV). Figure The experimentally determined lattice constants (c/a = 2.70) were used in the DFT calculations. Here, we present the results for the on-site Coulomb interaction parameter U of 0 eV and 2.2 eV, and the band dispersion along representative directions (Γ-K and A-H) are used in Fig. . Band structure of Ti2O3 obtained by the DFT + U calculations. The results for U = 0 and 2.2 eV are given as red and blue lines, respectively. Figure Figure As shown in Fig. The semimetallic ground states of Ti2O3 for U = 0-2.2 eV originate from the slight overlap in energy between the eg π -and a1g-derived bands near EF. The increment of U initially appears to reduce the overlapping. However, a closer inspection of the Fermi surface (FS) reveals a significant change in the FS topology. In the range of U = 0-2.0 eV, the electron pocket at the Γ point and hole pocket at the A point make Ti2O3 a semimetal. However, for U = 2.2 eV, the electron pockets are formed at both the Γ and A points and are compensated by the hole pocket at the midpoint of the Γ-A line. The results suggest a delicate balance between the energy of the eg π and a1g states causes a change in the FS topology of Ti2O3 and consequently a significant change in the character of the conduction carriers. Band structure of Ti2O3 with a c/a ratio of 2.70 calculated based on the GGA + U approximation. U is varied from 0 to 3.0 eV. Note that the results for U = 0 and 2.2 eV are the same as those in Fig. Figure eV (see Fig. Band structures of Ti2O3 with a c/a ratio of 2.639 calculated based on the GGA + U approximation. U is varied from 0 to 3.0 eV. To investigate the effect of lattice deformation on the electronic band structure of Ti2O3, bandstructure calculations were conducted by varying the c/a ratio while keeping the U value fixed to 2.2 eV. Figure With increasing the c/a ratio, the energy separation between the a1g and eg π states becomes smaller; the a1g-derived band is pushed up, whereas the eg π -derived band is pushed down. As a result, electron pockets appear at the G point, and simultaneously, a hole pocket appears at the midpoint of the Γ-A line for a critical c/a ratio of 2.68. The semimetallic ground states of Ti2O3 for c/a ≥ 2.68 originate from the slight overlap in energy between the eg π -and a1g-derived bands near EF. Interestingly, the c/a-ratio dependence of these band structures (with increasing c/a) appears to be similar to the U dependence (with decreasing U) as shown in Figs. These results demonstrate that the band structures of Ti2O3 strongly depend on both the parameters of the c/a ratio and U. Furthermore, the resultant delicate balance between the energy of the eg π and a1g states causes a change in the FS topology of Ti2O3, and consequently, a significant change in the character of the conduction carriers. Band structure of Ti2O3 calculated with a fixed U value of 2.2 eV based on the GGA + U approximation. The c/a ratio is varied from 2.639 to 2.74. Figure The excellent agreement indicates the essential validity of our band-structure calculation (indicated by green lines) and ARPES analysis procedures. As described in the text, we used U = 2.2 eV in the DFT + U calculation for comparison with the experimental results (Figs. Therefore, in our calculation for the Ti2O3 films shown in Figs. To further confirm the validity of U = 2.2 eV, we evaluated the suitability of the U value as follow. When U is not uniquely determined by comparing the band dispersion, as in the present case, the criterion for determining the appropriate U is the agreement in the kF values between the DFT + U calculations and ARPES results. Thus, we utilized the kF value in the same manner as described in the manuscript. We shifted the Fermi level in the DFT + U calculations with different U values (Fig. Figure Meanwhile, the bottom of the band around the Γ point is unclear owing to the overlap with the surface-derived nondispersive quasi-localized states and certain matrix-element effects. 18 The existence of the highly dispersive a1g-derived band along the Γ-A direction is further confirmed by the photon-energy dependent ARPES images. 