Supersonic engine development requires accurate and detailed measurements of fluidic and thermodynamic parameters to optimize engine designs and benchmark computational fluid dynamic (CFD) simulations. Here, we demonstrate that dual frequency comb spectroscopy (DCS) with mode-locked frequency combs can provide simultaneous absolute measurements of several flow parameters with low uncertainty across a range of conditions owing to the broadband and ultrastable optical frequency output of the lasers. We perform DCS measurements across a 6800-7200 cm -1 bandwidth covering hundreds of H2O absorption features resolved with a spectral point spacing of 0.0067 cm -1 and point spacing precision of 1.68 × 10 -10 cm -1 . We demonstrate 2D profiles of velocity, temperature, pressure, water mole fraction, and air mass flux in a ground-test dual-mode ramjet at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base. The narrow angles of the measurement beams offer sufficient spatial resolution to resolve properties across an oblique shock train in the isolator and the thermal throat of the combustor. We determine that the total measurement uncertainties for the various parameters range from 1% for temperature to 9% for water vapor mole fraction, with the absorption database/model that is used to interpret the data typically contributing the most uncertainty (leaving the door open for even lower uncertainty in the future). CFD at the various measurement locations show good agreement, largely falling within the DCS measurement uncertainty for most profiles and parameters. Supersonic systems are an important topic of research and development for various applications such as planetary reentry and national defense. Experimental and simulation-based evaluation of supersonic vehicles requires accurate and detailed diagnostics of various fluidic and thermodynamic parameters across vastly different conditions within and around the vehicle. For example, in supersonic air-breathing ramjet and scramjet engines, both inlet mass flux and complex flow conditions in the flame holding region can impact flight performance and even prevent combustion reactions DCS DCS with mode-locked frequency combs provides two attractive qualities for low-uncertainty LAS in supersonic environments: broad optical bandwidth and an extremely precise and stable optical frequency axis In a prior publication, we demonstrated spatially resolved mass flux measurements using dual-comb spectroscopy and proved via comparison with simple, known conditions and careful analysis that the approach can reach low levels of uncertainty We perform the measurements at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base Research Cell 18 To interrogate the system, we use DCS light which has several qualities that are well-suited for measurements in dynamic systems In DCS, two combs with slightly different pulse repetition rates (i.e. frequency spacings) are interfered to produce radio frequency beat notes that can be easily read by a fast photodetector for each comb tooth pair To take absorption measurements in the test engine, light from the DCS system goes through an optical filter that selects the desired wavelength range of the frequency comb light. Different wavelength ranges are used for the isolator and combustor as shown in Fig. The oblique shock train in the isolator provides a challenging environment for diagnostics. The shock train creates sharp gradients in multiple flow parameters along the vertical and horizontal directions, which wall-mount pressure and temperature measurements and intrusive diagnostics cannot resolve. We take DCS spectra at various heights and axial locations to spatially resolve these gradients. For the isolator measurements, we trim the broadband DCS light with optical filters to span 6880 -7186 cm -1 as shown in Fig. The bulk velocity of the flow in the isolator produces a frequency shift in the absorption feature positions induced by the Doppler effect. The equal but opposite angle between the upstream and downstream laser beam and the flow result in equal but opposite Doppler shifts. We use the same crossed-beam configuration as employed in similar LAS velocimetry studies Pressure correlates to the measured width of the absorption features, temperature to the integrated absorption area ratios between features, and H2O mole fraction to the total light absorbed across the spectra. Mass flux is calculated from the velocity, pressure, temperature, and H2O mole fraction values using a derivation of the ideal gas law We take DCS measurements at three axial positions downstream of the isolator entrance (220, 240, and 260 mm). At each axial position we scan the laser beams in 1-2 mm vertical increments spanning the isolator. The measurement locations are represented by the vertical green lines in Fig. The DCS results are shown in Fig. Uncertainties were calculated for each measured quantity by considering all major sources of uncertainty using the same method described in Comparisons of the measurements with CFD model values are also shown in Fig. Overall, the DCS and CFD results match closely across the various parameters. 73%, 99%, 100%, and 90% of CFD values fall within the DCS measurement uncertainties for temperature, pressure, χ H2O , and mass flux respectively. Velocity shows more significant disagreement, with only 43% of CFD values falling within DCS measurement uncertainties (which are relatively small). The disagreement is most significant in the two upstream axial locations where DCS measures sharper gradients in the vertical velocity profile than the CFD predicts. However overall, CFD and DCS velocities only differ by 4% magnitude on average. We make the first DCS velocity measurements in a high-speed combustor. These consist of vertical scans before and after the thermal throat. The thermal throat is the location downstream of the flame holder where the flow returns to the supersonic condition. For these measurements, we adjust the optical filter to 6800 to 7000 cm -1 . This lower wavenumber bound captures more absorption features with high lowerstate energies (E"). These features begin to absorb more strongly at the 1500-2000 K temperatures present in the combustor and offer more sensitivity for measurements at these conditions. DCS light is transmitted through the test section in the same way described in the Sections 2 and 3, but with angles of 15o and -15o to the flow corresponding to a 2.8 cm axial span. The two vertical scans were taken at axial positions 1268 and 1478 mm downstream of the isolator entrance, as shown in Fig. We use the same 300-1300 K H2O database to fit the combustor data, but with temperature-dependence exponents for pressure-broadening for the highesttemperature H2O features estimated from Antony et al. DCS and CFD velocity measurements are shown in Fig. While only 24% of CFD velocities fall within the DCS measurement uncertainty, there is a general agreement of ~6% magnitude on average. Both the DCS measurement and CFD predict a relatively flat velocity profile with comparable acceleration through the thermal throat. An uncertainty analysis performed in the same manner as Section 3 yields uncertainties of 3% to 5% across the combustor DCS velocity measurements. An example of the uncertainty analysis can be seen in Table We present 2D profiles of temperature, pressure, velocity, H2O, and mass flux measured with modelocked DCS in a ground-test dual-mode ramjet engine. We demonstrate measurements in two different environments in the engine across thermodynamics ranges of 0.6-2 atm pressure, 550-2000 Kelvin temperature, and 500-1200 m/s velocity. The DCS measurements provide 2D profiles which resolve gradients that cannot be detected by wallmounted or intrusive sensors. CFD calculations of the flow parameters show good agreement with the DCS across oblique shocks in the isolator. Aside from velocity, almost all CFD values fall within the uncertainty of the DCS measurements. DCS measurements of velocity in the combustor demonstrate the effects of the thermal throat. While CFD-derived velocity values across the thermal throat of the engine generally don't fall within the DCS uncertainty, the measurements and CFD are still within 6% on average in magnitude and variation. An analysis considering all major sources of measurement uncertainty demonstrates that the uncertainty for most quantities is driven by noninstrument sources (e.g. absorption models and databases) that can be improved. These results demonstrate the potential of DCS to be a nonintrusive, accurate, and absolute diagnostic for supersonic flows.