Majorana bound states are putative collective excitations in solids that exhibit the selfconjugate property of Majorana fermions-they are their own antiparticles. In ironbased superconductors, zero-energy states in vortices have been reported as potential Majorana bound states, but the evidence remains controversial. Here, we use scanning tunneling noise spectroscopy to study the tunneling process into vortex bound states in the conventional superconductor NbSe2, and in the putative Majorana platform FeTe0.55Se0.45. We find that tunneling into vortex bound states in both cases exhibits charge transfer of a single electron charge. Our data for the zero-energy bound states in FeTe0.55Se0.45 exclude the possibility of Yu-Shiba-Rusinov states and are consistent with both Majorana bound states and trivial vortex bound states. Our results open an avenue for investigating the exotic states in vortex cores and for future Majorana devices, although further theoretical investigations involving charge dynamics and superconducting tips are necessary. When a type-II superconductor is exposed to magnetic fields, vortices emerge as line defects where the order parameter vanishes, quantized magnetic flux penetrates the superconductor, and localized low-energy bound states form in the vortex cores. The nature of the vortex bound state is mysterious in many unconventional superconductors. Recently, much focus is on iron-based superconductors, where topologically nontrivial superconductivity and elusive Majorana bound states have been predicted to exist in vortex cores Zero-bias conductance peaks in full-flux-quantum vortex cores are also the main evidence for Majorana bound states in the iron-based superconductor FeTe0.55Se0.45 New local probes are thus desired to investigate the electronic properties of the vortex bound states in iron-based superconductors. It has been widely investigated theoretically how shot noise could act as a tell-tale probe to distinguish between trivial and Majorana bound states in vortex matter and nanowires These theoretical studies form the motivation for the shot noise measurements on individual vortex cores that we present here. We measure both the vortex bound states in a conventional superconductor NbSe2 and the putative Majorana bound states in vortices of FeTe0.55Se0.45 at temperature T = 2.3 K. While we argue that our results do not represent a smoking gun experiment for the existence of Majorana bound states, they allow us to exclude YSR states as the origin of the zero-bias conductance peak, and they give an experimental insight into these bound states. Shot noise is, at its core, a consequence of the discreteness of charge. Because of this, tunneling is a Poissonian process, and the noise spectral density S is proportional to the timeaveraged current I, S = 2q * |I|. ( Shot noise thus allows probing two quantities that are not visible in the time-averaged current: the effective charge q * of the charge carriers and possible correlations between them in electronic matters Despite a large number of theoretical studies on shot noise tunneling into vortex cores, there has been no experiment so far. The challenge is that one needs high enough sensitivity to measure the change in q * from noise, with nanometer resolution to locate individual vortices. This nanoscale resolution is not feasible in mesoscopic setups where noise measurements have been widely applied. Recently, we have developed scanning tunneling noise microscopy (STNM), which combines scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) and noise spectroscopy, allowing us to measure the effective tunneling charge with atomic resolution Here, we measure two different materials: the iron-based superconductor FeTe0.55Se0. where kB is the Boltzman constant; second, as a consequence of a convolution with the density of states of the superconducting tip, the tunneling signal into a zero-energy vortex bound state is effectively shifted from the Fermi level to ±Δt (illustrated in Supplementary Fig. Vortex bound states in NbSe2 and FeTe0.55Se0. 45 We first image the subgap electronic structure of the vortices in NbSe2. We introduce vortices by applying an external magnetic field B = 0.1 T perpendicular to the sample surface (the upper critical field of the tip Bc ~ 0.7 T, see Supplementary Fig. In contrast to the dispersing CdGM bound states in vortex cores of NbSe2, a Majorana bound state is topologically protected such that its energy is locked at the Fermi level is exactly what we observe, in agreement with the literature 2 ), identical to the states observed and interpreted as Majorana bound states in Refs. [13,15,16]. In principle, one expects a pair of peaks at ±Δt with an equal amplitude in the differential conductance spectrum when tunneling into a Majorana state Before discussing shot-noise, we comment on what conventional conductance spectroscopy can contribute to distinguishing Majorana, CdGM, or YSR states. CdGM states are expected to be at finite energy instead of zero energy, but the energy difference can be small, and additional effects might shift the energy Therefore, the zero-energy state we observe here is in agreement with the putative Majorana bound state previously reportedwith the caveat that it has recently been shown that a CdGM state can imitate a zero-energy state The key advance of this study is high-sensitivity, atomic-scale noise spectroscopy that allows to extract the effective charge q * transferred when tunneling into vortex bound states. In the tunneling regime where the transparency is small, we parametrize any changes in noise, including the so-called Fano factor, via the effective charge q * in Eq. (1) (see Methods for different definitions of the Fano factor). For example, in the simplest case of electron tunneling, the transferred charge of each tunneling event is a single electron charge (q * = 1e), as expected from Poissonian statistics. In contrast, when Andreev reflection takes place such that an incident electron is reflected as a hole, two electron charges (q * = 2e) are effectively transferred per event. Since our measurements are performed at a finite temperature T, the current noise in the tunnel junction with resistance RJ consists of shot noise and thermal current noise 4kBT/RJ, and takes the form of ( This equation, which reduces to Eq. ( We start by measuring current noise at B = 0.1 T at locations far away from the vortex cores. There, one expects the noise to correspond to an effective charge of q * = 1e at bias energies larger than the gap, |eVbias| > (Δt +Δs). At these energies, the tunneling of Bogoliubov quasiparticles dominates the noise. Around the gap energy ±(Δt +Δs), one then expects a step in noise from q * = 1e outside the gap, to q * = 2e inside. This is because, inside the gap, singleelectron processes are not allowed anymore, and only Andreev processes contribute to the noise. As shown in Fig. Interestingly, q * does not reach 2e inside the gap, but saturates at a value of 1.3e ~ 1.6e (Fig. Even a very small fraction of quasiparticles will decrease the noise substantially, because for a given tunneling transparency , the single-particle processes occur with probability , while the Andreev processes occur with probability  2 (see Supplementary Note 5 for an estimation of fractions). Future experiments at different magnetic fields, and mapping the exact spatial dependence of current noise around vortex cores are necessary to test this hypothesis relating to the effective charge away from the vortex core. In this study, we focus on the noise spectra in the centers of individual vortex cores. To investigate the tunneling process into vortex bound states, we then measure the current noise at the vortex cores, first for NbSe2. The experimental data in Fig. We proceed to our discussion of which states are compatible with our results from noise measurements for FeTe0.55Se0.45. We start with YSR states, which have been observed to cause the zero-bias peak and the saturating conductance, and are present in FeTe0.55Se0.45 One can tune the coupling by a local gate, such as a voltage-biased STM tip, and the energy levels of the YSR states shift correspondingly to the local field felt by the impurity To confirm this picture, we carry out tunneling conductance and noise measurements on the YSR states in FeTe0.55Se0.45 in the strong tunneling limit (see Supplementary Note 4). The YSR states appear as differential conductance peaks with a ring shape around an impurity site We then turn to the possibility of Majorana bound states as the origin of the zero-bias peak, as put forward by Refs. [13,15,16]. Theoretical calculations However, we emphasize that our observation of the identical noise behavior and effective charge for CdGM bound states and the putative Majorana bound states clearly implies consistency with CdGM states as well, at least from a shot-noise point of view. The possible accompanying CdGM states More More theoretical work, especially including a superconducting tip, might allow to gain more information from shot-noise studies. Such a model for the tunneling process from a superconducting tip into a Majorana bound state has already been developed There, Majorana-induced resonant Andreev reflection leads to a vanishing shot noise because of unity transmission, which distinguishes itself from q* =1e when only CdGM states exist in the vortex core. A further proposal in the low-bias limit While the Fano factor was originally defined as the ratio between the variance and the mean value of a quantity, specific definitions vary in dealing with electrical current and its shot noise. An often applied definition of the Fano factor F is the ratio between the shot noise power S (precisely the Fourier transform of the current-current correlation function) and the Poisson noise SP due to independent single electrons In some theory proposals where P is the shot noise power (time-averaged current-current correlation function). Another definition of the Fano factor is expressed as the ratio between the differential noise power (the derivative of the time-averaged current-current correlation function with respect to the bias voltage) and the differential conductance In the above definitions, however, the transmission of a single electron at a time is assumed. As a consequence, the correlation between them appears as sub-or super-Poissonian shot noise with F < 1 or F > 1, depending on the details of the transmission probabilities of the conducting channels. In this work, on the other hand, the charge transfer is the quantity of interest, and the STM junction is well in the single-channel, low-transmission regime (our highest tunnel conductance is 0.4 μS, yielding  < 5.2×10 -3 ). In this regime, we include the possible correlation between charge carriers in the effective charge, q * = S/2|I|, or, more precisely, following Eq. (2). The FeTe0.55Se0.45 single crystals with a transition temperature TC = 14.5 K were grown using the Bridgman method. The 2H-NbSe2 samples (TC = 7.2 K) are purchased from HQ Graphene. The samples with a thickness of ~ 0.5 mm are cleaved in an ultrahigh vacuum at ~ 30 K and immediately inserted into a customized STM (USM-1500, Unisoku Co., Ltd). All measurements are performed in a cryogenic vacuum at a base temperature of T = 2.3 K. We perform scanning tunneling spectroscopy using standard lock-in techniques without the feedback loop enabled. A bias voltage modulation at a frequency of 887 Hz with an amplitude of 100 μV (for maps around vortex) or 50 μV (for high-resolution point spectra) is applied. The resulting differential conductance (dI/dV) values are normalized by setup conductance Iset/Vset. Prior to all the measurements, a Pt-Ir tip is made superconducting by indenting it into a clean Pb(111) surface. Our superconducting tip exhibits a critical field of about 0.7 T, deducted from differential conductance measurements in different magnetic fields on an atomically flat Au(111) surface (see Supplementary Note 1 for details). We perform noise spectroscopy at a constant junction resistance RJ in a slow feedback loop (see Supplementary Note 6 for details) when varying the bias voltage Vbias (and hence tunneling current I = Vbias/RJ) using our custom-built cryogenic megahertz amplifier developed recently. Because the Josephson tunnel junction with a low RJ may couple to its environment The amplifier consists of an LC tank circuit and a high-electron-mobility transistor that converts the current fluctuations in the junction into voltage fluctuations across a 50 Ohm line, as described in detail elsewhere The measured total voltage noise is where G is the total gain calibrated by noise spectrum at a high bias (see Supplementary Fig. The first term is the junction noise from Eq. ( As the first step of the procedure, we measure the background noise by retracting the tip out of tunneling (I=0 so the first term vanishes), which gives 4kBTRres/|Zres| 2 + Samp, where Ztot = Zres because the junction is an open circuit. Then we measure noise in tunneling and subtract it by the background noise (for low RJ we also consider Ztot in the second term as Zres in parallel with RJ). Thus, the current noise data plotted in Fig. Finally, we extract the q * value at each bias by numerically solving Eq. ( A previous study We have verified in the strong tunneling limit (with a current of 800 pA) that the YSR state does not cause a spatial difference in shot noise, as shown by the noise map in Supplementary Fig. Note that there is no contradiction between Ref. [9] and our data for YSR states. For tunneling into the bare superconductor NbSe2, Ref. [9] measures 1e noise outside the gap but lacks of noise data inside the gap because of the low current (~20 pA), for which they could not detect the corresponding shot noise accurately. In principle, considering a normal tip used in this case, inside the gap q * increases gradually to 2e [10]. For tunneling into YSR states, Ref. [9] elucidates that Andreev reflection requires particle-hole symmetric resonances. The smaller of the asymmetric resonances leads to a deficiency of providing particle (or hole) for the Andreev (2e) process, so that tunneling into the excess hole (or particle) component in the larger resonance has to be mediated by an inelastic quasiparticle relaxation process. In our experiment this inelastic quasiparticle relaxation (1e) process is strongly suppressed because the YSR states in FeTe0.55Se0.45 are almost symmetric in amplitude and our noise measurements were carried out in the strong tunneling regime. In summary, both our data and Ref. [9] reach the conclusion that tunneling into YSR states, when inelastic quasiparticle relaxation can be neglected, gives 2e noise. generally, our work represents a step towards determining the exact nature of a zero-energy state, following theoretical work for Majorana bound states in vortex cores and nanowires.