The concept of creating all-mechanical soft microrobotic systems has great potential to address outstanding challenges in biomedical applications, and introduce more sustainable and multifunctional products. To this end, magnetic fields and light have been extensively studied as potential energy sources. On the other hand, coupling the response of materials to pressure waves has been overlooked despite the abundant use of acoustics in nature and engineering solutions. Here, we show that programmed commands can be contained on 3D nanoprinted polymer systems with the introduction of selectively excited air bubbles and rationally designed compliant mechanisms. A repertoire of micromechanical systems is engineered using experimentally validated computational models that consider the effects of primary and secondary pressure fields on entrapped air bubbles and the surrounding fluid. Coupling the dynamics of bubble oscillators reveals rich acoustofluidic interactions that can be programmed in space and time. We prescribe kinematics by harnessing the forces generated through these interactions to deform structural elements, which can be remotely reconfigured on-demand with the incorporation of mechanical switches. These basic micromechanical systems will serve as the building blocks for the development of a novel class of untethered soft microrobots powered and controlled by acoustic signals. Soft materials can be programmed to change their physical properties such as shape and stiffness on-the-fly by the externally applied light, heat, mechanical forces or magnetic fields Acoustofluidics has several unique properties that can reveal the full potential of programmable soft matter. Air bubbles are efficient transducers that generate forces through interactions with the external pressure waves, the surrounding fluid, and with each other Here, we present an integrated design, fabrication, and control methodology that transforms monolithically printed flexible structures into programmable soft robotic systems. The key innovation is the spatial patterning of polymer capsules that stably contain individual air bubbles along ultraflexible beams using direct laser writing. By tuning the geometry of the capsules and the architecture of the material, we precisely controlled the acoustofluidic interactions. We demonstrate the compatibility of our acousto-active systems with mechanical logic by constructing actuated bistable mechanisms. The basic actuator module consists of a 3D printed cylindrical capsule with a single circular orifice (Fig. A detailed description of the experimental methods is given in Supplementary Note 1. Within this capsule, the bubble is physically isolated from the surrounding fluid except at the side of the opening (Fig. In this configuration, acoustic streaming generated counter-rotating vortices and a jet localized in the center, which was captured using high-speed recordings of tracer particles around the actuator module (Fig. Large deformation and complex motion can be generated with slender structural elements including beams, plates, and shells In brief, we extended a previously published model We recorded the power spectrum of the ultrasound transducer using a hydrophone to determine the frequency bands at which the actuators could be effectively powered (Fig. Mechanisms printed parallel to the substrate are not ideal for the quantification of forces because the bubbles may interact with the substrate's surface We observed a linear relationship between the voltage applied to the transducer and the resultant acoustic pressure measured by a hydrophone (Fig. experimental platform (Fig. An actuator module with multiple DOF would drastically increase the dexterity and form factor of printed structures. We postulated that a capsule that contains multiple orifices of different sizes would serve this purpose. To test this idea, we printed an actuator module in the shape of an equilateral triangular prism with three orifices at the center of each face (Fig. We recorded the actuator motion while sweeping the frequency from 40 kHz to 160 kHz at a constant input voltage. Using a subpixel resolution image processing algorithm We performed a series of experiments to evaluate the control strategy. First, we programmed a calibrated device to repeatedly follow a rectangular trajectory, slightly offset from the origin where we had better control over the motion (Fig. Acoustically excited bubbles interact with each other through the surrounding fluid when they reside in close proximity. The total force acting on a bubble is the result of the exciting primary pressure field, and higher order fields emanating from neighboring bubbles that also act as acoustic sources The distances between bubbles are significantly smaller than the acoustic wavelength in all our prototypes. Therefore, we can assume that the acoustic radiation forces caused by the primary field do not affect the relative displacement of the actuators. The secondary forces that act on the coupled actuators are thrust, drag-induced acoustic streaming, and secondary acoustic radiation force (also known as secondary acoustic radiation force or secondary Bjerknes force). Identical bubbles are expected to generate the same acoustic streaming; thus, the generated thrust would push the bubbles away from each other. On the other hand, the magnitude of the acoustic radiation force, which primarily acts to pull the bubbles toward each other, depends on the distance between them where FR denotes the acoustic radiation force, FAS denotes thrust generated by streaming, and Fd is the drag force acting on a bubble due to the streaming generated by the adjacent bubble. To quantify the total force generated by interacting bubbles, we printed two adjacent cantilever beams with identical actuators that were faced toward each other (Table Figure The force balance equation, Eq.( where α and γ are functions of the excitation frequency and geometry, and d is the distance between the bubbles' vibrating surface. We fitted α = 174.5 nN V -2 μm -2 , and γ = 0.027 nN V -2 at 125 kHz to the empirical data shown in Figure Our results have shown that radiation forces between identical actuator modules do not change direction for a given spacing. Actuators with different orifice sizes displayed more complex interactions. We discovered that depending on the excitation frequency, actuators with the same initial distance attracted or repelled each other. An analogous phenomenon was observed between acoustically excited free-floating spherical bubbles with different radii We designed a flextensional mechanism that leverages this frequency-dependent behavior to manifest multiple distinct deformation patterns on the same system (Fig. So far, we focused on a paradigm where actuator modules were patterned on different structures. In this arrangement, rapid increase in radiation forces with decreasing distance limits the range of motion that the actuators can generate. To extend the interval at which the structure bends in a graded fashion, we constrained the actuators' motion. To this end, we connected two actuators with a truss so that they were not allowed to come very close to each other (Fig. The out-of-axis bending is a classic example for unimorph actuators where we control the angular displacement. By simply connecting a microbubble pair with an ultraflexible spring mechanism, we developed a linear microactuator (Fig. We calculated the stiffness of the spring as 0.7563 nN/μm by computing the derivative of the displacement with respect to the total force (Fig. Constrained elastic beams can exhibit complex mechanical responses depending on the geometry, degree of confinement, and boundary conditions. Previous work has shown that such mechanisms instantiate embodied logic and programmable functionality in soft machines For a fixed beam length and cross-sectional profile, as θ increases, the input pressure required to switch the mechanism state is expected to increase while the deformed position becomes more stable We harnessed frequency selective thrust generation to realize reversible actuation for the bistable mechanism (Fig. As a final demonstration, we programmed the motion of a continuously bending cantilever beam using an actuated bistable mechanism, which we refer to as the control module (Fig. We introduced a suite of mechanical microsystems with relatively basic design yet complex motion. Precise control over geometric parameters facilitated detailed analysis of forces and fluidstructure interactions. We made two important discoveries. First, we showed that a single bubble can provide multiple-degrees-of-freedom motion along prescribed trajectories with high fidelity through the application of frequency and amplitude modulated acoustic signals. The realization of this feature required printing of capsules with multiple orifices at different sizes and a real-time calibration process. Second, as a result of higher order interactions, forces between oscillating bubbles emerge, and their direction can be programmed by tuning the excitation frequency. We developed a control scheme that drives a mechanical system to follow prescribed trajectories by applying a complex signal. The position errors between the programmed and executed motion are not negligible, which may stem from multiple sources. We assumed that the 3D printed cantilever beam has an isotropic stiffness. However, the material stiffness depends on the degree of polymerization, which might show spatial variations along the vertical axis. Moreover, we assumed small deflections although the beam deflected beyond the limit defined by the theoretical linear model. Finally, at relatively large deflections, the beam started to tilt out of plane and rotate around its axis while we only considered in-plane translation. We focused our attention on geometric arrangements of entrapped bubbles, as a means to program the soft robotic system. Leveraging frequency selective bubble excitation, we could operate systems in different modes at different frequencies. Considering the interactions among neighboring actuators would advance the programming framework. An actuator may be attracted to other actuators from multiple directions, realizing a sophisticated motion that highly depends on the excitation frequency and time-varying spacing among bubbles. We have also incorporated acoustically actuated bistable mechanisms as on-board control units to introduce the capability to operate in different modes under the same input signal. This last functionality represents a first step towards reconfigurable mechanical systems that operate analogous to mechatronic systems. To this end, reversible switching of several bistable structures will be instrumental. Moving forward, bistable beams could be replaced by 3D architected materials that display sensing, pattern analysis, and multi-stability Table Pressure and vibration measurements. The pressure around the samples was measured using a needle hydrophone (RP. ACOUSTIC, PVDF hydrophone type l). The output signal was amplified (RP. ACOUSTIC, HVA-10m-60-F) before it was sampled (pico Technology, PicoScope 5243D). The vibration measurements were performed using a laser Doppler vibrometer (Polytec CLV-2534). The laser beam was steered using two 45°-angled mirrors into the objective of an inverted microscope (Nikon, Ti-2) using custom-built adapters. A 40X water immersion objective (CFI Apo NIR, Nikon) was used to reduce the mismatch in the refractive indices, thus providing high enough optical signal for the proper operation of the laser vibrometer. To confirm that the recorded signals are indeed coming from the air-water interface, we performed measurements on several randomly chosen locations from the printed structure and the glass slide by placing reflective stickers. A high-speed camera (VEO640L, Phantom) connected to an inverted microscope (Ti2, Nikon) with a 20x objective (Nikon) was utilized for image and video acquisition. Videos and imaged were postprocessed with Fiji (National Institute of Health). Data were plotted using a commercially available graphing and data analysis software (Origin 2021, OriginLab Corporation). Flow profile of the streaming was visualized using a 1 μm fluorescent beads (Cat # 17154-10, Polysciences). A scanning electron microscope (Merlin, Zeiss) was utilized to capture high resolution images. Fluorescence images were acquired using an inverted laser scanning confocal microscope (Zeiss LSM 700) equipped with a 20X objective. Finite element modelling. The commercial FEM software COMSOL Multiphysics 5.6 was used to simulate the deformation of structures at the equilibrium state. Large deformations of solid bodies were simulated using the structural mechanics module, where various constraints and loads were applied. Results are presented as mean ± standard deviation. Statistical analysis was performed using Origin 2021 (OriginLab Corporation). Data were collected using at least three different trials per device and the number of devices tested (n) is at least 6 for each condition. The total deflection at the end of the rigid beam is (2.6) Since Δ = P/k. (2.7) 