Early detection and identification of pathogenic bacteria such as Escherichia coli (E. coli) is an essential task for public health. The conventional culture-based methods for bacterial colony detection usually take ≥24 hours to get the final read-out. Here, we demonstrate a bacterial colony-forming-unit (CFU) detection system exploiting a thin-filmtransistor (TFT)-based image sensor array that saves ~12 hours compared to the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)-approved methods. To demonstrate the efficacy of this CFU detection system, a lensfree imaging modality was built using the TFT image sensor with a sample field-of-view of ~10 cm 2 . Time-lapse images of bacterial colonies cultured on chromogenic agar plates were automatically collected at 5-minute intervals. Two deep neural networks were used to detect and count the growing colonies and identify their species. When blindly tested with 265 colonies of E. coli and other coliform bacteria (i.e., Citrobacter and Klebsiella pneumoniae), our system reached an average CFU detection rate of 97.3% at 9 hours of incubation and an average recovery rate of 91.6% at ~12 hours. This TFTbased sensor can be applied to various microbiological detection methods. Due to the large scalability, ultra-large field-of-view, and low cost of the TFT-based image sensors, this platform can be integrated with each agar plate to be tested and disposed of after the automated CFU count. The imaging field-of-view of this platform can be costeffectively increased to >100 cm 2 to provide a massive throughput for CFU detection using, e.g., roll-to-roll manufacturing of TFTs as used in the flexible display industry. Bacterial infection has been a leading factor that causes millions of deaths each year in both developed and developing countries Recently, with the fast development of thin-film-transistors (TFT), the TFT technology has been widely used in the field of flexible display industry Here, we demonstrate the first use of a TFT-based image sensor to build a real-time CFU detection system to automatically count the bacterial colonies and rapidly identify their species using deep learning. Because of the large FOV of the TFT image sensor (~10 cm 2 ), there is no need for mechanical scanning of the agar plate, which enabled us to create a field-portable and cost-effective lensfree CFU detector as shown in Fig. Fig. We experimentally demonstrated the success of our framework by detecting and classifying the colonies E. coli and two other types of total coliform bacteria, i.e., Citrobacter and K. pneumoniae, on chromogenic agar plates, which result in a gray-green color for E. coli colonies and a pinkish color for other coliform bacteria, also inhibiting the growth of different bacterial colonies when other types of bacteria exist in the sample. Each sample was prepared following the EPA-1103.1 method 5 (see the Methods section) using a Petri dish. After the sample was prepared, it was directly placed on top of the TFT image sensor as part of the lensfree imaging system, and the entire imaging modality (except the laptop in Fig. The presented TFT imaging system periodically captures the images of the agar plate under test based on lensfree inline holography; however, due to its large pixel size (375 μm) and relatively small sample to sensor distance (~5 mm, which is equal to the thickness of the agar), a free space backpropagation Based on the imaging performance of our TFT-based CFU detection system summarized in Fig. To quantify the performance of our bacterial colony classification neural network, the recovery rate was defined as the ratio of the number of correctly classified colonies to the total number of colonies counted by an expert after 24hour incubation. Figure Note that our presented results in Fig. Another prominent advantage of the TFT-imager based detection system is that it can be adapted to image a wide range of biological samples using cost-effective and field-portable interfaces. Should the users have any contamination concerns, the TFT image sensor shown in Fig. In summary, we believe that the presented CFU detection system using TFT image sensor arrays provides a highthroughput, cost-effective, and easy-to-use solution to perform early detection and classification of bacterial colonies, opening up unique opportunities for microbiology instrumentation in the laboratory and field settings. All the bacterial sample preparations were performed at our Biosafety Level 2 laboratory in accordance with the environmental, health, and safety rules of the University of California, Los Angeles. We used E. coli (Migula) Castellani and Chalmers (ATCC® 25922TM), Citrobacter (ATCC® 43864TM), and K. pneumoniae subsp. pneumoniae (Schroeter) Trevisan (ATCC®13883TM) as our culture microorganisms. CHROMagarTM ECC (product no. EF322, DRG International, Inc., Springfield, NJ, USA) chromogenic substrate mixture was used as the solid growth medium to detect E. coli and other total coliform colonies. For each time-lapse imaging experiment, a bacterial suspension in a phosphate-buffered solution (PBS) (product no. 20-012-027, Fisher Scientific, Hampton, NH, USA) was prepared from a solid agar plate incubated for 24 hours. The concentration of the suspension was measured using a spectrophotometer (model no. ND-ONE-W, Thermo Fisher). Then, a serial dilution was performed in PBS to finally reach a concentration of ~10 3 CFUs / mL. Around 100 μL diluted suspension with ~100 CFUs was spread on a CHROMagarTM ECC plate using an L-shaped spreader (product no. 14-665-230, Fisher Scientific, Hampton, NH, USA). Next, the plate was covered with its lid, inverted, and placed on the TFT image sensor, which was placed with the whole imaging system into an incubator (product no. 151030513, ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) kept at 37 ± 0.2 °C. Additionally, CHROMagarTM ECC plates were prepared ahead of time using the following method. CHROMagarTM ECC (6.56 g) was mixed with 200 mL of reagent grade water (product no. 23-249-581, Fisher Scientific, Hampton, NH, USA). The mixture was then heated to 100 °C on a hot plate while being stirred regularly using a magnetic stirrer bar. After cooling the mixture to ~50 °C, 10 mL of the mixture was dispensed into each Petri dish (60 mm × 15 mm) (product no. FB0875713A, Fisher Scientific, Hampton, NH, USA). When the agar plates solidified, they were sealed using parafilm (product no. 13-374-16, Fisher Scientific, Hampton, NH, USA), and covered with aluminum foil to keep them in the dark before use. These plates were stored at 4 °C and were used within two weeks after preparation. Our field-portable CFU imager comprises an illumination module and a TFT-based image sensor. The light from a tri-color LED directly illuminates the samples and forms in-line holograms on the TFT image sensor (JDI, Japan Display Inc., Japan). The TFT module includes a controlling printed circuit board (PCB) that provides the illumination and image capture control signal and an image sensor (with 80×84 pixels, pixel size = 375 μm). For the illumination module, a tri-color LED (EDGELEC) was controlled by a microcontroller (Arduino Micro, Arduino LLC) through a constant current LED driver (TLC5916, Texas Instrument, TX, USA) to sequentially provide the red (620 nm), green (520 nm), and blue (420 nm) illumination beams. The microcontroller, the LED driver, and the tri-color LED were all integrated on a single PCB, which was powered by a 5V-1A voltage adapter and communicated with the TFT PCB through the LED power signal. The illumination light passes through the transparent solid agar and forms the lensfree images of the growing bacterial colonies on the TFT image sensor. The distance between the LED and the sample (i.e., the z 1 distance shown in Fig. Time-lapse imaging experiments were conducted to collect the data for both the training and testing phases. Our CFU imaging modality captured the time-lapse images of the agar plate under test every 5 min under red, green, and blue illuminations. A controlling program with a graphical user interface (GUI) was developed to perform the illumination switching and image capture automatically. The raw TFT images were saved in 12-bit format. After the experiments were completed, the samples were disposed of as solid biohazardous waste. In total, we collected the time-lapse TFT images of 889 E. coli colonies from 17 independent experiments to initially train our CFU detection neural network model. In addition to this, 442 bacterial colonies (128 E. coli, 126 Citrobacter, and 188 K. pneumoniae) were populated from 17 new agar plates and used to train (1) the final CFU detection neural network (through transfer learning from the initial detection model) and (2) the CFU classification neural network. A third independent dataset of 265 colonies from 13 new experiments was used to test the trained neural network models blindly. The entire candidate selection workflow consists of image pre-processing, differential analysis, colony mask segmentation, and candidate position localization, following the steps listed in Fig. To further improve the sensitivity of our system, differential images I N_diff averaged on three color channels were calculated as follows: By this operation, the signals of static artifacts were suppressed, and the spatio-temporal signals of the growing colonies were enhanced as ring-shaped patterns. Next, a pixel-wise minimum intensity projection was performed, as shown in Fig. Despite this pre-processing of the acquired TFT images, there are still some time-varying non-colony objects that can be selected as false colony candidates (such as bubbles, dust, or other features created by the uncontrolled motion of the agar surface). Therefore, a deep neural network was trained to further screen each colony candidate to eliminate false positives, the details of which will be discussed in the next subsection. The time-lapse video of each colony candidate region across 8 frames of I N_denoised, C was cropped as shown in Fig. The network model was optimized using the Adam optimizer with a momentum coefficient of (0.9, 0.999). The learning rate started as 1×10 -4 and a scheduler was used to decrease the learning rate with a coefficient of 0.8 at every 10 epochs. The batch size was set to 8. The loss function was selected as: where p is the network output, which is the probability of each class before the SoftMax layer, g is the ground-truth label (which is equal to 0 or 1 for binary classification), K is the total number of training samples in one batch, w is the weight assigned to each class, defined as w = 1 -d where d is the percentage of the samples in one class. The training process was performed using a GPU (GTX1080Ti) which took ~5 hours to converge. With a decision threshold of 0.5, the CFU detection neural network converged with 92.6% sensitivity and 95.8% specificity. In the testing phase, the decision threshold was set to be 0.99, which achieved 100% specificity. To classify the species of the detected bacterial colonies, a second DNN-based classifier was built. The CFU classification neural network was trained on the same multi-wavelength dataset populated with 442 colonies (128 E. coli colonies, 126 Citrobacter colonies, and 188 K. pneumonia colonies). The input of the classification DNN was organized into a four-dimensional array (3×8×160×160, i.e., color channels×number of frames×x×y), but with a different normalization method. Different from the background subtraction normalization adopted for the CFU detection neural network, for the classification DNN, the network input was re-normalized by dividing the background intensities obtained at the first time point T 0 . This division-based normalization was performed on three color channels so that the background would be normalized to ~1 in the three channels, revealing a white color in the background. Through this operation, the color variations across different experiments were minimized, improving the generalization capability of the classification DNN. The network structure of the classification DNN was the same as the CFU detection network but with some differences in the hyper-parameter selection (see Fig. 