The structural and magneto-transport properties of type-II Dirac semimetal candidate Ir2In8S have been investigated under high pressure. The ambient tetragonal structure (P 42/mnm) is found to be stable up to ∼7 GPa, above which the system takes an orthorhombic P nnm structure, possibly destroying the Dirac cones due to the loss of the four-fold screw symmetry. In the tetragonal structure, a gradual suppression of the transverse magneto-resistance and a rapid change in the magnetic field dependence above 50K suggest possible T -dependent Fermi surface modification. In the high pressure phase, the metallic character increases marginally (as evident from the increased RRR value) accompanied with suppressed magneto-resistance, without emergence of superconductivity up to 20 GPa and down to 1.4K. Most surprisingly, upon release of pressure to 0.2 GPa, a sharp resistance drop below ∼4K is observed, field varying measurements confirm this as the onset of superconductivity. The observed changes of the carrier density and mobility in the pressurereleased tetragonal phase indicate electronic structural modification resulting from the irreversible polyhedral distortion. A simultaneous increase in the residual resistivity and carrier density upon decompression indicates that an enhanced impurity scattering play a key role in the emergence of superconductivity in the tetragonal Ir2In8S, making it an ideal platform to study topological superconductivity. Three dimensional Dirac semimetals (DSM) are new states of topological quantum matter, characterized by symmetry-protected linear band crossing at the 4-fold degenerate Dirac point near the Fermi level. Subchalcogenide compounds with diverse structural motifs have recently been found to be promising topological semimetal candidates. We report here the effect of pressure on the structural and magneto-transport properties of subsulfide Ir 2 In 8 S. The ambient tetragonal structure (P 4 2 /mnm) is stable up to ∼7 GPa, above which the system takes an orthorhombic P nnm structure. A loss of the four-fold screw symmetry in the high P structure possibly destroys the Dirac cones making it a trivial semimetal. In the tetragonal structure, a drastically suppressed MR at high T and the change in its field dependence suggests significant Fermi surface (FS) modification with increasing temperature. The characteristic temperature T * , below which local polyhedral distortion ceases, decreases upon increasing P . In the high P orthorhombic phase, the metallicity increases marginally and the magneto-resistance gets suppressed. No superconductivity has been observed down to 1.4K up to ∼20 GPa. Surprisingly, upon decompression to 0.2 GPa a sharp resistance drop is noticed below ∼4K, indicating superconductivity onset in the pressure-released sample. The magneto-transport properties show significant change of the carrier density and mobility, suggesting electronic structural modification due to subtle polyhedral rearrangement upon P -cycling. An enhanced impurity scattering may have an important role in the emergence of SC in the ambient tetragonal structure (that supports type-II Dirac semimetal state), making tetragonal Ir 2 In 8 S an ideal platform to study topological superconductivity at ambient pressure. High quality single crystal Ir 2 In 8 S has been synthesized using indium metal flux method Powdered diffraction patterns at various high pressures are shown in Figure dx where ρ 0 is the residual resistivity and Θ D is the Debye temperature. The R(T ) data for pressures up to 5 GPa can be fit well with k=5, indicating phonon dominated scattering mechanism. At 0.2 GPa, Θ D =214K , in reasonable agreement with the reported value. In Figure First, we show the temperature dependence of resistivity in Ir 2 In 8 S at a low pressure (0.5 GPa) in different magnetic fields applied perpendicular to the current plane (see Figure Figure where n e (n h ) and μ e (μ h ) are electron (hole) density and mobility respectively. Figure Magneto-resistance (MR) and Hall measurements have been performed up to 7T field and at pressures up to 7.5 GPa. Figures The observed broad SC onset in P -released sample after repeated P -cycling further verifies that SC occurs in the tetragonal Ir 2 In 8 S and rules out the possibility of sample decomposition. ] with t=T /T c , estimates an upper critical field H c2 (0) ∼0.75 T, which is an order smaller than the Pauli limit of 1.84T c ∼7.5T. The estimated GL coherence length (ξ GL ∼10nm) is much less than the transport mean free path (l m ∼100 nm), suggesting the phonon mediated SC in the clean limit. In case of orbital-limited behavior, predicted by Werthamer-Helfand-Hohenberg (WHH) theory for the swave superconductor, We now focus on the results of magneto-resistance and Hall measurements at various high pressures. Figure The field variations of the Hall resistivity at various pressures are shown in Figure In the two-band model the magneto-resistance is represented by the equation We have calculated the MR at 2.5K using the values of carrier density and mobility obtained from the Hall conductivity fit and have compared with the measured values (see upper inset of Figure The structural and magneto-transport properties of the type-II Dirac semimetal candidate Ir 2 In 8 S have been investigated under high pressure. The ambient tetragonal structure with four fold screw symmetry that protects Dirac points is found to be stable up to ∼7 GPa. In the low pressure phase, a significant change in magnetotransport behavior with increasing T suggests systematic electronic structural modification. Surprisingly, upon release of pressure a sharp resistance drop below ∼4K is observed, field dependent studies on which verifies it as the onset of superconductivity. High pressure magnetotransport measurements show irreversible changes of the carrier density and mobility in the pressure-released tetragonal phase, suggesting an irreversible electronic structural modification. The enhanced impurity scattering may have an important role in the emergence of superconductivity in the ambient tetragonal structure (that hosts type-II Dirac semimetal state), making it an ideal platform to study topological superconductivity and Majorana physics. Present results will invite investigations to explore possible emergence of SC in other topological semimetals upon P -cycling by enhancing impurity scattering in an irreversible manner, retaining the structural symmetry and so the topological band structure.