Kagome metals AV3Sb5 (A = K, Rb, and Cs) exhibit a characteristic superconducting ground state coexisting with charge-density wave (CDW), whereas the mechanisms of the superconductivity and CDW have yet to be clarified. Here we report a systematic ARPES study of Cs(V 1-x Nbx)3Sb5 as a function of Nb content x, where isovalent Nb substitution causes an enhancement of superconducting transition temperature (Tc) and the reduction of CDW temperature (TCDW). We found that the Nb substitution shifts the Sb-derived electron band at the Γ point downward and simultaneously moves the V-derived band around the M point upward to lift up the saddle point (SP) away from the Fermi level, leading to the reduction of CDW-gap magnitude and TCDW. This indicates a primary role of the SP density of states to stabilize CDW. The present result also suggests that the enhancement of superconductivity by Nb substitution is caused by the cooperation between the expansion of the Sb-derived electron pocket and the recovery of the V-derived density of states at the Fermi level. The kagome lattice offers a fertile ground to explore exotic quantum phenomena originating from electron correlation and non-trivial band topology. Band structure of a simple kagome lattice is composed of a flat band over the entire momentum (k) region in the hexagonal Brillouin zone (BZ), a Dirac cone at the BZ corner, and a saddle point (SP) at the zone boundary. Owing to such a unique band structure, the kagome lattice shows various interesting physical properties depending on the position of the Fermi level (E F ). When E F is located at around the flat band, ferromagnetism Recently, a family of kagome metals AV 3 Sb 5 (AVS; A = K, Rb, Cs) with a V kagome network [Fig. A promising strategy to study the interplay among superconductivity, CDW, and electronic states is to modulate the band structure by varying key physical parameters that characterize the electronic phase diagram, such as pressure and carrier concentration In this paper, we report ARPES study of Nbsubstituted CVS, Cs(V 1-x Nb x ) 3 Sb 5 (CVNS; x = 0, 0.03, and 0.07), in which substitution of V ions with isovalent Nb ions leads to the T c enhancement and simultaneously the T CDW reduction [Fig. First, we present the electronic structure at the highest Nb concentration (x = 0.07) (see Supplemental Material for details on the experimental conditions [62]). Figure Figures To clarify the influence of Nb substitution on the CDW gap, we have performed high-resolution ARPES measurements below T CDW (= 58 K The present result has an important implication to the mechanism of CDW. We found in Fig. Taking into account the essential role of SP to the CDW, the mechanism of intriguing T c enhancement in CVNS is understood as following. Since the CDW is observed even in the superconducting state, the superconductivity would occur in the metallic k region where the CDW gap is absent In conclusion, we reported an ARPES study of Cs(V 1-x Nb x ) 3 Sb 5 as a function of x. We uncovered an intriguing change in the band structure upon Nb substitution characterized by the downward shift of the Sbderived electron band in contrast to the upward shift of the V-derived SP band. We also found that T CDW becomes higher when the SP band is located at closer to E F , pointing to a close connection between the SP and