The recent development of modular origami structures has ushered in a new era for active metamaterials with multiple degrees of freedom (multi-DOF). Notably, no systematic inverse design approach for volumetric modular origami structures has been reported. Moreover, very few topologies of modular origami have been studied for the design of active metamaterials with multi-DOF. Herein, we develop an inverse design method and reconfigurable algorithm for constructing 3D active architected structures -we synthesize modular origami structures that can be volumetrically mapped to a target 3D shape. We can control the reconfigurability by reconstructing the topology of the architected structures. Our inverse design based on volumetric mapping with mobility control by topology reconstruction can be used to construct architected metamaterials with any 3D complex shape that are also transformable with multi-DOF. Our work opens a new path toward 3D reconfigurable structures based on volumetric inverse design. This work is significant for the design of 3D active metamaterials and 3D morphing devices for automotive, aerospace, and biomedical engineering applications. With the advancement of conventional manufacturing in both additive Many groups have employed origami and kirigami techniques, the ancient folding and cutting arts All these methods require the construction of a building block (unit cell) with crease patterns and spatial periodicity (tessellation). This bottom-up design approach is convenient for controlling the kinematic and kinetic properties of the overall 3D architected structures with only a unit-cell design. However, this bottom-up design approach has a critical limitation when constructing practical engineering and artistic structures, whose shapes are mostly 3D curvilinear (e.g., automotive and aerospace structures with various curvatures), which require that the size and shape of the building blocks no longer be homogeneous in the design domain. Notably, most rectangular or cubic engineering structures have curved edges for minimum stress concentration and safety. Because of the break in spatial periodicity in curvilinear geometries, the kinematic and kinetic properties of the unit cell tend to differ from the properties of the tessellated structure, limiting the structural implementation of the architected origami materials. Very few studies have explored a top-down approach to the design of 3D architected origami structures Our inverse design can be used for various 3D active morphing structures in automotive, aerospace, and biomedical engineering applications and 3D active metamaterials to tune both the dynamic properties (acoustic and elastic wave) and static properties (directional stiffness). Figure with the scaling ratios S a ⌈o i -B p ⌉ (i = 1,2). o i is the centroid of the deformed i-th polyhedrons in the transformed template. A p and B p belong to the edge of the p-th face shared by two adjacent polyhedrons in the transformed template. The scaling constraint in Equation (1) forces the direction of connection on the p-th face to be parallel after shrinking; i.e., a 1,p -a 2,p = b 1,p -b 2,p , which is the critical condition for building a connection with adjacent polyhedron units. Our work is different from previous work We can also obtain the length of the connection L p between the adjacent polyhedron units after shrinking: Next, we connect the shrunken polyhedrons by extruding prismatic tubes on each shared face inside the transformed template, as shown in Figure The connected tubes serve as structural components, whereas the shrunken polyhedrons function as porous holes. The inverse-design method of the spatial architected materials can also be applied to planar cases, as illustrated in Figure Although our inverse-design method generates arbitrary 3D curvilinear structures through volumetric mapping, it hardly produces reconfigurability. From a macroscopic perspective, the fully connected origami modules (i.e., the structural unit) produce spatial loops and constrain inter-and intra-modular motions, delivering immobility to motion structures To obtain 3D curvilinear structures with tunable motion, we developed a topology reconstruction method using a simple numerical algorithm. Adapting graph theory, we re-design the spatial loops of 3D curvilinear structures where neighboring modules are tightly connected. A graph consists of vertices and edges representing polyhedron units and tubular connections, respectively, among adjacent units. We selectively remove loops (cycles) from the graph at the connection of modules to provide mobility. We formulate the construction of the graph using a constrained optimization problem, solving it using a genetic algorithm tool in MATLAB; the objective of the algorithm is to identify graphs with a smaller number of basic cycles (n bc ) while retaining the structural integrity. After screening the spatial loops, we reconstruct the microscopic topology of origami modules by selecting flexible ones from a library for each polyhedron unit of the transformed template. Note that the previous screening of spatial loops using graph theory does not cover a secondary connection by the geometry of modules. Combining the spatial loops with the selection of modules, we can generate 3D curvilinear structures with tunable motion (see details in Section 1.3, "The algorithm of enhancing reconfigurability" in the Supplementary Information.) Figure Figures By calculating the reduced row echelon form of J (= [ J v 0 J h -1 ] ), we can determine the free variables in terms of dφ , which can produce the motion of the structures. Section 1.4 "Kinematics" of the Supplementary Information provides further details. To investigate the tunable range of mobility of 3D prismatic architected materials, we applied our algorithm to transformed templates with 28 uniform space-filling tessellations 3D curvilinear structures are ubiquitous in automotive, aerospace, and ocean engineering structures. To date, the design of architected materials has relied on the bottom-up design approach, using planar and orthogonal periodic tessellation of modules The inverse design of 2D origami structures can generate a curvilinear surface with local control of the variable curvature The geometric and topology reconstruction can expand the design space of 3D modular origami, opening a new avenue for the design of 3D active metamaterials. The spatial scaling of space-filled polyhedrons can be applied for both orthogonal and curvilinear coordinates, meaning that our inverse design method is a universal approach that can be applied for both periodic and non-periodic structures. Our physical prototypes of 3D curvilinear structures fabricated by additive manufacturing validate the tunable motion, demonstrating untethered actuation by embedded hard magnets and moving external magnetic fields (see Supplementary Video In summary, we introduce a top-down design approach of modular origami structures to produce 3D curvilinear structures with tunable motion. The volumetric-mapping-based inverse design can be used to construct stress-free 3D curvilinear structures. Topology reconstruction (primary connection) of spatial connection and selection of modules (secondary connection) in the library can yield tunable motion with multi-DOF. Our geometry and topology reconstruction method of 3D curvilinear motion structures can be directly applied for i) 3D active metamaterials to achieve tunable acoustic and static properties on the nano-, micro-, and mesoscale and ii) 3D morphing devices with curvilinear shapes in automotive, aerospace, and biomedical engineering applications. Our top-down approach can expand the design space of modular origami to 3D non-periodic structures and 3D curvilinear geometries -spheres, cones, twisted cylinders, toruses, overcoming the limitation of planar and spatial tessellations for periodic structural design. Unlike 2D reconfigurable curvilinear origami structures, our 3D motion structures can be reconfigured into other shapes with multi-DOF and are frustration-free. This work will greatly advance the design of 3D architected materials with reconfigurability, shaking up traditional periodic tessellationbased 3D metamaterial design. the initial graph. Then, we set the binary design parameter x 1 , x N cc -1 = 0 (S4) The constraints shown in S2 to S6 are the structural requirements of the graph: 1. The constraint in S2 ensures the existence of the graph. 2. The inequalities S3 constrain the amount of connection on each node, where V i is the connectivity, i.e., the number of edges connected to the i-th node in the graph, and C i is the connectivity of the i-th node in the initial graph; we set the lower bound of V i to 2 to ensure that the i-th node is stringed by a cycle. The constraints in S3 only apply to the nodes we want to preserve in the reconstructed graph. In other words, we do not need to preserve all the nodes from the initial graph in the reconstructed graph. For the sake of completeness of the target shape, the nodes associated with the polyhedrons on the boundary of the transformed template are prior to preserve. 3. The constraint in Eq. S4 avoids identifying a disconnected graph. N cc is the number of connected graph components in the reconstructed graph, which can be calculated using the built-in function conncomp in MATLAB. 4. The constraint in Eq. S5 avoids the existence of biconnected components of a graph, where N bic is the number of biconnected components, which can be calculated using the built-in function biconncomp in MATLAB. 5. The constraint in Eq. S6 ensures that there are no triangular cycles consisting of only three nodes in the graph, as these triangular connections reduce the mobility. As a simple example of reconstructing a graph, Supplementary Fig. The next step after reconstructing the graph is to build a library consisting of mobile origami modules for every node of the graph. In each library, the desired modules are mobile (i.e., n DOF > 0), satisfying the connectivity condition of the corresponding node, and have no solely connected prismatic tubes to avoid local motion. We find these modules by collecting possible partial extrusion configurations of the unit polyhedron. For example, Supplementary Fig. We formulate the final procedure of assembling modules as another constrained optimization problem and solve it using the genetic algorithm tool ga in MATLAB. As indicated in Supplementary Fig. To identify the DOFs of reconfigurable architected materials comprising rigid plates and hinges, we calculate the number of free variables associated with the linearized constraint matrix We obtain the transformed configurations of such reconfigurable architected materials using a numerical iterative method that applies a projection matrix to reduce numerical errors satisfying the kinematics constraints. Between the input and output, there is where [I -J + J] is the projection matrix, J + is the pseudo-inverse of J, and I is a unit matrix. The term -J + r in Eq. S9 is for reducing the numerical error in each iteration with a residual vector r = To avoid overlapping of the faces during the transformation, we limit the range of dihedral angles of every hinge to 0 ≤ φ ≤ π, where φ = π -tan - 