The family of AV3Sb5 (A = K, Rb, Cs) kagome metals exhibit charge density wave (CDW) order, proposed to be chiral, followed by a lower temperature superconducting state. Recent studies have proposed the importance of band structure saddle points proximal to the Fermi energy in governing these two transitions. Here we show the effects of hole-doping achieved via chemical substitution of Sn for Sb on the CDW and superconducting states in both KV3Sb5 and RbV3Sb5, and generate a phase diagram. Hole-doping lifts the Γ pocket and van Hove singularities (vHs) toward EF causing the superconducting TC in both systems to increase to about 4.5 K, while rapidly suppressing the CDW state. The AV 3 Sb 5 (A: K, Rb, Cs) class of kagome superconductors The electron pocket comprising Sb p z orbitals at Γ and saddle points arising from V d-orbitals at M -points are regarded as playing important roles within the SC and CDW states. Consequently, resolving their behaviors when subject to external perturbations such as pressure and chemical doping is important to understand. Recently, the effect of hole doping in CsV 3 Sb 5 with Sn substituting Sb was reported, and a double superconducting dome was observed under light hole-substitution In contrast to the above, pressure studies of KV 3 Sb 5 and RbV 3 Sb 5 have reported only a single superconduct-ing dome coinciding with the suppression of CDW order Powder samples of KV 3 Sb 5-x Sn x and RbV 3 Sb 5-x Sn x for 0 ≤ x ≤ 1 were synthesized as described previously AV 3 Sb 5-x Sn x all adopt the parent hexagonal P 6/mmm structure at room temperature, with the V atoms making up an ideal kagome network. 121 Sb nuclear quadrupole resonance (NQR) studies on CsV 3 Sb 5-x Sn x have shown that the Sn atoms preferentially occupy the Sb1 sublattice site in the kagome plane Powder diffraction data were fitted using the Pawley method to study changes in unit cell as a function of Sn content. Similar to the changes observed in CsV 3 Sb 5-x Sn x , a increases as c decreases with increasing Sn content in both A = K, Rb as seen in Fig. Single crystal KV 3 Sb 5 has a superconducting T C of 0.93 K The CDW T * was determined by looking at the inflection point of χ -1 vs. T . Polycrystalline KV 3 Sb 5 as observed here has a T * of 86 K, which is in good agreement with reported CDW transition temperatures of ≈ 80 K in crystals Due to size considerations, the solubility limits of Sn in KV 3 Sb 5 and RbV 3 Sb 5 are much lower than in CsV 3 Sb 5 . However in all of these systems, the changes in electronic structure for the compositions of interest can be extrapolated by computing band structures of substitution one Sb atom for an Sn atom within the kagome plane and out of the kagome plane. Figure Given the close structural and electronic properties across the AV 3 Sb 5 series, the difference in the holedoping phase diagrams of KV 3 Sb 5 and RbV 3 Sb 5 relative to CsV 3 Sb 5 is anomalous. The changes in band structure for Sn substitution on the Sb1 sublattice in KV 3 Sb 4 Sn and RbV 3 Sb 4 Sn at first sight, appear to be very similar to those in CsV 3 Sb 4 Sn. However, subtle differences are nevertheless present and potentially lead to distinct electronic phase diagrams. A closer examination of the saddle points around M reveals that the irreducible representations of the two points are not the same for A = K, Rb and Cs One unifying theme amongst doping and pressure studies of AV 3 Sb 5 is the similarity of two SC domes present uniquely in CsV 3 Sb 5 . If one envisions either pressure/doping empirically as a perturbation that simply destabilizes CDW order, then the data suggest that CsV 3 Sb 5 hosts a CDW state distinct from the other two variants. In this scenario, there is a transition between CDW states within the phase diagram of CsV 3 Sb 5 that is naively absent in KV 3 Sb 5 and RbV 3 Sb 5 . While the details of the intermediate states differ between pressure and hole-doping studies, investigations of the parent CDW order in AV 3 Sb 5 have shown differences between A=Cs and A =Rb/K. The out-of-plane modulation for Cs is four times that of K The Sn-substitution or hole-doping phase diagrams of KV 3 Sb 5 and RbV 3 Sb 5 were explored. The solubility of Sn within the AV 3 Sb 5 lattice varies with A-site cation size with A=K having the smallest solubility and A=Cs having the largest. Prior to reaching the solubility limit, hole-doping achieved via substitution of Sn on Sb sites in KV 3 Sb 5 and RbV 3 Sb 5 reveals similar phase diagrams consisting of a single SC dome and rapidly suppressed CDW order. This contrasts the recently reported double dome observed in CsV 3 Sb 5 and suggests a distinct parent CDW state for the latter.