High drive current is a critical performance parameter in semiconductor devices for highspeed, low-power logic applications or high-efficiency, high-power, high-speed radio frequency (RF) analog applications. In this work, we demonstrate an In2O3 transistor grown by atomic layer deposition (ALD) at back-end-of-line (BEOL) compatible temperatures with a record high drain current exceeding 10 A/mm, the performance of which is 2-3 times better than all known transistors with semiconductor channels. A record high transconductance of 4 S/mm is also achieved among all transistors with a planar structure. It is found that a high carrier density and high electron velocity both contribute to this remarkably high on-state performance in ALD In2O3 transistors, which is made possible by the high-quality oxide/oxide interface, the metal-like charge-neutrality-level (CNL) alignment, and the high band velocities induced by the low densityof-state (DOS). Experimental Hall, I-V and split C-V measurements at room temperature confirm a high carrier density up to 6-7×10 13 /cm 2 and a high velocity of about 10 7 cm/s. Ultra-thin oxide semiconductors, with a CNL located deep inside the conduction band, represent a promising new direction for the search of alternative channel materials for high-performance semiconductor devices. Looking for a transistor with higher drain current (ID) at low voltages has been a key pursuit in the development of modern semiconductor devices. High drain current is essential for highspeed, low-power logic applications for microelectronics and high-efficiency, high-power, highspeed applications for radio frequency (RF) power electronics. The criteria for achieving a transistor with high ID is rather simple because ID is determined by the product of carrier density (n2D) and average velocity. Oxide semiconductor transistors are a mature technology in flat-panel display applications Therefore, considering the CNL alignment above EC and the U-shape distribution of interface traps, an ALD In2O3 transistor is expected to have low Dit in the on-state, leading to a high carrier density and a high electron velocity in scaled transistors. In this work, we report an ALD In2O3 transistor with scaled channel length (Lch) down to 7 nm achieving a high ID,max exceeding 10 A/mm, which is 2-3 times higher than the best known semiconducting materials such as Si, GaN, InGaAs, graphene, etc. A high transconductance (gm) of 4 S/mm is also achieved, which is higher than all known transistors with a planar structure. This remarkably high on-state performance is attributed to the high carrier density up to 6-7×10 Figure V is achieved, which is also higher than all known planar semiconductor devices. The ID-VGS, ID-VDS and gm-VGS characteristics of a device with the same gate stack and Lch of 100 nm are shown in Extended Data Fig. To understand the origin of the observed high current in ALD In2O3 transistors, the carrier density and velocity are characterized by Hall, I-V and split C-V measurements at room temperature. Figure Thus, with ALD In2O3 transistors containing an oxide/oxide interface, the capability of carrier density modulation by gate oxide is much higher than those with a conventional III-V oxide/semiconductor interface. The high carrier density is also further verified by split C-V measurements as shown in Extended Data Fig. To elucidate the nature of the high current in In2O3, density functional theory (DFT) calculations of the electronic properties were conducted (see Methods section for details). Figure Therefore, the two major contributors to the high ID,max in ALD In2O3 transistors are high carrier density and high velocity, with the former originating from the high-quality oxide/oxide interface and a metal-like CNL alignment and the latter arising from the low DOS and high-carrierinduced velocity enhancement. Moreover, the ALD In2O3 transistors are aided by low contact resistances and the wide bandgap of In2O3 for laterally scaled channel lengths. The above firstprinciples calculations are based on a single crystal structure. The crystal structure of the experimental devices is confirmed to be polycrystalline. As shown in the TEM cross-sectional image and X-Ray Diffraction (XRD) data in Extended Data Fig. Figure Device Fabrication. The device fabrication process started with solvent cleaning of the p+ Si substrate with thermally grown 90 nm SiO2. A bi-layer lift-off process was then adopted for the sharp lift-off of 30 nm Ni buried metal gate formed by e-beam evaporation, utilizing photoresist PMGI SF9 + AZ1518 stack, patterned by Heidelberg MLA150 Maskless Aligner. This step is critical to avoid sidewall metal coverage and to enable a high-quality ultra-scaled ALD gate dielectric and semiconducting channel. HfO2 of 3.0 nm as a gate dielectric was grown by ALD at 200°C using [(CH3)2N]4Hf (TDMAHf) and H2O as Hf and O precursors, respectively. Then, In2O3 thin films with various thicknesses were grown by ALD at 225°C using (CH3)3In (TMIn) and H2O as In and O precursors, respectively. N2 is used as the carrier gas at a flow rate of 40 sccm. The base pressure is 169 and 437 mTorr at a N2 flow rate of 0 sccm and 40 sccm, respectively. Concentrated hydrochloric acid was applied for the channel isolation. S/D ohmic contacts were formed by e-beam evaporation of 30 nm Ni in two steps to avoid the difficulty of the sub-10 nm lift-off process, as employed before. A two-step e-beam lithography process was performed by the formation of first the source electrode and then the drain electrode, utilizing diluted e-beam resist AR-P 6200 (2.5%), patterned by a JEOL JBX-8100FS E-Beam Writer. Then, inductively coupled plasma (ICP) dry etching using BCl3/Ar plasma was applied to accurately define the channel width. The devices were annealed in O2 at 275 °C for 1 min to further improve the performance. Material Characterization. The cross-sectional TEM specimens were fabricated by focused ion beam (FIB) using a FEI Helios G4 UX dual beam scanning electron microscope (SEM). Before FIB milling, a platinum (Pt) layer was deposited to protect the surface from ion damage. To remove FIB induced damages, the TEM samples were ion polished using a low current (27 pA) at a low voltage (2 keV) multiple times during the final steps. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) analyses and energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) element mapping were carried out on a Thermo-Fischer FEI Talos 200X TEM microscope operated at 200 kV equipped with a high angle annular dark field (HAADF) detector and SuperX EDS with four silicon drift detectors. All the EDX maps were captured under the drift correction mode. Device Characterization. The DC characterization is performed using a B1500A Semiconductor Device Analyzer. The pulse characterization is performed using a B1530A Waveform Generator/Fast Measurement Unit (WGFMU). The device is grounded at the source, while the drain and gate are connected to two channels of the WGFMU via Remote Sense/Switch Units (RSU). A waveform with a pulse delay time (PD) of 2 μs, a rise time (RT) of 60 ns, a pulse width (PW) of 90 ns and a fall time (FT) of 60 ns is adopted to maximize device reliability while minimizing pulse-induced AC response during measurements. Two channels carry the waveform simultaneously with a chronological difference less than 1 ns, confirmed with TDS5000 Digital Phosphor Oscilloscopes. Data is collected during an averaging time (AT) of 50 ns after a measurement delay (MD) of 2.1 μs to wait for the signal to stabilize. No bias is applied at each channel during the pulse interval to dissipate generated heat. During output characterization, the amplitude of the VDS pulse increases in 100 mV steps while the amplitude of the VGS pulse remains constant. During transfer characterization, the amplitude of the VDS pulse increases in 50 mV steps while the amplitude of the VGS pulse remains constant. The transfer data is spliced with the onstate data from the pulse characterization while the off-state data comes from the DC characterization, due to the limited signal sensing range of the B1530A WGFMU in the highcurrent mode (100 μA-10 mA) and the relatively low resolution of the RSUs. Pulse characterization is critical to alleviate severe self-heating-induced burning and minimize time-dependent dielectric breakdown of the ultra-thin gate insulator. The pulse data is in line with the DC data in the low power range. While DC characterization inevitably causes severe selfheating and resulting device failure, pulse characterization enables repeatable measurements. The details of pulsed I-V measurements and the impact of self-heating effects are shown in Extended Data Fig. Theoretical and computational details. The density functional theory (DFT) calculations were carried out using the Quantum Espresso (QE) code A kinetic energy cut-off of 140 Ry and a Monkhorst-Pack 