Optical spectroscopic sensors are powerful tools for analysing gas mixtures in industrial and scientific applications. Whilst highly sensitive spectrometers tend to have a large footprint, miniaturized optical devices usually lack sensitivity or wideband spectroscopic coverage. By employing a widely tunable, passively stable fiber Fabry-Perot cavity (FFPC), we demonstrate an absorption spectroscopic device that continuously samples over several tens of terahertz. Both broadband scans using cavity mode width spectroscopy to identify the spectral fingerprints of analytes and a fast, low-noise scan method for single absorption features to determine concentrations are exemplary demonstrated for the oxygen A-band. The novel scan method uses an injected modulation signal in a Pound-Drever-Hall feedback loop together with a lock-in measurement to reject noise at other frequencies. The FFPC-based approach provides a directly fiber coupled, extremely miniaturized, light-weight and robust platform for analyzing small analyte volumes that can straightforwardly be extended to sensing at different wavelength ranges, liquid analytes and other spectroscopic techniques with only little adjustments of the device platform. Optical absorption spectroscopy is a key tool for analysing the chemical composition of matter since the early days of optics High finesse fiber Fabry-Perot cavities (FFPCs) In this article, we demonstrate gas sensing and spectroscopy of diatomic oxygen with a high finesse FFPC. We use the oxygen A-Band (about 755 nm to 770 nm) to show the broadband performance of our devices that can resolve spectral fingerprints of molecules with a spectral resolution only limited by the employed laser source linewidth in a continuously sampled spectrum. Spectroscopy of oxygen absorption bands finds applications for example in the analysis of the structure and composition of earth's or even Mars' atmosphere The employed cavity design makes use of a recently introduced robust FFPC realization The accessibility of the open mode volume of the FFPC allows to freely introduce different gas mixtures. In the presented experiment, we place the FFPC device inside a gas mixing chamber, where the concentration of oxygen at room temperature and ambient pressure is controlled by the flux rates of oxygen and nitrogen into the mixing chamber volume (see Fig. The FFPC system is used together with a widely tunable (∼ 745 nm -782 nm) diode laser 2 (laser linewidth < 200 kHz within 1 ms) with an additional power stabilization and wavelength readout 3 as shown in Fig. A phase-modulating electro-optical modulator (EOM) is incorporated after the laser power stabilization to add sidebands spaced by 250 MHz. They are either used to increase the number of probed frequencies in a single cavity scan in the cavity mode width spectroscopy or for generating the error signal in the PDH-lock We monitor the reflection signal r from the FFPC, while the cavity resonance is scanned over the laser using the attached piezo (drive signal u). The reflection signal is split from the incident laser beam using a non polarizing beam splitter (90/10). A combination of a half and quarter wave plate is used to couple light to one polarization mode of the cavity. The observed signal features three reflection dips at the EOM sideband spacing (250 MHz) from which the cavity mode width is extracted (FWHM empty cavity mode width ν FWHM ≈ 24 MHz). 2 Lion Series ECDL from Sacher Lasertechnik 3 Wavelength Meter WS7-60 from HighFinesse We test our spectroscopic sensor using the wellknown oxygen A-band Cavity mode width spectroscopy i (T i + A i + C i ) of the FFPC is known from measuring ν FWHM with a cavity without absorbing medium, either by using an inert species inside or by measuring off-resonant to the absorption lines of oxygen. As the expected amount of absorption is on the order of parts per million, we linearly approximate Beer-Lambert's law such that M = a • L cav , where a is the absorption coefficient of the medium. Knowing L cav and the sum of mirror losses, a can therefore be obtained directly by measuring ν FWHM . This basic CMWS scheme is also depicted in Fig. To determine the absorption coefficient at a given point in the spectrum, we set our laser to a specific investigation wavelength λ inv = c/ν inv . We then tune the cavity resonance over the laser tone such that subsequently the first EOM-modulated sideband, the main laser tone, and the second sideband are getting into resonance. During the scan, the measured reflection signal r features a train of three cavity dips (see inset of Fig. Using the described technique, we measured the full oxygen A-band between 759 nm to 769 nm as shown in Fig. As the cavity resonance frequency is continuously tunable, the measurement resolution is only limited by the linewidth of the available laser source. This allows a high density sampling of individual absorption lines as shown in Fig. Commonly used techniques like NICE-OHMS use a simultaneous excitation of cavity resonances by EOMmodulated sidebands of the laser. In the case of our 90 μm long cavity, this would require the generation of sidebands at several THz spacing. It is thus only applicable for longer FFPC realizations (e.g. with mm-long cavities There are several possible options for setting up the modulation signal and readout within the feedback loop or by modulating the laser frequency. The particular choice mostly depends on the targeted modulation frequency. For example, for a modulation with a frequency larger than the feedback bandwidth of the PI-controller, but lower than the bandwidth of the piezo-element, m can be added onto u and then be read-off directly on e. The modulation signal should be chosen to fit in a lownoise area of the frequency-noise spectrum of the locked cavity As the FFPC is tunable by more than one free spectral range, this measurement technique can be used for continuous, wide range frequency scans, provided the utilized laser source runs mode-hop free within the scan. Scanning a single absorption line of oxygen as shown in Fig. Due to the single frequency readout of the LIA, the frequency noise of the cavity that otherwise affects the mode width measurement in the CMWS is strongly suppressed. The resulting resolvable absorption coefficient is reduced to ∆a = (2.2 ± 0.07) × 10 -5 cm -1 compared to ∆a = (6.4 ± 0.2) × 10 -5 cm -1 for CMWS, also visible in the reduced noise of the PDH-MS signal in Fig. In this article, we presented a fiber-based, miniaturized Fabry-Perot cavity that is used as a spectroscopy sensor for high resolution spectroscopy of the oxygen A-band as well as for measuring the concentration of oxygen down to one percent accuracy. The continuous, large tuning range of the cavity enables to record absorption spectra over tens of nanometers with a spectral resolution only limited by the linewidth of the employed light source. It can therefore serve to resolve spectral fingerprints of gases and at the same time be used to measure their concentration. Due to the miniaturized, light-weight and robust FFPC realization, it is suited for operation under demanding conditions like in aerospace or industry ap-plications, where small analyte volumes have to be investigated. We furthermore demonstrated a low-noise technique for cavity enhanced absorption spectroscopy that features continuous fast scanning of the spectrum with improved sensitivity. It is especially suited for miniaturized cavities due to their large free spectral range that prohibits other high sensitivity techniques like NICE-OHMS There are numerous possible extensions and improvements to our proof-of-principle demonstration. FFPCs with adjusted coating parameters for longer wavelength operation can be directly used as miniaturized sensors for atmospheric trace gases. Higher sensitivity can be reached by longer FFPCs To measure the cavity mode width, we scan the cavity length at a fixed laser wavelength. Sidebands at 250 MHz created by an electrooptic modulator are used as frequency markers to calibrate the scan. For consistent measurements of the cavity mode width, the intracavity field has to be in a steady state with the excitation laser. This is achieved, if the cavity is scanned in a quasistatic way, meaning that the time T required for scanning over the resonance is much bigger than the rate at which the cavity is coupled to the environment: T 1/∆ν FWHM . Here, we reach this regime, when the scan speed is maintained at a few THz/s. Figure A.5 shows the influence of the scan speed on the measured trace. If faster scans are used, the reflected light and the cavity field interfere and a ringing is observed as light is still leaking out of the cavity, while the laser is already off-resonant. The ringing has an exponential envelope connected to the cavity decay and a slight chirp as the cavity field is frequency shifted by the Doppler effect from the moving mirrors. The raised/ lowered energy of the photons thereby corresponds to the work done/ extracted by the moving mirrors being displaced against the light field's radiation pressure. Whilst the ringing effect limits the maximum scan speed for the data acquisition in the cavity modewidth spectroscopy (CMWS), it can itself be a valuable resource as an own characterization method for the cavity mode width. For this, one can either use a model as described in where v scan is the scan speed of the cavity (in (2π• THz)/s), κ is the full cavity energy decay rate and κ e the coupling rate to the excitation field a input . The time steps for a numerical evaluation have to be chosen to lead to a convergent behavior, still reflecting the fast scan process compared to the the energy decay of the cavity. Exact fitting to this model is however complicated by the detuning dependent mode matching coupling to fiber-cladding modes in case of fiber Fabry-Perot cavities The error and low concentration measurement limit of our CMWS measurements is caused by fluctuations in The fluctuations that limit the measurement accuracy are mostly caused by frequency noise of the cavity resonance from thermally excited high frequency mechanical resonances of the system within the red shaded area in Supplementary material part C: The influence of mode width and impedance matching in PDH modulation spectroscopy Due to the absorption of light within the cavity, both the cavity mode width and impedance matching are changed affecting both Lorentzian width and depth of the reflection signal R. This changes the Pound-Drever-Hall (PDH) error signal e that depends on the cavity reflection signal via (C1) where the detuning ∆ν is given by ∆ν = (ν pumpν cav )/ν FSR (ν pump being the laser frequency, ν cav the cavity resonance frequency and ν FSR the cavity's free spectral range). Ω ν FSR /F is the modulation frequency of the employed electrooptic modulator (EOM) -F being the cavity finesse. The proportionality constant A is given by the product of the gain of the photodetector G (V/W) times the amplitude of the modulated sidebands and the cavity pump power A = 2GJ 0 (β m )J 1 (β m )P pump Here, α, and β denote the mode overlap of fiber and cavity, and fiber and reflected mode respectively. ξ is the complex leakage ratio function of the FFPC. For sufficiently small cavity detuning (∆ν ≈ 0), the reflectivity of the modulated sidebands can be approximated as R(ω ± Ω) ≈ β. Using this, the measured error signal near resonance is and the FFPC complex leakage ratio function can be expressed as L thereby denotes the cavity length, a the absorption coefficient of the intracavity medium, t and r the mirrors' dielectric transmissivity and reflectivity for the electric field. The overlap integrals α and β expressed for small cavity detuning are Here, W f is the fiber mode field radius (∼ 2.5 μm for SM fiber), W m is the cavity mode waist at mirror interface with radius of curvature R (W m = cR √ L/(πν pump √ 2L -R), and c the speed of light in vacuum. Both mirrors are assumed identical here. Their reflection coefficient (usually expressed in ppm) is given by the modulus square of the dielectric reflectivity |r| 2 = 1 -T -L, T is the corresponding power transmissivity and L the mirror losses. Equation C2 is plotted in the main text in Fig. Here, β r,i defines the real and imaginary parts respectively and b = (4RW m W f ) 2 and g = R(W 2 m + W 2 f ). Finally, we obtain for the relative difference with respect to the absence of an absorbing gas species (here m N2 ) where C is a proportionality constant extracted from Eq. C3. Equation C4 is plotted using the measured cavity geometry and optical parameters, as well as the absorption coefficient from SpectraPlot All simulated spectrum data in this article is obtained using the web-based tool SpectraPlot: https://www.spectraplot.com/ LIA-MV-200-H from FEMTO Messtechnik GmbH