Superconducting Nb3Sn magnets have composite structures consisting of Nb3Sn multi-filaments, cooper, and epoxy resin. The complicated strain states due to different thermal expansion coefficients for Nb3Sn and matrix materials and high Lorentz force will cause significant degradation of critical current density Jc of Nb3Sn wires, thereby having a substantial impact on the thermomagnetic instabilities in the superconducting magnets. So, it is highly needed to explore the effects of strain on thermomagnetic instabilities with numerical simulations. We theoretically analyze the effects of Cu/SC (superconductor) ratio, strain, and the field ramp functional form on flux jumps in composite Nb3Sn wires inside the superconducting coil to obtain more accurate results. Considering the composite multi-filamentary structures, we find that a lower Cu/SC ratio leads to higher temperature peaks, and a larger proportion of Cu causes higher voltage peaks. Moreover, the strain significantly causes a higher frequency of flux jumps and higher voltage peaks. The temperatures recover to working temperature more difficultly, and SC wires quench earlier in the presence of strain. For the ramping magnetic field with a jagged ramp form, it is interesting that few flux jumps and temperature jumps occur at the decreasing branch, whereas frequent flux jumps can be observed promptly again when the applied current exceeds the pre-existing peak value. Our simulated results agree very well with experimental observations in Nb3Sn coils. Additionally, unlike the pulsed flux jumps observed in linear ramp cases, giant and prolonged flux jumps are observed at the increasing branch under linear field ramp with additional sinusoidal field oscillations, when the applied current is sufficiently large. Reverse voltage signals are also observed during a decreasing branch, which can be revealed by the variations of current, magnetic field, and temperature distributions. The findings in this paper provide new insights into understanding and exploring the complex flux jumps in composite Nb3Sn wires with multi-filaments. Nb3Sn with the A15 structure was discovered in 1954 and became an essential intermetallic compound due to its good superconductivity in extremely low-temperature regions However, the composite Nb3Sn wire is subjected to multiple strain states because of the thermal mismatch, manufacture and fabrication process, and high Lorentz force (FL = J  B). Numerous investigations and density functional theory (DFT) Except for high critical current density Jc, the stable operation of superconducting magnets also demands other performance targets, such as combating instability, reducing field-ramp-rate-dependent ac loss, and reducting magnetic field induced by screening current However, the price for a small filamentary size is a relatively low critical current The maximal strain of our Nb3Sn superconducting coil with an applied current of 700 A is about 0.9% which causes a severe decrease in critical current. Although the sensitivities of thermomagnetic instabilities to various electromagnetic and thermal parameters have been studied in experiments and numerical simulations In this work, we use the representative unit cell (RUC) multi-physics numerical model At first, we briefly introduce our numerical model. As shown in Fig. The A-V formulation ∇ × A ext = B a (2) A ext is due to the external field. A J is produced by the screening current in the superconducting wire. V is characterized by the voltage per circle v and the radian θ . Φ is the flux. e θ is the unit vector in the circumferential direction. We simplify the solution of the three-dimensional Poisson equation ∇ 2 A J = -μ 0 J to the axisymmetric cases We directly discretize the equation ( E c is the critical electric field. n is characterized by flux creep exponent n 0 , temperature T, and critical temperature T c . B c is the upper critical magnetic field when T = 0 K. J c is the critical current density characterized by T, B, and ε, where ε is the strain along the circumferential direction. In one superconducting wire, the total screen current induced by the external field is zero, which means that the filaments in the unit cell are fully coupled 1 T I = I a To obtain the temperature distribution of unit cell at any time, the governing equations of heat diffusion are given by: The specific heat c and the thermal conductivity λ are temperature-dependent. h is nonzero only at the edges of the unit cell, which approximatively denotes the capabilities to take heat away. We assume that h, c, and λ are all proportional to T 3 f(ε) = 1.09x10 7 ε 4 -2.70x10 5 ε 3 -9.28ε 2 -0.0054ε + 0.72 The consistency of mechanical response under equivalent parameters and actual material parameters validates the reliability of equivalent parameters. We calculate the displacement of the equivalent superconducting coil under the Lorentz force. We select the displacement data of several unit cells and re-apply these data to the actual composite structure to obtain the detailed strain distribution at sub-regions VSC, VCu, and Vepoxy represent the volume fractions of different materials, respectively. Note that the actual strain ε in our simulation contains two parts. ε L results from the Lorentz force. The electromagnetic and thermal parameters for various kinds of materials are as follows. For Nb3Sn, we adopt I c0 = 10500 A, B c2 = 28 T, T c = 18.2 K, E c = 0.0001 V/m, B 0 = 6.0 T, λ 0 = 0.1 W/m•K, c 0 = 1200 J/m 3 •K ) is limited as 100 In this paper, an appropriate theoretical method mentioned in Ref. Additionally, the strain causes a higher frequency of flux jumps and higher voltage peaks. The temperature in the SC wire is more challenging to return to the working temperature, and the SC wire quench earlier due to the existence of strain. For the ramping magnetic field with a jagged ramp form, few flux jumps and temperature jumps occur at decreasing branches, whereas frequent flux jumps can be observed promptly again when the applied current exceeds the pre-existing peak value. Our numerical results agree well with the experiments. Moreover, remarkable differences between the linear field ramp forms and the linear field ramp with additional sinusoidal field oscillations are observed. Giant and prolonged flux jumps are observed at the increasing branch when the applied current is sufficiently large. The statistics of voltage peaks under linear field ramp with additional sinusoidal field oscillations are significantly less than those under linear ones. At the decreasing branch, the frozen flux in the inner regions and the reverse temperature distribution in contrast with the cases in the increasing branch cause a lower Jc region in the interior of the Nb3Sn wire. The reverse current profile and high resistivity region because of the lower Jc lead to the reverse voltage signals. This numerical simulation qualitatively indicates that the thermomagnetic instabilities of the superconducting coil are strongly sensitive to Cu/SC ratio, strain, and the field ramp functional form. Future work will focus on a precise analysis of the superconducting coil.