This paper presents new methodology for comparing field electron emission (FE) theory and experiment, and provides a "demonstration of concept". This methodology uses the exponent k that describes the power to which voltage is raised in the pre-exponential of a mathematical equation that describes (for an electronically ideal FE system) the dependence of measured current on measured voltage. It aims to use experimental exponent-values k expt to decide between two alternative FE theories, for which allowable (but different) k-ranges have been established. At present, the contribution to the "total theoretical k" made by the voltage-dependence of notional emission area is not well known: this paper report simulations that add relevant knowledge, for four commonly investigated emitter shapes. The methodology is then applied to choosing between 1928/29 Fowler-Nordheim (FN) FE theory and 1956 Murphy-Good (MG) FE theory. It is theoretically certain that 1956 MG FE theory is "better physics" than 1928/29 FN FE theory). Like all previous attempts to reach known correct theoretical conclusions by experimentally based argument, the new methodology tends to favour MG FE theory, but is formally indecisive at this stage. There seems an urgent need for better methods of measuring k expt and of establishing reliable error limits. The work reported here contributes to a much wider project, recently outlined elsewhere Sections 2 to 4 set out some detailed background to the present work; remaining Sections then present technical details and conclusions. The term FE system is defined to include all aspects of the experimental system that can affect the relationship between measured current Im and the measured voltage Vm, including: emitter composition, geometry and surface condition; the mechanical, geometrical and electrical arrangements in the vacuum system; all aspects of the electronic circuitry and all electronic measurement instruments; the emission physics; and ALL relevant physical processes that might be taking place (for example, the generation of field emitted vacuum space-charge, Maxwell-stressinduced reversible changes in emitter geometry, and adsorbate atom dynamics). This Im(Vm) relationship can be discussed as follows. It is assumed that there exists a definite (albeit unknown) relationship Im(FC) between Im and the magnitude FC of the electrostatic field at some defined characteristic location "C" on the emitter surface, and that the relationship between FC and Vm can be written where zC is a parameter called the (characteristic) voltage conversion length (VCL). The VCL zC is a system characterization parameter, not a physical length. If the characteristic VCL is constant for a given FE system, and if there are no significant currentor time-dependent changes in the chemical state of the emitting surface (and hence no change in work-function values), then the FE system is said to be electronically ideal. If the characteristic VCL is not constant, due to some "system complication" (e.g., significant series resistance, but many other possible complications exist), the FE system is electronically nonideal. For such systems, the interpretation of measured FE current-voltage characteristics can be extremely complex, and often impossible to carry out exactly in the present state of research knowledge. There currently exist two forms of validity check (namely, apparent linearity of a Fowler-Nordheim or similar data-analysis plot, and the Orthodoxy Test For electronically ideal FE systems, the interpretation problem becomes part of FE emission physics, with the value of the characteristic VCL determined in principle by the zero-current electrostatics of the system geometry (but in practice nearly always by experiment). This paper is about FE current-voltage analysis in electronically ideal systems. For the last 90 years, since the publication in 1928 As is well known, the main theoretical LECD equations in SPME methodology have been: (a) the original 1928 FN FE equation (as corrected in 1929 The most common method of analysing Im(Vm) data has been the well-known "Fowler-Nordheim (FN) plot" introduced by Stern et al. in 1929 However, even for electronically ideal FE systems, it is not expected that an experimental MG plot should be exactly straight. This is because other factors, neglected in MG FE theory (and more generally in SPME methodology) are known to contribute additional voltage-dependence, and thus to cause departure from strict MG plot linearity. The main factors of this type are: (i) the long-known fact There are significant fundamental physical difficulties involved in accurately incorporating atomic structure into FE theory, and this has persuaded the authors to take a strategically different approach to making comparisons between FE theory and experiment. Rather than formulating some specific advanced FE theory, and then attempting to test this against experiment, there is a proposal where B, C and k (also written "k" in some past work) are parameters that in the first instance have been treated as constants. Two methods of carrying out this fitting have been discussed in Our present expectation is that C and k will be weakly varying functions of field, and that B will be a constant or a very weakly varying function of field. Thus, depending on the data-analysis method used, the extracted values of C and k may be average values for the range of voltages (and hence the range of characteristic-field values) used. We emphasize that eq. ( Equation ( The parameter "k" has been called the "pre-exponential voltage exponent" Thus, particularly when discussing electronically ideal FE systems, it is considered preferable to call k the AHFP exponent. In principle, our long-term aim in the context of emission theory is as follows. After confirming that a FE system under investigation is electronically ideal, and then extracting experimentally derived values of B, C and k, our aim is to use these values to deduce more detailed information about the nature of FE theory. It is expected that the values of C and k will be more useful than the value of B, but that trying to interpret extracted values of C and k simultaneously would be a difficult endeavour. Current efforts have therefore concentrated on issues related to the extraction and interpretation of values of k alone. It has been shown by Forbes et al. Hence, if Im(Vm) measurements of high quality were available for electronically ideal FE systems, and the effects of emitter shape and surface condition could be disentangled from these, then a measured value of k should provide a method of comparing different FE theories with experiment. Here we report some steps towards at least assessing emitter-shape effects. An experimental alternative would be to make reliable direct measurements of local emission current density, but this seems to be significantly more difficult experimentally. As part of the overall process, we need to know: Existing knowledge about these things is reviewed in Section 3, where it will become apparent that a gap in our knowledge is good understanding of how the voltage dependence of the notional emission area depends on the emitter shape and on assumed work-function value. An aim of this paper is to report the result of simulations relating to this knowledge gap. This is done in Sections 3 and 4. However, we need first to provide, in Section 3.1 some additional details of existing theory. For our simulations, we use the Extended Murphy-Good (EMG) formulation (see where the symbols have their usual meanings where cS [o (e 3 /4pe0) 1/2 )] is the Schottky constant, and fL is the local scaled-field for a barrier of zerofield height f. Using these yields the scaled-format expression: In EMG theory, the local emission current density (LECD) JL EMG is written where the parameter lL SN is a prediction uncertainty factor of unknown value and functional form. It formally takes account of all relevant physics not included in 1956 MG FE theory, including atomiclevel wave-function effects and band-structure effects, and also incorporates the usual Murphy-Good (MG) pre-exponential correction factor tF -2 , and the MG temperature correction factor. If the kernel current density JkL SN is integrated over the surface of a needle-shaped emitter, using the planar emission approximation, then the resulting calculated notional emission current In SN can be written in the form where JkC SN is the value of the kernel current density at some surface location "C" that characterizes the emitter. (In modelling, "C" is usually taken as the emitter apex). The notional emission area AnC SN is defined by eq. ( We may suppose that, for the chosen emitter model, there would be a true (but unknown) model emission current Itm, and that we can write; where lJ SN is a prediction uncertainty factor for current density, of the same general kind as lL SN . The factor lJ SN will depend on many things, but we specifically show the barrier label: this is because the interpretation of experimental results (in particular, FN and related plots) requires an assumption about the nature of the transmission barrier. In reality, when attempting to accurately model the "predicted" emission current Ip from a real emitter, it is inevitable (at least at present) that the model emitter will not be an accurate model for the real emitter. Hence a second source of prediction uncertainty is introduced, and we can write where lEM SN is a prediction uncertainty factor related to emitter-model inadequacy. Using eq. ( This can be simplified by defining a new area-like parameter AfC SN , the formal emission area for the SN barrier (as defined by location "C") by Equation ( Leakage current, if present, can be modelled by an additional correction factor included within lEM SN . We now assert that (for the electronically ideal systems under discussion) the "formally predicted" emission current Ip can be identified with the measured current Im, and hence [using eq. ( where fC is the scaled-field at location "C". In eq. ( For an electronically ideal FE system, the parameter fC can also be written fC = Vm/VmR , where VmR is the reference measured voltage needed to pull the top of the SN barrier down to the Fermi level, at location "C". Our assumption is that, in a first approximation (at least over defined ranges of measured voltage Vm), A !" #$ can be written in the form where CA and kA are parameters associated with the shape and work-function characteristics of the emitter. As already indicated, we expect these parameters either to be constants, or (more likely) to be weakly varying functions of apex field and hence of measured voltage. The discussion above is given specifically for the SN barrier and EMG theory, but generalized versions of the theory can be given for other barrier forms. *C. Atomic-level structure. In Oppenheimer's approach *D. Voltage dependence in the notional emission area. As discussed above, a formula for notional emission current In will involve a notional emission area An, and this will usually have field and voltage dependence. Details will depend on the chosen emitter shape and the work-function distribution. There is some relevant work, e.g. As indicated above, correction factors related to other physical effects (for example, a temperature correction factor) are formally included in lJ. These will or may contribute to k. Our present understanding is that--certainly for bulk metals with conventional 3-D band-structures-contributions due to these "other factors" are likely to be relatively small and hence can be disregarded for the time being. It is currently not clear whether this is also likely for materials with non-conventional band-structures. *F. The prediction uncertainty factor (lEM) related to emitter-model inadequacy. When predicting emission currents, if an inadequate emitter model is used, then it is likely that an incorrect total kvalue will be predicted, and that a correction will be necessary. At present, there is no useful classified knowledge about lEM or this correction, and this paper does not discuss this issue in detail. Table As already indicated, it is of considerable theoretical interest to know how the notional emission area AnC varies as a function of characteristic field FC and how this functionality depends on the emitter shape and work-function characteristics. In practice, we use cylindrically symmetric models, and take "C" as located at the emitter model apex "a". Also, it is more useful to investigate the behaviour of the so-called notional cap-area efficiency gn (also called the "area factor") given by where ra is the apex radius of curvature of the model. Further, it is better to investigate gn as a function of the apex scaled-field fa. Results will depend on what assumption is made as to the form of the transmission barrier. All discussion here assumes a Schottky-Nordheim barrier, and that the planar emission approximation is being used. [Except that to compile However, what we actually need is the form of the relationship ln{gn} vs ln{fa}, so that we can establish the power-law dependence of gn on fa and hence (for electronically ideal systems) on Vm. For f = 4.50 eV, h = 4.6368, and eq. ( So, over the range 0.15≤fa≤0.45 (which is the "Pass" range for the orthodoxy test Jensen has also given a formula ( He writes his formula as "g(F) ≈1/[b+1-ν]", which in our notation becomes However, there seems to be some difficulty with this formula, because it does not reduce to the HSP formula when the aspect ratio (height/base-radius) goes to unity. Since these are approximate analytical results, we have thought it helpful to check their accuracy by means of finite-element electrostatic simulations, as discussed below. We then went on to carry out numerical analyses for emitter shapes of greater practical interest, for which analytical treatment looks either impossible or impracticable. . In this and following Sections, for historical reasons, the contribution (to the total value of k) made by field/voltage dependence in the notional emission area is denoted by kA, rather than by Dk. To solve the Laplace equation numerically, a commercial finite-element software package (COMSOL v5.3) was used. In addition to the hemisphere-on-plane (HSP) model, we studied three well-known emitter shape models, namely the hemisphere-on-cylindrical post (HCP), the sphericallyrounded cone (SRC), and the hemi-ellipsoid-on plane (HEP). Recently Details of our simulation procedure are similar to those found in Refs. The emitters (other than the HSP model) are given the following geometric parameters: total height h= 4 μm, and apex radius of curvature ra= 50 nm. This implies that the apex sharpness ratio sa = h/ra = 80. The SRC emitter has an additional parameter θ, which defines the half-angle of the vertex (here θ = 5o). The work function of the emitters was taken as consta set to 4.50 eV. A cylindrical simulation cell was used. The cell radius and height, the meshing geometry, and the electrostatic boundary conditions, were chosen in accordance with the "minimum domain size", meshing criteria and electrostatic arguments outlined in Integration of current density over the emitter surface, to evaluate the emission current, was carried out directly in the software package using the planar emission approximation and the kernel current density for the Schottky-Nordheim barrier. For an initial comparison between our present results for the HSP model and those of Jensen, we show (in Fig. A further comparison can be made between the plots of kA(fa) derived from eq. ( The hemisphere-on-plane (HSP) model is the easiest to use when making comparisons between analytical models and simulations, and provides a useful degree of verification for the simulations. However, the HSP model is obviously not a realistic field-emitter model. Other field emitter shapes, closer to experimental reality, are of greater interest. As indicated earlier, we have investigated three other emitter models: the hemisphere-on-cylindrical-post (HCP) model, the hemiellipsoid-on-plane (HEP), and the spherically rounded (truncated) cone (SRC) model. For completeness, the data for the hemisphere-on-plane (HSP) model discussed in Section 4 are also included in diagrams below. The current-voltage characteristics were calculated using the general procedure described in Section 4.1. As before, an emitter height of 4 μm and apex radius of 50 nm (corresponding to an apex sharpness ratio of 80) were used, and calculations were carried out for apex scaled-fields in the range 0.15≤fa≤0.45. Figure With the theory and simulations now described, we now present a new methodology for comparing FE theory and experiment. The methodology seeks to use an experimental k-value to decide (if possible) which of two specific FE theories is "better science". As an example, we shall seek to establish experimentally that the Schottky-Nordheim barrier used by Murphy and Good in 1956 is "better science" than the exactly triangular barrier used by Fowler and Nordheim in 1928. Theoretically, there is no doubt about this (see We emphasise that the remarks here aim to establish a methodology, and provide a "proof of concept", but do not aim to produce a definitive result at this stage. We anticipate that getting a decisive result may be a long and messy process, but we hope that establishing this methodology may stimulate the development of techniques able to provide good experimental values of k, with reliable error limits. For In each case, on the last line of Table However, if we apply the thinking of Table Turning to discuss modern work on k expt , the only The main focus of this research has been the prediction of values for the AHFP exponent k, and on preliminary comparison of predicted values with such experimental results as currently exist. Socalled Extended Murphy-Good field electron emission theory has been outlined, six main theoretical contributions to k (for current-voltage characteristics taken from electronically ideal FE systems) have been identified, and existing knowledge about these contributions (as far as we are aware of it) has been collated into Table The most important need looks to be for better experimental methodologies for accurate measurement of k expt for metal emitters, and for determining reliable error limits. We make again the general point that this paper represents "first steps" toward a new methodology. As theoretical knowledge improves, and experimental results get better defined and more accurate, the decision table will change numerically (and perhaps new contributions to k will be added), and it is expected that its interpretation will change qualitatively. When we have reached the point that this methodology can clearly show, in alignment with theoretical understanding, that 1956 MG FE theory is "better science" than 1928/29 FN FE theory, then it will be timely to construct one or two new decision tables that compare 1956 MG FE theory with one or two more-sophisticated FE theories, for example the 2014 Kyritsakis-Xanthakis theory We note that our simulations have so far been carried out only for one value of work function and one value of apex sharpness ratio. This has been sufficient to establish a proof of concept for our new methodology, but we also plan to carry out further simulations for ranges of values of these parameters. Finally, two recent papers by other authors need comment. For a model involving a hemiellipsoid on a cylindrical post (HECP model), Ramachandran and Biswas In the second recent paper, Ayari et al. Finally, we state again our belief that the decision-table methodology introduced here could become a useful tool in developing better field electron emission science. eq. . A gap in this knowledge, namely the detailed effect of emitter shape on the related contribution kA, has been filled (at least partially) by simulations on four different emitter tip shapes, for the specific common work-function value 4.50 eV. These shapes include the hemisphereon-plane model, for which there is an analytical treatment by Jensen. For this model, our simulations and Jensen's analytics are in very good agreement. A