Magnetic skyrmions are promising candidates for logic-in-memory applications, intrinsically merging high density non-volatile data storage with computing capabilities, owing to their nanoscale size, fast motion, and mutual repulsions. However, concepts proposed so far suffer from reliability issues as well as inefficient conversion of magnetic information to electrical signals. In this paper, we propose a logic-in-memory device which exploits skyrmion confinement and channeling using anisotropy energy barriers to achieve reliable data storage and synchronous shift in racetracks combined with cascadable and reprogrammable logics relying purely on magnetic interactions. The device combines a racetrack shift register based on skyrmions confined in nanodots with Full Adder (FA) gates. The designed FA is reprogrammable and cascadable and can also be used to perform simple logic operations such as AND, OR, NOT, NAND, XOR and NXOR. The monolithic design of the logic gate and the absence of any complex electrical contacts makes the device ideal for integration with conventional CMOS circuitry. "Logic-In-Memory" (LIM) architectures have recently emerged as an alternative to Von Neumann architectures, where the constant shuttle of data between logic and memory units leads to a critical rise in energy consumption and delay when downscaling. This has led to the search for novel technologies that combine memory and logic functionalities. Recently, magnetic skyrmions have been proposed as the building block of such logicin-memory technologies. Magnetic skyrmions are local chiral whirling of the magnetization. Their small lateral dimensions, down to the nanometer size and topological stability grant them particle-like properties, which, combined with the possibility to be manipulated via electrical currents, can be exploited to code data and achieve computation at the nanoscale. These textures appear promising for logic-in-memory applications since they intrinsically merge high density non-volatile storage and logic capabilities. However, while a number of memory and logic concepts have been proposed based on skyrmions Besides the aforementioned limitations, moving skyrmions are subject to the skyrmion Hall effect (skHE), namely a motion transverse to the driving force. To address this problem, topological spin textures with vanishing topological charges and thus skHE have been proposed as alternatives of skyrmions In this work, using micromagnetic simulations, we propose a Logic-In-Memory (LIM) device based on SAF skyrmions which leverages skyrmion confinement using local variation of the anisotropy. It combines two main innovations: Firstly, a novel concept of racetrack shift register where the skyrmion position is defined by low anisotropy dots and moved reliably using current induced spin-orbit torques. This provides an elegant solution to the longstanding issue of reliability of data retention and shift operation in racetracks. We develop elementary protocols for basic "nucleate" and "shift" operations on a train of skyrmions. Secondly, a compact Full Adder logic gate extendable to n-bit FA by cascading is designed. The designed FA can be re-programmed to perform different logic operations (e.g. NOT, BUFFER, AND, OR, XOR, NXOR, NAND). Our proposal allows a simple and intuitive synchronization scheme which in turn enables us to seamlessly cascade logic design to implement large-scale networks without any additional electronic circuitry. The designed logic architecture can also tolerate deviations in the amplitude or width of the current pulses which may arise from the electrical part of the design. feature, we can engineer regions of different anisotropy values specifically tuned for two different tasks, namely nucleation and confinement of skyrmions. For the micromagnetic simulations, a SAF structure is assumed composed of two Co layers with a thickness of 0.9nm antiferromagnetically coupled by RKKY interaction and separated by a thin spacer [see Appendix. A for details regarding the micromagnetic model and parameters]. The magnetic parameters for the irradiated and non-irradiated areas are close to the ones of the Pt/Co/MgO stacks measured experimentally in Ref. In Fig. To nucleate and shift the skyrmions, three separate contacts C 1 , C 2 and C 3 are used (Fig. A Compact full Adder (FA) logic gate can also be designed using anisotropy energy barriers in irradiated SAF stacks. A Full Adder is considered as the basic unit in Arithmetic Logic Unit (ALUs) performing bitwise addition of two binary numbers. It has three inputs, A, B and carry -in (C in ) and produces two outputs, Sum and carry -out (C out ). The logic gate is divided into three parts (see Figure . 2(a)). The left part of the device is made of three bit cells, which are the inputs A, B and C in . Similarly, at the right-hand side of the logic gate, three other bit cells hold the two outputs Sum and C out of the FA. The middle region of the design represents the part of the device which performs the logic operation. All three regions and the individual bit cells are separated from each other by anisotropy energy barriers. We show the operation of the designed Full Adder gate in Figs. We have specifically designed our FA logic gate in Fig. In Fig. Full adder logic gates can be easily modified in order to build a number of basic logic functions, which in turn can be combined to perform complex logic operations. The output of the full adder gate is given as: Sum = C in ⊕ (A ⊕ B) ; C out = AB + BC in + AC in . By fixing one or more of the inputs, different logic gates can be achieved. Note that the inputs of a FA logic gate are all interchangeable, so it does not matter which of the inputs are fixed. Figures The universal NAND gate can also be designed by cascading two modified FA gates [Fig. For practical application of our design, it is important to probe its tolerance against variations in the current amplitude or pulse width. In Fig. We also performed simulations to check the robustness of device against variations in anisotropy. We varied the effective anisotropy field of the barrier region and found that the Full Adder works correctly for the range of values 155mT-167mT. Further, we also perform simulations by adding grains of size 15nm with random 0.5% variation of anisotropy constant (equivalent to ∼ 5% -8% change in effective anisotropy field), similar to previous works An important part of the logic gate design involves device testing against a possible failure during operation. To investigate this point, we include thermal noise corresponding to T = 350 K in our simulations To conclude, we proposed a logic-in-memory device based on skyrmion confinement and channeling by anisotropy energy barriers in synthetic antiferromagnets. We first designed a racetrack shift register memory based on skyrmions confined by anisotropy energy barriers as memory bits, allowing reliable data storage with large stability and robust synchronous shift operations on skyrmion train. This design naturally solves the stability and synchronization issues of the initial racetrack concept without introducing additional gates or complex geometries. We then combine our racetrack storage with a newly designed 1-bit Full Adder (FA) gate extendable to N -bits FA by cascading. The designed FA is reprogrammable and can also be used to perform AND/OR/NOT/NAND/XOR/NXOR operations. The device is expected to perform well even with some fluctuations in the amplitude/width of the injected current pulses and in presence of thermal noise. The simplicity and compactness of the design combined with the minimal use of electrical circuitry brings the proposed device to the same level as the current technological capabilities of fabrication/manufacturing processes, thus providing an important advance for the development of skyrmionbased logic-in-memory technology. anisotropy regions where they can be confined.