Twisted bilayer graphene (TBG) near the magic twist angle of ∼1.1°exhibits a rich phase diagram. However, the interplay between different phases and their dependence on twist angle is still elusive. Here, we explore the stability of various TBG phases and demonstrate that superconductivity near filling of two electrons per moiré unit cell alongside Fermi surface reconstructions, as well as entropydriven high-temperature phase transitions and linear-in-T resistance occur over a range of twist angles which extends far beyond those exhibiting correlated insulating phases. In the vicinity of the magic angle, we also find a metallic phase that displays a hysteretic anomalous Hall effect and incipient Chern insulating behaviour. Such a metallic phase can be rationalized in terms of the interplay between interaction-driven deformations of TBG bands leading to Berry curvature redistribution and Fermi surface reconstruction. Our results provide an extensive perspective on the hierarchy of correlated phases in TBG as classified by their robustness against deviations from the magic angle or, equivalently, their electronic interaction requirements. TBG is a highly tunable platform for exploring the effects of strong electronic interactions and topological bands the fading bar color. c, Critical temperatures T c of superconductivity for both holes and electrons over a range of twist angles between 0.79°and 1.23°(squares indicate 50% R n and the error bars 10% and 90% R n ; for more details, see Supplementary Fig. Figure In contrast, the device with twist angle 0.79°reveals a linear Hall density on the hole side that extends well beyond ν = -2, ultimately reaching a van Hove singularity We note that the addition of WSe 2 , while not changing the magic angle value, may help stabilize superconductivity Moreover, in a dual-gated geometry no dependence on the displacement field is found (Fig. Our observations indicate that a fully flavor (i.e., spin and valley) symmetric state strongly disfavors the formation of superconductivity. This rules out the simplest scenario for superconductivity based on electron-phonon coupling, which relies only on the local density of states Our data suggest that this description works reasonably well over the entire range of angles investigated here (Fig. The twist angle dependence of the linear-in-T resistivity behavior is shown in Fig. In contrast to the features at ν = ±2, the evolution of R xx near ν = ±1 is more subtle. In the temperature range 6 K < T < 40 K, the R xx peaks near both ν = +1 and ν = -1 evolve towards lower filling factors |ν| as temperature increases, following the phase boundary discussed above (Fig. reaches a maximal value of 2.5 kΩ, significantly smaller than the resistance quantum, which persists until the Curie temperature ∼ 5 K (Fig. Measurements of R xy at elevated temperatures and over a wider doping range further reveal the unusual nature of the observed AHE phase (Fig. The observation of hysteresis signals the emergence of an orbital ferromagnetic phase that arises from a band carrying nonzero Chern number C To model TBG, we employ a ten-band model Our results show that the robustness to deviations of the twist angle from the magic angle divides TBG phases into two categories. Superconductivity, cascade transitions, as well as the linear-in-T dependence of the resistivity are robust over a wide range of twist angles, spanning at least 0.8° θ 1.23°. Moreover, the cascade transitions near ν = ±2 appear to be a necessary prerequisite for the appearance of superconductivity, implying close relations between these two phases. In contrast, the correlated insulating and orbital ferromagnetic states require a more subtle interplay of strong interactions, kinetic energy scales, and possible breaking of spatial symmetries. Due to this sensitivity, these phases appear in a more immediate vicinity of the magic angle, where the close competition between various phases can result in differing behaviour of devices with the same twist angle (e.g., see Supplementary Fig. Device Fabrication: The devices were fabricated using a 'cut and stack' method, in which graphene flakes were separated into two pieces using a sharp Platinum-Iridium tip; this prevents unwanted twisting and strain during tearing while allowing more control over the flake size and shape. First, a thin hBN flake (10-30 nm) is picked up using a propylene carbonate film (PC) previously placed on a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) stamp. Then the hBN is used to pick up an exfoliated monolayer of WSe 2 (commercial source, HQ graphene) before approaching the graphene. After picking up the first half of the graphene flake, the transfer stage is rotated by approximately 1.1-1.3°(overshooting the target angle slightly), and then the second half is picked up, forming the twisted bilayer. Care was taken to approach and pick up each stacking step slowly. In the last step, a thicker hBN (30-70 nm) is picked up, and the whole stack is dropped on a predefined local gold back-gate at 150°C while the PC is released at 170°C. The PC is then cleaned off with N-Methyl-2-Pyrrolidinone (NMP). The final geometry is defined by dry etching with a CHF 3 /O 2 plasma and deposition of ohmic edge contacts (Ti/Au, 5 nm/100 nm). Measurements: All measurements were performed in a dilution refrigerator (Oxford Triton) with a base temperature of ∼25 mK, using standard low-frequency lock-in amplifier techniques. Unless otherwise specified, measurements are taken at the base temperature. Frequencies of the lock-in amplifiers (Stanford Research, models 830 and 865a) were kept in the range of 7-20 Hz in order to measure the device's DC properties and the AC excitation was kept <5 nA (most measurements were taken at 0.5-1 nA to preserve the linearity of the system and avoid disturbing the fragile states at low temperatures). Each of the DC fridge lines pass through cold filters, including 4 Pi filters that filter out a range from ∼80 MHz to >10 GHz, as well as a two-pole RC low-pass filter. Similarities to hBN-encapsulated samples: Here we briefly discuss similarities between devices studied here and hBN-encapsulated devices. While we showed previously that WSe 2 induces some amount of spin-orbit coupling Disorder in TBG-WSe 2 devices: In all TBG devices studied so far, it appears that there are significant device-to-device variations that are often associated with disorder. In addition to disorder that is intrinsic to graphene (such as charge disorder originating from residual polymers and other impurities, disordered edges, strain from wrinkles or bubbles, strain from the substrate or back gate), in TBG twist angle disorder is believed to play an important role. As previously reported, it generates domains and gradual twist-angle shifts on length scales from 100 nm to a micron Occasionally, we see evidence in transport of the presence of domains with slightly different twist angles (on the scale of the contact separation, or slightly smaller, a few hundred nm to a few μm), resulting in multiple resistance features near ν = 2 (Supplementary Fig. In the least disordered devices (in the context of transport measurements), the global twist-angle deviation between different contact pairs is below the detectable limit. For instance, Fig. Because of the rotational symmetry of the p orbitals, the intra-valley interaction matrix elements can be parametrized in terms of two independent parameters U and J, as where for p z orbitals m = 0. On the other hand, the inter-valley interaction matrix elements can be parametrized by the same two parameters, as In the current work, we set J = 0 for simplicity in the following. The interaction Hamiltonian in momentum space can be written as where V is the volume of the system size. Now we apply the Hartree-Fock approximiation. Up to a constant, we obtain the mean-field Hamiltonian and It can be seen that the two terms in Eq. ( In addition to the interaction, we assume there is a background positive charge distribution such that at charge neutrality the system is neutral. This potential can be modeled as where P η,σ CN is computed from the non-interacting Hamiltonian at charge neutrality. Thus, the total mean-field Hamiltonian can be written as