Andreev bound states with opposite phase-inversion asymmetries are observed in local and nonlocal tunneling spectra at the two ends of a superconductor-semiconductor-superconductor planar Josephson junction in the presence of a perpendicular magnetic field. Spectral signatures agree with a theoretical model, yielding a physical picture in which phase textures in superconducting leads localize and control the position of Andreev bound states in the junction, demonstrating a simple means of controlling the position and size of Andreev states within a planar junction. The manipulation of spatial properties of Andreev bound states (ABSs), both their position and spatial extent, is an important goal in contemporary superconducting physics. Braiding protocols that can test exotic exchange statistics, including constructions of a topological quantum processor, rely on spatially exchanging the positions of special types of ABSs, such as Majorana zero modes (MZMs) Controllable superconducting phase provides an additional useful knob for ABS manipulation. In bulk superconductors, Abrikosov and Pearl vortices In this Letter, we study PJJs consisting of superconductor-normal-superconductor (SNS) junctions, where N is a semiconductor with strong spin-orbit coupling. We focus on non-topological ABSs and study their response to a perpendicular magnetic field applied through the junction. A spatially varying phase texture is induced on the two superconducting leads. ABSs formed in the N region respond to this phase texture such that their localization length is controlled by the magnitude of magnetic flux penetrating the junction area and their position is controlled by a phase bias applied across the junction. The PJJs are fabricated on InAs/Al heterostructure stacks. The N region comprises an InAs layer with Al stripped away, whereas the S regions are composed of patterned Al/InAs superconducting leads. Quantum point contacts, formed by electrostatic gating, allow tunneling spectroscopy at the top and bottom ends of the junction. Nonlocal electrical transport between the two ends allows bulk spectroscopy This conductance fingerprint is captured by theoretical simulations. The combination of phase-biasing and magnetic field penetrating the Josephson junction creates a phase texture within the two S leads, which we obtain from a Ginzburg-Landau calculation (see Supplemental Material). As a result, the proximity induced gap in the N region is spatially modulated. Andreev bound states are trapped at positions along the junction where the local phase difference ∼ (2n + 1)π, n being an integer. For every flux quantum (Φ 0 = h/2e) that enters (exits) the superconducting loop, localized An- dreev bound states are pumped from the outer (inner) to the inner (outer) junction end, creating phase-inversionasymmetric conductance patterns at the two ends. Since these modes are spatially localized, they do not appear in the nonlocal conductance spectra. When the magnetic field through the junction center (defined later) exceeds Φ 0 , well-localized Josephson vortices are formed. Figure A second layer of HfO 2 is deposited globally followed by the deposition of Ti/Au gates for electrostatic control of the junction and the QPCs. The carrier density in the normal barrier of the JJ (width w n = 100 nm, length l = 1.6 μm) is controlled by energizing gate voltage V 1 . Gate voltage V sc controls the carrier density in the semiconductor underneath the superconducting leads. Split gates controlled by voltages V tqpc and V bqpc electrostatically define constrictions at the top and bottom of the junction to serve as QPC tunnel barriers. Additional gates controlled by V top and V bot control densities in the normal regions outside the QPCs, and are typically fixed at ∼ 100 mV. Here we focus on results from Device 1; qualitatively similar results are obtained in Device 2 (see supplementary material Figs. S8, S9, and S10). We first investigate local tunneling spectra at the two ends as a function of perpendicular magnetic field as shown in Fig. Focusing on the large scale gap structure, we observed that individual flux lobes acquire significant phase asymmetry as |B ⊥ | was increased. This is represented in Figs. To help understand this behavior, we perform theoretical simulations of the device. When subjected to a perpendicular magnetic field, identical Meissner supercurrents are set up in the superconducting leads, leading to a spatially varying phase profile (see supplementary material for details). We use Ginzburg-Landau equations to calculate the phase profile within the gauge A = -yB ⊥ x. The phase configurations in the left (φ L ) and right leads (φ R ) obtain a B ⊥ dependent gradient given by dφ L/R (x)/dx = ±πd S B ⊥ /Φ 0 , where d S = (w n +w s ) = 300 nm is the center-to-center distance between the two superconducting leads. The effect of the magnetic field through the superconducting loop is modeled as a global phase difference, φ 0 = 2πA L B ⊥ /Φ 0 between the two leads, where A L 15 μm 2 is the effective loop area. As a result, the gauge-invariant phase difference across the junction is given as ∆φ(x) = φ 0 + (2πd S B ⊥ /Φ 0 )x. The central area of the junction A c = d S l determines the total phase winding along the junction ∆φ(l) -∆φ(0) = (2πB ⊥ A c /Φ 0 ). Each 2π winding of the local phase difference corresponds to a Josephson vortex in the junction In the model, ABSs are trapped in nodes of the local phase difference, when ∆φ(x 0 ) = π at a position x 0 along the junction. The node position, x 0 , can be controlled by the global phase bias, φ 0 , while the localization length of the ABS along the junction, ξ B = Φ 0 /B ⊥ ξ P /d S , where ξ P is the proximity induced coherence length (see Around each gap minimum, the lowest energy states fade at the top and reappear at the bottom as the magnitude of the magnetic field is increased. These are the strongly localized, lowest-energy modes trapped in the phase-node. In contrast, nonlocal conductances, G TB and G BT , remain comparatively phase-inversionsymmetric and do not have pronounced gap minima. The main contribution to nonlocal conductance comes from states that are extended throughout the junction Even though our conductance calculations are performed in the clean limit, in the diffusive limit we expect similar results with a renormalized superconducting coherence length in the Al/InAs heterostructure We next consider experimental measurement of nonlocal differential conductance (see supplementary material and Ref. Reasonable agreement between theoretical and experimental conductance matrix signatures supports our interpretation of spatial manipulation of ABSs with superconducting phase texture. In the presence of a finite in-plane magnetic field, Josephson junctions with strong spin-orbit coupling, such as ours, may host spin-split Andreev bound states and topologically protected Majorana zero modes A conservative estimate for the typical supercurrent density flowing in the superconducting leads in response to an applied perpendicular field is given by the supercurrent density flowing along the edge of the junction. The gauge-invariant supercurrent density is given by Neglecting the contribution from the superconducting phase gradient ∇φ(x, y), which vanishes in the bulk of a rectangular superconducting lead with large aspect ratio for our gauge choice A = -yB ⊥ x, c.f. Fig. Theory details: We employ a tight-binding discretization of the spin-orbit coupled two-dimensional electron gas (2DEG) in the InAs quantum well including the coupling to the proximitized Al superconductors in terms of a frequency-dependent self energy Σ(ω), and metallic leads to compute the conductance matrix using the software package kwant with the effective mass m * = 0.023 m e , lattice spacing a = 20 nm, chemical potential μ = 1 meV, g-factor g = 5, Bohr magneton μ B , Rashba spin-orbit coupling strength α = 150 meV Å, chemical potential μ = 1 meV, Kronecker-delta δ i,j and Pauli matrices σ j , j = x, y, z in spin space. The orbital effect of the magnetic field is included via the substitution of the hopping terms ĉ † r+ a x/y ,σ ĉ r,σ → e -i e r+ a x/y r Ad r ĉ † r+ a x/y ,σ ĉ r,σ . The proximity-induced pairing is included via the self-energy term where Γ( r) is a phenomenological parameter describing the hopping rate between 2DEG and superconducting leads and ∆( r) = |∆ 0 |e iφ(r) is the order parameter in the superconducting lead with phase modulation φ( r) calculated from the Ginzburg-Landau equation, and shown in Fig. Figures S3 and S5 display the calculated conductance matrix for further windows of the perpendicular magnetic field between B ⊥ = -2.15 mT and B ⊥ = -12.9 mT. Figure Andreev bound states at vortex cores: Figure The length scale for the extent of the Andreev bound states below the superconducting leads is given by the proximity coherence length ξ P = π v F /Γ 270 nm. The extent of the ABS around the phase node can be estimated from the average gap experienced by this state 