We studied resistance oscillations in two types of superconducting mesoscopic Nb rings. In a simple superconducting ring device, a resistance oscillation with a period of the quantized magnetic flux h 2e ⁄ was clearly observed. On the other hand, in a micro-bridge ring device where two-narrow parts are embedded in parallel and work as superconductor-normal metal-superconductor junctions, higher harmonic resistance oscillations were obtained when the measurement current was well-tuned. We argue that such higher harmonic resistance oscillations can be detected even in the micro-bridge Nb superconducting ring device where the device size is much larger than the coherence length of Nb. Mesoscopic superconducting devices provide an excellent platform for investigating phase-related phenomena, owing to the macroscopic wave functions In a Josephson junction where two superconductors are weakly connected via a very thin insulator, normal metal, or micro-bridge structure, a supercurrent flows depending on the relative phase difference between the two superconductors without any voltage applied When two Josephson junctions are connected in parallel in a superconducting ring, the magnetic flux through the ring is quantized by φ 0 = h 2e ⁄ , where h is Planck's constant and e is the electric charge. This is well-known as superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) and has been utilized as a very sensitive magnetic field sensor When the distance d between two weak links is comparable or shorter than the coherence length ξ of superconductor, unique phase interference phenomena can be expected because of the interaction between the junctions via order parameter variations, quasiparticle diffusion In Such a thickness dependence of T c has been wellestablished To further evaluate the higher harmonic oscillations in Fig. Since the superconductivity in the simple ring device is suddenly broken at I c (see Fig. However, the above two effects become much less essential in the present device where the lateral size is much greater than the coherence length ξ of Nb (~38 nm In conclusion, we measured the magnetic field dependence of resistance in two types of ringshaped superconducting Nb devices. In a simple Nb ring device, a resistance oscillation with a period of h 2e ⁄ was observed. In a micro-bridge Nb ring device, on the other hand, higher harmonic resistance oscillations were detected only when the measurement current was well-tuned at around I c . oased on the FFT analysis, the higher harmonics can be seen up to the fourth harmonic component, i.e., (h 8e ⁄ ) -1 . The second harmonic component (h 4e ⁄ ) -1 has been reported so far in Al-based rings where the device size is comparable to ξ of the superconducting Al. On the other hand, the present work has demonstrated that the higher harmonic resistance oscillations can be realized even when the distance between the two SNS junctions is much longer than ξ. This result would pave the way for deep understanding of the superconducting interference effect especially in devices with short ξ , and would also be useful for a magnetic field sensor as mentioned in Ref. 8).