Twisted trilayer graphene is a particularly promising moiré superlattice system, due to its tunability, strong superconductivity, and complex electronic symmetry breaking. Motivated by these properties, we study lattice relaxation and the long-wavelength phonon modes of this system. We show that mirror-symmetric trilayer graphene hosts, aside from the conventional acoustic phonon modes, two classes of shear modes, which are even and odd under mirror reflection. The mirror-even modes are found to be gapless and equivalent to the "phason" modes of twisted bilayer graphene, with appropriately rescaled parameters. The modes odd under mirror symmetry have no analogue in twisted bilayer graphene and exhibit a finite gap, which we show is directly proportional to the degree of lattice relaxation. We also discuss the impact of mirror-symmetry breaking, which can be tuned by a displacement field or result from a stacking shift, and of rotational-as well as timereversal-symmetry breaking, resulting from spontaneous electronic order. We demonstrate that this can induce finite angular momentum to the phonon branches. Our findings are important to the interpretation of recent experiments, concerning the origin of superconductivity and of linear-in-T resistivity. Introduction.-Stacking and twisting different layers of graphene has emerged as a popular route to creating correlated superlattices over the last few years Long-wavelength phonon modes have recently attracted significant attention In this work, we not only investigate the twist-angle evolution of the phonon properties-which bear important consequences for the interpretation of experiments Formalism-To begin, we first focus on the mirrorsymmetric limit of TTG (i.e., in the absence of a displacement field) with no symmetry breaking in the electronic sector. The total free energy is a sum of two pieces F = F el + F ad , where F el describes in-plane elastic distortions of the graphene layers and F ad accounts for the interlayer adhesion energy. Labeling the layers from bottom to top by l = 1, 2, 3, and their corresponding in-plane where λ 3.25 eV/Å 2 and μ 9.57 eV/Å 2 are the Lamé coefficients of graphene The elastic theory is more naturally expressed in terms of the relative displacements, u ≡ s (3)s (1) , and v ≡ s (3) + s (1) -2s (2) , which are odd and even under mirror reflections, respectively, and the total displacement, w ≡ s (1) +s (2) +s (3) (cf. Fig. with p 1 = -1, p 3 = +1, where b ν are the reciprocal lattice vectors of a single graphene sheet; mirror symme- Putting F el and F ad together, and solving the coupled Euler-Lagrange equations of motion for harmonic oscillations about the self-consistently determined equilibrium configurations {u (0) (r), v (0) (r)}, we obtain the spectrum of lattice vibrations. Mirror-symmetric limit.-The relaxation of the moiré superlattice due to the interlayer couplings is captured by the displacement textures {u (0) , v (0) }. We see that this atomic reconstruction leads to a nontrivial v (0) = 0 [Fig. The fully relaxed spectra of the three distinct classes of vibrational modes, arising from the displacements u, v, and w, are arrayed in Fig. Finally, there also exists a gapped shear mode, u(q), which is unique to TTG. This mode corresponds to a distortion of the moiré lattice and is thus massive but the C 3 symmetry guarantees that the lowest two branches (the two polarizations) have the same mass. In Fig. obtained from perturbation theory (see Eq. (S32) Here, |b| ≡ |b ν |, and . . . Ω denotes the spatial average over the system. Without any relaxation, i.e., v 0 (r) = 0, we have α = 0, while relaxation will result in α > 0 to optimize the adhesion potential. This is also expected since, in the absence of relaxation, the top and bottom layers can be moved independently without any energetic cost in our elastic theory. Therefore, the gap of the mirror-odd shear mode-a thermodynamically observable quantityis directly proportional to the dimensionless measure α of lattice relaxation. Furthermore, we now also immediately understand that, for smaller twist angles, the impact of the relaxation will be stronger such that α, and hence, ∆, increases, in accordance with Fig. Mirror-symmetry breaking.-One particularly interesting aspect of TTG is that an electric displacement field D 0 can be applied perpendicular to the graphene layers (see Fig. The broken mirror symmetry has two crucial consequences. Firstly, while v (0) continues to resemble the previously found profile in Fig. Another route to breaking mirror symmetry is via lateral stacking shifts Spontaneous electronic symmetry breaking.-Besides explicit symmetry breaking via external fields, TTG also exhibits a variety of electronic phases with spontaneously broken symmetry, as indicated by experiments ) and thus, vanishes if C 2z Θ is a symmetry To begin with the latter, broken time-reversal symmetry induces a Hall viscosity term in the elastic theory Here, η has to scale as η ∼ g 2 M for small electron-phonon coupling strength g and magnitude M of the sublattice polarization Discussion.-Making the natural If electron-phonon coupling is also responsible for the linear-in-T resistivity, ∝ T , which is considered to be a plausible scenario , where g is the electron-phonon coupling matrix element, v f (v ph ) the Fermi (phonon) velocity, and ρ m ∝ sin(θ/2) the soliton-network mass density Supplemental Material for "Moiré phonons and impact of electronic symmetry breaking in twisted trilayer graphene" Rhine Samajdar, 1 Yanting Teng, 1 and Mathias S. Scheurer In this section, we derive the Euler-Lagrange equations of motion that govern the lattice vibrations on the moiré scale, closely following the approach outlined in Refs. 1 and 2. We will begin by developing the formalism for the general case where all symmetries of TTG are preserved, and extensions to more specific symmetry-breaking instances are described in subsequent sections. The elastic free energy consists of two parts: the first term describes in-plane elastic distortions of the graphene layers, whereas the second accounts for the interlayer adhesion energy. Labeling the layers from bottom to top by l = 1, 2, 3, we have where λ l and μ l are the Lamé coefficients of the l th graphene layer. While mirror symmetry technically only implies λ 1 = λ 3 and μ 1 = μ 3 (which, in general, can differ from λ 2 and μ 2 ), we choose λ l = λ and μ l = μ since we expect the impact of the neighboring graphene layers on the intralayer elastic constants to be weak. For the same reason, henceforth, we use the values, λ 3.25 eV/Å 2 and μ 9.57 eV/Å 2 , which are the elastic constants of monolayer graphene where u ij ≡ (∂ i u j + ∂ j u i )/2, and likewise for v ij , w ij . Next, we turn to the second term in Eq. (S1), namely, the adhesion energy, which describes energetic variations between different stacking configurations of the layers resulting from how the individual atoms are positioned. This energy should be a functional of the relative displacement fields only, i.e., where V ad is called the adhesion potential. In order to derive V ad , we first characterize the local structure of TTG. Let us consider an unrotated trilayer heterostructure in which the carbon atoms of the three layers lie on top of each other. Upon twisting by angles {-θ/2, +θ/2, -θ/2}, an atom on the second layer originally located at site r 0right above (below) the corresponding atom on the first (third) layer-shifts to a new position r = R(θ) r 0 . We thus define the interlayer sliding vector Assuming a rigid and static moiré lattice for TTG, this vector is the same for measurements relative to either the top or the bottom layer and is given by However, accounting for the in-plane lattice vibrations specified by the displacements s (l) (r, t), we obtain two time-dependent sliding vectors describing the shifts within the bilayers formed by layers l = 1, 2, and l = 2, 3, respectively. Intuitively, this means that when the moiré lattice constant L M a, the local lattice structure for the former (latter) bilayer at position r resembles that of unrotated bilayer graphene with the sheets relatively shifted by ∆ 1 (r, t) (∆ 3 (r, t)) The adhesion potential V ad is periodic in the fields ∆ l (l = 1, 3) with the lattice period of graphene where mirror symmetry implies V 1 = V 3 = V and b ν denotes the primitive vector of the reciprocal lattice of layer ν; we set V = 90 meV/nm 2 Note that even though the dependence on the stacking configurations varies on the atomic scale, the dependence on r is on the moiré scale. Finally, substituting the relations s (1) = (-3u + v + 2w)/6, s (2) = (-v + w)/3, and s (3) = (3u + v + 2w)/6 in the above, we arrive at We see that as required by the mirror symmetry. The net free energy is now given by the sum of Eqs. (S3) and (S4). By minimizing the free energy of variations with respect to u and v, we obtain These equations describe a generalized two-dimensional version of the Frenkel-Kontorova model Our discussion so far has addressed the static problem. The dynamical equations of motion follow from the total Lagrangian L = K -F , where F is defined in Eq. (S1) and the kinetic energy is given by with ρ = 7.6 × 10 -7 kg/m 2 being the mass density of the individual graphene layers. Hereafter, we will not be concerned with the field w, which just describes the in-phase displacements of the three layers, yielding the original acoustic phonons of graphene. Instead, focusing on the relative displacements, u and v, we consider the deviations δu(r, t) = u(r, t)u (0) (r), δv(r, t) = v(r, t)-v (0) (r), where u (0) (r) and v (0) (r) are metastable configurations satisfying Eq. (S10). Inserting these ansätze in Eqs. (S2) and (S4), we find that the free energy is of the form where the four terms are given by In particular, F ad in Eq. (S14) results from expanding the adhesion energy as a Taylor series up to quadratic order. A reorganization of the terms above now proves convenient. Upon integrating by parts, we notice that The first term in Eq. (S15), F 0 , is simply the free energy of the equilibrium solution, whereas the second, U [δu, δv], describes the spectrum of harmonic oscillations, Finally, the last two terms on the right in Eq. (S15) are identically zero since the integrands vanish by virtue of Eq. (S10). Then, from Eqs. (S11) and (S16), we obtain the coupled Euler-Lagrange equations These Euler-Lagrange equations, which constitute the central result of this section, will be used extensively to obtain the phason spectra in the rest of this work. Due to the constraint of mirror symmetry in Eq. (S9), we have A. Solutions of the Euler-Lagrange equations The solutions to Eqs. (S17) and (S18) are more easily obtained in Fourier space. We introduce Fourier series for the field u (and analogously for v) using the conventions, where q lies in the monolayer Brillouin zone. Here, we have implicitly assumed that u (0) varies on the moiré scale, so it admits a Fourier expansion in {G} which are the reciprocal lattice vectors of the moiré lattice. We also define the Fourier components for derivatives of the adhesion potential, With these definitions, the Euler-Lagrange equations can be solved as follows. First, from Eq. (S10), one can obtain the static configurations u As we show below, in the absence of external mirror-symmetry breaking, we find u (0) = 0, indicating that the mirrorsymmetric configuration is energetically most favorable, in accordance with experiments Using the thus-obtained relaxation textures to compute J ν G , J ν G , K ν G , the problem reduces to solving the following secular equations where we have defined the matrix Note that in the mirror-symmetric limit, K = 0 due to Eq. (S19); however, we retain these terms in Eq. (S24) as they will be nonzero when we study cases with broken mirror symmetry below. We now show that the lattice relaxation in TTG and TBG, as well as their phason modes, can be related by a rescaling of parameters. To this end, let us define x (0) = v (0) /2 which-upon recalling that u (0) = 0 when mirror symmetry is preserved-allows us to rewrite the second line in Eq. (S10) as Similarly, defining δx ≡ v/2x (0) , we can write the Euler-Lagrange equation (S18) as Comparison of the corresponding equations for the phason mode of TBG tbg (r; V, ρ, λ, μ) and the phason dispersion by ω tbg (q; V, ρ, λ, μ), it holds that the corresponding v (0) and ω phason for TTG are simply tbg (r; 3V, 2ρ, 2λ, 2μ), (S28) ω phason (q; V, ρ, λ, μ) = ω tbg (q; 3V, 2ρ, 2λ, 2μ). (S29) Naturally, neither v (0) nor ω phason change when rescaling all parameters V , ρ, λ, and μ such that there are several ways of expressing the rescaling from TTG to TBG. A particularly compact one is V → 2V /3, as stated in the main text. Apart from explaining the similarities of the phason spectrum shown for TTG in the last panel of Fig. which captures the energetic compromise between the adhension potential and intralayer elastic energy cost; we now immediately see from the above-mentioned rescaling that Since lattice relaxation becomes sizable when this length scale is comparable to or smaller than the moiré length L M , we conclude that lattice relaxation at a given twist angle is stronger in TTG than in TBG, which agrees with first-principle calculations In our analysis so far, we have focused on in-plane displacements of the graphene layers and, thus, neglected flexural phonon modes. By generalizing the arguments of Ref. 1 to the trilayer case, we show here that these modes are not affected by the moiré-superlattice modulation and, therefore, are largely independent of twist angle. To capture out-of-plane modes, we have to introduce additional out-of-plane displacements, s (j) z , for each of the three layers l = 1, 2, 3. The interlayer binding potential can be approximated by where V ⊥ > 0, and h z (∆) denotes the energetically most favorable distance between the graphene layers for a local stacking parameterized by sliding vector ∆, and h 0 = h z (0) is a reference height. Note that mirror symmetry acts as s z → -s z , and ∆ 1,3 → ∆ 3,1 ; as required, F ⊥ is invariant under it. To proceed, we reparameterize {s z , and w z = s First, we see that, similar to the in-plane acoustic modes-where all three graphene layers move together, and which are thus unaffected by F ad -the out-of-plane modes associated with w z do not "feel" F ⊥ ; as such, they are independent of the twist angle. To study the phonon modes associated with d j , we write d j (r, t) = d (0) j (r) + δd j (r, t), where δd j are the fluctuations away from the equilibrium configuration d (0) j (r). As follows from Eq. (S33), the latter is approximately given by 0) . Neglecting the difference between ∆ (0) j and ∆ j , V ⊥ V ⊥ j=1,3 (δd j ) 2 and the moiré superlattice does not affect these phonon modes either. Taking into account that ∆ j = ∆ (0) j in the presence of in-plane phonons will lead to a coupling of the inplane modes and δd j . We neglect this coupling as the δd j modes have a finite gap (of order 100 cm -1 In the course of this section, we employ the formalism developed in Sec. SI to compute the lattice relaxation and phonon spectra in TTG, both with and without external mirror-symmetry breaking, for a wide range of twist angles. However, we do not yet consider the effects of broken electronic symmetries, which will be addressed in the next section. As discussed in the main text, the textures of u (0) (r) and v (0) (r) together encode the relaxation of the moiré superlattice. To pick a starting point, the simplest possible approximation that one can make is to neglect all lattice relaxation effects and set u (0) = v (0) = 0 ∀ r. In such a scenario-which describes a case where the three graphene layers are "floating" on top of one anotherone may naively imagine that the mirror-even mode obtained by displacing the middle layer against the outer two simply corresponds to a translation of the moiré superlattice and is thus gapless. However, we find that this simplified model incorrectly predicts a strong (and unphysical) softening of the acoustic branches near the Brillouin zone center as demonstrated by Fig. Subsequently incorporating lattice relaxation effects in computing the phonon frequencies, we find that the spatial reorganization of atoms within the graphene sheets stabilizes the heterostructure, removing the unstable phonon modes in the process (see Fig. over the system (with area Ω) without any intralayer energetic cost, we must have α ν < 0 for v (0) = 0 minimizing the elastic energy. Bearing this in mind, we see, from Eq. (S8), that turning on a finite value of u (0) would immediately decrease the energetic gain from the mirroreven relaxation and, at the same time, cost intralayer elastic energy [see Eq. ( Figure and treat ε > 0 as a small parameter (where ε = 1 corresponds to the actual system). Importantly, this generalization does not break any physical symmetry. Further, note that we still have u (0) = 0 for any ε ≤ 1 (since ε < 1 will not make it more favorable energetically to break mirror symmetry); consequently, v (0) also does not depend on ε (and neither does any other property of the phason sector). Using the multi-index notation (δ U q ) j,G = δ(u G+q ) j and recalling that K = 0 in the mirror-symmetric limit, we can rewrite Eq. (S24a) as H q δ U q = ρ ω 2 q δ U q , where On treating ε 2 as a perturbation, the zeroth-order eigenstates are of the form (δ U (0) q ) j,G = (e ± G+q ) j δ G,G0 with eigenvalues (3μ+λ±(μ+λ))(G 0 +q) 2 /2. We see that, for q in the moiré Brillouin zone, the lowest-energy solutions correspond to G 0 = 0. To compute the gap, we focus on q = 0, where the two unperturbed lowest-energy solutions, with polarizations e ± G0=0 , are degenerate but separated by a finite gap to the other states (with G 0 = 0). Therefore, to first order in V , the energy of the mirror-odd shear modes are given by the eigenvalues of H q=0 projected to this two dimensional subspace, in this equation, |b| ≡ |b ν | and α ≡ α ν ≤ 0, with α ν as defined in Eq. (S34), which does not depend on ν due to rotational symmetry. Therefore, the two modes remain degenerate but acquire a finite energy gap given by Eq. (3) of the main text. The fact that the effective Hamiltonian H eff is diagonal is simply a consequence of C 3 rotational symmetry; as such, the degeneracy of the lowest-energy mirror-odd shear modes at q = 0-transforming under the E representation of C 3 -holds to arbitrary order in V as long as C 3 and the gap to the higher-energy modes remain intact. The perpendicular displacement field, D 0 , in Fig. and likewise for μ l . Furthermore, the parameters of the adhesion potential (S7) are also allowed to be nonuniform, according as The incorporation of the varying Lamé coefficients (S36) lies beyond the scope of our previously derived Euler-Lagrange equations (S24). Thus, in our framework, we theoretically model the effect of the displacement field by Eq. (S37), treating γ as a phenomenological parameter. Since V 1 = V 3 leads to mirror-odd lattice relaxation, u (0) = 0, the coefficients K ν G in Eq. (S24) are now nonzero, so the equations of motion for δu and δv are coupled and have to be solved together selfconsistently. The results of such a calculation are presented in Figs. Besides by an external displacement field, the mirror symmetry can also be broken by a lateral stacking shift of an outer layer, which has a strong influence on electronic properties Among the 11 candidate orders analyzed in Ref. 17 for TTG around charge neutrality (ν = 0), there are only two states-denoted by SLP ± in that reference-which break C 2z Θ (and any combination of it with U(1) valley symmetry and/or spin rotations) and thus, allow for L z q = 0 for generic q. Focusing for simplicity on the TBG-like bands The situation is different in the regime 2 ≤ ν 3 where Ref. 17 finds spin polarization on top of these candidate orders. In this case, SLP ± and SSLP ± become equivalent, can induce finite angular momentum in the phonon bands, and are favored energetically beyond a critical value of the displacement field D 0 . Note further that this doping range is also more interesting as it includes the main superconducting regime of TTG's phase diagram, both close to the magic angle and in the small-twist-angle regime Next, we first derive a general expression for the angular momentum in terms of the relative displacement fields. Thereafter, we provide further details on the case of broken Θ and preserved C 2z symmetry (SLP -) and then discuss the SLP + where C 2z is broken but Θ is preserved. The total phonon angular momentum of the moiré system is If all three modes are decoupled, then we can define the angular momentum L z for each individual mode separately, e.g., for mode u, To compute the angular momentum for mode u, we need to solve the analogous secular equations when time-reversal symmetry [see Eq. (S55)] or rotational symmetry [see Eq. (S24)] is broken. Our analysis will closely follow Ref. Recall that in deriving the secular equations, we have defined the Fourier transform of δu(r, t) as Then, the displacement field in second quantization can be written as δu(r, t) = q=(q,σ) G q+G, σ e i(r(q+G)-ωqt) 2ω q m a q + * q+G, σ e -i(r(q+G)-ωqt) 2ω q m a † q , (S42) where q = (q, σ) includes both the wavevector q in the moiré Brillouin zone (MBZ) and the band index σ, and q+G,σ is the orthonormal eigenvector ( † q+G,σ q+G,σ = δ σ,σ ) that is associated to G in the secular equations. So, the angular momentum is ω q ω q a † q a q e i (q +G -q-G)r e i (ωq-ω q )t . The integration over space gives dr e i (q +G -q-G)r = V δ(q + Gq -G), and since q lies in the MBZ, we must have δ(q + Gq -G) = δ q ,q δ G ,G . Also using the fact that † q M q = -( T q M * q ) T as well as the commutation relation [a q,σ , a q ,σ ] = δ q,q = δ q,q δ σ,σ , we arrive at where f (ω q ) = 1/(e ωq/k B T + 1) is the Bose-Einstein distribution at temperature T . The derivations for the modes v and w follow similarly, so the final formula for the total angular momentum is where ξ q,σ (ζ q,σ ) is the orthonormal eigenvector for the δv (δw) modes. As discussed in the main text, the broken time-reversal symmetry of the SLP -state effectively manifests as a Hall viscosity (F HV ) contribution to the free energy. The viscosity tensor η (ij)(kl) is defined as the coefficient of a term with a single time derivative The pair indices (ij) and (kl) are symmetric under exchange η ijkl = η jikl = η ijlk because s i ) is the symmetrized strain tensor. However, the indices are pairwise antisymmetric as η ijkl = -η klij . Due to the antisymmetry, there are only three independent component in 2D: xxxy, xyyy, xxyy. Furthermore, with C 6 symmetry, there is only one independent coefficient η ≡ η xyyy , which we refer to as the Hall viscosity ρ ω 2 δv G+q = MG+q δv G+q + 1 3 ĤG+q δv G+q + 6 with Employing this formalism, we iteratively solve for the energies ω in the presence of a nonzero η; the associated eigenfunctions are then used to calculate the angular momentum from Eq. (S46a), which is shown in Figs. A different possibility for obtaining chiral phonons is to preserve time-reversal symmetry and break C 2z symmetry, which is spontaneously broken in the electronic SLP + phase where V ad is invariant under the residual C 3z symmetry for an arbitrary phase φ p but breaks C 2z symmetry if φ p = 2nπ/3 for n ∈ Z. With the modification in the adhesion energy, the secular equations in Eq. (S24) are only affected through the Fourier coefficients J ν G , J ν G , K ν G . Here, we consider the case where φ p = φ, independent of p. While Figs. 