Computational methods are driving high impact microscopy techniques such as ptychography. However, the design and implementation of new algorithms is often a laborious process, as many parts of the code are written in close-to-the-hardware programming constructs to speed up the reconstruction. In this paper, we present SciComPty, a new ptychography software framework aiming at simulating ptychography datasets and testing state-of-the-art and new reconstruction algorithms. Despite its simplicity, the software leverages GPU accelerated processing through the PyTorch CUDA interface. This is essential to design new methods that can readily be employed. As an example, we present an improved position refinement method based on Adam and a new version of the rPIE algorithm, adapted for partial coherence setups. Results are shown on both synthetic and real datasets. The software is released as open-source. Today, modern microscopy fully relies on cutting edge computing. The contemporary presence of a large Field Of View (FOV), high resolution and quantitative phase information is the distinctive characteristic of the ptychography diffraction imaging technique Iterative algorithms such as ePIE In this paper we describe how these three elements can be combined within the SciComPty GPU framework, a new software released as open-source Ptychography aims at recovering the 2D specimen transmission function O(x, y) ∈ C starting solely from a set of diffraction patterns Finally, a 2D photon detector is used to reveal the intensity (magnitude squared) of the incident radiation, producing a real, discrete, and quantised image I(x, y), which is the diffraction pattern. Ptychography employs translation diversity to over-condition the problem; a large illumination (probe) is indeed scanned across the sample, by imposing a large overlap on each illuminated region (Fig. Reconstructions apart, SciComPty offers a simple method to perform virtual experiments. To simulate a ptychography dataset, one can implement the general transmission model of Eq. 3, and assign particular values to its setup parameters. In the case of a far-field setup In order to describe partial coherece beams where P p with p ∈ {1, ..., M} is a particular probe mode; o o o j j j = o j (x, y) = O(x, y, x j , y j ) is the cropped region of the object, corresponding to the jth illuminated area in the scan sequence. To reconstruct an object with the model in Eq. 4, we solve for O(x, y) and a set of M mutually incoherent probe functions P P P p p p = P p (x, y). A public implementation of rPIE is currently missing and its multiprobe variant has not been reported yet. We implemented it in SciComPty, calling it M-rPIE. The procedure to design the method follows what has been done for one of the multimode-ePIE (M-ePIE) versions P P P p p p = P P P p p p + α P (ψ ψ ψ exw p, j - (5) As usual, o o o j j j = o j (x, y) and P P P p p p = P p (x, y) represent the updated quantities respectively for the current object box and the current probe, while: is the magnitude-corrected scattering wave produced by the pth illumination mode; α p and α o represent the update rates of the probe and object estimates and are typically set to [0.5, 1]. The role of each denominator is to weight the update where the exit wave is not bright As the resolution increases, the effects of backlash and limited mechanical precision become more and more noticeable. The positions vector is indeed populated by the open-loop commands given to the stage. A correction method must then be introduced a posteriori, increasing the reconstruction time. In In this work, we consider a fast and reliable way to correct translations. Similarly to where η x, j and η y, j are the gain factors (>> 1). The variable gain is calculated by using the Adam optimization algorithm Experiments on simulated and real data were performed. We compared the proposed reconstruction recipe in SciComPty with other state of the art algorithms, also implemented in the advanced PyNx software Real data have been acquired at the TwinMic beamline of the Elettra Synchrotron facility. We used a 1020 eV (Fig. SciComPty software framework leverage GPU-based computing for the entire process. The test configuration is reported in the supplementary material. The performance gain obtained by carrying the reconstruction algorithm from the CPU to the GPU is about 10x (0.1 s vs 1.3 s). The reason for such a large gain is the high number of GPU cores which allow to parallelize array calculations. With no position correction, the performance in terms of speed are comparable to other CUDA based solvers implemented in PyNx, which is currently the fastest alternative. Regarding the position correction, at the best of our knowledge, no implementation of A larger FOV is the most noticeable effect in the reconstructions obtained with M-rPIE (see Fig. In this paper, we presented solutions for three major flaws in ptychography: complex software architectures, partial coherence and position errors. By combining together the proposed solutions, we provide a recipe that is giving good results in many ptychography experiments performed at synchrotron and FEL laboratories (Elettra Sincrotrone Trieste). The development of a multi-mode variant for rPIE is essential to reduce the overlap condition, allowing for sparser measurements and thus providing shorter acquisition and reconstruction time. This is critical for dynamics experiments (e.g. with many energies and pump-probe delays). Reducing the lag between measurements and reconstruction is a critical research path, which has a significant impact on all the fields that use this kind of microscopy. We designed these solutions by employing our new GPU-accelerated ptychography software framework, SciComPty, which can be used to easily study and develop both state-of-the-art and new reconstruction algorithms. Throughout the text, we presented several reconstruction examples from real and synthetic datasets, comparing them to other state-of-the art solutions. The position refinement procedure relies on a fast subpixel registration algorithm that also runs on GPU. The entire software is provided to the research community as open source and can be downloaded from 