Studies of biochemical liquids require precise determination of their complex permittivity. We developed a microwave characterization technique on the basis of a highquality whispering-gallery mode (WGM) sapphire resonator with a microfluidic channel filled with the liquid under test. A novel approach allows obtaining the complex permittivity of biochemical liquids of sub-microliter/nanoliter volumes with high accuracy. The method is based on special procedure of analysis of the interaction of electromagnetic field with liquid in WGM microfluidic resonator and measurements of both the WGM resonance frequency shift and the change of the inverse quality factor. The approach is successfully applied to obtain the complex permittivity in the Ka band of glucose, albumin bovine serum, lactalbumin and cytochrome C aqueous solutions using the developed microwave technique. ccurate electromagnetic characterization is of crucial importance for a wide range of substances It is well known that there are methods and technical approaches to study the properties of condensed matter using both resonator and non-resonant electrodynamic structures. Each of the approaches has its advantages and disadvantages. Resonant approaches are the most accurate and sensitive techniques for microwave characterization of substances including founding complex permittivity of liquids. However resonator technique allows measuring only at one or several resonant frequencies with a single device Waveguides or planar transmission lines allow performing measurements in a large bandwidth with frequency independent characteristic impedance and propagation constant. This peculiarity makes them useful in the broadband study of substances depending on frequency Whispering-gallery mode (WGM) resonator techniques provide advanced properties comprising open resonator system, high quality factor, accessibility of rigorous analysis of electromagnetic field distribution in the resonator, controllability of mode coupling with feeder lines. Using microfluidic channels The complex permittivity of the liquid under test can be obtained by analytical (or numerical) solutions in the case of an open coaxial line technique after the setup calibration procedure We used the technique to investigate small volumes of liquids, which were put into the measurement cell developed on the basis of WGM dielectric resonator covered by plastic layers with a microfluidic channel filled with LUT The measurement setup also consisted of two sapphire dielectric waveguides as input and output transmission lines and the positioning system with temperature sensor and Peltier element (Fig. Sapphire disk resonator (d=14.5 mm, h=2.5 mm) is used in our measurement cell. The temperature variation of the resonator quality factor is negligible and the variation of resonant frequency shift of such a resonator is about 2 MHz per Celsius degree. The error of the resonant frequency determination caused by resonator temperature variation is lower than 20 kHz in our case. Such a measurement cell allows characterizing the resonator with LUT at a number of resonant frequencies (on different modes) with spacing about 1.8 GHz for the frequency range of 27-40 GHz. However the measurement on different modes usually requires changing the resonator coupling with the dielectric waveguides. All the measurements in our work were performed on a single mode (on a single resonant frequency) to keep identical all measurement conditions. The measurement cell was optimized using several approaches. Different plastics were investigated to choose the optimal material for making the microfluidic system. Zeonor 1420R was used as suitable material for our measurements. It has a relatively low dielectric loss (inverse quality factor of the resonator covered with such a plastic is about 6.25x10 -6 ) and can be processed using thermo-compression in a form of the microfluidic system with improved quality of the surface in the measurement cell. The designed microfluidic systems (see Fig. Different commercial software products were tested for the simulation of measurement cells based on a WGM disk dielectric resonator. A number of WGM dielectric resonators were simulated and the data were compared with analytical calculations To obtain the absolute value of the complex permittivity of LUT from the measured data, we performed a special calibration of the experimental setup by simulating it using COMSOL Multiphysics. In order to precisely determine the interaction of the liquid inside the microfluidic channel with the electromagnetic field, the geometry of the system should be determined with high precision. The measured dimensions of the microfluidic channel and its position in the plastic layer can be accurately refined by fitting the experimental data with calculated data COMSOL Multiphysics for our case of a WGM resonator with a microfluidic channel. The series of measurements: both the WGM resonance frequency shift and the change of the inverse quality factor were performed with different positions of the plastic layer with a microfluidic channel filled with distilled water and a channel without liquid (air inside the microfluidic channel). The measurements with air-and water-filled microfluidic channel were used to determine the real diameter. In the calculations, the known permittivity of water was used as a well-known reference We used the refinement procedure described below. In the case of a real sample, the position of the microfluidic channel in the plastic layer is displaced from the middle of the layer in the axial (z) direction due to the fabrication procedure. In order to obtain the value of such a shift, we fitted the calculated data to the measured results for a microfluidic channel filled with water. The measurements were performed in two positions of the plastic layer with the microfluidic channel when it was facing the resonator with its lower and with its top part. In such geometries, we can evaluate the precise channel displacement. This means that the distance of the microfluidic channel from the resonator surface is half the plastic thickness plus the value of the shift in one case and half of the plastic thickness minus the value of the shift in the other. In order to fit the experimental measurement, we considered two positions of the channel, corresponding to the two cases mentioned above. The position of the channel was changed in the same way in the simulation model in order to fit the simulated pair of results to the measured results. The refined position of the microfluidic channel in the radial (x) direction as well as the refined channel radius were obtained from fitting the calculated data to measured results for a microfluidic channel filled with air and water. The geometrical dimensions in the process of fitting were varied only within the measurement accuracy of the channel dimensions. The dimensions were varied in the calculations to achieve the best fitting of the simulated data to the measured data. The geometrical dimensions as well as the position of the microfluidic channel obtained from the best fitting were found to be as follows: diameter of the microfluidic channel is 0.188 mm; shift of the microfluidic channel from the middle of the plastic layer depth in the direction of the resonator is 0.0325 mm and in a radial direction it is 4.1 mm from the resonator center. Measurements of resonant frequency shift air liq f f  of the resonator with microfluidic channel filled with liquid in respect to air-filled one and losses in liquid, which can be found as a difference in inverse quality factors of the resonator with liquid filled microfluidic channel in respect to air-filled one for different well known liquids, were performed to check reliability of the numerical calculations. Methanol, ethanol, propanol, acetone and water were chosen as test liquids with well-known values of the permittivity of the resonator with liquid filled channel in respect to air as a function of the real and imaginary parts of LUT permittivity are shown in Fig. on imaginary part of liquid permittivity is also almost linear for liquids with relatively high permittivity. The numerical calculations were performed using corrected geometrical dimensions of the plastic layer with a microfluidic channel as was described in the previous section. The calculated data are in good agreement with experimental ones, which proves reliability of the modeling calculation with the geometrical dimensions obtained as a result of fitting procedure. Solutions of glucose in water were chosen as well-known, important for insulin-related research and readily available biological solutions for resonator measurements. Aqueous solutions of glucose were prepared just before the measurements by dissolving glucose in water with mass concentrations of glucose equal to 0.5, 1, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 15 and 20%. The measurements were performed at a frequency of 35.5 GHz and with the temperature stabilized at 25oC ± 0.01°C. The dependencies of the resonant frequency shift of the resonator with a microfluidic channel filled with water and aqueous glucose solution on the concentration of glucose are shown in Fig. In the inverse electrodynamic problem, the real '  and imaginary ' '  parts of the permittivity of LUT are functions of both the resonant frequency shift and changes in the inverse . It should be noted that the values measured in the direct experiment are the eigenfrequencies and the magnitudes of the Q-factor and these values depend on '  and ' '  . In this case, it is not possible to obtain the absolute value of permittivity for LUT by calibration using the known liquids. For this purpose, simulation by COMSOL Multiphysics can be used as will be shown below. As was shown previously G lu c o s e c o n c e n t r a t io n ( % ) Fig. Fig. The high sensitivity of WGM resonator technique promises possibility to study biochemical and biological liquids. The albumin bovine serum, lactalbumin and cytochrome C solutions in water were investigated. The concentration varies from 0.01 up to 3.0 mmol/l. The real and imaginary parts of liquid permittivity's dependencies on concentration of the mentioned biological substances in aqueous solutions are shown in Fig. The measurements show not only possibility of studying the aqueous solutions of different compounds with the small concentration changes, but also show possibility of quantitative monitoring of different LUT behavior using proposed novel technique. A novel approach for obtaining the absolute values of complex permittivity of a liquid under test in the microwave range using the WGM resonator with a microfluidic channel on a top of the resonator has been proposed and successfully verified. The permittivity values of glucose aqueous solutions obtained using the developed procedures are in good agreement with literature data. The complex permittivities of albumin bovine serum, lactalbumin and cytochrome C aqueous solutions of various concentrations were obtained on the basis of measured data of the WGM resonator technique. It was shown that the presented measurement system allows measuring small concentration changes of liquid solutions in sub-microliter/nanoliter volumes. The approach enables the contactless determination of complex permittivity for small amounts of biological liquids in the microwave range with high measurement accuracy.