We derive the dynamical magnetic response functions in the Fulde-Ferrell (FF) state of a superconductor with inversion symmetry. The pair momentum 2q is obtained by minimization of the condensation energy and the resulting quasiparticle states and spectral functions exhibit the segmentation into paired and unpaired regions due to the finite q. The dynamical magnetic susceptibility is then calculated in linear response formalism in the FF state with finite-q condensate resulting from s-wave or d-wave pairing. We show that quasiparticle excitations inside as well as between paired and unpaired segments contribute to the dynamical response. We discuss its dependence on frequency and momentum transfer which develops a characteristic symmetry-breaking parallel to q. Furthermore we investigate the possible influence on Knight shift and in the case of d-wave pairing on the spin resonance formation in the FF state. In singlet superconductors with modest orbital pair breaking a state with finite-momentum may become stable at low temperature and high fields. In this state Cooper pairs (-k + q ↑, k + q ↓) with finite common momentum 2q form the Fulde-Ferrell (FF) Experimental evidence for this exotic pair state in the low-temperature and high-field sector is, however, hard to obtain, possibly caused by sensitivity to impurity scattering Such experiments, however, do not probe the microscopic nature of the FF state whose central aspect is the breakup of the Fermi surface into paired and unpaired segments. This state is due to a kdependent tradeoff between the loss of condensation energy due to the pair kinetic energy associated with the overall momentum and a gain in Zeeman energy due to population imbalance of spin states in the external field Another important probe for the FF state may be inelastic neutron scattering (INS) which probes the dynamical spin susceptibility. The latter is determined by the quasiparticle excitations in the FF phase which are considerably different from the BCS phase for two reasons: i) the gap amplitude will be much reduced for states in the paired segments and ii) the appearance of unpaired states will lead to additional low energy response and a symmetry breaking in momentum space with respect to the direction of the pair momentum 2q. Both effects should leave their signature on the dynamical spin response observable by INS. Spin dynamics has sofar been mostly investigated for the q = 0 BCS phase. It also encompasses the possibility of a spin exciton or resonance inside the gap for a unconventional, e.g. d-wave gap symmetry with nodal structure In essence the FFLO superconducting state is characterized by a coherent superposition of paired (-k + q ↑ , k + q ↓) and unpaired states whose momenta k be-FIG. long to different segments of the Fermi surface such that the paired states have a common center of mass (CM) momentum 2q. The formation of this state may be described by a mean field pairing Hamiltonian where a 2D tight binding (TB) conduction band ε k = -2t(cos k x + cos k y ) with hopping element t > 0 and band width 2D c = 8t will be used. Furthermore defining ξ k = ε k -μ with respect to the chemical potential μ we will abbreviate the field split conduction band energies (b = μ B B, σ = ±1 or ↑, ↓) and its (anti-)symmetrized combinations s(+) and a(-) of dispersions shifted by ±q according to In Eq. (1) τ 0 is the unit in Nambu particle-hole space. Furthermore ∆ k q is the gap function and ∆ 0 q its amplitude in the FF state. The effective interaction strength V 0 is defined below in Eq. (3) The symmetrized form of the Hamiltonian in Eq. (1) implies that only the symmetrized dispersions ξ s kq will appear in the Bogoliubov transformation but both ξ s kq , ξ a kq and b will be present in the expression for the (positive) quasiparticle excitation energies |E σ kq | (σ = ±) which are given by Furthermore the ground state energy of the FF phase is obtained as There are two possible cases We will consider two possible one-dimensional spinsinglet C 4v -representations (Γ = A 1 , B 1 ) for the gap function defined by ∆ k q = ∆ 0 q f Γ (k) with the form factor f Γ (k) = 1 for the isotropic s-wave and f Γ (k) = cos k xcos k y in the d-wave cases, respectively. The form factors are normalized according to (1/N ) k f 2 Γ (k) = 1 such that the Brillouin zone (BZ) averaged gaps ∆ k2 q 1 2 = ∆ 0 q are equal in the two cases. Note, however, that the maximum gap modulus at the points (π, 0), (0, π) and equivalents is given by ∆ d q = 2∆ 0 q in the d-wave case which will be used in Sec. III C. The strength V 0 of the corresponding pair interactions Here the index Γ for V 0 has been suppressed. How large the paired and unpaired Fermi segments are depends on the size of CM pair momentum 2q(b) and gap size ∆ q (b) in the FFLO state. They are determined by the minimization of the condensation energy G where E G is the ground state energy of the superconducting state appearing in Eq. ( ) that of the normal ground state. One obtains (7) For each field b the minimum energy state characterized by (q, ∆ q ) has to be found numerically from this con-densation energy functional. We choose the field b = bẑ and spin quantization axis along z-direction and the FF vector q = qx along x-direction which is the antinodal direction in d-wave case. The field dependence of the pair (q, ∆ q ) is shown in Fig. The static and dynamical spin susceptibility are important tools to investigate the BCS superconductor using Knight shift and NMR experiments as well as inelastic neutron scattering (INS). It is worthwhile to extend the analysis of this important quantity to the FF phase. An earlier investigation for the d-wave state with fixed pair momentum, coexisting SDW and focused on static results was given in Ref. The bare magnetic response function of a superconductor obtained from the bubble diagram without vertex corrrections is given by Here τ is the index in particle-hole space of the Nambu Green's functions Ĝq (q, iω n ) of the FF state. Furthermore q = kk is the momentum transfer and q the (half-) pair momentum. We perform the spin sum which is isotropic (independent of α = x, y, z) for singlet pairs and use the explicit form of the Green's function matrix Ĝq Then we obtain in closed form, suppressing spin index α from now on: . (11) Carrying out the summation over the Matsubara frequencies ω n and analytically continuing to the real axis according to iν m → ω + iη a lengthy calculation leads to the final result: where f (E) = (exp(E/T ) + 1) -1 is the Fermi function. The last two terms may also be written differently by using 1 -f (E) = f (-E). Here the generalized superconducting coherence factors of magnetic response for the FF phase are given by Note that only the q-symmetrized dispersions ξ s kq (directly and implicitly in E kq ) appear in the coherence factors. The above magnetic response function for the FF phase reduces to the well known result to f (E) = 1 -Θ(E) = Θ(-E). Then we obtain If we look at the numerators of the four terms in this equations we realize that the first two correspond to quasiparticle scattering processes k ↔ k from paired to unpaired FS segments and vice versa (p-u,u-p). whereas the third and fourth term are quasiparticle annihilation and creation respectively, containing only processes between the paired (p-p) or unpaired (u-u) segments. The various possible contributions are illustrated pictorially in the spectral plot of Fig. ) where σ = -σ. This may be further simplified for the homogeneous susceptibility with q = 0. Using Cq + (kk) = 1 and Cq -(kk) = 0 it can be derived as This q = 0 static susceptibility is therefore proportional to the T-averaged DOS of quasiparticles at a given temperature and this determines the T-dependence of the Knight shift in an NMR experiment in the superconductor. Usually, in the zero-field BCS singlet superconducting state this quantity contains information on the nodal structure of the SC gap function. In the FF state, however it is also determined by the normal quasiparticles in the depaired momentum space segments and is influenced by them. This problem has also been considered with a different quasiclassical method for spatially inhomogeneous d-wave state where Y σ q (T ) is the generalized Yosida function It is known from many examples, in particular from the f-based heavy fermion superconductors Here we investigate how the spin resonance appearance is modified in the FF phase of a d-wave superconductor. Firstly if the external field is appreciably larger than b * the reduced gap ∆ d q (b) in the FF phase (Fig. (18) The INS cross section will therefore develop a peak at ω r when the resonance condition is fulfilled for sufficiently small imaginary part at this frequency. From the d-wave BCS case (see Appendix A) it is known One way to observe the profound influence of finite momentum pairs on the magnetic response function is comparison of spectral function (constant frequency cuts of the dispersions |E σ kq | and the real and imaginary parts of the dynamical susceptibility. This is shown in Fig. The C 4v symmetry breaking of the magnetic spectrum becomes even more evident by comparing χ 0q (q, ω) for qdirections parallel and perpendicular to the pair momentum direction (1, 0) as shown in Fig. A complementary way to view the change of the magnetic excitation spectrum across the critical field b * separating BCS and FF phase is presented in Fig. Besides the dynamics discussed above which is relevant for INS the static homogeneous susceptibility is also an important quantity because it is proportional to the Knight shift observed in NMR experiments Finally we discuss the possibility of the spin-resonance phenomenon in the d-wave case as outlined in Sec. III C. We present the real and imaginary parts of the susceptibility for a constant qvector as function of frequency in Fig. onance condition may no longer be fulfilled. Therefore the collective response in the FF phase will be subdued and/or moved to a different wave vector q. For a suitably sized 1/J q = 0.16 this may happen as illustrated in Fig. We have investigated the dynamical magnetic response in the Fulde-Ferrell superconducting phase characterized by Cooper pairs with finite center of mass momentum 2q. We have derived general analytical expressions for the dynamical magnetic susceptibility and shown that it reduces to the well known result for the BCS phase with q = 0. In the latter only excitations between gapped quasiparticles on the completely paired Fermi surface contribute. In the FF phase excitations between paired and unpaired quasiparticle states contribute as well where the latter are gapless. As an explicit model we consider a single orbital tight binding band and s-and d-wave singlet pairs. By minimization of the total condensation energy we determine the field dependence of (half-) pair momentum q(b) and associated FF gap ∆ q (b) as input quantities for the two quasiparticle branches E σ kq that determine the magnetic response function. We find that the presence of finite momentum pairs breaks the fourfold C 4v symmetry of the susceptibility in the square BZ with only twofold rotations and reflections perpedicular to the (half-) pair momentum q remaining. This is particularly evident for the d-wave case in the small momentum transfer qregime and should be observable by constant -ω scans as well as in the dispersive continuum excitations in the (q, ω) plane accessible by INS in the FF phase. The static susceptibility determines the Knight shift and its temperature dependence shows the well known distinction between exponential and power-law dependence for s-and d-wave cases, respectively, at low temperature for the BCS phase. It was found that the gapless unpaired states appearing in the FF phase lead to a rapid appearance of a large residual low temperature Knight shift. We also considered the fate of a possible in-gap collective spin resonance that may appear in a d-wave BCS state when entering the FF phase. We observe that the condition for the resonance formation, i.e. the presence of a large peak in the real part of the dynamical susceptibility is harder to fulfil in the FF case. Therefore one may expect a suppression of the resonance and/or a shift to different wave vectors in this state. This would be an interesting subject to explore with inelastic neutron scattering. Appendix A: Limiting BCS case of the response function It is worthwhile to see whether the generalized FF dynamical response derived in Eq. ( (A1) Setting b = 0, q = 0 we have ξ s k = ξ k and ξ a k = 0. Furthermore with ∆ k q = ∆ k 0 ≡ ∆ k this leads to . This is the quasiparticle energy for the BCS case for all wave vectors since the pairing is stable for all values of k and there is no more segmentation of the Fermi surface in paired and unpaired regions as in the FF case. This leads to a greatly simplified response function that only depends on the momentum transfer q and no longer on the FF pair vector q. We obtain from Eqs. (12,A1): (A2) The coherence factors now also simplify to This expression agrees with the result in Refs. For zero temperature and positive frequency only the last term in Eq. (A3) contributes and the response function reduces to In the case of sign-changing unconventional gap function with ∆ k+Q = -∆ q where e. On the other hand for the s-wave case with ∆ k+Q = ∆ q = ∆ 0 the coherence factor C-(k, k+Q) 0 is vanishingly small. This results in a step-like increase of Imχ 0 (Q, ω) for ω > 2∆ d in the d-wave case and only gradual increase for for ω > 2∆ 0 for the s-wave gap. This is associated with a peak or no peak in the real part in both cases, respectively. Therefore a spin resonance in the collective RPA susceptibility at ω r (Q) < 2∆ d develops according to Eq. ( 