Materials tuned to a quantum critical point display universal scaling properties as a function of temperature T and frequency ω. A long-standing puzzle regarding cuprate superconductors has been the observed power-law dependence of optical conductivity with an exponent smaller than one, in contrast to T-linear dependence of the resistivity and ω-linear dependence of the optical scattering rate. Here, we present and analyze resistivity and optical conductivity of La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 with x = 0.24. We demonstrate ħω/k B T scaling of the optical data over a wide range of frequency and temperature, T-linear resistivity, and optical effective mass proportional to ∼ ln T corroborating previous specific heat experiments. We show that a T, ω-linear scaling Ansatz for the inelastic scattering rate leads to a unified theoretical description of the experimental data, including the power-law of the optical conductivity. This theoretical framework provides new opportunities for describing the unique properties of quantum critical matter. The linear-in-temperature electrical resistivity is one of the remarkable properties of the cuprate high temperature superconductors As expected for a system tuned to a quantum critical point Here we present systematic measurements of the optical spectra, as well as dc resistivity, of a La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 (LSCO) sample with x = p = 0.24 close to the pseudogap critical point, over a broad range of temperature and frequency. We demonstrate that the data display Planckian quantum critical scaling over an unprecedented range of ħω/k B T. Furthermore, a direct analysis of the data reveals a logarithmic temperature dependence of the optical effective mass. This establishes a direct connection to another hallmark of Planckian behavior, namely the logarithmic enhancement of the specific heat coefficient C/T ∼ ln T previously observed for LSCO at p = 0.24 We introduce a theoretical framework which relies on a minimal Planckian scaling Ansatz for the inelastic scattering rate. We show that this provides an excellent description of the experimental data. Our theoretical analysis offers, notably, a solution to the puzzle mentioned above. Indeed we show that, despite the purely Planckian Ansatz which underlies our model, the optical conductivity computed in this framework is well described by an apparent power law with ν * < 1 over an intermediate frequency regime, as also observed in our experimental data. The effective exponent ν * is found to be non-universal and to depend on the inelastic coupling constant, which we determine from several independent considerations. The proposed theoretical analysis provides a unifying framework in which the behavior of the T-linear resistivity, ln T behavior of C/T, and scaling properties of the optical spectra can all be understood in a consistent manner. We measured the optical properties and extracted the complex optical conductivity σ(ω, T) of an LSCO single crystal with ab orientation (CuO 2 planes). The hole doping is p = x = 0.24, which places our sample above and close to the pseudogap critical point of the LSCO family The quantity probed by the optical experiments of the present study is the planar complex dielectric function ε (ω). The dielectric function has contributions from the free charge carriers, as well as interband (bound charge) contributions. In the limit ω → 0, the latter contribution converges to a constant Here the free-carrier response σ(ω) is given by the generalized Drude formula, where all dynamical mass renormalization (m * /m) and relaxation (ħ/τ) processes are represented by a memory-function The free-carrier spectral weight per plane is given by the constant K and the interplanar spacing is d c . The scattering rate ħ/τ(ω) deduced using Eqs. The optical mass enhancement m * (ω)/m is displayed in Fig. In this section, we consider simultaneously the frequency and temperature dependence of the optical properties and investigate whether ħω/k B T scaling holds for this sample close to the pseudogap critical point. We propose a procedure to determine the three parameters ε ∞ , K, and m introduced above. Quantum systems close to a quantum critical point display scale invariance. Temperature being the only relevant energy scale in the quantum critical regime, this leads in many cases to ω/T scaling with f τ and f m two scaling functions. This behavior requires that both ħω and k B T are smaller than a high-energy electronic cutoff, but their ratio can be arbitrary. Furthermore, we note that when ν = 1 (Planckian case) the scaling is violated by logarithmic terms, which control in particular the zerofrequency value of the optical mass m * (0, T). As shown in Sec. II C within a simple theoretical model, ω/T scaling nonetheless holds in this case to an excellent approximation provided that m * (0, T) is subtracted, as in Eq. ( Here, we investigate whether our optical data obey ω/T scaling. We find that the quality of the scaling depends sensitively on the chosen value of ε ∞ . Different prescriptions in the literature to fix ε ∞ yield -independently of the method used -values ranging from ε ∞ ≈ 4.3 for strongly underdoped Bi2212 to ε ∞ ≈ 5.6 for strongly overdoped Bi2212 The scaling properties of the scattering rate obtained from our optical data according to the procedure described above is illustrated in Fig. The dc mass enhancement values m * (0, T)/m resulting from the procedure described above are displayed in Fig. Remarkably, we have found that this condition is obeyed within less than a percent by a square-lattice tight-binding model with parameters appropriate for LSCO at p = 0.24 (Supplementary Information Sec. E). This model has nearest and next-nearest neighbor hopping amplitudes t = 0.3 eV and t ′ /t = -0.17 Figure The above scaling analysis has led us to the following conclusions. (i) The optical scattering rate and optical mass enhancement of LSCO at p = 0.24 exhibit ω/T scaling over two decades for the chosen value ε ∞ = 2.76. (ii) The best collapse of the data is achieved for an exponent ν = 1 corresponding to Planckian dissipation. This behavior is consistent with the measured T-linear resistivity. (iii) The temperature dependence of m * (0, T) that produces the best data collapse is logarithmic, consistently with the temperature dependence of the electronic specific heat. Hence, the data presented in Fig. In this section, we consider a simple theoretical model and explore its implications for the optical conductivity. Our central assumption is that the inelastic scattering rate (imaginary part of the self-energy) obeys the following scaling property: In this expression g is a dimensionless inelastic coupling constant and ε = ħω. This ħω/k B T scaling form is assumed to apply when both ħω and k B T are smaller than a highenergy cutoff Λ but their ratio can be arbitrary. The detailed form of the scaling function S is not essential, except for the requirements that S(0) is finite and S(x ≫ 1) ∝ |x|. These properties ensure that the low-frequency inelastic scattering rate depends linearly on T for ħω ≪ k B T and that dissipation is linear in energy for ħω ≫ k B T, which are hallmarks of Planckian behavior. We note that such a scaling form appears in the context of microscopic models such as overscreened non-Fermi liquid Kondo models The real part of the self-energy is obtained from the Kramers-Kronig relation which reads, substituting the scaling form above: We note that this expression is only defined provided the integral is bounded at high-frequency by the cutoff Λ, as detailed in Supplementary Information Sec. C. This reflects into a logarithmic temperature dependence at low energy: with a = 0.770542 a numerical constant (Supplementary Information Sec. C). Correspondingly, the effective mass of quasiparticles, as well as the specific heat, is logarithmically divergent at low temperature: with 1/Z = 1 -dRe Σ(ε)/dε| ε=0 . Importantly, the coefficient of the dominant ln T term depends only on the value of the inelastic coupling g. In a local (momentum-independent) theory, vertex corrections are absent where f (ε) = (e ε/k B T + 1) -1 is the Fermi function and Σ * denotes complex conjugation. In this expression is the transport function associated with the bare bandstructure. We have assumed that its energy dependence can be neglected so that only the value Φ(0) at the Fermi level matters (we set μ 0 = 0 by convention). Using a tight-binding model for the band dispersion, Φ(0) can be related to the spectral weight K discussed in the previous section as: Within our model, the behavior of the optical conductivity relies on three parameters: the cutoff Λ, the Drude weight related to Φ(0) and, importantly, the dimensionless inelastic coupling g. An analysis of Eq. • ħω ≲ k B T. The optical conductivity in this regime takes a Drude-like form Eq. ( The numerically computed zero-frequency optical mass enhancement m * (0)/m agrees very well with m * qp /m = 1/Z as given by Eq. ( • ħω ≳ Λ. In this high-frequency regime, the asymptotic behavior is fixed by causality and reads |σ| ∼ 1/ω, arg(σ) → π/2 (see Supplementary Fig. • k B T ≲ ħω ≲ Λ. In this regime, which is the most important in practice when considering our experimental data, one can derive the following expression: Remarkably, as shown in Fig. Correspondingly, arg(σ) has a plateau at arg(σ) ≈ πν * /2 before reaching its eventual asymptotic value π/2 (Supplementary Fig. In the dc limit ω → 0, Eq. ( Using the values of g and Φ(0) determined above, we obtain: A = 0.38 μΩ cm/K, to be compared to the experimental value A = 0.63 μΩ cm/K. It is reassuring that a reasonable order of magnitude is obtained (at the 60% level) for the A-coefficient, while obviously a precise quantitative agreement cannot be expected from such a simple model. Finally, we present in Fig. In this article, we have shown that our experimental optical data for LSCO at p = 0.24 display scaling properties as a function of ħω/k B T which are consistent with Planckian behavior corresponding to a scaling exponent ν = 1. We found that the accuracy of the data scaling depends on the choice of the parameter ε ∞ relating the optical conductivity to the measured dielectric permittivity, and that optimal scaling is achieved for a specific range of values of this parameter. From both a direct analysis of the optical data and by requiring optimal scaling, we demonstrated that the low-frequency optical effective mass m * (ω ≈ 0, T)/m displays a logarithmic dependence on temperature. This dependence, also a hallmark of Planckian behavior, is qualitatively consistent with that reported for the specific heat (quasiparticle effective mass) We have introduced a simple theoretical model which relies on the assumption that the single-particle inelastic scattering rate (imaginary part of the self-energy) displays ħω/k B T scaling properties with ν = 1 and that its angular dependence along the Fermi surface can be neglected. These assumptions are consistent with angular dependent magnetoresistance measurements A key finding of our analysis is that the calculated optical conductivity displays an apparent power-law behavior with an effective exponent ν * < 1 over an extended frequency range relevant to experiments (Figs. The logarithmic temperature dependence of both the optical effective mass and the quasiparticle effective mass is directly proportional to the inelastic coupling constant g. We emphasize that this is profoundly different from what happens in a Fermi liquid. There, using the Kramers-Kronig relation, one sees that the effective mass enhancement (related to the low-frequency behavior of the real part of the self-energy) depends on the whole high-frequency behavior of the imaginary part of the self-energy. In contrast, in a Planckian metal obeying ω/T scaling, the dominant ln T dependence of the mass is entirely determined by the low-energy behavior of the imaginary part of the self-energy, see Eq. ( In recent works Finally, we note for completeness that a power-law behavior of the optical conductivity has also been observed in other materials, including quasi one-dimensional conductors The La 1.76 Sr 0.24 CuO 4 (p = 0.24) single crystal used in the present study was grown by the travelling solvent floating zone method We measured the infrared reflectivity from 2.5 meV to 0.5 eV using a Fourier-transform spectrometer with a home-built UHV optical flow cryostat and in-situ gold evaporation for calibrating the signal. In the energy range from 0.5 to 5 eV, we measured the real and imaginary parts of the dielectric function ε (ω) using a home-built UHV cryostat installed in a visible-UV ellipsometer. Raw data for ε (ω) are presented in Supplementary Fig. In this expression, ε ∞ is the background relative permittivity due to high-energy transitions [see Eq. ( As is common for materials with strong electronic correlations, and well documented for cuprates in particular so that the scattering rate and mass enhancement can be determined from the optical conductivity according to: 1 In these expressions, d c = 6.605 Å is the distance between two CuO 2 planes, m is the band mass and K is the spectral weight for a single plane. The determination of m and K is also discussed in Sec. II B along with that of ε ∞ . K only affects the absolute magnitude of 1/τ and m * /m, while the choice of ε ∞ has a more significant influence. DC resistivity was measured inside a Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS) from Quantum Design in fourpoint geometry on the temperature range from 300 K to 2 K. The electric contacts were made by using silver wires of 50 μm and silver paste. To increase the contact quality, contacts were annealed at 500 • C in oxygen atmosphere for an hour in order to get a resistance of a few ohms. To obtain the resistivity ρ(T) as a function of temperature in the units Ω cm from the raw sample resistance R(T) in Ω, the length L, width W, and thickness t of the sample were measured to get a geometric factor α = W × t/L knowing the relation: ρ(T) = αR(T). Resistivity was measured at two magnetic fields H = 0 T and H = 16 T to extract the superconducting transition temperature T c = 19 K at H = 0 T and the normal-state resistivity down to 5 K (H = 16 T). The experimental and theoretical data generated in this study as well as the associated codes have been deposited in the Yareta database The theoretical scaling Ansatz that we have used to interpret the optical conductivity data only applies at low energy. Obviously, there are also higher-energy transitions that are not described by this Ansatz. In this section, we show that these higher-energy transitions yield a contribution to ε ∞ which is of order unity. This observation is helpful in clarifying why the value of ε ∞ that provides the best possible scaling of the data is smaller than both the one deduced by analyzing the integrated spectral weight and the value more commonly admitted for this class of materials. We use a simple model of these high-energy transitions involving upper and lower Hubbard bands. We consider electrons characterized by a spectral function of the form A( k, ε) = A Z (ξ k , ε) + A Δ (ε). The term A Z (ξ k , ε) represents low-energy quasiparticles with a band dispersion ξ k (measured from the chemical potential) and a momentum-independent self-energy. The sum rule for this term is where Z is the quasiparticle residue. The remaining spectral weight 1 -Z is assumed to reside in lower and upper Hubbard-like bands, the former being fully occupied around energy -Δ 1 and the latter being empty around energy +Δ 2 . For simplicity, we describes these bands as dispersion-less and write the corresponding spectral function as A Δ (ε) = p 1 δ(ε + Δ 1 ) + p 2 δ(ε -Δ 2 ) with Δ 1 and Δ 2 positive. In a one-band model, the condition p 1 + p 2 = 1 -Z must be obeyed to ensure the total sum rule ∫ ∞ -∞ dε A(ξ k , ε) = 1. In the cuprates, the hybridization of O 2p and Cu 3d electrons implies that the total spectral weight of the Hubbard bands is generally larger than 1 -Z, but difficult to estimate precisely. We will therefore keep p 1 and p 2 as independent parameters in the following. The optical conductivity is split into a low-frequency contribution σ L (ω) determined by the transitions within the quasiparticle band and a high-frequency contribution σ H (ω) containing the transitions between the Hubbard bands and the quasiparticle band, as well as the transitions between the Hubbard bands. The dielectric function is ε (ω) = 1 -σ(ω)/(iε 0 ω). The 1 represents the dielectric response of the vacuum with vanishing conductivity. The quantity ε L (ω) = 1 -σ L (ω)/(iε 0 ω) therefore represents the dielectric function of a vacuum dressed by the low-energy quasiparticles, without the polarizability associated with the high-frequency transitions, which is captured by ε H (ω) = -σ H (ω)/(iε 0 ω). If the low-and high-frequency transitions are well separated-we will assume they are-the function ε H (ω) approaches a real constant in the low-frequency region, where the intra-band quasiparticle transitions take place, and this term can be replaced by its zero-frequency value, e.g., ε H (ω) ≈ ε H (0) = Δε ∞ with ∞ recalling that this contribution originates from high-frequency transitions. The corresponding approximate dielectric function is commonly written as Using the Kramers-Kronig relation and the fact that Re σ H (ω) is an even function of ω, this may also be expressed as This expression only makes sense if σ H (ω) vanishes sufficiently fast at ω = 0 or is gapped. This condition may be considered as a necessary one for the separation into low-and high-frequency degrees of freedom to be meaningful. The optical conductivity is related to the electron spectral function and transport function Φ(ξ) via which reduces to Eq. ( (S21) There are three contributions to Re σ H (ω): one describes the transitions from the lower Hubbard band to the quasiparticle band [A(ξ, ε) = p 1 δ(ε + Δ 1 ), A(ξ, ε + ħω) = A Z (ξ, ε + ħω)]; one describes the transitions from the quasiparticle band to the upper Hubbard band [A(ξ, ε) = A Z (ξ, ε), A(ξ, ε + ħω) = p 2 δ(ε + ħω -Δ 2 )]; one describes the transitions from the lower to the upper Hubbard bands [A(ξ, ε) = p 1 δ(ε + Δ 1 ), A(ξ, ε + ħω) = p 2 δ(ε + ħω -Δ 2 )]. The three other processes (quasiparticle to lower Hubbard, higher Hubbard to quasiparticle, and higher Hubbard to lower Hubbard) are suppressed at T = 0. The real part of the high-frequency conductivity is, therefore, where θ (ε) is the Heaviside step function. Δε ∞ follows from Eq. (S19) as The remaining ε integral is cut at the non-interacting bandwidth D, beyond which Φ(ε) vanishes. For an order-of-magnitude estimate, we take Φ(ε) = Φ(0) for |ε| < D and zero otherwise, which leads to Using our model parameter Φ(0) = 1.33 × 10 7 ε 0 THz 2 , Δ 1 = 1.46 eV, which corresponds to the peak in Fig. Here, we show that the frequency and temperature dependencies of the optical scattering rate and optical mass enhancement indicate a Planckian dissipation (with single-particle self-energy exponent ν = 1) -despite the fact that the modulus of the optical conductivity displays an exponent ν * < 1 as seen in Fig. The measured infrared dielectric function of LSCO at doping p = 0.24 is displayed in Supplementary Fig. The data for T = 30 K and below are strongly affected by the loss of information due to the sharpening of the Drude peak below our observation limit of 2.5 meV and the opening of the superconducting gap below T c = 19 K. Furthermore, interband transitions come into play above 0.4 eV. The figure shows that the collapse improves upon increasing ν towards ν = 1. For ν ≲ 0.8, the optimal ε ∞ is larger than the largest measured infrared dielectric function (Supplementary Fig. In order to test the scaling laws for m * , we must determine m * (0). The low-frequency noise prevents us from extracting this information directly from the data. We therefore treat m * (0) for each temperature as a variable that we adjust, like ε ∞ , for optimal collapse. The results are displayed in Supplementary Fig. The optimizations presented so far establish that the selfenergy exponent takes the value ν = 1. However, the optimal ε ∞ determined from 1/τ and m * differ. One sees in Supplementary Fig. Here, we study the Planckian model defined by Eqs. We implement the ultraviolet cutoff in Eq. ( where Z is the quasiparticle residue. After evaluating the derivative of Σ(ε) using Eq. ( The function to integrate approaches 1/x at large x and the integral therefore approaches ln(Λ/k B T) We write this as where the constant a is given by If ε ≫ k B T, the integral giving Σ(ε) is dominated by the region |x| ≫ 1 and we can replace the scaling function by its asymptotic form S(|x| ≫ 1) = |x|. We then find in this regime, which will be used below in building approximations for the conductivity. the cutoff-dependent logarithmic correction, σ (II) (ω) would display pure σ ∝ (-iω) -1 behavior, as may be expected in a quantum critical system with linear-in-energy single-particle scattering rate As the approximations presented so far take one of the two limits ω ≪ T or ω ≫ T, they cannot predict the form of the ω/T scaling expected when ω and T are comparable. If the selfenergy were obeying the scaling property Σ(ε) = TF (ε/T), then also the conductivity, Eq. ( At low energy and temperature, Im Σ is not influenced by the cutoff, such that the ideal scaling 1/σ ∝ -iωm * /m + 1/τ = T F (ω/T) is expected to hold reasonably well for the real part, i.e., 1/τ ≈ T f τ (ω/T). This expectation is confirmed by the numerical simulations (Fig. qp /m, a result confirmed by the numerics (see Supplementary Fig. To conclude this section, we note that the presence of ω/T scaling has been previously tested in Bi2212 by considering the quantity ħ/(k B TRe σ) (S34) This expression is in reasonable agreement with the exact numerical result (see dotted lines in Supplementary Fig. Here, we introduce and study a model with sub-linear energy and temperature dependencies of the self-energy. We follow the same outline as for the Planckian model, first discussing the self-energy, then the optical conductivity, and finally the ω/T scaling. Beside presenting the model, our main goal is to argue that it gives predictions that are in disagreement with the experimental observations in LSCO at doping p * , including for the apparent exponent ν * < 1 of the optical conductivity. The central property of the class of theories discussed in this paper is that the single-particle scattering rate is local (independent of momentum) and assumes the form -Im Σ(ε) = πg(k B T) ν S ν (ε/k B T), where S ν (0) is finite and S ν (|x| ≫ 1) ∝ |x| ν . These two conditions ensure that the dc resistivity behaves as T ν and the ac scattering rate approaches ω ν for ħω > k B T, while at intermediate frequencies the scattering rate divided by T ν is a function of ω/T. The case ν = 1 is the Planckian model described in Supplementary Information Sec. C, while here we consider the case ν < 1. An important aspect of the sub-Planckian model is that it does not require an ultraviolet cutoff, because the Kramers-Kronig integral giving the real part of the self-energy is now convergent. Thus the theory is completely specified in terms of the low-energy properties of the carriers, which then determine the thermodynamic, transport, and spectroscopic properties. This is an important difference relative to the case ν = 1, where the high-energy structure of the theory, represented by the ultraviolet cutoff, controls the thermodynamics and the optical mass. Certain microscopic models with conformal invariance realize exactly the scaling form of the single-particle scattering rate with ν < 1 and provide an explicit expression for the function S ν (x) where Γ denotes the Euler gamma function. Note that g is dimensionfull with the unit of energy to the power 1 -ν. Proceeding like in the case ν = 1, we find that the quasiparticle mass diverges at low temperature like T ν-1 : This is a robust property of the sub-Planckian model -it does not depend on the particular scaling function S ν (x) -that disagrees with the logarithmic temperature dependence observed experimentally in LSCO at doping p = 0.24. Arguably, for ν close to unity it is difficult to distinguish the power law T ν-1 from a logarithmic temperature dependence. In order to derive approximations for the conductivity, it is helpful to estimate the self-energy at energies larger than k B T. For ε ≫ k B T, we replace S ν (x) by its asymptotic value, which is |x| ν /Γ(1 + ν), and we obtain for the real part: (S36) The frequency-dependent conductivity crosses over from the dissipative Drude regime to the asymptotic inductive regime via an intermediate regime whose extension is controlled by g and ν (while for ν = 1, it is controlled by the cutoff Λ). We define a crossover frequency ω * by the condition ħω * = 2Re[Σ(ħω * ) -Σ(0)]: for ω < ω * , the self-energy dominates in Eq. ( If the temperature and the frequency are both measured in units of ω * , the conductivity multiplied by ω * becomes a function of ω/ω * and T/ω * that depends on ν, but no longer on g. This function is displayed in Supplementary Fig. 2