Traditional sound diffusers are quasi-random phase gratings attached to reflecting surfaces whose purpose is to augment the spatiotemporal incoherence of the acoustic field scattered from reflective surfaces. This configuration allows one to cover a large reflecting surface by periodically tiling the diffuser unit cells to cover a large area while reducing undesirable specular reflection for incident plane waves. However, the periodic arrangement of the unit cells leads to coherent constructive and destructive interference in the scattered field in some directions which is undesirable for achieving acoustic diffusivity. The spatial uniformity of acoustic energy scattered from conventional diffusers constructed in this way is a fundamental limitation of the traditional approach which is not easily overcome when one wishes to cover large reflecting surfaces. In this work, we investigate spatiotemporal modulation of the surface acoustic admittance of an acoustic diffuser as a new approach to improve the sound diffusion. We develop a semi-analytical model that employs Fourier series expansion to determine the scattered sound field from a surface admittance consisting of a quadratic residue diffuser (QRD) design whose individual well admittances are modulated with a traveling wave with modulation frequency, ω m , amplitude, Y m , and a wavenumber that matches the unit cell length, Λ. We observe significant improvement in diffusion performance due to the fact that the spatiotemporal modulation scatters sound into additional frequency-wavenumber pairs associated with harmonics of the modulation frequency and their diffraction orders. The semi-analytical model results are verified using time-domain finite element model. Conventional sound diffuser designs employ surface irregularity, usually in the form of acoustic cavities Spatiotemporal modulation of material properties has recently gained interest as a mechanism to generate nonreciprocal wave propagating in the electromagnetic, acoustic, and elastic wave propagation thereby enabling new avenues to control wave fields Spatiotemporal modulation of bounded and unbounded media leads to the generation of harmonics in propagating and forced standing wave fields, respectively, at multiples of the modulation frequency and wavenumber In this work, we adapt the approach that Goldsberry et al. 17 employed to investigate nonreciprocal vibrations in Euler beams to the present case of surface acoustic admittance modulation of a traditional Schroeder diffuser scheme to improve sound diffusion. We derive a theoretical model that considers a spatiotemporally modulated surface admittance in the form of a traveling wave with modulation frequency, ω m , amplitude, Y m , and a wavenumber that matches the unit cell length, Λ. With the properly selected modulation parameters, the far-field scattering is determined using a semi-analytical model shows that the directions of the diffraction modes are rotated from the original ones due to the addition of wavenumber and frequency harmonics which do not have symmetric amplitudes with respect to the incident frequency and wavenumber. Further, we show that the diversity of scattered wavenumbers generated by the modulation leads to additional diffracted modes, thereby reducing the prominence in grating lobes of the classical diffuser design and significantly improving diffuser performance. These results demonstrate that the spatiotemporal modulation of the phase grating on a sound diffuser is a new approach to tailor the scattered sounds and to improve the diffusion performance in order to disperse scattered sound power. Consider the classical, Schroeder-type one-dimensional (1D) sound diffuser shown in Fig. where p I (x, z,t) and p s (x, z,t) represent the incident and the scattered sound respectively, ω 0 is the frequency of the inci- dent plane wave, k x = k sin θ I and k z = k cos θ I are the wave numbers of the incident sound in the x and z-direction, θ I is the angle of incidence, β n and γ n are the wave numbers of the n th diffraction mode in the x-and z-direction, respectively, and θ n is the angle of the propagation of the n th diffracted mode. The scattering amplitudes, a n (t), are represented as the function of time to consider the effect of the temporal modulation. By using the classical grating equation, β n can be related to the geometry of the sound diffuser as where Λ is the length of one period of the acoustic diffuser. The momentum equation at the diffuser interface, Eq. 3, must consider the interaction of the incident field with the spatiotemporally modulated surface impedance through the normal component of the particle velocity, u z (x, z = 0,t) and the acoustic pressure, p(x, z = 0,t). Using the definition of the surface impedance, the normal velocity can be related to the sound pressure at z = 0 and the surface impedance, Z(x,t). The sound pressure, normal velocity, and surface impedance must all be expressed as the function of time and space to account for spatiotemporal modulation. The normalize surface admittance, Y (x,t) = ρ 0 c 0 /Z(x,t), where ρ 0 c 0 is the charac- teristic impedance of the background medium, is represented by the expansion of the harmonic terms in the form of the admittance where Y m and ω m are the modulation magnitude and the mod- ulation frequency and χ p (x) represents the spatial variation of the modulation amplitude due to the p th harmonic component of the modulation function. In order to conserve momentum in the normal direction in the presence of spatiotemporal modulation, the surface admittance as expressed by Eq. 4 requires the introduction of modulation harmonics in the scattered wave field. The complex amplitude of the scattered field must therefore be expressed with a Fourier expansion of the harmonics of the modulation frequency. Specifically, the the scattering amplitudes a n (t) in Eq. ( where âp n represents the amplitudes of p th modulation harmonic and ω p = ω 0 + pω m which is the scattered frequency shifted by the integer harmonic of the modulation frequency. The wavenumber of the scattered sound in the z-direction can also be expressed using the shifted frequency, ω p , as Furthermore, the field of each diffraction order is scattered at the angle where n is the diffraction order associated with the diffuser periodicity and p is the modulation harmonic index. When spatiotemporal modulation is absent, p = 0 and ω m = 0, and Eq. ( The shifted frequency of the scattered sound, ω p , caused by the modulation clearly affects the directions of each diffraction mode by shifting them from what one would observe with with an unmodulated diffuser surface. We clearly observe that the primary effect of the spatiotemporal modulation on the scattered sound is to scatter energy into modulation harmonics and their associated diffraction angles which leads to significant improvement of the diffusion performance as shown below. Finally, we note that diffraction mode having the purely imaginary γ p n are evanescent and cannot propagate into the far-field. Propagating diffraction modes are therefore bounded by the relations where ν := ω m ω 0 . Equations ( To demonstrate the ability spatiotemporal modulation to improve sound diffuser performance, consider two periods of a one dimensional QRD with seven cavities and design frequency of 5 kHz as a baseline model. The cavity depths (left to right) of the design shown in Fig. We now consider a single frequency, single wavenumber spatiotemporal surface admittance given by where k m = 2π/Λ. The term for the modulation is assumed to be purely imaginary assuming no losses in the QRD. A purely reactive admittance modulation may be achieved by continuously varying cavity depth of an QRD element or altering the termination stiffness of the cavity. Based on Eq. ( where The surface admittance of the unmodulated QRD elements, Y 0 (x), can also be represented as a Fourier series Assembling Eqs. ( where the surface admittance and pressure are Fourier expansions. In order to calculate the scattered sound field, we must truncated the number of terms of the diffraction modes, n, and the modulation harmonics, p to lie within n ∈ [-N, N] and p ∈ [-P, P]. Then, using the truncated series and the expression for the scattering amplitude from the modulation provided in Eq. ( The magnitude of the calculated scattering amplitudes using the input parameters described here are plotted according to the indices of the diffraction modes and the modulation harmonics for two opposite spatial modulation directions in Fig. Using the Fraunhofer far-field approximation, by taking the spatial Fourier transform of âp (x), the far-field directivity for each modulation harmonic for p ∈ [-P, P] are obtained 39 and plotted in Fig. To compare the response from the modulated sound diffuser with that of the unmodulated case, all modulation harmonics in Fig. From the polar responses in Fig. For the verification of the developed semi-analytical model, the numerical finite element model was established in Comsol including the modulated surface admittance of Eq. ( The semi-analytical model for the spatiotemporal modulation has been developed by representing the surface admittance and the scattered amplitudes with the expansion of the modulation harmonics. For the demonstration, the scattering amplitudes for multiple diffraction orders and modulation harmonics were calculated for a representative QRD geometry along with a specified modulation frequency and amplitude. The presence of modulation harmonics lead to a shift in the frequency of the scattered acoustic field which affects the propagation direction for each of the diffraction orders which significantly improves diffusion performance. The resulting diversity in scattering directions in the presence of spatiotemporal modulation leads to a significantly more uniform farfield scattering pattern when compared to the unmodulated case. This approach can therefore mitigate the minima and maxima in the scattering directivity present in conventional diffuser designs. The validity of the semi-analytical model was demonstrated by comparison with the far-field scattering response obtained using finite element methods, which showed very similar directivity and improved diffusion behavior when spatiotemporally modulating the input admittance of a conventional diffuser design. 