We present a unified framework to construct and classify topological crystalline superconductors (TCSCs). The building blocks are one-dimensional topological superconductors (TSCs) protected solely by onsite symmetries, which are arranged and glued by crystalline symmetries in real space. We call this real-space scheme "wire construction", and we show its procedure can be formulated mathematically. For illustration, we treat TCSCs of Altland-Zirnbauer (AZ) class[1] DIII protected by wallpaper group as well as layer group symmetries, with the resulting states by wire construction being TCSCs in two-dimension. We also discuss how these real-space TCSCs by wire construction are characterized by anomalous boundary states. Our method provides a real-space picture for TCSCs versus momentum-space pictures. Topological quantum matters have received wide concerns among the condensed matter physics community in recent years . Beyond Landau's theory of symmetry breaking which classifies matters according to symmetries, the studies of topological quantum matters reveal many different phases of matter with the same symmetries, which entail explanations from the perspective of topology. One significant problem in the studies of topological matters is how many topologically inequivalent classes of states exist for a specific kind of physical system, i.e., topological classification. This issue has been resolved, completely or incompletely, for many physical systems, especially for weakly interacting systems, which have single-particle band descriptions. For free fermion systems protected by only onsite symmetries, the classification problems have been solved by K-theory-based method, which is also known as the "tenfold way" Historically, topological classifications always began with momentum-space frameworks, where one can mathematically define topological invariants in terms of Bloch wave functions. Besides, the diagnosis of topological states sometimes can be easily accessible in momentum space, where one can acquire (usually partial) information of the topological invariants by using only the symmetry representations of Bloch wave functions at high symmetry points in Brillouin zone (BZ). The diagnosis of band topology through symmetries traced back to * pengbingrui@iphy.ac.cn the Fu-Kane formula Despite success in the classification of topological crystalline insulators (TCIs) In this letter, we focus on real-space construction by 1D building blocks, i.e., "wire construction", which we claim can give complete classification of TCSCs in 2D, including weak TSCs (protected by translation symmetries) and second-order TSCs. We deal with 2D TCSCs in AZ class DIII, which have always received special concerns. It is worth noting that, 2D strong TSCs with helical Majorana edge states are beyond the scope of wire construction. Therefore we remark our method does not give the full classification of TSCs in 2D. In addition, one should be careful when discussing 2D spacial symmetries for spinful electron systems. For instance, even though p2 and p 1, which are generated by twofold rotation C 2 and spatial inversion I, respectively, plus lattice translations, share the same lattice in 2D, their symmetry representations on spin- 1 2 particles are different, i.e., C 2 2 = -1 while I 2 = 1. This difference can significantly influence the TCSC classification, as will be shown in the following context. For a comprehensive discussion, in this work, we treat both wallpaper groups and layer groups. Before going further, we briefly outline the contents. Sec.II is devoted to the formulation of wire construction, where we begin with the geometric structure in real space to decorate with "wires", i.e., 1D TSCs protected solely by onsite symmetries, and then show the condition for the wire-like building blocks to be glued together without "opened boundaries" (see Sec.II D), as well as the condition for them to be stable under real-space trivialization process (Sec.II E). In Sec.III, we give an example of wallpaper group p4 to show the above procedure, and more examples can be found in the appendix. In Sec.IV we compare wallpaper groups and layer groups in terms of TCSC classification. In Sec.V we summarise the results of TCSC classification by wire construction, with detailed tables in Appendix.G. In Sec.VI, we discuss the topological invariants and anomalous boundary states which characterize the TCSCs by wire construction. Lastly, in Sec.VII we summarise this work and discuss further directions. In this section, we explicitly present the complete procedure of wire construction. Here we formulate the symmetries of BdG Hamiltonian following Ref. Consider a generic superconducting Hamiltonian H = (ĉ † ĉ + h.c.) + ∆ † ĉ † ĉ † + ∆ĉĉ A crystalline symmetry g of normal state Hamiltonian could no longer be a symmetry for the superconducting Hamiltonian, as it may be broken by the superconducting gap function ∆, i.e., where e iθ is a U (1) phase factor. Nevertheless, we can redefine the crystalline symmetry as where Q is the charge operator. Then we have So we get to restore the crystalline symmetry of the Hamiltonian. Now for Ûg , we have where T is time-reversal symmetry and P is particle-hole symmetry, by noting and In the first-quantization language, we can write where U g is the matrix representation of g for normal state. However, we move on for a new convention as we hope to make Ûg commutes with T as it does for the normal state. We do this by This actually amounts to changing ĉ and ĉ † as In such a convention, we have [ Ûg , T ] = 0, Ûg P = e iθ P Ûg where K is the complex conjugation operator, ξ = ±1 depends on physical realization. In presence of T , θ is restricted to be 0 or θ, thus we have which leads to and further where S = T P is the Chiral symmetry. To sum up, due to the nontrivial representation of superconducting gap function under crystalline symmetry (2), the redefined crystalline symmetry U g , in presence of time-reversal, could either commute or anti-commute with particle-hole symmetry P (or Chiral symmetry S), i.e., As a result, the whole symmetry group generated by crystalline symmetry group G c , time-reversal symmetry T and particle-hole symmetry P (or Chiral symmetry S), is projectively represented, with the factor system given by z gS,gS U gSgS = U gS U gS The first step of wire construction (as well as for other real-space construction schemes) is to decompose the nD space into small units by applying crystalline symmetries, which we call d-cells, where d = 0, 1, 2, • • • , n. The resulting geometric structure composed of all d-cells is called a cell complex, which is a CW-complex in mathematics. Each d-cell has no two points inside it related by crystalline symmetry operations. In our case, we have n = 2. The 2-cells are small patches that cover the whole 2D space without overlaps, and a single 2-cell is also called an asymmetric unit (AU). 1-cells are edges of 2-cells, and 0-cells are ends of 1-cells. Each (d -1)-cell is shared by more than one d-cells. It is worth noting that there could be different ways to construct the cell complex for a specific crystalline symmetry group. However, these seemingly different cell complexes are essentially equivalent and can be deformed into each other while preserving symmetries. Here we give an example, i.e., the cell complex of 2D space group p2, which is shown in Figure .1. 1 . There are three symmetry-independent 1-cells, colored by three different colors, and denoted as e 1 1 , e 1 2 and e 1 3 . There are four symmetry-independent 0-cells, which we denote as e 0 1 , e 0 2 , e 0 3 and e 0 4 . Note we only have to label the symmetry-independent cells, since other ones are related to them by either inversion or translations. Upon having the cell complex, one has to decide what topological states can be decorated on the 1-cells as building blocks for wire construction. On each 1-cell, no crystalline symmetry operation can relate two distinct points, therefore the topological states that can be placed on it are those protected solely by onsite symmetries. Note that apart from T , P and S, the onsite symmetries could include crystalline operations that keep every point on the 1-cell invariant, which form a subgroup G 1 c of the entire onsite symmetry group G 1 . We remark that, although G 1 c generically could contain lattice translations, here we ignore them and always regard G 1 c as a point group. For wallpaper groups, G 1 c is always simple, which depends on whether the 1-cell coincides with some mirror line or not and turns out to be either 1 or M , where 1 stands for the point group with identity operation only, and M for the point group having mirror reflection besides identity. Different types of 1-cells host different topological states protected by onsite symmetries, depending on specific G 1 c thus G 1 . And it further depends on the projective representations of G 1 , as in presence of nontrivial symmetry representations of the gap function, the representations of G 1 are projective. Actually, the projective irreducible representations of G 1 can be obtained from the irreducible representations (irreps) of G 1 c . Given the irreps of G 1 c , the inclusion of T , P and S can have effects on these irreps, making them either invariant or paired, and the resulting representations, together with those of T , P and S, form projective irreps of G 1 . For each sector labeled by an irrep of G 1 c , we determine its effective Altland-Zirnbaue (AZ) class under T , P, and S, so that the topological classification of this sector can be directly known from the "tenfold way" results To figure out the effective AZ classes and the behaviors of the irreps of G 1 c under T , P and S, one can employ a powerful tool, the generalized Wigner test where G 0 is a unitary group, a is a T -like operator, b is a P-like operator and ab is S-like operator, there are three indices to compute in order to determine the effects of T , P and S on a irrep α of G 0 : with W α (T ) ∈ {±1, 0}, W α (P) ∈ {±1, 0}, and W α (S) ∈ {1, 0}. Here |G 0 | is the number of elements in G 0 , z g1,g2 U g1g2 = U g1 U g2 specifies the factor system, and χ α denotes the character of the irrep α. Specifically, indicates α is invariant under U , indicates α is paired with itself, and indicates α is paired with another irrep α . The effective AZ class for α is determined as For instance, dictates α has effective AZ class AII. In fact, it is straightforward to figure out all the building blocks for wallpaper groups. As the irreps of point group 1 and M are all 1D, it is each to see the behaviors of each sector under T , P and S, i.e., whether it is unchanged or get paired with either itself or another irrep. The results are illustrated in Fig. 1. 1-cells with C 1 c = 1 These 1-cells do not coincide with any mirror lines, and their G c is trivial. Therefore the onsite symmetry group G 1 is generated by T and P (orS). Apparently, the effective AZ class is DIII with Z 2 classification in 1D, and the corresponding topolog-ical invariant ν T is defined as where A I (-) and A II (-) represent the Berry phase of the Kramer's pair formed by the occupied states. The boundary state of such a building block with Z 2 = 1 is a Kramer's pair of Majorana zero modes. Actually such a pair of zero modes can be eigenstates of chiral symmetry S, with opposite eigenvalues of S, i.e., ±1. One can write out the symmetry representation taken by the zero modes as which satisfies T 2 = -1, S 2 = 1 and P 2 = (T S) 2 = 1. This type of 1-cells lie on mirror lines. The Hilbert space is divided into two sectors with mirror eigenvalues ±i since M 2 = -1. One has to discuss whether the gap function is even or odd under M , i.e., χ M = 1 or χ M = -1. (a) χ M = 1 Since [M, T ] = 0 and [M, S] = 0, it is easy to see each of the two sectors is closed under S, and they are interchanged under T and P. Therefore each sector belongs to AZ class AIII with Z classification in 1D. The corresponding topological invariant is the 1D winding number where H ± stands for the Hamiltonian of the M = ±i sector. Since the two sectors are not independent but related by T and P, there is only one independent Z index and actually w + = -w -. We can define the independent index as w M = 1 2 (w + -w -). For a |w M | = n state, at its 0D boundary there are n Majorana zero modes with M = +i and S = ±1, as well as n Majorana zero modes with M = -i and S = ∓1, forming n Majorana Kramer's pairs. In fact, one can write out the symmetry representation carried by the zero modes as which satisfies T 2 = -1, S 2 = 1, P 2 = (T S) 2 = 1, [T , M ] = 0, and [S, M ] = 0. (b) χ M = -1 Like the above case, it is easy to find each of the two mirror sectors is closed under P but change into the other one under T and S. Therefore each sector belongs to AZ class D with Z 2 classification in 1D. The topological index ν is given by where A (-) stands for Berry connection of occupied states. Since each of the two sectors is not independent and they are related by T and S, they have the same ν and there is only one independent Z 2 index. The Majorana zero modes at its 0D boundary are described by the symmetries which satisfy T 2 = -1, S 2 = 1, P 2 = (T S) 2 = 1, [T , M ] = 0, and {S, M } = 0. Firstly note that all the building blocks for wallpaper groups discussed above are also for layer groups, as wallpaper groups can be viewed as subset of layer groups. Besides, for layer groups there can be mirror reflection vertical to the lattice plane, which we denote as M z . When combined with M x (M y ), the generated point group is C 2v . As a consequence, the 1-cells coinciding with such C 2v axis have C 1 c = C 2v . The determination of building blocks on such 1-cells is not straightforward and one need turn to the Wigner test. For C 2v , there are four representations of the gap function, A 1 , B 1 , A 2 and B 2 . Meanwhile, there is only one double-valued irrep, Γ5 . By careful analysis, we find that for A 1 representation, the classification on the 1-cell is trivial, while for the remaining three representations, i.e., A 2 , B 1 and B 2 , the classifications are all Z, with the corresponding topological index being the 1D winding numbers defined regarding either M or C 2 sectors. Here we summarise the three nontrivial building blocks in Fig. By decorating 1-cells with the above building blocks, we have a resulting state in 2D, which we call a decoration. However, not all those decorations are what we need. As the building blocks are 1D TSCs, they naturally have topologically protected Majorana zero modes 3. Nontrivial Building blocks on C2v-axis. The three types of building blocks are for A2, B1 and B2, respectively. The trivial building block for A1 is not plotted. (a) Building block for A2. The topological index is mirror winding number wM x ∈ Z. The generator with wM x = 1 has a pair of Majorana zero modes at its 0D boundary (blue and orange dots), with Mx eigenvalues ±i and S eigenvalues ±1. (b) Building block for B1. The topological index is mirror winding number wM y ∈ Z. The generator with wM y = 1 has a pair of Majorana zero modes at its boundary (blue and orange dots), with My eigenvalues ±i and S eigenvalues ±1. (c) Building block for B2. The topological index is C2 winding number wC 2 ∈ Z. The generator with wC 2 = 1 has a pair of Majorana zero modes at its boundary (blue and orange dots), with C2 eigenvalues ±i and S eigenvalues ±1. at their 0D boundaries, which coincide with 0-cells. To make a decoration a TCSC fully gapped in the bulk, one has to ensure all the 0D zero modes at the 0-cells are gapped out, i.e., there are not "opened boundaries" in the interior of the decoration, which we call gluing condition at 0-cells. To determine whether 1-cells decorated with building blocks can be glued together, one has to carefully study the boundary theories of Majorana modes. The crucial issue for gluing condition is to address the problem of group induction, which is illustrated in Fig. Illustration of group induction. The 1-cells and 0cell have onsite symmetry group G 1 and G 0 , respectively. The zero modes {γ1} belong to a projective representation Γ 1 of G 1 , which locate at the 0D boundary of a single 1-cell. There will be an induced projective representation Γ 0 of G 0 , carried by the zero modes {γ0} from all the symmetry-related 1-cells which meet at the 0-cell. (c) and (d) Intuitive comprehension of the gluing condition. Two boundary modes of the same symmetry representation can not be gapped if they have the same topological number (c) and can be gapped if they have opposite topological numbers (d). symmetry-related 1-cells and decorating it by 1D TCS with 0D zero modes taking projective irreps of G 1 , we can derive an induced projective representation of G 0 spanned by the entire set of zero modes from all the symmetry-related 1-cells. In another word, the symmetry group that describes the zero modes at the 0-cell is enhanced from G 0 to G 1 . Mathematically, there is a standard formalism to derive induced representations, see Appendix.B. This group induction procedure is necessary since the boundary modes of 1-cells locate at 0-cells and therefore their corresponding onsite symmetry group is enhanced from G 1 to G 0 . One can further imagine the 0D boundary modes are contributed by 1D TSCs with onsite symmetry group lifted from G 1 to G 0 . Here we give an intuitive example regarding inversion symmetry, as shown in Fig. Mathematically, the space of decorations satisfying the gluing condition can be obtained by calculating the kernel of a linear map from all 1-cells to all 0-cells. Suppose we have all the projective irreps of G 1 for all 1-cells, and we denote the m-th projective irrep for the i-th 1-cell as Γ 1 i,m . Correspondingly, the generator of the states spanning Γ 1 i,m is denoted as φ 1 i,m , i.e., if the sector of Γ 1 i,m has Z topological classification, then φ 1 i,m has Z = 1. Likewise, we denote the n-th projective irrep for the jth 0-cell as Γ 0 j,n , and the generator as φ 0 j,n . By group induction, we get to know the mappings from all Γ 1 's to Γ 0 's, and the matrix elements from the linear space spanned by {φ 1 } to the space spanned by {φ 0 } are given by where c i,m j,n is determined by the weight of Γ 0 j,n in the decomposition of the induced projective representation from Γ 1 i,m , i.e., E. Bubble equivalence However, we have not arrived at our destination even we get all decorations allowed by gluing condition, because some of them could be unstable against a kind of real-space trivialization process called "bubble equivalence" Like gluing condition, the bubble equivalence process also involves group induction. Consider a set of symmetry-related 2-cells (in our 2D case, at most two such bubbles, related by mirror or C 2 ) with onsite symmetry group G 2 intersecting at a 1-cell with onsite symmetry group G 1 , which they share as a common edge. Then we must have G 2 ⊆ G 1 , as well as G 2 c ⊆ G 1 c . Since a single bubble locates inside a 2-cell, it has the same onsite symmetry group as the 2-cell does, i.e., G 2 , and the symmetry group of the entire set of symmetry-related bubbles should be enhanced to G 1 . That is to say, the resulting states from the edges of surrounding bubbles on a 1-cell span an induced projective representation of G 1 . However, to give a simple example of bubble equivalence to the readers, we turn to TCI classification in 3D, in the presence of mirror symmetry and in absence of time-reversal Nevertheless, we find for 2D TCSCs in class DIII protected by wallpaper groups, any bubble equivalence has trivial effects, i.e., does not change the decorations on 1-cells, thus we need not consider such a process. For a detailed analysis see AppendixC. On the contrary, for layer groups, there can be non- trivial bubble equivalence due to additional symmetries. In fact, nontrivial bubble equivalence happens if there is a vertical mirror reflection M z , which is absent in wallpaper groups. Consider layer group pm2m as an example. This group is generated by mirror reflection in x direction, M x , and vertical mirror reflection M z . The combination of them is a C 2y rotation. As a result, there are 1-cells that coincide with C 2v axes at x = 0 and x = 1 2 . When the representation of gap function is chosen such that χ Mx = -1 and χ Mz = 1, these two 1-cells can be decorated with 1D C 2v -symmetric TSC with Z classification. The topological index is the mirror winding number regarding M z , i.e., w Mz = 1 2 (w + Mz -w - Mz ), and the generator of decoration has w Mz = 1. Next we analysis the effect of bubbles on the C 2v axis, as shown in Fig. When the two bubbles related by M x have their edges coinciding with the C 2v axis, the G c of the resulting state contributed by the two bubble edges is enhanced from M z to C 2v , and by group induction the symmetries are represented as which satisfy [M z , S] = 0 and {M x , S} = 0. We can diagonalize M z and S simultaneously, leading to Obviously, the resulting state are described by two copies of Γ5 , i.e., the only double-valued irrep of C 2v , with w Mz = 1, and thus w Mz = 2 in total, which is exactly the double of the generator of C 2v -axis decoration. Therefore we can see that the bubbles leave a state of w Mz = 2 on the 1-cell, trivializing all the decorations with w Mz = 2Z and reducing the classification on the 1-cell from Z to Z 2 . Here we use wallpaper group p4 with the representation of gap function A g (χ C4 = 1) to show the complete procedure of wire construction. There is another example for wallpaper group in Appendix.D, as well as an example for layer group in Appendix.E. The cell complex of p4 is shown in Fig. For convenience of analyzing gluing condition, we first look into the projective irreps of C 0 , which in this case are actually equivalent to linear irreps since χ C4 = 1. The irreps of G 0 c are given in the following table. Among the 0-cells, e 0 1 and e 0 3 have Applying the Wigner test to the irreps of C 4 , we get for α = Γi,i=1,2,3,4 , which means each irrep of C 4 belongs to class AIII characterised by the 1D winding number w ∈ Z, and each of them is closed under S but paired with its conjugate irrep, Γ * i , under T and P. It is easy to see Γ5 , Γ7 are paired, and Γ6 , Γ8 are paired. We denote the resulting projective irreps as Γ5⊕7 and Γ6⊕8 , and write out them explicitly as for Γ5⊕7 , and and for Γ6⊕8 Likewise, we apply the Wigner test to the irreps of C 2 and get for α = Γi,i=3,4 , which means each irrep of C 2 also belongs to AZ class AIII characterised by the 1D winding number w ∈ Z. We denote the resulting projective irrep as Γ3⊕4 , and write it out explicitly as It is easy to see the two sectors of C 2 = ±i have opposite winding numbers. We can define the independent topological index as Now we are prepared to consider gluing condition for each 1-cell decoration. 1. e 1 1 decoration From the cell complex, it is easy to see that e 1 1 and its symmetry-related partners only intersect at the 0-cells e 0 3 and e 0 2 , but not at e 0 1 . Thus we only have to consider gluing condition at e 0 3 and e 0 2 . (a) gluing condition at e 0 3 We have symmetry representation for the zero modes at the boundary of e 1 1 as By group induction, we have the induced representation at e 0 1 : As [C 4 , S] = 0, we can simultaneously diagonalize them and get By decomposition, we can see there are two Γ5⊕7 's and two Γ6⊕8 's to describe the zero modes. Explicitly, the two Γ5⊕7 's are given by and The first one has w C4 = 1 while the second one has w C4 = -1, thus the net topological number by them is zero. Likewise, the two Γ6⊕8 's are given by and with the first one having w C4 = 1 and the second one having w C4 = -1, thus the net topological number is also zero. We see that both the sector of Γ5⊕7 and the sector of Γ6⊕8 have vanishing net topological numbers, thus the gluing condition at e 0 3 is met. As what we did above, we have the induced representation at e 0 2 by group induction, i.e., After simultaneous diagonalization of C 2 and S, we have This representation is reducible and can be decomposed in two Γ3⊕4 's, with the first one given by and the second one given by We can see the first one has w C2 = 1 while the second one has w C2 = -1, thus the net topological number is zero. The vanishing topological number indicates the zero modes at e 0 2. e 1 2 decoration This decoration is essentially the same with e 1 1 , and the gluing condition is also satisfied at e 0 2 and e 0 1 . Through above analysis, we see that the decorations of e 1 1 and e 1 2 are allowed, both being Z 2 -type and serving as the two generators for all TCSCs by wire construction. As bubble equivalence is trivial for wallpaper groups, the final classification is Z 2 2 . In the introduction, we mentioned that wallpaper groups (WGs) sometimes can not give a full description of symmetries for spin- 1 2 particles in 2D, and for a complete description one should refer to layer groups (LGs). We gave the example of p2 and p 1, which share the same lattice though, have different topological classifications of DIII TCSCs because C 2 and Ī are implemented differently on spinful electrons. In Sec.II D, we showed that Ī with χ I = 1 prohibits nontrivial decorations as gluing condition is not satisfied. Below we show it is different for C 2 . Two 1-cells related by 1 or C2. Each 1-cell is decorated with 1D DIII TSC. For comparison, we consider χ C2 = 1. The symmetries for the 0D zero modes contributed by the two C 2 -related 1-cells are represented as The mass term proportional to μ 2 σ 1 commutes with C 2 and T while anti-commutes with S, and therefore can be added to gap out these zero modes. As bubble equivalence is not needed for wallpaper groups, the success of gluing condition for C 2 case indicates nontrivial TCSC classification. By contrast, the failure of gluing condition for I case indicates trivial topological classification for even parity superconductors, and only odd-parity superconductors can be topologically nontrivial It could be helpful for one to be clear with the relationships between WGs and LGs. In fact, each LG has one or more corresponding WGs which share the same 2D lattice as this WG, and the number of LGs ( LGs corresponding to the same WG, one of them shares completely the same group elements with the WG, and the remaining ones either have the same number of group elements although some elements differ, or can be generated from this WG by adding inversion or reflection (glide) in the vertical direction to the 2D plane. For instance, for the WG p4mm with all symmetry elements defined in x-y plane, LG p4mm is completely the same with it, LG p422 has the same elements except that mirrors are replaced by C 2 rotations, and LG p4mmm is generated from p4mm by adding mirror reflection in z direction. It is worth noting that, p4mm and p422 share the same results of TCSC classification by wire constrution, while p4mmm is more complicated due to the inclusion of M z and its TCSC classification can not be inferred from that of p4mm. Using wire construction, we obtain the classification of TCSCs protected by spacial symmetries in 2D, and we present the results as tables in Appendix.G. Specifically, in TABLE.VI, we show TCSC classification by wire construction for all WGs with all representations of gap function considered. In TABLE.VII, we list the LGs which share the same wire constructions thus TCSC classifications as those of LGs. In TABLE.VIII, we show the TCSC classification for a portion of LGs that can not be inferred directly from the results of WGs. When employing real-space method, one usually has the benefits that topological invariants and boundary states of the output states, i.e., those by real-space construction, are relatively easy to see. One can usually define topological invariants in real-space, and for each decoration, identify these topological invariants. In realspace construction of TCIs Apart from topological invariants, the TCSCs by wire construction can be characterized in terms of their anomalous boundary states, in one-to-one correspondence with their invariants. We deal with decorations protected by single representative 2D spacial symmetries, including translation, C n rotation, mirror reflection, and glide. For each independent generator of decorations, we figure out what its boundary states can be. If there are more complicated symmetries, i.e., any kinds of combinations of them, the boundary states can be comprehended as a superimposition of those protected by single symmetry. Through our careful analysis, we identify some boundary states which are not touched by previous works, as shown in the following two cases. For boundary states protected by other symmetries, see Appendix.F. The generators of wire construction are shown in Fig. Firstly one notes that since {M, S} = 0, both the mirror-invariant lines in BZ, i.e., k x = 0 and k y = π, have effective AZ class D, with Z 2 classification in 1D. Both the two generators in Fig. To answer this question we carefully analyze the boundary state of this decoration. Consider an edge respecting mirror symmetry as well as translation symmetry in x direction, see Figure with F being the hopping amplitude. Before proceeding, we specify the symmetries of the Majorana zero modes. We choose Note here we take another convention with M 2 = 1 and {M, T } = 0, which is equivalent to the convention with M 2 = -1 and [M, T ] = 0 that we used before. Timereversal symmetry requires Fermion statistics requires As a result, the hopping amplitudes are constrained as Because we choose P = K, the Majorana operators are real and F 's must be real as well. Keeping only the nearest hoppings, i.e., n = 1, the Hamiltonian in momentum space reads where and Below we show the spectrum is always gapless at some generic point between k = 0 and k = π (as well as between k = π and k = 2π, by symmetry). First we set k = 0 and we have Then we set k = π and we have Since the determinant of H(k) is a continuous function of k, according to the mean value theorem, there must exist at least one point k 0 between 0 and π satisfying det(H(k = k 0 )) = 0, which indicates the spectrum of H(k 0 ) is gapless. For illustration, we plot the boundary spectrum in Fig. Through the above discussion, we showed the existence of gapless boundary modes, which confirms that the decoration by wires at both x = 0 and x = 1 2 is topologically nontrivial. To further understand the nontrivial topology, we note a generic momentum at k x line has effective AZ class BDI, because one has T = T • M x and P = P •M x , both of which leaving any k x unchanged and satisfying T 2 = 1, P 2 = 1. As class BDI has Z 2 topological invariant in 0 D, the existence of gapless mode at k x = k 0 indicates different such Z 2 values on the two sides of k 0 . There are two decorations as the generators of wire construction for WG p1g1 with both χ g = +1 and where n ∈ Z. To maintain the glide symmetry, the boundary geometry can only be made into a strip finite in x direction while infinite in y direction, see Fig. In this work, we present a unified real-space framework to construct and classify TCSCs using 1D building blocks which we call wire construction. We deal with 2D TCSCs of AZ class DIII, and our products are second-order TSCs as well as weak TSCs, i.e., those protected by translation symmetries. We show that our framework can be formulated mathematically with central issues as projective representations and group induction, and we use several examples to illustrate the detailed procedure of wire construction. For an inclusive description of the symmetries for spinful electrons in 2D, we deal with both pure 2D systems which are described by wallpaper groups, and 2D systems embedded into 3D, which are described by layer groups. Furthermore, we discuss what kinds of boundary states these TCSCs by wire construction are characterized by. We comment again that our results are not complete classifications for TSCs in 2D, as the 2D strong TSC can not be obtained by wire construction. To include the 2D strong phase for complete TSC classification, one should first figure out whether it is compatible with the crystalline symmetries, i.e., whether the Z 2 invariant for 2D strong TSC is restricted to be zero by crystalline symmetries. For an incompatible example see the discussion of layer group p11m in For 3D TCSCs, wire construction can still be applied, with the products being third-order TCSs in 3D. However, there is another problem to handle that is not encountered in 2D. According to the discussions in where h ∈ G, n q denotes the number of {α i }, i.e., the dimension of ρ, and a iα denotes the i-th orbital at Wyckoff position q α . For each α, the determination of β is given by the following way. Firstly one makes the coset decomposition of G, i.e. where Then g β is determined by finding the coset which includes hg α , i.e., there exists some g ∈ G q such that with t αβ given by We can apply the above formulas to our wire construction, where the representations become projective and group elements include T , P and S apart from crystalline operations. We give the example of group G generated by C 4 , T , and S. First we note for point group, (B3) reduces to and (B1) reduces to as translations are now absent. As shown in Figure .12, we label the four 1-cells as 1, 2, 3, 4 in the counterclockwise direction, and the C 4 center, which is also the original point, is denoted as O. The site symmetry group of each 1-cell is trivial, and the onsite symmetry group is generated by T and S. We can write the representation as Then we use the formula (B6) to derive the induced representation at the 0-cell O. We first deal with C 4 , under which the four 1-cells transform as i.e., in a permutation manner. We can assign the coset representatives as where 1 stands for the identity operation. It is easy to find for g α = g i , we have g β = g i+1 , where i ∈ Z 4 . Therefore, for h = C 4 , (120) reads which leads to g = 1 for i = 1, 2, 3 while g = -1 for i = 4, by noting C 4 4 = -1. We can see that the induced representation of C 4 at the 0-cell can be derived based on the representation of the identity operation, 1, at the 1-cell, perhaps up to a minus sign. As a result, we have Then we deal with T . Since T acts locally and always commutes with C 4 , one can directly write the induced representation of T with a thought Lastly for S, one has to consider χ C4 = ±1, i.e., both [C 4 , S] = 0 and {C 4 , S} = 0. 1. [C 4 , S] = 0 In this case, it is similar with T , and we have In this case, we should be a little careful, since C 4 reverses the eigenvalue of S. Note S does not change the position of 1-cells, so we always have g β = g α . Specifically, for g α = g i,i=1,2,3,4 , we have where the extra factor (-1) i-1 comes from {C 4 , S} = 0. Thus we have the induced representation. Below we show that for wallpaper groups, bubble equivalence always has trivial effects. Firstly we note in 2D, any 1-cell is always shared by two 2-cells, which means when considering bubble equivalence, a 1-cell has always two bubbles on its two sides. Recall that there are two types of 1-cells for wallpaper groups, one with G 1 c = 1 and the other with G 1 c = M . A 1-cell of the first type has Z 2 classification, and the resulting states by two bubbles can only have Z 2 = 0. For the second type, the trivial effects of bubble equivalence are not obvious, and we make careful analysis as follows. 1. χ M = 1 According to Sec.II C 1, the classification on the 1cell is Z, and the corresponding topological index can be defined as mirror winding number w M = 1 2 (w + -w -), which indicates the number of zero modes at the 0D boundary. On the two sides of the 1-cell, two bubbles are related by mirror M . Each bubble edge is a 1D DIII TCS with boundary zero modes described by symmetries When coinciding with the 1-cell, by group induction, the resulting state from the two mirror-related bubble edges have zero modes described by Since [M, S] = 0, we can diagonalize them simultaneously, leading to which can be decomposed into M = +i sector with w = 0 and M = -i sector with w = 0 Since both w + and w -are zero, w M = 1 2 (w +w -) is also zero. The vanishing topological number means the zero modes can be gapped out and the resulting 1D state from the two bubble edges is trivial. Consequently, the classification on the 1cell is unchanged under bubble equivalence. According to Sec.II C 1, the topological classification on the 1-cell is Z 2 . Similar to the 1-cells with C 1 c = 1, bubble equivalence can not change the topological index by 1 thus has trivial effects on the 1-cell classification. One can see the topological number is which means the gluing condition is met and the decoration of e 1 2 (e 1 4 ) is allowed. As a result, decorations on e 1 2 and e 1 4 are the generators for all decorations. As they are both Z 2 -type, the classification is Z 2 2 . Appendix E: Example: layer group pm2m with A1 and B1 representations Here we present an example of layer group, pm2m. There are four representations of gap function, and here we deal with two of them, A 1 and B 1 . This LG is generated by adding mirror reflection in z direction, M z , to the WG p1m1. Since p1m1 has M x , the product M z • M x generates a C 2 rotation in y direction, C 2y . The cell complex of pm2m is the same as that of WG p1m1. Note all the d-cells (d = 0, 1, 2) have M z as onsite symmetry. Besides, e 0 i,i=1,2 and e 1 i,i=1,3 have M x as onsite symmetry thus they have G c = C 2v . Therefore we have the particular type of building blocks for layer groups to be decorated on e 1 1 and e 1 3 , which have G 1 c = C 2v . Nevertheless, we need not explicitly analyze gluing condition involving them. Actually, at e 0 1 (e 0 2 ), the two relevant e 1 1 's (e 1 2 's) are related by y translation and one has its tail connected by the other's head, which makes the gluing condition trivially satisfied, and the decorations of e 1 1 and e 1 3 are always allowed. As a result, for gluing condition we only need to explicitly consider the two e 1 2 's related by C 2y at e 0 1 (e 0 2 ). According to the above tables, the only doublevalued irrep of C 2v , i.e., Γ5 , belongs to class CI with trivial classification in 1D. This means the building blocks on e 1 1 and e 1 3 with G 1 c = C 2v are trivial. What's more, the gluing condition is trivially satisfied at e 0 1 and e 0 2 with G 0 c = C 2v . Therefore one has 1-cell decoration of e 1 2 allowed by gluing condition. Then we consider bubble equivalence. However, the two bubbles on the two sides of e 1 2 are related by translation in y direction and they have trivial effects on e 1 2 . As a result, the final classification is Z, contributed by e 1 2 decoration. For this representation of gap function, one has χ Mx = -1, χ Mz = 1 and χ C2y = -1. The projectvie irreps for the 1-cells and 0-cells are shown in Table From the above tables, we know the building blocks on e 1 i,i=1,2,3 are all nontrivial. Then we consider the gluing condition at e 0 1 (e 0 2 ), which involves e 1 2 . The induced representation from Γ3⊕4 at e 1 2 is given by By diagonalizing S and M z together, we obtain which equals to two Γ5 's with the same S, i.e., the same topological number w Mz = 1 2 (w +i -w -i ) = 1. This leads to the non-vanishing total topological number w Mz = 2, which protects the 0D modes from being gapped out. Therefore the gluing condition is failed, which means decoration on e 1 2 is not allowed. Then one has to analyze whether the decorations on e 1 1 and e 1 3 , which are trivially allowed the gluing condition, are stable against bubble equivalence. For a single bubble, its edge can be 1D mirrorsymmetric TSC with 0D zero modes described by By group induction, the two M x -related bubble edges contribute 1D states on e 1 1 (e 1 3 ) with 0D zero modes described by This induced projective representation can be decomposed into two Γ5 's with the same S, which is exactly double of the irrep carried by e 1 1 (e 1 3 ) decoration. Thus we can see that the bubble equivalence generates double e 1 1 decoration and double e 1 3 decoration simultaneously, and the final classification is given by Z 2 /2Z = Z ⊕ Z 2 . In Sec.VI of the main text, we discussed some TSCS boundary states. Here we give detailed analyses for other ones. This wallpaper group has only translation symmetries. The two decorations are simply 1D DIII TSCs stacking along x/y directions. Here we choose the decoration in x direction for discussion, and the decoration in y direction is essentially the same. The real-space topological invariant, i.e., the Z 2 topological number of the 1D DIII TSC, can be transformed into momentum space, denoted as ν. It can be evaluated at k x = 0 or k x = π line where A I and A II are the Berry connection of the Kramer's pair formed by the occupied states. When a boundary termination is made preserving x translation, the array of 0D Majorana modes form Majorana band in x direction, as shown in Fig. We can see the decorations of p1 are still compatible with p2, as shown in Fig. We remark that the authors in Ref. In Sec.VI 1 of the main text, we discussed the boundary state protected by p1m1 with χ M = -1. Here we focus on the χ M = 1 case. The first decoration, as shown in Fig. These two decorations are built by mirror-symmetric 1D TSCs, whose topological invariant is the mirror winding number w M = 1 2 (w + -w -). The momentum-space mirror winding numbers can be derived from the realspace ones. Consider assigning mirror eigenstates with M = ±i at x = n where n ∈ Z, i.e., At k = 0, we have M φ k = ±iφ k , while at k = π, we have M φ k = ∓iφ k , i.e., φ k=0 is a mirror eigenstate with M = ±i while φ k=π is a mirror eigenstate with M = ∓i. Then we apply the above results to analyze the boundary states. The decoration in Fig. We further consider combinations of the two decorations. First we put 1D mirror-symmetric TSC of w M = +1 at both x = 0 and x = The decorations and boundary states for p11m are similar with those of p1. Only note that for χM , the decorations are Z-type instead if Z2-type, which means there can be n ∈ Z pairs of Majorana zeros. Consequently, at k x = 0 there are two pairs of zero modes, while at k x = π, there is no zero mode but a gap opened, as shown in Fig. As we have mentioned previously, the generating symmetry of LGs are those of WGs plus mirror or glide in the vertical direction. For brevity, we only consider the boundary states protected solely by vertical mirror and vertical glide. For the LG generated by vertical mirror reflection, i.e. p11m, its decorations are generated by stacking 1D mirror-symmetric TSCs with χ Mz = ±1 along x or y directions, which are similar as those of WG p1, with the difference of building blocks. The only thing to note is that, for χ Mz = 1, the decorations are Z-type, while for χ Mz , the decorations are Z 2 -type. At k x/y = 0 and k x/y = π, there are the same number of Majorana zero modes, as also discussed in Ref. The LG generated by vertical glide {M z |t x t y 0}, where t x , t y = 0, 1 2 , is p1g1. The TCSC boundary states are already studied in Ref. can be gapped, therefore the gluing condition is satisfied.