We study theoretically a junction of a PT -symmetric non-Hermitian superconductor (PTS) placed between two conventional superconductors. We show that due to non-Hermitian electron-electron interaction in the PTS region and the combination of symmetries, only discrete values of phases of the conventional superconductors yield solutions for Andreev bound states. Remarkably, in the case of 0 and π, we obtain growing and decaying in time Andreev bound states. For π/2 and 3π/2, there is a Majorana zero mode penetrating through the junction in only one direction forming a quasiparticle supercurrent. Introduction.-Hybrid superconducting structures containing normal parts, such as semiconducting nanowires or insulating layers, are platforms for numerous theoretical and experimental investigations often related to the study of Andreev bound states Unconventional and exotic superconductors yield new physical phenomena and states, e.g. high-T c superconductors Non-Hermitian superconductors are not well-understood yet. They are mainly studied in relation to Majorana zero modes In this work, we study Andreev bound states in a junction between a PT -symmetric non-Hermitian superconductor (PTS) and two conventional superconductors with phases φ 1 and φ 2 FIG. Model.-We consider a system of three 1D superconducting leads: two conventional superconductors and a PTS of width d between them, see Fig. Note that parity (or space inversion) symmetry P inverts the sign of momentum and time-inversion symmetry T inverts the signs of momentum, spin, and imaginary i. As a result, PT -symmetric Hamiltonians of a single-band superconductor must obey the relation H P T = H * P T , i.e. all mean fields must be real. In order to obtain a non-Hermitian superconductor, we take the particle mean field with the opposite sign to the hole mean field, ∆ P T = -∆P T We assume that all leads form good contacts at the interfaces and there is no normal scattering there. In order to consider Andreev scattering in this junction, we represent the electron field operators for all superconductors as quasiparticles close to Fermi wavevectors k F and -k F : , where α is an index denoting the type of superconductor, σ denotes spin, and x is the coordinate along the junction. In the bases , the linearized Hamiltonians for PTS and conventional superconductors are respectively. Here, v F is the Fermi velocity and ⊗ denotes the Kronecker product. In this work, we assume for simplicity that all three leads have the same Fermi velocity and Fermi wavevector. As we consider spin-singlet superconductivity and assume for simplicity that ∆ P T is even in frequency, then ∆ P T must be odd in momentum due to the fact that V (q) is odd In order to obtain eigenvectors of the Hamiltonians for a given excitation energy, we first find the wavevectors k via the equations det[H α -E] = 0. For PTS, k P T = E 2 + ∆ 2 P T /v F and, for conventional superconductors, we have Note that k denotes a small deviation of the wavevector of the quasiparticle from ±k F (see Fig. The eigenvectors of the Hamiltonians yield the basis for wavefunctions (we omit the spin index for brevity, as there are no spin interactions in this work): Here, indices L and R denote left-(at -k c and -k P T ) and right-moving (at k c and k P T ) quasiparticles, respectively. Eqs. ( Spectrum.-Assuming that the interfaces between the superconductors are ideal, we write the continuity equations for the wavefunctions. We consider Andreev scattering: rightmoving quasiparticles in PTS are reflected into left-moving quasiparticles. They penetrate into the conventional superconductors as evanescent modes, if their excitation energy E is smaller than ∆. This gives two equations with unknown coefficients α, β, and two transmission coefficients t 1 and t 2 at the boundaries x = -d/2 and x = d/2, respectively, for scattering of quasiparticles close to k F and close to -k F . For an illustration of scattering processes in an S-PTS-S junction with excitation energies of quasiparticles above the gap, see Fig. From this equations, we obtain the spectrum of Andreev bound states determined by The equations for scattering of quasiparticles near -k F have the same form as Eq. ( Taking into account that we consider a composite non-Hermitian system, the energy of Andreev bound states can be complex. One way to solve Eq. ( Phases 0 and π.-For the short junction, ∆d/v F 1, and φ 1 = 0 and φ 2 = π, we obtain E = i∆ P T ∆d/v F for scattering close to k F and the complex conjugate of it, E = -i∆ P T ∆d/v F , for scattering close to -k F . Once we reverse the phases, φ 1 = π and φ 2 = 0, we obtain the opposite results: E = i∆ P T ∆d/v F for scattering close to -k F and E = -i∆ P T ∆d/v F for scattering close to k F . This means that the phases define, which scattering process dominates, because negative imaginary energy implies decay and positive imaginary energy implies growth or pumping of the state with respect to time. We can draw an analogy to Andreev bound states in conventional SNS junctions. At the phase difference π and transparent interfaces, the processes of scattering around k F and -k F yield degenerate states at E = 0. However, if 0 < φ 2 -φ 1 < π, the states for E > 0 are formed by the scattering at -k F and if π < φ 2 -φ 1 < 2π, the states for E > 0 are formed due to scattering at k F . For E < 0, it is vice versa. Thus, in conventional SNS junctions, the phases also define which process dominates at a certain energy. The striking difference to our junction is that in the S-PTS-S case, the degeneracy at phase difference π is lifted because we obtain non-stationary states that decay or grow. Moreover, in contrast to conventional SNS junctions, the electron and hole content of the Andreev bound states at the edges of the junction are not equal. Let us discuss in more detail, what growth and decay of these bound states mean physically in our system. The process of growth and decay occurs within the PTS. If we look at a very narrow layer of the PTS, d → 0, we can see that E → 0, corresponding to the value of energy at the phase difference π in clean conventional SNS junctions without normal scattering. This happens because at d → 0 electrons penetrate through the PTS region quickly and do not experience the influence of its properties. Formation of an Andreev bound state at energy ε n in conventional SNS junction can be understood as an interference effect, when the phase difference between electron and hole in one scattering cycle between the interfaces of superconductors match the phase difference of superconductors plus 2 arccos (ε n /∆) + 2πn Perturbation theory.-We now verify that the allowed phases are restricted to discrete values via perturbation theory in ∆ P T . We assume that ∆ P T is the smallest energy scale in our system. This means that we should exclude E = 0. Let us consider the case of scattering at -k F for concreteness. We note that the upper term in the left-mover eigenvector Eq. (4) diverges in the limit ∆ P T → 0. This happens because we have put all normalizations into the factors α, β, and t 1,2 in Eq. . Thus, we substitute E = iE into Eq. ( We can see that in order for E to be real and finite, we need φ 1 -φ 2 = (2n + 1)π. If we exchange the phases φ 1 and φ 2 , the sign of E changes. For instance, we obtain E < 0 for φ 1 = 0 and φ 2 = π, as stated in the previous section. Phases π/2 and 3π/2.-For these phases, we obtain E = 0 from the full calculation using Eq. ( For φ 1 = 3π/2 and φ 2 = π/2, we obtain This implies that the eigenvectors in all three superconductors are the same with the exception of the factors e ±ik P T x , e ±ikcx ; meaning that if we put x = 0, they are equal. For the scattering close to k F and putting x = 0, they are For the subspace close to -k F , the corresponding eigenvectors are (1 1) T . This means that there is only a right-moving quasiparticle in PTS. It propagates through PTS obtaining a phase ∆ P T d/v F . This quasiparticle penetrates through the whole junction without reflection because the eigenmode is the same in all three superconductors. It becomes an evanescent mode in the conventional superconductors, as its energy is zero, i.e. less than ∆. In the inverse case, φ 1 = π/2 and φ 2 = 3π/2, the quasiparticle is left-moving, because α vanishes in Eq. ( This non-reciprocal behaviour can be understood as a supercurrent of quasiparticles. In conventional SNS junctions, the supercurrent often times follows the sinusoidal currentphase relation I ∝ sin (φ 1 -φ 2 ). Hence, the phase difference π gives zero current. However, in our S-PTS-S junction, there is a supercurrent of quasiparticles with net zero charge. The direction of the current is defined by the phases: It moves in the direction of the superconductor with phase π/2. As these quasiparticles are at zero energy and all superconductors obey particle-hole symmetry (see section "Symmetry considerations"), these states are Majorana zero modes according to the definition for non-Hermitian Hamiltonians Symmetry considerations.-We now argue why the phases {0, π} and {π/2, 3π/2} allow for solutions and why they are physically different in terms of symmetry considerations. In conventional superconductors, quasiparticles have particle-hole symmetry defined as , where C c is a unitary transformation and the subscript T denotes transposition. Particlehole symmetry of non-Hermitian systems has two definitions due to the fact that H * = H T In the case of phases {0, π}, we obtain a purely imaginary spectrum. When we have phases {π/2, 3π/2}, the energy is zero. In principle, obtaining a real energy spectrum in a non-Hermitian system is non-trivial. It was considered to be not feasible for a long time, until it was shown by Bender and Boettcher for PT -symmetric systems in 1998 Taking into account that we have phases π/2 and 3π/2, H 1 and H 2 exchange with each other under this transformation. However, P symmetry is by definition x → -x, which means that if we act on the whole S-PTS-S junction with PT symmetry, we have to exchange the conventional superconductors. Thus, P and T effectively exchange the conventional superconductors twice and we obtain the same junction. This means that S-PTS-S junctions with phases π/2 and 3π/2 are PT -symmetric as a whole, and real energy of the Andreev bound state can be expected. Conclusions.-In this work, we consider a junction between two conventional superconductors and a PT -symmetric non-Hermitian superconductor. PT -symmetric non-Hermitian superconductivity can emerge from Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction in combination with an external bath or the imbalance between electron-electron and hole-hole pairs We have shown that Andreev bound states are formed in the S-PTS-S junction. However, the physical properties of these states are conceptually different from the ones that occur in ordinary SNS junctions. First of all, solutions exist only for particular discrete values of phases of the conventional superconductors. Such strong selection can be useful in logical quantum devices. Remarkably, for phases 0 and π, we obtain growing and decaying states. These non-equilibrium processes occur due to non-Hermitian electron-electron interaction in PTS. Experimentally, this can lead to the presence of only one strongly-pumped mode. This pumped mode indicates particular phase differences by growing signal in time. In this sense, it corresponds to a novel feature of a Josephson junction as an amplifier. For phases π/2 and 3π/2, there is a unidirectional supercurrent of Majorana zero modes. The discreteness of φ 1 and φ 2 is stable with respect to a change of the length of the PTS and for moderate temperatures (below superconducting transition temperatures). We acknowledge useful discussions with Sebastian Bergeret. This work was supported by the DFG (SPP1666 and SFB1170 "ToCoTronics"), the Würzburg-Dresden Cluster of