The diode effect is fundamental to electronic devices and is widely used in rectifiers and AC-DC converters. At low temperatures, however, conventional semiconductor diodes possess a high resistivity, which yields energy loss and heating during operation. The superconducting diode effect (SDE) 1-8 , which relies on broken inversion symmetry in a superconductor may mitigate this obstacle: in one direction a zero-resistance supercurrent can flow through the diode, but for the opposite direction of current flow, the device enters the normal state with ohmic resistance. Nb/V/Ta superlattices with a polar structure 1,2 , in superconducting devices with asymmetric patterning of pinning centres 9 , or in superconductor/ferromagnet hybrid devices with induced vortices 10,11 . The need for an external magnetic field limits their practical application. Recently, a field-free SDE was observed in a NbSe2/Nb3Br8/NbSe2 junction, and it originates from asymmetric Josephson tunneling that is induced by the Nb3Br8 barrier and the associated NbSe2/Nb3Br8 interfaces 12 . Here, we present another implementation of zero-field SDE using noncentrosymmetric [Nb/V/Co/V/Ta]20 multilayers. The magnetic layers provide the necessary symmetry breaking and we can tune the SDE by adjusting the structural parameters, such as the constituent elements, film thickness, stacking order, and number of repetitions. We control the polarity of the SDE through the magnetization direction of the ferromagnetic layers. Artificially stacked structures 13-18 , as the one used in this work, are of particular interest as they are compatible with microfabrication techniques and can be integrated with devices such as Josephson junctions 19-22 . Energy-loss-free SDEs as presented in this work may therefore enable novel non-volatile memories and logic circuits with ultralow power consumption. In this regard, we fabricated noncentrosymmetric ferromagnet/superconductor multilayers [Nb (4.5 nm)/V (4.5 nm)/Co (1.7 nm)/V (4.5 nm)/Ta (4.5 nm)]20 by replacing the V layers in Nb/V/Ta superlattices Figure The superconducting transition temperature, Tc (the temperature at which the resistivity drops to half of that above the transition), of the device was determined to be 2.6 K in the absence of a magnetic field. The Tc of the present device is lower than that of the previously studied [Nb (1nm)/V (1 nm)/Ta (1 nm)]40 device Furthermore, vortices were observed to start breaking the superconducting phase with increasing magnetic field, and the superconducting phase completely disappeared above 0.5 T at the lowest measurement temperature of 1.9 K. The superconducting coherence length ╬Š(0) was estimated to be 24 nm (see Supplementary Fig. Figure As the current density increases, the hysteresis of magnetoresistance becomes more pronounced, and the conventional magnetoresistance of Co is observed above 22.72 kA/cm 2 , where the superconductivity is completely destroyed. The observation of the conventional magnetoresistance of Co also indicates that the device fabrication process does not alter the ferromagnetic properties of the multilayers. Figures Figure After saturating the magnetization at -0.5 T, ’üäJc was measured again by sweeping the magnetic field in the order of -0.5, 0, +0.5 T. Moreover, the magnetic field dependence of ’üäJc in the upward sweep shows a trend (red dots) opposite to that of the downward sweep (black dots). The microscopic origin of the observed peaks and dip structures in the magnetic field dependence of ’üäJc is not clear. However, it is possibly related to the evolution of complex magnetic domains. We also checked the reproducibilities of Jc and ’üäJc in additional two devices (see Supplementary Fig. The polarity control of SDE in a zero field is essential to develop non-volatile devices based on SDEs. We demonstrate it using the minor hysteresis loops of the magnetization. Figure The limiting field of the minor loops is 0.15 T, as shown by the dashed line in Fig. Owing to the asymmetrical magnetic field sweeping, Jc shows asymmetry with respect to the zero field (dashed line). Consequently, we observe the positive ’üäJc in the zero-field after sweeping the magnetic field in the order of +0.5, 0, -0.15, 0 T, as shown in Fig. Here, we demonstrate the non-volatile SDE. The red and black dots in Fig. Thus, the atoms that are not adjacent to Co atoms can stabilize the superconductivity against the Pauli depairing effect due to the ferromagnetic spin polarization. We indeed noticed that the partial densities of states are almost unchanged for Nb, V, and Ta atoms, and all atoms contribute at EF in the ferromagnetic state, as shown in Fig. Pairing states that exhibit the diode effect would correspond to helical superconductivity, which has been investigated in noncentrosymmetric superconductors such as CePt3Si The experiments revealed that noncentrosymmetric superconductor/ferromagnet multilayers exhibited magnetization-mediated nonreciprocal critical currents, i.e., a magnetization-mediated SDE. The field-free SDE demonstrated here enables rectification without an external magnetic field. However, significant issues still need to be overcome for practical application. The rectification still requires precise controls of the applied current and temperature, which are major limitations for practical device operation. Therefore, it is essential to explore materials with a larger ’üäJc and higher Tc to realize a wide temperature range of operation. The proposed method of symmetry breaking using artificial stacked structures is versatile and controllable. Furthermore, the electronic band structure can be controlled by modulating the thickness and period of each constituent layer, which offers a promising route for exploring new materials for practical application. Our findings pave the way for obtaining rewritable superconducting diode logic circuits using the nonvolatility of magnetic materials. dependence of the resistivity under various magnetic fields for positive and negative currents at 1.9 K. The magnetic field was swept from +0.5 T to -0.5 T (downward sweep). b, Dependence of the resistivity on J under various magnetic fields for positive and negative currents at 1.9 K. The magnetic field was swept from -0.5 T to +0.5 T (upward sweep). c, Jc as a function of the magnetic field at 1.9 K. First, the magnetic hysteresis of Jc was measured from +0.5 to -0.5 T (downward sweep) for positive (red) and negative (black) currents. Subsequently, the sweep direction was reversed, and the magnetic field was swept from -0.5 to +0.5 T (upward sweep) for positive (blue) and negative (green) currents. The arrows indicate the sweep directions. d, Nonreciprocal component of the critical current density, ’üäJc, as a function of the magnetic field at various temperatures. The magnetic hysteresis of ’üäJc was measured from +0.5 to -0.5 T (downward sweep, black). Subsequently, the sweep direction was reversed, and the magnetic field was swept from -0.5 to +0.5 T (upward sweep, red). The arrows indicate the sweep direction. Jc for positive and negative currents in minor hysteresis loops at 1.9 K. Magnetic field was swept in the order of +0.5, 0, -0.15 T (downward sweep) and then -0.15, 0, +0.15 T (upward sweep). b, Magnetic field dependence of ’üäJc in the minor hysteresis loops obtained by Fig. The deposited films were then patterned into a wire (dimensions: 50 ╬╝m ├Ś 1000 ╬╝m ├Ś 0.44 ╬╝m) using conventional photolithography and Ar-ion milling. Finally, Au (100 nm)/Ti (5.0 nm) metal electrodes were electrically connected to the wire. The surface layer was removed through weak Ar-ion milling before the electrode deposition to create Ohmic contacts. During the transport measurements, the temperature and magnetic field were controlled using a commercial refrigerator (Quantum Design, Physical Property Measurement System) with DC applied using a current source (Yokogawa 7651). The voltage was measured using a four-terminal configuration with a nanovoltmeter (Keithley 2182A). The magnetization of the sample was studied under a magnetic field parallel to the film surface, using a superconducting quantum interference device magnetometer (Quantum Design MPMS3). Before starting the measurements, the magnetic field was reduced from 1.0 to 0 T using an oscillating field sequence to remove any trapped flux in the superconducting magnet. Subsequently, the magnetic hysteresis loops of the zerofield-cooled magnetization were measured in the "DC and no overshoot" mode using film samples with dimensions of 7 mm ├Ś 2 mm. The magnetization of the MgO substrate was subtracted to determine the intrinsic magnetic properties of the multilayers with the field parallel to the surface. We conducted first-principles calculations for nonmagnetic and ferromagnetic states on a bulk [Nb/V/Co/V/Ta] superlattice. We adopted the full-potential linearized augmented plane wave+local orbitals method within the generalized gradient approximation in the WIEN2k package The Pauli limit in a BCS superconductor can be estimated using the following 