High-resolution synthesis/projection of images over a large field-of-view (FOV) is hindered by the restricted space-bandwidth-product (SBP) of wavefront modulators. We report a deep learning-enabled diffractive display design that is based on a jointly-trained pair of an electronic encoder and a diffractive optical decoder to synthesize/project super-resolved images using low-resolution wavefront modulators. The digital encoder, composed of a trained convolutional neural network (CNN), rapidly pre-processes the high-resolution images of interest so that their spatial information is encoded into low-resolution (LR) modulation patterns, projected via a low SBP wavefront modulator. The diffractive decoder processes this LR encoded information using thin transmissive layers that are structured using deep learning to all-optically synthesize and project super-resolved images at its output FOV. Our results indicate that this diffractive image display can achieve a super-resolution factor of ~4, demonstrating a ~16-fold increase in SBP. We also experimentally validate the success of this diffractive super-resolution display using 3D-printed diffractive decoders that operate at the THz spectrum. This diffractive image decoder can be scaled to operate at visible wavelengths and inspire the design of large FOV and high-resolution displays that are compact, low-power, and computationally efficient. In the past decade, augmented/virtual reality (AR/VR) systems have attracted tremendous interest aiming to provide immersive and enhanced user experiences in a vast range of areas, including, e.g., human-computer interactions, visual media, art, and entertainment consumption as well as biomedical applications and instrumentation Over the years, considerable effort has been devoted to increasing the SBP of SLM technology to unleash the full potential of holographic displays, including various designs that use spatialmultiplexing of wavefront modulators arranged in application-specific configurations Recently, advances in machine learning have been extended to bring deep learning-enabled solutions to some of the earlier discussed challenges associated with holographic displays. Various deep neural network architectures were used to learn the transformation from a given target image to the corresponding phase-only pattern over the SLM, aiming to replace the traditional iterative hologram computation algorithms with faster and better alternatives Here, we present a deep learning-enabled diffractive super-resolution (SR) image display framework (Fig. We demonstrate the SR capabilities of this unique diffractive display design using a lens-free image projection system as shown in Fig. The operational principles and the building blocks of the presented diffractive SR image display are depicted in Fig. Figure In Fig. Beyond the visual inspections and comparisons provided in Fig. To provide more insights into the success of our diffractive decoders in synthesizing superresolved images, we conducted additional blinded tests using the images of various lines with subpixel linewidths compared to the native phase-only SLM resolution, as shown in Fig. Next, to experimentally demonstrate the success of the presented SR image display framework, we trained two different diffractive decoders designed for operation at the THz part of the spectrum (see the Methods section for details). The first one uses a 3-layer diffractive decoder design (Figs. The experimental results of the diffractive SR image display system with L = 3 layers are shown in Fig. Finally, the resilience of the SR image display framework to different quantization levels of the wavefront modulation is illustrated in Fig. We presented a diffractive SR image display framework based on a jointly-trained pair of encoder and decoder networks that collectively improve the SBP of the image projection system. The deep learning-designed diffractive display system synthesizes and projects super-resolved images at its output FOV by encoding each high-resolution image of interest into low-resolution representations with lower number of pixels per image. As a result of this, the all-optical decoding capability of the diffractive network not only improves the effective SBP of the image projection system but also reduces the data transmission and storage needs since low-resolution wavefront modulators are used. The decoder network is an all-optical diffractive system composed of passive structured surfaces and therefore does not consume computing power except for the illumination light. Similarly, the all-optically synthesized images are computed at the speed of light propagation between the encoder SLM plane and the diffractive decoder output FOV, and therefore the only computational bottleneck for speed and power consumption is at the inference of the front-end CNN encoder. As shown in our experimental results (Figs. Although the THz part of the electromagnetic spectrum was used for these proof-of-concept experimental demonstrations, the main design principles and conclusions provided in our study also apply to display systems operating at visible wavelengths. Extending the presented SR display designs to visible wavelengths is feasible using various nano-fabrication techniques providing subwavelength features, e.g., two-photon polymerization and lithography While the SR image display results of this manuscript were obtained at a single illumination wavelength, we can also extend the design principles of diffractive decoders to operate at multiple wavelengths to bring spectral information into the projected images. To optically synthesize fullcolor (RGB) images, some of the traditional holographic display systems use sequential operation (i.e., one illumination wavelength at a given time followed by another wavelength), which spatially utilizes all the pixels of the SLM for each wavelength at the expense of reducing the frame rate The presented SR image display can be thought of as a hybrid autoencoder framework containing a digital encoder network that is used to create low-dimensional representations of the target highresolution images and an all-optical diffractive decoder (jointly-trained with the encoder) to synthesize super-resolved images at its output FOV from the diffraction patterns of these low resolution encoded patterns generated by the encoder network. This joint optimization and the communication between the electronic front-end and the diffractive optical back-end of our SR image display is crucial to increase the SBP of the image formation models and will inspire the design of the new high-resolution camera and display systems that are compact, low-power, and computationally-efficient. In our optical forward model, the diffractive modulation layers are discretized over a regular 2D grid with a period of w x and w y for the x-and y-axes, respectively. Each point in the grid, termed 'diffractive neuron', denotes the transmittance coefficient t l [m, n] of the smallest feature in each modulation layer. The field transmittance of a diffractive layer, l ≥ 1, is defined as: where τ(λ) = n(λ) + jκ(λ) is the complex refractive index of the optical material used to fabricate the diffractive layers, λ denotes the wavelength of the coherent illumination. n a = 1 refers to the refractive index of the medium (air in our case) surrounding the modulation layers, and h l [m, n] represents the material thickness of the corresponding neuron, which is defined as where o l [m, n] is an auxiliary input variable used to compute the material thickness values between [h b , h m ]. These auxiliary variables o l [m, n] and the material thickness values h l [m, n] for all m, n & l are optimized using stochastic gradient descent based error backpropagation and deep learning The 2D modulation function T l (x, y) for continuous coordinates (x, y) can be written in terms of transmittance coefficients t l [m, n] and 2D rectangular sampling kernels p l (x, y) as follows: where p l (x, y) is defined as The light propagation between successive diffractive layers is modeled by a fast Fourier transform (FFT)-based implementation of the Rayleigh-Sommerfeld diffraction integral, using the angular spectrum method. This diffraction integral can be expressed as a 2D convolution of the propagation kernel w(x, y, z) and the input wavefield U′ l (x, y): ( To mitigate the impact of potential misalignments during the experiments, we incorporated possible physical error sources as part of the optical forward model of the diffractive decoders. During the training of the experimentally-tested diffractive designs, these errors were modeled using random 3D displacement vectors, D l = (D x , D y , D z ) denoting the deviation of the location of diffractive layer l, from its ideal position, where D x , D y , and D z were defined as uniformly distributed independent random variables, The variables ∆ x , ∆ y , and ∆ z in Eq. 6 denote the maximum amount of displacement along the corresponding axis. Accordingly, the position of the diffractive layer l at i th iteration L (l,i) was defined as L (l,i) = (L x l , L y l , , L z l , ) + (D x (l,i) , D y (l,i) , D z (l,i) ). (7) We used a CNN-based electronic encoder to compress high-resolution input images of interest into lower-dimensional latent representations that can be presented using a low SBP wavefront modulator or SLM. The CNN network architecture is illustrated in Fig. We created a training image dataset, namely the EMNIST display dataset, to train and test our diffractive SR display system. As seen in Supplementary Fig. Then, these selected and augmented images were randomly placed in a 3x3 grid. This procedure was used for each image in our display dataset. In the original EMNIST handwritten letters dataset, there are 88,000 and 14,800 letter images for training and testing, respectively In the experimentally tested designs, two complementary image sets containing 80,000 and 8,800 different handwritten letters from the EMNIST letters training dataset were used as the training and validation datasets, respectively. The EMNIST letters test dataset with 14,800 different handwritten letters was used as our test dataset. The handwritten letters were resized to 15 x 15 pixels using bicubic downsampling (with an anti-aliasing filter), based on the effective pixel size used at the measurement (output) plane. Diffractive neuron width of the transmissive layers (w x , w y ) and the sampling period of the light propagation model were chosen as 0.533λ. Each diffractive layer had a size of 106.66λ x 106.66λ (200 x 200 pixels). The input and output FOVs of the diffractive decoders were 51.168λ x 51.168λ (96 x 96 pixels). To avoid aliasing in our optical forward model, these matrices were padded with zeros to have 400x400 pixels. In our optical forward propagation model, the material absorption was assumed to be zero (κ(λ) = 0). Therefore, the transmittance coefficient of each feature of a diffractive layer can be written as: Phase coefficients θ l [m, n] of each diffractive layer of the decoder was optimized using deep learning and error backpropagation. The phase coefficients θ l [m, n] were initialized as 0. Different diffractive decoders, including 1, 3, and 5 transmissive layers were analyzed in our results. The axial distances (Fig. In our experiments, a monochromatic THz illumination source (λ = ~0.75 mm) was used. The diffractive neuron size of the transmissive layers and the sampling period of the light propagation model were chosen as ~0.667λ and the size of each layer was determined to be 66.7λ x 66.7λ (5 cm × 5 cm). The effective pixel size at the measurement plane was selected as ~2.67λ in our experiments. The size of the phase-only wavefront modulator was selected as 40λ × 40λ (3 cm × 3 cm), which is also equal to the size of the output FOV. Based on the ~2.67λ pixel size at the output FOV, the number of the output image pixels was set to be 15 × 15 and the LR wavefront modulator was selected as a 5 × 5 pixel phase-only layer with a pixel pitch of 8λ × 8λ. This corresponds to a desired SR factor of k=15/5=3 that was targeted during the training of these models i.e., a 9-fold SBP enhancement through the diffractive decoder. To avoid spatial aliasing in the optical forward model, the matrices were padded with zeros to have 300 × 300 pixels. The complex refractive index of the 3D-printing material τ(λ) used to fabricate the diffractive layers and the phase-encoded inputs was measured as ~1.6518 + j0.0612. In our model, the Two diffractive decoders with L=3 and L=1 were fabricated and tested in the experiments. The axial distances for these models are given in Table The schematic diagram of the experimental setup is shown in Figs. For the joint training of an electronic CNN-based encoder and an optical diffractive decoder, the mean absolute error function together with an efficiency penalty term (e -η ) was used as our training loss function (L), which is defined as: where y i and y ̂i denote the target (ground truth) high-resolution image and the all-optical decoder output intensity, respectively. N represents the number of pixels in each image, and σ is a normalization term. P i and P o = ∑ y ̂i N i=1 represent the optical power incident on the input FOV and the output FOV, respectively. The power efficiency of a diffractive decoder can be adjusted by tuning γ. For the training of the experimentally demonstrated diffractive decoders, γ was set to be 0.005 for L=1 and 0.015 for L=3; for the other designs, γ = 0. During the joint training of the CNN encoder and the diffractive decoder, several image data augmentations, including random image rotations (0, 90, 180, and 270 degrees), random flipping of images, and random contrast adjustments were used. The joint training was implemented in Python (v3.6.12) and TensorFlow (v1.15.4, Google LLC). Adam optimizer was used during the training with a learning rate of 0.001 for the all-optical diffractive decoders and 0.0005 for the CNN-based encoders For quantitative comparison of our results, PSNR and SSIM values were calculated for each target image in our test sets ). 