Emergence of π-magnetism in open-shell nanographenes has been theoretically predicted decades ago but their experimental characterization was elusive due to the strong chemical reactivity that makes their synthesis and stabilization difficult. In recent years, on-surface synthesis under vacuum conditions has provided unprecedented opportunities for atomically precise engineering of nanographenes, which in combination with scanning probe techniques have led to a substantial progress in our capabilities to realize localized electron spin states and to control electron spin interactions at the atomic scale. Here we review the essential concepts and the remarkable advances in the last few years, and outline the versatility of carbon-based π-magnetic materials as an interesting platform for applications in spintronics and quantum technologies. Magnetic materials are key to a wide variety of technological applications. However, to date their practical use is limited to transition metals with unpaired d-or f -shell electrons. The same applies even for the so-called molecular magnetism that has been studied and developed for decades, but still relying on coordination of d-or f -block elements to organic ligands Until recently, the main drawback faced by carbon-based π-magnetism was its poor reproducibility. The magnetic properties or carbon-based nanostructures are extremely susceptible to minute changes in the bonding configuration and at the same time they are based on unpaired π-electrons that display great propensity for chemical reactions These new prospects have caused the research on magnetic carbon-based nanostructures to be booming over the last years The growing number of available systems for experimental study has also brought about an increasing understanding of the properties and of the magnetic interactions between different magnetic (radical) π-states. This increased understanding, along with the continuously improving capabilities of OSS strategies, have further allowed for the generation of one-and two-dimensional materials with engineered properties as provided by the controlled coupling of appropriately placed radical π-states in periodic arrays At this point it needs to be remarked that there is a stringent requirement on atomic precision for the synthesis of the carbon nanostructures. Minor changes in the bonding structure may result in dramatic changes to the optoelectronic and magnetic properties, as exemplified in figure This review is organized as follows. We begin with an overview in section 2 of commonly used computational approaches to describe the electronic structure of graphene nanostructures and relationships between band topology, emergence of spin-polarization and many-body spin states. In section 3 we present well-established counting rules to infer the relationship between nanographene geometry and its ground-state spin properties. After a review in section 4 of the experimental techniques for nanographene synthesis and scanning probe characterization, we proceed to discuss the different mechanisms to induce magnetism. Section 6 is devoted to interactions among spin states and section 7 to the chemical reactivity associated with the open-shell character of the involved spin states. Finally, an outlook is presented in section 8. Carbon has four valence electrons in the second shell which favors the formation of four single bonds. In the case of planar carbon structures like graphene, the robust trigonal structure arises from a sp 2 hybridization of one 2s and two 2p carbon orbitals to form doubly-occupied σ bonds with its three neighbours. The remaining electron, associated with the out-of-plane orbital 2p z , forms π-bonding with its neighbours, resulting in a half-filled π band at the origin of interesting electronic properties of graphene, such as "relativistic" massless Dirac fermions and valley degeneracy In condensed matter physics, density functional theory (DFT) is probably the most popular approach to describe the electronic structure of materials The reason for the popularity of DFT nowadays is the tractability of systems of thousands of atoms, without any system-specific parameters, with high accuracy for ground state properties such as lattice constants and phonons for solids as well as geometry and vibrations for molecules. A recent Special Topic Issue DFT is also successful in describing many aspects of carbon π-magnetism as is evident from the vast body of literature covered in this review. It allows, for instance, to compute the spin density for adsorbed atoms, molecules and extended 2D structures on metal surfaces and interfaces. Spin in KS-DFT This leads to wave functions that are not true eigenstates of the total spin operator Ŝ2 (only of the Ŝz projection), i.e., they are in principle spin-contaminated. This limitation, which applies more generally to all meanfield descriptions, is important to keep in mind for applications to open-shell molecules. Wavefunction based methods from computational chemistry (configuration-interaction, coupled cluster, etc.) are therefore more suitable for accurately describing spin states, but these are limited to small systems. Due to the orthogonality of the σ and π electrons in planar structures, it is possible to study them separately. The advantages of such effective descriptions involving only the latter are simplicity and numerical efficiency, which may also help to reach a better understanding of the mechanisms at play. In the tight-binding (TB) approximation one describes electrons in a solid in terms of the atomic orbitals of isolated atoms and the corrections that arise due to their overlaps where ĉ † iσ is the fermionic creation operator of an electron with spin σ = {↑, ↓} in basis orbital i. The operators satisfy the usual anticommutation relations {ĉ μ , ĉν } = {ĉ † μ , ĉ † ν } = 0 and {ĉ μ , ĉ † ν } = δ μν . The matrix elements H 0 ij = i| Ĥ0 |j describe the onsite energies along the diagonal and the strength of electron hopping between orbitals i and j in the off-diagonals. The nearest neighbour (1nn, blue) model includes t 1 = -2.7 eV, the next-nearest neighbour (2nn, red) model also t 2 = -0.2 eV, and the third-nearest neighbour (3nn, green) model additionally t 3 = -0.18 eV. Both orthogonal (-o, full lines) and nonorthogonal (-no, dashed lines) basis variants are considered, the latter with a nearest-neighbor overlap set to s 1 = 0.1. The gray bands correspond to SIESTA The matrix elements are real and satisfy H 0 ij = H 0 ji . In general, the basis orbitals may be nonorthogonal represented by the overlap integrals S ij = i|j . For simplicity, one may assume orthogonality and write S ij = δ ij . For sp 2 carbon the simplest description includes just the 2p z orbital at each carbon atom with nearest-neighbour hopping matrix elements t = -2.7 eV The time-independent Schrödinger equation for the TB Hamiltonian can be written as as a generalized eigenvalue problem (2) where E α is the eigenenergy corresponding to state Different TB approximations for the π-bands of graphene are shown in figure Figure While the TB method is a well-established starting point for describing the electronic structure of carbonbased systems, the method itself cannot account for the emergence of π-magnetism due to the neglect of electron interactions. One way to include them is called the Hubbard model. The Hubbard model was introduced in 1963 as an approximate description of electron correlation effects in narrow energy bands of solids, taking into account the atomistic nature in a minimal fashion Energy spectrum of the half-filled Hubbard dimer. In absence of a magnetic field the ground state is a singlet |S 0 and the first excited state a triplet |T . In the limit of large U/t the low-energy spectrum can be described by the Heisenberg spin dimer with antiferromagnetic exchange coupling J = 4t 2 /U . transitions, magnetism, and superconductivity. In the (fermionic) Hubbard model one adds to the TB Hamiltonian Ĥ0 a term that accounts for shortrange electron interactions. The model is defined by the Hamiltonian where niσ = ĉ † iσ ĉiσ is the number operator for site i and U 0 > 0 is the onsite Coulomb repulsion energy. The model thus ignores long-range Coulomb effects by only considering the interaction energy when two electrons occupy the same orbital. Solving the Hubbard model is in general a difficult problem due to the quartic structure of the operators appearing in (3) and the exponential growth of Fock-space with system size, thus sharing challenges with full many-body descriptions (section 2.5). In order to solve the Hubbard model for moderately large nanographenes, methods based on configuration interaction in the so-called complete active space (CAS) have been developed 2.3.1. Example: half-filled Hubbard dimer A simple, illustrative example of analytic solution of the Hubbard model is the case of a half-filled dimer, i.e., a system composed of two electronic orbitals and occupied by two electrons. We define it as where E α the single-particle energy of orbital α ∈ {L, R}, t the effective hopping matrix element between the orbitals, and the effective Coulomb repulsion for each orbital. Projecting this Hamiltonian on the following basis of two-electron states where |0 represents the vacuum state, we arrive at the simple matrix form which is readily diagonalized. In the symmetric limit ε L = ε R = 0 and U L = U R = U the eigenenergies are and the corresponding eigenstates Here |S i can be identified as the singlet states while |T is the S z = 0 triplet state. An illustration of the energy spectrum of the Hubbard dimer is shown in figure In the limit U/t → 0, where α → 1, we see that the ground state is an equal mix of the openand closed-shell configurations. Conversely, in the limit U/t → ∞, where α → ∞, only the open-shell configuration remains. Here the ground state energy can be expanded in t to read This allows to map the low-energy spectrum in this limit onto the antiferromagnetic Heisenberg model for a spin-1/2 dimer where S i is the spin-1/2 operator for site i and the exchange coupling can identified as J = 4t 2 /U . From the relations 2 R and S 2 = S(S + 1), it is easy to see that the eigenenergies of Ĥeff correspond to -J for the singlet (S = 0) and 0 for the triplets (S = 1), exactly as derived above for the Hubbard dimer. The Hubbard model can in principle be solved by numerically exact diagonalization, but the Hilbert space grows exponentially with the number of lattice sites. This makes a brute-force approach to even small nanographenes impractical. Instead a dramatic simplification is achieved if one resorts to the mean-field approximation. By defining the occupation operators niσ = niσ +δn iσ in terms of the fluctuations around their average values, one can write the product of operators as = ni↑ ni↓ + ni↑ ni↓ -ni↑ ni↓ + δn i↑ δn i↓ ≈ ni↑ ni↓ + ni↑ ni↓ -ni↑ ni↓ , where the fluctuations (last term) has been neglected. This leads to the mean-field Hubbard (MFH) model of the form ĤMFH = Ĥ0 +U i (n i↑ ni↓ + ni↑ ni↓ -ni↑ ni↓ ).( An example of MFH results for the band structure of a 6-atom wide zigzag GNR (ZGNR) is shown in figure The problem of electron correlation in open-shell nanographenes can also be addressed with full ab initio quantum chemistry approaches. This is particularly pertinent when strong correlation effects are at play. However, the computational cost of traditional wave-function based methods (configuration interaction, coupled cluster, multi-configurational selfconsistent fields etc.) typically scale very unfavorable with the system size and are thus limited to rather small molecules. Examples of quantum chemistry calculations for graphene nanoislands include CAS-SCF and multireference NEVPT2 methods Another important aspect beyond the properties of isolated nanographenes is the impact of the interaction with a supporting surface. This can for instance give rise to Kondo-like phenomena on metal surfaces arising from the coupling of a magnetic system with the conduction electrons in the substrate. This situation has been described theoretically based on the multi-orbital Anderson model in the non-crossing approximation Another useful way to analyze, understand or predict radical states in sp 2 -carbon structures is through topology where k is the wave vector, a is the unit cell size, and u nk is the periodic part of the electron Bloch wave function in band n. Note that for systems with bandcrossings or degenerate states there is an arbitrariness to the definition of the Zak phase for the individual bands. However, the total phase γ = n∈occ γ n (i.e., summed over occupied bands) is invariant and unaffected by this arbitrariness as long as the filled and empty bands do not intersect The Zak phase γ depends on the choice of shape and origin of the unit cell and can in general take any value. However, if the unit cell possesses inversion or mirror symmetry, it is possible to choose the origin such that γ (mod 2π) is quantized to either 0 or π. The corresponding Z 2 invariant is then obtained from The Z 2 invariant is also related to the parity of the Bloch wave functions at the time-reversal invariant momentum points Γ and π/a by where P is the parity operator (applying to either inversion or mirror symmetry) and ψ nk is the wave function of the n-th occupied band at momentum k. According to the bulk-boundary correspondence, at the interface between materials belonging to different topology classes one (or an odd number) of localized zero-energy modes will emerge. Such in-gap states in sp 2 carbon structures are also manifestations of π-radicals As an example, applying these concepts to the band structure of a 7-AGNR described by the unit cell shown by the red box in figure Graphene is a so-called bipartite system in which sp 2 -hybridized carbon atoms are arranged in two alternating hexagonal sublattices. That is, carbon atoms of one sublattice are covalently bound only to carbons of the opposite sublattice. The lowenergy electronic states that prevalently determine most physico-chemical processes of graphene and its nanostructured derivatives are π-orbitals that arise from the hybridization of the carbon p z electrons. Each sp 2 -hybridized carbon atom has one p z electron. Indeed, as described in the previous sections, a oneorbital approximation with the TB or MFH models has been extremely successful to describe the properties of graphene and its nanostructured derivatives In a bipartite structure, each p z electron can only form π-bonds with electrons belonging to atoms of the opposite sublattice. It automatically follows that, if the two sublattices have a different number of atoms, the electrons will not be able to bind pairwise. The electrons that remain unpaired become π-radicals with an associated spin S = 1/2. This is an intuitive basis for Lieb's theorem where N A and N B are the number of atoms belonging to each sublattice. A molecular system with an unbalanced amount of atoms in each sublattice will thus necessarily display a net spin. A very intuitive example of such a system is defective graphene, in which the local removal of one p z electron endows the defect with magnetic properties The spin density distribution is further displayed in figure Another simple and very useful counting rule to predict magnetic properties in electronically neutral carbonbased nanostructures is the analysis of the structure's so-called "nullity" (η). Nullity represents the number of zero-energy states that result from solving the nearestneighbor TB Hamiltonian for a specific nanostructure, dating back to early work on the spectral properties of unsaturated hydrocarbons where α is the maximum number of sites that are not nearest neighbors to each other and N is the total number of sites. Whereas for bipartite structures α often coincides with the number of atoms belonging to the dominant sublattice (or of either sublattice if they display the same number of sites), that is not always the case. This is shown by way of example in figure We note that the nullity can be understood in terms of two contributions η = η pre + η sup , where η pre = |N A -N B | is the predictable number of zero modes from sublattice imbalance and η sup ∈ 2Z is the remaining supernumerary zero modes (of topological origin) that come in pairs Figure However, counting the maximum number of non-adjacent sites α as displayed in figure It is well-established that aromatization of conjugated structures increases their band gap and overall stability. An easy way to quantify the aromaticity with simple counting rules is analyzing the number of Clar sextets (a six-membered carbon ring comprising three conjugated π-bonds) contained within a molecular structure It must be kept in mind, however, that this proposed threshold is only indicative and may vary from structure to structure. Some of the factors affecting this threshold will be elaborated on in later sections. A key part in the booming development of carbonbased magnetism has been clearly the progress in the synthetic capabilities. As will be discussed later in more detail, carbon nanostructures with magnetic properties are normally very reactive, which complicates their synthesis and characterization. In this respect, OSS performed under vacuum conditions offers opportunities that were previously unavailable to more conventional approaches. The inert vacuum environment, along with the generally stabilizing effect of the supporting substrate surface, allow for the synthesis of carbon nanostructures that under different conditions would either degrade extremely fast or can not be directly achieved. In spite of being a relatively young research field, OSS has been reviewed extensively and we refer the reader to more detailed descriptions on the virtues and possibilities offered by this approach In short, the OSS approach consists in the deposition of appropriately designed molecular reactants (figure 8a) onto a substrate surface (figure The fact that the products obtained by OSS remain adsorbed on the surface is probably the most important difference with respect to heterogeneous catalysis As mentioned above, most of the progress achieved in the field has been thanks to the new synthetic capabilities offered by OSS under vacuum. As occurs with conventional chemistry, also in OSS the yield with which the target product is obtained varies largely from system to system. However, because target as well as byproducts remain on the surface and no means have been developed yet for purification processes, ensemble averaging measurement techniques may be hampered depending on the nature and amount of byproducts contributing to it. This is one of the reasons for which SPM are the most popular characterization techniques applied in the wider field of OSS, as well as more specifically to the study of magnetic carbon nanostructures. Nevertheless, SPM techniques specifically developed to directly measure the magnetism with spatial resolution like spin-polarized STM (SP-STM) The conceptually simplest signal utilized to indirectly prove the single occupation of molecular orbitals and the associated magnetism of molecular nanostructures is the presence of a Coulomb gap. An example thereof is shown in figure That is, the more extended the orbital is that hosts the unpaired electron, the lower the Coulomb repulsion will be if filled with a second electron An alternative signal that is often used as proof for magnetism is a zero-bias resonance, namely a so-called Kondo resonance, that can appear when magnetic states interact with a metallic substrate [104, 105, 106]. A magnetic state with energy ε 0 hosts an unpaired electron with spin S = 1/2 whose zcomponent displays up or down orientation. Quantum mechanically there is a limited time of the order of h/|ε 0 | or h/|ε 0 + U | (typically some femtoseconds) during which the magnetic state can be empty or doubly occupied, respectively [104, 105, 106]. The former requires the electron in the magnetic state to populate an empty state of the substrate, whereas the latter requires the population of the magnetic state by a second electron from the metal. Either case can subsequently relax leaving the magnetic state with a single electron of reversed spin. That is, the impurity's spin state is constantly fluctuating and a combination of all these spin exchange processes results in the appearance of an additional Kondo resonance at the Fermi energy that can thus be directly related to the magnetic moment of the screened state [104, 105, 106]. An example of such a Kondo resonance in carbon nanostructures is shown in figure However, an unambiguous discrimination of the Kondo origin normally requires differentiating it from other possible sources of zero-bias features like tipeffects or low-energy inelastic excitations In scanning probe spectroscopy experiments, this is most commonly performed analyzing the temperature-dependent width of the resonance Proof for the magnetic origin of the zerobias resonance can also be obtained analyzing its response to a magnetic field, which causes a Zeeman splitting of the resonance that becomes observable at sufficiently strong fields that depend on its width or Kondo temperature Another approach is ramping the associated state's energy, which can in turn modify its occupation. This approach is often utilized in devices The fading electrostatic influence of the substrate causes the molecular states to gradually realign. This can be seen for example in figure A different type of signal that has been also used to demonstrate the magnetism of carbon nanostructures by SPM and spectroscopy is the presence of inelastic spin-flip excitations. A beautiful example thereof is shown again in figure 9d-f with the GNR junctions As already explained above in section 3.1, molecules formed by alternant structures but with a different number of atoms in each sublattice, N A and N B , display a net spin of magnitude S = |N A -N B |/2 In bipartite lattices this generic assumption causes atoms on the same lattice to share the same spin, while being antiferromagnetically aligned to atoms of Figure Although triangulene was already hypothesized by Erich Clar in 1953 As the size is increased, also the nullity and the sublattice imbalance become greater (figure Further examples with sublattice imbalance are, e.g., heptauthrene, in which N A -N B = 2 and the net spin is therefore S = 1 [122], or rhombusshaped molecules whose symmetry is broken by a missing C atom, causing a sublattice imbalance of 1 and thus S = 1/2 The graphene sp 2 -to-sp 3 rehybridization by hydrogen or other adsorbates/defects, and their implications for π-magnetism, has been studied extensively by calculations By topological frustration it is meant that there is no possible way to draw a Kekulé structure for the molecules. All the molecular structures discussed in the previous section displaying sublattice imbalance suffer topological frustration. Chemical structure drawings require the addition of explicit radicals to satisfy the valence four of carbon atoms. This is easily understood with the qualitative arguments outlined in the description of the counting rules for bipartite lattices as in nanographenes. Each carbon atom has one p z electron that can only bind to electrons of the opposite sublattice. It automatically follows that, if the two sublattices have a different number of atoms, the electrons will not be able to bind pairwise, leaving some unpaired electron as a radical. A similar scenario can also apply to non-benzenoid structures in which the sublattices are no longer well-defined. By way of example, the presence of odd-membered rings may result in structures with an odd number of p z electrons, which automatically prevents their pairwise coupling. An example thereof can be found in structure 6 of figure However, topological frustration can also occur for benzenoid carbon nanostructures displaying sublattice balance, which were formerly termed as "concealed non-Kekuléan" structures As illustrated in figure The carbon-based nanostructures discussed in previous sections (see also table 1) with sublattice imbalance and topological frustration all feature zero-energy states (as predicted by the nullity parameter η), for which any repulsive Coulomb interaction triggers a spin-polarization that reduces the density of states around the Fermi level and thereby avoids the associated instability. However, the same scenario can happen also with molecular states that are not strictly at zero energy (η = 0), requiring a larger Coulomb repulsion the farther the orbitals are from the Fermi Table Sublattice balance ZGNRs, chiral GNRs Extended triangulene (ETRI) In a simplified two-electron picture, the polariza-tion of low-energy states takes place when the Coulomb energy of putting a second electron into one orbital is larger than the energy cost of creating two spatially separated radical states (with reduced Coulomb repulsion) that can be understood as a linear combination of the frontier occupied and unoccupied states (figure There are multiple ways to qualitatively understand the behavior of molecular nanostructures undergoing (or not) such spin polarization, which often shows a notable size-dependence with relatively welldefined thresholds. Although with some exceptions A complementary explanation to the sizedependent spin-polarization is that two singly occupied radical states hybridize into a fully occupied HOMO and a fully unoccupied LUMO as they are brought sufficiently close to one another in carbon nanostructures below a certain size threshold. Such threshold is again dependent on the radical's delocalization described above, and thus strongly dependent on the particular bonding structure. By way of example, finite GNRs with longitudinal armchair-shaped edges and 5 carbon atoms across their width are open-shell structures with radical states at their zigzag ends Chemical counting rules to predict spin polarization of low-energy states The perhaps most intuitive way to qualitatively understand the spin polarization of low-energy states is based on chemical counting rules. As already explained in section 3.3, the stabilization energy of three new Clar sextets approximately compensates the energetic cost of forming a pair of radicals by breaking a π-bond. Thus, as we will see with a number of examples, if three or more sextets can be formed for each new pair of radicals, this will normally be favorable, marking an approximate threshold at which polarization of lowenergy states sets in. The larger are the molecular structures, the more possibilities there are to generate a sufficient number of Clar sextets, supporting again the stronger tendency of larger molecules to produce radicals by polarization of low-energy states. In a first example, we analyze the number of Clar sextets (four) in the Clar formula of a molecule consisting of two fused triangulene moieties (figure In the following we describe another example of more extended structures, namely chiral GNRs of varying width. Chiral GNRs display an alternating number of zigzag and armchair segments. They are predicted to be open-shell structures with so-called edge states consisting of π-radicals In particular, we focus on (3,1)-chiral GNRs, which is the only type of atomically precise chiral GNRs that have been synthesized to date with varying width In fact, considering the extended nature of the ribbons that allows creating larger supercells, the ratio of newly created sextets per radical pair can be increased up to four (figure The same threshold also explains the transition from closed-shell to open-shell in other molecules as a function of their size, like in the case of periacenes The Clar sextet can furthermore migrate freely to any of the six-membered rings, diluting even more the effect of the sextet's aromatic stabilization. Indeed, calculations reveal that the homodesmic stabilization energy per π-electron scales inversely with the acene size Alternative factors that also lower the threshold of new Clar sextets per radical pair are topological defects, as will be discussed in section 5.4. Associating spin-polarization to competing aromatic-quinoid conjugation patterns Many of the cases undergoing spin-polarization of low-energy states can be understood from the point of view of a competition between aromaticity and π-electron delocalization, the latter being typically promoted by quinoid conjugation patterns In fact this applies to carbon-based materials beyond pure hydrocarbons and hexagonal patterns, as for example shown in figure One is the usual antiferromagnetic alignment of the π-radicals in symmetric and linear molecules of this kind, which renders their ground state a singlet. Under these conditions, the "spin-up" electron of the HOMO can hybridize with the "spin-down" singlyoccupied molecular orbital (SOMO) electron and vice versa (figure Another characteristic property of the radical states, namely their spatial distribution, can also be related to the hybridization picture. The hybridization of the radical states with the extended doubly occupied orbitals allows for their increased delocalization. Given that the hybridization increases the closer the in-gap radical states are to the following doubly occupied orbitals, the radical delocalization scales inversely with the molecular band gaps As explained in section 2.6, a useful alternative way to understand and predict the presence of radical states in certain molecular structures is topology. From the symmetries of the filled bands of infinite systems, or from the calculated Zak phase, the materials are classified as trivial or nontrivial. For the latter, zero energy modes appear at the structure's ends as they are made finite. The simplest organic conjugated chain for which to calculate this is polyacetylene, which has only two p z electrons per unit cell and thus only one filled π-band. It can be easily modelled with TB by a linear array of electronic states coupled with alternating hopping constants t n and t m (figure and the associated bands are plotted in figure From figure The usefulness and simplicity of this SSH Hamiltonian is such that also other more complex polyaromatic structures have been mapped onto this model under the assumption that the HOMO and LUMO orbitals of the unit cell can be viewed as the bonding and antibonding dimer states of the SSH chain In fact, those radicals appear at any topological interface. Vacuum can be considered as a topologically trivial material, and the ends of the chains discussed earlier represent an interface between a topologically non-trivial polyacetylene chain and vacuum. However, substituting the vacuum by another topologically trivial carbon-based material results in a similar radical state at the interface. For example, as discussed earlier, the change from aromatic to quinoid structures brings about a reversal of HOMO and LUMO levels (figure Another instructive case is polyparaphenylene (PPP), which can also display aromatic and quinoid conjugation character, with the associated cross-over of valence and conduction band onsets. Figure The second occupied and unoccupied orbitals (labelled as 2 and 5) in turn correspond to the analogous valence and conduction band onsets of the quinoid segment. Looking at their respective wave functions and the associated longitudinal symmetry within the unit cells (marked with squares for the aromatic and quinoid segments separately), one can easily distinguish their reversal, confirming the different topological classes of either conjugation pattern. Most interestingly, two in-gap states appear (labelled 3 and 4) around the aromatic-quinoid junctions, although extending further into the quinoid segment that displays the lower band gap, exactly as expected from topological interface states. Samples resembling the calculated structure have been realized experimentally on Cu The inspiring examples described above, along with many others, have motivated the rational design of molecular structures with premeditated conjugation patterns to obtain materials according to our needs. Controlling the topological class determines the presence (or absence) of magnetic topological interface or end-states, which may be even rationally coupled by a tailored distance between them. In addition, creating materials that carefully balance between their quinoid and aromatic structures typically have the lowest band gaps and also low reorganization energies, thereby promoting high charge mobilities Closely related to this, a recent work demonstrated how the use of differently sized units within acene-based polymers linked by ethynyl bridges can be used to promote aromatic-ethynyl or cumulenequinoid conjugation patterns (figure There are also alternative ways that have been proposed to move across the aromatic/quinoid or topological phase map that do not even modify the backbone structure of the p z orbital network. Taking into account that topology can be associated to orbital symmetries, it seems intuitively easy to modify those by changing the carbon backbone and thereby the network of p z electrons. However, it is less intuitive to assume their modification for a fixed electron network. One of the various ways is through a polymer length control. By way of example, the previously described pentacene-based polymers undergo a topological transition and become trivial for lengths below ∼26 unit cells Alternatively, TB simulations have shown that a key to move across the topological phase diagram is the control of the hopping constants between lattice sites, in such a way that differences can be created for different types of bonds A somewhat related concept that has also been proposed at a theoretical level is based on a topological inversion process driven by transverse electric fields. GNRs that are asymmetric across their width can be engineered so as to have the valence and conduction bands displaying opposite energy shifts in response to transverse electric fields, potentially enabling a band inversion above a critical electric field that would bring along a change in the topological class. A type of ribbons that has been proposed to fulfil the requirements for transverse electric field-induced topological changes is 11-AGNRs with nitrogen and boron heteroatom dimers on opposite sides of the ribbon All in all, controlling the topological class of carbon nanostructures allows for the tailored generation of magnetic states at the ends, edges, or topological interfaces within their carbon backbones, which represents an extraordinary playground for the generation of custom-made materials. Most of the structures discussed above are benzenoid, made up by hexagonal carbon rings. However, the presence of topological defects as given by carbon rings with a different number of atoms has a notable impact on the materials' properties, including their magnetism. For example we analyze in the following the effect of four-membered rings on two closely related linear conjugated structures. Both consist in acene segments fused by four-membered rings. In one case the acene segments are fused in a linear configuration (figure As explained in section 5.3.2, acenes in their closed-shell structure display one Clar sextet independently of their length and it is only for higher acenes that they display a notable open-shell character. The structures shown in figure This can be understood from a conceptually very simple idea, namely that opposite spins in neighboring C atoms allow for their π-bonding and therefore are stabilizing, whereas for equal spins the Pauli exclusion principle prohibits their bonding and such configuration is therefore destabilizing The scenario with odd-membered rings is different, since it does not allow for configurations in which all atoms display an alternant spin alignment. This causes spin-frustration Besides facilitating the spin-polarization of low energy states by reducing the HOMO-LUMO gaps, topological defects in the form of odd-membered rings also have the peculiarity of potentially resulting in structures with an odd number of p z electrons, which automatically causes topological frustration and the concomitant appearance of radical states, as exemplified with structure 6 in figure A nice example systematically following the magnetism of molecules arising from topological defects is based on truxene derivatives (figure As readily explained in previous sections, their dehydrogenation and sp 3 to sp 2 rehybridization can be triggered by tip-induced manipulations, controllably affecting one (figure spin quartet [n]-triangulenes, and predictions are such that the same ferromagnetic alignment would hold also for an increasing number of radicals in two-dimensional networks based on these truxene-derivatives Although always in close relation to the previous sections, the origin of magnetism in carbon-based nanostructures (or alternatively a way to tune it) can also be sought in the presence of heteroatoms. Let us first focus on edge functionalization. Just as hydrogenation can cause an sp 2 to sp 3 rehybridization and thereby effectively remove a p z electron (and the process can be reversed by dehydrogenation), different types of chemical functionalization can have the opposite effect. An example is pictured in figure As will be discussed later on, these structures are highly unstable and easily react with gases like O 2 even at room temperature (RT) A similar scenario occurs for chiral GNRs in which each unit cell is doubly functionalized with a ketone on either side In a similar way as edge functionalization with heteroatoms can bring about or modify the magnetism of carbon nanostructures, the same occurs within the backbone structure. By way of example, the addition of substitutional nitrogen is predicted to trigger ferromagnetism in graphene Another nice example of backbone heteroatom doping is the substitution of carbon by boron atoms. In contrast to N, B in its sp 2 configuration has its p z orbital empty. Naively this would equally remove it from its sublattice count and thereby cause a net spin according to Ovchinnikov's rule, in a similar way as the sp 2 to sp 3 rehybridization by hydrogenation of graphene does Most spin density spin density interestingly, the two spins align ferromagnetically into a S = 1 ground state (figure It is worth noting that, apart from causing the appearance of magnetism via one mechanism or another, the introduction of heteroatoms has also been found to allow for the stabilization of magnetic states and their electronic decoupling from the underlying metallic substrates merely by a modification of the molecular adsorbate's adsorption geometry All examples that have been reviewed so far correspond to carbon-based nanostructures that intrinsically display an open-shell character. When molecules are adsorbed on solid substrates, another very important factor needs to be considered. The effects of the molecule-substrate interactions on the magnetic properties of the molecular structures can be manifold. They may quench the intrinsic magnetism of the molecules or instead endow magnetic properties to carbon nanostructures that in a free-standing configuration would display a conventional closed-shell character. In this respect it is instructive to analyze the simple picture of the Anderson model for single magnetic states This model describes a magnetic state at energy E 0 . Placing a second electron into that same state implies a Coulomb repulsion U between the two electrons, thus requiring an addition energy of E 0 + U . However, as the states interact with their environment (e.g., the substrate) and get a finite width, if their tails cross the Fermi level their occupation deviates from 1 and 0 and instead becomes n + and n -for spin up and spin down, respectively. The partial occupation n -causes Coulomb repulsion on the spin up state and increases its energy to E 0 + U n -, whereas the The "humps" at E 0 + U n -and E 0 + U n + are the virtual levels of the magnetic state, of width 2∆, for up and down spins, respectively. The number of electrons n -and n + occupying them correspond to the integration of their unshaded region below the Fermi level and determine the Coulomb repulsion they feel from electrons of the opposite spin and thereby the energy deviation of the virtual states with respect to E 0 and E 0 +U . Reprinted with permission from Coulomb repulsion on the spin down state is lowered to E 0 + U n + . As may be directy inferred from this simple picture, the net spin density ( n + -n -) is maximized for large U values, low ∆ values and for binding energies E 0 as close as possible to U/2. All of these relevant parameters can be affected by the substrate and the supramolecular environment. By way of example, the binding energy E 0 of an electronic state will greatly vary with substrates of different work function In addition, the state's width ∆ is crucially dependent on the specific substrate-adsorbate interactions and hybridization If a closed-shell adsorbate undergoes charge transfer to or from the substrate, it may display molecular magnetism if the following conditions are additionally met. According to the A good example is the case of pentacene on Ag(001) (figure The Kondo resonance still implies a minor molecule-substrate coupling, since it relates to the screening of the molecular spin by the substrate electrons. It is, however, small enough to stabilize a singly charged molecule with net spin S = 1/2. Although exemplified above with pentacene or its derivatives on Ag substrates, the appearance of magnetism upon adsorption in molecules that in their free-standing configuration are conventional closedshell structures has been observed also with other molecules and substrates Nevertheless, just as charge transfer may cause the appearance of magnetism in otherwise non-magnetic materials In the case of carbon-based nanostructures that have been obtained by OSS, the most commonly utilized substrate is Au It should also be mentioned that even for systems in which the magnetism is associated to more electrons, like in chiral or ZGNRs, charge transfer is predicted to similarly affect the magnetism Another example are ZGNRs with six atoms across their width. An indirect fingerprint of their magnetism (in particular the observation of a correlation gap) was only observed when adsorbed on a NaCl buffer layer, but not directly on Au(111) Therefore, besides charge transfer, an excessively large hybridization of the flat band with the underlying substrate cannot be discarded either as the reason for the lacking magnetism, as indeed suggested by the appearance of those resonances in closely related ZGNRs with nitrogen dopants that allow for their electronic decoupling from the substrate by a modified adsorption geometry Another important point to remind regarding charge transfer is that Ovchinnikov's rule and Lieb's theorem no longer apply for doped systems. Applied to GNRs this means that, for doping levels at which the magnetization is not yet quenched, ground states other than that predicted for neutral ribbons (whether chiral or zigzag edged) are allowed and may thus not correspond to the expected ferromagnetic alignment of the spins along each edge of the ribbons and an interedge antiferromagnetic alignment As we have seen in figures 7 and 9 the emergence of two unpaired electrons in a graphene nanostructure can lead to a sizable spin interaction on the J ∼ 1-100 meV scale, promising for potential applications in RT spinlogic operations Considering the simplest case of exchange coupling J between only a pair of electron spins, we have seen that it can manifest itself in an antiferromagnetically (AFM) ordered ground state (J > 0), exemplified by the Hubbard dimer (section 2.3.1) and Clar's goblet (figure A typical fingerprint of the magnetic interactions may be seen in inelastic electron tunneling spectroscopy (IETS), i.e., symmetric features in dI/dV at characteristic energies |eV | = ∆E ST due to inelastic transitions between the singlet and triplet states. This is similar to spin IETS of single or few magnetic atoms with STM We note here that the intrinsic singlet-triplet gap of a molecule is also known to be reduced on a surface due to renormalization of the energies by coupling with substrate electrons Although IETS features for high-spin systems like Going beyond a pair of electron spins, IETS features have also been observed in open-shell nanographenes such as the triangulene dimer with four unpaired electrons (figure Very recently, b MFH calculations with U > 3 eV. c This work considers spin interactions beyond Heisenberg exchange within the bilinear-biquadratic (BLBQ) model. One-dimensional spin chains constructed with extended GNRs have also been proposed through topological band engineering with heterostructures or heteroatoms In figure Another class of GNR spin chains is that of AGNRs with borylated segments as shown in figure 21k Radical states are intrinsically associated with a pronounced reactivity, although the latter may be reduced by steric protection of the radical sites, by electronic stabilization or by a combination of these two strategies The high reactivity of radical states has indeed also been used as an indirect hint or support for the partial open-shell character of molecular structures on which no other magnetic fingerprint was experimentally measured. For example, this is the case of higher acenes. Heptacene, and to a greater extent nonacene, show a tendency to coordinate to metal adatoms at their most reactive central ring Although the examples outlined above present the increased reactivity of open-shell molecules as a downside, it may also be used constructively. A beautiful example is the formation of porphyrine nanotapes, in which an initial cyclodehydrogenation step first forms surface-supported porphyrine diradical molecules (figure A very important parameter with regard to the reactivity of the molecules is the supporting substrate, which can affect it in different ways. For example, a strong molecule-substrate interaction may quench the radical character of the molecules and thereby their reactivity, although at the expense of an equally quenched magnetism. However, even if the molecules retain their radical character, strong molecule-substrate interactions may also be associated to strongly corrugated adsorption energies that limit the molecule's diffusion and thereby the potential polymerization events. Either way, the substrate can limit the molecule's reactivity and thereby increase the yield and selectivity during their synthesis. By way of example, whereas isolated The previous section discussed the reactivity of openshell carbon-nanostructures under ultra-high-vacuum, which, as already seen, is of key importance for their synthesis. However, most of the potential applications envisioned for these materials requires further processing By way of example, it has been recently shown that narrow (3,1)-chiral GNRs, which display an alternating edge structure composed by three zigzag and one armchair units (figure that came with the air exposure (although as may be observed in figure Similar findings with regard to the lack of stability and of the most common reaction product, were found also for the zigzag ends of 5-AGNRs At this point it is important to remark various issues. First, that the examples discussed above show a predominantly closed-shell character and that the lack of stability will be even worse in structures with increasing open-shell character. Second, that all these cases already suffered irreversible damage upon exposure to low pressures of pure oxygen (still in the high-vacuum range), which is beyond doubt a lower limit regarding the harshness of the treatment to which the carbon-based nanostructures may be exposed, if compared to a conventional transfer process or device implementation in solvents or air. Altogether, this brings up the need to revise the approaches and devise new strategies for the actual implementation of magnetic carbon-based nanostructures in scalable devices. Although still far from allowing for this ultimate goal, the development of chemical protection and deprotection strategies may be a first step in that direction [183]. As stressed throughout the first sections of this review, the rapid progress made in the development of magnetic carbon-based materials is intimately linked to the advances in the field of OSS. For that reason, it also shares many of its challenges. The latter have been analyzed and listed in several OSS reviews When it comes to actual applications, openshell carbon nanostructures have been proposed as a promising platform for many disparate uses. By way of example, radical molecules may act as particularly efficient photon emitters, whose doublet-spin nature avoids the formation of triplet excitons that limit the electroluminescence efficiency of non-radical emitters Graphene-based nanostructures have been also proposed for a variety of other spintronics Furthermore, in analogy with nitrogen-vacancy (NV) color centres in diamond [264], they could also become components in quantum sensors for various metrology applications. Most of these applications, however, have been only proposed at the theoretical level and their experimental realization still needs to be demonstrated in coming years. With many groups worldwide working in the field, we will surely witness important advances in a near future addressing many of the above mentioned challenges and creating new ones aiming at novel directions.