We perform systematic numerical simulations for carbon nanotube (CNT) film microstrip antennas to fabricate flexible and durable applications in terms of various device design parameters. The selection of appropriate materials for conductive films and a substrate of the conformable and robust microstrip antennas are crucial to increase the radiation efficiency and to reduce the losses while maintaining the mechanical properties. CNTs have been spotlighted as a promising nanomaterial, exhibiting excellent electrical and mechanical performances as desirable features for microwave wearable devices. Considering the material properties of the conductor and the substrate, we examine the possible ranges of the CNT film conductivities, conductive film thickness, and a dielectric constant and thickness of a substrate. Furthermore, we model non-uniform spatial distributions of conductivity in the CNT film to assess their impact on the antenna performance. Our extensive studies of material constants and conductivity spatial patterns propose design guidelines for optimal microstrip antennas made of CNT conductive films operating in microwave frequencies. Microstrip or patch antennas have been actively developed and widely deployed ever since G. A. Deschamps first demonstrated it in 1953 A microstrip antenna consists of a dielectric substrate sandwiched by a ground plane at the bottom and a small (traditionally, rectangular-shaped) conductive patch on the top, which radiates. When we design microstrip antennas, we pay attention to two aspects: (1) right materials for substrates and conductors, and (2) geometric dimensions. First, for the antenna substrate materials, a dielectric constant ( r ) and thickness (h) are studied. Several different materials have been studied as the antenna substrates: paper, textile, polyethylene terephthalate (PET), kapton polyimide, polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS), and nickel aluminate Parallel to the substrate material search, a variety of novel conductive materials, instead of the traditionally used copper (Cu), have been recently tested for the metallic patch itself such as graphene-based conductive films High conductivity is a basic and necessary trait of the conductive material for the flexible microstrip antenna. The durability is also an essential material property against strains or stresses from the action of stretch or compression. In these regards, CNT is an appropriate material candidate because the CNT possesses not only superb electrical attributes of high conductivity and high mobility To explain these experimental results, we also look into the conductor skin depth (δ) carefully with regards to the conductor film thickness t, and the quality factor. The skin depth effect is significant in AC devices because δ can set a minimum thickness of the conductive patch where the charge carriers can flow. δ indeed varies as a function of σ according to the well-known relation: where ρ is resistivity, ω is an angular frequency, and μ is the permeability of the conductive film. The other criterion is the antenna quality factor that represents the losses of the antenna from various sources: due to the radiation loss (Q Rad ), due to the conduction loss (Q C ), due to the dielectric loss (Q D ), and due to the surface wave loss (Q SW ). The total quality factor (Q tot ) is described as While the optimized Q Rad is a function of r and h, Q C is directly related to the skin depth effect, both will be discussed in the results section. Note that the Q D solely relies on material parameters, and Q SW is negligible because the loss from the surface wave is very small in microstrip antennas. To our best knowledge, extensive numerical simulations to assess various factors of conductive films and substrates have been elusive, and systematic investigation with quantitative analysis is absolutely required for microstrip antenna based on novel conductive nanomaterials, i.e. CNTs. Here, we perform systematic studies with a number of crucial material constant and dimension factors relevant for fabricating a thin, flexible microstrip antenna using COM-SOL Multiphysics ® . First, we start by varying both σ and thickness (t) of the patch conductive material. Next, we attempt to simulate realistic CNT conductive films in which the film σ is spatially non-uniform due to several origins such as random alignment, nonuniform film thickness, and mixing with lower conductive SWCNTs. In an effort to mimic inhomogeneous CNT films in practice, we assess 7 artificial patterns, some of which can generate higher harmonic responses. Finally, we examine the dependence of the substrate thickness (h) and different r as a practical guideline to select appropriate substrates for CNT-film strip antennas. Section II describes our numerical simulation setup and parameters, followed by the results and discussions in Sec. III. Based on our numerical studies, we propose a design guideline for microwave CNT film microstrip antennas with flexible and durable features in Sec. IV. At a given resonance frequency, the initial design parameters of a microstrip antenna are geometric dimensions of the simple planar structure and quantities of material parameters. A main microstrip antenna design (green rectangle in Fig. The input feed of our antenna is broken into two rectangular sections: one serves as a quarter-wave transformer (brown area in Fig. Our numerical simulations investigate the CNT film antenna performance by varying geometric and material parameters of the conductor and the substrate: the conductor thickness t, conductivity distribution patterns, and substrate thickness h with different dielectric constant values. The most commonly used microstrip antenna designs often neglect to consider the thickness of the conductive material by assuming it is "very thin," i.e. t λ 0 where λ 0 is the free-space wavelength The second study is to explore the uniformity effect of the conductor film on the antenna performance with various patch patterns. Specifically, we make nonuniform conductor (NUC) patches mixed with high (6.0 × 10 5 S/m) and low (6.0 × 10 3 S/m) conductivity materials as an attempt to build a reasonable model for revealing possible non-uniformities in σ that may arise in CNT nano-material films. The first four NUC cases (NUC1 -NUC4) shown in Fig. Lastly, the variations of substrate thickness with three-different r are simulated in order to study the substrate thickness effect. This study is especially crucial to design flexible and stretchable antennas. In this case, we fix σ and t from the first two studies. To quantify the antenna performance, the quarterwave transformer model is considered to evaluate S 11 , η, resonance frequency (f 0 ), and full-width half maximum (FWHM). Especially, η at the fundamental resonance frequency is calculated by integrating the radiated power over the far-field boundary in Fig. The reference simulation design targets a 5 GHz resonance frequency (f 0 ) with an RT/Duroid ® 5880 substrate ( r = 2.20, h = 1.575 mm), and the design parameters are specified in Table The electric σ of a single individual metallic CNT is known to be ∼ 10 6 -10 7 S/m almost as good as σ Cu = 5.96 × 10 7 S/m or other metals. On the other hand, a random network of CNTs forming a film has a conductivity close to 10 2 -10 5 S/m • σ = 6 × 10 4 S/m with t > 1,200 μm • σ = 6 × 10 5 S/m with t > 50 μm • σ > 6 × 10 6 S/m for all t > 5 μm. Our simulations show that the variations of both σ and t have a minor impact on the f 0 of the antenna as seen in Fig. Fig. We can also identify the effect of the pattern directions between NUC1 (vertical) and NUC2 (horizontal), whose effective σ is the same as 6 ×10 4 S/m. Both NUC1 and NUC2 require thicker t for reducing the reflection loss S 11 in order to compensate the lower σ with respect to the reference. In addition, the horizontal NUC2 needs a much thicker t than the NUC1 due to the similar directional reason of the above NUC4, NUC6-2, and NUC7-3. One distinctive observation is that in the checkerboard pattern of NUC3 with the 50:50 uniform combination of two different σ values, the S 11 follows the low effective σ case, where the thicker t helps to improve the S 11 monotonically. The last contributing factor in this study is the area fraction of the low σ region in the patch. As expected, when the total area of the low σ part is larger like in NUC7-1 and NUC7-2, the reflection loss can be compensated by making t thicker. The η values of NUC4 and NUC7-3 are above 75 % similar to the η of the reference for all t values, and NUC3 has quite high η of 75 %. For the rest of the patterns in NUC1, NUC2, NUC5-1, NUC5-2, NUC7-1, and NUC7-2, η can be improved by around 30 % with ∼10 times thicker t. Therefore, given a NUC pattern, we select an appropriate t by optimizing both quantities, S 11 and η. Higher η is mainly followed by the large portions of high σ in the patch as well as the pattern direction (Fig. The pattern variations do not affect f 0 and FWHM in most cases shown in Fig. The simulations of the h variation are performed with three representative materials of different r : 1.6045 for a sheet of paper or fabric, 2.20 for a PTFE plate, and 4 for a FR4 plate. Here we have a conductive film of σ = 6 × 10 7 S/m in the simulations. The h values are set between 180 um and 1575 um to cover the thin substrate like paper and the thick PTFE case. From the h-dependence simulations displayed in Fig. Our systematic numerical studies give several important lessons that can be applied to design a flexible and durable antenna using a thin conductive film and a thin substrate based on CNT films whose conductivity is not as good as that of Cu. First, we have seen that the σ of the film plays a significant role in the overall frequency response of the antenna, in the form of both resistive losses and losses due to the skin depth effect when it exceeds the thickness of the material. Above a certain value of σ, however, the antenna performance does not change significantly by t. According to our simulations, we conclude that for a radiation efficiency of about 90%, one should aim for a minimum σ threshold of about 6.0 × 10 4 S/m at t > 1200 μm. The film thickness can be reduced to be t > 50 μm for a conductive film of σ = 6.0 × 10 5 S/m. If σ is bigger than 6.0 × 10 6 S/m, any value of t works. The σ uniformity in the conductive film plays an essential role to improve the η from the simulations of the skin-depth effect. Considering the mixture of two different σ materials, the larger areas of the high σ material in a given antenna patch produces higher η. In particular, higher η tends to appear for the patch designs where high σ materials cover both vertical edges of the patch. One more observation is that small checker pattern does not significantly effect on the η, however, the pattern shifts about 4 % on the f 0 to the lower frequency. Lastly, we also examine how the thickness of the substrate affects the antenna performance which is directly relevant to designing a thin, flexible substrate. In general, thinner substrates are not preferable since they tend to suffer from a low radiation efficiency trend; however, we think that this may be compensated by adjusting the values of the dielectric constant. When the substrate is thinner, undesirable effects are seen on the S 11 and η responses of the antenna, specifically in reducing the power absorbed by the antenna at the first resonance frequency. Overall, we consider the factors discussed in Section III to reach design guidelines of flexible microstrip antennas using CNT films in the microwave frequency domain: A suggested target σ value of the CNT conductive film should be at least σ of 6.0×10 5 S/m with a minimum thickness of 50 μm. Making uniform σ CNT films is a key factor and this can be achieved by aligning purified CNTs in films, that can be placed on a paper or a fabric as such low-dielectric flexible substrates. We report our methodological analysis of several crucial design factors on the flexible microstrip antenna performance via numerical simulations in the COM-SOL Multiphysics ® . Specifically, both σ and δ of the conductive materials directly influence on the S 11 and the radiation efficiency of the antenna. Furthermore, various non-uniform spatial distributions of σ are modeled together with the substrate parameters of the thickness and dielectric constant. Our numerical study allows us to design promising microstrip antennas based on CNT films for flexible, lightweight, and high-frequency microwave applications. tion is attributed to several material factors: the presence of lower σ semiconductive CNTs, random orientations of nanotubes in films, and the abundance of interconnections between CNTs