Resonant optical phased arrays are a promising way to reach fully reconfigurable metasurfaces in the optical and NIR regimes with low energy consumption, low footprint and high reliability. Continuously tunable resonant structures suffer from inherent drawbacks such as low phase range, amplitude-phase correlation or extreme sensitivity that makes precise control at the individual element level very challenging. In order to bypass these issues, we use 1bit (binary) control for beam steering for an innovative nano-resonator antenna and explore the theoretical capabilities of such phased arrays. A thermally realistic structure based on vanadium dioxide sandwiched in a metal-insulator-metal structure is proposed and optimized using inverse design to enhance its performance at 1550 nm. Continuous beam steering over 90° range is successfully achieved using binary control, with excellent agreement with predictions based on the theoretical first principles description of phased arrays. Furthermore a broadband response from 1500 nm to 1700 nm is achieved. The robustness of the design manufacturing imperfections is also demonstrated. This simplified approach can be implemented to optimize tunable nanophotonic phased array metasurfaces based on other materials or phased sifting mechanisms for various functionalities. Nano-sized phased arrays are investigated for various near-infrared or optical applications such as flat optics 1 , LIDAR 2 or optical communications 3 . They require subwavelength control which means nano-antennas capable of phase modulation must be engineered and manufactured. The transfer of phased arrays from RF/mmW ranges to the optical domain 4 would enable a drastic reduction in cost, size, complexity, reliability and energy consumption for LIDAR systems 2 but also enable a new generation of 2D reconfigurable optical elements 5 . One of the main ways to achieve this is by using the phase shift which occurs in a resonant antenna where light and matter strongly couple Most of these difficulties arise from the fact that a continuous phase shift such as that implemented in radiofrequency phased arrays is targeted. However, what is feasible at the macro-scale in the RF range may not be realistically applicable at the nano-scale. We propose to simplify the continuous phase shifting by using 1-bit (binary) control of the array, the complexity and most problems associated with resonant antennas are drastically reduced whilst control over the far-field amplitude pattern is retained. In this paper, we introduce a metasurface based on a metal-insulator-metal (MIM) structure, which includes a layer of VO 2 as the tunable component. We use this example without loss of generality to consider a theoretical analysis of a binary controlled phased array metasurface, we demonstrate excellent properties for beam steering applications can be achieved. A continuum of anomalous refraction angles can be obtained over a wide angular range and the beam shape and width do not differ from the continuous phase shift case. Binary control can be applied to metasurfaces comprised of tunable antenna Figure Section I: Resonant antenna using VO 2 Vanadium dioxide is a material that exhibits a volatile structural change over a temperature range around 68°C Section II: Binary control Binary control principle Binary control has been proposed in the context of "programmable metasurfaces" or "coding metamaterials" Figure The angular dependence of the electric field for a reflecting array in the Fraunhofer conditions is given by equation 1. It is a direct summation of each antenna's complex contribution at every angle in space. The geometry and parameters are shown in Figure N m=1 e j(kx m sin(θ i )+kx m sin(Θ)+Ф m ) 1 For beam steering applications, the electric field from all antennas have to constructively interfere at a given angle as to maximize energy in that direction. The generalized law of refraction Integrating this equation gives a linear phase profile as in Figure ) ∈ [-, we use a phase shift of 0 ("OFF" state, the VO 2 element is in its cold dielectric state ∈ , "ON" state (the VO 2 element is in its hot metallic state). This selection algorithm is simple and maximizes by construction the power at angle r but simultaneously maximizes the power sent atr for normal incidence i =0. As can be seen in Figure Θ lim = -θ i = arcsin ( λ 4p ) 3 As the phase gradient shown in Figure ∆ FWHM = 0.886 λ N p cos(Θ) 4 Section II: Antenna design Thermal design Deposited Vanadium dioxide thin films are inhomogeneous structures that require a precise understanding of their microstructure to explain their optical behavior As described earlier, the beam-steering metasurface under consideration is based on a MIM structure, with additional layers added for thermal purposes as shown in Figure The antenna-scale heat problem is summarized in Figure where k is the thermal conductivity of the insulator and Q vol is the volumetric heat generation in W/m 3 . This value is set to 9,67.10 14 which corresponds to a current density of 2.10 11 A/m 2 , 10 times less than the experimental limit The array scale heat dissipation problem has already been studied intensively by microprocessor manufacturers avg corresponds to the average temperature increase in the array and max to the maximum temperature increase (usually at the center of the array where heat dissipation is the most difficult to achieve). For a fixed set of cooling conditions there will be an array size where the operating point will be above the VO 2 transition temperature, rendering it ineffective. Now that we have set several design parameters to obtain a functional binary controlled phased array, we can optimize the structure to maximize its performance while respecting the aforementioned engineering constraints. To conduct this multi-parameter optimization, we employ inverse design. Machine learning has opened new possibilities in many its applications in photonics are just starting to be explored The only values that are optimized here are therefore the antenna width w, the VO 2 thickness t VO2 and the gold reflector thickness t Au reflector . FOM = gauss(π, π/9). min (R ON , R OFF ) Eventually this FOM component also increases the overall reflectance but unlike any other formula (geometric mean or arithmetic mean for example), it does not push the algorithm to increase the reflectance of one state at the expense of the other. Note that it is better for our array performance to have a 0-reflectance discrepancy rather than a higher reflectance in a single state to avoid side lobes. The hybrid inverse design algorithm results can be found in Table Section III: Antenna performance The geometry prescribed in Table The results for the FDTD simulation of a full array with N=32 elements, an angle of incidence i =45° and the der =20° is presented in Figure Excellent agreement of the theoretical model with numerical simulations is obtained demonstrating that electromagnetic crosstalk remains limited, and the antennas performance is unchanged when placed in an array with adjacent antennas in a different state. Given the broadband response of the metasurface a scheme employing wavelength multiplexing to scan several angles at once could be considered. The antenna behaves close to a perfect binary antenna with π phase shift and near-unity amplitude ratio of the reflectance in the cold and hot states over a broad wavelength band. If the incident beam contains multiple wavelengths the anomalous reflection will separate them, which could be used to increase the scanning speed, for example in LiDAR applications. This could enable another degree freedom to steer the beam around a second axis by tuning the illumination wavelength Binary control can be applied without any loss of ality to any phased array regardless of the mechanism used to tune the output phase. For example, this approach can be applied to phased arrays using other PCMs or external phase shifters at any wavelength and scale. All the analytical derivations have been presented in 1D but can easily be extended to 2D metasurfaces (see SI section III). Furthermore, one can note that we have only considered a structurally periodic (with uniform antenna spacing) phased array with uniform illumination (all the antennas are subjected to the same incident field amplitude), this kind of device is not known for its optimal performance. Structurally aperiodic arrays tend to perform better in practice We have successfully applied binary control to phase change nanoantenna arrays. It is seen that this approach provides a solution to many of the issues that have been encountered in the practical implementation of tunable resonant phased array metasurfaces in the NIR and optical domains. The performance decrease compared to ideal continuous control is compensated by an easy implementation based on a control of the binary state of each antenna. This approach can be applied to tunable metasurfaces for a wide range of applications. A thermally realistic VO 2 based MIM antenna has been investigated. Using binary control, combined, with inverse design at the antenna level within feasible engineering limits, broadband continuous beam-steering over a 90 o angular range between 1500 and 1700 nm has been demonstrated. It is expected that inverse design and machine learning at the antenna and array levels will reveal designs capable of high performance coupled with less demanding implementation requirements for a wide range of metasurface wavefront engineering challenges and applications. ASSOCIATED CONTENT -Derivation and proof of equations, detailed heat transfer calculations and more simulation results are available in the Supplementary Information. This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org