We investigate dissipationless magneto-Seebeck effect in three-dimensional Dirac/Weyl semimetal. The Hall resistivity ρyx and thermoelectric Hall coefficient αxy exhibit plateaus at the quantum limit, where electrons occupy only the zeroth Landau level. In this condition, quantum oscillation in the Seebeck coefficient Sxx ≈ ρyxαxy is suppressed, and the massless fermions are transformed into a Fermi liquid system. We show that the Seebeck coefficient at the quantum limit is expressed by the harmonic sum of Fermi wavelength and thermal de Broglie wavelength scaled by magnetic length. Research on thermoelectricity in low-dimensional materials is pioneered by the theoretical works of Hicks and Dresselhaus An advantage of using a 3D Dirac/Weyl material in magneto-thermoelectric devices was pointed out by Skinner and Fu Similar experimental results are reported by Tang et al. In this Letter, we show that the saturated value of S xx becomes the Seebeck coefficient of 3D Fermi liquid S The calculation of the Hall conductivity and thermoelectric Hall coefficient is carried out within quantum edge formalism where the LL is dispersive along k y , which allows charge carriers to move in the y-direction with velocity is the magnetic length, and v ⊥ F is the Fermi velocity in the direction perpendicular to the magnetic field. Due to the relativistic nature of the Dirac fermion, the effect of E x is also included in the Lorentz factor, , which induces the shrinking of the LL for E x = 0 the density of states per unit volume (DOS) for each spin direction is given by where we define N n ≡ 1/2 (1) for n = 0 (n = 0) to avoid double counting of the zeroth LL that includes both E +0 and E -0 . The number of charge carriers n 0 is given by the difference between the number of electrons and holes, as follows: where The chemical potential μ * is given as a function of x due to V x : where μ is a constant which determines the average carrier density By considering only the currents along the edges (x = ±L x /2), σ xy and α xy in Eq. ( and where σ (n) xy and α xy denote, respectively, the Hall conductivity and thermoelectric Hall coefficient for n-th LL. The prefactor of 2 in Eqs. ( and where Li 2 (z) we adopt the parameters for calculating ρ yx = 1/σ xy and α xy from the experimentally determined values of 3D Dirac material ZrTe 5 .015 × 10 5 m/s, and μ = v z F k z F = 7.36 meV. In Fig. Let us discuss the quantum limit case, in which ρ yx (μ, T ) = 1/σ (0) xy (μ, T ). From Eq. ( where It is noted that the magnitude of the Hall plateau shown by Eq. ( In Figs. and S xx become constants for all temperatures. By applying identity Li 2 (z) + Li 2 (1/z) = -π 2 /6 -[ln(-z)] 2 /2 on Eq. ( xy is given as follows: Eq. ( where S is the expression for the Seebeck coefficient of the Fermi liquid system The length scale associated with the temperature is thermal de Broglie wavelength the condition for obtaining S xx = is given by λ H /l B 1. In Fig ), where similar behaviour is observed. This phenomenon shows that the confinement within the length of l B will transform the 3D Dirac fermions into a Fermi liquid system. In other words, the states of the Dirac fermions at the zeroth LL become localized in the k-space within a small Fermi surface (due to low carrier density n 0 ), which does not change with keeping chemical potential constant. In contrast, for an ordinary massive 3D electron gas with a fixed μ, we show in the Section E of Supplemental material that ρ yx tends to increase after n = 1 LL is emptied, while α xy becomes zero. This phenomenon is unlikely to occur because of large n 0 , which tends to be preserved in order to minimize the change of energy Finally, we have to consider the ranges of B and T in which the Fermi liquid phase can survive. For λ H /l B 1.2 in Fig. In summary, we have analytically shown that at a fixed chemical potential, both the Hall resistivity and thermoelectric Hall coefficient show plateau structures. In this condition, magnetic confinement of carriers occupying the zeroth LL transform the 3D Dirac/Weyl fermion into the Fermi liquid. Particularly, the threshold of this phenomenon can be parameterized by magnetic length , the Fermi wavelength, and the thermal de Broglie wavelength. Our findings establish a relationship between the three fundamental lengths in the quantum Hall and thermoelectric Hall effects in the 3D Dirac/Weyl semimetals.