The group-IV diamond-structure elements are known to host a variety of planar defects, including {001} planar defects in C and {001}, {111} and {113} planar defects in Si and Ge. Among the {001} planar defects, the Humble defect, known for some time to occur in Ge, has recently also been observed in Si/Ge alloys, but the details of its electronic structure remain poorly understood. Here we perform first-principles density functional calculations to study Humble defects in both Ge and Ge0.8Si0.2. We also measure the Si L2,3-edge electron energy loss spectra both at the defect and in a bulk-like region far from the defect, and compare with theoretical calculations on corresponding Si sites in our first-principles calculations. We find that inclusion of core-hole effects in the theory is essential for reproducing the observed L2,3 edge spectra, and that once they are included, the results provide a set of fingerprints for different types of local atomic bonding environments in Ge0.8Si0.2. Our first-principles calculations reveal that the Humble defects have a tendency to enlarge the electronic band gap, which may have potential uses in band engineering. The use of hybrid functionals for an improved description of the band gap in these systems is also discussed. Group IV elements, especially Si and Ge, are now widely used in semiconductor devices One important type of defect is the extended planar defect. A well-known example is the {001} planar defect in natural diamond Several structural models have been proposed to describe the atomic structure of {001} planar defects. In 1964, Lang proposed the first model which assumes that these defects in diamond consist of nitrogen platelets Planar defects in semiconductors have been the subject of a variety of computational approaches. Studies on planar defects in Si have been carried out using molecular dynamics simulations In this work, we use first-principles DFT calculations to investigate the electronic properties of Humble defects in Ge and Ge 0.8 Si 0.2 , which we denote as GeSi henceforth. We also carry out experimental measurements of the Si L 2,3 -edge EEL spectra in the defects and in nearby bulk regions of GeSi at room temperature, and compare our theoretical spectra with experiments. Our calculations reveal that core-hole effects play an important role in describing the Si L 2,3 -edge EEL spectra of the Humble defects in GeSi. We also find that the electronic band gap is locally enhanced in the vicinity of the Humble defects, potentially offering a unique platform for band engineering. The use of hybrid functionals to obtain an improved description of the band gaps in these systems is also discussed. This paper is organized as follows: In Sec. II we briefly introduce the Lang and Humble models. In Sec. III we provide details of our DFT calculations (Sec. III A) and EELS measurements (Sec. III B). We present the elec- tronic properties of bulk Ge and GeSe in Sec. IV, and show how the DFT band-gap problem, which is particularly severe for bulk Ge, can be fixed by performing hybrid-functional DFT calculations. Section V provides futher discussion of the electronic properties of the Humble defects in Ge and GeSi, focusing on the effect on the local band gap. The EELS measurements and their comparison with simulations are presented in Sec. VI, both in the bulk-like region (Sec. VI A) and the in the defect core (Sec. VI B). We summarize our findings and conclude in Sec. VII. Before presenting the Humble model All the reported DFT calculations are performed using the Vienna Ab-initio Simulation Package (VASP) The virtual crystal approximation (VCA) as implemented in Ref. The Si L 2,3 edge EEL spectra are acquired using a scanning transmission electron microscope equipped with a electron monochromator. In our experiments, the size of our electron beam is about 2 Å, small enough to allow separate imaging of the bulk and defect regions of Ge 0.8 Si 0.2 . To avoid radiation damage, a rectangular scan window is placed at the defect or bulk region during EEL spectra acquisition. We use the monochromator to improve the energy resolution to about 100 meV and use an EELS detector dispersion of 25.7 meV/pixel. After focusing the zero-loss peak, the spectrometer is further tuned to obtain optimal focus in the vicinity of 100 eV, close to the Si L 2,3 edges of interest. With a detector dwell time of 2 sec, 30 to 50 EEL spectra are taken in serial and summed to obtain good statistics. We then fit and subtract an exponential background from the spectra and perform a deconvolution to obtain the Si L 3 edge spectra presented in Sec. VI. IV. BULK PROPERTIES OF Ge AND Ge0.8Si0.8 We start from bulk Ge and Ge 0.8 Si 0.2 . Due to the quasi-random distribution of atoms in the Ge 0.8 Si 0.2 alloy, it is computationally challenging to simulate the Ge 0.8 Si 0.2 alloy within DFT. Here we employ the virtual crystal approximation (VCA) as implemented in Ref. First, we use GGA-PBE to relax the bulk Ge and Ge 0.8 Si 0.2 diamond structures. The relaxation is performed on a two-atom primitive unit cell with a 16×16× 16 Monkhorst-Pack (MP) The HSE03 results for the band gaps are also presented in Table We also calculate the density of states (DOS) using both the GGA-PBE and HSE03 functionals, as shown in the right panels of Fig. We now discuss the role of Si alloying on the electronic band structure of bulk Ge. As shown in Fig. V. HUMBLE DEFECTS IN Ge AND Ge0.8Si0.2 The Humble defects are experimentally observed in both Ge The Humble structure is built by the procedure mentioned in Sec. II. The supercell consists of 52 atoms in 13 layers, and we assume periodic boundary conditions in all three dimensions. The space group of the Humble structure is P 4m2 (no. 115). The relaxation is performed using GGA-PBE with a 6 × 6 × 3 MP grid of k-points. The in-plane lattice constants (a and b) are fixed to the bulk value obtained from the GGA-PBE relaxation of the defect-free bulk structure, whereas the supercell lat- The calculated electronic band structures of the GGA-PBE optimized 13-layer Humble structures are presented in Fig. In Appendix A, we report the HSE03-calculated band structures of the Ge and Ge 0.8 Si 0.2 Humble structures. However, due to the computational expense, these calculations were performed on a 9-layer Humble structures instead of the 13-layer ones used here. We again find that the HSE03 correction to the GGA-PBE band structure is of the scissors type, so that the DOS of the conduction bands calculated within the HSE03 approximation is very close to those given by GGA-PBE after a rigid shift in energy. This suggests that the DOS calculated using the GGA-PBE can be used to simulate the experimental EEL spectra, an expectation that is borne out by the good agreement between theory and experiment that is presented below. In the past, core-loss EELS has mainly been used to differentiate between different chemical bonding environments of a given element As discussed in Sec. III B, the defect core spectra are measured separately for electron beam subscan windows with heights of 3 Å and 6 Å as indicated in Fig. In the EELS measurement, the differential cross section d 2 σ/dΩdE for electron scattering is given by where γ is the Lorentz factor, a 0 is the Bohr radius, q is the momentum transfer, m L±1 = f L±1 |r|i L is the electric-dipole transition matrix element slowly varying with energy, |i L is the initial core-level state, |f L±1 is the final conduction state, and ρ L±1 (E) is the angularmomentum-resolved DOS. Here we have assumed the dipole selection rule (∆L = ±1) for the transitions from the core-level to the conduction states. For the Si L 3 edges, since the |i L is the Si 2p core-level state, the EELS is only sensitive to final states |f L±1 of predominant s or d character. As mentioned in Sec. V, the Humble structure in Ge and Ge 0.8 Si 0.2 have very similar electronic structures. Considering the similarity between Si and Ge atoms and the fact that an average of 80% of the neighbors of any given Si site are Ge atoms, we now abandon the use of the VCA and work instead in the limit of low Si concentration. That is, we carry out calculations using supercells in which only a single Si atom has been substituted into the Ge Humble structure, and vary the location of this impurity atom to take statistical averages. A further complication is that a core hole is formed when a core electron is ejected, giving rise to an interaction with the conduction bands. In most cases, such a "core-hole effect" cannot be neglected, especially in insulators The spin-orbit coupling is included while implementing the Z and Z+1 approximations. To save computational expense, these supercell calculations are carried out using GGA-PBE rather than HSE03. In Appendix A, we show that the correction coming from HSE03 is again mainly of the scissors type. That is, the DOS of the conduction bands calculated using GGA-PBE and HSE03 are very similar after a rigid upward shift of the GGA-PBE calculated conduction bands. As will be shown below, we find that the GGA-PBE simulations give good agreement with our experimental EELS data. All the reported EELS simulations are performed in 13layer Humble structures. We include enough conduction bands so that all states up to 8 eV above the valence-band maximum are included. For the calculation of the partial DOS, the considered Wigner-Seitz radii for Si and P are 1.312 and 1.233 Å, respectively. The DOS is broadened by a Gaussian function with a width of 0.05 eV. In this section, we present our results for the EELS measurements and simulations in the bulk-like region of the Humble structure, i.e., far from the Humble defect layer. The EEL spectrum in the bulk-region is measured 1 nm away from the defect core, and is essentially identical if measured 3 nm away. For the simulations, the most bulk-like atoms in the 13-layer Humble structure are the four atoms in the sixth atomic layer above or below the defect core, as shown in Fig. For the first case, we determine the lowest-energy site for the substitution of Si atom by computing the energy cost of the substitution at each site. By symmetry there are three inequivalent sites, denoted as the corner, edge, and center sites in Fig. For the second case, we obtain the simulated EEL spectrum n i (E) at each of the three unique sites separately, and average them as with weights w i = 0.25 for corner and center sites and 0.5 for the edge sites. The resulting Z and Z+1 spectra are shown in Fig. In the simulations described above, we only substitute one Ge atom at a time by Si (or P) in the Humble supercell. In other words, no nearest-neighbor Si-Si bonds are considered. In Appendix B, we investigate the effect of such Si-Si bonds by substituting two Ge atoms simultaneously. The results show that Si-Si bonds do not change the excitation spectra substantially, suggesting that the single-impurity approximation is sufficient to model the behavior of Si atoms in the Ge 0.8 Si 0.2 Humble structure. In the previous subsection, we used the Z and Z+1 approximations to simulate the EEL spectrum and compared it with measurements in the bulk-like region of the sample. Here we present similar comparisons, but for the defect region. In the defect core, EEL spectra are separately measured within 3 Å and a 6 Å integration windows. Both windows are centered around the defect core, as shown in Fig. By comparing Fig. In the spectrum measured within the 3 Å window, the intensity of the peak below 1 eV is relatively higher, when compared to the intensity of the adjacent peak lying in the 1-2 eV range of the same spectrum, than that of in the 6 Å-window spectrum. This suggests that the highest peak below 1 eV might serve as a fingerprint of the Humble defect. Next, we compare our experimental measurements with the theoretical simulations. From Figs. In summary, we first calculated the band structures of bulk Ge and Ge 0.8 Si 0.2 at the GGA-PBE level. Although both materials are insulating experimentally, LDA and GGA calculations predict them to be semimetallic due to the well-known band gap problem of DFT. This issue was resolved by performing HSE03 hybrid-functional calculations, which correctly predict band gaps that are in good agreement with experiment. Next, we used the GGA-PBE to calculate the electronic properties of the Ge and Ge 0.8 Si 0.2 Humble structures. These are both insulating in our calculations, although their defect-free bulk structures are predicted to be semimetallic when calculated in the same way. This indicates that the Humble defect can locally enlarge the band gap of Ge and Ge 0.8 Si 0.2 , a fact that may potentially be useful in band engineering. We also found that the DOS calculated using HSE03 is very nearly a rigid shift of that calculated using GGA-PBE, justifying the use of the GGA-PBE calculations for the simulation of the EEL spectra. We have separately measured the Si L 3 edge EEL spectra in Ge 0.8 Si 0.2 in a bulk-like region and at the Humble defect. To simulate the EEL spectra, we used a single Si atom in the Ge Humble structure to mimic the Si atom in the Ge 0.8 Si 0.2 alloy, and we placed the Si atom at various sites to simulate the EEL spectra measured from different regions. We think this is a good approximation for three reasons. (i) The band-structure calculations show that the Ge and Ge 0.8 Si 0.2 Humble structures have similar electronic properties. (ii) The chemical properties of Si are similar to those of Ge, and the concentration of Si is relatively low. (iii) The Si-Si bond was not found to have a strong effect on the simulated EEL spectra. We implemented both the Z and Z+1 approximations to simulate the EEL spectra, corresponding to the absence and presence of the core hole, respectively. The spectra simulated using the Z+1 approximation were in much better agreement with experiment, especially near the edge onset, indicating that the core-hole effect is not negligible, as might be expected given that the studied system is semiconducting so that no metallic screening of the core-hole occurs. However, the intensities of a few peaks were still not well predicted by theory. There are several possible reasons. Firstly, the EEL spectra are measured in the Ge 0.8 Si 0.2 alloy. Due to the randomness of the alloy, the electron momentum k is no longer a good quantum number. As a result, the dipole selection rules in Eq. ( Figure The solid blue lines in Fig. By comparing panels (a) and (b) in Fig. Appendix B: The effect of Si-Si bonds in simulations of the EEL Spectra In Appendix A, we have argued that we can use the Ge Humble structure to approximate the Ge 0.8 Si 0.2 one. We implement this approximation when simulating EEL spectra, and we only replace one atom by Si in the Ge Humble structure. As a result, no Si-Si bond is considered in the simulation. Due to the low concentration, the Si atom tends to form bonds with Ge atoms. Therefore, the effect of Si-Si bonds should be minor. However, it is instructive to check how the Si-Si bond affects the simulation of the EEL spectra. Similar to what we have done in Sec. VI, we use a 13-layer Ge Humble structure, but with two Ge atoms replaced by Si. One of these is located at the corner site in the bulk-like layer, as in Fig. As can be seen in Fig. 