The dipole moment is a physical quantity indicating the polarity of a molecule and is determined by reflecting the electrical properties of constituent atoms and the geometric properties of the molecule. Most embeddings used to represent graph representations in traditional graph neural network methodologies treat molecules as topological graphs, creating a significant barrier to the goal of recognizing geometric information. Unlike existing embeddings dealing with equivariance, which have been proposed to handle the 3D structure of molecules properly, our proposed embeddings directly express the physical implications of the local contribution of dipole moments. We show that the developed model works reasonably even for molecules with extended geometries and captures more interatomic interaction information, significantly improving the prediction results with accuracy comparable to ab-initio calculations. The dipole moment has been considered a valuable property that can explain the chemical and physical behavior of molecules in various environments Data-based machine learning approaches for quantum-mechanics properties computation have dramatically decreased the computational overhead required to predict various properties of molecules or crystals such as potential energy, dipole moments, and Gibbs free energy Despite these successes, it has been reported that MPNN-based models still have difficulties in predicting tensorial or vectorial properties Our core idea to address these issues is to make the embeddings that model interatomic interactions invariant to edge direction. In a molecule represented as an undirected graph, pairs of atoms have edges in both directions. The existing rotational equivariant model does not guarantee that the representations of two edges are the same, which is unnatural to model the concept of dipole moment determined by partial charge and distance. Instead, our approach models the dipole moment by ensuring that one pair of atoms has one representation, and by predicting the dipole moment of the entire molecule as the sum of them, reflects the molecular geometry with high accuracy. Ablation studies have demonstrated the effectiveness of this direction-invariant representation. Our model approaches quantum-mechanical accuracy by significantly outperforming most modern MPNN models in predicting the published dipole moment dataset QM9. Graph neural networks (GNNs) have recently been popular in the field of materials science and engineering due to their advantages in accuracy. In most applications, GNNs learn meaningful representations from a molecular graph G = (V, E) consisting of nodes V representing atoms and edges E representing atom-atom pairs. In most previous work, an edge is considered to exist between two atoms if they have an interatomic distance within a fixed cutoff radius, even if there is no explicit bond between the atoms. Each node has a hidden state vector h l+1 i ∈ R d representing the state of atom i at layer l, and each edge has a vector representation e ij commonly referred to as an edge feature. Edge features are often embedded as a function of the interatomic distance d ij . Message passing neural networks(MPNNs) are one of the most widely used frameworks for learning on graph. A general MPNN for embedded 3d molecular graphs can be written as where M l and U l are an arbitrary message function and update function It becomes clear that the representation of the central node is primarily local, but can be extended to the receptive field of the surrounding atoms through multiple layers to obtain an improvement in the expressive power. This allows for the possibility of MPNNs capturing long-range interactions, which can explain multi-body correlations of complex molecules. It was recently discovered that the expressive power of MPNNs is limited to the 1-Weisfeiler-Lehman isomorphism test Most molecular properties such as potential energy or bandgap must satisfy invariance in transformations for the Euclidean group E(3). Most existing MPNNs guarantee the invariance of their predictied properties by acting only on invariant inputs. However, in the case of vector properties such as dipole moments, equivariance should be satisfied instead of invariance. More recently, a class of models known as equivariant GNNs where T g is the transformation on input space X for the abstract group g and S g is the transformation on output space Y 3 Method The molecular dipole moment is defined by integrating the total electron charge density distribution, where ρ e (r) is the electronic charge density, r i is the position of the i-th nucleus, and Z i is number of protons of it. We can simplify this expression by making the approximation that partial charge q i induced by the difference between the electron charge distribution of each atom i and the nuclear charge Z i has the position of that atom. The approximated dipole moment can be written as where N is the total number of atoms, μ ij is the local dipole moment element of an atom pair. This representation makes more sense because the position of the partial charge does not necessarily coincide with the position of the nucleus of the atom. The problem then becomes the determination of the μ ij that best reproduces whole dipole moment. Line graph framework Line graph framework We use graph isomorphism network (GIN) Edge embedding In most GNN applications of materials field, the molecule is considered as undirected graph. In fact, a node pair has one pair of edges, from source to target and from target to source. This structure does not guarantee the symmetry of embeddings of the edge pair. If the invariance of the edge direction of the embedding is not respected, there is a risk of learning a potentially useless representation. On the other hand, if symmetry with respect to the direction of the edges of the embedding is enforced, the model representation may be restricted. To solve this, we propose a latent vector embedding that is invariant in the edge direction. We use weights with different signs for source node embeddings h i and target node embeddings h j to ensure symmetry of edge direction: where W h is weight matrix for node embeddings and W r is weight matrix for atomic dislocation vector. v ij is edge direction invariant since φ ij and r ij change their sign simultaneously when edge direction is switched. Readout To calculate dipole moments, we assumed that the predicted dipole moment as a sum of the function of latent vector embeddings as shown in equation 7. We applied sum-pooling to get the final predictions. This is consistent with the physical intuition that the total dipole moment is calculated as the sum of the local dipole moments. We trained our model with the root mean square error loss function as 4 Results We test EDiGNN's performances for predicting dipole moments using the common QM9 benchmark Activation function We further investigate the performance of our model with different activation functions. SiLU, mish and shifted softplus are widely used as the activation functions of MLP in the quantum chemical property prediction task, which is a general application in the field of materials. This is to ensure the differentiability and continuity of the derivative function. Unfortunately, SiLU and mish are not injective functions. The shifted softplus activation function is one variant of softplus designed to aid convergence by allowing negative outputs. Softplus and its variants are easily squashed and numerically limited although they are injective functions. These activation functions make it difficult to satisfy injective MLP, which is the condition for securing the maximum expressive power of GIN. Bent identities, on the other hand, are injective and unbounded. As can be seen in Figure To test whether direction-invariant edge embeddings are the actual reason for improved performances, we compared them with rotational-equivariant edge embeddings and node embeddings. Figure The efficient representation of molecular geometric information is important for predicting molecular properties. Existing work applied to molecular graphs fails to utilize molecular geometry to predict dipole moments described by vector sums, especially as is prominent in the example of aromatic compounds. To this end, we introduce a geometry-based latent vector representation to capture 3D molecular structures. This representation is designed to be invariant in the direction of the edges in a molecular graph, which is considered an undirected graph. We conducted an experiment to verify the effect of direction-invariant edge embedding and verified its superiority by comparing it with several competitive baseline models. The proposed embedding method can be useful for the related work of predicting vector properties of molecules, and we will try to apply the proposed embeddings to more molecular vector property prediction tasks in our future works. The model is implemented in Pytorch 