Vertical Graphene Nano sheets (VGN) have become promising candidates for a wide range of applications due to their unique architecture and remarkable properties. However, utilization of VGN in potential applications relies on their structural and thermal stability in ambient conditions. The present study investigates the environmental aging effects and thermal stability of VGN. The effects of aging on VGN are investigated by Raman spectroscopy, X-ray Photoelectron spectroscopy and electrical measurements at regular intervals for a period of six months. Thermogravimetry was employed to examine the thermal stability of VGN and it is found that they are highly stable upto 575 ̊C in ambient atmosphere. Detailed spectroscopic analysis substantiated the retention of structural quality and surface chemistry of VGN over the test period. These findings asserted the long-term structural as well as thermal stability of VGN up to 575 ̊C and validate their potential utilization for the next-generation device applications. Vertical graphene nanosheets (VGN), is one of the novel architectures in graphene family, attracted a strong research momentum in a variety of applications spanning from energy storage to spintronics However, utilization of this material for device application relies on the stability against different environment and high temperatures. The VGN demonstrate excellent thermal stability with less than 3% weight loss upto 800 o C under N 2 environment. The focus of the present study lays on investigating the effect of aging on the morphology, structure, chemical composition and electrical properties of VGN. A thorough investigation of these properties with respect to aging time is carried out at in periodic intervals over six months. Additionally, thermal stability of the VGN in ambient conditions was demonstrated by thermogravimetric analysis. The VGN grown on SiO 2 substrates by Electron Cyclotron Resonance Plasma Chemical Vapor Deposition (ECR-CVD) were used in this study. After loading the substrates, the ECR-CVD chamber was evacuated down to 10 -6 mbar followed by substrate heating to 800 ̊C. Prior to the growth, substrates were annealed for 30 min and then cleaned by Argon plasma at 800 ̊C for 10 min. CH 4 (5N purity) at 5 sccm, as hydrocarbon source, was fed into the chamber along with the 20 sccm Ar (5N purity) as carrier gas. The flow rates of CH4and Ar were controlled by Alicat scientific mass flow controller. Growth was carried out at a Microwave power of 350 W, operating pressure of 10 -3 mbar and temperature of 800 ̊C for 30 min. After the growth, microwave plasma and gas flow were turned off and allowed to anneal the as-grown VGN for 30 min at the same temperature. Finally, sample was cooled down to room temperature and taken out for further characterization. Field emission scanning electron microscopy (Supra 55, Zeiss, Germany) was employed to obtain the surface morphology of VGN. To assess the chemical and structural changes, Raman spectra of as-grown and aged VGN were recorded with 514 nm excitation in back scattering geometry with in-Via Renishaw Raman spectrometer, equipped with 50× objective lens (N.A. of 0.85) and 2400 gratings. Laser power was kept below 1 mW to avoid the laser induced heating. The chemical composition and surface chemistry of VGN were examined by X-Ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) (SPECS Surface Nano Analysis GmbH) by employing Al Kα radiation (E = 1486.71 eV). The water contact angle of VGNs surface was measured by sessile drop method with the help of a CCD camera (Apex Instrument Co. Pvt. Ltd., India). The volume of the droplet is about 1μl and all measurements were carried out in ambient conditions. The value of contact angle is evaluated by half angle fitting method provided with the instrument. Sheet resistance was measured using Agilent B2902A precision source/measure unit by four-probe resistivity method. Contacts were made by Ag paste and thin Cu wire. Thermal stability was monitored using Thermo-gravimetric analyzer (SETSYS 16/18, SETARAM, France) equipped with high temperature furnace. Samples for TGA are prepared by peeling (scratching) out VGN from the substrate. Samples were taken in alumina crucibles and subjected to a heating rate of 10 °C/min from 25 to800 °C under air atmosphere. The scanning electron micrograph of VGN, shown in Fig. Figure In order to evaluate the change in chemical composition of the surface upon aging, the surface chemistry of as-grown and aged VGN are investigated through XPS. The panels (a) and (b) in Fig. In addition to the investigation on morphology, structure and chemical composition, it is essential to verify the influence of aging process on the electrical properties of VGN. With this motivation, the sheet resistance of VGN is measured at regular intervals for 180 days using fourpoint probe method. Considering VGN as a thin film in microscopic point of view, the sheet resistance is measured using van-der Pauw geometry. Besides the long-term stability, thermal stability of VGNs is determined using TGA in ambient environment. TGA is a well-known technique to investigate the oxidative stability of carbon nanostructures. The morphological, structural, electrical property and thermal stability of vertical graphene nanosheets (VGN) are investigated using SEM, Raman spectroscopy, XPS, four-probe resistance measurement and thermogravimetric analysis, respectively. The novel architecture exhibited an excellent morphological, structural, and electrical stability over a period of 180 days. They also possess thermal stability in ambient conditions upto 575°C. The observed facts on long-term stability of VGN pave way for their potential utilization for device applications.