Magnetic materials with tilted electron spins often exhibit conducting behaviour that cannot be explained from semiclassical theories without invoking fictitious (emergent) electromagnetic fields. Quantum-mechanical models explaining such phenomena are rooted in the concept of a moving quasiparticle's Berry phase Spin dynamical processes, where chiral magnetic textures appear in a transient fashion, have become experimentally accessible to modern magnetism research with the rise of ultrafast optical and x-ray techniques To investigate the role of lattice geometry in SSC from thermal fluctuations, we have chosen two reference materials: Gd 3 Ru 4 Al 12 and Gd 2 PdSi 3 , metallic magnets with Néel temperatures of 18.6 and 21 K respectively Both materials crystallize in hexagonal structures We illustrate the key point of our study in Fig. Unbiased numerical calculations in the high-temperature state, detailed in Methods, yield almost equal probability p(χ) for negative and positive spin chirality on a given triangle, corresponding to a symmetric curve in the inset of Fig. Hence, although the instantaneous lattice state represented in Fig. Conduction electrons feel the SSC as an emergent magnetic field, and are deflected transverse to the direction of the applied current We proceed to contrast data from the kagomé material with the simpler triangular lattice geometry in Gd 2 PdSi 3 , for which Fig. For comparison of triangular and kagomé lattices, we carefully chose samples with comparable metallicity, as illustrated in Fig. We proceed by comparing electric and thermoelectric transport properties. The experimental geometry for the presently reported thermoelectric Nernst measurement is indicated in Fig. The thermoelectric Nernst conductivity α xy ∼ J y /(-∇T ) includes a contribution from spin chirality, which is directly apparent in the ratio Γ = α xy /(T M )| B→+0 : Figure The present, centrosymmetric intermetallics are representative members of an emerging materials family with an ultra-dense lattice of skyrmion spin-vortex tubes (skyrmion diameter ∼ 2 -3 nanometres) We conclude with a broader classification of two-dimensional magnetic lattices and their role in fluctuation phenomena. Starting with lattices made from equilateral polygons, we define trivial tiling motifs to be those where cancellation of local spin chirality occurs due to identical neighbouring polygons. Of these, there are four basic types: square, triangular, and honeycomb lattices, assembled from regular polygons, as well as the rhombic tiling. Tiling motifs of the second group, labelled as non-trivial in Fig. We note that the implications of our work are not restricted to two dimensional, periodic tiling motifs: Firstly, quasi-layered sublattices of three-dimensional materials are amenable to such discussions. For example, the pyrochlore lattice of corner-sharing tetrahedra, a famous platform for frustration physics, features kagomé layers when viewed along the cubic 111 direction. Secondly, quasi-crystalline magnets, e.g. a Penrose tiling of rhombi, are classified as nontrivial in our scheme and are hence expected to generate large fluctuationinduced effects related to spin chirality. ratio across topological magnets, Phys. Rev. B 101, 180404 (2020). [45] R. Williams, The Geometrical foundation of natural structure. A source book of design (Dover Publications, 1979). 