The study of defect centers in silicon has been recently reinvigorated by their potential applications in optical quantum information processing. A number of silicon defect centers emit single photons in the telecommunication O-band, making them promising building blocks for quantum networks between computing nodes. The two-carbon G-center, self-interstitial W-center, and spin-1/2 Tcenter are the most intensively studied silicon defect centers, yet despite this, there is no consensus on the precise configurations of defect atoms in these centers, and their electronic structures remain ambiguous. Here we employ ab initio density functional theory to characterize these defect centers, providing insight into the relaxed structures, bandstructures, and photoluminescence spectra, which are compared to experimental results. Motivation is provided for how these properties are intimately related to the localization of electronic states in the defect centers. In particular, we present the calculation of the zero-field splitting for the excited triplet state of the G-center defect as the structure is linearly interpolated from the A-configuration to the B-configuration, showing a sudden increase in the magnitude of the Dzz component of the zero-field splitting tensor. By performing projections onto the local orbital states of the defect, we analyze this transition in terms of the symmetry and bonding character of the G-center defect which sheds light on its potential application as a spin-photon interface. Point defect centers are receiving increasing attention due to their potential applications for quantum information science (QIS). Point defects in silicon hold a number of advantages in this regard, exhibiting photon emission in the telecommunication band Work on understanding the PL properties of silicon has been ongoing for nearly half a century. In that time, a general understanding has emerged of the various point defects that can arise in silicon, the techniques for generating them through radiation damage and annealing, as well as their structures and vibronic properties. More recently, the focus has turned to isolating high-quality defect centers with narrow PL linewidths, with ongoing efforts to create silicon-based devices that can generate indistinguishable photons, couple spin and photon degrees of freedom, and various other properties needed for QIS applications Despite the promise of silicon defect centers for QIS applications, there exists no firm consensus in regard to their structural and electronic properties. In particular, a deeper understanding is needed of the electronic defect levels within the bulk silicon gap and the nature of the local states corresponding to these levels. In this work, we present a theoretical study of the electronic properties of the G-center This work is structured as follows: in Section II, we summarize the progress in understanding the structures of these various defect centers and then compare with our first-principles calculations in Section III. Section IV outlines the procedure for computing the photoluminescence and presents the spectra for the three defect structures, which are compared with experiments. In Section V, we focus on the ZFS in the excited triplet state of the Gcenter and discuss aspects of the electronic structure and localization that enhance the ZFS. Finally in Section VI, we conclude with a perspective on the field and how these silicon point defects may aid in the development of QIS technologies. Understanding the details of the electronic structure of silicon point defects is integral to the development of new QIS technologies based on silicon. In particular, there is a need for defects that have narrow linewidths within or near the telecommunication bands, and can couple photons to spin degrees of freedom, making the zero phonon line (ZPL), ZFS, and photoluminescence (PL) crucial properties for computation. These electronic properties are quite sensitive to the structure of the defects One such defect is the the silicon W-center, which was originally identified as a narrow band at 1018 meV in the PL spectrum of silicon that had been exposed to neutron or ion radiation damage A number of models were initially proposed to describe the W-center, including the 111 -split-triple diinterstitial, tri-interstitial, and tetra-interstitial Another such luminescent defect in silicon is the Tcenter. It is less well studied than other defect centers in silicon The T-center transition was identified as a doublet pair of states split by 1.75 meV, with uniaxial stress measurements indicating non-linear energy dependence of the defect levels Perhaps the most extensively studied defect centers in silicon is the G-center, which consists of two carbon atoms and one silicon atom. The G-center forms when a substitutional carbon C (s) combines with an interstitial carbon C (i) . C (i) defects are relatively mobile at 300 K and can be formed by radiation damage displacing another C (s) or by direct injection Uniaxial stress perturbation measurements were used to identify the symmetry of the G-center as C 1h , with the mirror plane along the 110 crystalographic axis. Early on it was suggested that there were two possible structures that satisfied this symmetry Despite extensive study, the electronic structure (and to a lesser extent the atomic structure) of the G-center are still not settled. Early cluster calculations focused on understanding the relative stability of the Type-A and Type-B G-centers when positively or negatively charged, and revealed two defect levels within the silicon band gap corresponding to the two charge states In order to compute the electronic structures of these three defect centers, first principles density functional theory (DFT) calculations are performed with the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) Excited state calculations for each defect are preformed by manually constraining the orbital occupations to excite one electron into an unoccupied band. Such an approach has been successfully used in combination with hybrid functionals to study the excited state properties of the nitrogen-vacancy (NV) defect in diamond The computed band structures for the color centers provide additional information about which bands correspond to the local defect state at each k-point, provided that the defect states are well localized. However, if the defect states are not well localized, it is not possible to determine where they lie in the band order from an atom-projected band structure plot. The information contained in the projected band structure plots can be used to improve the accuracy of the constrained occupation method, by using the positions of the defect levels in the band order of the ground state to perform excited state calculations of the bands structure on the same k-path, as well as the excited state properties on a 2 × 2 × 2 k-point grid. For the excited state calculations, the electron occupations are constrained independently at each k-point by removing an electron from the band corresponding to the lower defect level, and adding an electron to the band corresponding to the upper defect level. As the band order, and hence the positions of lower/upper defect levels, changes at different k-points, the constraints must be set independently for each kpoint. This procedure is performed for TC, WC, and the optically active GCB, in conjunction with an additional structural relaxation in the constrained excited state to obtain the true excited state energy. We note that there is a functional limitation to this approach -setting the initial occupations places electrons into states that do not correspond to a converged self-consistent charge density in the excited state. In particular, occupying a state changes its energy, so when the self-consistency in the charge density is reached, the character of the occupied state may change, so the intended occupations might no longer correspond to the local defect levels. The hybrid functional calculation of the silicon Tcenter produces the band structure shown in Figure For the W-center, the band structure calculation produces two defect levels within the band gap (See Supplemental Material at [18]), which are positioned near the conduction and valence band edges. Projection onto atomic orbitals reveals that both defect levels exhibit a low degree of localization -the lower defect level is somewhat localized to the ring of silicon atoms formed by the three Si interstitials and the three Si atoms they displace, while the upper defect level is completely delocalized. For the G-center, band structure calculations were performed for both configurations, GCA and GCB, in order to reveal the differences in their electronic structures. Figure The plots also reveal a marked difference between the electronic structures of GCA and GCB. While the defect states for both centers are similarly well localized, the states belong to different sets of atoms. In GCA the defect levels are localized on separate atoms, with the lower energy state being localized to the interstitial carbon C (i) , and the higher energy state being localized to the the substitutional silicon Si (s) . In contrast, both defect levels in GCB are localized on Si (i) . This results in increased interactions between electrons occupying the two-electron defect state, leading to an enhancement of the ZFS, which will be discussed in a subsequent section. The localization of the defect orbitals additionally has a dramatic impact on the optical properties of the Gcenter. In fact the experimental PL spectrum of the Gcenter is attributed to the GCB structure, as GCA is considered to be optically inactive The ZPL energies for the defects are obtained using the constrained occupation approach on a 2 × 2 × 2 k-point grid, by occupying the bands corresponding to the defect levels in the ground and excited states independently at each k-point using the band order determined from the band structure calculation. The computed ZPL energies are shown in Table A key property of quantum defect centers relevant for QIS is their ability to produce indistinguishable photons. In order to investigate the optical properties of the Gcenter, W-center, and T-center, we compute the PL spectra using a procedure originally developed for the NVcenter in diamond where the first subscript (g or e) denotes ground and excited state vibrational levels χ, and the second index (0 or m) denotes the vibrational mode. Likewise E gm is the energy of vibrational mode m of the ground state, while E ZP L is the ZPL energy. The prefactor C is a normalization constant, given by C = A(hω)ω 3 d(hω). Due to the difficulty of computing the overlap integrals χ gm |χ e0 , we opt instead to use the generating function approach where the optical spectral function is derived from a generating function G(t) of the electron-phonon coupling spectral function S(hω): where hω is the photon energy, E ZP L is the ZPL energy and γ is the line broadening. The generating function is defined as where S(t) = ∞ 0 S(hω)e -iωt dhω. The electron-phonon spectral function can in turn be computed as a sum over the phonon modes λ and wave vectors q: where hω λ (q) is the energy of the phonon mode (λ, q) and the coefficients f λ (q) are given by: where λ,αi (q) is the coefficient of the phonon eigenvector. Further details on the calculation are provided in the supplementary material In particular, there are several features in the PL spectra that stand out. The W-center PL has a broad shoulder that is absent from the PL spectra of the other two defects, along with a lack of clear LVM peaks, which suggests a strong hybridization between the W-center local modes and silicon TA modes may be responsible. In fact, in the relaxed atomic structure of the excited state, the atoms are significantly displaced from their ground state positions, resulting in a broadening of the spectral function [18] and PL spectrum. The TA peak in the T-center PL (Fig. The computed spectra are compared with the experimentally obtained PL in the insets of Fig. The Huang-Rhys factors (HR) for each defect were also computed, and are shown in Table Quantum defects hosting an optically accessible triplet state can serve as platforms for building quantum devices with coupled spin-photon degrees of freedom It has been shown that the silicon G-center can be driven into a metastable excited triplet state with spin-1 angular momentum The fidelity of these schemes for encoding a qubit using triplet states is highly dependent on the separation of the m s = 0 and m s = ±1 levels. In the absence of magnetic fields, this splitting is driven by spin-spin interactions of the electrons occupying the defect states. The spin-spin interaction can be written where μ 0 is the magnetic permeability, g is the Landé g-factor, μ B is the Bohr magneton, D is the traceless dipole-dipole interaction tensor, the total spin S = s 1 + s 2 , s i = 1 2 [σ x , σ y , σ z ] is the spin operator for particle i, and σ x , σ y , σ z are the Pauli matrices. For the excited triplet state of the G-center, ψ, this spin-spin interaction leads to a gap 3∆ between the m s = 0 and m s = ±1 where The ZFS tensor was computed using hybrid functionals for both GCA and GCB in the excited triplet state. The absolute values of the diagonalized tensor are shown in Table Both the calculation and experiment show a dramatic difference in the magnitudes of the ZFS of GCA and GCB. The evolution of the ZFS diagonal values is tracked as the G-center atomic positions are linearly interpolated between the two structures. The magnitudes of the ZFS for each structure along the interpolation are compared to the experimental values in Figure To understand the evolution of the ZFS components as the G-center transitions from the A-type to B-type configuration, we project the two single-electron defect levels onto the s and p orbitals of the six atoms in the local cluster (Fig. During the linear interpolation between GCA and GCB configurations, the total energy of the defect changes considerably, as shown in Figure The evolution of the defect states can be understood in terms of a simple nearest neighbor tight binding model on the defect cluster (see supplementary material where i is the energy of the orbital on the C or Si atom, t ij is the hopping energy between atoms, and the second sum runs over the nearest neighbors ij . We can approximate all nearest neighbor hoppings as equal t ij ≡ t, to demonstrate that the origin of the defect level structure is purely geometrical. In the G-center all of the atoms are tetrahedrally bonded to their nearest neighbors, except some of the defect atoms which have a lower coordination. For a tetrahedrally bonded atom, the natural basis is the set of sp 3 orbitals. Taking the energy 0 of an unhybridized p orbital as a reference point, let the energy of the four sp 3 orbitals be ∆ 1 = 1 -0 , and the energy of the four orbitals on the nearest neighbor atoms be ∆ 2 = 2 -0 . Diagonalizing the Hamiltonian of this cluster [18] we find two sets of bands which when taken together with all the other tetrahedrally bonded silicon atoms in the bulk, form the valence and conduction bands. When the energies of the four sp 3 orbitals and the nearest-neighbor orbitals are similar, t (∆ 1 -∆ 2 ), and the expression above reduces to E bulk,± ≈ (∆ 1 + ∆ 2 )/2 ± t, yielding two bands separated by a gap ∼ 2t. The defect levels in the G-center arise from the defect atoms having lower than tetrahedral coordination. In GCA, the Si and C (i) defect atoms are both trigonally bonded, and so can be represented using a basis consisting of the in-plane sp 2 orbitals and non-bonding p z orbital, oriented to align with the local geometry of each atom. Taking the energy of the p z orbital to be 0 = 0, the energy of the sp 2 to be ∆ 1 , and the energies of the nearest-neighbor orbitals as ∆ 2 , we diagonalize the Hamiltonian of the defect atom. Once again, we recover two sets of degenerate bands of the form Eq. 9, but now the non-bonding p z orbital forms a single defect level in the middle of the gap. Given there are two such trigonal defect atoms, we can expect two defect levels in the gap, having the character of p z orbitals aligned with their local orientation. This is in fact consistent with the orbital projections shown in Figure In GCB, the bonding geometry is quite different, with both carbons assuming tetrahedrally bonded substitutional positions, and the defect Si atom bonding only to the two nearest carbon atoms. Due to the bent shape of the C (s) -Si (i) -C (s) chain, the same sp 2 + p z basis is appropriate here, however now only two of the sp 2 orbitals bond with nearest neighbor atoms. The resulting eigenenergies FIG. The argument for why the ZFS is enhanced in GCB can be made more explicit by comparing the ZFS integrals given by Eq. 7 for the approximate two-electron defect states previously derived for GCA and GCB In this work, we have presented an overview of three different defect centers in silicon that have potential QIS applications, the G-center, T-center, and W-center. Using a hybrid functional approach, we have computed the electronic structure ZPL, ZFS, and PL spectra for these defects. In particular, we have shown how the physical structure impacts the electronic structure of the Gcenter, resulting in a significant enhancement of the ZFS in the Type-B configuration. Specifically, we investigate the zero-field splitting for the excited triplet state of the G-center defect as the structure is linearly interpolated from the A-configuration to the B-configuration, showing a sudden increase in the magnitude of the D zz component of the zero-field splitting tensor. This transition is explained in terms of localization of the G-center defect states onto the Si interstitial. We have also shown how the excited state associated with the ZPL transition in the T-center has a complete delocalization of the magnetic moment even though the defect states are well localized, which provides theoretical insight for engineering coupling between optical degrees of freedom and spin localization. Finally, we establish the delocalized nature of the defect levels in the W-center, and discuss how that leads to a stronger electron-phonon coupling, ultimately resulting in a broadened PL spectrum and an increased Huang-Rhys factor. Finally, the tight-binding models derived in this work provide a simple framework for designing defects with bonding arrangements that favor the localization of both spins in a defect triplet state to the same atom, resulting in an improved ZFS while keeping HR factors low. Such models are quite robust, in the sense that they may be easily applied to other color centers in silicon or other host materials, enabling the prediction of a wide range of desirable defects. Future work will focus on finding such defects that are also ground-state triplets while being thermodynamically stable, setting up the possibility of creating them through novel methods such as those demonstrated recently to reliably create G-and W-centers Computing Center, a DOE Office of Science User Facility supported by the Office of Science of the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231.