The synthesis of the high temperature superconductor LaH 10 requires pressures in excess of 100 GPa, wherein it adopts a face-centered cubic structure. Upon decompression, this structure undergoes a distortion which still supports superconductivity, but with a much lower critical temperature. Previous calculations have shown that quantum and anharmonic effects are necessary to stabilize the cubic structure, but have not resolved the low pressure distortion. Using large scale path-integral molecular dynamics enabled by a machine learned potential, we show that a rhombohedral distortion appears at sufficiently low pressures, even with quantum and anharmonic effects. We also highlight the importance of quantum zero point motion in stabilizing the cubic structure. In recent years, the search for room temperature superconductors has been revitalized by advances in high-throughput first principles calculations and subsequent successes in experiments. These high superconducting temperatures are enabled by metallic hydrogen, which is expected to support phonon mediated superconductivity at room temperature To circumvent these prohibitively high pressures, it was suggested that one could make a hydrogen-dominant alloy instead Inspired by this idea, initial high-throughput calculations based on density functional theory (DFT) predicted the possible formation of several metallic rare-earth superhydrides at around 200 GPa By necessity, high-throughput calculations forgo a more careful treatment of the hydrogen sublattice, for example by ignoring anharmonic effects. Within the harmonic approximation, fcc-LaH 10 is unstable to distortions below 250 GPa. Initial classical ab-initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) simulations showed the fcc structure to be stable above 140 GPa MD based methods are more versatile than the SSCHA, which is designed primarily to calculate phonons. For example, in We constructed a machine learned potential (MLP) for LaH 10 in order to perform both classical and path integral molecular dynamics. Varying the temperature and pressure, and turning quantum effects on and off, we investigated the stability and distortion of the high pressure cubic structure. Consistent with previous studies, our PIMD simulations favor the cubic structure over a large pressure range. At sufficiently low pressures, a distortion is observed, which we are able to resolve as rhombohedral. This resolution is enabled by large scale simulations accessible with the MLP. Furthermore, while lowering the temperature in classical MD destabilizes the cubic structure at all of the pressures studied here, the same is not true in PIMD, down to 100 K. This may mean that zero point motion (ZPM) plays a significant role in stabilizing the cubic structure at lower pressures, and should be considered in future hydride structure studies. All DFT calculations were performed with QUANTUM ESPRESSO We used the Deep Potential (DP) method to construct a MLP for LaH 10 In the DP model we used a cutoff of 4.0 Å. For the densities studied here, this cutoff corresponds to local environments containing between 60 and 110 atoms. The deep neural network consists of an embedding and fitting network, with sizes (25, 50, 100) and (240, 240, 240), respectively. A feature of DP which is not shared by all current MLPs is the usage of virial information, which we take advantage of. We found that the inclusion of virial information in training improved performance, likely because our data covers a pressure range of about 90 GPa. Our final model is actually the sum of two parts, a pair potential f ({R}) plus the DP model g({R}). The DP model is trained to learn the difference between the DFT energy and the pair potential Uf . This pair potential enforces repulsion between the atoms at very short ranges, ensuring that atoms never get closer than they should. Importantly, subtracting from the training data a reasonable pair potential reduces the range of energies, since the energy can increase dramatically as atoms get close to each other. This also reduces the variance of the training data. The resultant dataset of differences is easier for the model to learn from. By "reasonable" pair potential, we mean that that it only needs be accurate for very short distances, as the DP model can learn the remainder. To construct these pair potentials, we calculated the energy of the isolated La-La, La-H, and H-H dimers as a function of bond length with PySCF The structures used for training were generated in an iterative procedure. Following the DPGEN protocol A committee of 3 models was trained on this data. The models are identical in architecture and differ only in the random seeds used for training. As a result, the models do not make identical predictions, yielding generally different forces for a given structure. One of these models is then used to sample more structures with MD at various thermodynamic conditions. By performing MD using the model, rather than performing AIMD, a large quantity of structures may be generated quickly. From this large pool of structures a subset is selected for labelling, meaning their energies and forces will be calculated with DFT. Given a structure, each model from the committee evaluates the forces F i on every atom i. where . . . represents an average over the committee. In other words, the standard deviation among the committee is calculated for each force in the structure, and E is chosen to be the largest deviation. This is meant to represent the committee's uncertainty on that structure. We then selected the structures for which the uncertainties are greatest. Once these structures are labelled, they are added to the training dataset, and the procedure is repeated: train a new committee, use one of the models to generate more structures, then poll the new committee on these samples to determine which to include for labelling. This procedure allows us to generate structures efficiently across the phase space of in-terest, and also includes a failsafe: it is possible for early iterations to perform poorly under certain thermodynamic conditions, especially those beyond the scope of the training data. Consequently, sampling based on these models may yield highly unusual structures which should not be included. If this is so, we expect the uncertainty E on such structures to be anomalously high. Such cases are excluded from consideration. If the models are sufficiently accurate, the committee uncertainty may not vary enough to distinguish structures. More importantly, our goal is to have a diverse set of structures spanning the phase space of interest, so that resultant models would be uniformly accurate over the desired thermodynamic conditions. To this end, in the final iterations the subset selection criteria is changed to approximately maximize structural diversity. Specifically, given a structure i, a set of SOAP descriptors x i is computed using ASAP the sum of distances over all pairs of structures is maximized. In total, we generated 2779 structures, 259 of which were set aside for testing, with the rest used for training. A visualization of these structures is shown in Figure We focus entirely on fcc-LaH 10 and distortions thereof. Shown in Figure To study potential distortions of the cubic structure, we performed molecular dynamics simulations targeting the isothermal-isobaric (NPT) ensemble. We used LAMMPS We first show our classical simulations in Figure At 300 K and above 150 GPa, the simulation cell is overall cubic. Recall that within the harmonic approximation the cubic structure is not stable at these pressures, meaning that classical anharmonic effects are stabilizing it here. When the pressure is lowered, all three angles deviate from 90 • in a rhombohedral manner |α -90 When the temperature is lowered to 100 K, the cubic structure no longer appears in this range, and requires much higher pressures. This is consistent with what we expect, since as T → 0 we should effectively recover the harmonic approximation. We performed quantum simulations using PIMD with either 16 or 32 beads; convergence with the number of beads is shown in the supplementary material. Shown in Figure A striking difference between the classical and path-integral simulations can be seen upon cooling. Shown in Figure When substituting H with D, the pressure required to stabilize the cubic structure is increased. Shown in Figure They are meant only to illustrate that the cubic structure can be stabilized with increasing temperature and pressure. They also illustrate the significant difference between the classical and quantum simulations, where the quantum phase boundary has a weak dependence on temperature. Using PIMD, we showed that fcc-LaH 10 experiences a rhombohedral distortion at low pressures. Even without quantum effects, the cubic structure can be stabilized down to nearly 150 GPa at 300 K. Upon cooling, the difference between our classical and quantum simulations suggests that ZPM is significant in extending the range of stability. This may account for the relative difficulty reported in experiments in synthesizing the isotopic ana- logue LaD 10 , as the substitution of deuterium suppresses the role of the ZPM. This differs from the case of the superconducting sulfur hydride, in which both H 3 S and D 3 S undergo a cubic-to-rhombohedral distortion upon decompression at nearly the same pressure The pressure at which we observed the distortion is noticeably lower than that reported by experiments. We believe this is due to the underlying density functional PBE, which is overestimating the stability of the cubic structure. We performed some simulations with an LDA-based model, and the distortion never appears. It is known that DFT simulations of dense hydrogen can vary significantly with the choice of density functional In We have found that, where applicable, our MLP-based simulations are consistent with previous SSCHA and AIMD calculations. We believe that, constructed carefully, MLPs are viable in performing path-integral simulations for future studies in designing hydrogenbased superconductors. Recent studies explored candidate structures based on fcc-LaH 10 with the goal of finding superconductors at lower pressures Since these calculations worked within the harmonic approximation, it may be worthwhile to revisit some of these candidates with path-integral simulations. It is possible that the inclusion of anharmonicity and quantum effects, particularly ZPM, will lower the pressure requirements more. Shown in Figure To ensure repulsion at short distances, we train our neural network to learn the difference between the DFT energy / force and a short-ranged pair potential. We only require that this potential approximate the repulsion between atoms as they get close, as the neural network will learn corrections to it. To generate this potential we calculate the energy of the H-H, La-H, and La-La dimers with CCSD, varying the bond length. The resulting forces are shown in Figure In Figure We have also trained an NEP We believe that the consistency in the results between these two distinct approaches means that the results are independent of the specific details of the models. Instead, they are a consequence of the underlying dataset, a common factor between the models. For this reason, we believe that our models are a good representation of the physics of the underlying DFT. Previous AIMD simulations found the onset of diffusion in the hydrogen sublattice at about 800 K The frequency of proton hopping obviously increases with temperature, but we note that it is also a finite size effect. In Figure In path-integral simulations, the path is discretized into "beads." A path with one bead yields the classical limit, while a fully quantum calculation would involve infinitely many beads. In practice, one must settle for a finite number of beads such that the quantities of interest are sufficiently converged. Since we found a distortion at 90 GPa in our path- S. FIG. Recall that upon lowering the temperature, the cubic structure is still stable at 100 GPa. Since quantum effects favor the more symmetric cubic structure, the cell angles in these simulations are already converged. In other words, increasing the number of beads would not make it somehow less cubic. Given that the number of beads required increases with decreasing temperature, and our low temperature simulations appear to be converged, we believe this is further evidence that all of our path-integrals have a sufficient number of beads. Shown in Figure 