) obey non-Abelian statistics and are considered building blocks for constructing topological qubits 1,2 . Iron-based superconductors with topological band structures have emerged as promising hosting materials, since isolated candidate MZMs in the quantum limit have been observed inside the topological vortex cores 3-9 . However, these materials suffer from issues related to alloying-induced disorder, uncontrolled vortex lattices 10- 13 and a low yield of topological vortices 5-8 . Here, we report the formation of an ordered and tunable MZM lattice in naturally-strained stoichiometric LiFeAs by scanning tunneling microscopy/spectroscopy (STM/S). We observe biaxial charge density wave (CDW) stripes along the Fe-Fe and As-As directions in the strained regions. The vortices are pinned on the CDW stripes in the As-As direction and form an ordered lattice. We detect more than 90 percent of the vortices to be topological and possess the characteristics of isolated MZMs at the vortex center, forming an ordered MZM lattice with the density and the geometry tunable by an external magnetic field. Remarkably, with decreasing the spacing of neighboring vortices, the MZMs start to couple with each other. Our findings provide a new pathway towards tunable and ordered MZM lattices as a platform for future topological quantum computation. The long quest for Majorana excitations We start with LiFeAs crystal due to its homogeneous bulk electronic structure, well-defined cleaving surface and rich topological band structures symmetry lattice orientations ( [10] and [01] in Fig. To investigate the influence of the biaxial CDW phase on the SC behavior, we measure the dI/dV spectra in different regions. In the unstrained region (black dot in Fig. We note that the periodicity of CDWAs-As is significantly larger than the SC coherence length (4.8 nm, ref. The SC gap map (Fig. We then apply an external field of 0.5 T normal to the sample surface, and find magnetic vortices emerging exclusively on the bright stripes of CDWAs-As (Fig. The ZBCP decays without splitting when the tip moves away from the vortex center (Fig. In order to determine the energies of the vortex core states, five individual dI/dV spectra close to the center of the vortex core (red arrows in Fig. However, for a topological vortex, the topological Dirac fermion surface states contribute an additional π phase, leading to a half-integer shift in the quantum number of the total angular momentum. As a result, the energy of the CdGM states is integer-quantized, Ej=j×E0, where j=0, ±1, ±2..., in the topological vortex. The average values and the deviations of the core states are summarized in Fig. Five discrete states at -1.76±0.11 (L-2), -0.81±0.09 (L-1), 0.00±0.06 (L0), 0.86±0.10 (L1), and 1.80±0.13 (L2) meV are extracted, which approximately follow an integer-quantized sequence. Different from conventional CdGM states, the vortex core states exhibit weak spatial dispersions (horizontal black arrows in Fig. We then investigate the influence of the CDW stripes on the dI/dV spectra of the vortices for further understanding of the spatial evolution of the CdGM states. In the negative 2 nd derivative of the intensity maps of dI/dV spectra across a topological vortex (Extended Data Fig. Remarkably, these horizontal lines are in good agreement with the positions of the dark Fe-Fe stripes (see height profile in the right panel in Extended Data Fig. Increasing the external field to 3 T, we observe that more vortices emerge, pinned to the bright CDWAs-As stripes (Extended Data Fig. However, the ZBCP is absent for the ordinary vortex (lower panel in Fig. The above assigned CDW coherence peaks, together with the SC coherence peaks, lie on a background of a "V" shaped envelope in the dI/dV spectra (Fig. We finally demonstrate the tunability of the ordered MZM lattice by external magnetic field. The ordered MZM lattice originates from the fact that all vortices are firmly pinned to the periodic bright stripes along the As-As direction (Fig. It is further demonstrated that the ordered lattice is tunable by the external magnetic fields. The overall size of the MZM lattice can be brought up to the micron level, only limited by the STM scanning capability, and could extend to an even larger area (bottom panel of Fig. In summary, we have observed a micron-scale MZM lattice on naturally strained LiFeAs surface. The vortices are pinned to the CDWAs-As stripes, giving rise to an ordered Abrikosov vortex lattice. We have demonstrated that the ordered lattice is tunable by external magnetic fields and observed the coupling between the MZMs under high magnetic fields. Our findings provide a promising platform for manipulating and braiding MZMs in the future. The large ordered array of MZMs can be suitable for realizing the "braiding by measurement-only" algorithm using interferometry High-quality LiFeAs single crystals were synthesized by using the self-flux method. A LiFeAs crystal was mounted on a STM sample holder in a glove box and transferred to an ultra-high vacuum chamber. The crystal was cleaved in-situ. The low cleaving temperature of 10 K is for a higher chance to find the strained regions hosting the CDWs compared with the room-temperature cleavage. After cleavage, the sample was immediately transferred to the STM scanner. The STM/S measurements were conducted in an ultra-low temperature STM system equipped with 9-2-2 T vectorial magnets. Tungsten tips were etched chemically and calibrated on Au(111) surfaces before use. The dI/dV spectra and maps were obtained by a standard lock-in technique with a modulation voltage of 0.1 mV at 973.0 Hz. All the images, spectra and dI/dV maps were taken at 400 mK. Linear least square fitting was used to determine the positions of the vortex core states. Five Gaussian peaks representing the in-gap bound states were used for the fitting of each spectrum. In the fitting process, all the parameters of the Gaussian peaks are set free. The peak positions of the bound states were extracted from the fitting results. The determination of percentage of topological vortices in the biaxial CDW region was performed by the measurement of dI/dV spectra of 51 vortices under 3 T. A relatively smaller region that contains 3 to 4 vortices within the area were mapped at zero energy so that the centers of the vortex cores could be accurately located. The spectra were all taken under the same scanning settings. The spectra were further calibrated by the multi-Gaussian peak fitting method to accurately locate the positions of the bound states. The same strategy was used for different fields from 0.5 to 6 T, and the topological vortices were always higher than 90% of the total number. 