Layered two-dimensional (2D) semiconductors have been widely exploited in photodetectors due to their excellent electronic and optoelectronic properties. To improve their performance, photogating, photoconductive, photovoltaic, photothermoelectric, and other effects have been used in phototransistors and photodiodes made with 2D semiconductors or hybrid structures. However, it is difficult to achieve the desired high responsivity and linear photoresponse simultaneously in a monopolar conduction channel or a p-n junction. Here we present dual-channel conduction with ambipolar multilayer WSe2 by employing the device concept of dual-gate phototransistor, where p-type and n-type channels are produced in the same semiconductor using opposite dual-gating. It is possible to tune the photoconductive gain using a vertical electric field, so that the gain is constant with respect to the light intensity -a linear photoresponse, with a high responsivity of ~2.5×10 4 A W -1 . Additionally, the 1/f noise of the device is kept at a low level under the opposite dual-gating due to the reduction of current and carrier fluctuation, resulting in a high detectivity of ~2×10 13 Jones in the linear photoresponse regime. The linear photoresponse and high performance of our dual-gate WSe2 phototransistor offer the possibility of achieving high-resolution and quantitative light detection with layered 2D semiconductors. Layered two-dimensional (2D) semiconductors are considered as candidates for next-generation electronic and optoelectronic technologies, due to qualities such as their high carrier mobility, bandgap tunability (by the number of layers or strain), and large absorption coefficient. Both unipolar and ambipolar 2D semiconductors are frequently considered as the single active material for phototransistors. Taking the typical n-type monolayer MoS2 phototransistor as an example, a high responsivity of ~880 A W -1 (with EQE ~2×10 5 %) is achieved. Narrow bandgap 2D semiconductors are often chosen for the detection of wide spectral bandwidth, although they exhibit a large parasitic dark current. In this work, dual-gate phototransistors based on multilayer ambipolar WSe2 (bandgap ~1.4 eV) were fabricated with the dry transfer technique. and 1b show the schematic of the dual-gate WSe2 phototransistor on a Si/SiO2 substrate, fabricated with the dry transfer method. The band structures of the multilayer WSe2 and Au electrode are shown in Figure To identify the thickness of each nanosheet, atomic force microscopy (AFM) mapping was carried out around the side of the transistor (white box region in Figure The device was then electrically characterized. All the measurements were carried out in a vacuum chamber at room temperature, unless otherwise specified, more details can be found in the Experimental Section. Figure Typical ambipolar behavior appeared with a prominent hole branch, and the on-off ratios for electrons and holes were ~10 4 and ~10 that the linearity can be adopted to determine the dominant photoresponse operating mechanism between photoconductive and photogating effects. However, > 1 was found in our experiments (Figure The input-output efficiency for a photodetector is the responsivity (, in units of A W -1 ), which is defined as the ratio of photocurrent and laser intensity illuminating the active area: Different photoresponse regimes are probably results of the coaction of a complex process involving carrier generation, separation, recombination, trapping, and conduction, within the same WSe2 channel. Based on the calculated potential profile (Figure The abundant deep traps in the flat band led to a very large gain under weak illumination. However, the offset of band bending due to charge accumulation hardly arose with the absence of the p-n homojunction, causing regime II in Figure shows the rise time (~60 ms) and decay time (~100 ms), measured between 10% and 90% of the maximum photocurrent, in regime II when bg =-75 V and tg = 3 V, which both decreased to < 5 ms in regime III. Another important measure of photodetector sensitivity is noise equivalent power (NEP, units W Hz -1/2 ). It is defined as the input signal power at which the signal-to-noise ratio is 1 and the output bandwidth is 1 Hz. The noise current is calculated using 2 = 0 ∆ , where is the spectral noise density (measured under dark conditions) with respect to the noise frequency ƒ, as shown in Figure For a small bandwidth, It is shown that the detectivity was greatly enhanced for the opposite dual-gating, and reached a plateau value up to 2×10 After being kept in an ordinary plastic vacuum tank for nine months, the dual-gate WSe2 phototransistor was measured again in regime III with a switchable laser (modulation frequencies 200, 500, 1000, 2000 Hz), as shown in Figure The good reproducibility and stability implied excellent encapsulation properties of hBN. When tg = 3 V and bg =-75 V, the rise time (~0.47 ms) and the decay time (~1.56 ms), measured between 10% and 90% of the maximum photocurrent, were consistent with the response time of the fast decay process of the original device shown in Figure At laser modulation frequency 2000 Hz, the photocurrent signal was still distinguishable under the opposite dual-gating (Figure We fabricated dual-gate WSe2 phototransistors with the dry transfer technique, where a multilayer ambipolar WSe2 channel was sandwiched with hBN nanosheets and a uniform top gate was made from transparent graphene. The vertical electric field inside the WSe2 channel was tunable using the dual-gating, resulting in charge accumulation at both WSe2 interfaces. Dual-channel conduction was formed under the opposite dual-gating, where the built-in vertical p-n homojunction was highly effective at separating photogenerated electron-hole pairs and also reduced the 1/f noise of the device. The photoconductive gain was tuned to be constant by adjusting the top and bottom gating, which is the key for a linear photoresponse. From our results, a linear photoresponse with high responsivity of ~2.5×10 4 A W -1 and high detectivity of ~2×10 Fabrication: All the multilayer WSe2, hBN, and graphene nanosheets were exfoliated from commercially available bulk crystals (HQ Graphene Company) by micromechanical cleavage technique with Scotch-tape. The dual-gate phototransistor was then fabricated by the dry transfer technique with the assistance of polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) stamp. First, hBN nanosheets were deposited onto the pre-cleaned Si/SiO2 substrate (highly p-doped Si with resistivity < 5×10 -3 Ω cm, the SiO2 thickness ~285 nm). WSe2 nanosheets and Au (thickness ~50 nm) electrodes were then transferred in sequence on the hBN to form the channel and source/drain electrode. After that, another hBN nanosheet was transferred to cover on the whole WSe2 channel as the dielectric and encapsulation layer. Following that, the whole WSe2 channel was covered with a large area graphene (i.e., the top gate). Finally, an Au (thickness ~50 nm) electrode was transferred onto the graphene as the top gate electrode. The as-prepared device was annealed at 180 °C in a vacuum tube furnace for 0.5 hours to remove the resisted residues and to decrease contact resistance. The fabrication process is also shown in Figure Characterization: Raman and PL spectra of WSe2 flakes were collected by using a confocal mirco-Raman system (Alpha300R, WITec) excited by 532 nm laser (spot size ~400 nm, laser power = 1.0 mW, resolution ~0.02 cm -1 ). AFM images were obtained by an atomic force microscope (Dimension Icon, Bruker). All the electrical/optoelectrical measurements were carried out at room temperature by a semiconductor parameter analyzer (PDA FS380 Pro, Platform Design Automation) in a probe station with the vacuum degree of 6×10 -6 mbar. The photocurrent is excited with a 532 nm laser (diameter ~2 mm).