This paper presents an analytical framework for the analysis of time-varying metal-based metamaterials. Concretely, we particularize the study to time-modulated metal-air interfaces embedded between two different semi-infinite media that are illuminated by monochromatic plane waves of frequency ω0. The formulation is based on a Floquet-Bloch modal expansion, which takes into account the time periodicity of the structure (Ts = 2π/ωs), and integral-equation techniques. It allows to extract the reflection/transmission coefficients as well as to derive nontrivial features about the dynamic response and dispersion curves of time-modulated metal-based screens. In addition, the proposed formulation has an associated analytical equivalent circuit that gives physical insight to the diffraction phenomenon. Similarities and differences between space-and time-modulated metamaterials are discussed via the proposed circuit model. Finally, some analytical results are presented to validate the present framework. A good agreement is observed with numerical computations provided by a self-implemented finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) method. Interestingly, the present results suggest that time-modulated metal-based screens can be used as pulsed sources (when ωs ω0), beamformers (ωs ∼ ω0) to redirect energy in specific regions of space, and analog samplers (ωs ω0). The propagation properties of electromagnetic waves through time-varying media is a topic that has classically been studied to understand effective modulations produced by interaction of two waves Modern time-varying systems are based on periodicstructure and metasurface configurations, whose architecture can approximately be interpreted as periodic or quasi-periodic distributions of individual emitters or meta atoms The analysis and design of temporal and spatiotemporal models lacks from the existence of commercial tools. Generally, a home-made numerical code based on Finite-Differences Time Domain (FDTD) State-of-art works in the literature have traditionally focused on the study of dielectric-like systems with spatiotemporal variations. This work discusses on timevarying systems of metallic nature, consisting of infinitely extended metallic screens that appear and vanish periodically. This situation emulates systems in microwave, millimeter and low-THz regions, where metals behave as good conductors. A plane wave impinges on the structure, interacting with the time-modulated screen. Despite the simplicity of the scenario, it is prone to pose the problem in terms of Floquet and a subsequent circuit analysis. The derivation of simple expressions for the circuit elements allows the reader to acquire substantial physical insight. The methodology is motivated by previous analysis reported in the literature, as in The time-periodic system presented here is formed by a screen that periodically alternates between "metal" and "air" states. To recreate this system in a real-world implementation, we would require the use of materials, of metallic/semiconductor nature, that can be electronically reconfigured. 2-D materials such as graphene, molibdenum disulfide (MoS2) and hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) could be an interesting option to consider The scenario to evaluate a time-varying metallic structure is depicted in Figure Let us define an arbitrary plane wave impinging on such a discontinuity. Assuming TE incidence, the fields associated to this plane wave are expressed as E 0 = e jω0t-jkty-jβ (1) 0 z x (1) where we have assumed electric-field amplitude unity. The parameter Y (1) 0 is the wave admittance in the incidence region (1) (z < 0), and the vectors r k 0 sin(θ) and β r k 0 cos(θ) refer to the transverse and longitudinal components of the incident wavevector, respectively. The angle θ corresponds to the incidence angle. In the case of TM incidence, the fields of the incident plane wave are expressed as E 0 = e jω0t-jkty-jβ (1) 0 z [ŷ cos(θ) -ẑ sin(θ)] A. Floquet-Bloch Expansion Due to the existence of the time-varying interface and its interaction with the incidence wave, the global transverse electromagnetic field in region (1) admits to be represented in terms of a Floquet series: t (y, z, t) = e jω0t-jkty-jβ (1) 0 z + Re jω0t-jkty+jβ (1) 0 z E (1) n e jωnt-jkty+jβ (1) n z x ( Y (1) n E (1) n e jωnt-jkty+jβ (1) n z ŷ n is the amplitude of the nth harmonic, R is the reflection coefficient caused by the time-varying interface, and ω n is the angular frequency associated with the nthorder harmonic: As it can be appreciated in eqs. ( t (y, z, t) = T e jω0t-jkty-jβ (2) 0 z + ∀n =0 E (2) n e jωnt-jkty-jβ (2) n z x (8) Y (2) n E (2) n e jωnt-jkty-jβ (2) n z ŷ n the amplitude associated to a nth-order Floquet harmonic. In the former expressions, Y n is the admittance of the i-th medium (i = 1 for input, i = 2 for output) associated with the nth-order harmonic: TM incidence ( with The parameter k n is the nth-order wavenumber and β (i) n its corresponding propagation constant, both in region (i). For TE incidence, just TE admittances in (11) take part in ( Figure Additionally, by looking at eqs. ( when the considered background is air. In fact, in case of normal incidence (θ = 0), there are no evanescent waves. Conversely, larger ratios ω 0 /ω s in combination with large incident angles θ provoke that a greater number of modes are evanescent. C. Time-varying E-field at the Discontinuity. Equivalent-circuit interpretation In order to proceed, we will assume the a priori knowledge of the time-dependent field profile at the discontinuity. Without loss of generality, it can be described by a function depending on time E(t). This assumption allows us to apply and adapt the models presented in Thus, we first begin by imposing the continuity of the electric field at the interface z = 0, where both E (1) (y, 0, t) and E (2) (y, 0, t) have the field profile at the discontinuity E(t). This equality allows us to apply standard Fourier analysis, where we reach the following expressions: -Ts/2 E(t)e -jω0t dt ( From eq.( where accounts for the coupling between the incident wave and the corresponding nth-order harmonic. Now, the continuity of the instantaneous Poynting vector at the interface is imposed. The power passing through the interface is evaluated over a period T s , The former expression is valid as long as the input and output media are identical. Comparing the integrals in eq.( where we can identify each of the admittances taking part on the expression as individual transmission lines with characteristic admittance n and propagation constant β (i) n . Similarly as in Thus, the reflection coefficient can be rewritten as Close inspection of eqs. ( which are real-valued (in lossless media), independent from index n, and identical for both TM and TE polarizations. This provokes that higher-order modes contribute with a purely resistive term R hi eq that can be modeled as a resistor [see Figure The situation is different when considering low-order harmonics, whose associated wave impedance/admittance is a function, among other parameters, of the incident angle θ. Thus, the complex low-order contribution of the equivalent admittance present in Figure At this point, it is important to remark that a n-th TE and TM low-order harmonic do now differ. Unlike higherorder harmonics, which behaves almost identically regardless of their TM or TE nature (see The reflection/transmission angle of each nth-order harmonic is described by Notice that the fundamental harmonic (n = 0) is not affected by the time modulation. This implies that the fundamental harmonic simply obeys conventional Snell's law of refraction, sin(θ) sin θ thus propagates in the same direction of incidence when the considered input and output media are air (θ It can be inferred from eq.( The application of eq.( Note that in the vast majority of scenarios, the normalized diffraction angle is less than the unity, thus θ n is generally less than θ. Only in cases where ω s ω 0 , the diffraction angle θ n is larger than the incident angle θ. Nonetheless, note that if ω s ω 0 in eq.( The choice of the basis function E(t) is crucial to validate the above approach. At this point, it is important to remark that the time period related to appearance/disappearance of the electric wall T s does not necessarily coincide with the period associated with E(t). In order to make both periods to coincide, there must be a particular relationship between ω s and ω 0 . It can be demonstrated that this relationship must satisfy ω 0 /ω s = p, with p ∈ N. Figure The basis function will therefore be expressed as fol- lows: When the time-varying screen turns into a metal (-T s /2 ≤ t < 0), the tangential electric field should vanish if a perfect electric conductor (PEC) is assumed. When the time-varying screen is in air state (0 ≤ t ≤ T s /2), the tangential field has the shape of the incident time-harmonic excitation; namely, a sinusoidal wave. Furthermore, the continuity of the electric/magnetic displacement fields D and B is guaranteed at t = 0 s, what is strictly mandatory to satisfy the boundary conditions The expressions for the transformers N (w n ) will give the relative weight of the harmonics [eq. ( Up to this point, we have only considered scenarios where the time modulation is either slower or identical to the vibration of the incident wave (ω s ≤ ω 0 ). Now, Figure Losses in dielectrics can be accounted in a straightforward manner. Simply replace the real-valued dielectric constant ε (i) r by the complex term where tan δ (i) is the loss tangent term. A similar rationale can be applied for magnetic losses, where the relative permeability would also be defined by a complex-valued expression. Dielectric and magnetic losses can be incorporated in both models. In order to validate the former approach, some results are presented here. We initially consider the scenario depicted in Figure Nonetheless, we should remark that the former approach can be further extended to more complex scenarios involving dielectrics and modulations in both space and time. Figure Some conclusions can be extracted by looking at Figure When the time modulation ω s is slow compared to the frequency of the incident wave (ω s ω 0 ), the modal separation between the two harmonics that carry the main power contribution is large. This can be appreciated in Figure Figure (2) r provoke that the diffracted waves approach to the normal (θ = 0). If the output medium is dense, higherorder harmonics concentrate on a small angular region close to the normal, which makes them very difficult to visualize in a field chart. As a consequence, diffraction orders n ≥ 3 are not compared to the FDTD in Table At the light of the present results, the applications of the proposed time-periodic metallic screen are directly linked to its diffractive and pulsed-source behav-ior. In general, diffraction gratings (space-only, timeonly or spacetime-modulated) are commonly used as filters, monochromators, spectrometers, lasers, wavelength division multiplexing devices, holographers, polarizers, beamformers, direction-of-arrival (DoA) estimators, and in many other microwave, photonic and optical applications. Naturally, gratings can be of reflective or transmissive types, depending on the intended operation. The main advantages of time gratings compared to traditional space gratings are related to the inherent capabilities of time-periodic structures to mix frequencies. This is an inherent property related to the time periodicity, ω n = ω 0 + nω s . This fact is a valuable asset that can be exploited in engineering for the design of analog FSSbased mixers. Furthermore, combining time and space periodicities could directly lead to nonreciprocal responses for the considered devices. The search of nonreciprocity has become a hot topic in electromagnetism in the last years, especially if it is achieved by avoiding bulky magnets or, in general, magnetic materials. Next-generation networks based on beamforming can take advantage of the nonreciprocal response of spacetime-modulated metamaterials. In fact, the present time-varying screen can efficiently act as a beamformer by simply adjusting the frequency modulation ω s . On the other hand, pulsed sources are demanded in many fields of physics, engineering and medicine. For instance, pulsed electromagnetic field therapy (PEMF) uses electromagnetic fields to heal non-union fractures and other injuries In addition, the proposed structure can act as an analog sampler when the modulation frequency is much greater than the vibration of the incident wave (ω s ω 0 ). This phenomenon can be visualized in Figure Previous state-of-art works have mainly focused on the study of dielectric-based metamaterials with spatiotemporal variations. In this work, we have presented an an-alytical framework that serves as a basis for the study of time-modulated metal-based metamaterials. The time periodicity of the problem allows us to expand the electromagnetic fields in terms of a Floquet-Bloch series. By imposing the continuity of the electric field and the instantaneous Poynting vector across the time interface, the Floquet coefficients, dispersion curves, diffraction angles as well as the reflection/transmission coefficients are derived. The present approach comes with an associated equivalent circuit, formed by two input and output transmission lines and an equivalent admittance that models the time-varying screen. This equivalent admittance groups an infinitely set of parallel transformers and transmission lines (one per each harmonic). By checking the dispersion curves of the system, we have seen the linearity (non-dispersion) of the modes and the absence of stopbands. In addition, we have shown that higher-order harmonics are propagative, which is a notable difference compared to spatially-modulated diffraction gratings where higher-order modes are typically evanescent and carry reactive power. Some analytical and numerical (self-implemented FDTD) results are provided in order to validate the approach. Results show that time-modulated metallic screens can act either as pulsed sources (when ω s ω 0 ) or as beamformers (when ω s ∼ ω 0 ) to redirect power. Moreover, cases where the time modulation is notably faster compared to the frequency of the incident wave (ω s ω 0 ) provoke that most of the diffracted power redirect to the fundamental harmonic and to angles close to the normal. These are interesting features that can be considered for the manipulation and reconfiguration of electromagnetic waves in future wireless communications systems. consequence, (A1) can be simplified to By inserting eq. (A2) into eqs. As it can be appreciated, TM and TE admittances are identical, real-valued (in lossless media) and independent from n in the case of considering higher-order waves.