A superconducting qubit in a waveguide behaves as a point-like nonlinear element. If irradiated with nearly resonant microwave pulses, the qubit undergoes quantum evolution and generates coherent fields at sideband frequencies due to elastic scattering. This effect is called Quantum Wave Mixing (QWM), and the number of emerged side components depends on the number of interacting photons. By driving a superconducting qubit with short pulses with alternating carrier frequencies, we control the maximal number of photons simultaneously interacting with a two-level system by varying the number and duration of applied pulses. Increasing the number of pulses results in consecutive growth of the order of non-linearity, which manifests in additional coherent side peaks appearing in the spectrum of scattered radiation while the whole spectrum maintains its asymmetry. The scattering of electromagnetic waves on a single atom in an open space is a cornerstone problem in quantum optics The pioneering experiments with the use of atomic vapours In current work, we measure a complete picture of QWM spectrum due to elastic scattering of microwave pulses when the qubit undergoes coherent dynamics. To achieve that, the qubit is driven by a series of N nonoverlapping pulses with alternating frequencies ω -and ω + , with N from 2 to 6. In the elastic spectrum, we observe solely 2N -1 components which depend on the maximal number of interacting photons. Particularly, we extend the result of Ref. For the time-domain multiphoton QWM experiment, we utilize a single transmon qubit We prepare the input pulses with a typical heterodyne up-conversion setup with rf-sources, AWGs (arbitrary waveform generators), and IQ-mixers. As a result, two sequences of short pulses with carrier frequencies ω ± are simultaneously propagating near the qubit. Figure We down-convert the scattered light and digitize both quadratures at an intermediate frequency of 100 MHz to characterize the output field. We use high-frequency ADC with an embedded FPGA, which is programmed to average the identical traces recorded when the trigger is sent from AWG. Since we are interested here in the elastic components, the averaging time is much larger than the period of the sequence. The convenient choice is the time divisible by the period of beats with frequency 2δω because it allows acquiring all the temporal variations of the signal. After recording the complex average field, we make Fourier transformation to get the complex spectrum of the signal analyzed below. The lower panels of Fig. FIG. Next, we characterize quantitative properties of side peaks. For that, we measure how durations ∆t -, ∆t + and amplitudes Ω -, Ω + of pulses affect the intensities of QWM components, implying that similar pulses with the same carrier frequencies rotate qubit states by equal angles. As described earlier, we make complex Fourier transformation of down-converted field, which allows us to extract amplitude and phase of any coherent component. It is also possible to rotate complex traces such that all the emitted field is concentrated in one quadrature and takes either positive or negative values. We plot color maps of these quadratures versus two arguments Ω -∆t -, Ω + ∆t + for each number of pulses N . As a result, we obtain several expressive maps demonstrating the rich dynamics of fields, see Fig. In order to interpret the observed elastic spectra in terms of multi-photon scattering, we use the framework developed in The Hamiltonian in the interaction picture reads To get the field components, we first calculate the following matrix element: where the initial state is |φ 0 = |0, γ -, γ + , meaning that the scattered field mode is initially in the ground state, and the driving fields are always in coherent states |γ - and |γ + . The interaction with modes only happens when a corresponding pulse reaches the qubit. The evolution operator Λ N for N applied pulses is defined as and evolution operators for every single applied pulse with the duration ∆t i may approximately be expressed in the case of γ -, γ + 1 as Here we introduced rotation angles θ ± = Ω ± ∆t i and used Ω ± = 2gγ ± . For convenience, we also define the following operators: where α = tan θ -/2, β = tan θ + /2. With these expressions, for the case N = 2, one obtains: M (2) p = cos where under brackets denote the total phase multiplier acquired from operators a, b, a † , b † , not counting the phase of σ - p for a moment. If we now calculate the timeaverage field at an arbitrary frequency ω p : the last term of Eq. ( It is now straightforward to generalize the calculation for N > 2 pulses. For three pulses, the analogue of Eq. ( The spectrum of emitted field recorded for different θ - and θ + allows us to reconstruct how every observable harmonic depends on rotation angles. We then compare these results with the corresponding analytical dependencies, similar to Eqs. ( Although, we notice a small disagreement for the emission at the frequency of the last pulse (either ω + or ω -) at large effective angles. The origin of this discrepancy could be in our data processing procedure. In order to restore dependencies for ω + and ω -, we cut out the initial pulses from the digitized traces, replacing them with zero. Therefore, a small part of the emission gets lost. Besides, some part of the last pulse might get distorted due to presence of a small impedance mismatch in the signal line. It may cause a significant effect if the rotation angle of the pulse is large. Analyzing the patterns in Fig. Our analytical results allow the exact identification of multi-photon contributions into every single mode. As N increases, the higher-order photon processes contribute more significantly to the emission at the frequencies of initial drives and the neighboring frequencies. For example, for N = 3, the field at ω -contains only one term corresponding to a single-photon process (single-photon absorption and emission, or in analogy with higher orders, "two-wave mixing"), two terms related to the third-order processes (four-wave mixing) and one term connected with the fifth-order process (six-wave mixing). The exact expressions are presented in Supplemental Materials [40] to this article. Therefore, the interference of all these terms with different orders forms the overall pattern for every component. However, there is always only one term in the evolution responsible for the emission at the leftmost and rightmost peaks frequencies. The observed pictures could be considered as a spectral decomposition of coherent pulses being scattered on a qubit. To illustrate the physical meaning of this de- The net field obtained as a sum of all measured coherent components, as if it could be emitted for the drives with δω = 0, that is, for a monochromatic drive. From (a) to (d) the map is plotted for N=2,3,4,5 pulses, horizontal axis is θ-and vertical is θ+. The cross-sections are harmonic Rabi oscillations. composition, we can consider the limit δω → 0. Our interleaved pulses then turn to continuous monochromatic wave exactly resonant with the qubit. The side peaks now all have the same frequency, and we can simply sum up all the contributions presented in Fig. Another observation relates to the efficiency of conversion. For two applied pulses, one can see from Fig. We wish to acknowledge the support of Russian Science Foundation (grant N 21-42-00025). We thank W. Pogosov for useful discussions. carrier frequency is the fraction of T b , but nevertheless it is much greater than the relaxation lifetime of a qubit. The waveforms are loaded into AWG, the output channels of which are connected to I and Q ports of quadrature mixer. The continuous wave at frequency ω LO is given by the rf-generator, output of which is connected to L port of mixer. We calibrate up-conversion by adjusting the phases and offsets of waveforms with carrier frequency of ω IF in order to maximize the signal at ω LO + ω IF and to minimize all other harmonics. As for down-conversion part, we exploit the same quadrature mixer. The scattered field undergoes amplification and then comes into R-port of the output mixer. The LO signal goes from the same generator as used for up-conversion. Down-converted quadratures from I and Q ports are digitized with the two synchronized channels of ADC, and the acquisition is triggered by AWG. After moderate averaging (typically millions of waveform periods), we take complex Fourier transform of signal and get the results presented in Fig. The single-tone spectroscopy of the qubit is shown in Fig. )UHTXHQF\+] H With the presented experimental setup we are able to measure the dynamics of the qubit under strong resonant microwave pulses. For this, we direct into a waveguide a sequence of short pulses divided by long intervals. The sequence is formed by our up-conversion scheme. Being resonant with the qubit, the pulse causes the rotational dynamics of the latter, also known as Rabi oscillations. Let us consider the rotation around x-axis on the Bloch sphere, then the qubit state evolves in time as: Here we suppose that the pure dephasing and non-radiative relaxation are negligible, and that the drive is exactly in resonance with the transition. Also we introduced the generalized Rabi frequency Ω = Ω 2 -Γ 2 1 /16. For measuring the amplitude of the emitted field (which is proportional to σ y ), we down-convert the field emitted right after the driving pulse is gone. After that, we digitize both quadratures the signal at ω IF and average over many single traces. Then we apply fast Fourier transform (FFT) in order to get the complex amplitude of field. The single quadrature of field measured for different lengths of driving pulse is presented at Fig. Here we present the extension of results presented in Fig. In this section, we describe in detail how analytical expressions for the mixing components are calculated. To derive the dynamics of p-th side spectral components when N pulses are applied, we calculate the matrix element M (N ) p , defined in Eq. ( where Λ N is total evolution operator of the system defined in Eq. (3) of the main text. Operators Λ N can be directly written by multiplying all the evolution operators defined in Eq. ( H RWA (t) = 0 Ω + (t)e -iδωt + Ω -(t)e iδωt Ω + (t)e iδωt + Ω -(t)e -iδωt 0 , (S15) where we kept only slowly varying terms from both drives. We employ open-source QuTiP package to construct the short pulses with envelopes Ω + (t) and Ω -(t) which are plotted at Fig. ). These results confirm that the missing peaks at Fig. 