We present a mechanistic theory for predicting void evolution in the Li metal electrode during the charge and discharge of all-solid-state battery cells. A phase field formulation is developed to model vacancy annihilation and nucleation, and to enable the tracking of the void-Li metal interface. This is coupled with a viscoplastic description of Li deformation, to capture creep effects, and a mass transfer formulation accounting for substitutional (bulk and surface) Li diffusion and current-driven flux. Moreover, we incorporate the interaction between the electrode and the solid electrolyte, resolving the coupled electro-chemical-mechanical problem in both domains. This enables predicting the electrolyte current distribution and thus the emergence of local current 'hot spots', which act as precursors for dendrite formation and cell death. The theoretical framework is numerically implemented, and single and multiple void case studies are carried out to predict the evolution of voids and current hot spots as a function of the applied pressure, material properties and charge (magnitude and cycle history). For both plating and stripping, insight is gained into the interplay between bulk diffusion, Li dissolution and deposition, creep, and the nucleation and annihilation of vacancies. The model is shown to capture the main experimental observations, including not only key features of electrolyte current and void morphology but also the sensitivity to the applied current, the role of pressure in increasing the electrode-electrolyte contact area, and the dominance of creep over vacancy diffusion. All-solid-state batteries are arguably the most promising development in energy storage technology, allowing for significant improvements in both energy and power densities, relative to traditional Li-ion batteries using organic liquid electrolytes Figure Recently, it has been suggested that voiding and subsequent dendrite formation can be suppressed by applying a constant pressure to the free surface of the Li metal anode Monroe and Newman were among the first to propose a mechanistic rationale for dendrite formation and an accompanying model Increasing electrolyte stiffness can also favour interface delamination, as shown computationally by In this work, we present a new electro-chemo-mechanical formulation for all-solid-state batteries which is capable of predicting void evolution in the Li metal anode and the electrolyte current density distribution. Our theoretical and computational framework is developed by building upon the phase field method, which enables capturing relevant morphological changes in the void-electrode interface such as shape variations of arbitrary complexity (including occlusion) and the interaction between multiple voids (e.g., void coalescence). In addition, our model accounts for: (i) the nucleation and annihilation of Li metal lattice sites, (ii) the diffusion of Li in the electrode, (iii) the viscoplastic and creep behaviour of the Our theory aims at encapsulating the main physical mechanisms driving void nucleation and evolution during plating and stripping (see, e.g., Finally, consider the plating process (Figs. The diffusion problem takes as primary kinematic variable the occupancy of Li sites in the anode (θ m ) and as boundary condition a current-dependent flux that incorporates the role of Li dissolution and deposition. Moreover, both bulk and surface diffusion are captured in its governing equation through the interaction with the mechanical and phase field problems. Finally, as appropriate for metallic lithium, the mechanical description is characterised by a viscoplastic constitutive response, capturing creep effects. Also, the role of lattice distortion is incorporated via chemical strains and the balance of linear momentum is coupled to the phase field to account for the presence of voids. These elements of our theory are defined below in a thermodynamically-consistent manner. Moreover, the framework is extended to solve for the electric potential in the electrolyte, yielding a coupled electro-chemo-mechanical formulation able to predict the occurrence of local current hot-spots, which result from the voiding process and lead to the formation of dendrites. Consider a lithium metal electrode with a volume V , where the Li lattice sites can be annihilated into and nucleated from voids, as shown in Fig. The remaining volume, denoted by V v , corresponds to the voids. The total volume of the anode is thus V = V m + V v , and is kept constant. We emphasise that voids refer to regions where vacancies have been condensated or annihilated; unlike vacancies, voids cannot store strain energy. In the absence of external loading, vacancies are in equilibrium with voids. We proceed to define the molar concentration of Li atoms c m Li , Li vacant sites c m v , and Li lattice sites c m L as Let θ m = c m Li /c m L denote the Li occupancy, while θ v = c m v /c m L gives the vacancy occupancy in the Li metal network. It follows that θ v = 1 -θ m . In the Li metal anode, Li is both the solute and the solvent, implying that there is no theoretical upper bound on the Li concentration when V m reduces to 0 For a pressure p m and an elastic strain energy density ψ e , the Gibbs free energy of the electrode reads where R is the gas constant, T is the absolute temperature, μ 0 m is the reference molar enthalpy of Li atoms at zero pressure and h v is the molar enthalpy of the formation of vacant sites in Li (≈ 50 kJ/mol, The total Gibbs free energy, discarding the interfacial energy between the void and the lithium metal, is thus The chemical potentials of Li atoms and lattice sites can be respectively derived as We shall now explore the equilibrium chemical potentials μ 0 m and h v . In equilibrium, diffusion of lithium atoms is precluded and thus the chemical potential is constant everywhere, viz. μ m Li = μ m L . Moreover, Li vacant sites are not annihilated or nucleated under equilibrium conditions, indicating that μ m L should vanish. Thus, μ m Li = μ m L = 0. If we define θ 0 m as the equilibrium lithium occupancy in the absence of mechanical pressure and elastic straining, it naturally follows from Eqs. ( Accordingly, we can derive θ 0 m and μ 0 m as Thus, the total Gibbs free energy of the lithium electrode is where the superscript "Bulk" is used to emphasise the absence of a Li metal-void interfacial energy term. We can also obtain the Helmholtz free energy from Ψ Bulk = G Bulk -V p m , yielding which, recalling Eq. ( 2.3. Phase field formulation of the Helmholtz free energy of a lithium electrode with voids Let us now incorporate into the model the presence of an evolving void-anode interface. To achieve this, we exploit the phase field paradigm, which has been successfully applied to a wide range of interfacial problems, including corrosion The lattice concentration c m L is taken as a constant, with the average molar volume of the lattice Ω L as reciprocal. In the void, there are no lattice sites (c ξ L = 0) and thus the model is, from a theoretical viewpoint, insensitive to the choice of θ ξ m in V v (ξ = 0). However, note that numerical convergence is facilitated by choices of θ const m that are close to the magnitude of the lithium occupancy in the lattice θ m . Since θ ξ m ≡ θ m for 0 < ξ ≤ 1, we proceed to drop the superscript ξ for the lithium occupancy. Contrarily, c ξ L and ψ ξ e are interpolated along the lithium-void interface by means of an interpolation function h(ξ), such that This interpolation function must satisfy h(0) = 0 and h(1) = 1, such that Eqs. ( Recalling Eq. ( Eq. ( Considering these ξ-dependent variables, the Helmholtz free energy ( We further introduce an interfacial energy of the following form where κ is the gradient energy coefficient and the first term on the right hand side of ( where w/16 is the barrier height. The total free energy is then defined as the sum of the bulk and interfacial terms: Ψ = Ψ Bulk + Ψ Interface . The proposed deformation-diffusion-phase field model is described by three primal kinematic variables: the displacement field vector u(x, t), the lithium occupancy θ m (x, t), and the phase field order parameter ξ(x, t). These variables respectively characterise the mechanical response, lithium diffusion (vacancy and adatom diffusion), and the evolution of the void-anode interface, as dictated by site nucleation and annihilation. In this subsection, we provide a description of the related kinematic and constitutive equations. The deformation of the lithium metal electrode is characterised by a total strain rate ε, defined as where the superposed dot indicates differentiation with respect to time. The total strain rate can be additively decomposed into its elastic, viscoplastic and chemical components as follows The chemical strain rate is the strain variation induced by the transport of Li atoms within the electrode as, due to the different partial molar volumes of occupied and vacant lattice sites, lattice distortion takes place when Li atoms diffuse to occupy a vacancy. We define the chemical strain rate tensor as εc = 1 3 where 1 is the second-order unit tensor and c ξ ref is the stress-free concentration, which equals results from the consideration of the substitutional nature of Li diffusion. Recalling Eq. ( Inspection of ( (24) because h(ξ) is defined such that h(0) = h (0) = 0, see Eq. ( The viscoplastic strain rate εv is defined following Anand's model where σ ξ dev and σ ξ e denote the deviatoric stress tensor and the von Mises effective stress, respectively. They are defined as where trσ ξ is the trace of the stress tensor σ ξ . The equivalent plastic shear strain-rate F cr is given by where A is a pre-exponential factor, Q is the activation energy, and m is the strain rate sensitivity exponent (0 < m ≤ 1). The flow resistance rate Ṡa is defined as follows, Here, H 0 , a, n and S 0 are strain hardening parameters (see Regarding the elastic part, the elastic constants are degraded by the phase field to ensure that a zero stiffness response is attained in the void. Accordingly, we interpolate the elastic moduli as where G and K are the shear and bulk modulus of the lithium metal, respectively. Along the same lines, we construct the elastic strain energy as and the definition of the stress tensor σ ξ readily follows as, Combining Eqs. ( (34) We proceed to define the chemical potential for the diffusion of lithium atoms within the anode. The evolution of lithium per unit area is described by the time derivative of lithium concentration c ξ Li , as defined in (17). The work conjugate of c ξ Li is the chemical potential of lithium atoms, which can be derived as where σ ξ h is the hydrostatic stress, given by σ ξ h = K ξ (trε e ). The evolution of lattice sites is characterised by the phase field order parameter ξ. The work conjugate of ξ, which acts as the driving force for the phase field evolution, can be derived as follows, It can be seen that, if the interfacial and pressure terms are ignored, μ ξ differs from the lattice site chemical potential (7) only by the factor h c m L . We shall now derive the governing equations. As shown in Fig. the lithium metal V m and the void V v . We then identify two more interfaces: the one between the lithium metal and the void Γ Interface , and that between the void and the solid electrolyte Γ v . Using the phase field paradigm, Γ Interface has been replaced by a diffuse interface, characterised by the phase field order parameter ξ and its gradient. Following experimental observations, we assume that voids can nucleate from the electrolyte side. Under this assumption, the solid electrolyte can be in contact with both the void and the lithium metal. We denote the interface with the void as Γ v and the interface with lithium metal as Γ f . Then, Γ v ∪ Γ f = Γ r . We choose lithium occupancy θ m , displacements u and phase field order parameter ξ as independent field variables, which are defined in the complete domain V . In order to capture the transport of Li atoms, the annihilation and creation of lithium lattice sites and the deformation of the Li metal, we derive the following three sets of governing equations. Li transport. The evolution of the Li concentration is governed by the following mass transfer equation where j ξ Li is the lithium flux, which is defined as with D eff being the effective diffusion coefficient. Combining eqs. ( Hence, the lithium flux is driven by the gradients of lithium occupancy and hydrostatic stress. The flux must be zero inside of the void and this is naturally captured in the formulation, as h(ξ = 0) = 0. Also, the gradient terms vanish when ξ = 0, as the lithium occupancy is constant and the void carries no stress. Substituting Eqs. ( Dividing by c m L on both sides and rearranging, the chemical balance can be formulated as, Inspection of Eq. ( Evolution of lattice sites. The nucleation and growth of voids are driven by the annihilation and creation of lattice sites; here described by a novel phase field formulation. The density of lattice sites is not a conserved quantity and its evolution is driven by the free energy of the system. Accordingly, the evolution for the phase field parameter ξ follows an Allen-Cahn-type equation where L is the so-called phase field mobility or kinetic parameter. Mechanical deformation. In the absence of body forces and neglecting the role of inertia, the mechanical behaviour of the electrode is characterised by the balance of linear momentum: where the ξ-dependent stress tensor is used to capture the loss of stiffness associated with voided regions (ξ = 0). We proceed to discuss the boundary conditions for the couple deformation-diffusion-phase field problem. For the sake of clarity, these are divided in three sets, as in the description of the local force balances. Li transport. As shown in Fig. All other three boundaries are impermeable to lithium atoms. The arising current density ĩ can be obtained from a Butler-Volmer equation based on the above electrochemical reaction. It can also be prescribed as a distributed current density. As sketched in Fig. where F is the Faraday constant and z is the charge number of the ion, equal to 1 for Li. One should note that if Eq. ( We emphasise that the model comprises two classes of reactions: (i) Li dissolution/deposition, shown in Eq. ( Evolution of lattice sites. The boundary condition for the phase field order parameter ξ is a natural boundary condition for all sides, viz. Mechanical deformation. Unlike the case of the diffusion problem, the only relevant boundary from a mechanical point of view is the left side of the electrode, Γ l . We assume all boundaries are traction free in the tangential direction. In the normal direction to the boundary, pressure can be applied to minimise voiding and maximise the contact between the electrode and the electrolyte. Accordingly, the boundary conditions in the normal direction are defined as Finally, the initial conditions are defined as, In all computations, the phase field distribution is allowed to equilibrate before applying any loading. 2.6. Coupling with the electro-mechanical behaviour of the solid electrolyte To enable the prediction of current hot spots, which act as dendrite nucleation sites, we extend our electrode deformation-diffusion-phase field model to capture the electro-mechanical behaviour of the electrolyte. As shown in Fig. where i el is the electric current and σ el is the electric conductivity. Upon further assuming that no charge is present, one reaches Mechanically, we assume that the electrolyte behaves in a linear elastic manner. Thus, the displacement u in the electrolyte is described by the Navier-Lamè equation where λ and G are the Lamè constants of the electrolyte. We shall now turn our attention to the governing equations in the electrode. The chemical and mechanical governing equations have been introduced in Section 2.5.1. Now we derive the governing equation for the electric field. The current in the Li metal electrode anode is conducted by electrons. Since the conductivity of the Li metal (σ s ) is several orders of magnitude greater than that of the electrolyte, we can adopt the common assumption of a constant electric potential within the electrode. However, the air in the void can act as an electron insulator with zero conductivity, influencing the distribution of electric potential in the electrode. Therefore, we define a phase field dependent conductivity The choice of f (ξ) must satisfy the following requirements: f (0) = 0, f (1) = 1, and f (0) = 0. Here, we choose to adopt the following higher-order form to achieve a steep conductivity change near the interface, The current density (i s ) and electric potential (φ s ) in the electrode then read Finally, the boundary and interface conditions are defined. As shown in Fig. where n x is the normal vector along the x direction. Superscripts -and + denote the left and right side of the interface Γ r , respectively. Remark. In our formulation, we encapsulate the four kinetic events that govern void evolution: (i) the rate of Li dissolution/deposition, (ii) Li diffusion, (iii) the nucleation/annihilation of vacancies, and (iv) creep. We independently incorporate these phenomena through boundary/interface conditions (for (i)), field governing equations (for (ii) and (iii)) and constitutive relations (for (iv)). As described in Appendix A, in the absence of applied current and bulk diffusion, we can derive a simplified model and estimate the interface velocity. The resulting expression for the interface velocity highlights the importance of the lattice annihilation-induced pressure source term inside the interface, and the similarities with traditional models of surface diffusion The theoretical framework described in Section 2 is numerically implemented using the finite element method. Specifically, the commercial finite element package COMSOL Multiphysics is used. Plane strain conditions are assumed, time integration is carried out using a backward Euler method, and quadratic quadrilateral elements are used for discretising the electrode and electrolyte domains. A mesh sensitivity analysis is conducted in all the computations, with the characteristic element length in the regions of void evolution being at least ten times smaller than the inteface thickness , which is sufficient to ensure mesh-independent results (64) The number of degrees-of-freedom employed in the various boundary value problems examined ranges from 25 to 30 million. To achieve mesh-objective results, the finite element mesh has to be sufficiently refined along the electrode-electrolyte and Li metal-void interfaces to resolve the gradients of the phase field order parameter and the local current. We begin, in Section 3.1, by describing our choice of electrode-electrolyte system, presenting the phase field and material parameters, and calibrating the viscoplastic constitutive behaviour of metallic lithium with the uniaxial tension tests conducted at various strain rates by LePage et al. (2019). Then, numerical experiments are conducted on a single void model (Section 3.2) to investigate: (i) the role of plating and stripping in driving void evolution (Section 3.2.1), (ii) the sensitivity to the applied current density and the phase field mobility parameter (Section 3.2.2), and (iii) the interplay between creep and vacancy diffusion (Section 3.2.3). Subsequently, a fullscale model is developed, which includes multiple voids and where several charge/discharge cycles are simulated to mimic realistic conditions (Section 3.3). This realistic model is used to gain insight into the important role of the applied pressure and the results obtained are discussed in the context of experimental observations. In these boundary value problems, voids are introduced to mimic the non-ideal solid-solid contact between the Li anode and the ceramic electrolyte. Gaps along the anode-electrolyte interface can arise from multiple sources, including the pores that nucleate at impurities, volume change differences between charged and discharged electrodes 3.1. Phase field and material parameters for a Li anode -LLZO electrolyte system. We choose to conduct our numerical experiments in a cell composed of a metallic lithium anode and a Li 7 La 3 Zr 2 O 12 (LLZO) solid electrolyte, arguably the most relevant electrode-electrolyte system. The garnet LLZO is a common choice in the experimental and theoretical literature, as it can be synthesized at high relative densities (>95%), exhibits high conductivity and stiffness, and is stable against metallic lithium Height of the double well potential, w Ionic conductivity of solid electrolyte (LLZO), σ el [S m -1 ] 5.5 × 10 -6 (iv) It remains to define the constitutive parameters of the viscoplastic formulation adopted to characterise the mechanical behaviour of the Li metal anode. As described in Section 2.4.1, we choose to describe the viscoplastic and creep behaviour of metallic lithium using the model developed by A good agreement with experiments is obtained for the parameters reported in Table Insight is first gained by simulating the evolution of a single void lying at the interface between the Li metal anode and the electrolyte, see Fig. Void Initial condition All the edges of the Li metal anode are impermeable to Li flux except for Γ f , the electrodeelectrolyte interface. Regarding the electric problem, a uniformly distributed current density (i app ) is applied to the right edge of the electrolyte. This current is generally taken to be equal to |i app | = 0.1 mA cm -2 but other magnitudes are also considered to investigate its influence. Mechanically, we constrain the vertical displacements of the bottom and top edges of the electrode and of the electrolyte. The horizontal displacement of the right edge of the electrolyte is also kept equal to zero. This reflects the assumption of composite cathode whose macroscopic volume change is negligible during operation compared with lithium anode. Moreover, the cathode and electrolyte are both assumed much stiffer than lithium metal. As for the left edge, we consider two scenarios: (i) a pressure of p is applied at this boundary to study the influence the applied pressure; or (ii) a fixed displacement is enforced in order to mimic the constraint of a solid shell that wraps the battery cell. First, we present model predictions of void evolution under stripping and plating conditions. For the sake of clarity, no pressure is applied on the electrode and simulations are presented for one continuous cycle of stripping or plating. Otherwise, the loading conditions correspond to those described above. Currents with the same magnitude (but different sign) are applied for plating and stripping; specifically, i app = 0.1 mA cm -2 during plating and i app = -0.1 mA cm -2 during stripping. The corresponding Li + flux j ξ Li flowing across the electrode-electrolyte interface is then calculated from the interfacial current density. The results of the stripping and plating processes are shown in Figs. Void evolution is characterised by contours of the phase field order parameter (ξ) in the electrode, while the contours in the electrolyte describe the predicted normalised electrolyte current density (i l /i app ). Consider first the results obtained for the stripping process, Fig. We proceed to conduct a parametric analysis to investigate the influence of the applied current density i app and the phase field kinetic parameter L. The aim is to investigate the competition between relevant kinetic phenomena. Thus, voiding is governed by four kinetic events: the rate of Li dissolution/deposition, bulk Li transport, the nucleation/annihilation of vacancies, and creep. Let us momentarily leave aside the role of creep, which is investigated below (Section 3.2.3). The first three events are governed by the applied current i app , the effective diffusion coefficient D eff , and the phase field mobility coefficient L, respectively. Since D eff is known and can be indepen-dently measured, we focus our attention on the sensitivity to i app and L. The boundary value problem corresponds to that considered in the previous section and depicted in Fig. We shall now investigate the role of the phase field kinetic parameter L, also termed phase field mobility coefficient. In this formulation, L characterises the ability of a material to nucleate or annihilate vacancy sites. The results obtained for selected values of L are shown in Fig. Finally, we use the single void boundary value problem to gain insight into the competition between diffusion and creep. We isolate these effects by assuming that no flux is applied on the electrode-electrolyte interface and by replacing the electrolyte and its mechanical constraint by a fixed displacement u x = 0 at Γ f . A pressure with magnitude p = 0.6 MPa is applied on the left edge of the electrode. This pressure is applied instantaneously (time t = 0 + ) and then held fixed for 7 h, such that creep strains significantly out-weight their elastic counterparts. The results obtained are shown in Fig. Three curves are shown to characterise the contributions of Li diffusion and creep to void shape evolution: (i) the initial void shape, before the pressure is applied (time t = 0); (ii) the void shape after 8 h if the undeformed shape is considered (i.e., the change in shape due to diffusion only); and (iii) the void shape after 8 h considering both diffusion and material deformation contributions. The results reveal that, in the absence of current, the void shrinks while maintaining a semi-circular shape -no localisation events are observed. It is also seen that the change in void shape due to diffusion appears to be a small contribution to the final void shape. Li diffusion. This is in agreement with recent experimental measurements for various levels of applied pressure, which suggest that creep rather than diffusion dominates the rate at which Li is replenished at the interface We proceed now to predict the evolution of voids and hot-spots in an all-solid-state cell undergoing multiple plating and stripping cycles. The aim is two-fold: to gain new insight and to showcase the abilities of the model in delivering predictions under realistic conditions. The schematic of the boundary value problem is given in Fig. Figure First, we investigate the evolution of the voids' morphology during multiple cycles of plating and stripping. Specifically, we simulate 5 charging cycles, each of which lasts for 2.5 h; stripping regimes of 1.25 h followed by plating periods of the same duration. The results obtained in the absence of an applied pressure (p = 0) are shown in Fig. see, e.g., the evolution of void 2 between the first and fifth plating cycles. However, the smallest void (void 3) vanishes during the fourth plating period and therefore current hot-spots are not subsequently present in that region. We also observe how the void shape changes with plating and stripping cycles, adopting aspect ratios closer to the initial one. Overall, we see a deterioration of the electrolyte-electrode interface, with voids increasing in size, and a reduction in the electrolyteelectrode contact area. It has been frequently argued that the most promising strategy to prevent the interfacial instabilities that result from voiding is the application of mechanical pressure Figure It can be observed that the application of pressure is very effective in reducing the size of the voids. The cases with p > 0 show ellipsoidal voids that flatten with time, up to the point of vanishing for p = 1 MPa. This leads to the suppression of current hot spots that are otherwise present at the void ligaments (see the region beetween voids 4 and 5 for p = 0). Significant differences are observed with the case of no pressure, in terms of the electrode-electrolyte contact area. Phenomena such as void coalescence can also be observed for intermediate pressures (p = 0.5 MPa). The sensitivity of void size to pressure is important as smaller voids lead to a higher conductance of the battery cell. For the charging conditions and materials considered here, a constant pressure of 1 MPa appears to be sufficient to significantly reduce voiding. We have presented a phase field-based electro-chemo-mechanical model that can predict the evolution of voids and current hot-spots as a function of material properties, applied current and mechanical pressure. To capture the phenomena governing voiding and other interfacial instabilities in all-solid-state battery cells, the theory combines substitutional Li diffusion, a phase field description of vacancy nucleation and annihilation, and a viscoplastic constitutive model for Li metal. Moreover, the framework is extended to predict deformation and current distribution in the electrolyte, accounting for electrode-electrolyte interactions and capturing the emergence of regions of high current near the void edges. Being able to predict the nucleation and intensity of these local current 'hot spots' is of utmost importance as they lead to the formation of dendrites and subsequent cell short-circuit. To deliver predictions over relevant time and space scales, the model is numerically implemented using the finite element method. Case studies involving stripping and plating cycles in electrode-electrolyte systems with one or multiple voids are carried out to showcase the predictive capabilities of the model and gain insight into interfacial stabilities in all-solid-state batteries. Calculations are conducted to investigate the competition and interplay between creep, bulk and surface Li diffusion, Li dissolution and deposition, and vacancy nucleation and annihilation. Our main findings are: • Void morphology is very sensitive to charging conditions. As observed experimentally, stripping currents lead to an expansion of the void along the interface, while plating translates into a contraction of the void edges, potentially leading to the complete void occlusion. These phenomena are magnified with increasing applied current and in materials that can more readily annihilate vacancies (as characterised by the phase field kinetic parameter L). • High magnitudes of current density are predicted near the void edges, with the region where local current is high (i l /i app > 3) increasing in size with the stripping time. • The application of a mechanical pressure on the free surface of the electrode notably reduces voiding and leads to much larger contact areas between electrode and electrolyte. We observe that smaller voids can eventually vanish under relevant conditions if the pressure is sufficiently large. • Creep is found to play a much more significant role than bulk Li diffusion in governing the shape of the voids. • Complex voiding phenomena such as void coalescence are found to govern interfacial instabilities when simulating realistic conditions (multiple voids and charging cycles). This work can be further enhanced by incorporating a dendrite nucleation criterion or explicitly simulating dendrite evolution. Thus, the theoretical and computational framework presented establishes the basis for the development of advanced prognosis tools that can accelerate future developments in battery technology. which can be re-arranged as, It is anticipated that there are no sinks or sources of hydrostatic stresses in the Li metal anode (e.g. point loads or atom sinks), which leads to ∇ 2 σ ξ h = 0 in the bulk (h = 1). Thus, by defining θ m as constant, diffusion is constrained to the interface between the void and the lithium metal. We denote s as the moving front displacement of the interface, whose direction is normal to the interface and can be expressed by ∇h/ |∇h|. The tangential direction is denoted by u. Recalling that where (•) represents a field variable of interest, Eq. (A.2) can be expressed as In quasi-static problems, the pressure is equilibrated by surface tension, which means that both ∂σ ξ h /∂s and ∂ 2 σ ξ h /∂s 2 vanish in the surface. Thus, Eq. (A.4) can be further simplified to Accordingly, Eq. ( 