We synthesized the pure and co-doped titanium dioxide (TiO2) electrodes via spin coating. We examined the optical and electronic properties of as-prepared thin film electrodes with co-doping of transition metals and non-metals. The co-doping of Cu, Zn, and N increase the absorption of the radiation in the visible region. The doping leads to the formation of defect states in the electrodes. In this article, we have studied the carrier kinetics in pristine and co-doped TiO2 electrodes. To study the role of dopants in carrier transport of the synthesized TiO2 based electrodes, the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy measurement is performed in the frequency range of 10 -1 Hz to 10 6 Hz. The study reveals the influence of dopants on electron-hole recombination in the defect sites present in bulk and the transport mechanism of the electrons and ions to the surface/interface of the electrodes. TiO2 is the supreme candidate among the wide bandgap metal oxide semiconductors for many applications due to its prodigious properties Improved photocatalytic efficiency is linked with the total number of charge carriers reaching the surface of the electrodes, so we must ensure that many charge carriers reach the surface before recombination. Thus, there is a strong need to study the electron and ions transport in the electrode material and how the dopants affect their kinetics. Conduction of ions towards the electrode/electrolyte interface and dielectric behavior of material plays an important role in the low-frequency range, so it is crucial to study low-frequency carrier kinetics in detail. Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) is a magnificent technique for studying material's charge carrier kinetics and electrical properties In this article, we discuss the change in the optical properties of TiO2 electrodes implemented via co-doping of Cu, Zn, and N. We observed the increment in the visible region photon absorption with the help of the UV-Visible absorption spectrum. The report studies charge carrier kinetics in the TiO2 based electrodes utilizing Electro-impedance spectroscopy. The change in capacitive and resistive behavior of the electrodes is observed with different doping elements (Table The chemicals were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Chemical Co. and used in good and stable condition as received. Fluorine-doped Tin Oxide (FTO) coated glass was used as a thin film coating substrate. Substrates were cut into 1 cm × 1 cm size, cleaned thoroughly with DI water, acetone, and isopropyl alcohol (IPA) and dried in hot air. The conductivity of the FTO coated glass surface was ≤ 20 Ωm, supplied by Shilpent Nagpur, India. Pristine and co-doped TiO2 thin films were prepared using the spin coating technique. Precursors were prepared for the p-TiO2 electrodes by dissolving 1 ml of titanium (IV) tetra-isopropoxide (TTIP, Ti{OCH(CH 3 ) 2 } 4 ) in 5 ml of isopropyl alcohol (IPA) and stirred on a magnetic stirrer for 5 min. Then 0.5 ml of acetic acid (CH 3 COOH) was mixed with the solution dropwise to prevent the precipitation of the TiO 2 and stirred vigorously for 1 hour. Copper sulphate pentahydrate (CuSO 4 ⋅ 5H 2 O), Zinc Acetate ((CH 3 COO) 2 Zn), and Urea (NH 2 CONH 2 ) were used for the Cu, Zn, and N doping, respectively. By dissolving 4 wt.% CuSO 4 ⋅ 5H 2 O, 4wt.% (CH 3 COO) 2 Zn in methanol separately and 4 wt.% Urea in IPA. The prepared dopant solution is mixed accordingly with the precursor and coated on the FTO coated glass substrate (1 cm × 1 cm) with the help of the spin coater at 3000 rpm for 60 sec. Coated films were dried on the hot plate at 100°C for 0.5H and then annealed in a muffle furnace at 450°C in the air for 1H to achieve the crystallinity and remove the organic solvents (Fig. XRD patterns of the pristine and co-doped TiO2 electrodes were measured with the Smart Lab, Rigaku's thin film x-ray diffractometer using HyPix-3000 high energy resolution 2D HPAD detector. The instrument uses Cu target (K α ; λ = 1.54 Å) and is operated at 45 kV, 200 mA. The data was collected from 20°< 2θ < 70° angle with the scan rate 2°/min. UV-Visible absorbance spectra were taken of all the samples with an Agilent Cary 100 UV-Vis spectrophotometer. The spectra were collected over the 200-800 nm wavelength, referenced against air background. A field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM; Carl Zeiss Ultra, Carl Zeiss; Germany) equipped with energy dispersed X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) was used for the study of thin film's surface morphology and elemental color mapping. EIS measurements of the samples were performed using AutoLab Electrochemical Workstation under dark conditions at 0.1 V bias. The electrolyte (NaCl) of 0.5 M concentration was prepared by dissolving the NaCl in the DI water. In the EIS measurements, an AC signal of 20 mV amplitude was varied in the frequency range from 10 6 Hz to 10 -1 Hz. The measured impedance data were fitted using ZSimpWin software. Characterization of all the samples were performed in the ambient air conditions. To check the crystalline quality of as-fabricated electrodes, we have measured X-ray diffraction patterns for pristine TiO2, Cu, Zn-TiO2 and Cu, Zn, TiO2-N electrodes. XRD pattern of the pristine and co-doped TiO 2 exclusively manifest the anatase (tetragonal) phase after the annealing (Fig. Where D is the crystallite size, λ is the wavelength of the X-Ray, β is the FWHM of the peak, and θ is the angle. The crystallite sizes of p-TiO 2 , Cu, Zn-TiO 2 , and Cu, Zn-TiO 2 -N are 2.549 nm, 2.505 nm, and 2.501 nm, respectively, showing no significant change. Since there is no peak for the Cu, Zn in the XRD data indicates that Cu, Zn substitutionally doped in TiO 2 We have taken the FE-SEM images to probe the morphology of undoped and co-doped TiO 2 electrodes. We observed the uniform and flat surface morphology of the pristine TiO 2 (Fig. Absorption spectrum analysis is the direct way to find out the optical properties, especially the bandgap of the materials. When a photon of specific energy is absorbed by an electron present in a lower energy state, it gets excited and jumps to a higher energy state. In this process, changes in transmitted radiation provide us an idea about the different electronic transitions. To calculate the bandgap of semiconductor materials, Tauc developed a method in 1966 which was further improved by Davis and Mott. His approach is based on the energy-dependent photon absorption coefficient, presented by the equation, Where α, h, ν, E g are the absorption coefficient, plank's constant, absorbed photon's frequency and bandgap energy of the material, respectively. B is the equation constant, and the value of the factor γ depends on the nature of the electronic transition. The value of γ can be 2 for the indirect band transition and 0.5 for the direct band transition UV-Visible absorption spectra were collected (from 200 nm to 800 nm) to check the optical bandgap of the synthesized TiO 2 based electrodes (Fig. Electrochemical-Impedance Spectroscopy is a very advanced technique that uses an AC signal of small amplitude to investigate the impedance-based behavior of the cell. It gives us information on charge transfer dynamics, capacitive and diffusion processes occurring in the electrochemical cell In this research article, we synthesized the pristine and co-doped electrodes using spin coating method. We performed the Thin Film XRD, FESEM, UV-Visible Spectroscopy, and Electroimpedance spectroscopy characterizations of the synthesized samples. Thin film XRD data confirms only the anatase structure of the TiO2 based electrodes. FESEM images manifest the change in surface morphology of the electrodes with the dopants. The change in morphology supports the low contact resistance with the electrolyte and larger surface area of contact. Elemental color mapping detected the presence of the Ti, Cu, Zn, O, and N elements with the uniform distribution. A significant improvement in the visible light absorption is observed with the co-doping. Tauc plot analysis shows the bandgap of p-TiO2, Cu, Zn doped TiO2, and Cu, Zn, and N doped TiO2 are 3.29, 3.27, and 3.38, respectively. Intermediate bandgap states were also observed in the Tauc plot. The EIS measurement is performed to study the charge carrier kinetics in the electrodes. The study concludes that at the defect state capacitance increased due to the localization of the charge carriers and the transport of electrons is enhanced due to the decrement in the charge transfer resistance in bulk. The double layers capacitance decreased, and transportation of the electrons and ions to the surface/interface improved.