The formation of modified Z-phase in a 12Cr1MoV (German grade: X20) tempered martensite ferritic (TMF) steel subjected to interrupted long-term creep-testing at 550 °C and 120 MPa was investigated. Quantitative volumetric measurements collected from thin-foil and extraction replica samples showed that modified Z-phase precipitated in both the uniformly-elongated gauge ( f v : 0.23 ± 0.02 %) and thread regions ( f v : 0.06 ± 0.01 %) of the sample that ruptured after 139 kh. The formation of modified Z-phase was accompanied by a progressive dissolution of MX precipitates, which decreased from ( f v : 0.16 ± 0.02%) for the initial state to ( f v : 0.03 ± 0.01%) in the uniformlyelongated gauge section of the sample tested to failure. The interparticle spacing of the creep-strengthening MX particles increased from (λ 3D : 0.55 ± 0.05 μm) in the initial state to (λ 3D : 1.01 ± 0.10 μm) for the uniformly-elongated gauge section of the ruptured sample, while the thread region had an interparticle spacing of (λ 3D : 0.60 ± 0.05 μm). The locally deformed fracture region had an increased phase fraction of modified Z-phase ( f v : 0.40 ± 0.20%), which implies that localised creep-strain strongly promotes the formation of modified Z-phase. The modified Z-phase precipitates did not form only on prior-austenite grain boundaries and formed throughout the tempered martensite ferritic grain structure. Tempered martensite ferritic (TMF) steels with 9-12%Cr are used extensively for steam pipes, turbines and boilers in fossil fired steam power plants. These steels have high creep strength, good oxidation resistance, good thermal fatigue properties and a moderate cost. The most common commercial material grades are 9Cr1Mo grade 91 (T/P91) or 9Cr2W grade 92 (T/P92), but older 12Cr1MoV (German grade: X20) is currently still in operation at several power utilities The TMF steel structure consists of a hierarchical arrangement of prior-austenite grains (PAG), packets, blocks and micro-grains with a high density of free dislocations New generation TMF steels are typically designed with an 11-12 wt.% chrome content to have sufficient oxidation resistance at the higher operation temperatures (650 °C) needed for improved power plant efficiency. Although, short-term testing on these new generation steels (up to 10 kh) has shown an enhancement in creep-strength and oxidation resistance, longterm testing (longer than 50 kh) revealed microstructural instabilities resulting in a creep-strength breakdown The formation of Cr(Nb,V)N modified Z-phase in 9-12% Cr TMF steels has been the subject of numerous studies The modified Z-phase has a chemical composition close to 1/3Cr, 1/3(V+Nb) and 1/3N, where the V/Nb ratio can vary significantly for precipitates in a particular steel. Two types of modified Z-phase are found in 9-12% Cr TMF steels: (1) a metastable fcc phase with a lattice parameter of 0.405 nm, and (2) a stable tetragonal phase which is a distortion of the NaCl-type lattice. Electron diffraction measurements of Cr(V,Nb)N and CrVN particles showed that both cubic and tetragonal diffraction patterns could be obtained from the same particles Thermodynamical calculations have shown that matrix concentration of chromium is the most influential element driving the formation of modified Z-phase Previous experimental observations based on extraction replicas found that the modified Z-phase precipitated preferentially along prior-austenite and packet grain boundaries grade: X20) during long-term creep X20 is an older German steel grade based on 12%Cr with a relatively high carbon content of 0.2 wt%. The chemical composition of the steel used in this study can be seen in Table The presence of modified Z-phase in X20 grade steels was first observed by Danielsen The microstructural evolution of the 12Cr1MoV TMF steel samples exposed to long-term interrupted creep-testing at near operating temperatures (550 °C) and 120 MPa stress has been the subject of several extensive investigations. The gauge and thread portions of the interrupted creep-tested samples have been characterised to quantify precipitates Investigations of modified Z-phase precipitation in 9-12%Cr TMF steels have been mainly performed on extraction replicas using TEM-based techniques (SAED, EFTEM and STEM-EDS/EELS). Extraction replicas are relatively easy to prepare and provide large electron transparent areas available for analysis of the precipitate phases, without the influence of the magnetic matrix. However, the sampled volume is unknown and quantitative results are often reported as the projected area measurements to quantify the phase fraction ( f A ) and number density (N A ) of precipitates The present experimental study applies volumetric quantification methods to systematically study the formation of CrVN modified Z-phase and the associated dissolution of the MX precipitates during long-term creep in a 12Cr1MoV steel. In addition, results on the reaction kinetics (time), effects of stress, localised creep-deformation, and the preferential nucleation sites of the modified Z-phase are presented. The TMF steel investigated in this study was supplied by Salzgitter Mannesmann Research Centre, Duisburg. The chemical composition given in Table Four identical samples were tested simultaneously at 550 °C with an applied stress of 120 MPa. Three interrupted experiments were tested to creep-strain values of 0.5% (12 kh), 1.0% (51 kh), and 1.6% (81 kh) respectively, and one sample was taken to rupture at a creep-strain value of 11.5% after 139 kh. Figure The chemical composition of the precipitates was investigated using scanning transmission electron mi-croscopy (STEM) combined with energy dispersive Xray spectroscopy (EDX) and electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) on a JEOL2100 (LaB 6 ) TEM fitted with an Oxford X-Max (80 mm 2 ) X-ray spectrometer and a Gatan Quantum GIF electron energy loss spectrometer. The crystallographic information of the precipitates was determined using selected area electron diffraction (SAED) patterns taken from several different zone-axes and matching it to theoretically simulated patterns. The precipitates (M 23 C 6 , MX and modified Zphase) were mapped on ten sites of interest using energy filtered TEM (EFTEM) (512x512 pixels; 5x5 μm 2 ) for each material state and sample preparation method (thin-foil and extraction replica). The signals for Cr (green) and V (red) were overlayed to produce a RGB composite image. M 23 C 6 precipitates rich in chromium appeared as green particles, while the vanadium rich MX precipitates appeared as red particles. Modified Zphase contains both chromium and vanadium and appeared as orange particles. A thickness map using the log-ratio method was collected on the thin-foil samples sites of interest, which was used to determine the sampled volume. The composite RGB images were segmented into M 23 C 6 , MX and modified Z-phase precipitates with the MIPAR The corrections and calculations were performed separately for each site of interest, which resulted in ten measured values for each material state. This distribution of measurements was then plotted as a box plot to show the distribution of values obtained from each site of interest, which was then used to calculate the mean value and the standard error in the mean for a particular material state. Any data points falling outside 1.5 x interquartile range (IQR) were considered outliers for the box plots, but these outliers were still used to de-termine the quantitative measurements. A total area of 10x25μm 2 was investigated for each material state. The total material volume investigated depends on the sample preparation method (thin-foil or extraction replica). The sampled volume can be calculated by multiplying with the foil thickness (80 nm) or the extraction depth (1 μm) in the case of the extraction replica with the projected area in the field of view. The extraction depth is unknown for the extraction replica preparation method, however, it can be estimated with the assumption that the M 23 C 6 precipitate phase fraction remains constant during long-term creep SAED experiments are very time-consuming and difficult to perform in the case of magnetic samples. Transmission Kikuchi diffraction Figure The identification of modified Z-phase/MX/M 2 X precipitates based only on EFTEM maps must be done with care, since all of these particles contain chromium and nitrogen. The identification of the modified Z-phase based on the EFTEM RGB composite elemental map overlay was confirmed using diffraction (SAED and TKD) and compositional (STEM-EDS/EELS) measurements. Figure Figure Figure Figure In order to investigate the effects of creep-strain, applied stress and ageing temperature on the formation of modified Z-phase and the associated dissolution of the MX precipitates, the different sections (Fracture; Gauge; Thread) of the ruptured creep-tested sample (139 kh) were compared to the initial state. Figure The thread region still had numerous MX precipitates compared to the low number of MX carbonitride particles observed in the (uniformly-elongated) gauge region and the fracture region. Additionally, the projected area number density of precipitates is much lower for the extraction replica prepared from the fracture region. This is probably due to the significant microstructural coarsening that occurred during the final stages of tertiary creep, prior to fracture. Consequently, the calculated sampled depth for the extraction replica prepared from the fracture region was only 0.5μm compared to 1μm for the extraction replicas prepared from the other material states. The phase fraction of modified Z-phase in the fracture region ( f v = 0.40 ± 0.20 %) is significantly higher than in the uniformly-elongated gauge section. This implies that the localised creep-strain is correlated with modified Z-phase formation. The analysis was then performed at prior austenite grain interiors and at prior-austenite boundaries on the extraction replica prepared from the gauge region of the ruptured sample. Figure TKD-EDS analyses were performed on the thin-foil sample prepared from the uniformly-elongated gauge region of the sample tested to rupture. The thin-foil was scanned with a step size of 20 nm across two prioraustenite grains, which was confirmed by employing a reconstruction algorithm (results not shown). Figure This study investigated the formation of modified Z-phase and the associated dissolution of creepstrengthening MX precipitates in a 12%Cr (Germangrade) X20 TMF steel using quantitative electron microscopy. The previous investigations by Aghajani et. al Several quantitative microscopy techniques were used in this study. Extraction replication is a relatively simple sample preparation technique, which allows for investigations on large areas without the influence of the magnetic iron matrix. However, the extraction volume for this preparation method is unknown. We provided a way to estimate this volume and used it quantify the volumetric phase fractions of MX particles based on EFTEM analysis. Previous investigations Thin-foils preserve the precipitate locations and the investigated volume can be accurately determined by measuring the thickness of the foil with EELS. However, the precipitate feature measurements have to be stereologically corrected to calculate the volumetric measurements, due to the fact that the precipitates are sectioned and then viewed as a projected area. The sampled volume for thin-foils is approximately 10% of that of the extraction replica method for a given site of interest. It is important to perform measurements from several sites of interest per material state and then to calculate the mean value for each area. The standard deviation in the mean values will be an indication of the representative nature of the measurements for a particular microstructural feature. Combined TKD-EDS SEM analyses performed on the thin-foils were able to map out the precipitate species with a spatial resolution in the order of 20 nm to obtain crystallographic phase, orientation and compositional information. The modified Z-phase particles were quantified from RGB EFTEM elemental maps. Image segmentation was performed to identify the modified Z-phase based on the intensity of the chromium and vanadium signals. It is very difficult to distinguish between a modified Z-phase particle and an MX/M 23 C 6 overlap for the early stages (12 kh). Segmentation errors are an important consideration that could influence the quantitative results in this study and it must be performed with care. Modified Z-phase particles identified in the uniformly-elongated gauge section of the sample creep-tested to 12 kh should be interpreted with care, since these particles almost exclusively occurred adjacent to M 23 C 6 precipitates and could be due to MX/M 23 C 6 overlapping Cr/V signals. These phases could not be identified as the modified Zphase using electron diffraction due to their small size and close proximity to the M 23 C 6 particles. tion Characterisation of extraction replicas by Sawada et. al It is quite challenging to quantify the contribution of the MX precipitate dissolution towards the progressive loss of creep-resistance, since it is also influenced by a combination of several microstructural mechanisms as discussed by Aghajani et. al Previous investigations found that the modified Zphase formed preferentially on prior-austenite and packet boundaries The quantitative investigations performed in this study to determine the preferential nucleation sites for the modified Z-phase, could not conclusively show whether modified Z-phase forms preferentially on the PAGB in this X20 steel grade, since several particles were distributed throughout the grain structure away from the PAGB. Qualitative evaluation found that most of the modified Z-phase particles were located adjacent to the M 23 C 6 precipitates and the modified Z-phase formed through the transformation of MX particles by chromium diffusion. The modified Z-phase number density remains constant (N v = 3 ± 1 μm -3 ) once formed and only increases in size by further dissolution of MX particles through the matrix diffusion of vanadium and chromium. A detailed study of the preferential nucleation sites of the modified Z-phase will be the subject of a follow-up study using TKD-EDS, HR(S)TEM-EELS, and atom-probe tomography. 1. Modified Z-phase was observed in German-grade (X20) material after creep-testing for 51 kh (120 MPa at 550 °C) in the uniformly-elongated gauge portion of the sample. This phase increased in size with an accompanied dissolution of MX particles until rupture after 139 kh. 2. The effects of stress and localised creep-strain significantly increased the formation of the modified Zphase for the sample tested to failure. 3. The modified Z-phase (CrVN) formed preferentially near M 23 C 6 precipitates and no conclusive evidence for preferential formation at PAGBs could be found based on investigations performed on the uniformly-elongated gauge section of the ruptured X20 grade sample. 4. The modified Z-phase formation and dissolution of MX is considered to be an important microstructural degradation mechanism that results in a non-linear decrease in creep-strength for 11-12% Cr TMF steels. The microstructural characterisation techniques demonstrated in this study can be applied to quantitatively characterise the finest microstructural features (MX) which are considered critical to the creep-strength of 9-12% TMF steel grades.