By solving the Bogoliubov-de Gennes Hamiltonian, the electron-hole coherence within a partially proximitized n-doped semiconductor shell of a core-shell nanowire heterostructure is investigated numerically and compared with the Andreev reflection interpretation of proximity induced superconductivity. Partial proximitization is considered to quantify the effects of a reduced coherence length. Three cases of partial proximitization of the shell are explored: radial, angular and longitudinal. For the radial case, it is found that the boundary conditions impose localization probability maxima in the center of the shell in spite of off-center radial proximitization. The induced superconductivity gap is calculated as a function of the ratio between the proximitized shell thickness and the total shell thickness. In the angular case, the lowest energy state of a hexagonal wire with a single proximitized side is found to display the essence of Andreev reflection, only by lengthwise summation of the localization probability. In the longitudinal case, a clear correspondence with Andreev reflection is seen in the localization probability as a function of length along a half-proximitized wire. The effect of an external magnetic field oriented along the wire is explored. Semiconductor nanowires with proximity induced superconductivity have emerged as key elements in various platforms proposed to realize qubits and other emerging technologies at the quantum scale Core-shell nanowires are radial heterojunctions consisting of a core which is wrapped by one or more layers of different materials. Due to crystallographic structure they usually have polygonal cross-sections In this paper, electron-hole coherence is investigated in an n-doped semiconductor core-shell nanowire with partial proximity induced superconductivity. Electronhole coherence of the lowest energy states is compared with the Andreev reflection picture of proximitized superconductivity in the radial, angular and longitudinal interfaces arising within a single nanowire. One of the earlier theoretical descriptions of the spatial dependence of the order parameter in the superconducting proximity effect was done by McMillan 51 , using a Green's function approach based on the Gor'kov equations where the ensemble average of field operators with opposite spin projections describes the condensation amplitude 53 McMillan 51 called the problem of the NS-junction possibly the simplest one in space-dependent superconductivity and proposed, in his own words, "a very nearly complete solution" of the problem for the case of infinite length of both metals, evaluating where E c0 is the cut-off energy written in the Nambu where T denotes time ordering and |0 the Heisenberg ground state. F (x) is also known as the anomalous Green's function where φ(x) is some slowly varying function, k B is the Boltzmann constant, T denotes temperature and v F is the Fermi velocity. For the limiting case of the temperature being close to zero a result by Falk 58 is cited, Falks paper Even if the pairing interaction V (r) is zero in the normal metal, F (r) can be non-zero, stemming from electronhole coherence, which can be interpreted as the superconductivity leakage in the normal metal A three dimensional proximitized core-shell nanowire is modeled in the zero temperature limit using cylindrical coordinates, where the z-axis is defined along the wire growth direction. Using a divide and conquer algorithm The matrix elements are written in the composite basis |q consisting of the transverse modes |a , longitudinal modes |n , spin |σ and particle-hole eigenstates |η such that where |anσ are the eigenstates of the Hamiltonian for the wire without proximity induced superconductivity, The transverse and longitudinal components of the Hamiltonian are written as where A φ = 1 2 Br is the vector potential in the symmetric gauge, incorporating an external magnetic field, B, directed along the wire axis. The transverse eigenstates are expanded in terms of the lattice sites and matrix elements obtained by finite-difference discretization of derivatives The length of the wire is L z , the origin is defined in the nanowire center so that the wire spans the interval along the z axis. The external magnetic field B gives rise to the Zeeman term where g * is the effective Landé g-factor and μ B the Bohr magneton. The particle-hole symmetry and coupling are contained in the quantum number η = ±1 and the matrix elements of the BdG Hamiltonian are obtained by the following, for and for η = η ′ , The chemical potential, μ, is set to correspond to an ndoped semiconductor such that electrons are the main carriers of the system. In accordance with the original works of Andreev 4 and BTK A core-shell nanowire fully coated with a superconducting layer has a radially symmetric proximity induced gap in the shell. Full-shell nanowire systems allow for additional control of the superconducting energy gap due to the Little-Parks effect 100-102 . Multiple fabricationspecific microscopic details and material properties can influence the strength of the induced gap 103 . To investigate electron-hole coherence within the partially proximitized shell, the semiconductor shell is considered to have a superconducting gap ∆ s in its outer half, brought on by a surrounding superconductor, not included in 2.5×10 -4 3.0×10 -4 0.8 0.85 0.9 0.95 1 2.5×10 -4 3.0×10 -4 0.8 0.85 0.9 0.95 1 the Hamiltonian. A cylindrical shell is studied, to isolate the effect of a partial proximitization radially, Fig. Systems where nanowires are proximitized by fabrication of the wire on top of a superconducting slab are common experimental platforms for Majorana physics Another possibility of partial proximitization is partial covering of a nanowire longitudinally with a superconductor The manifestation of Andreev reflection in the electron-hole coherence of the lowest energy quasiparticle states of partially proximitized core-shell nanowires, has been investigated by separately considering radial, angular and longitudinal interfaces of an induced superconducting pairing potential. In the radial case, finite-size effects in the thin shell lead to in-phase electron and hole components, with a symmetric distribution of the total localization probability over the interface. The shell is therefore found to be uniformly gapped, with the superconducting gap of the wire as a whole being suppressed with respect to the proximitized gap. For the angular case, asymmetry of the total localization probability over the interface of the lowest energy state, is shown to correspond to Andreev reflection phenomenology. Including higher energy states results in more complex distributions of the total localization probability, worthy of further investigation, as higher order scattering events come into play. The most direct correspondence to Andreev reflection is found for the longitudinal interface, where the electron-hole coherence propagates the quasiparticle wavefunction into the non-proximitized part of the wire. This is found for each transverse site, which is effectively a one-dimensional nanowire. The results confirm the applicability of the phenomenology for partially proximitized wires of these dimensions. Andreev reflection as described by BTK 6 is a one dimensional picture of electron-hole coherence from scattering at an infinite normal conductor-superconductor (NS) interface, utilizing the Andreev approximation k N e/h ≈ k S e/h ≈ k f , i.e. that all wavevectors are evaluated around the Fermi level. The notion has proven to be very useful for understanding multiple aspects of hybrid superconductor systems in the past decades Low energy physics of the radial, angular and longitudinal superconductor interfaces of proximitized coreshell nanowires has been explored using the Bogoliubovde Gennes equations. Partial proximitization is considered to quantify the effects of a reduced coherence length and to investigate the Andreev reflection interpretation of proximity induced superconductivity. For a thin shell, boundary conditions are found to impose symmetry of the localization probability in spite of partial radial proximitization. In the case of a hexagonal wire with a single proximitized side, it is only by lengthwise summation of localization probability that the essence of Andreev reflection can be seen. For a longitudinally half proximitized wire, electron-hole coherence is explicitly shown to propagate the quasiparticle wavefunction into the nonproximitized part of the wire. Application of an external magnetic field directed along the wire axis is found to cause amplitude modulation of the quasiparticle wavefunction. Correspondence with Andreev reflection is obtained per site of the shell, from considering the localization probability as a function of length in the core-shell nanowire. The results show in what way Andreev reflection is compatible with electron-hole coherence at the various interfaces that can arise in proximitized core-shell nanowire systems.