We demonstrate a novel electro-luminescence device in which GaN-based μ-LEDs are used to trigger the emission spectra of monolayers of transition metal dichalcogenides, which are deposited directly on μ-LED surface. A special μ-LED design enables the operation of our structures even in the limit of low temperatures. A device equipped with a selected WSe2 monolayer flake is shown to act as a stand-alone, electrically-driven single-photon source. Atomically thin semiconductors, such as monolayers of transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) and their homo-and hetero-structures, exhibit interesting optical properties. The list of prominent attributes of these twodimensional (2D) structures includes: strong excitonic binding Therefore, alternative methods are being developed, relying most often on tunneling mechanisms of carrier injection into the active 2D component of the device. In fact, the electrically driven emission from TMD semiconductors has been successfully demonstrated in a number of differently designed structures Taking advantage of the advanced technology of nitrides The technology of nitride LEDs has undergone intense development in recent years The epitaxial structure, schematically shown in Figure The TMD monolayers have been placed on top of (In,Ga)N μ-LEDs (see Figure The optical measurements were carried out in the two experimental configurations. Time-integrated studies were performed with the samples placed in the coldfinger cryostat. The emission of TMD monolayers has been measured in two different configurations. Primarily, the measurements have been carried out using the external laser excitation at 532 nm (2330 meV). Secondly, the luminescence was triggered from underneath with (In,Ga)N μ-LEDs. The spectra composed of sharp emission lines characteristic of a WSe2 monolayer have also been examined with photon correlation experiments. These experiments have been carried out in the Hanbury-Brown-Twiss configuration, under (In,Ga)N LED excitation, and required the device to be immersed in superfluid helium to minimize the undesirable effects of heating (when large currents are driven to trigger the (In,Ga)N LEDs). The optical microscopy images of four different, WSe 2 , MoSe 2 , WS 2 and MoS 2 monolayers deposited on top of individual (In,Ga)N μ-LEDs are illustrated in Figure Having established the overall functionality of our pseudo-electroluminescence devices, we now turn our attention to structures displaying sharp emission lines, possibly comprising the quantum emitter centers. Such centers preferentially appear in WSe 2 layers. Several μ-(In,Ga)N-LED/WSe 2 -monolayer devices have been fabricated and tested. The irregular shape of WSe 2 flakes has been found to favour the observation of sharp emis- sion lines. One may speculate this is due to the increased probability of the formation of the specific centers trapping the photoexcited carries at the edges of TMD flakes The representative example of a device displaying sharp emission lines contains a narrow, elongated flake of a WSe 2 monolayer. The device has been mounted on a cold finger of the cryostat, cooled down to 10 K and primarily tested under such conditions. After turning on the (In,Ga)N diodes, the emission spectra, in the spectral range 1590 -1775 meV, were measured when scanning the surface of the WSe 2 flake and its surrounding, with a spatial resolution of 2 μm. A map of the intensity of the PL integrated over the spectral range of 1625 -1640 meV is shown in Figure Notably, the low activation current (below 1 nA μm -2 ) of our device permits the measurements of the emission spectra of the WSe 2 monolayer over a broad range of current densities driving the (In,Ga)N diodes and thus enables the straightforward tuning of the excitation power to match the saturation point of a particular emitter. To illustrate this effect, we present a typical PL intensity of the emitter as a function of the current density (Figure To demonstrate the operation of our device as a singlephoton source, the device was immersed in a superfluid helium bath and cooled down to a temperature of 1.65 K. This resulted in an improved cooling efficiency of the device, enabling the application of higher diode currents, and at the same time gaining higher emission intensities of narrow emission lines. This allowed for the correlation measurements of the photon statistics emitted from the particular centre. In Figure The acquired photon coincidence correlation function, g 2 (τ ), is presented in Figure The amplitude of the correlation function at zero delay is significantly low (g 2 (0) = 0.22), which attests to the single-photon character of the emission. The photon coincidence correlation can also be used to determine the lifetime of the emitter state (Figure We also used the photon coincidence correlation experiment to verify the temporal stability of the emitter. Fluctuations of either the emitter intensity or the intensity of its excitation source would result in the effect of photon bunching. We observe no decrease of g 2 at large τ , confirming the good stability of the emission center and the μ-LED. We also observed good long-term stability of our device. During several days of measurements, we have observed no significant variation in the emission efficiency of the selected center. In conclusion, we have demonstrated that light emission from TMD monolayers can be efficiently generated when they are directly deposited on, and excited by the (In,Ga)N μ-LEDs. Our hybrid devices, 100 μm in size, can be seen as an optional route towards the effective, electrically driven generation of light from TMD semiconductors. The devices equipped with different MoS 2 , WSe 2 , WS 2 and MoSe 2 monolayers have been shown to be operational at low temperatures thanks to the unique design of our (In,Ga)N micro-LEDs. A proof of concept for a new, electrically driven source of single photons has been demonstrated with one of our (In,Ga)N μ-LEDs/WSe 2 -monolayer devices.