The Josephson-Anderson relation, valid for the incompressible Navier-Stokes solutions which describe flow around a solid body, instantaneously equates the power dissipated by drag to the flux of vorticity across the flow lines of the potential Euler solution considered by d'Alembert. Its derivation involves a decomposition of the velocity field into this background potential-flow field and a solenoidal field corresponding to the rotational wake behind the body, with the flux term describing transfer from the interaction energy between the two fields and into kinetic energy of the rotational flow. We establish the validity of the Josephson-Anderson relation for the weak solutions of the Euler equations obtained in the zero-viscosity limit, with one transfer term due to inviscid vorticity flux and the other due to a viscous skin-friction anomaly. Furthermore, we establish weak forms of the local balance equations for both interaction and rotational energies. We define nonlinear spatial fluxes of these energies and show that the asymptotic flux of interaction energy to the wall equals the anomalous skin-friction term in the Josephson-Anderson relation. However, when the Euler solution satisfies suitably the no-flow-through condition at the wall, then the anomalous term vanishes. In this case, we can show also that the asymptotic flux of rotational energy to the wall must vanish and we obtain in the rotational wake the Onsager-Duchon-Robert relation between viscous dissipation anomaly and inertial dissipation due to scale-cascade. In this way we establish a precise connection between the Josephson-Anderson relation and the Onsager theory of turbulence, and we provide a novel resolution of the d'Alembert paradox. 1. Introduction 1.1. Josephson-Anderson Relation for Flow Around a Solid Body. The Josephson-Anderson relation was first derived for voltage-drops in superconductors Recently, the detailed Josephson-Anderson relation was extended to incompressible Navier-Stokes solutions describing flow around a smooth, solid body expressing local conservation of the "vortex momentum" P ν ω = ρ Ω u ν ω dV. Here the pressure p ν ω is to be determined by the divergence-free constraint ∇ • u ν ω = 0 and ρ is mass density of the fluid. The formulation (1) of the incompressible Navier-Stokes equation gives a precise mathematical description of the rotational wake that develops behind the body. In this setting, the Josephson-Anderson relation follows by considering balance equations for the interaction energy between potential and rotational flow, E ν int = ρ Ω u ν ω • u φ dV, and the kinetic energy in the rotational flow itself, E ν ω = (ρ/2) Ω |u ν ω | 2 dV, that is: and Clearly, the space-integrated expression represents a transfer from the interaction energy to the energy of rotational flow, which is thereafter disposed by viscosity, and it can be interpreted physically in terms of the flux of vorticity across the streamlines of the potential flow The expression for T ν in the second line is obtained from the first by simple vector calculus identities and spatial integration by parts. As already remarked in 1.2. Prior Work. Our analysis here will depend essentially upon the approach and results in our preceding paper More precisely, these limits exist as distributional sections of the tangent and normal bundles, respectively, of the space-time manifold (∂B) T = ∂B × (0, T ), where we assume that B ⊂ R 3 is closed, bounded, and connected, the complement Ω = R 3 \B is also connected, and the common boundary ∂Ω = ∂B is a C ∞ manifold embedded in R 3 . See The second main result of and the isotropic pressure contribution p ω I. A turbulent cascade of rotational momentum is defined for the infinite-Re Euler solution by introducing fields Tω, = G * T ω , pω, = G * p ω spatially coarse-grained at length-scale with a standard mollifier G and a smooth window function η h, (x) = θ h, (d(x)) which =0 when distance to the boundary d(x) < h for h > . The turbulent flux of momentum toward the wall is thus defined by the quantity To justify this physical interpretation it is important to note that for sufficiently small < η(Ω), for Ω := {x ∈ Ω : d(x) < }, and for any x ∈ Ω , there exists a unique point π(x) ∈ ∂Ω such that Thus, ∇η h, (x) = θ h, (d(x))n(π(x)) is the product of an approximate delta function θ h, (d(x)) δ(d(x) -h) and the wall normal vector n(x) := n(π(x)) extended into the interior, so that (11) indeed measures momentum transfer toward the wall at distance h. See section 2 in which are non-vanishing on ∂Ω, and also sets E T and E N of extension operators where Ext ∈ E T is a continuous, linear map Ext : Ext * (∇η h, • Tω, + pω, ∇η h, ) = τ w in D ((∂B) T , T (∂B) T ) The final main result of with Ω := {x ∈ Ω : dist(x, ∂B) < } and the no-flow-through condition Then Theorem 3 of and for all Ext ∈ E N , Here ẼT is a class of natural extensions which consists of those which allows to infer that pω, ∇η h, gives vanishing contribution to the tangential wall stress in The present work will build on these these results for vortex momentum and extend them to rotational kinetic energy and to interaction energy of potential and rotational flow, obtaining the infinite Reynolds-number limit of the Josephson-Anderson relation in the process. Because kinetic energies are scalar quantities, we can simplify somewhat the approach of 1.3. Results on Interaction Energy and Josephson-Anderson Relation. We can now state the first main result of the present work, which is analogous to Theorem 1 of Theorem 1. We make the following assumptions (which are same as those in Theorem 1 of and that (p ν ω ) ν>0 strongly converges to p ω in L 1 ((0, T ), L 1 loc (Ω)) : Assume furthermore for some > 0 arbitrarily small Then, the limit (u ω , p ω ) is a weak solution of (9) and for this same sequence and for all Ext ∈ E, Furthermore, the local balance Eq.( then the Josephson-Anderson relation (6) holds also in the inviscid limit, in the sense that for all χ ∈ D((0, T )). Remark 1. Although we have so far presented our results by assuming a fluid velocity at infinity V which is time-independent, the proof presented below should allow any function V(t) which is C ∞ in time, corresponding to smooth translational motion of the body B. In that case the potential Euler solution u φ is of course also time-dependent. See footnote [91] in Remark 2. Just as in p ν ω uniformly bounded in L q ((0, T ), L q loc (Ω)) for some q > 1 (30) would suffice. See Our next result is analogous to Theorem 2 in Here τ (f, g) := (f g) -f ḡ for any functions f, g on Ω := {x ∈ Ω : d(x) > } and spatial flux of interaction energy is given by Jν The balance equation (31) holds also for the limiting fields (u ω , p ω ) of Theorem 1, as stated by the following Proposition, whose easy proof is left to the reader: Proposition 1. Under the assumptions ( where Jφ, is given by the formula (32) with ν → 0, (u ν ω , p ν ω ) → (u ω , p ω ). Our second main result is then: Theorem 2. Assume conditions ( for all Ext ∈ E. This theorem states that the spatial cascade of interaction energy to the wall equals the skin friction term in the inviscid Josephson-Anderson relation (29). Finally, Theorem 3 of for some > 0. Assume further the stronger near-wall boundedness property and the no-flow-through condition at the boundary in the sense Then, for all so that u φ • τ w = 0. Thus, an inviscid form of the balance Eq.( If convergence to the inviscid limit holds in the global L 2 -sense (28), then the Josephson-Anderson relation The implication is that cascade of interaction energy to the wall must vanish if the strong near-wall boundedness and no-flow-through conditions are satisfied. 1.4. Results on Energy Balance of the Rotational Flow. We next wish to show that results hold analogous to those of Duchon & Robert on turbulent kinetic energy balance and Assume further for some > 0 Then, along a suitable subsequence with Q, φ ≥ 0 for φ ≥ 0. Finally, an inviscid version of the balance equation (3) for rotational energy holds in the sense that for all φ ∈ D( Ω ×(0, T )), ψ = φ| ∂B , Remark 3. The result (44) is analogous to Proposition 4 of Duchon-Robert We have not shown that a Radon measure Q exists on Ω × (0, T ) such that the representation (46) holds for all φ ∈ D( Ω × (0, T )), but it is plausible to conjecture that this is true. If so, another natural question is whether Q((∂B) T ) > 0 or = 0. The latter question is related to the famous theorem of Kato → 0 for some constant c > 0. Under these specific assumptions, a dissipative Euler solution obtained in the inviscid limit plausibly must have Q((∂B) T ) > 0. Remark 4. Under the stronger assumptions of Theorem 4 then also the conclusions of Theorem 1 hold, so that one can combine Eq.( This combined quantity was termed the "relative kinetic energy" in Our next result is a close analogue of Theorem 2 but considering now the spatial flux of rotational flow energy. By applying spatial coarse-graining and windowing to Eq.( with spatial flux of rotational energy given by Jν The balance equation (48) holds also for the limiting fields (u ω , p ω ) of Theorem 4, as stated by the following easy Proposition, with proof left to the reader: Proposition 2. Under the assumptions (40)-(44) of Theorem 4, the following equation holds pointwise for x ∈ Ω and distributionally for t ∈ (0, T ): where Jω, is given by the formula (49) with ν → 0, (u ν ω , p ν ω ) → (u ω , p ω ). Our next main result then relates the spatial cascade of rotational energy toward the wall and the skin friction term in the inviscid Josephson-Anderson relation (29). However, the statement is more complex than our previous Theorem 2 for interaction energy, because it involves also the quantity η h, ∇ū ω, : τ (u ω , u ω ) which represents scale-cascade of rotational energy and as well the anomalous energy dissipation Q in the rotational wake. Thus, we find: Theorem 5. Let (u ω , p ω ) be the limiting weak solutions of the inviscid equation (9) obtained in Theorem 4. For 0 < < h, and ∀φ ∈ D( Ω × (0, T )) with The result (51) is not entirely satisfactory, because one would expect that the first and second terms on the lefthand side equal respectively the first and second terms on the righthand side, and not only when added together. We can obtain this physically more natural statement, but only by assuming conditions under which the first terms of each side of (51) vanish: Theorem 6. Let (u ω , p ω ) be the limiting weak solutions of the inviscid equation (9) obtained in Theorem 4, with u ω ∈ L 3 ((0, T ), for some > 0. Assume further the stronger near-wall boundedness property and the no-flow-through condition at the boundary in the sense Then u φ • τ w = 0 in D ((∂B) T ) and for all Ext ∈ E, In consequence, an inviscid form of the balance equation (3) for rotational energy holds distributionally, in the sense that for all φ ∈ D( Ω × (0, T )), and furthermore Remark 5. The results (55) and (56) of Theorem 6 correspond exactly to those in Proposition 2 of Duchon & Robert Remark 6. Theorem 6 implies a strong-weak uniqueness result for any viscosity weak solution u ω ∈ L ∞ ((0, T ), L 2 (Ω)). In fact, the quantity coincides with the "relative energy" used by Wiedemann This inequality follows from the result (45) of Theorem 4 by substituting φ = χ [0,t] χ η U R where χ [0,t] is an -smoothed characteristic function of [0, T ] and χ η U R is an η-smoothed characteristic function of U R = Ω ∩ B(0, R) and by then taking the limits → 0 and R → ∞. Therefore, if we use the consequence u φ • τ w = 0 of Theorem 6, then it easily follows from (58) that and thus by Gronwall inequality In particular, we see that if u 0 = u φ , then u(t) = u φ for a.e t ∈ [0, T ]. Note that (58) can be derived also when initial data u ν 0 → u φ strongly in L 2 (Ω), by taking φ = χ [0,t] χ η U R in (110) below for ν > 0, and then taking the successive limits → 0, ν → 0, and R → ∞. Thus, u φ • τ w = 0 implies strong-weak uniqueness even if the initial data satisfy u ν 0 = 0 at ∂Ω because of a thin boundary layer. We present briefly here some background material needed for our proofs. 2.1. Extension operators.. Extension operators of the type discussed in the introduction are defined more precisely by as linear and continuous operators, satisfying pointwise equality φ| (∂B) T = ψ. Here Ext is continuous in the sense that for a multi-index α = (α 1 , α 2 , α 3 , α 4 ) with |α| ≤ N , ∀(x, t) ∈ Ω × (0, T ) where denotes inequality with constant prefactor depending on the domain (∂B) T and the extension operator Ext. Here, (p N,m,i ) are the seminorms associated with the Fréchet space D((∂B) T ), where i ∈ I index a system of smooth charts ∪ i∈I (V i , φ i ), φ i : V i ⊂ (∂B) T → R 3 , and m is the index of a fundamental increasing sequence (K (i) m ) of compact subsets of φ i (V i ). See section 2 in by means of the explicit expression for any 0 < < η(Ω). Ext 0 is clearly linear in ψ by definition. φ is smooth by the smoothness of distance function d and projection π. One can easily obtain the bound (62) for Ext 0 by product rule and chain rule in calculus. We use extension operators to identify F ∈ D ((0, T ), C ∞ ( Ω)) with distributions on the space-time boundary (∂B) T . For each Ext ∈ E, we define as follows: for all ψ ∈ D((∂B) T ). The linearity and continuity properties of Ext * (F ) follow from those of Ext ∈ E, so that Ext * (F ) ∈ D ((∂B) T ). This identification of functions on the whole domain with distributions in D ((∂B) T ) depends of course on the choice of the extension operator Ext. The potential-flow solution u φ of the incompressible Euler equation is given by u φ = ∇φ for the velocity potential φ which solves the following Neumann problem for the Laplace equation: allowing for the moment a time-dependent external velocity field V(t) = V (t)x. The Euler pressure p φ is then obtained from the Bernoulli equation and is unique up to the arbitrary space-independent constant c(t). For our proofs below it is essential that φ ∈ C ∞ ( Ω×(0, T )) and thus possesses smoothness up to the boundary ∂Ω. In the general case of smoothly time-dependent velocity V(t), this property will depend upon differentiability of the solution of the Neumann problem (67) in the boundary data. Here, for simplicity, we shall consider only time-independent flow at infinity, so that the required smoothness follows from the following result: Proposition 3. The Neumann problem (67) of the Laplace equation for the case Proof. This result is essentially classical but we provide a proof here for completeness. By the mapping φ := φ -V x, any solution φ of ( From classical potential theory, a unique solution φ ∈ C 2 (Ω) ∩ C 1 ( Ω) of (69) exists. See e.g. It then suffices to show φ is smooth in a neighborhood of the boundary ∂Ω. Since B is compact in R 3 , B B(0, R) for some large R > 0. Define U := B(0, R) ∩ Ω, which has C ∞ smooth boundary ∂U = ∂Ω ∪ ∂B(0, R). For some sufficiently small r, we have Ω 2r ⊂ U . To further localize near the boundary, we consider a smooth non-increasing function θ : R → [0, 1] such that θ = 1 in (-∞, r] and 0 in [2r, +∞). We denote ξ(x) := θ(d(x)). As we reviewed in the introduction, the distance function By definition, f ∈ C ∞ ( Ū ), since φ is C ∞ in Ω and ∆ξ = ∇ξ = 0 in Ωr . Furthermore U f dV = 0. Since ∂U is C ∞ , we can deduce from boundary elliptic regularity theory, such as Theorem 4 in section 4.2 of for all integers k ≥ 1. Here, the inequalities above with constant prefactors depend only on Ω, R, r. The Sobolev embedding theorem implies φ ∈ C k ( Ωr ) for any integer k ≥ 0, and thus φ ∈ C ∞ ( Ωr ). Together with the interior smoothness of φ, we conclude that φ ∈ C ∞ ( Ω). 3.1. Proof of Theorem 1. We take an arbitrary φ ∈ D( Ω × (0, T )) and let ψ = φ| ∂B . Testing the interaction energy equation ( As φ ∈ D( Ω × (0, T )), there exists a compact subset It follows by Green's identity and stick b.c. for the velocity u ν that with τ ν w = ν∂u ν /∂n. We obtain an upper bound by Cauchy-Schwartz which vanishes as ν → 0. By Proposition 3, u φ is smooth everywhere in Ω×(0, T ) and tangential at the boundary ∂B, so that We can thus identify ψu φ | ∂B as a smooth section of the cotangent bundle D((∂B) T , T * (∂B) T ), via its graph as the natural embedding Thus by the convergence of skin friction Combining ( Note that for every extension operator Ext ∈ E, we can define for all ψ ∈ D((∂B) T ) with φ = Ext(ψ) ∈ D( Ω × (0, T )). Thus, as ν → 0 Just as in Theorem 1 and Lemma 1 of and as ν → 0 This implies that as ν → 0 All of the terms in (73) converge along the same sequence as ν → 0 to their inviscid limit, by very similar arguments as above. Thus, we obtain the local balance equation ( after smearing with χ ∈ D((0, T )). Because the velocity potential φ in Proposition 3 is harmonic in R 3 \B, it follows that |∇u φ | = O(|x| -3 ) as |x| → ∞; e.g. see and the righthand side is well-defined because u ω ∈ L 2 ((0, T ), L 2 (Ω)). Using also the convergence (7) of the skin friction τ ν w , we conclude that 3.2. Proof of Theorem 2. Fix an arbitrary ψ ∈ D((∂B) T ) and let φ = Ext(ψ) for some arbitrary Ext ∈ E. Testing the inviscid balance equation (33) of coarsegrained interaction energy against φ and rearranging yields Our strategy is to prove that all the terms on the right hand side of (86) converge as h, → 0 and then to compare with the balance (27) obtained in Theorem 1. The proof of the convergence relies on the following lemma: ) for i = 1, . . . k, with some integer k, and p i ∈ [1, ∞] and k i=1 1 pi = 1, for some arbitrarily small > 0, then for 0 < < h, and some compact set This is a simple extension of Lemma 2 in Note that u φ is smooth everywhere in (∂B) T and Thus, we obtain by Lemma 1 that and likewise Similarly, Thus, all the terms in (86) that contains these cumulants τ (u ω , u ω ), τ (u ω , u φ ), τ (u φ , u ω ), vanish in the limit as h, → 0. We deduce from these vanishing cumulants and Lemma 1 that To obtain a bound on the term containing ∇ • τ (u φ , u φ ), we use a general commutator estimate on gradients of cumulants from where δf (r; x) := f (x + r) -f (x) and the last bound follows from smoothness of u φ . Using this estimate and the L 2 -bound (82) on u ω , we see that the term in the equation ( From the L 1 convergence of all the integrands on the right hand side of the equation ( where the final equality follows by comparison with (27). This convergence for all ψ ∈ D ((∂B) T ) yields the stated result. 3.3. Proof of Theorem 3. The proof is similar to that for Theorem 3 in which is supported in Ω h+ \Ω h ⊂ Ω 3h ⊂ Ω . For all x ∈ Ω h+ \Ω h , a.e. t ∈ (0, T ), we write for all x ∈ Ω h+ \Ω h and |r| < < ρ. Then it follows that Obviously and thus u ∈ L 2 ((0, T ), L ∞ (Ω )). Bounds analogous to (100) hold for u ω , u φ . Recalling the definition of τ (u ω , u ω ) we obtain in similar fashion that and likewise that (103) Consider then some ψ ∈ D((∂B) T ) and Ext ∈ E, and let φ = Ext(ψ) ∈ D( Ω × (0, T )). Using the bounds above, together with θ h, (d(x)) Similarly, From the uniform bound (41), we can use the same type of diagonal argument as in we have by integration by parts and the no-slip condition on u ν that Next, from Theorem 1, we have The convergence of all of the rest of the terms in the equation (110) can be easily deduced by Lemma 1 in From this definition, the balance equation (45) trivially follows. Furthermore, Q defined by ( 4.2. Proof of Theorem 5. We take an arbitrary φ ∈ D( Ω×(0, T )) with ψ = φ| ∂B . Testing the inviscid coarse-grained balance equation (50) for energy in rotational flow against φ and rearranging yields as all others can be treated in the same way. Since u ω ∈ L 3 ((0, T ), L 3 (K φ )) from ( for any > 0. Thus, we obtain that (125) vanishes in the limit of h, → 0. Since the terms considered in (117)-(120) all converge in L 1 ((0, T ), L 1 (K φ )), we conclude from (116) that By comparison with (51), we obtain the equality (56) between inertial energy dissipation and zero-viscosity limit of viscous energy dissipation. ((0, T ), L (Ω)) distributionally, with (u ω , p ω ) a weak