The quest to govern the driving forces behind superconductivity and gain control over the superconducting transition temperature Tc is as old as the phenomenon itself. Microscopically, this requires a proper understanding of the evolution of electron-lattice interactions in their parameter space. We report such a controlled study on Tc in InxTe via fine-tuning the In stoichiometry x. We find that increasing x from 0.84 to 1 results in an enhancement of Tc from 1.3 K to 3.5 K accompanied by an increase of the electron-phonon coupling constant from 0.45 to 0.63. Employing first-principles calculations, we show that this behavior is driven by two factors, each taking the dominant role depending on x. For x 0.92, the major role is played by the density of electronic states at the Fermi level. Above x ∼ 0.92, the change in the density of states flattens while the enhancement of Tc continues. We attribute this to a systematic softening of lattice vibrations, amplifying the electron-phonon coupling, and hence, Tc. Superconductivity has been the subject of continuous research since its discovery more than a century ago in 1911 by Kammerling-Onnes Against this background, cubic InTe is an interesting superconductor: In is one of these valence-skipping elements found in the periodic table. At first glance, it should take its divalent state here, given the strong electron affinity of Te which tends to be in its 2-state. However, In 2+ is energetically unstable In this paper, to elucidate the microscopic mechanism that governs T c , we vary the In concentration 0.84 ≤ x ≤ 1 in In x Te. This enables a very fine-tuned and systematic control of T c from around 1.3 K to about 3.5 K. This composition control allows to study the interrelation of DOS, phonon frequencies, electron-phonon interaction, and lattice expansion by simply changing x. Here, we observe an interesting crossover in the nature of the superconductivity around x ∼ 0.92 where T c has increased to about 2.2 K: Initially this enhancement can be traced back to a concomitant increase of DOS with x as it is often seen in conventional superconductors. However, above x 0.92, the DOS enhancement becomes gradual and, hence, solely DOS-based arguments cannot explain the observed continued enhancement of T c up to x = 1. The only material parameter which keeps changing is the cubic InTe lattice constant a c , as presented in Fig. In x Te batches with 0.84 ≤ x ≤ 1 were grown by melting stoichiometric amounts of In and Te shots in evacuated quartz glass tubes at 950 • C for 24 -48 h, and subsequently quenching into water. The resulting tetragonal InTe material was ground again and approximately 400 mg powder of each batch were used for high-pressure synthesis (5 GPa, 600 • C, 1 h) to obtain the metastable superconducting phase of InTe with cubic structure at ambient conditions. X-ray diffraction patterns were taken on these batches with an in-house x-ray diffractometer (Rigaku). All batches with x > 0.85 were found to be single-phase cubic InTe (space group 225; F m 3m) with sharp reflection peaks, see Figs. The In concentration of all batches was checked by inductively coupled plasma atomic-emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES) chemical analyses. The results are close to the nominal values, cf. Section S2 in The superconducting critical temperatures T c of all samples were determined by temperature-dependent magnetization M (T ) measurements (magnetic property measurement system MPMS3 equipped with a 3 He insert, Quantum Design). Data were taken upon heating in B = 10 G after zero-field cooling to the base temperature. All samples exhibit sharp single superconducting transitions. The shielding fractions were roughly corrected for the demagnetization effect according to Ref. Resistivity ρ xx and specific heat c p were measured on selected samples by a standard four-probe technique and relaxation method, respectively (physical property measurement system PPMS equipped with a 3 He insert, Quantum Design). In these measurements, T c is either defined as the temperature at which the resistivity drops to zero, or as midpoint of the superconducting transition in the electronic specific heat divided by temperature c el /T , cf. Section S4 in The electronic and vibrational properties of InTe were calculated within density functional theory A schematic plot of the face-centered cubic structure of superconducting InTe is shown in Fig. Figure To shed light on this issue, we have developed a meanfield model which successfully reproduces our observations for x 0.92. The results are summarized in Fig. Figures Figure Density-of-states data are shown in Fig. The x dependences of the experimental Debye frequency ω D and its theoretical counterpart <ω> = 2/λ el-ph dωα 2 F (ω) Theoretical and experimental T c values are summarized in Fig. Finally, we will propose a possible scenario of this change in the superconductivity in In x Te. Below x ∼ 0.92, an interpretation of our data in terms of a mainly DOS-driven enhancement of λ el-ph and T c seems obvious, as suggested by the concomitant increase of DOS with x, when comparing Figs. 4(a), (b), and (d). However, above x ∼ 0.92, DOS flattens while λ el-ph and T c keep increasing. The continuous increase of λ el-ph is ascribed to the softening of phonons in the higher x region. A phenomenological explanation can be given when considering the observed expansion of the cubic lattice with x as shown in Fig. enhancement of superconductivity is discussed in literature To further test this hypothesis, we converted the "negative pressure" effect into physical pressure, which is shown with blue circle symbols in Fig. The total change of T c in In x Te for 0.84 ≤ x ≤ 1.00 corresponds to an applied physical pressure of p ∼ 3.75 GPa. To further contextualize this value, a comparison between the case of In x Te and several superconducting elements is shown in Section S5 in To summarize, we demonstrate that controlling and fine-tuning superconductivity can be achieved by simply changing the In concentration x in In x Te. For x < 0.92, the enhancement of the superconductivity can be straight-forwardly understood as a consequence of an enhanced density of states at the Fermi level. Upon further increasing x, this enhancement fades out and the observed continued increase of the superconducting T c cannot be attributed exclusively to a density-of-states effect any more. Therefore, we modeled this In concentration range theoretically and reproduced well the experimental data of density of states, electron-phonon coupling constant, and superconducting transition temperature for 0.92 < x ≤ 1 by solely changing the cubic lattice constant. Together with the outcome of our physical pressure experiment, our results suggest that the enhanced superconductivity in this system is closely related to the soft lattice of this simple chalcogenide. [27] As mentioned in Section II, we also synthesized one sample with a smaller x = 0.79 which contains additional minority phases. The Tc of its superconducting main phase fraction is comparable to the Tc of the sample with x = 0.84 suggesting that Tc does not further decrease due to the apparent border of stability of cubic InxTe in this x range. Another point to be checked is whether some Te ions move into In voids, forming antisite disorder which is conceivable especially at larger x. To address this issue we analyzed the peak intensities of the 200 main peak (2θ ∼ 29 • ) and the 111 peak (2θ ∼ 25 • ) as follows (cf., e.g., In turn F hkl of an fcc lattice (as it is the case in InTe) is given by with summation over all atoms in the unit cell. Here d j = (a b c) and b = (h k l) are the position and the reciprocal lattice vectors of the j th atom, respectively. In an fcc lattice, the conventional unit cell is built up by four atoms at d 1 = (0 0 0), d 2 = (0.5 0.5 0), d 3 = (0 0.5 0.5), and d 4 = (0.5 0 0.5) and F fcc hkl evaluates to 4 if h, k, and l are all even or all odd and 0 otherwise. InTe consists of two fcc lattices shifted by ∆ d = (0.5 0.5 0.5), i.e., d j Te = d j In + ∆ d. Hence, the total structure factor of InTe amounts to with the site occupancies g k and atomic form factors f k of k = In and Te. The exponential function evaluates to +1 when h + k + l is even and -1 when it is odd, hence, F hkl ∝ For the 111 and 200 reflections, the atomic form factors of In and Te are similar (within 5%). Therefore, for stoichiometric InTe g In = g Te = 1, the intensity of the "all odd" reflection 111 should be much smaller than 1 while the intensity of the "all even" reflection 200 should be much larger than 1 in agreement with the experimental observation that the 200 peak is strong and its neighboring 111 peak is weak. When changing x and, hence, g In < g Te = 1, the "all odd" peak intensity should increase. This is again in qualitative agreement with Fig. To quantify this, we calculated the intensity ratio of these two peaks for our In x Te samples. If Te remains on its regular lattice sites in In-deficient In x Te, i.e., g Te = 1 and assuming f In ∼ = f Te then the intensity ratio is approximately (with F fcc 111 = F fcc 200 = 4) . We note, that in reality the intensity ratio will not become exactly 0 even for g In = x = 1 because the atomic form factors are similar but not identical. Hence, the 111 reflection exists in stoichiometric InTe, although possibly not visible depending on the x-ray intensity of the diffractometer used. The quadratic dependence in Eq. 6 holds in our case as shown in Fig. We also note, that strictly speaking one has to take into account the integrated intensities here. This is neglected because both peaks are close to each other and at small 2θ values where the instrument broadening effect does not cause big differences. Figure x ≤ 1 displayed as c el /T vs T . These were measured in B = 0 T (blue data) and 2 T (red). Background (addenda) data were taken in each case before the sample was mounted and duly subtracted from the total signal sample + addenda. A magnetic field of 2 T is sufficient to suppress the superconductivity in In x Te and, hence, the in-field data represents the normal-state specific heat c p . The following equation was fitted to the normal-state c p (not shown): with c el = γ n T and c ph = A 3 T 3 + A 5 T 5 denoting the electronic and phononic contributions to c p , respectively. We added a T 5 term to the conventional Debye-T 3 law to account for anharmonic effects which allowed better fit results. This approach yields the Sommerfeld parameter γ n and from the coefficient A 3 of the Debye term via The tabulated BCS specific-heat data given in Apparently the electronic specific heat of all samples is reproduced well within the BCS theory. The most interesting point here is that the BCS coupling strength in In x Te changes to the Drude-Sommerfeld theory, the normal-state electronic specific-heat coefficient γ n is related to the density of states (DOS) via (cf., e.g., To properly convert the units and taking into account that in the BCS theory of superconductivity, the DOS is counted for each spin direction separately (cf., e.g., with the elemental charge e, the unit-cell volume V 0 , and the molar volume In the latter, t denotes the number of formula units per unit cell: t = 4 for cubic InTe. However, the DOS obtained from this formula cannot be readily compared to theoretical data which yields the bare band-structure density of states without correlation effects. Hence, the experimental value has to be corrected for these effects. To do so, the experimental electronphonon constant λ is calculated via the McMillan formula As in our theoretical calculations, we used μ * = 0.10 for the repulsive Coulomb potential to determine λ el-ph . The final formula to estimate the band-structure DOS data from c p becomes (cf., e.g., in units of states / eV and for one spin direction. To obtain the experimental counterpart ω D to the average phonon frequency <ω>, we used the Allen-Dynes formula with the experimental results for T c and λ el-ph . Al, Cd, Sn, Zn The transition temperatures are normalized to the maximum T 0 c ∼ 3.51 K in In x Te (x = 1.00; blue circles, from magnetization measurements) and to the ambient-pressure T c values in case of the elemental superconductors. The highest pressure applied to In x Te by reducing x corresponds to ∼ 3.75 GPa and is indicated by the vertical dashed line in Fig. For some elemental superconductors there are no literature data available up to this pressure explaining why the experimental data of these stop at lower pressure. We also note that at a certain physical pressure T c (p) often tends to fall below the approximate linear evolution. The normalized data for elemental superconductors shown in Fig. 