Recent discoveries of superconductivity in various hydrides at high pressures have shown that a critical temperature of superconductivity Tc can reach near-room-temperature values 1-3 . However, experimental studies are severely limited by high-pressure conditions, and electrical transport measurements have long been the primary technique for detecting superconductivity in hydrides. Herein, we dramatically changed the protocol for magnetic measurements and probed the trapped magnetic flux in two near room-temperature superconductors H3S and LaH10. The specific behavior of the trapped flux generated under zero-field-cooled and filed-cooled conditions unequivocally proved superconductivity in these materials. In addition, we determined Tc, critical currents and their temperature dependence, the lower critical field Hc1, London penetration depth, full penetration field, pinning properties and flux creep. We revealed, that the absence of pronounced Meissner effect is associated with the very strong pinning of vortices inside samples. Contrary to traditional magnetic susceptibility measurements, magnetic response from the trapped flux is not affected by the background signal of the bulky diamond anvil cell due to the absence of external magnetic fields. This approach can be a powerful tool not only for a routine screening of new superconducting materials at high pressures, but also for studying multiphase samples or samples having a low superconducting fraction at ambient pressure. Current search for room-temperature superconductivity has progressed due to advances in high-pressure studies. A decade ago, superconductivity was as assumed to be a solely low-temperature phenomenon with the highest Tc of approximately 130 K found in mercury Although extreme pressure conditions render these record high-Tc superconductors unsuitable for technological applications, the study of high-temperature superconductivity in various phases of hydrogen-rich compounds has highlighted the fundamental problem of the ultimate value of Tc possible in a superconductor. Latest theoretical predictions suggest that very high multi-megabar pressures are required for superconductivity substantially above room temperature However, high pressures necessitate tiny micrometer-sized samples and drastically limit the available techniques for experimental study of superconductivity. When cooled below its critical temperature, a superconductor exhibits two characteristic properties: it abruptly loses electrical resistance and generates superconducting current loops that cancel the imposed magnetic field within its interior (Meissner effect). These two fundamental effects should be observed experimentally for the ultimate evidence of superconductivity in a newly discovered material. Electrical transport measurements have been successfully adopted in the a multi-megabar pressure range and have become the primary experimental technique to detect superconductivity Two techniques are currently used for magnetic susceptibility measurements at high pressures: a double modulation ac technique with a system of coils Im-3m-H3S sample pressurized at P 155±5 GPa showed pronounced superconducting transition in ZFC m(T) magnetization measurements with a Tc 195 K, 18 months after its synthesis (see Figure 1. Trapped flux measurements. The magnetization of a type-II superconductor is irreversible due to the pinning of vortices if the superconductor contains defects, such as dislocations, precipitates, and phase boundaries, which interact with the flux lines penetrating the superconductor above Hc1. We created a trapped flux in Im-3m-H3S under ZFC and FC conditions (run 1 and 2). ZFC mode consisted of cooling the sample at zero field from TTc to the target magnetization temperature TMTc, switching on an applied magnetic field HM and gradually decreasing of the magnetic field to 0 T (see details in Methods section). In FC mode, the sample was cooled from TTc at applied magnetic field HM, which was gradually decreased to 0 T at the target lowest temperature TM. The temperature-dependencies of the trapped magnetic moment mtrap(T) generated in H3S under ZFC and FC conditions at different HM and measured between 10 and 250 K at zero field clearly showed a superconducting transition with a Tc ~195 K (see Figure Figure Contrary to the FC mode, the ZFC magnetization provided valuable data for estimating Hp, when the applied magnetic field starts to penetrate the sample The observed trapped magnetic moment in the superconducting Im-3m-H3S phase saturated under ZFC and FC conditions at different values of HM. We qualitatively interpreted this behavior of magnetization process in terms of the classical critical state Bean model The trapped magnetic moment became saturated (m ) at 0HM 1.7 T under ZFC conditions and at 0HM 0.8 T under FC conditions, and did not vary with further increase in 0HM up to 6 T, which was the highest applied magnetic field in the experiment (see Figure The observed saturation is defined by the maximum value of the trapped magnetic field in the sample and corresponds to the critical current density jc that can be achieved in a superconductor. We also estimated Hc1, which is proportional to Hp using the relation H = H . The demagnetization factor N was derived from the absolute value of m, which was the difference in ZFC m(T) magnetization measurements between the normal and superconducting states. For the thin diskshaped Im-3m-H3S sample having d 85 μm and h 2.8 μm (estimated lower and upper limits of h were 2.1 μm and 3.1 μm), the demagnetization correction was 8.5 (7.7-11.4 for the estimated approximate limits of h, see details in Methods section). Thus, 0Hc1(10 K) was approximately 0.36 T (0.32-0.48 T). The obtained value of 0Hp 42 mT (and consequently, the retrieved value of Hc1) was noticeably lower than 95 mT derived from the virgin curves of hysteretic magnetization loops in classical m(H) measurements to lie approximately between the values observed in the two types of measurements. Using the data of electrical resistance measurements under high magnetic fields 2. Critical current density. In addition to the determination of fundamental characteristics Tc and L, we deduced another important characteristics of a superconductor from measured m (μ H , T) data -the critical current density over a wide temperature range. According to the Bean critical state model The measured value of m The ultimate critical current density is limited by the depairing currents , where φ is the magnetic flux quantum. Substituting the estimated values of L and  we obtained jd 410 13 A m -2 . The ratio between jc(0) and jd provided additional information. The values of jc(0)/jd being approximately in the order of 10 -2 -10 -1 is conventionally observed in low-temperature superconductors, which characterized by relatively low Ginzburg-Landau parameter  of 20 and strong pinning that stems from the interaction of vortices with extended defects The different factors influencing the flux pinning in type-II superconductors are divided into two main types: δTc and δl 3. Pinning and thermally activated motion of vortices. The kinetics of the trapped magnetic moment demonstrates extremely slow rate of flux creep even at temperatures in vicinity of Tc, at which thermal fluctuations must be significantly higher (see Figure On account of strong pinning of vortices in H3S sample the amount of the trapped flux solely depended on HM at which the flux was generated and the maximum temperature at which the sample was exposed after the magnetization step (see Figure 4. Trapped flux in lanthanum superhydrides. The trapped magnetic flux was further probed in the lanthanum-hydrogen system. The ZFC curve of m(T) data measured at an applied magnetic field of 10 mT demonstrate an extended transition with the onset of Tc 200 K at 120±5 GPa (Figure Contrarily, the trapped flux method demonstrates more pronounced superconducting transitions in this sample. In addition to the detection of the transition at 200 K in the C2/m-LaH10 phase, it revealed a superconducting state of another phase below 70 K. Superconductivity with a Tc 70 K was previously observed in several samples prepared from La and H2 (taken in a large deficiency) at approximately 150-178 GPa by four-probe electrical transport measurements and could be related to LaHx (where 3  x  10) Furthermore, we clearly demonstrated that the observed superconducting transitions in the m (T) data collected at 1205 GPa (cycles I and II in Figure and it has been considered as the proof for the bulk superconductivity. However, a magnitude of the Meissner effect in type-II superconductors substantially varies in experiments from almost complete expulsion in pinning-free conventional type-II superconductors In contrast to standard m(T) magnetization measurements at low magnetic fields, which demonstrate the shielding of an external magnetic field in the Meissner state, the registered value of the trapped magnetic moment is substantially larger (see Figure We used the same samples, which were studied in our previous work Magnetization measurements m(T) were performed using the S700X SQUID magnetometer by Cryogenic Limited, and a miniature DAC was attached to a 140-mm-long straw made of Kapton polyimide film, which was specially designed to minimize end effects. The position of the sample relative to the pickup coil of SQUID magnetometer was determined using the ferromagnetic signal from a small steel piece with a size of approximately 14010025 m 3 attached directly to the rhenium gasket surrounding the sample. The precision of the centering procedure is approximately 0.2 mm. The superconducting transition in H3S and LaH10 was probed by ZFC and FC m(T) measurements at 4 mT and 10 mT, respectively. A Tc 195 K in the Im-3m-H3S phase, which was determined as the offset of the diamagnetic transition on the ZFC curves of m(T), was in good agreement with the values estimated in our previous measurements The trapped flux was generated in two different protocols under ZFC (run 1) and FC (run 2) conditions. The 