We study the pairing of fermions by an interaction consisting of a Hubbard repulsion, mimicking a screened Coulomb potential, and a dynamical phonon-mediated attraction. For such interaction, the gap equation allows even-and odd-frequency solutions ∆e and ∆o. We show that odd-frequency pairing does not develop within the Eliashberg approximation due to over-critical pair-breaking from the self-energy. When vertex corrections are included, the pairing interaction gets stronger, and ∆o can develop. We argue that even in this case keeping the self-energy is still a must as it cancels out the thermal piece in the gap equation. We further argue that ∆o is not affected by Hubbard repulsion and for strong repulsion is comparable to a reduced ∆e. The resulting superconducting state is a superposition ∆e ± i∆o, which spontaneously breaks the time-reversal symmetry, despite that the pairing symmetry is an ordinary s-wave. When two electrons in a superconductor form a Cooper pair with gap function ∆(r, t), they must obey the Pauli principle. This iron fact enables a systematic symmetry classification of superconducting order parameters. Interestingly, the Pauli principle can be obeyed even when ∆(r, t) is odd under time exchange, ∆ o (r, t) = -∆ o (r, -t), Refs. However, in a regular bulk superconductor at zero field, OF superconductivity remains mostly elusive despite being intensively searched for over the last three decades. From a theoretical perspective, there are three obstacles to OF superconductivity. First, an OF solution ∆ o (ω m ) does not emerge at weak coupling because the vanishing of ∆ o (0) implies that there is no enhancement of the pairing susceptibility by the Cooper logarithm. Second, OF pairing is eliminated by the development of evenfrequency (EF) superconductivity, which reduces the kernel in the OF pairing channel While the strong-coupling requirement cannot be avoided, we argue there are ways to overcome the two other obstacles. In this work we revisit them in the context of phonon-mediated superconductivity, by studying a model of spin-1/2 fermions with an effective dynamical interaction This model captures the competition between Hubbard repulsion, parametrized by f , and phonon-mediated attraction Phonon-mediated OF superconductivity has been analyzed before, most notably by A. Balatsky and co-workers (see The model of Eq. ( We first analyze OF superconductivity in the model of Eq. (1) on its own, assuming the EF superconductivity is not present. We prove a compact and fairly general theorem that OF superconductivity cannot develop within the canonical Eliashberg approximation, in which the interaction that gives rise to the pairing is exactly the same one that determines the fermionic self-energy. More specifically, we show that thermal contributions from the static interaction to the pairing vertex Φ o (ω m ) and the self-energy Σ(ω m ) are exactly the same and cancel out in the gap equation for ∆ o (ω m ) = Φ o (ω m )/(1+Σ(ω m )/ω m ), but the non-thermal piece is stronger for the self-energy, and this does not allow OF superconductivity to develop. We then go beyond this approximation, include vertex corrections, and show that the dressed interaction in the particle-particle channel becomes different from the one in the particle-hole channel. We show that in our model the pairing interaction gets relatively stronger and, as a result, OF superconductivity does develop at strong enough coupling. This is in agreement with Ref. We compute the onset temperature for OF pairing, T c , and show that a non-zero OF condensate develops below T c . We argue, however, that the self-energy cannot be neglected entirely as thermal contributions to the pairing vertex and the self-energy still cancel out even when vertex corrections are present. We next analyze the interplay between OF and EF superconductivity. It has been shown previously This paper is structured as follows: In Sec. II we introduce the model and the gap equation for the EF and OF components. In Sec. III A we momentarily neglect the self-energy and analyze the appearance of the OF solution for the gap once the coupling exceeds a certain threshold. Furthermore, we discuss the special role of the thermal term in the gap equation. In Sec. III B we include the self-energy, analyze the set of coupled Eliashberg equations for the pairing vertex and the self-energy and show that the thermal term gets cancelled in the gap equation, and that there is no solution for a non-zero OF gap function. We then go beyond the Eliashberg approximation, evaluate vertex corrections at T = 0 and show that they increase the interaction in the particle-particle channel compared to that in the particlehole channel and make OF superconductivity possible at strong enough coupling. In Sec. III C we analyze vertex corrections at a finite T > 0 and show that the thermal term in the gap equation still cancels out. In Sec. IV we discuss the interplay between EF and OF superconductivity: First, in Sec. IV A, we analyze the suppression of the EF solution by a static repulsion and show that once the coupling λ exceeds a critical value, EF superconductivity exists for arbitrary strong Hubbard repulsion f . Then, in Sec. IV B, we compare the couplings and critical temperatures for EF and OF solutions. Finally, in Sec. V, we discuss the co-existence of EF and OF gap functions and argue that in such a state timereversal invariance is spontaneously broken. Conclusion and outlook are presented in Sec. VI. Technical details are relegated to the Appendices. We consider a system of spin-1/2 particles that interact via a dynamical interaction where Ω m is a bosonic Matsubara frequency, ρ is the density of states, λ a dimensionless coupling constant, f a dimensionless measure of the Hubbard repulsion, and Ω 1 is a typical phonon energy scale, e.g., Debye energy. To distinguish between T = 0 and a finite T in the calculations on the Matsubara axis, we will label fermionic and bosonic frequencies as ω, Ω in the T → 0 limit, and as ω m , Ω m at a finite T . We will measure all frequencies in units of Ω 1 and set Ω 1 ≡ 1. The dynamical interaction (2) gives rise to perturbations in both the particle-particle and particle-hole channels. Without vertex corrections (the terms that dress V (Ω m )), it yields a set of two coupled Eliashberg equations for the dynamical pairing vertex Φ(ω) and the selfenergy Σ(ω). These two equations can be combined into a closed-form equation for the dynamical gap function ∆(ω) = Φ(ω)/(1 + Σ(ω)/ω) (see, e.g., Ref. where the second term in the numerator on the r.h.s. is the contribution coming from the self-energy. The dimensionless UV cutoff Λ is generally of order of the Fermi energy in units of Ω 1 . For most metals Λ 1, but for low-density systems, Λ 1. We will study both Λ 1 and Λ 1. Since we consider a momentum-independent interaction for simplicity, the resulting gap function ∆(ω) has s-wave symmetry; more general interaction potentials can also lead to d-wave states etc. The gap equation can be re-expressed by introducing even and odd components: ∆ e (ω) = ∆ e (-ω), ∆ o (ω) = -∆ o (-ω) ) (5) Viewed separately, ∆ e (ω) and ∆ o (ω) can be made real. Observe that the Hubbard repulsion f is present in χ e , but drops out of χ o and that the self-energy contribution (the last term on the r.h.s. of Eq. ( in the sign convention such that G -1 (k, ω) = i (ω + Σ(ω)) -ξ(k), with ξ(k) the electron dispersion. For simplicity, we work with a parabolic electron dispersion, ξ k = |k| 2 /2m -μ, which can be linearized near the Fermi surface. Eq. ( We argue that this is an artefact. The issue can be traced back to the applicability of the canonical Eliashberg-type treatment of the self-energy for a model with frequency-independent Hubbard repulsion. We recall that the Eliashberg self-energy is obtained by integrating over ξ(k) in infinite limits, before integrating over frequency. This procedure is well justified when the interaction drops starting from frequencies below the cutoff, which is the case for the electron-phonon term, but it is not justified for the frequency-independent Hubbard term. Indeed, if we compute the self-energy to first order in f by integrating over frequency first, we find that it is purely static and just renormalizes the chemical potential. The implication is that the dynamical -2λf ω term in the self-energy is a parasitic one. It can be eliminated by either keeping the cutoff in the bosonic propagator, but adding a ghost counter-term to the Eliashberg selfenergy, or by imposing a symmetric cutoff on the integral over fermionic ω rather than bosonic ω -ω. This is what we did in Eqs. ( In this section we solve the gap equation for ∆ o , assuming that ∆ e is absent. It is instructive to first solve the gap equation for ∆ o (ω) without fermionic self-energy. We remind that the selfenergy accounts for the second term in the numerator on the r.h.s. of Eq. ( . This equation can be solved numerically by iteration. At small λ, there is no non-zero solution for ∆ o (ω) because the pairing kernel is not logarithmically singular. However at large enough λ, exceeding the critical one, λ o c , which depends on Λ, the solution does exist. We show λ o c as a function of Λ in Fig. In frequencies, passes through a maximum at a higher ω, and at even higher ω decreases as 1/ω 3 . This last behavior can be obtained analytically by extracting ω from the kernel on the r.h.s. of ( We next move to finite T . To obtain the critical temperature T o c for OF pairing, it is convenient to treat the linearized gap equation as a matrix problem. A straightforward discretization of Eq. ( where ω m = (2m + 1)πT are (positive) Matsubara frequencies and K is the matrix kernel At the critical temperature T o c , the largest eigenvalue κ(T ) of the matrix K is equal to 1. It would be natural to expect that κ(T ) is a decreasing function of T , such that κ(T ) < 1 at T > T o c and κ(T ) > 1 at T < T o c . However, the numerical analysis yields a different result: κ(T ) increases with T (the green line in Fig. The exotic behavior of κ(T ) is easy to understand from Eq. ( We present a numerical check of this behavior in Fig. III C that this cancellation holds beyond the Eliashberg approximation. This cancellation has a drastic effect on where OF superconductivity develops in the (λ, T ) phase diagram, which we discuss in detail in the next Section. As a preview, in Fig. B. Role of self-energy at T = 0 We now discuss the self-energy in more detail. Our first point is that when this term is kept, there is no nonzero solution of the full Eliashberg gap equation ( where K T n,m is the transpose of the OF matrix kernel in Eq. which is impossible. When vertex corrections are included, the interplay between the attraction in the odd-frequency pairing channel and pair-breaking by the self-energy becomes more nuanced as the interaction in the particle-particle channel, χ pp , and the one in the particle-hole channel, χ ph , generally become different. Keeping the two interactions as separate variables in the gap equation at T = 0, we obtain the gap equation in the form ∆ o (ω) = ( , where For our purposes, this equation has to be projected to odd-frequency channel. That vertex corrections make χ pp and χ ph nonequivalent can be seen already in perturbation theory, by collecting vertex corrections for these two interactions to leading order in λ. We present the diagrams in Fig. The key point is that there are two vertex correction diagrams for the pairing vertex but only one for the selfenergy. In both cases, the integration over two fermionic and one bosonic propagator in the vertex correction piece in Fig. Hence To simplify the analysis, below we treat α < 1 as a phenomenological parameter. In Fig. We note in passing that for quantum-critical OF pairing by a gapless boson (the limit Ω 1 → 0, λ → ∞, λΩ 2 1 tends to a constant), the system is at the boundary towards OF pairing already without vertex corrections. In this case OF superconductivity emerges already at infinitesimally small 1 -α (Ref. Also, the authors of Ref. C. Role of self-energy at T > 0: cancellation of thermal terms in the gap equation So far we discussed vertex corrections at T = 0. The situation at a finite T is a bit more tricky. Namely, at a finite T we have to distinguish between vertex renormalization of the interaction at a finite frequency transfer Ω m and at zero frequency Ω m = 0. The contributions from the latter to the pairing vertex and the self-energy are For interactions with Ω m = 0, computations to the leading (first) order in λ yield a different result: there is no factor of 2 difference between vertex corrections to χ pp (0) and χ ph (0). To see this, in Fig. To summarize, inclusion of vertex corrections with proper treatment of the thermal terms makes OF superconductivity possible. However, the condition λ > λ o c = O(1) is required, and λ o c is large if the vertex corrections are weak. The conditions for OF pairing are easier to fulfill in a quantum-critical regime, where the coupling is large. As we said in the Introduction, a particle-particle interaction of the form of Eq. ( For generic f ≤ 1, ∆ e is much larger than ∆ o because of the Cooper logarithm, and for λ < λ o c is the only su- perconducting solution at T = 0. When the Hubbard repulsion f increases, ∆ e is suppressed. At weak coupling, a phase transition into the normal state occurs when f reaches a critical value f c . For Λ 1 and α = 0, this critical value is given by An exemplary (T -f ) phase diagram for EF superconductivity is shown in Fig. At a first glance the vanishing of T e c at f > f c implies that for such f EF superconductivity is not a competitor to OF superconductivity, and to get OF pairing one just needs to find a way to increase f . However, the actual situation is more complex. The reason is that, as we found earlier, OF superconductivity only holds when λ > λ o c , and λ o c is at least O(1), while Eq. ( at which f c diverges. We have verified Eq. ( We see from Eq. ( These observations suggest that at T = 0 both EF and OF gap functions may be non-zero. Our next goal is to find such a mixed state and determine the relative phase factor between the U (1) order parameters ∆ o and ∆ e . We show an exemplary phase diagram in the (T, f ) plane in Fig. As we will demonstrate below, the gap function in the mixed state at T = 0 is of the form This agrees with Ref. A superconducting state with ∆(ω) from Eq. ( Taken separately, ∆ e (ω) and ∆ o (ω) are time-reversal invariant (we recall that ∆ o is odd under time permutation, but even under time reversal To see that the relative phase between ∆ e and ∆ o is ±π/2, we consider the gap equation at T = 0 without self-energy correction and assume that the gap function is and that ∆ o is smaller than ∆ e . To leading order in ∆ o , the gap equation in the OF channel then takes the form One can easily verify that φ can be either zero or ±π/2. For φ = 0, the expression in parentheses reduces to 1 -∆ 2 e /((ω ) 2 + ∆ 2 e ), which reduces χ o . For φ = ±π/2, the expression in parentheses becomes ±i, in which case there is suppression. We conclude therefore that the mixed state with φ = ±π/2 is indeed preferential. We note in passing that ∆ = ∆ e ± i∆ o also realized when the time-reversal symmetry is broken explicitly by applying a magnetic field, as shown in Ref. A spontaneous breaking of time-reversal symmetry can be detected experimentally via muon spin relaxation or Kerr rotation In this work we considered OF superconductivity in a model of fermions with an interaction potential which contains a static Hubbard repulsion and a dynamical phonon-mediated attraction. We critically reexamined the three foes which usually prevent OF superconductivity: the necessity for strong coupling, the self-energy effect and the suppression by EF superconductivity. We have found that the strong coupling requirement cannot be avoided, but there are ways to overcome the other two obstacles. The self-energy does prevent OF superconductivity in the Eliashberg approximation, if the same interaction determines the pairing and the fermionic selfenergy. We argued that vertex corrections change this balance and make OF pairing possible. At the same time, the self-energy cannot be simply neglected as with and without vertex corrections it leads to cancellation of the thermal terms in the gap equation. Consequently, we find an OF state, which is stable below T o c down to zero temperature, and not the reentrant behavior observed in previous works. The suppression of OF pairing by pre-existing EF superconductivity remains a problem when the Fermi energy is much larger than the typical phonon energy scale. However, when these scales become comparable, the critical temperatures for EF and OF orders are comparable, and OF superconducting order can co-exist with EF superconductivity. We have shown that a mixed state with the gap function ∆ e (ω) ± i∆ o (ω) can be realized in this case. This state spontaneously breaks the time-reversal invariance. It has been argued that induced OF superconducting state may exhibit a paramagnetic Meissner effect (see Ref. Our analysis of the OF state was performed by studying gap functions on the Matsubara axis. On the other hand, the measurable physical properties of the system are determined by the gap function on the real axis. Since the OF gap vanishes at ω = 0, the density of states of an OF superconductor is qualitatively similar to that of an EF gapless superconductor in the presence of magnetic impurities Note added: shortly after this paper was posted, a work appeared where and we use notations k = (ω, k), p = (ω , p), l = (ω, l) and the conventions with ξ(k) the electron dispersion, which can be linearized near the Fermi surface. We will focus on d = 2 for concreteness, and comment on the analogous 3d results along the way. Without the vertex corrections, Γ = 0, the gap equation (3) directly follows from (B1) by rewriting the definition of the gap, ∆(ω) = Φ(ω)/(1 + Σ(ω)/ω) as and evaluating the momentum integrals in (B1). We now evaluate the vertex correction Γ, using bare Green's functions (no Σ), and working in the limit Λ → ∞ for simplicity. Shifting the integration variables, Γ can be written as We expand the dispersion as and integrate over ξ(l) in infinite limits. Such an expansion is legitimate as for Ω ≡ ω -ω E F the relevant contributions come from small angle scattering where |q| |k|, |p|. We call Γ 1 the part ∝ f and the remainder Γ 2 . To compute Γ 1 , we need to perform the frequency integral first, since the integral is not absolutely convergent. The computation is standard; it is the same as for the polarization function, since the part ∼ f is shortrange. We obtain The second term in Γ 1 contains |q|. To find the renormalization of the interactions which enter the Eliashberg equations, we can take the s-wave part of this term. I.e., we write where k and p are on the Fermi surface. We then average In d = 3, one obtains a correction ∼ |Ω|/E F without the logarithm. In the limit E F 1, the dynamical correction is small, in accordance with Migdal's theorem To compute Γ 2 , it is easier to perform the integral over dispersion ξ first. This is allowed because the extra frequency-dependence renders the integral absolutely convergent. The result is This term depends on ω and ω separately. I.e., it depends on both ω -ω and ω + ω . However, after taking the s-wave part it will scale as |Ω|/E F similar to (B10). Collecting the results, the vertex correction reads The static part reads 2λf , as stated in the main text. In Fig. As discussed in the main text, at a finite temperature we can isolate two thermal contributions from the second-order self-energy diagram. However, we need to subtract the contribution shown in Fig. where p , p ⊥ are the components of p parallel and perpendicular to k, respectively, and m is an effective mass. Expanding ξ(k + p + l) in the same way, for instance the integral over p vanishes for zero frequency transfer: if the integral is evaluated by contour integration in infinite limits, both poles are in the same half-plane. Note that such an argument does not work if only one of the transferred frequencies is non-zero, while the other frequency is integrated over, since in this case the additional frequency integral must be evaluated before the momentum integrals, yielding non-zero. As a result, the thermal contributions to Φ and Σ in Eq. (B1) read (with ω = ω and after evaluating momentum integrals): In Fig. As seen in Fig. To derive the action of the time-reversal transformation T on gap functions on the Matsubara axis, we first derive the action on real-frequency gap functions. We work with retarded and advanced gap functions in the time domain at zero temperature, which are defined as with |0 the interacting ground state, and The magnetic response of a superconductor is determined by the energy-cost of phase fluctuations. Given a spatially homogeneous mean-field solution ∆ with fluctuating phase θ(x), the momentum-space action for θ is S θ ∼ dq n s |q| 2 θ(q)θ(-q), (E1) where we neglected temporal fluctuations of θ. As shown in previous works This is a manifestly positive expression. Therefore, the Meissner effect is diamagnetic in both EF and OF cases. If we simply evaluate Eq. (E4) in the OF state at T = 0, we run into a problem: for ∆(ω) ∼ ω as ω → 0 (see Sec. III A), the integral is logarithmically divergent at small frequencies, as already observed in Ref. For the given ω-linear gap function, the logarithmic singularity of n s will be cut off by finite momenta q. Therefore, the action for the phase field (E4) is modified to S θ ∼ dq n s (q)|q| 2 θ(q)θ(-q), n s (q) ∼ log(k F /|q|) . The Meissner response can be obtained by coupling the system to an electromagnetic field A. In the conventional case of Eq. (E4), the constant n s acts a a mass term for A, which leads to a penetration depth λ ∼ 1/ √ n s . Taken at face value, the logarithmic n s (q) obtained in (E4) then implies a super-exponential decay of an external magnetic field in a superconductor, B(x) ∼ exp(-x log(x)). However, we do not regard this as an observable effect, but rather as an artifact of the mean-field approximation: the logarithmic divergence of n s (q) likely signals that in the full theory with fluctuations included, the gap function ∆(ω) scales as ω a , with a = 1. As discussed above, in this case n s is finite, and the Meissner response is a conventional. m K T n,m /(1 + m K T n,m ) < 1, hence a non-zero ∆ o (ω m ) has to satisfy the strict inequality max n