We develop a comprehensive theory of twisted bilayer magnetism. Starting from the firstprinciples calculations of two-dimensional honeycomb magnet CrI3, we construct the generic spin models that represent a broad class of twisted bilayer magnetic systems. Using Monte-Carlo method, we discover a variety of non-collinear magnetic orders and topological magnons that have been overlooked in the previous theoretical and experimental studies. As a function of the twist angle, the collinear magnetic order undergoes the phase transitions to the non-collinear order and the magnetic domain phase. In the magnetic domain phase, we find that the spatially varying interlayer coupling produces the magnetic skyrmions even in the absence of the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interactions. In addition, we describe the critical phenomena of the magnetic phase transitions by constructing the field theoretical model of the moiré magnet. Our continuum model well-explains the nature of the phase transitions observed in the numerical simulations. Finally, we classify the topological properties of the magnon excitations. The magnons in each phases are characterized by the distinct mass gaps with different physical origins. In the collinear ferromagnetic order, the higher-order topological magnonic insulator phase occurs. It serves as a unique example of the higher-order topological phase in magnonic system, since it does not require non-collinear order or asymmetric form of the interactions. In the magnetic domain phases, the magnons are localized along the domain wall and form one-dimensional topological edge mode. As the closed domain walls deform to a open network, the confined edge mode extends to form a network model of the topological magnons. After the discovery of superconductivity and correlated insulator phases in twisted bilayer graphene Although there have been several studies in the theory of moiré magnetism, most of the previous works have relied on either continuum approximation or the effective model, which ignores the mutual interactions between the layers. Here, we provide comprehensive theory of the moiré magnetism by fully taking account of the lattice structure and mutual spin interactions between the two layers. Our study offers important guidance in future experiments of moiré magnetism by providing the following theoretical breakthroughs: (i) In our model, the mutual spin interactions between the layers are fully taken into account in the Monte-Carlo simulations. The resulting magnetic ground states are different from the previous predictions in substrate models. (ii) The implementation of the full lattice model explains the magnetic structures beyond the small twist angle regime, where the continuum models have focused on. (iii) We provide the topological band theory of the magnonic excitations, based on the full lattice model and magnetic symmetry groups. The main goal of this work is to unveil the non-collinear magnetic orders of twisted bilayer magnet CrI 3 and provide a general theoretical framework that can be extended to various two-dimensional magnetic materials with different magnetic interactions and symmetries. By controlling the twist angle, we show that the collinear magnetic order in the aligned bilayer undergoes the phase transitions to the non-collinear domain, magnetic domain, and skyrmion domain phases. The developement of the non-collinear magnetic order is based on the geometric property of a moiré superlattice that different local stacking regions coexist within a single moiré unit cell. In particular, our theory explains the recent experimental observation of the magnetic domains of CrI 3 considering the general spin model with different sets of the spin interactions and anisotropies, we explicitly show that our theory of non-collinear phase transition is applicable to other magnetic materials such as XXZ-type and Ising type magnets. Chromium trihalide family represented by CrI 3 has gathered great interests for the controllable twodimensional magnetism . The bilayer CrI 3 exhibits the magnetic phase transitions from the interlayer ferromagnetism (FM) to the interlayer antiferromagnet (AFM) accompanied by the structural phase transitions of stacking patterns Another important hallmark of honeycomb magnet is the topological magnons associated with Dirac magnons This paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we consider the generic spin model of the twisted bilayer magnets. Based on the first-principles calculations, the ef-fective spin model of twisted bilayer CrI 3 is constructed. In Sec. III, using Monte Carlo simulation, we clarify the magnetic phase transitions to the non-collinear orders as a function of the twist angle. In the small twist angles, we find the emergence of the non-collinear domain, magnetic domain, and skyrmion phases respectively. In particular, the skyrmion phase is stabilized in the absence of the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interactions (DMI) due to the peculiar spatial distributions of the interlayer couplings. We compare our results with previous experimental results. In Sec. IV, we construct the generic continuum field theoretical model and compare it with the results obtained from the numerical Monte Carlo simulation. In Sec. V, we use the linear spin-wave theory to describe the magnon excitations of each phase. We show that the distinct topological invariants characterize both collinear and non-collinear order found in Sec III. In the collinear phase, the higher-order topological magnonic insulator phase is found. In the non-collinear phase, the first-order topology manifests as the edge modes localized on the domain walls. In Sec. VI, we conclude our study by providing future research directions with the discussion of various van der Waals magnetic materials. Starting from AA-stacked honeycomb bilayer of CrI 3 (point group D 3d ), the rotation along one of the hexagonal center [see Fig. For example, when d shift = 0, the superlattice belongs to the point group D 3 by retaining the two rotational symmetry C 3z and C 2y along z and y axis, but the twist breaks S 6z about the z axis. This is different from the previously well-studied cases of the AA stacked twisted bilayer graphene (point group D 6 ) Heisenberg spin model Spins at each site of the twisted bilayer [Fig. (2.1) where J > 0 represents the constant ferromagnetic intralayer Heisenberg interactions for nearest-neighbor J0(meV) J s 1 ( ) J c 1 ( ) l0( Å) l s 1 ( ) l c 1 ( ) q s 1 ( Å-1 ) q c 1 ( ) -0.1 -0.5 0.1 0.1 0.3 0.6 (0.7, 0) (1.73, 1) spins. D z is the single-ion anisotropy Based on the first-principles calculation, we generally write down the continuum form of the C 3z -rotational symmetric interlayer couplings, which is given as, where r = (x i -x j , y i -y j ) is the parallel displacement vector between the two spins at site i and j. d 0 = 6.7 Å is the interlayer distance. r ij = |r | 2 + d 2 0 . r * = 7.3 Å is the characteristic length scale. Due to the C 3z symmetry, the wave vectors, q s a and q c a , are related by 120 • rotation as q s,c 1 = R(-2π/3)q s,c 2 = R(-4π/3)q s,c 3 where R(θ) is the rotation matrix. The detailed values of the parameters are summarized in Table where x i represents the coordinate of the spins on the top layer. While the average interlayer coupling ( i J ⊥ (x i )) is found to be ferromagnetic, we find the well-defined local antiferromagnetic patches (red triangles inside green circles) on the ferromagnetic background regions (blue triangles). Furthermore, the antiferromagnetic patches can be divided into the three distinct regions depending on how the local field acts on different sublattices: (i) both A and B sublattices are antiferromagnetic, (ii) only A sublattice are antiferromagnetic, while B sublattice is ferromagnetic, and (iii) the opposite of the region (ii). This sublattice selective local field has not been found in previous studies. In the microscopic model, the origin of the sublattice selection is attributed to the iodine atoms that break the C 2z symmetry, which exchanges A and B sublattice degree of the freedom. In the next sections, we show that the sublattice selective interaction plays a crucial role in determining the magnetic ground state. After constructing the microscopic spin model, we perform the classical Monte-Carlo simulations (See Appendix C for the detailed methods). Figure where S i represents a spin vector at each site i, and N is the number of spins within a single moiré unit cell. We first focus on the case of CrI 3 , which corresponds to the intralayer coupling J ≈ 2.2-2.7meV As the twist angle is further lowered (θ 2 • ), we find the additional non-collinear ordered phases distinguished from the NCD phase, which we refer to as magnetic do-main (MD) phase. π-spin flip occurs in one of the layers across the domain wall [Fig. We identify two more magnetic ground states, as the intralayer coupling is decreased. In the small intralayer coupling limit (J → 0), the magnetic ground state is disordered due to the loss of intralayer coherence. In the intermediate intralayer coupling strength between the MD phase and the disordered phase, the skyrmion (SK) magnetic domain phase is additionally distinguished from the MD phase. Along the one-dimensional domain wall, the orientation of the azimuthal spins winds through the equator in the Bloch sphere [See Fig. where A represents the two dimensional area including the interior and the exterior of the domain. In the SK phase, one of the layer carries the non-trivial skyrmion number, while the spins of the other layer form nearly ferromagnet (trivial skyrmion number) [See Fig. After we have established the magnetic phase diagram of the nearly Heisenberg spin models, we describes the scenario in the generic spin models. Fig. After establishing the magnetic phase diagram, we construct the low-energy effective field theory that describes the critical behaviors and the magnetic phase transitions. When the spatial variation of the local spin vector vary slow enough (∇n t,b (x) 1), the spin model in Eq. (2.1) can be well-approximated by the following continuum free energy functional: where n l (x) is a normalized spin vector for l-th layer. J and D z are the same magnetic interactions given in Eq. (2.1), and J⊥ is the coarse grained value of interlayer coupling, J ⊥ ij . Using this free energy functional, we now describe the field theoretical model of the magnetic phase transitions of each magnetic phases. The NCD phase is characterized by the antiferromagnetic spin tilting to the azimuthal direction [Fig. where the dependence of the tilting angle of the spin, Φ t (ρ) = Φ 0 (1 -ρ/R), is evaluated up to the linear-order as a function of the distance, ρ, from the center of the domain. R is the size of the non-collinear magnetic domain. Inserting the above ansatz of the NCD phase into Eq. (4.1), we obtain the expression of the free energy functional up to the quartic order as a function of the tilting angle Φ 0 as, N ncd (θ) is the number of tilted spins in the non-collinear magnetic domain, which scales as a function of the twist angle as, N ncd (θ) ∼ 1/θ 2 . J c (θ) is the characteristic energy scale given as, J c (θ) = cN ncd (θ)( J⊥ -D z ), and a, b, c are O(1) constant (See Appendix D 1 for the details of the analytical calculation). We consider the Landau theory of the second-order phase transition as a function of Φ 0 . As the twist angle decreases from large value, the sign of the coefficient of the quadratic term changes from positive to negative, which develops the non-trivial free energy minimum (Φ 0 = 0) [See Fig. Fig. In contrast to the NCD phase, the MD phase has the spin flipping in one of the layer, and the other layer is nearly ferromagnetically ordered [see Fig. where N md (θ) is the number of spins in the magnetic domain, which scales as a function of the twist angle as N md (θ) ≈ 1 3θ 2 . In the large twist angle, the free energy has only a trivial minimum with l = R, i.e. a magnetic state without magnetic domains. When θ becomes small, however, F develops a nontrivial minimum for l < R [See Fig. The non-collinearity of the magnetic ground state plays a crucial role in the description of the magnon excitations. Especially, the Dirac magnons that exists in the honeycomb magnet is the subject of great interest for the realization of the topological phases. In this section, we now turn our attention to the magnon excitations. We construct the linear spin wave theory of each magnetic phases we uncovered in Sec. III. (See Appendix E for the detailed methods). In the collinear FM phase, the U (1)-spin rotation symmetry along the collinear axis exists (U (1) c ), and it allows to decouple the Hilbert space of the magnon Hamiltonian into the particle-hole sectors as, where each sector is composed of the single-particle magnon excitations carrying spin ±1 respect to the collinear axis respectively. Each subsector can be diagonalized as H ± = ±U DU † | ± . The corresponding eigenstates satisfy the unitary condition, as fermionic eigenstates do. Thus, the system described by the equivalent tight-binding model and the topological classification is equivalent to the (spinless) electronic systems In the absence of the interlayer coupling, each layer with the collinear FM phase exhibits the gapless Dirac magnons at K and K points, which is analogous to electronic band structure of the monolayer graphene. Accordingly, the magnon spectrum in each valley possesses the linearized Dirac Hamiltonian with the four fold degeneracy (the total four Dirac cones from top and bottom layers). Under a proper rotation of the basis, the corresponding magnon Hamiltonian can be expressed as where σ represents the rotated Pauli matrix for the sublattice degree of the freedom. K M ( K M ) represents K(K ) point in the moiré BZ). In general, the addition of arbitrarily small perturbation on the off-diagonal term in Eq. (5.2) gaps out the Dirac magnons. The topological protection of the Dirac magnons requires the decoupling between the particle-hole sector (U (1) c symmetry), the decoupling between different valleys (U (1) v symmetry), and C 2z T (effective space-time inversion), where T is the effective time-reversal symmetry of magnons (T : S y → -S y ). Within the spin-space group, the coexistence of the three symmetries ({U (1) c , U (1) v , C 2z T }) provides the Z 2 -valued topological protection of the Dirac magnons, associated with the quantized π-Berry phase. As the finite interlayer exchange interaction is turned on, Fig. On the other hands, in generic large angles, the finite valley coupling breaks U (1) v symmetry. Fig. where n Γ and n M represents the number of the occupied bands in C 2y = 1 space below the massive Dirac points at Γ and C 2y -symmetric M point respectively. In the presence of the additional C 2x symmetry which the magnonic Hamiltonian approximately preserves, we can additionally define the Zak phase, ν ± , calculated along C 2y symmetric line for C 2y = ±1 subsector. The mirror winding number ν ± can be evaluated by , ), A ± is the non-Abelian Berry connection evaluated from the ±-sector, respectively. P indicates the path ordering, and P± is the projection operator to the occupied mirror ±-subspace. The physical manifestation of the non-trivial Zak phase is the quantized polarization along C 2y -symmetric line in the BZ, analogous to the Su-Schrieffer-Heeger model The quantized polarization manifests as the topological magnon modes at the C 2y -symmetric corners, characterizing the HOTMI phase [See Fig. In the NCD phase, the spin tilting to the azimuthal directions explicitly breaks U (1) c symmetry, and it contributes to the finite pairing gap in the BdG Hamiltonian of the magnons. The amplitude of the magnon gap is gradually enhanced as the spin tilting to the horizontal direction is increased in the deep NCD phase region. As the twist angle is further lowered, in the MD phase, the local spins of deep inside and far outside of the domain can be approximated as the collinear interlayer antiferromagnet and ferromagnet respectively, where π-spin flip locally restores U (1) c symmetry both inside and outside of the magnetic domain. Due to the restoration of U (1) c symmetry, the magnon gap vanishes. On the other hand, CrI 3 still possesses the additional inversion symmetry preserving next-neareast neighbor intralayer DMI where A ij = ±|D|ν ij ẑ represent the DMI, where the sign alternates for the sublattice degree of freedom. ν ij = +1(-1) for the clockwise (counter-clockwise) circulation respect to the honeycomb center. The addition of the small DMI does not suppress the local FM order, but it immediately generates the mass gap of Dirac magnons by breaking the time-reversal symmetry (of the magnonic Hamiltonian). The magnonic Hamiltonian of each layer corresponds to the Haldane model of the electronic system, which is characterized by the non-trivial Chern number In the moiré BZ, the topological edge mode realizes as the extensive number of the flat band (mid gap states within the massive Dirac fermions), since each domain wall magnon is isolated from one another. On the other hands, near the disordered phase by gradually decreasing the intralayer coupling strength, the spin configurations of the domains are connected each other, and the domain wall form extended network (See Fig. In this work, we have constructed the theory of moiré magnetism. Starting from the first-principles calculations, we construct the effective spin model of twisted bilayer CrI 3 . Our theory based on full lattice model descriptions reveal various non-collinear order and topological magnon phases that have been overlooked in previous studies. In particular, the interlayer coupling, which intrinsically lacks C 2z symmetry, plays an important role by stabilizing the magnetic skyrmion phase and HOTMI phase without DMI. We also classify the topological magnon phases, and the topological phases sensitively depend on the underlying symmetry of the magnetic order. The measurement of the change of the magnonic excitations can be the fingerprints of the exotic non-collinear orders, and it can be experimentally detected through the thin-film neutron scattering experiment Our theory can be readily generalized to the other family of the transition metal trihalides such as CrCl 3 and CrBr 3 . Broader classes of two-dimensional magnetic materials are promising candidates for twisted magnetism. For example, the family of A 2 TMO 3 compounds (A=Na,Li, TM=transition metal), which contains many monoclinic honeycomb antiferromagnets Another natural generalization of our work is to consider the twisted multiple-layer magnets. For instance, in the case of twisted triple layers, enhanced interlayer coupling is expected to promote the non-collinearity and unconventional magnetic phases. In the case of the twisted double bilayer where a 1 = a 0 (1, 0, 0) and a 2 = a 0 (1/2, √ 3/2, 0) are primitive lattice vectors of a triangular lattice and x i and y i are integers and a 0 = 6.86 Å is the lattice length of the honeycomb lattice. The coordinates of the two Cr atoms in the unit cell are given as, An untwisted AA-stacked bilayer with θ m,n = 0 and L ⊥ = (0, 0, 0) has the same point group symmetry D 3d as with the monolayer. A twist by θ m,n = 0 makes interlayer Cr and I atoms misaligned, so it breaks S 6z of the original AAstacked bilayer in addition to the inversion symmetry. As a result, the point group of the twisted bilayer is classified by D 3 point group symmetry or the subgroups of D 3 , which includes C 3 , C 2 , and C 1 , depending on the lateral shift vector L ⊥ . There exist four different cases depending on the lateral shifts: (i) If L ⊥ = (0, 0, 0) or the lateral shift by the finite L ⊥ makes some hexagonal centers of Cr atoms from both layers overlapped on x -y plane, then the twisted bilayer has the D 3 point group symmetry since both C 2y and C 3z are preserved. (ii) If L ⊥ makes two Cr atom sites from the top and the bottom layers overlap on x -y plane, then the twisted bilayer has the C 3 point group symmetry since the new rotation center for C 3z appears at this position. (iii) If L ⊥ x, the twisted bilayer has the C 2 point group symmetry since C 2y symmetry is preserved. (iv) Finally, if L ⊥ does not satisfy any of the conditions above, it breaks both C 2y and C 3z , then the twisted bilayer has the trivial point group symmetry of C 1 . Table We now determine the precise form of Eq. (B4) based on the density-functional theory computations. We used the density functional theory package 'openMX' Figure Figure Figure The observations made in Sec. C 2 suggest that the NCD state can be characterized by the tilting angle while the MD state can be characterized by the width of the domain wall. Those quantities change systematically as a function of J and D z so they can be utilized as "order parameters" for the magnetic phase transitions. In addition to the usual ferromagnetic order parameter, we compute those three order parameters to investigate the magnetic phase transitions quantitatively. The ferromagnetic order parameter is computed numerically as where n i is a spin vector at site i and N is the number of spins in the moiré unit cell. The tilting angle order parameter is computed numerically as where Φ i = cos -1 n z i / (n x i ) 2 + (n y i ) 2 is the polar angle of n i . The order parameter for the domain-wall width is computed numerically as where l and R are the width of the domain-wall and the radius of the whole domain, respectively. Here, the order parameter is defined as the ratio of l and R since both l and R increase trivially as the twist angle θ decreases but their ratio is not scaled with θ so can utilized to keep track of the evolution of MD state. If the shape of the domain is approximated as a disk [see Fig. where Φ 0 stands for the maximum value of the tilting angles, R is the width of the non-collinear magnetic domain, and ρ is a radial coordinate measured from the center of the domain. φ t = 0 and φ b = -π have been taken without loss of generality (φ t -φ b = π in general). Inserting Eq. (D2) into Eq. (D1), we obtain The integrals for J and D z are computed straightforwardly as The integral for J ⊥ (ρ, φ) depends on the form of J ⊥ (ρ, φ) and cannot be evaluated in general. However, when the spin vector fields vary smoothly, i.e. Φ 0 /R 1, we may obtain the generic functional dependence on J ⊥ (ρ, φ) by approximating the integral as where J⊥ is the average value of J ⊥ (ρ, φ) given as Inserting Eqs. (D4) and (D5) into Eq. (D3), we finally obtain where N ncd (θ) is the number of tilted spins in the non-collinear magnetic domain, which is given as N ncd (θ) = πR 2 /A 0 . The free energy F (Φ 0 ) explains the FM-NCD phase transition within a standard Landau theory of the phase transition. As Φ 0 increases, F is increased by the first two terms while decreased by the last term. When F is dominated by the last term, which can be achieved by either decreasing J and/or D z or increasing N ncd , a continuous phase transition occurs and F has a non-trivial minimum with a non-zero Φ 0 . Near the phase transition, Φ 0 would be small, and we may expand F about Φ 0 = 0 as where F 0 is a free energy in the ferromagnetic phase given as We rewrite F more simply as where J c (θ) is given by and a, b, c are given by Lastly, we compute another order parameter for the NCD-MD phase transition, which is the ferromagnetic order parameter defined in Eq. (C3). Inserting Eqs. (D20) and (D21) into Eq. (D15b), we find where M 2,y is zero. The integrals can be done straightforwardly, and the results are given as where f md = 6N md /N stands for the fraction of the spins in the domains among all spins in the moiré unit cell. M 2 is the same with NCD phase, which is given as Summing both contributions, we finally obtain M as where M y is zero. Finally, we obtain the ferromagnetic order parameter M = |M| as 3. Scaling analysis for the phase transitions (D32a) where N (θ) 4/θ 2 is the total number of spins inside the moiré unit cell (valid when θ 1), and a, b, c numerical constants [see Sec. D 1 for the derivation]. As shown in the phase diagram of Fig. Figure where f md ≈ 0.55 stands for the fraction of spins in the magnetic domain and the numerical constant is found from Eq. (D25). Indeed, as shown in Fig. where H ijμν and A iμ represent a Heisenberg interaction and a single-ion anisotropy energy. i, j is the index represents the unit cell. μ, ν represent the different sites within a unit cell. α = x, y, z is the index that represent the direction In the case of the collinear magnetic order, the system possesses the additional U (1)-spin rotation symmetry(U (1) c ) along the easy axis. As the pairing term in the BdG Hamiltonian vanishes due to the U (1) c symmetry, the Bogoliubovde Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian can be decoupled into the particle and hole sectors as, where H s=±1 indicates the particle (hole) sector of the magnons carrying the spin ±1 along the collinear axis. When the particle and the hole sectors are decoupled, we can choose the basis of the eigenfunctions, which satisfy the unitary condition, U † k U k = I. The unitary eigenstates of the magnons follow the same topological classifications of the spinless fermions. In the presence of the space-time inversion symmetry (PT ), where T : S y → -S y is the effective time-reversal symmetry of the magnons, ensures Z 2 quantization of the Berry phase along a closed loop in the BZ (AI class in the Altland-Zirnbauer classification). The non-trivial π-Berry phase along a closed loop topologically protects the odd number of the Dirac cones of the magnonic systems in the interior of the loop. In the commensurate angles of the twisted bilayer systems, the Dirac cones from the top layer and the bottom layers are located at the same point in the folded BZ . Point group symmetries of CrI3 twisted bilayer structures defined in Eq. (A6). "+ (-)" indicates that the corresponding symmetry is present (absent).