The direct calculation of magnetoelastic wave dispersion in layered media is presented using an efficient, accurate computational technique. The governing, coupled equations for elasticity and magnetism, the Navier and Landau-Lifshitz equations, respectively, are linearized to form a quadratic eigenvalue problem that determines a complex web of wavenumber-frequency dispersion branches and their corresponding mode profiles. Numerical discretization of the eigenvalue problem via a spectral collocation method (SCM) is employed to determine the complete dispersion maps for both a single, finite-thickness magnetic layer and a finite magnetic-nonmagnetic double-layer. The SCM, previously used to study elastic waves in non-magnetic media, is fast, accurate, and adaptable to a variety of sample configurations and geometries. Emphasis is placed on the extremely high frequency regimes being accessed in ultrafast magnetism experiments. The dispersion maps and modes provide insight into how energy propagates through the coupled system, including how energy can be transferred between elastic-and magnetic-dominated waves as well as between different layers. The numerical computations for a single layer are further understood by a simplified analytical calculation in the high-frequency, exchange-dominated regime where the resonance condition required for energy exchange (an anticrossing) between quasi-elastic and quasi-magnetic dispersion branches is determined. Nonresonant interactions are shown to be well approximated by the dispersion of uncoupled elastic and magnetic waves. The methods and results provide fundamental theoretical tools to model and understand current and future magnetic devices powering spintronic innovation. The coupling between a material's vibrational and spin degrees of freedom is a fundamental feature of magnetic materials. While the existence of this coupling has been known for over a century Magnetoelastic coupling Similarly, there are many physical applications for calculating the dispersion of elastic waves in a layered material, all of which are made more general by the introduction of magnetic coupling. One application is nondestructive evaluation, where elastic waves are excited in a material in order to identify defects or other internal properties Past analytical studies of magnetoelastic waves have primarily focused on either the bulk d → ∞ or thin film kd 1 limits, where k is the angular wavenumber and d is the material thickness A traditional method for determining the dispersion of elastic waves in layered media is the general matrix method (GMM), which involves a complex exponential profile ansatz in the direction of layering Despite the typical layered geometry of magnetic devices and the high frequencies now being accessed, there are few developed theoretical tools for investigating magnetoelastic wave propagation and little in the way of comprehensive descriptions for these common configurations and operating regimes. In this paper, we directly compute wavenumber-frequency dispersion maps and the corresponding vertical mode profiles of magnetoelastic, layered materials using the spectral collocation method (SCM), an accurate, fast numerical method to compute dispersion maps and mode profiles for single and multiple, finite thickness magnetic and elastic layers. A recent innovation for calculating elastic dispersion in nonmagnetic materials, the SCM utilizes a discretization at special points (zeros of Chebyshev polynomials) and differentiation matrices for derivatives in the direction perpendicular to the layering in order to achieve efficient, accurate computation For magnetoelastic boundary value problems, other discretization methods such as traditional finite differences applied to N equispaced grid points, exhibit errors that decrease algebraically O(N -n ) for some n. Usually, n = 2 is used in practice. The SCM method benefits from its superior accuracy because interpolation at the nonuniform Chebyshev points is almost optimal in a certain sense, achieving errors that decrease faster than any power of N for smooth functions Our numerical computations are complemented by an analytical calculation in the EHF, exchange-dominated regime that is used to explicitly determine magnetoelastic dispersion curves in a single, finite thickness ferromagnetic layer. We find that crossings between phonon and magnon dispersion branches can be resonant or nonresonant in the presence of magnetoelastic coupling. If the vertical mode profiles are of the same order, they are resonant and an anticrossing appears. Anticrossings result in the transfer of energy between quasi-elastic and quasi-magnetic dispersion branches with a well-defined gap width linearly proportional to the magnetoelastic coupling. If the waves are nonresonant, no anticrossing occurs, and the dispersion branches intersect with very weak modification that is proportional to the square of the magnetoelastic coupling. Our calculations also show that the magnetoelastic gap width decreases with increasing frequency and decreasing wave number. Our work is also motivated by recent experiments where an ultrafast X-ray free electron laser (XFEL) was used to excite and measure far-from-equilibrium conditions in layered magnetic samples The outline of this work is as follows. After introducing the Navier and Landau-Lifshitz equations for elasticity and magnetism in Sec. II, their linearization about a perpendicularly magnetized, static configuration in Sec. III results in a quadratic eigenvalue problem in differential form. An asymptotic analysis of this eigenvalue problem, neglecting dipole effects, for weak magnetoelastic coupling in Sec. IV determines the resonance condition for anticrossings and phonon-magnon energy transfer. In Sec. V, we introduce the spectral collocation method (SCM) and use it in Sec. VI to compute dispersion maps for single and double layer films of various thicknesses. Finally, we conclude with a discussion in Sec. VII. This section summarizes the equations for magnetoelastic waves mostly following The energy density of a magnetoelastic material consists of the following components These terms represent, from left to right, the energy density due to dipole (demagnetization) effects, exchange interactions, the Zeeman effect (applied field), anisotropy energy, elastic potential, kinetic energy, and magnetoelastic coupling. For a material with magnetization vector M , the first three energy density quantities are calculated as where A ex is the exchange stiffness coefficient, M s is the saturation magnetization of the material, μ 0 = 4π ×10 -7 H/m is the magnetic permeability of free space, H dip is the induced field by the magnet, which is computed here under the magnetostatic approximation of Maxwell's equations by assuming that wave speeds are much smaller than the speed of light (see eq. ( In the materials of interest here, the intrinsic crystalline anisotropy is weaker than the other energy terms In the interest of simplicity, we will ignore it but its incorporation into the computation of magnetoelastic dispersion is straightforward because it is a local, undifferentiated effective field term. Under Hooke's Law, which assumes a linear relationship between stress and strain, the elastic energy density is calculated as where σ is the stress tensor and ε is the strain tensor. Kinetic energy for the displacement u is calculated as where ρ is the material density. The coupling energy for a cubic material is calculated as an expansion of anisotropy and elastic energy around the strain ε and the magnetization M as The coupling coefficients in an isotropic medium are defined as B 1 = -3μλ 100 and B 2 = -3μλ 111 , where μ is the Lamé coefficient and λ 100 and λ 111 are dimensionless coupling coefficients for a particular material. The total energy in the magnetic material occupying the region U is calculated by a volume integral of the energy density, Equilibrium states of a magnetoelastic material are local minima of the total energy E (8). The relaxation from a non-equilibrium state of the magnetization vector M (x, t), defined within the region U ⊂ R 3 is governed by the Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert equation where α is the nondimensional Gilbert damping parameter and |γ| = 1.76 × 10 -11 rad/Ts is the gyromagnetic ratio for an electron. One important property of ( The dipole field H dip , also known as the stray field or the demagnetizing field, is obtained by solving Maxwell's equations where B is the total magnetic induction field The appropriate boundary conditions are where ∂U is the boundary of U . The exchange field is due to the property that ferromagnetic materials tend to align spins along a common direction where is the exchange length of the material defined as 2 = 2A ex /(μ 0 M 2 s ). Physically, represents the length scale where exchange effects are dominant. For lengths much larger than , dipole effects dominate. Although the materials considered here are magnetically cubic, we will assume that the effect of this anisotropy on the total effective field is small enough so that it can be ignored. Finally, the effective field due to magnetoelastic coupling can be calculated from the coupling energy density The boundary conditions for magnetism are free spin, i.e. where n is the unit vector normal to the surface, and ∇ n • M represents the divergence in the direction of n. Recently, inertial effects have been observed in magnetic samples driven at 0.4-1.0 THz frequencies The elastic displacement u in the linear regime is governed by the equation With constant temperature, the variational derivative of energy is the stress tensor δE δε = σ. We assume an isotropic elastic material and neglect acoustic damping. Then, Hooke's law for the total stress σ in terms of the strain ε depends on two parameters, σ = λ tr (ε)I + 2με. The constants λ and μ are the Lamé moduli with units of stress. For small displacements, we can in general approximate the total strain tensor ε as Combining the above equations, we obtain a forced Navier equation for homogeneous, linear, isotropic magnetoelastic deformations (18) For an elastic material, the boundary conditions at the surface are where f surf is the traction force per unit surface (or stress) at the boundary. We consider two magnetic and nonmagnetic materials. They are chosen for their use in recent experiments, their low magnetic damping in the case of YIG, and their relatively large magnetoelastic coupling. One of the double layers we study consists of 100 nm of Si 3 N 4 supporting a 50 nm layer of nickel. See Fig. Ni Parameter values for the four materials studied in this paper. The parameter values for Si2N3 were chosen from the ranges given by In this paper, we assume that all materials are elastically isotropic, and that the magnetic lattice is cubic. We also assume that the material is infinitely wide in the transverse x 1 and x 2 directions, the displacements are small and therefore linear, and the waves of interest propagate in the x 1 -direction. We will limit ourselves to materials with either a single magnetic layer, or a single magnetic layer on a nonmagnetic substrate, with the magnetic layer in both cases vertically localized to 0 < x 3 < d. The nondimensional Gilbert damping parameter α is as low as 3 × 10 -5 for YIG We assume that a magnetic field H 0 is applied in the x 3 -direction, perpendicular to the plane of the material, so that H 0 = 0 0 H 0 T . The magnetic field is sufficiently strong that, in the absence of waves, the magnetization is saturated in the x 3 -direction. This occurs when H 0 ≥ M s . In order to ensure saturation magnetization in the vertical direction, we choose μ 0 H 0 = 0.25 T for the calculations involving YIG, and μ 0 H 0 = 0.65 T for the calcluations involving nickel. It is important to stress that nearly all of these assumptions can be relaxed without reducing the effectiveness of the SCM approach, which is very versatile. SCM can be readily generalized to situations with other geometries, more complex elastic or magnetic anisotropies We look for linear wave solutions of the form Inserting ( - where a prime denotes differentiation with respect to x 3 . Here, f i /ρ should also be understood to be divided by the common exponential factor. For small oscillations, we linearize the magnetic waves around the vertical saturation magnetization as where m 1 , m 2 M s . Since we are only interested in real dispersion relations for ω and k, we will neglect the damping in Given the linearization In order to determine the field due to dipole effects H dip we must first solve the magnetostatic Maxwell equations We follow For the wave-only term M = m in for the dipole field -k 2 g ± (x 3 ) + (g ± ) (x 3 ) = 0. (27b) Equation (27b) with the boundary condition (11f) is solved with g ± (x 3 ) = C ± e ∓kx3 . Since the second component of H dip is zero (no x 2 dependence in ( so that the complete dipole potential is φ = φ 0 + φ and the corresponding dipole field inside the magnet is Note that no averaging assumptions were made for the dipole field From the magnetic wave ansatz The magnetoelastic forcing terms from The effective field due to elastic coupling from ( Inserting ( - where g satisfies We must also incorporate boundary conditions to close the above system. For a purely elastic layer, we have three second-order equations, requiring six boundary conditions. These come from continuity of the three stresses σ j3 For a magnetic layer, we include the Neumann conditions for magnetization elements ( Consequently, modes oscillate between populating the longitudinal components A 1 , m 1 and then the transverse components A 2 , A 3 , and m 2 , which are π/2 out of phase. FIG. Due to the property The dispersion relations for magnetoelastic waves in a bulk material with d → ∞ can be calculated directly from First, we consider uncoupled waves (B 2 = 0). For the three purely elastic waves, the dispersion then is where c is one of the speeds of sound where Note that Next, we consider the dispersion of (32) with nonzero magnetoelastic coupling (B 2 = 0). In the bulk limit, A 1 and A 2 separate from the magnetic terms and the corresponding waves travel with the uncoupled speeds c L and c S , respectively. The remaining elastic component A 3 and the magnetic components m 1 and m 2 form coupled magnetoelastic waves subject to the quartic dispersion relation where ω el = c S k. In Fig. The coupled and uncoupled bulk dispersion curves present some general principles regarding magnetoelastic wave interactions. As evident from Fig. More generally, uncoupled magnetic dispersion curves Even when layering is incorporated, we still expect to see magnetoelastic interactions in the ω-k region near where the bulk shear and magnetic dispersion curves intersect, i.e. ω m ≈ ω el . For YIG and Ni, the higherfrequency intersections between the shear elastic and magnetic waves are around 100-200 GHz, and so are well within the current experimentally accessible regime. The longitudinal speeds of sound are twice as large (see Tab. I). Consequently, longitudinal-magnetic waves are expected to occur at twice the frequency range. The separation of A 1 and A 2 from the other wave components in the bulk limit indicates that the most significant elasticmagnetic interactions will involve the A 3 shear elastic component and m 1 , m 2 . We also note that the higher-frequency magnetic and elastic intersections in Fig. In summary, analysis of the bulk dispersion curves reveals that magnetoelastic anticrossings between magnetic and shear waves are possible in the extremely high frequency regimes of experimental interest and exchange effects will be more significant than long-range dipole effects in this regime. When finite-thickness and boundary effects are included, a direct analytical calculation of the dispersion from the eigenvalue problem Motivated by the analysis in the previous subsection, we consider a simplified scenario where displacements in the A 1 and A 2 direction are ignored. We also neglect dipole effects, i.e., we set g ≡ 0. These assumptions greatly simplify the eigenvalue problem ( where ξ n = nπ/d is the discrete vertical wavenumber. The corresponding vertical mode profiles are cosines m 2,j (x 3 ) = a m,j cos(ξ j x 3 ), j = 0, 1, . . . . Magnetic materials exhibit weak magnetoelastic coupling B 2 . We find in App. A that this can be quantified by the smallness of the nondimensional parameter For example, ≈ 0.02 for both YIG and Ni. An expansion of the frequencies and mode profiles around ( necessary for magnetoelastic frequency corrections that are proportional to . Otherwise, for nonresonant conditions, the frequency corrections are significantly smaller (proportional to 2 ). Equation ( The frequency corrections are provided in App. A (see eqs. (A18), (A22)) and describe an anticrossing. Additionally, the resonance condition (42) leads to a wavenumber dependent relative scaling between the elastic and a el,n and magnetic a m,n mode amplitudes (see eq. ( of the uncoupled dispersion branches (39) determines the anticrossing frequency gap width FIG. The gap width is proportional to B 2 , as in the bulk and thin film limits We compare asymptotic results with the SCM computation, described in the next Section, of the simplified system considered here analytically (eq. (A1) with elastic components A 1 , A 2 and dipole field g neglected) for a single layer of YIG. The top panel of Fig. On the bottom panel of Fig. The previous section demonstrated a marked increase in dispersion complexity due to the incorporation of boundary effects for a single, finite-thickness magnetoelastic layer. In this Section, we introduce a spectral collocation method (SCM) for determining the dispersion relations of multiple layers. Unlike the above asymptotic calculation, this method studies the full system The SCM approach we develop is adapted from one utilized for purely elastic waves These are known as Chebyshev points (or Gauss-Chebyshev-Lobatto points) For each layer, the six functions A 1 (x 3 ), A 2 (x 3 ), A 3 (x 3 ), m 1 (x 3 ), m 2 (x 3 ), and the dipole field g(x 3 ) are interpolated at Chebyshev points The key to the efficiency of the SCM method is that, for smooth functions, a discretization at Chebyshev nodes Next, the boundary conditions are incorporated by replacing the rows representing the boundaries for each of the vector equations. The boundary rows occur at rows 1, N, N + 1, 2N, . . . , 6N and are discretized with Chebyshev differentiation matrices as above. Then these equations are inserted into the 1, N, N +1, 2N, . . . , 6N rows of the polynomial eigenvalue problem. Since our boundary conditions are time-independent and therefore frequency independent, the boundary effects are all incorporated into A 0 , and the corresponding 1, N, N + 1, . . . rows of A 2 and A 1 are replaced with zeros. Polynomial eigenvalue problems can be solved directly using the built-in MATLAB polyeig command. The frequency polynomial is second degree, so in principle we will find 12N modes for a coupled magnetoelastic layer. An increase in N leads to an increase in the number of approximated eigenvalues, with new, larger eigenvalues appearing while the smaller eigenvalues exhibit improved accuracy. Due to spectral convergence, N need not be very high before accurate results are obtained for the smaller eigenvalues. In the polynomial eigenvalue problem, the linear in ω terms arise from the Landau-Lifshitz equation The extension of the above method to multiple layers is straightforward. We outline it for a magnetoelastic material layered on a purely elastic substrate. The substrate has three governing equations for the displacements Āj , j = 1, 2, 3 (we denote displacements in the substrate by an overbar), for a total of nine equations. The discretized field matrix for these equations (3N × 3N ) is joined to the discretized field matrix above to form a matrix with (9N ) 2 elements. The differentiation matrix in each layer D N must be suitably scaled to account for the thicknesses of the two layers. Once again, the appropriate boundary conditions replace rows 1, N, N + 1, . . . , 9N . The larger quadratic eigenvalue problem is solved to obtain the solution. The generated matrices in the polynomial eigenvalue problem can be ill-conditioned, so the problem is numerically sensitive. In order to ensure sufficient numerical precision, we utilize a multi-precision MATLAB toolbox to perform calculations in quadruple precision. Higher precisions than quadruple did not appear to increase the accuracy, and the toolbox is calibrated to perform optimally in quadruple precision One advantage of the SCM method is the direct computation of the dipole field g. Accounting for dipole effects is one of the most significant challenges when studying magnetic waves. By including g as a discretized function in the polynomial eigenvalue problem, we spectrally converge to the correct dipole field with little additional computational cost. Another benefit of the SCM method is that the eigenvector determined from the polynomial eigenvalue problem is a composite vector containing the discretized ver-tical mode profiles A 1 , A 2 , . . . , m 1 , . . . at the Chebyshev points The discretized eigenvector can be used to determine the vertical mode profile by using the Chebyshev interpolating polynomial corresponding to the discretization. To ensure the property (34), we first apply a complex phase shift so that the vertical shear profile evaluated at the top of the upper layer is positive A 3 (d) > 0. Then, we present the real parts of A 2 , A 3 , and m 2 together and, separately, the π/2 out of phase imaginary parts of A 1 and m 1 . In order to compare profiles of elastic and magnetic components, they are first nondimensionalized according to (cf. eq. ( and then normalized by the maximum amplitude. Wave profiles are presented below in Figs. A validation study is performed in Appendix B. We observe rapid convergence of the frequencies requiring only a modest number of Chebyshev discretization points N ∈ {10, . . . , 24}. Furthermore, we directly compare the uncoupled B 2 = 0 elastic dispersion computed using SCM for a double layer with a published elastic dispersion solver, finding quantitative agreement. In this section, we review some selected results of SCM calculations in order to highlight its utility. In all figures in this section, curves with mode profiles whose 2-norms are dominated by magnetism are green, elastic waves in a magnetic material are blue, and elastic waves in a nonmagnetic material are red. In addition, variables corresponding to a nonmagnetic material are denoted by a bar, e.g., A 1 . FIG. We first examine the effect of magnetoelastic coupling on a single layer. Figure In contrast, panel (b) has a nonzero coupling constant B 2 set to the physical value for YIG given in Tab. I. Away from the intersections, the dispersion curves are nearly identical between panels (a) and (b). Near some intersections, however, anticrossings appear, as expected. Multiple simple crossings are also displayed. One can readily observe that the anticrossing gap width decreases with increasing frequency and lower wavenumber. These findings are consistent with the simplified analysis presented in Sec. IV. We next examine resonant and nonresonant interactions in the single layer of YIG. In the top panel of Fig. FIG. Next, we incorporate a second, nonmagnetic layer and examine its effect on the magnetoelastic dispersion curves. Figure Interestingly, the magnetic dispersion curves interact with elastic modes from each layer, even though the bottom layer is nonmagnetic. In other words, an elastic wave with energy localized in the nonmagnetic substrate can still interact resonantly with a magnetic-dominated mode. One consequence of this observation is that a single dispersion curve can transition between a quasi-elastic wave in the top layer to a quasi-elastic wave in the bottom layer or a quasi-magnetic wave, depending on the wavenumber and frequency regime. In Fig. Similar effects are seen here as in Fig. Now, we continuously follow a single dispersion curve in a YIG-GGG layered material to understand how energy can transition from magnetic to elastic or vice-versa as well as between layers. The top panel of Fig. One dispersion curve in Fig. Finally, the vertical mode profiles at the three labeled points are shown in the bottom panel of 9. At points (a) and (b), the elastic portion of the wave is localized primarily at the top surface of the magnetic layer, adjacent to vacuum. However, when the mode becomes dominated by vertical shear elastic oscillations in the nonmagnetic layer, the mode is excited across much of the nonmagnetic layer. This is accompanied by a vertical shear component with about half the energy in the magnetic layer and a small magnetic excitation. Interestingly, the mode profiles for anticrossings in a layered material do not display as simple of a resonance behavior as for a single layer (see Fig. To summarize, the highlighted dispersion curve in Fig. For completeness, we also present some dispersion and wave profile results for waves in a lower-frequency range, shown in Fig. Figure The leftmost quasi-elastic dispersion curve (panel (a)) appears to be a transverse shear, zeroth-order elastic mode with energy concentrated in A 2 , while the rightmost quasi-elastic curve (panels (d), (e), (f )) is also a zeroth-order mode but with energy concentrated in vertical shear A 3 . The A 2 mode only has an anticrossing with the second magnetic mode, which from panels (b) and (e) also appears to be a zeroth-order mode. This is generally consistent with the asymptotic results obtained earlier regarding resonant and nonresonant anticrossings. However, the A 3 mode (panels (d), (e), and (f )) displays anticrossing behavior with all three magnetic modes. Apparently, the presence of strong dipole effects alters whether magnetoelastic intersections are resonant or nonresonant. Since the dipole effects occur in the vertical x 3 -direction, this may explain why resonant and nonresonant interactions are still present for the A 2 -mode, which does not experience as strongly the presence of the dipole effective field. The main contribution of this work is an analysis of magnetoelastic dispersion in finitely thick and layered materials. We first fully coupled magnetoelastic equations, which were then linearized to coupled system of ordinary differential equations in the vertical, layered direction. This was analytically and numerically. Analytically, we performed an asymptotic calculation to study multiple dispersion curve and anticrossings in a single layer. identified that anticrossings occur when the uncoupled and elastic dispersion curves are resonant each other. These anticrossings were well-modeled using asymptotic predictions. We also correctly predicted a but noticeable correction for nonresonant dispersion curve intersections from the uncoupled case. Despite performing our calculaa simplified scenario, these same general behaviors were observed numerically for the full equations in a single layer. The calculation assumed weak coupling, which is the case for all known materials. Numerically, we a magnetoelastic spectral collocation method (SCM), a fast, simple, accurate, direct approach for calculating the dispersion curves of a magnetoelastic, layered material. Discretizing the coupled system of differential equations at Chebyshev points yields a polynomial eigenvalue problem whose solutions are the angular frequencies for a given wavenumber. Solving this polynomial eigenvalue problem for a mesh of wavenumbers gives curves corresponding wave profiles. speed and reliability of SCM was validated in multiple ways. We then applied SCM to a variety of materials and samples. First, we calculated the dispersion curves for a 30 nm layer of YIG surrounded by a vacuum. This dispersion map revealed a number of anticrossings and simple crossings. Examining the corresponding wave structures supported our analytical result that, for a single layer, anticrossings only occur for resonant magnetic and elastic waves. Next, we calculated dispersion curves for two differ-ent double layers. Both calculations showed complex dispersion maps with numerous anticrossings. In addition, it was observed that the same dispersion curve can transition between quasi-elastic in the top layer, quasimagnetic, and then quasi-elastic in the bottom, nonmagnetic layer. The magnetic curve is resonant with an elastic curve in both the bottom and top layers, and so mediates energy transfer between them with increasing frequency. This curve was subsequently investigated by examining the wave structures at various points. We also found that resonant and nonresonant interactions are signficantly complicated by dipole effects and layering. Both effects can lead to results that are at odds with our simplified analytical predictions for a single layer and negligible dipole field. This highlights the importance of the numerical method for determining the solutions to the full linearized system of differential equations. We emphasize the fact that SCM is easily generalizable to many magnetoelastic wave applications. The method works just as effectively for GHz frequency ranges as for the extremely high frequency ranges primarily considered here. Calculations for a material with an in-plane magnetic field are also readily obtainable. In that case, the linearization assumptions would lead to a slightly different set of differential equations, but these can be similarly discretized and converted into a polynomial eigenvalue problem. The implementation is straightforward, and spectral convergence ensures fast computational times. In addition, SCM is also applicable to more complex anisotropies and geometries, such as a spherical material or a material with more layers. For example, experimental work reported in Another advantage of SCM is the ability to recover wave profiles with spectral accuracy. These profiles can then be utilized to classify the dispersion mode type. In addition, we can identify transitions along a dispersion curve between the various wave types. This ability to recover wave profiles could also lead in some interesting directions. Ultrafast magnetism experiments measuring scattering intensities using an XFEL yield only a wavenumber-frequency relation; they contain no information about the wave type or structure. By fitting experimentally-obtained dispersion curves to SCM results, one can predict information about the wave structure. Similarly, wave structure data can also aid in the calculation of surface waves such as Rayleigh or Love modes, or waves localized to an interface, another area with many practical applications. c S K = βK 2 , determining a natural length scale for the waves in this problem. The magnetization M s and displacement A * scalings provide the means to directly compare magnetic and elastic mode amplitudes. This scaling is used in all mode comparison plots: Figs. 5, 8, 9, and 10. The scalings in (A2) imply that ω = k = 1 when the lowest order uncoupled dispersion branches intersect ω H = ω M . Under the above scalings, we obtain the nondimensional applied field parameter H and elasticity constant G, frequency f , (A22) The two branches of f ± in (A22) correspond to the two branches of the anticrossing. The corresponding null space of the singular matrix yields the relative sizes of ãm,n and ãel,n ∆ -2∆ω * ∓ ∆ 2 (2ω * -1) 2 + ω * ãel,n = ãm,n . (A23) Analyzing (A23) reveals that for f + , as ∆ → -∞, the magnitude of the elastic displacement ãel,n grows large in comparison to magnetism ãm,n . As ∆ → +∞, ãm,n grows large in comparison to ãel,n . These behaviors are reversed for f -. This implies that the top anticrossing curve transitions from quasi-elastic to quasi-magnetic, while the bottom curve transitions from quasi-magnetic to quasi-elastic. A plot comparing the predicted quasielastic and quasi-magnetic dispersion curves with the SCM applied to eqs. (A1) is provided in Fig. , the anticrossing frequency gap has width k * / √ ω * . The dimensional frequency gap is eq. ( For nonresonant interactions, i.e. when n = j, then the integral of cos( ξn x3 ) cos( ξj x3 ) in (A20) is zero. What remains is the following system of equations k * ∆ -ω * f = 0, 4 k * ∆ -2f = 0. (A24) The system of equations (A24) is solved either by ∆ = f = 0 or ω * = 1/2. The second of these solutions is not generic. The first solution implies that higher order effects are necessary, as there is no interaction at O( ). This is consistent with the earlier finding that, away from anticrossings, i.e., for nonresonant interactions, magnetoelastic coupling only has a O( 2 ) effect on the dispersion curves. To summarize, in this Appendix, we showed that finite thickness effects lead to an infinite number of dispersion curves in a material. The many intersections between magnetic and elastic curves can be classified as resonant or nonresonant, depending on whether the quasi-elastic and quasi-magnetic waves share the same order. For exchange-dominated waves, only resonant interactions yield anticrossings. Nonresonant interactions only display simple crossings, which nevertheless experience an O( 2 ) shift from their uncoupled intersections. In order to validate the SCM approach, we examine the convergence of eigenvalues (i.e. frequencies) as the discretization N is increased. In Fig. As another validation step, we compare SCM results to GMM results from a published solver, the Elastic-Matrix MATLAB toolbox The results of this comparison for N = 24 are presented in Fig. We stress that, running on the same machine, the SCM code to generate Fig. A third validation for SCM is its close agreement with the asymptotic analysis shown in Sec. IV B. Since the asymptotic calculation included an analytical calculation of the uncoupled magnetic and elastic dispersion curves in a simplified layered material, the agreement in the vicinity of the anticrossing in Fig. 