We introduce a thermo-optic phase shifter (TOPS) array architecture with independent phase control of each phase shifter for large-scale and high-density photonic integrated circuits with two different control schemes: pulse amplitude modulation (PAM) and pulse width modulation (PWM). We realize a compact spiral TOPS and a 288-element high-density rowcolumn TOPS array with this architecture and drive TOPS with waveforms of both control schemes and of different array sizes. We present a thermal excitation model and a finite difference method-based simulation to simulate large-scale TOPS arrays and compare both schemes experimentally and theoretically. We also analyze the effects of thermal crosstalk in the realized TOPS array and implement a thermal crosstalk correction algorithm with the developed model. The high-density TOPS array architecture and the thermal crosstalk correction algorithm pave the way for high-density TOPS arrays with independent phase control in large-scale photonic integrated circuits interfaced with electronics limited in voltage swing and bandwidth. I NTEGRATED photonics allows numerous bulk optic com- ponents such as lenses, modulators, and fiber-optics to be integrated on a thin substrate to realize millimeter-scale, energy-efficient optical systems with better manufacturability and cost Silicon photonics leverage the high refractive index of silicon to enable the realization of optical waveguides with tight mode confinement. This allows compact nanophotonic structures to be implemented on chip at a high volume. Combined with its CMOS compatibility, silicon photonics enable the largest scale PICs with tens of thousands of components realized on a single chip Large-scale PICs ubiquitously utilize phase shifters for modulation, tuning, calibration of systematic phase errors, and Manuscript received February 01, 2022; revised June 04, 2022; accepted June 13, 2022. (Corresponding author: B. Volkan Gurses.) B. Volkan Gurses, Reza Fatemi, Aroutin Khachaturian, and Ali Hajimiri are with the Department of Electrical Engineering, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, 91125 USA (e-mail: gurses@caltech.edu; sfatemi@caltech.edu; akhachat@caltech.edu; hajimiri@caltech.edu). correction of random phases along the signal path In high-density integration of TOPS, unless photonics and electronics are both monolithically integrated, electrical connections required to drive each phase shifter in a direct addressing scheme can pose a problem for scaling. Furthermore, if each phase shifter requires its own driver, the complexity of the control electronics and their power consumption scale rapidly To overcome these challenges, row-column or matrix addressing schemes have been implemented In this paper, we realize a compact TOPS design and a largescale 288-element row-column TOPS array with independent phase control using a folded row-column architecture where λ 0 is the wavelength in free space and L is the length of the heated waveguide. Then, the phase shift in the TOPS is where ∆T is the temperature difference, and γ is the temperature coefficient of refractive index. Then, ∆T π , temperature difference for π phase shift is A single TOPS can be modeled as a simple RC circuit, with P π , power required for π phase shift, defined as where A is the effective surface area and k is the effective thermal conductivity between the waveguide and the heat sink. In the RC model, G = 1/R = Ak is the thermal conductance of TOPS to the heat sink. Another parameter to characterize a TOPS is its time constant, τ , similarly defined with the first-order RC approximation as where C is the heat capacity of TOPS. We now develop a time-varying lumped model starting with a 3D analysis of TOPS seen in Fig. • Heat used to increase the heater temperature (q H = ρ H c H dT (y, t)dV ) where ρ H , c H and V are the heater mass density, specific heat capacity and volume.) • Heat exchange with the waveguide (q where k W H is the effective thermal conductivity between the waveguide and the heater, d A is the differential surface area vector, and ∇T (y, t) is the instantaneous temperature gradient.) • Heat exchange with the substrate (q S = -k SH dtd A • ∇T (y, t) where k SH is the effective thermal conductivity between the substrate and the heater.) • Heat exchange with surrounding environment other than the waveguide and substrate (q where k EH is the effective thermal conductivity between the environment and the heater.) 1) No Crosstalk: First, we neglect the crosstalk between phase shifters. Then, dP (t)dt = q H + q W + q S + q E . Going through the derivation in the Supplementary Material, we have the matrix ODE for the lumped model of the system. where we defined We also take note that substrate usually facilitates the thermal conduction between structures. Therefore, 2) With Crosstalk: Now, we include the crosstalk between phase shifters and repeat the analysis (see Supplementary Material) by scaling the single TOPS model to N phase shifters. Hence, we have the generalized matrix ODE. where . . . C S,N . . . We also again take note that substrate facilitates the thermal conduction between structures. Therefore, for each TOPS, This also means crosstalk between TOPS is entirely due to G S,iS,j = 1/R S,iS,j . Hence, 1 We define For any array of phase shifters, this system of ODEs can be solved numerically or through variation of parameters to obtain the time-domain response of the heaters, waveguides, and substrate. This enables fast modeling of large-scale TOPS arrays without the need for computationally-intensive FDTD simulations enabling efficient engineering of driving waveforms for arbitrary system parameters. Using the framework developed with the thermal excitation model, we implement a finite difference method-based timedomain simulation, numerically solving the aforementioned matrix ODEs to simulate large-scale TOPS arrays. Electrical signals to drive the TOPS array are defined by P i . Therefore, we construct an ideal signal and pass it through an FIR low pass filter designed to simulate the bandwidth of the electronics. Then, to reduce the matrix size and decrease computation time in the simulation, we make some simplifications to the model. We make a first-order approximation for the frequency range we are characterizing the array. We set the substrate parameters, C S and G ES significantly high, making the substrate an ideal heat sink. Since substrate heating introduces a low-frequency pole to the system, this simplification makes the simulation at low frequencies less accurate but can be removed from the simulation. Furthermore, we define the heater to have low C H , which is a valid assumption for our design as will be shown by the first-order frequency response in our characterization. However, for different designs, this simplification can also be modified. For thermal crosstalk simulations, we assume only first-order crosstalk, meaning G S,iS,i±n = G (n) SS = 0 with n > 1. We finally approximate G = G SW = G SH . With these simplifications, we rederive (3), (4), and (5) to find the remaining simulation parameters, namely C W , G, G (1) SS , and MZI extinction ratio (extinction ratio due to non-ideal couplers), ER (see Supplementary Material). where P (1) π is the power required to drive a TOPS adjacent to the main TOPS to induce π phase shift at the main TOPS and P min , P max correspond to the observed minimum and maximum optical powers, respectively. C W , G, G (1) SS , and ER can all be characterized experimentally. A row-column TOPS array can be realized by arranging multiple TOPS with diode switches in a row-column format. It can be driven with PAM We realize a 32 × 9 row-column TOPS array on a silicon photonics platform as seen in Fig. Light is coupled to the chip via a grating coupler with 3.5 dB insertion loss and is distributed to the TOPS array via a 1:256 splitter tree with 2.4 dB excess loss. There are 32 heaters without any optical waveguides acting as dummy phase shifters We characterize a TOPS test structure for the simulation parameters as shown in Fig. For an arbitrary array with M rows and N columns such as in Fig. We first drive a single TOPS test structure with different waveforms to simulate row-column TOPS arrays of different sizes without thermal crosstalk and then the 32 × 9 TOPS array to investigate and correct thermal crosstalk. The control electronics for these measurements are shown in Fig. We now investigate both PAM and PWM driving schemes in more detail. PAM driving entails controlling the average power dissipated in the heaters by tuning the amplitude of the square waveform that has a constant pulse width as observed by a single TOPS. First, without crosstalk, we drive a single TOPS (P π = 13.4 mW, τ = 20.9 μs, ER = -21.3 dB) with this waveform at different frequencies for N = 2 at P π as seen in Fig 8 . The electronics bandwidth of the electronics is 200 MHz, which determines the cut-off frequency of the low-pass filter in the simulation. We then drive another single TOPS (P π = 11.6 mW, τ = 20 μs, ER = -19.9 dB) at different frequencies with different AC powers to compare the simulated and experimental MZI curves seen in Fig. PWM driving entails controlling the average power dissipated in the heaters by tuning the duty cycle of the square waveform that has a constant amplitude as observed by a single TOPS. Without crosstalk, we again drive a single TOPS (P π = 14.1 mW, τ = 23.1 μs, ER = -21.3 dB) with this waveform at different frequencies for N = 2 at P π as seen in Fig. We then again drive another single TOPS (P π = 14.3 mW, τ = 18.6 μs, ER = -23.1 dB) at different frequencies with different AC powers to compare simulated and experimental MZI curves as seen in Fig. With these measurements, we can compare PAM and PWM, whose waveforms and some of the definitions that will be used in the following analysis are shown in Fig. 1) Voltage Swing: The voltage swing requirement for either scheme is set by the required phase shift range, which in most cases is 2π for full-wave coverage. For a single TOPS (N =1), the voltage swing requirement for PAM is V 2π , and P 2π = V 2 2π /R, where R is the TOPS heater's electrical resistance. However, for PWM, since AC power is only tunable with duty cycle, an AC power that requires a pulse width corresponding to a bandwidth significantly larger than the electronics' bandwidth cannot be realized accurately. This can be observed in Fig. Moreover, the voltage swing requirement scales linearly with √ N , and for full-wave coverage, the driving electronics' output voltage swing should be √ N V 2π for PAM and N (V 2 2π + V 2 Φ ) for PWM. Therefore, the PAM voltage swing requirement is less stringent than that of PWM especially for large-scale TOPS arrays if P Φ > P DAC where P Φ is the power corresponding to t Φ and P DAC is the power corresponding to t DAC , the sampling resolution of the row driver. This increased voltage swing requirement may become significantly detrimental to large-scale TOPS arrays with PWM driving since it also implies a larger reverse breakdown voltage requirement for the TOPS diodes and could extend the peak voltage requirement beyond the CMOS transistor breakdown voltage In the time domain, TOPS phase shift oscillates back and forth centered around the intended phase shift. Phase swing of this oscillation determines the phase precision/extinction ratio of the TOPS/MZI. Phase swing is positively correlated with the time when TOPS is not driven, t OFF , the steadystate temperature difference of the waveguide when TOPS is driven vs. not driven, ∆T , and is negatively correlated with the time constant, τ , as determined by the solution to the system of ODEs in the model. While τ is specific to the TOPS design and ∆T is dictated by the required phase shift, t OFF increases with pulse width, which is determined by electronics' bandwidth. PAM has an inherent advantage since its t OFF is lower for a certain phase shift than that of PWM, t OFF,PAM ≤ t OFF,PWM . The difference between these times, ∆t OFF = t OFF,PWM -t OFF,PAM , determines the difference in the extinction ratio of these two schemes. Therefore, as the modulation frequency increases, ∆t OFF decreases, consequently reducing the difference in extinction ratio. The same effect takes place as N is scaled, meaning both PAM and PWM bandwidth requirement scales linearly with N . To demonstrate this, we plot the difference in extinction ratio by performing the frequency-domain analysis in Fig. Positive correlation between phase swing and ∆T also explains the reduction in the extinction ratio as power dissipation increases for higher phase shifts (e.g. 2π) in Figs. Finally, since voltage swing and bandwidth requirements are coupled for PWM, bandwidth could be used to minimize the voltage swing requirement by setting P Φ < P DAC , namely t Φ < t DAC . However, since t Φ ∝ 1 BW , as we minimize the voltage swing requirement for PWM, bandwidth requirement becomes more stringent. Therefore, PWM suffers from a more stringent voltage swing requirement and/or a more stringent bandwidth requirement. IV. THERMAL CROSSTALK Now, we showcase the effects of thermal crosstalk in rowcolumn TOPS arrays and demonstrate a correction algorithm with the information fed back from the integrated MZI+PD array and utilizing the previously detailed thermal excitation model. To maximize the effects of crosstalk, we select a TOPS in the middle of the array (row 16, column 5). To characterize the phase shift from the TOPS with and without crosstalk, we use the TOPS left of the main TOPS as the reference for the corresponding MZI. First, we drive the main TOPS with N = 9 PAM of 200 kHz frequency (0.56 μs pulse width) but still keep the other TOPS off to have a baseline for the phase shift without crosstalk. Then, we drive 142 TOPS with the same waveform. We only keep the reference TOPS off since it serves as a reference and the TOPS right of the main TOPS off to introduce an asymmetry to observe the crosstalk effect. We drive the rest of the TOPS (16 rows x 9 columns) with a maximum amplitude of 9 V to maximize crosstalk. We also simulate the amplitude-domain response with the thermal excitation model. We use the simulation parameters (C W =440 pJ/K, G=62.8 μW/K, G (1) SS =4.57 μW/K, ER = -0.665 dB) extracted from the TOPS characterization as a starting point. We tune G (1) SS = 4.57 μW/K to G (1) SS = 13.2 μW/K since we neglected higher-order crosstalk in the simulation and crosstalk dynamics in the array are expected to be different from the test structure and from setup to setup. Hence, measured and simulated amplitude-domain responses for the main TOPS with and without crosstalk are shown in Fig. We now demonstrate a thermal crosstalk correction algorithm utilizing the thermal excitation model. For TOPS arrays with direct addressing, various thermal crosstalk correction algorithms have been proposed based on eigenmode decomposition Since we used the parameters from the parameter extraction, this shows how our algorithm can be used in any arbitrary row-column TOPS array using only the characterization values from its test structure with minimal tuning. This also shows that in the case where parameter extraction is inaccurate, a row-column array of integrated feedback PDs and MZIs can be used to find the corrected parameters of all orders for accurate matrix inversion and extinction ratio correction. We realize a 32 × 9 TOPS array based on a folded row-column array architecture with PAM and PWM control schemes and a thermal excitation model to analyze and compare both schemes. By leveraging our model, we shine light on the design requirements for the driving electronics and observe the time-domain, amplitude-domain, and frequency-domain behavior of row-column TOPS arrays. This enables waveform engineering for more versatile row-column TOPS arrays with less stringent electronic voltage swing and bandwidth requirements while maintaining the scalability advantage (M+N drivers for M × N TOPS). We also investigate the effects of thermal crosstalk in rowcolumn TOPS arrays and implement a crosstalk correction algorithm to completely cancel the thermal crosstalk for a TOPS in the middle of our array. This demonstrates negating the effects of thermal crosstalk in row-column TOPS architectures, unlocking higher-density TOPS integration. From PIC dimensions, it is estimated that up to more than 40,000 crosstalk-corrected TOPS can be realized on a single 30 mm × 30 mm reticle by only modularizing this design with a potential for further scaling with larger N row-column TOPS and feedback MZI+PD arrays. To the best of our knowledge, this realization signifies the largest row-column TOPS array with independent phase control ever demonstrated, paving the way for larger-scale and higher-density error-corrected PICs. For no crosstalk, we have one TOPS with a heater, waveguide and substrate as shown in Fig. Since temperature gradient is uniform over the surface area, d A • ∇T (y, t) = dA∇T (y, t). Then, Integrating over volume, where we used dV = dxdydz, and dA = dxdz. Then, where C H is the heat capacity of the heater. Simplifying, where we took G ij = A ij k ij and noted that A and k are the same physical parameters as in ( where C W is the heat capacity of the waveguide and G SW , G EW signifies the thermal coupling between the waveguide and the substrate, the environment respectively. Similarly, we can also derive a PDE for the substrate. where C S is the heat capacity of the substrate and G ES signifies the thermal coupling between the substrate and the environment. Since we assumed uniform temperature distribution within all structures in all directions, spatial temperature distribution within each structure can be ignored, simplifying spatial partial derivatives to a lumped model. This is due to (for a linearly-varying spatial temperature distribution within each structure) where ∆T i is the temperature difference within structure i, ∆T ij is the temperature difference between structures i and j at their interface, k i is the thermal conductivity of the structure i, and k ij is the thermal contact conductivity between the structures i and j. Considering only the heat flow at the interfaces between structures, G ij reduces to A ij k ij , where k ij is now the effective thermal contact conductivity between the respective structures. Defining T H , T W , T S , and T E as lumped time-varying temperatures for the heater, waveguide, substrate and environment, respectively, we simplify Similarly, and Hence, using using ( We now redo the above derivation including the crosstalk between all phase shifters. If we have N phase shifters, for phase shifter i, (1) SS , we draw the circuit diagram for a coupled TOPS pair of first-order crosstalk, again with the same approximations, as shown in Fig. N j=1 [G H,iH,j (T H,j -T H,i )]