During the reversible insertion of ions, lattices in intercalation materials undergo structural transformations. These lattice transformations generate misfit strains and volume changes that, in turn, contribute to the structural decay of intercalation materials and limit their reversible cycling. In this paper, we draw on insights from shape-memory alloys, another class of phase transformation materials, that also undergo large lattice transformations but do so with negligible macroscopic volume changes and internal stresses. We develop a theoretical framework to predict structural transformations in intercalation compounds and establish crystallographic design rules necessary for forming shape-memory-like microstructures in intercalation materials. We use our framework to systematically screen open-source structural databases comprising n > 5, 000 pairs of intercalation compounds. We identify candidate compounds, such as Li x Mn 2 O 4 (Spinel), Li x Ti 2 (PO 4 ) 3 (NASICON), that approximately satisfy the crystallographic design rules and can be precisely doped to form shape-memory-like microstructures. Throughout, we compare our analytical results with experimental measurements of intercalation compounds. We find a direct correlation between structural transformations, microstructures, and increased capacity retention in these materials. These results, more generally, show that crystallographic designing of intercalation materials could be a novel route to discovering compounds that do not decay with continuous usage. Intercalation is the reversible insertion of guest species (e.g., molecules, atoms or ions) into a material's lattice structure, see Fig. At the microscopic scale, this intercalation-induced transformation leads to a misfit between neighboring lattices which, in turn, leads to a stressed interface. At the macroscopic scale, this transformation induces volume changes of the intercalation material In shape memory alloys (SMAs), another class of phase transformation materials, the structural changes of lattices are also accompanied by large strains. Despite the large transformation strains, SMAs form characteristic microstructures with small coherency stresses (austenite-martensite interface), negligible volume changes (self-accommodating), and low fatigue (λ 2 = 1). In these materials, lattices of different orientations rotate and/or shear to fit with each other resulting in the formation of twin boundaries, see Figure Intercalation materials and SMAs share several similarities. First, during phase transformation, lattices in both materials undergo reversible structural changes at a critical point. For example, intercalation electrodes transform between the intercalated (lithiated) and reference (delithiated) phases at critical intercalant (guest-species such as Li) concentrations, while SMAs transform between the austenite and martensite phases at the Curie temperature, see Fig. These structural changes in the host intercalation material are supported by, in-situ, X-ray diffraction experiments that show abrupt lattice transformations. Recently, researchers imaged a nanotwinned microstructure in a Spinel cathode (Li x Mn 2 O 4 ) that forms during electrochemical lithiation (discharging), see Fig. The self-accommodating and low-fatigue (or λ 2 = 1) microstructures have important advantages that could address the chemo-mechanical challenges in intercalation materials. The self-accommodation mi-Figure The self-accommodating or λ 2 = 1 microstructures form when the material's lattice parameters satisfy very specific geometric relationships The central aim of this work is to quantify structural transformations in commonly used intercalation materials and to establish crystallographic design rules necessary to reduce coherency stresses and volume changes. In the Methods section, we outline our theoretical framework to quantify structural transformation pathways and establish the crystallographic design rules necessary to form shape-memory-like microstructures in intercalation materials. In the Results section, we use our newly developed framework for two studies: In Study 1, we analyze the structural transformations in commonly used crystal structures (e.g., Layered, Spinel, Olivine) and identify families of intercalation compounds that are capable of forming shape-memory-like microstructures. In Study 2, we apply our algorithms to the Materials Project database to analyze whether any known intercalation compound can form shape-memory-like microstructures during phase transformation. Our results show that none of the existing intercalation compounds exactly satisfy the geometric constraint for self-accommodating or highly reversible microstructures; however, intercalation compound groups, such as the Spinels, Tavorites, Phosphates, and NASICON, satisfy a few of the fundamental design principles. These compounds can be systematically doped either using first-principles calculations or site-selective synthesis to precisely satisfy lattice parameter relationships In Study 1, we apply our theoretical framework to commonly used cathode compounds (see Fig. We compute the stretch tensors U for n = 25 representative intercalation compounds, see Supplementary Table Li x Mn 2 O 4 (LMO) is a Spinel compound that undergoes a first-order phase transformation between LiMn 2 O 4 (reference phase) and Li 2 Mn 2 O 4 (intercalated phase). Using our algorithm, we determine that the cubicto-tetragonal structural transformation of LMO minimizes the distance function U - Twin solution A/M solution The structural transformation of Li x Mn 2 O 4 generates coherency stresses at the phase boundary between the cubic LiMn 2 O 4 phase and the tetragonal Li 2 Mn 2 O 4 phase. To minimize these coherency stresses, the tetragonal variants form a finely twinned mixture that fits compatibly with the cubic phase and results in the characteristic austenite-martensite microstructure, see Fig. We next compute the stretch tensors for each intercalation compound in Supplementary Table From Table From Table We next apply our framework to analyze the structural transformations of n = 5, 142 pairs of intercalation compounds in the Materials Project database. Our microstructural analysis shows that only ∼ 22% (n = 1, 127) of the known intercalation compounds undergo a lattice symmetry change during transformation, see Fig. Fig. Fig. We note that many intercalation compounds undergoing symmetry lowering transformations in Fig. Fig. We next compare our analytical results with previously published experimental literature on intercalation cathodes (Refs. Overall, Fig. Our microstructural analysis shows that only a small percentage of known intercalation compounds form twins and austenite/martensite microstructures during intercalation and, a vast majority of the compounds do not satisfy the design principles for self-accommodation and/or λ 2 = 1 microstructures. This was the case in Study 1, in which selected compounds from the Spinel family form twins and austenite/martensite microstructures; however, their lattice geometries did not exactly satisfy the geometric constraints for self-accommodation and/or λ 2 = 1 microstructures. In Study 2, less than 22% of intercalation compounds reported on the Materials Project database undergo symmetry lowering transformation and thus form twins; however, none of these materials precisely satisfy the geometric constraints for self-accommodation and/or λ 2 = 1 microstructures. These compounds are promising candidates that can be systematically doped to satisfy precise lattice geometries. In the remainder of this section, we discuss some limitations of our findings, compare our results with prior work on understanding intercalation material reversibility, and present the potential impact of our work on the materials discovery program. Two features of this work limit the conclusions we can draw from our microstructural analysis. First, we minimize a distance function ||U -2 -I|| 2 to identify an optimal stretch tensor U. This distance function quantifies the total strain of a structural transformation; however, minimizing this function can generate more than one solution for the stretch tensor. In these cases, we choose the stretch tensor describing a lattice-symmetry lowering transformation as this would generate energy minimizing microstructures. Second, the accuracy of the computed structural data of intercalation compounds on the Materials Project database affects our microstructural analysis. For example, we identify candidate compounds that approximately satisfy the design constraints for self-accommodation and/or λ 2 = 1 microstructures; however, we have limited information on the chemical stability of these compounds. Many of these compounds were predicted using first-principle calculations, and rigorous experimental investigations would be necessary to ascertain their chemical stability. With these reservations in mind, we next discuss the impact of our findings on the materials discovery program. A key feature of our work is that we establish a theoretical framework and crystallographic design rules to guide the discovery of intercalation materials with minimum volume changes and interfacial stresses. For example, our results identify intercalation compounds that approximately satisfy the design rules necessary to form self-accommodation and/or λ 2 = 1 microstructures. These compounds serve as potential candidates that can be systematically engineered (e.g., using site-selective topochemical synthesis) to satisfy precise lattice geometries. This theory-guided search for intercalation compounds would accelerate the discovery of novel intercalation materials with improved reversibility. Another significant feature of our work is that we show a direct link between structural transformations, microstructures, and material behavior. For example, we compute the stretch tensor for Li 1-2 Mn 2 O 4 and quantitatively predict the microstructural features measured in Fig. To summarize, we quantify structural transformations in intercalation compounds and establish crystallographic design rules necessary to form shape-memory-like microstructures in intercalation materials. Our findings show that majority of the known intercalation compounds do not satisfy the crystallographic design rules necessary to form microstructures that are self-accommodating and/or have stress-free interfaces (i.e., λ 2 = 1 microstructure). However, we identify candidate intercalation compounds-such as the spinel Li x Mn 2 O 4 and NASICON Li x Ti 2 (PO 4 ) 3 -that approximately satisfy the crystallographic design rules. These compounds serve as promising candidates that can be systematically doped to satisfy precise lattice geometries and thus form microstructures with minimum volume changes and/or stress-free interfaces. More generally, our analysis and the crystallographic design principles serve as a theoretical guide to discovering a new generation of intercalation materials with reduced volume changes and stress-free microstructures. In this section, we outline the theoretical framework that we use to compute the structural transformation of unit cells during intercalation and to analyze how these transformations collectively generate microstructures at the continuum scale, see Fig. We describe the structural transformation of unit cells in intercalation compounds using a stretch tensor U. 9 This stretch tensor maps a unit cell in the reference phase (i.e., before intercalation) to the corresponding unit cell in the intercalated phase (i.e., after intercalation). This stretch tensor, for a given compound, is not unique and can have multiple solutions based on how we choose the unit cells for reference and intercalated phases, see Fig. Fig. generate the same lattice points in 3D space, see Fig. Following Refs. lated unit cells. We describe this algorithm in detail in the Supplementary Information, and outline the three key steps below: 1. Determine the primitive unit cells of reference and intercalated phases and identify all potential lattice correspondence matrices P for a given compound. In the Supplementary Information, we outline the specific steps to compute P using a pair of primitive unit cells as an example. 2. Compute the stretch tensor U mapping a unit cell of the reference phase to the corresponding unit cell of the intercalated phase. The general form for the mapping is given by FE R P R = E I P I in which F is the deformation gradient, and the transformation stretch tensor U is the unique positive-definite square root of F T F. 11 This stretch tensor U is unique for a given pair of correspondence matrices P R , P I , and we determine all possible stretch tensors by cycling through the set of correspondence matrices identified in the first step. 3. Identify an optimal lattice correspondence (and thus the stretch tensor) that minimizes a distance function representing the total strain of a structural transformation: dist(P R , Here, . is the Frobenius norm, A Further details of this algorithm using Li x Fe 2 (MoO 4 ) 3 as an example is described in the Supplementary Information. In principle, this algorithm can be applied to determine stretch tensors for any crystalline material undergoing a first-order phase transformation; however, for the present work, we apply our theoretical framework to intercalation compounds commonly used in batteries. We use the computed optimal stretch tensors in our microstructural analysis-that is, we determine whether an intercalation compound satisfies the crystallographic design principles described in the next section. The crystallographic theory of martensites is an energy minimization theory Following the crystallographic theory of martensites, we next list the design principles necessary to form the four candidate shape-memory-like microstructures in Table 1. Shape-memory-like microstructures, such as the twins and austenite/martensite microstructure, reduce the elastic energy arising from misfit strains between neighboring lattices and across phase boundaries, respectively. This reduced energy suppresses microcracking of intercalation materials with repeated usage. 3. The λ 2 = 1 microstructure corresponds to an exactly compatible and stress-free phase boundary, which forms between the reference and intercalated phases. These microstructures eliminate interfacial stresses that commonly arise during phase transformations, and have contributed to a phenomenal improvement in the reversible cycling of phase transformation materials Data Availability. The authors declare that the data supporting the findings of this study are available within the paper and its supplementary information files. Brief description e i Lattice vector A stretch tensor maps a unit cells of the reference phase to the corresponding unit cell of the transformed phase. This tensor describes the local stretching (or contraction) at a material point. A set of scalars associated with a linear system of equations. In our calculations, these values correspond to the lattice stretches during transformation. Variants are lattices of different orientations belonging to the same phase of the material. These variants are related to each other via a symmetry operation. Bravais lattice A Bravais lattice is an infinite set of points in three-dimensional space generated by the translation of a single point o through three linearly independent lattice vectors E = {e 1 , e 2 , e 3 }. The lattice vectors e i enclosing the smallest repeatable volume constitute a primitive unit cell E. The latter lattice vectors e i enclosing a larger volume (relative to E) constitute a conventional unit cell E . A conventional cell of a crystal structure can be described in multiple ways, however, all the conventional and the primitive cells generate the same set of lattice points in 3D space. Lattice correspondence P A conventional cell is related to the primitive cell via a lattice correspondence matrix P, i.e., E = EP Frobenius norm . A matrix norm which is defined as the square root of the sum of the absolute squares of elements in a matrix. It is also equal to the square root of the matrix trace of A T A, i.e., A = Tr(A T A) Supplementary Table (i) We calculate the ratio of host-atoms in the unit cells of the reference and intercalated phases for a given compound, an irreducible fraction m = p q with p, q ∈ Z. This ratio can be of three types m ∈ Z, 1 m ∈ Z, and m = / ∈ Z. For example, the ratio of atoms in the reference and intercalated phases of Li x Fe 2 (MoO 4 ) 3 compound (see Supplementary Table (ii) We determine the largest edge ratio d, which is rounded-off to the nearest integer, for the reference and intercalated primitive cells of a given compound. For example, in Li x Fe 2 (MoO 4 ) 3 compound the largest edge corresponds to the reference phase (e.g., a R = 15.7380 Å) and the smallest edge corresponds to the intercalated phase (e.g., b I = 9.4837 Å). The edge ratio is therefore d = 15.7380 Å 9.4837 Å ≈ 2. Physically, this ratio determines the bounds on the elements p ij of the correspondence matrix P. (iii) We next construct lattice correspondence matrices P such that each element satisfies p ij ∈ We follow steps (i)-(iii) to determine the primitive bases and suitable correspondence matrices for all intercalation compounds and use them to determine the stretch tensors U. In the second task, we compute the transformation stretch tensor U that maps a unit cell of the reference phase to the corresponding unit cell of the intercalated phase. The general form for the mapping is given by: in which F is the deformation gradient, and the transformation stretch tensor U is the unique positive-definite square root of F T F. This stretch tensor U is unique for a given pair of correspondence matrices P R , P I , and we determine all possible stretch tensors by cycling through the set of correspondence matrices. For example, in Li x Fe 2 (MoO 4 ) 3 we determine a total of 36,924 stretch tensors by cycling through its set of correspondence matrices. In the third task, we determine the optimal lattice correspondence (and thus the transformation stretch tensor) that minimizes the total strain of the structural transformation. We note that multiple lattice correspondences and transformation stretch tensors could describe different structural transformation pathways between the reference and intercalated phases. Following Chen et al. in which . is the Frobenius norm, A 2 = A : A = Tr(A T A). By minimizing Eq. (S.2) over the set of stretch tensors, we determine the optimal lattice correspondence and the transformation stretch tensor for a given intercalation compound. In Li x Fe 2 (MoO 4 ) 3 , we identify a stretch tensor U that minimizes the distance function, see Supplementary Table In this section, we give an overview of lattice deformation and outline the necessary conditions to form shape-memory-like microstructures (i.e., twin boundaries, austenite-martensite interface, self-accommodating microstructures, and λ 2 = 1 microstructures). These microstructures form in materials with very specific lattice geometries, which satisfy the crystallographic design rules described below. In our analysis, we use these design rules as a quantitative guide to investigate whether any known intercalation compound can form shape-memory-like microstructures. Twin interfaces are energy minimization deformations in which lattices rotate and/or shear to fit compatibly with each other. These twins form in materials that undergo lattice-symmetry lowering during phase transformation. For example, in Supplementary Figure for a given rotation matrix Q and vectors a = 0 and n. The deformation tensors have positive determinants. For our purposes, we note that Eq. (S.3) has a solution if and only if its eigenvalues λ i , which describe relative lattice stretches, satisfy λ 1 ≤ 1, λ 2 = 1 and λ 3 ≥ 1. The solution to Eq. (S.3) then describes a twin plane that connects the two lattice variants U I and U J coherently. These twin boundaries often have zero (or negligible) elastic energy, and thus stabilizing these microstructural features would reduce internal stresses in intercalation materials. Let us construct a twin interface using Li 2 Mn 2 O 4 as a representative example. Supplementary Table 2. If C = I, then there is no solution to Eq. (S.3) 3 The number of variants N is the ratio of the number of rotations in the point groups of the reference and intercalated phases, respectively where λ i > 0 are eigenvalues of the matrix C, and êi are eigenvectors of C corresponding to λ i . Eq. (S.3) has a solution if and only if the eigenvalues satisfy λ 1 ≤ λ 2 = 1 ≤ λ 3 . 4. If above-mentioned conditions are satisfied, then there are exactly two solutions give by: where k = ±1, ρ = 0 is chosen to make |n| = 1. Choosing k = 1 gives one solution while k = -1 gives the other. In both situation, we obtain Q by substituting a and n back into Eq. (S.3). 5. We substitute the values of stretch tensors U 1 , U 2 for Li 2 Mn 2 O 4 and list its twin solutions in Supplementary Table In phase transformation materials, the twin interfaces are rarely found in isolation. Instead, complex microstructures, such as those in Supplementary Figure Analytically, an austenite-martensite microstructure forms when any two lattice variants, with deformation tensors U I and U J , satisfy the kinematic compatibility condition for some scalar 0 Here the reference lattice is represented by I, rotation matrices by Q, Q , and vectors b = 0 and m. The austenite-martensite interface describes energy minimizing deformations that reduce coherency stresses at the phase boundary. This interface forms for specific lattice geometry conditions and in materials that can undergo a symmetry-lowering phase transformation. These microstructures, if stabilized in intercalation electrodes, would address structural problems related to stressed phase boundaries in cathodes and help mitigate the chemo-mechanical challenges during the charging/discharging process. Supplementary Figure As an example, we construct austenite/martensite interfaces for Li 2 Mn 2 O 4 using its stretch tensors from Supplementary Table Self-accommodation is a material's ability to undergo phase transformations without any macroscopic change in its volume, despite crystal structure changes at the atomic scale, see Supplementary Figure Cubic detU = 1 Tetragonal (1) detU = 1 (2) (2) Supplementary Table These stress-free microstructures form when the reference and intercalated phases satisfy the kinematic compatibility condition. From Eq. (S.6) with f ∈ {0, 1} and suitably redefining Q and U, we have: Eq. (S.7) has solution if and only if the middle eigenvalue λ 2 = 1, and the other two eigenvalues satisfy 0 < λ 1 ≤ 1 and λ 3 ≥ 1. The solution to Eq. (S.7) describes a coherent plane between the reference phase and a single variant of the transformed phase. Besides the λ 2 = 1 condition, researchers have identified other compatibility conditions, referred to as the cofactor conditions, which permit stress-free microstructures to form during phase transformations. Materials satisfying these cofactor conditions have solutions to Eq. (S.6) for any volume fraction 0 ≤ f ≤ 1, and the resulting microstructures are stress-free Eqs. (S.3), (S.6) and (S.7) serve as the design principles necessary to form shape-memory-like microstructures in crystalline materials. These design principles establish a direct link between individual lattice deformations and continuum microstructures in phase transformation materials. These principles can be used to systematically investigate whether any known intercalation material can form shape-memory-like microstructures. Supplementary Table. 9 lists the self-accommodation geometric constraints of cathode materials, which have a monoclinic symmetry in the reference phase. We note that although some intercalation cathodes satisfy |detM -1| → 0, these compounds do not satisfy the other geometric constraints 0 < M 11 < 1 + δ 2 and 0 < M 33 < 1 necessary to form self-accommodating microstructures. x Mn Intercalation compounds such as Lix V2O5 undergo multiple phase transformations as a function of Li-content. In these cases, we categorize the end products across each phase transformation stage as a distinct pair of intercalation compounds. Variants are lattices of different orientations belonging to the same phase of the material. These variants are related to each other via a symmetry operation. Following similar steps, other solutions of the austenite-martensite interface can be obtained between other tetragonal variants, see Supplementary Table5. In addition to the λ2 = 1 condition, we examine whether these intercalation compounds satisfy the remaining cofactor conditions necessary to form highly-reversible microstructures[20], see Supplementary Table10. We note that none of the compounds precisely satisfy these strong compatibility conditions. We omit 16 intercalation compounds from our microstructural analysis due to significant errors (≥ 6%) in reporting unit cell volume changes on the Materials Project database[30, 31].6 The number of variants N generated during transformation is defined as the ratio of the number of rotations in the point group of Bravais lattices. For example the cubic (24 rotations) ⇔ tetragonal (8 rotations) transformation in Li0-2Mn3CrO8 intercalation compounds generates N = 24/8 = 3 variants. The intercalation compounds documented on Materials Project have been predicted using high-throughput computing, and the chemical stability of these compounds is often not ascertained using experiments[32, 33]. For our analysis, we screen intercalation compounds that are stable (i.e., do not decompose into smaller compounds) and analyze their structural transformation pathways. Other factors, such as material thermodynamics and diffusion kinetics could affect microstructural evolution; however, none of these factors are known to be as important as the specific lattice geometries of the material[21]. The self-accommodation microstructure, adapts to the original shape of the material without any macroscopic change in volume, despite significant structural changes at the atomic scale. These microstructures have the potential to eliminate large volume changes of intercalation electrodes, which in turn lead to delamination in the composite electrode/electrolyte system.11 Please see Supplementary Table2for the physical meaning of a deformation gradient. The listed self-accommodation condition applies to all Bravais lattice symmetries except the monoclinic symmetry in the reference phase. For these cases, we use detM = 1 and further details are described in Supplementary Information. Please note that in intercalation materials, the total number of atoms refers to the atoms of the host-material and does not account for the guest (or intercalating) species. This is to ensure the volume change between the reference and intercalated phases matches the volume scaling of the correspondence matrix. However, when p = 1 or q = 1, we define P R = I or P I = I, respectively. For further details please see Ref.[2]. The scalar f corresponds to the volume fraction of different variants in the martensite mixture. Note, this differs from the twin interface in Eq. (S.3) that connects two variants of the same phase.