The π-ring qubit array is described using quasiclassical approaches that are shown to be accurate and give clarity to the complex energy landscape of connected vortex qubits. Using the techniques, large arrays of Josephson junction systems can be designed, including phase shift devices. Herein, connected arrays of loops containing π junctions are described. These techniques are useful for design of quantum computers based on superconducting technologies, hybrid quantum technologies and quantum networks. In topological quantum computation it is a design stipulation that the utmost protection of the qubits from the effects of environmental noise should ensue. Extraneous noise or circuitry can destroy the quantum state and drastically affect coherence times. One way of protecting the qubits is to enclose them in a medium of almost identical structures. Indeed, this gives a quantum error correction capability to the systems such that the effects of local noise become exponentially small as the size of the lattice increases Every interconnection in a superconducting island network contains a Josephson junction. We introduce a phase shift of π to some of the junctions. Technologically, this can be created by linking superconducting islands through a ferromagnetic layer of the correct thickness. Frolov and co-workers did just that when determining the spontaneous currents in superconducting arrays of π-junctions In the experiments of Frolov et al It is assumed that the critical current I C of each Josephson junction is the same. When the number of Josephson junctions in a loop enables the variation in the phase to be small Figure where D is the length of one of the sides of a plaquette, a is the leg-width, and m is the number of legs in the polygon geometry of the π-ring (e.g. for a triangular plaquette with L ∆ , m=3). In Fig. Note that for plaquettes that contain π-junctions a -1/2 term is included in each of the n i -f terms on the right hand side of Eq.( The solution of Eq.( To calculate the energy of the system we write, For the stack of triangular plaquettes of Fig. In the following we write the Josephson energy equal to Φ 0 I c /2π, the length of a plaquette leg as D = 45μm, the leg width as 2a = 15μm, and the critical current as . With these parameters and using Eq.( At this point it is time to also point out that schemes do exist with completely different architectures to those proposed for standard quantum computation. Quantum logic gates form the foundation for one methodology. This approach, whilst enormously promising, would seem to be many years from creating large scale quantum computing. Currently, a Canadian company called D-wave are marketing a quantum computer designed around a different concept using quantum annealing. However, there is a debate going on as to whether quantum annealing offers any speed up on classical computers. Quantum annealing searches for the lowest energy configuration of the system [Boixo 2014] and so the techniques we have described here are equally relevant for qubit architectures based on quantum gating, annealing concept and it is therefore prudent to keep investigating innovative new techniques and methods of analysis to avoid the problem of noise in the system. Another very promising form of quantum computation using superconducting systems is that of the topologically protected system 