Aqueous asymmetric electrochemical capacitor, with their high power density and superior cycle stability in comparison to conventional batteries, are presently considered as the most promising contender for energy storage. However, fabricating an electrode material and choosing a suitable aqueous electrolyte are vital in developing an electrochemical capacitor device with high charge storage capacity. Herein, we report a feasible method to synthesize MnO2/Vertical graphene nanosheets (VGN) and Fe2O3/VGN as positive and negative electrodes, respectively. The surface of VGN skeleton is independently decorated with MnO2 having sponge gourd-like morphology and Fe2O3 having nanorice like morphology. A schematic representation of the growth mechanism for metal oxide on VGN network is established. Both the electrodes have shown around 250 times higher charge-storage capacity than the bare VGN (0.47 mF/cm 2 ) with the specific capacitance of 118 (MnO2/VGN) and 151 mF/cm 2 (Fe2O3/VGN). In addition to the double layer capacitance contribution, the porous interconnected vertical graphene architecture serves as a mechanical backbone for the metal oxide materials and provides multiple conducting channels for the electron transport. The fabricated asymmetric device exhibited a specific capacitance of 76 mF/cm 2 and energy density of 71 Wh/cm 2 with an excellent electrochemical stability up to 12000 cycles, over a potential window of 2.6 V. The commendable performance of asymmetric electrochemical capacitor device authenticated its potential utilization for next-generation portable energy storage device. With the ever-rising proliferation of portable and flexible energy storage devices, electrochemical capacitor (EC) have drawn the significant interest, owing to their higher power density and longer cyclic stability in comparison to conventional batteries. Herein, we constructed an aqueous based asymmetric Electrochemical capacitor device comprised of binder-free and additive free, MnO2/VGN and Fe2O3/VGN nanoarchitectures as the positive and negative electrode, respectively. We propose a facile and scalable method to prepare the sponge gourd-like MnO2 and nanorice-like Fe2O3 structures onto each sheet of vertical graphene with preserving vertical orientation and open network, without the aid of binder and the conductive agent. The fabricated device ensured its ability to operate with the high cell voltage of 2.6 V in 1M sodium perchlorate electrolyte (NaClO4). In combination of open network and vertical orientation, metal oxide-VGN provides efficient accessible surface area and conductive pathways for the electrolyte ions. The advantages of such devices include an enhanced capacitance of 76 mF/cm 2 , excellent stability and higher energy density. The VGN was grown using plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition on the graphite paper substrate. The details of the growth process were elaborated in our previous report. The fabrication of MnO2/VGN electrode was achieved by dip-coating followed by annealing at 400 0 C. Briefly, the precursor solution of MnO2 nanostructure was prepared by dissolving KMnO4 in deionized water under constant magnetic stirring. An activated VGN was dipped into KMnO4 solution and consecutively subjected to keep the solution at 80 0 C for 30 min. Subsequently after the growth, the electrode was rinsed in DI water and ethanol. Finally, the samples were loaded into the furnace and allowed them to anneal for 2h at 400 0 C in Ar environment (Scheme 1). The growth of MnO2 nanostructures on VGN occurred via the following reaction: ( . ) + ( ) + → ( ) + + (1) Scheme 1: Schematic of the fabrication process of positive and negative electrodes based on metal oxide-vertical graphene nanosheets The bare Fe2O3 nanorice were fabricated by hydrothermal methods to compare its performance with that of Fe2O3/VGN. The morphology of as-grown and metal oxide decorated VGN was inspected using Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope (FESEM, Zeiss, ULTRA PRUS). The wettability of all the studied samples was measured by water contact angle measurement using the sessile drop method (GSM, Surfacetech Co., Ltd.). The structural confirmation of all samples was investigated by Raman Spectroscopy (in-Via Renishaw) using 532 nm laser. The chemical composition and oxidation states were evaluated using X-Ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy ((XPS, Thermo Scientific, K-Alpha) with Al K α (1486.7 eV) X-ray radiation. The electrochemical performance of each individual electrode was evaluated by cyclic voltammetry at different scan rates and charge-discharge at different current densities. The specific capacitance of electrodes ( ) in F/cm 2 were estimated by the relations where ∫ , , v, ∆ and td are the area under the CV profile, exposed area of the electrode in electrolyte, scan rate, the operating potential window and discharge time, respectively. The individual electrodes were tested in the three-electrode configuration in which graphite rod and Ag/AgCl (Saturated in 3M KCl) were used as the counter and reference electrodes, respectively. The supercapacitive behavior of asymmetric device was evaluated in the two-electrode configuration. To assemble the ASC device, NaClO4 soaked cellulose paper as separator-cumelectrolyte was sandwiched between the electrodes. Autolab electrochemical workstation (AUT84455, Netherland) was employed for the above investigations. The specific energy density (Wh/cm 2 ) and power density (W/cm 2 ) of ASC device were estimated from using the following relations: and P= × 3600 ⁄ (6) Where E and P are the specific energy density and power density, respectively. A well-controlled MnO2 structure on the VGN was obtained according to Scheme 1 by varying the molar concentration of KMnO4 precursor from 2 to 20 mM. The well-controlled and uniform MnO2/VGN was achieved only with the 10 mM KMnO4 solution, where the open gap between the vertical nanosheets was preserved. The growth rate of MnO2 nanostructure can be controlled by immersion time and deposition temperature. Figure Based on the above investigation, we propose a step-wise formation mechanism of metal oxide/VGN as follows (Fig. Prior to the electrochemical performance of vertical metal oxide-graphene composite, the supercapacitive properties of VGN was evaluated. The estimated specific capacitance of VGN is found to 0.47 mF/cm 2 at scan rate of 100 mV/s. Moreover, with the advantages of edges, high surface area and open network, the vertical structures are more efficient in charge-storage compared to planar graphitic structures. . The value of b is determining factors for charge storage mechanism, wherein b=1 corresponds to pure capacitive response and 0.5 refers to semi-infinite diffusion-controlled charge-storage. From the linear fitting, the slope is estimated to be 0.56, indicating the semi-infinite diffusion-controlled chargestorage mechanism of the MnO2/VGN electrode (Fig. The charge-discharge (C-D) profile at various current densities, as shown in Fig. The electrochemical performance of Fe 2O3/VGN is investigated, while it was tested as the negative electrode (Fig. Considering a good charge-storage performance of MnO2/VGN as the positive electrode and Fe2O3/VGN as negative electrode, the ASC device was fabricated by sandwiching NaClO4 soaked filter paper between them, which acts as a separator-cum-electrolyte reservoir. Figure where A+(-), C+(-) and V+(-) are the area, specific capacitance and the potential window of positive(negative) electrode, respectively. Thus, the calculated area ratio between the electrode is 1.32:1 for our case. The CV profile of individual electrode along with the ASC device is displayed in Fig. There are no conflicts to declare.