Low-loss planar Goubau lines show promising potential for terahertz applications. However, a single-wire waveguide exhibits less design freedom than standard multi-conductor lines, which is a significant constraint for realizing standard components. Existing filters for planar Goubau line lack clear design procedures preventing the synthesis of an arbitrary filter response. In this work, we present a design for a bandpass/bandstop filter for planar Goubau line by periodically loading the line with capacitively coupled ∕2 resonators, which can be easily tuned by changing their electrical length. The filter's working principle is explained by a proposed transmission-line model. We designed and fabricated a passband filter centered at 0.9 THz on a 10-m silicon-membrane substrate and compared measurement results between 0.5 THz and 1.1 THz to electromagnetic simulations, showing excellent agreement in both 11 and 21 . The measured passband has an insertion loss of 7 dB and a 3-dB bandwidth of 31%. Overall, the proposed filter design has good performance while having a simple design procedure. The development of efficient radio-frequency technology and components at terahertz (THz) frequencies Juan Cabello-Sánchez, Vladimir Drakinskiy, Jan Stake and Helena Rodilla are with the Terahertz and Millimetre Wave Laboratory, Chalmers University of Technology, SE-412 96 Gothenburg, Sweden. (e-mail: juancab@chalmers.se; vladimir.drakinskiy@chalmers.se; jan.stake@chalmers.se; rodilla@chalmers.se) Color versions of one or more of the figures in this article are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TTHZ.2022.3220599 authors' knowledge its properties were first mentioned in Designing circuit elements for PGL remains challenging due to its lack of ground plane. Despite this, several filtering circuit elements have been published for PGL, including stopband elements based on corrugations in the line The proposed terahertz filter consists of a PGL periodically loaded with capacitively-coupled ∕2 resonators in a balanced configuration, see Fig. This section describes the transmission-line model, design, fabrication process, and on-wafer measurement setup to demonstrate a bandpass PGL filter centered at 0.9 THz fabricated on a silicon membrane. Herein, an equivalent transmission-line model Two types of planar waveguides are used in the unit-cell model: coplanar waveguides (even mode) for the central line crossing the filter, and ; and parallel metal strips (even mode) for the waves excited in the coupled resonators, , and . No coplanar waveguide odd modes will be excited in the central line due to the symmetry of the filter for a single coupled resonator is: where is the angular frequency and is the coupling capacitance. The properties of the unit cell shown in Fig. where [ ], [ ], and [ ] are the matrices of a coplanar waveguide, a series inductor, and a shunt admittance, given by: Then, the ABCD matrix of the proposed model with a filter with unit cells and a total PGL length of is where [ ] is the ABCD matrix corresponding to a PGL with length = ( -)∕2 (see Fig. B. Filter design A 0.9-THz passband filter was designed, simulated and fabricated on a 10-m thick high-resistivity ( > 10 kΩ cm) suspended silicon membrane, with a bulk permittivity of = 11.7 and tan = 1.7 ⋅ 10 -5 The PGL was designed with a relatively large strip width of = 10 m, which decreases conductor loss After choosing the substrate and filter layout dimensions, the propagation constants and impedances of the three lines involved in the model were calculated with electromagnetic simulations using absorbing boundary conditions. Port sizes were a vacuum wavelength at the lowest frequency of analysis for PGL and resonators, and 3( + 2 ) by 2( + 2 ) for the rectangular port for the coplanar waveguide. Each planar waveguide's propagation constant, = + , was obtained from the S-parameter results using 3D electromagnetic simulations based on the finite integration technique (CST Studio Suite). Simulation results were calculated between 50 GHz and 1.5 THz in several frequency bands and extrapolated down to dc. The excitation ports used inhomogeneous port accuracy enhancement, enabling accurate wideband results. The phase constants of the dielectric slab modes were calculated analytically The characteristic impedance of the lines was calculated using 2D finite-element-method simulations (COMSOL multiphysics) of the cross-section of the planar waveguides between 50 GHz and 1.5 THz, using the power-current definition where denotes the time-averaged power of the waveguide, and is the current. The characteristic impedance results of the planar waveguides used for modeling the filter are shown in Fig. With the above values of , and , we fitted the values of and to 1.5 fF and 7 pH, respectively, by comparing 3D electromagnetic simulations of a single resonator pair of arbitrary length with its model, taking and from a 5-m PGL strip. With the resulting values of and , a stopband centered around 0.6 THz requires a resonator length of = 100 m, producing a passband response around 0.9 THz. Fig. The suspended PGL filter was fabricated using a silicon-on-insulator (SOI) wafer from University Wafers. We used a high-resistivity (>10 kΩ cm), undoped, 10-m device layer; 1-m buried oxide layer grown on a high-resistivity, 400-m thick, silicon handle wafer. In Fig. A scanning-electron-microscope photograph of the fabricated suspended PGL circuit is shown in Fig. The PGL filter was characterized by measuring the S-parameters between 0.5 THz and 1.1 THz using a vector network analyzer (Keysight N5242A) with frequency extenders (VDI WR1.5SAX and WR1.0SAX) and DMPI T-Wave ground-signal-ground probes First, Fig. In Fig. Although simplified, the proposed transmission-line model describes well the magnitude response of the filter demonstrating that the operating principle of the filter can be mostly explained by the periodic placement of coupled ∕2 resonators and that other possible effects like coupling between neighboring resonators do not play a key role. The model accuracy could be further improved by recalculating for each of the 49 unit cells-since we kept the same value calculated for a single unit cell-, and taking into account additional parasitic circuit elements. The simulated electric field distribution of the filter in Fig. The forward efficiency factor (| 11 | 2 + | 21 | 2 ) is presented in Fig. In summary, we present a planar-Goubau-line terahertz bandpass/bandstop filter which can be easily tuned by changing the electrical length of the periodic capacitively-coupled ∕2 resonators. The working principle of the periodic filter was confirmed by a simple transmission-line model, which agrees with simulations and measurements. The proposed filter design was validated by fabricating and measuring a periodic structure with 49 unit cells with a passband centered around 0.9 THz, showing good agreement between simulations and measurements, and a relatively low insertion loss of 7 dB compared to planar filters measured in the sub-millimeter band. Future work could explore the design and tune of a filter response by modulating the length of the different capacitively-coupled resonators 