We propose a scheme for obtaining highly-sensitive oscillators in a coupled-resonator system with an exceptional point of degeneracy (EPD) and a small instability. The oscillator with the exceptional degeneracy is realized by using two coupled resonators with an almost balanced small-signal gain and loss, that saturates due to nonlinear effects of the active component, resulting in an oscillation frequency that is very sensitive to a perturbation of the circuit. Two cases are investigated, with two parallel LC resonators with balanced small-signal gain and loss that are either coupled wirelessly by mutual inductance or coupled-wired by a capacitor. This paper demonstrates theoretically and experimentally the conditions to obtain a second-order EPD oscillator and analyzes the ultrasensitivity of the oscillation frequency to components' perturbation, including the case of asymmetric perturbation that breaks PT-symmetry. We discuss the effects of nonlinearity on the performance of the oscillator and how the proposed scheme improves the sensing's sensitivity of perturbations. In contrast to previous methods, our proposed degenerate oscillator can sense positive or negative changes of a circuit component. The degenerate oscillator circuit may find applications in various areas such as ultrasensitive sensors, tunable oscillators and modulators. O SCILLATORS are fundamental components of radio frequency (RF) electronics. Traditionally, an oscillator is viewed as a positive feedback mechanism utilizing a gain device with a selective reactive circuit. An oscillator generates a continuous, periodic single-frequency output when the Barkhausen's criteria are satisfied. The oscillator circuit should have a self-sustaining mechanism such that noise gets filtered, quickly grows and becomes a periodic signal. Most RF oscillators are implemented by only one active device for noise and cost considerations, such as Van der Pol and voltage-controlled oscillators A. Nikzamir and F. Capolino are with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of California, Irvine, CA 92697, USA. e-mail: anikzami, f.capolino@uci.edu. In this paper, we study the concept of an oscillator based on a double pole, i.e., an oscillator designed to utilize an exceptional point of degeneracy (EPD) in two coupled resonators. A system reaches the EPD when at least two eigenmodes coalesce into a single degenerate one, in their eigenfrequencies (eigenvalues) and polarization states (eigenvectors) A very significant feature of a system with EPD is the ultrasensitivity of its eigenvectors and eigenvalues to a perturbation of a system's parameter. This property paves the way to conceive a scheme to measure a small change in either physical, chemical, or biological parameters that causes a perturbation in the system. Typically, a sensor's sensitivity is related to the amount of spectral shift of a resonance mechanism in response to a perturbation in environmental parameters, for example, a glucose concentration or other physical variations like changing pressure, etc. Sensors with EPD can be wired or wirelessly connected to the measuring part of the sensor. In this paper, we show the extreme sensitivity of an oscillator operating at an EPD to external perturbations. Previous parity-time (PT)-symmetric circuits have been conceived as two coupled resonators where changes happen at one resonator, and the data is detected on the other side The limitation of PT-symmetry schemes is that they can detect only perturbations that lead to the same-sign change in a system's component, such as a capacitor's value. This is because a PT-symmetric system provides two real-valued frequencies only when the system is perturbed away from its EPD in one direction (for example for G values smaller than the G e related to the EPD, when looking at the eigenfrequencies in Fig. In this paper, we provide a scheme that starts by using a quasi PT-symmetric condition, working near an EPD, that makes the double-pole system slightly unstable even before having any perturbation. In other words, we turn the abovementioned practical problems that occur in PT-symmetric systems to our advantage when the circuit has to be used in a highly sensitive sensor. We set the gain value slightly higher than the loss counterpart to make the system slightly unstable. As a result of instability and nonlinear gain, the signal grows until the active gain component reaches saturation, and the working operation will be close to the EPD. We first show the behavior of wirelessly coupled LC resonators through the dispersion relation of the resonance frequency versus perturbation and we discuss the occurrence of EPDs in such a system. In section III, we use the nonlinear model for the gain to achieve the oscillator's characteristics. We show that the oscillation frequency is very close to the EPD frequency. The EPD-based oscillator has an oscillation frequency that is very sensitive to perturbation, exhibiting the typical square root-like behavior of EPD systems, where the change in frequency of the oscillator is proportional to the square root of the perturbation. In section IV, we demonstrate the highly sensitive behavior of the circuit by breaking PTsymmetry, i.e., by perturbing the capacitance on the lossy side (the sensing capacitance). In this case, the circuit oscillates at a shifted frequency compared to the EPD one. Notably, both positive and negative perturbations in the capacitance are shown to lead to opposite shifted frequencies, i.e., the proposed scheme detects positive and negative changes in the capacitance, in contrast to conventional PT-symmetry systems We investigate the coupled resonators shown in Fig. By writing Kirchhoff's current laws, we obtain the equations where Q n is the capacitors charge on the gain side (n = 1) and the lossy side (n = 2), and Qn = dQ n /dt is the current flowing into the capacitor. We define the state vector as consisting of a combination of stored charges and currents on both sides, and the superscript T denotes the transpose operation. Thus, we describe the system in a Liouvillian formalism as We are interested in finding the eigenfrequencies and eigenvectors of the system matrix M describing the circuit. Assuming signals of the form Q n ∝ e jωt , we write the eigenvalues problem associated with the circuit equations, (M -jωI)Ψ = 0, where I is a 4 by 4 identity matrix. Then, by solving P (ω) det(M -jωI) = 0, the four eigenfrequencies are found. By assuming C 1 = C 2 = C 0 and linear G 1 = G 2 = G, a symmetry condition that has been described as PT symmetric where Z = L/C 0 is a convenient normalizing impedance, and ω 2 0 = 1/ (LC 0 ). The characteristic equation is quadratic in ω 2 ; therefore, ω and -ω are both solutions. Moreover, the ω's coefficients in the characteristic equation are real, hence ω and ω * are both solutions, where * represents the complex conjugate operation. The 4 by 4 matrix M results in 4 angular eigenfrequencies which are found analytically as, The EPD frequency is found when the component values obey the condition b = 0. So far b = 0 is a necessary condition, but in a simple system like this, the eigenvectors can be represented as a function of the eigenvalues so this condition is also sufficient to show the convergence of the eigenvectors, hence for an EPD to occur. Under this condition, we calculate the EPD angular frequency based on Eqs. 4 and 7 as ω 1 = ω 2 = ω e where The real and imaginary parts of the eigenfrequencies are shown in Fig. For clarification, when G = 0 (lossless and gainless circuit), we have two pairs of resonance frequencies ω 1,3 = ±ω 0 / √ 1 + k and ω 2,4 = ±ω 0 / √ 1 -k, and ω 1 = ω 2 always, except for the trivial case with k = 0, when these eigenfrequencies are equal to those of the isolated circuits, but since the two circuits are isolated this is not an important degeneracy. With the given values of L and C in the caption of Fig. second coalescence (i.e., degeneracy) happens for larger values of G, i.e., at all frequencies are imaginary, so we only study cases of G < G e . In the strong coupling regime, 0 < G < G e , the eigenfrequencies are purely real, and the oscillation wave has two fundamental frequencies. In the weak coupling regime, G e < G < G e , the frequencies are complex conjugate and the imaginary part of the angular eigenfrequencies is non-zero, and it causes two system solutions (Q 1 and Q 2 ) with damping and exponentially growing signals in the system. Since the solution of the circuit is Q n ∝ e jωt , the eigenfrequency with a negative imaginary part is associated to an exponentially growing signal and the oscillation frequency is associated to the real part of the eigenfrequency. At each positive (real part) angular eigenfrequency ω 1 and ω 2 , calculated by Eqs. ( Here the inner product is defined as where the dagger symbol † denotes the complex conjugate transpose operation, | | represents the absolute value, and || || represents the norm of a vector. According to this definition, the state vectors Ψ 1 and Ψ 2 correspond to resonance frequencies ω 1 and ω 2 , respectively. When some system's parameter is varied, eigenfrequencies and associated eigenvectors are calculated using Eq. ( This section describes the important features of an oscillator made of two coupled resonators with discrete (lumped) elements with balanced gain and loss, coupled wirelessly by a mutual inductance as in is a simplified description of the gain obtained from a crosscoupled transistor or an operational amplifier (opamp) based circuit. Here, -G 1 is the small-signal gain provided by the negative slope of the i -v curve, i.e., is the negative conductance in the small-signal region and α = G 1 / 3V 2 b is a third-order nonlinearity that describes saturation, where V b is a turning point voltage determined by the biasing direct current (DC) voltage. We assume V b = 1 V, and to start selfsustained oscillation we assume that gain -G 1 is not a perfect balance of the loss G 2 . Indeed, we assume that G 1 is 0.1% larger than G 2 . Therefore, the system is slightly perturbed away from the PT-symmetry condition to start with. We also assume white noise (at the temperature of 298 K) is present in the loss resistor and it is indeed the initial condition for starting oscillations. Using G 1 to be 0.1% larger than G 2 , the circuit is unstable and it starts to oscillate, and after a transient, the circuit saturates, yielding a stable oscillation, as shown in Fig. B. Root locus of zeros of the total admittance This subsection discusses the frequency (phasor) approach to better understand the degenerate resonance frequencies of the coupled resonators circuit. We use the admittance resonance method and we demonstrate the occurrence of double zeros at the EPD. The resonance condition based on the vanishing of the total admittance implies that where the Y in is the input admittance of the linear circuit, including the capacitor C 1 , looking right as shown in Fig. The polynomial P(ω) is given in Eq. ( As mentioned in the Introduction, when the system is operating at an EPD, the eigenfrequencies are extremely sensitive to system perturbations, and this property is intrinsically related to the Puiseux series A perturbation ∆ X leads to a perturbed matrix M(∆ X ) and, as a consequence, it leads to two distinct perturbed eigenfrequencies ω p (∆ X ), with p = 1, 2, near the EPD eigenfrequency ω e as predicted by the Puiseux series containing power terms of ∆ 1 2 X . A good approximation of the two ω p (∆ X ), with p = 1, 2, is given by the first order expansion Following where H(∆, ω) = det[M(∆) -jωI], and its derivatives are evaluated at the EPD, i.e., at ∆ X = 0 and ω = ω e . Consider a coupled LC resonator, as described in Fig. The Puiseux fractional power series expansion Eq. ( To show how the sensitivity is improved when using the second-order EPD (double-pole) oscillator, we compare its the resonance frequency of the single LC resonator (dashed green). The results demonstrate that the EPD-based circuit with nonlinearity has higher sensitivity (square root-like behavior due to the perturbation) than a single LC resonator without EPD (linear behavior). The whole frequency variation, relative to the full perturbation range of capacitance (-5% < ∆ C2 < 5%) for the single LC resonator, could be achieved by only 1/10 of the perturbation (-0.5% < ∆ C2 < 0.5%) when the EPD based circuit is used. The highest sensitivity of the EPD circuit is shown for very small perturbations ∆ C2 ,e.g., |∆ C2 | ≈ 1%. For larger ∆ C2 variations, i.e., around |∆ C2 | ≈ 5%, the slope of the flattened square root-like curve is similar to the slope of the curve relative to the perturbed LC resonator. To show how a telemetric sensor with nonlinearity works, we now consider that the gain element is nonlinear, following the cubic model in Eq. ( An analogous system with the properties highlighted in the previous sections is made by the two resonators with balanced gain loss (PT-symmetry) coupled with a capacitor C c as shown in Fig. In this configuration, EPD occurs at and this indicates the coalescence of the two eigenmodes in their eigenvalues and eigenvectors, and hence the occurrence of a second-order EPD. It is seen from this plot that the system eigenfrequencies are coalescing at a specific capacitance C 2 = C e . The system is unstable for any C 2 = C e because of broken PT symmetry, since there is always an eigenfrequency with Im(ω)<0. Moreover, the bifurcation of the dispersion diagram at the EPD is in agreement with the one provided by the Puiseux fractional power series expansion truncated to its first order, represented by a dashed black line in Fig. In order to confirm the high sensitivity to a perturbation in the proposed oscillator scheme based on nonlinear negative conductance (nonlinear gain), the gain is now realized using an opamp (Analog Devices Inc., model ADA4817) whose gain is tuned with a resistance trimmer (Bourns Inc., model 3252W-1-501LF) to reach the proper small-signal gain value of -G 1 = -9 mS. Note that we assume that the nonlinear gain is a bit larger (around 0.1 %) than the loss on the other side of the circuit to make the system slightly unstable. All the other parameters are as in the previous example: a linear conductance of G 2 = 9 mS, capacitors of C 1 = C 2 = C c = 1.5 nF, and inductors of L = 10 μH (Coilcraft, model MSS7348-103MEC). This nonlinear circuit oscillates at the EPD frequency. The actual experimental circuit differs from the ideal one using nonlinear gain in a couple of points: First, extra losses are present in the reactive components associated with their quality factor. The inductor has the lowest quality factor in this circuit with an internal DC resistance of 45 mΩ, from its datasheet, which is however small. Second, electronic components have tolerances. To overcome some of the imperfections in the experiment process, we use a capacitance trimmer (Sprague-Goodman, model GMC40300) and a resistance trimer in our printed circuit board (PCB) to tune the circuit to operate at the EPD. Also, to have more tunability, a series of pin headers are connected parallel to the loss side, where extra capacitors and resistors could be connected in parallel, as mentioned in Appendix B. The circuit is designed to work at the EPD frequency of f e = 988.6 kHz, and indeed after tuning the circuit, we experimentally obtain an experimental EPD frequency at f = 989.6 kHz as shown in Fig. We then perturb C 2 as (1 + ∆ C2 )C e where C e satisfies the EPD condition, with small steps ∆ C2 as explained in Appendix B. As shown in Fig. An essential feature of any oscillator is its ability to produce a near-perfect periodic time-domain signal (pure sinusoidal wave), and this feature is quantified in terms of phase noise, determined here based on the measured power spectrum up to 10 kHz frequency offset. The phase noise and power spectrum in Fig. We demonstrated that two coupled LC resonators terminated with nonlinear gain, with almost balanced loss and smallsignal gain, working near an EPD, make an oscillator whose oscillation frequency is very sensitive to perturbations. The nonlinear behavior of the active component is essential for the three important features observed by simulations and experimentally: (i) the oscillation frequency is very sensitive to perturbations, and both positive and negative perturbations of a capacitor are measured leading to very high sensitivity based on shifted oscillation frequency that approximately follows the square-root law, proper of EPD systems; (ii) the measured spectrum has very low phase noise allowing clean measurements of the shifted oscillation frequencies. (iii) It is not necessary to have a perfect gain/loss balance, i.e., we have shown that slightly broken gain/loss balance leads to the same results as for the case of perfectly balanced gain and loss. Note that none of the features above are available in current PT-symmetry circuits in the literature The oscillation frequency shift follows the square rootlike behavior predicted by the Puiseux series expansion, as expected for EPD-based systems. We show the performance of the oscillator-sensor scheme based on two configurations: wireless coupling with a mutual inductor, and wired coupling by a capacitor. The latter oscillator scheme has been fabricated and tested. We have analyzed how the nonlinearity in the gain element makes the circuit unstable and oscillate after reaching saturation. The oscillator's characteristics have been determined in terms of transient behavior and sensitivity to perturbations due to either capacitance or resistance change in the system. The experimental verification provided results in very good agreement with theoretical expectations. The measured high sensitivity of the oscillator sensor to perturbations can be used as a practical solution for enhancing sensitivity, also because the measured shifted frequencies are well visible with respect to underlying noise. The proposed EPD-based oscillator-sensor can be used in many automotive, medical, and industrial applications where detections of small variations of physical, chemical, or biological variations need to be detected. This material is based upon work supported by the USA National Science Foundation under Award NSF ECCS-1711975. Several different approaches provide negative nonlinear conductance needed for proposed circuits. In this subsection, we show the circuit in Fig. We investigate resonances and their degeneracy in the two LC resonators coupled by a capacitor as in Fig. In the experiment, we setup the nonlinear gain to be a bit larger (around 0.1%) than the balanced gain by tuning the RV1 to make the system slightly unstable.To tune and find the exact value of the capacitance that leads to an EPD (C 2 = C e ), a variable capacitor (Sprague-Goodman, model GMC40300) and a series of pin headers, where extra capacitors could be connected in parallel to C 2 , are provided. By adding small and known capacitors values on the load side, we tuned the capacitance C 2 to bring the circuit very close to the EPD and observe the EPD oscillation frequency f = f e . To show the square root-like behavior of the oscillator's frequency due to perturbations in Fig. 