The ability to detect single photons has become increasingly essential due to the rise of photonbased quantum computing. In this theoretical work, we propose a system consisting of a quantum dot (QD) side-coupled to a superconducting nanowire. The coupling opens a gap in both the QD mode and the Majorana zero mode (MZM) at the nanowire edge, enabling photon absorption in the system. We show that the absorbed photoelectron decays via rapid (sub-nanosecond to nanosecond) nonradiative heat transfer to the nanowire phonon modes rather than by spontaneous emission. Furthermore, we calculate the temperature increase and associated resistance increase induced by the absorption of a photon for a given appropriate set of material and environmental parameters, yielding a temperature increase in the millikelvin range and a resistance increase in the kiloohm range, vastly exceeding the photon-absorption-induced temperature and resistance increases for competing 2D-3D hybrid systems by 5 and 9 orders of magnitude, respectively. Lastly, we determine the detector efficiency and discuss the system density required for deterministic photon number measurement, demonstrating that a photon absorption probability of over 99.9 percent can be achieved for an integrated system consisting of an array of nanowire-QD complexes on-chip inside a cavity. Our results thus provide a basis for a deterministic microwave photon number detector with an unprecedented photon-number-detection resolution. The ability to detect single radio-frequency photons has become increasingly essential due to the rise of superconducting quantum computing. The bolometer approach of single-photon detectors is more appropriate than others because of the extreme sensitivity of temperature-change-induced physical measurement capabilities In order to achieve a measurement resolution sufficient for detecting every absorbed single photon, it is therefore desirable to use a low-dimensional detector that reduces vastly the heat capacity and, thus, increases the temperature contrast. To this end, superconducting nanowires (consisting of a 1D semiconductor that has acquired a superconducting gap through proximity) provide an ideal platform for single photon detection. Superconducting nanowire single photon detectors (SNSPDs), which involve a photon absorbed by a Cooper pair causing the nanowire to revert to the normal (non-superconducting) state, thereby reducing the current flow through the wire, have gained popularity as a means of detecting optical photons Here, we propose a system consisting of a p-wave superconducting nanowire side-coupled to a quantum dot at each end. The topological edge state of such a nanowire has been theorized to be a Majorana bound state Our ultra-high-precision microwave photon number detector serves as a major breakthrough in multiple respects. It is the first real-world application of Majorana zero modes other than topological quantum computing. It also provides a revolutionary improvement in detection resolution for microwave photons, with a 9-ordersof-magnitude resolution improvement over a Cd 3 As 2 detector The paper is organized as follows: In Sec. II, we derive the QD-Majorana hybridized spectrum and the interaction strength between a photon and an electron in this complex. In Sec. III, we calculate the heat capacity of the nanowire, and from that the temperature increase per absorbed photon. Section IV shows the method for calculating the energy transfer rate from the excited photoelectron to the nanowire phonons. In Sec. V, we lay out the means of calculating the photon absorption probability for a system of QD-nanowire complexes on-chip inside a microwave cavity. Finally, in Sec. VI, we optimize the numerical values for the parameters. The results demonstrate a near-deterministic photon absorption probability of over 99.9%, an absorber-to-bolometer energy transfer rate exceeding the parasitic radiative decay rate by over 8 orders of magnitude, and most crucially, an over 6-order-of-magnitude improvement in single-photon resolution compared to a 2D/3D hybrid system such as a Cd 3 As 2 detector The setup of the QD-nanowire system is depicted in Fig. At low temperatures, the s-wave superconducting strips induce p-wave superconductivity in the semiconducting nanowire, leading to the formation of Majorana zero modes (MZMs) at the edges. Fundamentally, this process is driven by two phenomena. First, Rashba spin-orbit coupling, as well as Zeeman splitting induced by an applied magnetic field, give rise to spin-momentum locking for the semiconducting nanowire at the Fermi level. Next, Cooper pairs tunnel from the s-wave superconducting strips to the semiconducting nanowire due to FIG. where the constants m, μ, V z , and α represent the effective electron mass, chemical potential, effective Zeeman splitting, and Rashba spin-orbit interaction strength, respectively, the operators p and σ denote the momentum and spin, respectively, and the spatially-varying parameter ∆(x) is the proximity-induced superconducting gap. Note that x is defined as the axis of the nanowire, whereas ẑ is the direction of the applied magnetic field (i.e., the axis perpendicular to the interface between the semiconducting nanowire and the s-wave strips). A pair of leads are connected at the ends of the intermediate region between the s-wave strips in order to dynamically measure the resistance increase (which serves as a proxy for temperature increase). The nanowire is side-coupled to a QD at each end, with a hopping parameter of λ between a QD mode and the Majorana zero mode (MZM) facing the QD, as depicted in Fig. Next, we consider the Majorana operators on each end of the nanowire. In general, for an N -site chain, the unpaired "left" and "right" Majorana operators (η L 1 and η R N , respectively) are defined in terms of the fermionic operators f for the first and N th sites as follows , indicating that the Majorana operators cycle the system between states in a twofold-degenerate system (assuming that the nanowire is much longer than the Majorana wavefunction's coherence length). Given the requirement that these zeroenergy states obey particle-hole symmetry Intuitively, for each edge, the |0 and |1 states can be conceptualized as a half-hole and a half-electron, respectively. As such, the states satisfy the requirement that a Majorana state be composed of an electron-hole superposition The overlap between the Majorana wavefunction and the quantum dot wavefunction gives rise to the following interaction Hamiltonian where H R is modified to ensure that the interaction Hamiltonian only features real matrix elements corresponding to the hopping between |01 and |10 , i.e., between the QD wavefunction and the Majorana wavefunction, and that these hopping parameters equal those for H L . This in turn ensures that these wavefunctions remain real-valued in the real-space representation, thus simplifying the dipole matrix element calculation that will be performed later in this work. For the left edge, in the composite basis the QD-MZM interaction Hamiltonian is represented by the following matrix: It is evident that the Hamiltonian couples |0ψ ± L with |1ψ ± L , thus allowing the composite 4-dimensional system to be split into two 2-dimensional subsystems. Physically, we can explain it as the QD-Majorana interaction switching the QD state while conserving the Majorana state. Solving for the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of H, we find that the energy levels become the following: corresponding to the following composite states: where each state is labeled + or -based on whether the corresponding energy is + λ or -λ. For the right edge, in the composite basis , the interaction Hamiltonian takes the following matrix form: As with the left edge, the Hamiltonian couples |0ψ ± R with |1ψ ∓ R , allowing the composite 4-dimensional system to be split into two 2-dimensional subsystems. Here, too, we find that the energy levels split into ± λ, corresponding to the following composite states: The hybridization of the states is depicted in Fig. We are now ready to consider the photon absorption by the QD-Majorana coupled system, provided a photon field resonant with the gap between the -and + QD-Majorana states, i.e. ω = 2λ. The electric field E interacts with the dipole moment d of the QD-Majorana complex via the following perturbative Hamiltonian: The dipole moment calculation is discussed in detail in Appendix A. For the transmon frequency of about 5 GHz, the results reveal a dipole matrix element amplitude of |d +,-| ≈ 1.8 × 10 -26 C • m for a QD coherence length matching that of the Majorana wavefunction, corresponding a QD-Majorana center-to-center distance of 440 nm. On the other hand, the photon field can be expanded in terms of the ladder operators a ( †) in the conventional manner: where the electric field zero-point function E zpf is oriented along the field polarization axis and carries the following amplitude as a function of the frequency ω and cavity volume V The Jaynes-Cummings Hamiltonian H can thus be expressed in terms of the ladder operators connecting lowerenergy and higher-energy QD-Majorana states |n i ,and |n f , + (respectively) as interactions with coupling coefficient g n f ,ni : where we sum over all possible values of n i and n f from the list (A, B, C, D), and the operator b n f ,ni is defined as follows: and the interaction coefficients g n f ,ni feature the following amplitude: In the last line, we have assumed that the polarization axis of the electric field is in line with the center-to-center axis between the QD and the Majorana mode, which represents the QD-Majorana dipole axis (effectively, the polarization axis for the QD-Majorana system). Once the system has been photoexcited, we desire for the excitation to rapidly decay via heat transfer to the nanowire phonon modes, while avoiding radiative decay. Quantitatively, this corresponds to a nonradiative decay rate Γ nr much greater than the radiative decay rate Γ rad , i.e. FIG. Γ nr Γ rad . On the other hand, it is also important to ensure that the nonradiative loss rate is well below the gap frequency, i.e. Γ nr ω, so that the spectral broadening does not wash out the distinctness of the states. Furthermore, we also wish to ensure that a measurable temperature increase is registered in the nanowire for a single-photon absorption by the QD-Majorana system. Here, we determine the heat capacity of the superconducting nanowire in order to calculate the temperature increase caused by the absorption of a single photon by the QD-Majorana system. In the low-temperature limit, the occupied phonon modes are restricted to the longwavelength acoustic modes, thus enabling the use of the Debye model where ω q = v s q represents the average frequency of a mode at wavevector q. As in a 3D lattice, this summation can be solved by determining the density of states for each branch, given a 1D lattice of length L: Note that the factor of 2 in the first line is inserted in order to ensure that for each wavevector amplitude q, the modes at both +q and -q are included. We thus convert the summation in Eq. ( While the total phonon energy scales quadratically with temperature T , the corresponding heat capacity varies linearly in the baseline temperature, as expected for a 1D lattice: Intuitively, the scaling of the heat capacity with the lattice length L corresponds to a fact that a larger lattice is more resistant to temperature change. Furthermore, the inverse variation with the speed of sound is due to the fact that a higher speed of sound leads to a lower number of occupied states (due to the sharper dispersion), causing greater occupation number increase per state for a given total energy gain, in turn leading to a greater temperature increase. Similarly, the variation with the baseline temperature T can be explained by the fact that a higher baseline temperature lifts the maximum occupied energy level, resulting in a higher number of occupied states and hence a lower occupation number increase per state for a given total energy gain (and thus a lower temperature increase as well). Upon absorption of a single photon of angular frequency ω by the QD-Majorana system, the temperature increase ∆T in the nanowire is thus calculated as follows: where C s is the heat capacity of the s-wave superconducting strips. It is therefore desirable to minimize the superconducting critical temperature when selecting the nanowire material. It is worth noting that when calculating the actual peak temperature increase, it is important to consider dissipation through the leads. We will consider the resulting attenuation of the temperature increase in detail later in this work. We now calculate the energy transfer rate through carrier-phonon interaction from the photoexcited carriers of the QD-Majorana system to the phonon modes of the nanowire. Fundamentally, carrier-phonon interaction requires that the Majorana mode be occupied by an electron. Consequently, the allowed QD-Majorana tensorproduct transitions are |01 + → |01 -and |11 + → |11 - (where the + and -subscripts denote the higher-energy and lower-energy states, respectively). Given a carrierphonon interaction Hamiltonian H (which will be defined later in equation ( where n μ,q represents the phonon number in a mode at wavevector q and branch μ, (n i , n f ) = (A, B), (B, A), (C, D), or (D, C), and we have introduced the notation |+ and |-to distinguish the higher-energy and lower-energy QD states. On the other hand, |n i , + and |n i , -feature opposite phases for |01 and |11 , causing the probability amplitudes for the |01 + → |01 -and |11 + → |11 -phonon emission processes to cancel out through destructive interference: Consequently, just half of the possible pairs of initial higher-energy and final lower-energy states are available for phonon-induced transitions. This will attenuate the overall transition rate by a factor of 2, which we will incorporate into Fermi's Golden Rule later in this section. Next, we estimate the wavefunction for the QD state so that we can decompose it into plane wave states with well-defined momenta and thereby calculate the matrix element -, n μ,q + 1|H |+, n μ,q for any phonon wavevector q. Although we modeled this wavefunction as an exponential function in Appendix A, its narrowness relative to the length of the nanowire ensures that it can be approximated as the square-root of a Dirac delta function from the perspective of the full nanowire: where b denotes the span of the QD. Following the treatment in our prior analysis of Cd 3 As 2 As this expression shows, a spatially narrower edge state corresponds to a wider range of momenta, and vice versa, thus satisfying the Heisenberg uncertainty principle. This representation is useful since, in general, the carrier-phonon Hamiltonian H couples initial wavevector k and final wavevector k -q through emission (absorption) of a phonon q (-q) from branch μ: where c k = |0 k | is defined as the annihilation operator for the electron at wavevector k . Note that the coupling coefficient g μ,q is independent of the initial wavevector k (see Appendix A of Since the reciprocal space between k = -π/a and π/a is divided into L/a segments (each of length 2π/L), the transition matrix element from |+ to |-due to emission of a phonon q is simply equivalent to the transition from any initial wavevector k to final wavevector k -q through the same process: Next, we examine the values of the coefficients g μ,q . Here, we note that since the energy gap between |+ and |-corresponds to the long-wavelength acoustic phonon regime, we can use the deformation potential treatment where D, v s and V represent the nanowire deformation potential, speed of sound, and quantization volume, respectively. We are now ready to determine the nonradiative decay rate. In general, for a continuum of electronic states, a rapid carrier-carrier rethermalization occurs first, elevating the system to a hot electron Fermi-Dirac distribution where ω = (E + -E -)/ . Note that the extra factor of 1/2 in the first line is inserted due to the fact that for an excited photoelectron in a given higher-energy state, there is only a 50% probability that the required final state is unoccupied. The Dirac delta function enforces energy conservation, ensuring that the emitted phonon carries an frequency of ω = v s q, where q is the phonon wavevector. We thus replaced the summation of the Dirac delta functions with the density of phonon modes with respect to energy, i.e. D(ω)/ , at q = ±ω/v s . Using the matrix element value calculated in Eqs. ( where n(ω, T ) is the Bose-Einstein phonon occupation number at frequency ω and temperature T , and A denotes the cross-sectional area of the nanowire. We note that the nonradiative decay rate rises with increasing temperature, as expected due to the greater phonon occupation number at higher temperatures. Furthermore, in the limit e ω/k B T 1, it scales linearly with the phonon frequency ω, since the transition strength (i.e. the matrix element amplitude-squared) increases linearly with the wavevector magnitude |q|. Finally, the rate varies inversely with the nanowire cross-sectional area A. This can be conceptualized as follows: A broader area leads to a reduction in the vibrational amplitude of each bond for a given mode energy (thus lowering the electron-phonon coupling strength per phonon), without simultaneously increasing the number of phonon modes (in the 1D limit). Here, we seek to verify the deterministic nature of the measurement process in two steps: first, by ensuring that the absorbed photon energy is faithfully transferred to the internal energy of the nanowire, and second, by designing a network of QD-nanowire complexes on-chip inside a cavity such that multiple absorbers can be effectuated in parallel, and the system will have a vast number of opportunities to absorb each photon (since each photon travels back and forth inside the cavity). For the former step, it is essential to calculate the parasitic radiative loss rate in order to ensure that it is negligible compared to the energy transfer rate from the photoelectrons to the bulk phonons (calculated in the previous section). For the latter step, we will derive the absorption rate per QD-nanowire complex, from which we can determine the overall probability that a photon inside the cavity is absorbed by the system before it escapes the cavity. Both the radiative loss and absorption rates vary quadratically with the transition dipole moment amplitude |d +,-| (which was calculated in Appendix A). The radiative decay rate is determined as follows Note that the radiative loss rate scales cubically with the resonance frequency. Since the microwave frequency range we are interested in falls about 5 orders of magnitude below the typical optical frequency, we would expect the rate to be far smaller than the radiative loss rate for an optical transition. In the next section, we will numerically demonstrate that the radiative loss rate is multiple orders of magnitude smaller than the phonon emission rate, given practical material parameters. Next, we seek to derive the absorption rate for a QDnanowire complex and lay out a procedure for calculating the total absorption probability for a system of QD-nanowires on-chip inside a cavity. For a single complex, the photon absorption rate Γ abs is determined using Fermi's Golden Rule: where the parameters f ± (ω, T ) denote the equilibrium populations of the upper and lower levels, respectively, of the QD-Majorana hybridization ladder, and Γ ± represent the spectral broadening of the respective levels. In a lattice featuring a continuum of electronic states, the populations would be governed by the Fermi-Dirac distribution, with the thermal broadening dominated by electron-electron interaction. However, in this highly localized QD-Majorana system, the lack of a significant electron population strongly suppresses electron-electron interaction, leaving the dominant thermal broadening mechanism as the interaction between the QD-Majorana electrons and the nanowire phonons. To this end, the equilibrium electron populations are achieved when the phonon emission rate by upper-level electrons is balanced out by the phonon absorption rate by lower-level electrons. In turn, the phonon absorption and emission rates are proportional to n(ω, T ) and n(ω, T ) + 1, respectively, where n(ω, T ) represents the phonon number for a mode featuring a frequency ω with a lattice temperature T . Using the Bose-Einstein distribution to model the phonon population, we find the following relationship between f + and f -: . (47) Furthermore, in the low-temperature limit, each twolevel system consists of a single ground-state electron and a vacuum excited state. Consequently, the total electron population for each two-level system should be one, with the individual-state population representing the probability that the single electron is residing in that state: The above 2 expressions yield the following state populations: As expected, for the low-temperature limit (k B T ω), all of the population is concentrated in the ground state (i.e, f -→ 1 and f + → 0), whereas in the hightemperature limit (k B T ω), the spectral broadening makes the states indistinguishable in population (i.e., f -, f + → 1/2. We now turn to the spectral broadening of the upper and lower states (Γ + and Γ -, respectively). As we discussed previously, the electron-phonon interaction serves as the dominant decay mechanism for both states. Consequently, Γ + and Γ -are approximately equivalent to the phonon emission and absorption rates, respectively, at frequency ω and temperature T . Based on Eq. ( Comporting with intuition regarding thermal broadening, a higher temperature leads to a higher spectral broadening, and vice versa. We are thus in a position to derive a closed-form expression for the single-pass absorption probability P abs = Γ abs l/c for a single photon in a cavity of length l and beam area A beam (such that the effective cavity volume V = A beam l), substituting state populations f ± (ω, T ) from Eqs. ( (53) where x = ω/k B T represents the ratio between the gap energy and the thermal energy parameter. Note that the single-pass absorption probability for each QD-nanowire complex varies inversely with the beam area A beam . Consequently, for an array of complexes on a 2D chip, the total single-pass absorption probability will vary with the spatial density of complexes σ = N/A beam , where N is the number of complexes covered by the beam: The optimal method for achieving deterministic photon absorption is by placing the chip in a high-finesse cavity. In general, Bragg mirrors can feature transmittance rates as low as 1 ppm In the next section, we will calculate the numerical value for the net absorption probability P abs,chip given a maximal on-chip complex density σ. The results will demonstrate near-deterministic photon absorption by the detector system. Here, we provide a recipe for optimizing the controllable parameters, namely the nanowire dimensions, the nanowire material, the s-wave superconducting material used to induce superconductivity in the nanowire (and the associated critical temperature), and the baseline temperature relative to the critical temperature. We also calculate the temperature increase and corresponding resistance increase for a single absorbed photon, accounting for thermal dissipation. We start by discussing the trade-offs when choosing an s-wave superconductor based on the critical temperature. This serves as the key temperature parameter, since the baseline temperature is only about 10-20% lower than the critical temperature (as we will discuss later in this section). The primary advantage of a lower temperature is more deterministic detection, due to a greater photon absorption rate. The increase in the photon absorption rate is due to two effects of suppressing the electron-phonon interaction rate: first, the spectral broadening of the hybridized QD-Majorana states is reduced, thus sharpening the absorption peak; second, the population contrast between the upper and lower hybridized states is increased, thus causing the raw photon absorption process to dominate more strongly over stimulated emission. On the other hand, the key advantage of a higher critical temperature is a larger superconducting gap, which allows for detection of photons in a wider range of frequencies. Another controllable parameter is the nanowire crosssectional area A, which plays an important role in the electron-phonon interaction rate. In order to suppress the spectral broadening of the QD-Majorana system (thus ensuring a high absorption rate and a deterministic detection process), we set A high enough such that the nonradiative decay rate Γ nr (see Eq. ( On the other hand, we set A low enough such that the phonon modes behave as a true 1D system, i.e. the energy gap between phonon wavevectors separated along the transverse axis is much greater than the thermal energy k B T , thereby ensuring that the phonon population in the transverse-propagating branches is negligible and the heat capacity is minimized (thus optimizing the resolution of the detector): Together, these two conditions set a range for the nanowire diameter (which approximately equals √ A) in terms of the baseline temperature T = rT c (where r is the ratio between the baseline temperature and critical temperature) and the material properties: (58) Based on the example of InAs (indium arsenide) as a typical nanowire, we use the material parameters v s ≈ 4500 m/s We now consider the optimal range of baseline temperatures, which is related to the critical temperature of the superconducting metal used to induce superconductivity in the nanowire. Here, it is essential to choose a material such that the superconducting gap (the energy required to break a Cooper pair) is significantly larger than the photon frequency in order to ensure that the photon can only be absorbed by the QD-Majorana complex at either edge rather than by the nanowire bulk. For proximityinduced superconductivity in a nanowire, studies have shown that the critical temperature is similar to the critical temperature of the metal inducing the superconductivity For a resonance frequency of 5 GHz (i.e., ω = π × 10 10 s -1 ), a reasonable low-end value for T c would be 0.39 K, i.e. the critical temperature for titanium On the other hand, based on the dipole moment matrix element amplitude of |d +,-| = 1.8 × 10 -26 C • m (as calculated in Appendix A), the radiative decay rate is determined using the expression laid out in Sec. V: for ω = π×10 10 s -1 . The radiative loss rate is thus negligible even compared to the minimum nonradiative decay rate. As a result, the excited photoelectron in the QD-Majorana system will decay through the desired phonon emission channel rather than through the undesired spontaneous photon emission process. Having established that the energy transfer from the excited photoelectrons to the nanowire phonons is dominant, we now return to our analysis of the absorption probability as a function of temperature and nanowire diameter in order to prove that the overall detection process is deterministic. As discussed previously, we select the baseline temperature range 0.3 to 0.7 K. For the diameters, we select the values roughly satisfying Eq. ( Next, we consider the resolution of the detector by calculating the temperature increase per absorbed photon. Here, it is important to consider the role played by thermal dissipation, which will serve to lower the peak temperature increase. As depicted in Fig. gitudinal resistance, with the other end of each lead connecting to a thermal reservoir. These leads thus serve as the dominant channel of thermal dissipation. Given a length l lead , cross-sectional area A lead , and thermal conductivity k t for each lead, the rate constant for thermal dissipation through the 2 leads can be calculated in terms of the nanowire heat capacity C ph (T ) and the heat capacity C s of the s-wave superconducting strips as follows: where we substituted the relationship between C ph and the temperature T shown in Eq. where n denotes the molar density of the material (i.e. 10 5 mol/m 3 for aluminum, corresponding to 4 atoms per unit cell), V s denotes the volume of the material, and γ = 1.35 × 10 -3 J/(mol • K 2 ). Regarding the volume, the material covers about 4/5 of the nanowire length, with a thickness as low as d s = 5 nm, yielding V s ≈ 0.8d s L √ A, where L and √ A are the nanowire length and diameter, respectively. Finally, as will be discussed later in this section, the baseline temperature T lies slightly below the critical temperature T c , with a relationship of approximately T ≈ 0.86T c . Substituting these, we find that C s is linear in the nanowire length L and baseline temperature T , as is the case with the nanowire heat capacity C ph : where ζ = 9.4×10 -7 J/(K 2 •m 2 ). Based on Eq. ( Per Eq. ( Given an input heat transfer rate from the absorbed photoelectron at a rate Γ nr , we can evaluate the actual temperature increase per absorbed photon as a function of ideal increase (∆T ) max using the following differential equation: Solving this, we find that the attenuation factor (i.e. the ratio between the peak temperature increase and the dissipationless ideal increase) becomes a function of r = γ dis /Γ nr : Note that if the dissipation rate is much higher than the nonradiative decay rate (i.e. if r 1), then this relationship reduces to ∆T ≈ (∆T ) max /r. We can obtain an analytical approximate expression for ∆T based on the dissipation rate γ dis from Eq. (67) and the nonradiative electron-phonon interaction rate Γ nr from Eq. ( Note that the temperature increase for the highdissipation regime is independent of nanowire length L, since the higher heat capacity associated with a greater length leads to a reduced ideal temperature increased but also a lower dissipation rate, with these two shifts cancelling out. For the other two controllable parameters, i.e. nanowire cross-sectional area A and baseline temperature T , ∆T increases with temperature and decreases with cross-sectional area. These correlations are due to the fact that the a lower cross-sectional area and a higher temperature yield a greater electron-phonon interaction rate, as previously mentioned, thus causing more rapid heat transfer into the nanowire phonons and enhancing the peak temperature increase. We now substitute practical values to numerically calculate the temperature increase per absorbed photon. Regarding the lead dimensions, each of our superconducting aluminum leads features a minimum diameter of 100 nm and a maximum length (from nanowire to thermal FIG. where L between is the overall length of the region between the s-wave superconducting strips, and the parameter δ represents the distance between each end of the intermediate region and the side of the corresponding lead facing the center of the nanowire. In general, the length of each s-wave strip should be greater than the material's superconducting coherence length L , while the length of the intermediate region should be significantly less than 2L This yields a strip-to-strip distance of L between = 0.2L. FIG. Further, given a lead diameter of 100 nm and a spacing of 150 nm between the s-wave material and the side of the lead facing the material, δ reduces to 250 nm. In general, the rate of increase of resistivity with temperature, dρ e /dT , varies with the magnetic field along the nanowire. Generalizing from the results in Fig. where n = 0.6 and 1.7 for B = 0.15B c and 0.25B c , respectively. Figure For the purpose of setting a precise baseline temperature, it is important to note that the critical temperature decreases slightly as the magnetic field is increased to 0.25B c , reaching values of 0.97T c,0 and 0.937T c,0 for field strengths of 0.15B c and 0.25B c , respectively. As previously discussed, we set the baseline temperature 10% below the critical temperature, yielding baseline values of 0.873T c,0 and 0.843T c,0 for the respective fields, corre-sponding to T ≈ 0.5 K. Throughout the relevant range of nanowire lengths, we find a resistance increase above in the kiloohm range, far above the minimum resolution for resistance measurement. In fact, the resistance increase per photon is on the order of 9 orders of magnitude higher than the corresponding resistance increase in a Cd 3 As 2 device We have theoretically demonstrated a revolutionary ultra-high-precision microwave photon number detector using a 1D system consisting of a nanowire coupled to a quantum dot at each end. To the best of our knowledge, our system serves as the first real-world application of Majorana zero modes since topological computing. The Majorana edge states couple with the quantum dots, giving rise to a hybridized energy spectrum well-suited for microwave photon absorption, while the superconducting nanowire bulk acts as a bolometer. As with our previous Cd 3 As 2 detector In addition to serving as a photon number detector, the nanowire-QD system will provide a highly promising platform for conclusively proving the existence of Majorana zero modes. Specifically, demonstrating photon absorption would prove the existence of a zero-energy edge mode that hybridizes with the quantum dot. Furthermore, we can verify the spinlessness and chargeneutrality of such a mode by applying new magnetic and DC electric fields to test the Zeeman and Stark effects, respectively. The energy level of a spinless and chargeneutral Majorana edge mode would be unperturbed by these fields, while the quantum dot level would shift, thus breaking the QD-Majorana hybridization and suppressing photon absorption. Our nanowire-QD system thus holds significant potential in solving one of the central physics questions in recent decades. In solving for the dipole matrix elements, it is conventional to express the dipole operator d in terms of the momentum operator p instead: where q e and m represent the electron charge and effective mass, respectively, and ω = (E + -E -)/ . In terms of the hybrid states, Eqs. (A1) and (A2) imply that all transitions between higher-energy and lower-energy states, i.e. |A, -↔ |A, + , |B, -↔ |B, + , |A, -↔ |B, + , and |B, -↔ |A, + are valid. Noting that all hopping fundamentally takes place between |01 and |10 (representing a carrier going back-and-forth between the QD and Majorana modes), and utilizing the fact that for the higher-energy (lower-energy) states, the coefficients for |01 and |10 feature equal (opposite) signs, we find that all of the transitions for the QD-Majorana complex on the left end of the nanowire feature the same matrix-element amplitude: where n i and n f can each equal either A or B. Note that the result in the last line is a consequence of the Hermitian nature of the momentum operator p. Next, we examine the dipole matrix elements for the right end of the nanowire. As in the left end, we substitute the representation of the composite states shown in Eqs. ( Note that the sign corresponding to |01 and |10 each is the same for the A and C superpositions, as well as for the B and D superpositions. Consequently, the matrixelement amplitude for each transition is equivalent to that calculated in Eq. (A4): where n i and n f can each equal either C or D. It is worth noting that these matrix elements are nonzero if and only if the QD-Majorana hopping dipole moment contains an imaginary component. Indeed, since p = -i ∇, and since |10 and |01 are both localized states with fully real wavefunction values in position space, the matrix elements are fully imaginary, as desired. Defining ŷ as the direction of the electric field E, the matrix-element amplitudes for d • Ê thus reduce to the following: Although the localized states |10 and |01 effectively reduce to Dirac delta functions from the point of view of the nanowire length, it is convenient to model them as ground-state solutions to finite potential wells, with exponentially decaying tails outside their respective wells: where κ, A, and the normalization coefficient N are functions of the well width w and the constant k (proportional to the square of the state energy): A = e κw/2 cos kw 2 , (A11) The potential well depth can be expressed in terms of k and κ as V 0 = f (k 2 + κ 2 ), where f = 2 /2m. In order for the exponentially decaying part of each wavefunction to be dominant, it is necessary that the well width be much smaller than the wavefunction span, i.e. w 1/κ. Furthermore, for the ground state, it is necessary that w 1/k. Applying these limits, we find that the normalization coefficient N approximately reduces to √ κ, and A ≈ 1. Then, if the QD and Majorana mode centers are separated by a length l > 1/κ w, the dipole matrix element is solved by the following integral: Note that for |y -l/2| > (l -w)/2, the initial and final wavefunctions are both even about y = l/2, thus negating the contribution of these regions to the dipole matrix element. It is also worth noting that at small center-tocenter distances l, the dipole matrix element increases with the distance, whereas at long distances, the correlation is reversed. This is due to the trade-off between an increase of dipole moment with distance between charges and the drop-off in wavefunction overlap with distance. Next, we seek to solve for the center-to-center distance l that produces the desired QD-Majorana coupling λ = ω/2, where ω is the RF photon angular frequency. Note that λ represents the transition amplitude for a charge carrier between the QD mode and the Majorana mode. To calculate this hopping parameter, we use as our operator the alteration of the potential energy landscape induced by the new neighboring potential well: Consequently, the hopping parameter is determined as follows: As intuitively expected, the dipole moment amplitude linearly varies with the center-to-center length l. Regarding the value of κ, although the coherence length of the Majorana wavefunction is about 14 nm in ironbased superconducting nanowires Using the inverse of this as κ, along with an electron effective mass of 0.020m 0 in InAs Appendix B: Fine-Tuning the Dipole Matrix Element Here, we discuss the adjustments required to the height of the barrier separating the QD and Majorana wells in order to tune the QD-Majorana coupling strength. This method is advantageous in that it preserves symmetry in the potential energy landscape for the two modes. Labeling the shift in the potential energy barrier as δV , we obtain the following wavefunctions for the quantum dot and Majorana states, respectively, in the narrow-well limit: where κ 1 and κ 2 are defined in the following manner: Similar to our approximation that k 2 ≈ 2κ/w for the case of V 1 = V 2 = V , we can show that k 2 ≈ (κ 1 + κ 2 )/w for the general case. If we also assume a perturbative barrier potential energy shift such that δV V 1 , we can approximate the relationship between the decay constants κ 1 and κ 2 and the original κ (for δV = 0) as follows: We are now in a position to calculate the change in the hopping parameter induced by the barrier potential energy shift δV . To this end, we use the method that we introduced in Eq. (A15): Defining δκ = mδV /(2 2 κ), we can make the first-order approximation that κ 1 κ 2 ≈ κ 2 , leading to the conclusion that the dominant effect of the shift in the potential energy barrier occurs on the exponential term due to the replacement e -κl → e -(κ+δk)l . Consequently, given the fact that λ is proportional to the resonance frequency ω, the original resonance frequency ω 0 can be shifted to a different value ω via the following potential energy barrier shift δV : |d +,-| ≈ q e l 2 We can express the dipole moment perturbation δ|d +,-| due to the barrier potential energy shift δV required to induce the resonance frequency shift ω 0 → ω by substituting the approximate expressions from Eq. (B5) and (B6), as well as the expression in Eq. (B8) relating δV to the ratio between new and original resonance frequencies: δ|d +,-| ≈ q e l 2 δκ 2κ ≈ q e l 4κ m 2 2 κ δV ≈ -q e 4κ ln ω ω 0 .