Electrically conductive objects can be detected using the principle of electromagnetic induction where a primary oscillating magnetic field induces eddy currents in the object, which in turn produce a secondary magnetic field that can be measured with a magnetometer. We have developed a portable radio-frequency optically pumped magnetometer (RF OPM) working in unshielded conditions with sub-pT/ √ Hz magnetic field sensitivity when used for the detection of small oscillating magnetic fields, setting a new benchmark for the sensitivity of a portable RF OPM in unshielded conditions. Using this OPM, we have detected the induced magnetic field from aluminium disks with diameters as small as 1.5 cm and with the disks being ∼ 25 cm from both the excitation coil and the magnetometer. When used for eddy current detection, our magnetometer achieves a sensitivity of a 2-6 pT/ √ Hz. We have also detected a moving aluminium disk using our RF OPM and analysed the magnetometer signals which depend on the position of the disk, illustrating the potential of high sensitivity RF OPMs for remote sensing applications. Optically pumped magnetometers (OPMs) In this work, we present a portable RF OPM working in unshielded conditions with sub-pT/ √ Hz sensitivity to small oscillating magnetic fields. When detecting eddy currents, we use a differential technique The experimental setup for detecting conductive objects is shown in Fig. A stable DC field B 0 oriented along the z-axis is required for the operation of our OPM. Operating the OPM at 10.5 kHz, which is an appropriate frequency for the detection of our Al samples, requires the DC field to have an amplitude of 3.00 μT. The Earth's magnetic field is 30-60 μT and thus needs to be compensated for in order to have a stable field along the z-axis. A 3-axis fluxgate magnetometer (Bartington Mag690) is used to measure the ambient field and its detection point is 6.25 cm from the centre of the vapour cell. This 3-axis fluxgate has a bandwidth of 1.5 kHz and can measure magnetic fields up to ±100 μT in x-, yand z-directions, which makes it suitable for measuring the Earth's field as well as 50 Hz magnetic field noise. The two magnetometers are placed inside a 3D-printed cylinder, which is surrounded by flexible printed circuit board cosine-theta coils capable of producing magnetic fields along the yand z-directions and also by a solenoid which can produce a magnetic field along the xdirection. The x-, yand z-fluxgate outputs (100 mV/μT) are fed into the analogue inputs of a field-programmable gate array (FPGA, sbRIO-9627). A proportional-integral-derivative (PID) controller implemented on the FPGA outputs a voltage to a current feedback amplifier (LT1210) and a current is sent through the coils, producing magnetic fields to cancel the Earth's field at the position of the fluxgate in the xand y-directions, whilst keeping the z-static field fixed to B 0 = 3.00 μT. Without the PID in place, the 50 Hz noise measured by the fluxgate along the z-axis is ∼ 21.2 nT p-p (corresponding to ∼ 74 Hz when converting to Hz using the caesium gyromagnetic ratio). With the PID in place, the 50 Hz noise is reduced by at least an order of magnitude down to ∼ 2.5 nT p-p (corresponding to ∼ 9 Hz precession frequency), reducing the 50 Hz noise to below the linewidth of the magnetic resonance (40 Hz). Further noise reduction can potentially be achieved with the implementation of an active noise control system for magnetic fields The first part of the characterisation of the OPM in unshielded conditions involves measuring the magnetic resonance, which is done by sweeping the frequency of an applied oscillating magnetic field B 2 (t) produced by a "compensation coil" (5 mm diameter) inside the OPM head adjacent to the vapour cell. The amplitude of the RF field B 2 is 3.36 nT rms 33 . The peak value of 4.32 V in Fig. Once this step is done, the RF frequency is fixed to where there is maximum signal in X, which in this case is at 10.5 kHz. A 240 s time trace was taken (see Fig. The characterisation of the OPM thus far has been done by applying an oscillating magnetic field B 2 (t) using the small compensation coil placed inside the OPM. During eddy current measurements, the excitation coil which produces the primary oscillating magnetic field B 1 (t) is also used. We employ a differential method , where B ec (t, r OPM ) is the secondary magnetic field generated by the conductive object. The differential technique improves the SNR and thereby allows for the detection of small objects at a distance, because it allows for the detection of the small signal B ec (t, r OPM ) on a zero background. Without the differential technique, one would measure the signal from the conductive object on top of the large primary magnetic field, i.e. B tot (t, r OPM ) = B 1 (t, r OPM ) + B ec (t, r OPM ), which for OPMs lead to non-linearities and additional noise. The measurement shown in Fig. The intrinsic sensitivity of the OPM was tested by placing the OPM in a magnetic shield (Twinleaf MS-2). Time traces with the compensation coil on and off were taken, from which the Allan deviation was calculated and plotted in Fig. Results are now presented on the detection of Al (grade 6061 with conductivity σ ∼ 25 MS/m) disks of 4 mm thickness with varying diameters (1 cm, 1.5 cm, 2 cm, 3 cm, 5 cm) in unshielded conditions using a frequency of 10.5 kHz. The excitation coil and the OPM (with the compensation coil right next to the vapour cell) are separated by 50.3 cm. One set of measurements were taken with the Al disks only 6.4 cm from the excitation coil (43.9 cm from the OPM), and a second set of measurements taken with the disks roughly halfway between the excitation coil and the OPM (23.9 cm from OPM to disk, 26.4 cm from disk to excitation coil). The compensation coil was used throughout these measurements. Figure Additional time traces when the disks are placed approximately halfway between the excitation coil and OPM are included in Appendix A. From such time traces we can calculate the induced field in pT as a function of disk diameter for the two disk positions (see Fig. Our experimental results are compared to analytical formulae calculated from a simple model based on the work by Honke and Bidinosti In Honke and Bidinosti at the position of the OPM. If the object is exactly halfway between the excitation coil and the OPM (i.e r = r ), Eq. 1 further simplifies to The experimental data sets in Fig. To investigate the discrepancy between theory and experiment further, numerical simulations of the experimental setup were performed in COMSOL using the methods in were not taken into account, although these would also contribute to uncertainties in the numerical simulations. With regard to experimental uncertainties, we calculate the standard deviation of the induced field from 5 repeated measurements, see e.g. Fig. The ratio B ec /B 1 measured at the OPM position can be used as a figure of merit for the remote detection of conductive objects. For the 1.5 cm diameter disk which was clearly detectable, we have B ec /B 1 ∼ 2 • 10 -4 . Using the noise level of 2 pT for X from the Allan deviation calculations, the smallest detectable diameter should be around 0.7 cm (see Fig. To illustrate the potential of using RF OPMs for remote sensing, we have detected the 5 cm diameter disk as it was moved off-axis along a linear path from y = -22.5 cm to y = 22.5 cm at a fixed x = 6.4 cm position. The disk was moved by hand with an approximately constant velocity on an orthogonal rail (not shown) parallel to the table which was added to the setup in Fig. RF OPMs are sensitive to oscillating magnetic fields perpendicular to the direction of the static field B 0 , which in our case are the xand y-directions. The measured secondary field can be written as where x and y are unit vectors along the xand y-directions. For a moving disk, the amplitudes of the induced field at the magnetometer position, B ec,x (t) and B ec,y (t), will vary slowly as a function of time due to the changing position of the disk. Overall, the induced field is oscillating at the excitation frequency ω RF and with a phase θ which here is defined as the phase relative to the compensation field (which is 180°out-ofphase with the primary field). The phase θ should not depend on the position of the disk. When the thickness t of the disk is much larger than the skin depth δ , or equivalently the excitation frequency f = 2πω RF 1/ πt 2 μ 0 σ , then the secondary field will be 180°out-of-phase with the primary field In the above we assumed that the amplitudes B ec,x (t) and B ec,y (t) vary slowly in time compared to the oscillation period 1/ f , the inverse of the magnetometer bandwidth (1/40 Hz) and the lock-in time constant of 10 ms. From Eq. 4 we see that the lock-in outputs X(t) and Y (t) from the RF OPM depend on the xand y-components of the induced magnetic field, B ec, x (t) and B ec, y (t) respectively, as well as its phase θ . When the object is placed on-axis, the measured secondary field only has an x-component and the lock-in signals are (disk on-axis). (5) Figure In our experiment the phase θ is close to zero. In a more general situation, however, the phase θ will be non-zero and will depend on the object's size and shape, its electrical conductivity and magnetic permeability, and the excitation frequency Based on the geometry/symmetry of our experimental setup and the fact that the aluminium disk is moving parallel to the y-axis, we expect that B ec, x ∝ X is symmetric around y = 0 (equivalent to 8.1(0.2) s in Fig. Our method of detecting conductive objects using RF OPMs can potentially be extended to localising unknown conductive objects moving along arbitrary paths. As a single RF OPM only provides two measurements X(t) and Y (t) at each instance of time, more RF OPMs would be needed to uniquely determine the position of the object in real time. Furthermore, one would need to develop algorithms for extracting the location of the object based on the recorded data. Also, localisation of stationary conductive objects using one or more RF OPMs could be done by placing the RF OPMs on a moving platform and recording data while the platform is moving over some area. In conclusion, we have developed a portable sub-pT/ √ Hz (when B 1 (t) = B 2 (t) ∼ 0) radio-frequency optically pumped magnetometer (RF OPM) working in unshielded/ambient conditions, setting a new benchmark for the sensitivity of a portable RF OPM in unshielded conditions. Using electromagnetic induction, we have demonstrated remote detection of electrically conductive objects far from both the excitation coil and the magnetometer. We detected a 2a = 1.5 cm diameter aluminium disk at a distance of r ∼ 25 cm from both the OPM and the excitation coil i.e. at a distance r a much larger than the object size. This detection distance could be further extended using larger primary magnetic fields or by improving the sensitivity of the OPM, which had a sensitivity of 2 pT/ √ Hz during the eddy current measurements when B 1 (t) + B 2 (t) = 0 and B 1 (t) = B 2 (t) 0. To illustrate the potential of high sensitivity RF OPMs for remote sensing applications, we detected a moving aluminium disk using our RF OPM. We analysed the magnetometer signals to extract two spatial components of the induced magnetic field which depend on the position of the disk. Using this principle with multiple OPMs and an extraction algorithm should allow for the location and motion of conductive objects to be determined in the future. primary magnetic field at the OPM position for the two cases 8r 3 (R 2 c /(4r 2 ) + 1) 3/2 . (C3) In the limit where the object is placed far from the excitation coil (r R c ), this expression simplifies to Inserting the relevant numbers for our setup (r ∼ 25 cm and R c ∼ 6 cm) we calculate B 1 (x = 2r)/B 1 (x = 0) ∼ 0.002. By placing the excitation coil and the OPM on opposite sides of the object, the primary magnetic field is orders of magnitude smaller at the OPM position. This configuration will therefore enable much larger detection distances compared to if the excitation coil and the OPM were co-located.