Antimony sulfide (Sb 2 S 3 ) and selenide (Sb 2 Se 3 ) are emerging earth-abundant absorbers for photovoltaic applications. Solar cell performance depends strongly on charge carrier transport properties, but these remain poorly understood in Sb 2 X 3 (X = S, Se). Here we report band-like transport in Sb 2 X 3 by investigating the electronlattice interaction and theoretical limits of carrier mobility using first-principles density functional theory and Boltzmann transport calculations. We demonstrate that transport in Sb 2 X 3 is governed by large polarons with moderate Fröhlich coupling constants (α ≈ 2), large polaron radii (extending over several unit cells) and high carrier mobility (an isotropic average of >10 cm 2 V -1 s -1 for both electrons and holes). The room temperature mobility is intrinsically limited by scattering from polar phonon modes and is further reduced in highly defective samples. Our study confirms that the performance of Sb 2 X 3 solar cells is not limited by intrinsic self-trapping. Antimony chalcogenides (Sb 2 X 3 ; X=S, Se) have emerged as promising light absorbing materials due to their attractive electronic and optical properties, including ideal band gaps 1 (1.1-1.8 eV) and high optical absorption coefficients (>10 5 cm -1 ). In this work, we studied the tendency for polaron trapping and its effect on charge carrier transport in Sb 2 X 3 by first-principles density functional theory (DFT) and Boltzmann transport calculations. The electron-lattice interaction in Sb 2 X 3 was explored through the Fröhlich polaron coupling constant and Schultz polaron radius. Modelling of electron and hole polarons in Sb 2 X 3 indicates the intrinsic formation of large polarons and contrast to recent suggestions of small polarons (i.e. self-trapped carriers). Ribbon formation is driven by the Sb lone pair with ribbons stacked together by weak interactions. For an alternative assessment, we performed direct first-principles DFT calculations to model charge carriers in Sb 2 X 3 . There are two challenges for reliable polaron modelling. The first is the self-interaction error 41 arising from the approximate form of the exchangecorrelation functional which causes electrons to spuriously delocalise. Firstly, the large dielectric constants (∼ 100) and small effective masses (∼ 0.1) in Sb 2 X 3 11 suggest that the Coulomb interaction is strongly screened and a large exciton radius is favoured. The small experimental exciton binding energies (0.01-0.05 eV for Sb 2 S 3 and 0.04 eV for Sb 2 Se 3 ) 31,54 further indicate weak electron-hole interactions in Sb 2 X 3 . Additionally, experimental measurements of the imaginary part of the frequency-dependent complex photoconductivity in Sb 2 Se 3 do not reveal any negative components To further understand the nature of transport in Sb 2 X 3 the first-principles carrier mobility This agrees well with previous experimental reports that the defect density is crucial to the carrier transport in Sb 2 X 3 , whereby bulk defect densities above 10 15 cm -3 led to significant degradation in conversion efficiency. According to our results (Fig. Conclusively, our results show no evidence for carrier self-trapping in Sb 2 X 3 . While selftrapping has been proposed based on several experimental observations, 15,73 large polaron carriers do not contradict these observations: i) a Stokes shift of 0.6 eV and broad photoluminescence (PL); ii) picosecond carrier decay kinetics; iii) absence of photoexcited carrier density saturation (up to 10 20 cm -3 ); and iv) polarized light emission in Sb 2 X 3 single crystals. Firstly, a large Stokes shift and broad PL is found in many chalcogenide semiconductors, especially those with deep defect levels such as Sb 2 X 3 . Secondly, the timescale for carrier decay due to self-trapping is typically sub-picosecond or several picoseconds, while a timescale of tens of picoseconds is found in transient absorption (TA) measurements of Sb 2 X 3 . Finally, polarized light emission is found in many semiconductors and is connected to the crystal and defect structure. Therefore, we find no evidence that directly supports intrinsic carrier self-trapping in these materials. In summary, we investigated the nature of charge carriers in Sb 2 X 3 semiconductors. Our results strongly suggest that self-trapping (i.e. the formation of small polarons) is unlikely to occur and that instead charge transport involves large polarons with moderate mobility. In particular, we found: i) intermediate Fröhlich coupling constants (∼2); ii) large Schultz polaron radii (∼40 Å); iii) the absence of electron or hole polaron formation in DFT calculations using the bond distortion and electron attractor methods; and iv) carrier mobilities >10 cm 2 V -1 s -1 at room temperature for both electrons and holes (in agreement with experiments). We conclude that there is no theoretical evidence for small polaron formation in pristine Sb 2 X 3 and self-trapping is unlikely to be the origin of the low opencircuit voltages in Sb 2 X 3 devices as reported in previous studies. The Fröhlich polaron properties were solved using the open-source package PolaronMobility. The atomic positions were optimised until the Hellman-Feynman forces on each atom were below 0.0005 eV Å-1 for unit cells and 0.01 eV Å-1 for 3×1×1 supercells. The energy convergence criterion was set to 10 -6 eV. Γ -centered k -point meshes were set to 7×2×2 and 2×2×2 for geometry optimisation with primitive unit cells and supercells, respectively. For uniform band structure calculations which were used as inputs for AMSET, a denser k -point mesh of 19×10×10 was used which is consistent with our previous calculations of carrier effective masses. where E ∞ and E 0 are the high-frequency and static dielectric constants, respectively, m * is the effective mass and ω is the effective phonon frequency. The effective mass and effective frequency were calculated using the AMSET package. where v and w are Feynman-model variational parameters which specify the polaron state. They are solved variationally by the Feyman polaron model using Fröhlich polaron coupling constant α as an input. μ is the reduced effective mass. The effect of grain boundary scattering on the mobility in Sb 2 X 3 was evaluated by incorporating an average grain size using the AMSET package. According to our results (Table replaced system, suggesting one extra hole in Sb 2 S 3 . The structures with the substituted atom and local distortions were fully relaxed. Finally, for each non-equivalent S case, we used the lowest-energy structures among different distortions, replaced back the S atom and relaxed the configuration again. Nevertheless, all structures went back to perfect configurations, indicating that the localised polarons are unlikely to form. Nevertheless, we note that using a k -point mesh of 1×1×1 to do geometry relaxation could lead to localised solution in some cases (Fig. The k -point meshes used to calculate transport properties were tested (shown in Fig. (15) Yang, Z.; Wang, X.; Chen, Y.; Zheng, Z.; Chen, Z.; Xu, W.; Liu, W.; Yang, Y. M.; Zhao, J.; Chen, T., et al. Ultrafast self-trapping of photoexcited carriers sets the upper limit on antimony trisulfide photovoltaic devices. Nat. Commun. 2019, 10, 1-8.