We present a formalism for modelling parametric amplification by resonators subject to ratelimited nonlinearity of mixed reactive/dissipative character, with relevance to superconducting devices. The nonlinearity is assumed to be characterised by a single state parameter that responds to changes in the energy stored in the resonator with finite response time. We show how the operating point and small signal amplification behaviour of the pumped resonator can be calculated, characterised and optimised in terms of a set of three dimensionless parameters. The formalism is illustrated with a simple, first-order, model nonlinearity and the implications for amplification via quasiparticle generation in a superconductor discussed. Throughout we describe how the parameters needed to characterise the device can be determined experimentally from steady-state measurements. A key result of this paper is that rate-limiting of a nonlinear mechanism does not preclude amplification, although it does limit the bandwidth over which it may be achieved. There is demand for microwave amplifiers with near quantum-limited noise performance for readout of quantum devices such as qubits, as well as for experiments in fundamental physics such as axion haloscopes and measurements of the neutrino mass by cyclotron radiation emission spectroscopy. Where only moderate fractional bandwidth is needed, parametric amplifiers made from nonlinear superconducting resonators are a competitive technology. As well as delivering the necessary sensitivity, they are easily integrated with other superconducting components to realise more complicated systems, and can be operated in a phase-sensitive mode, allowing generation and amplification of squeezed states. Although narrower band than their superconducting travelling counterparts Several sources of nonlinearity can be used to realise a superconducting resonator amplifier. A popular approach has been to use composite superconducting devices such as SQUIDs as a source of nonlinear inductance Whether a source of nonlinearity can be used for parametric amplification under pumping and, if so, how to optimize for gain, bandwidth and power handling depends critically on three characteristics: (i) The ratio of reactive to dissipative response. (ii) The 'large' signal behaviour of the nonlinearity and the corresponding accessible operating points under pumping. (iii) What we will call the 'speed' of the nonlinearity, corresponding to the maximum rate at which it can modulate device parameters. Typical analyses of resonator amplifiers focus only on the ideal case: a purely-reactive, instantaneous, nonlinearity with simple functional form, e.g. quadratic dependence on a state variable. This is instructive in building a qualitative understanding of amplifier operation, however it is straightforward to see how even small deviations from this ideal may change device behaviour significantly. For example, any one of the characteristics on its own may prevent gain being achieved: (i) The presence of nonlinear dissipation may alter the dynamics of the resonator in a such a way that gain becomes impossible. (ii) An operating point with the necessary small signal parameters for gain may not exist. (iii) The response time of the nonlinearity may be too slow to produce modulation of a device parameter at the rate necessary to couple signal and idler. A model that accounts for all three characteristics is therefore crucial to quantitatively interpret data and for design optimization. As an example, consider a device that uses nonlinearity in the surface impedance of a superconductor to achieve parametric amplification. The electrodynamics of a superconductor are governed by the populations of Cooper pairs and quasiparticles In this paper we present a framework for modelling parametric amplification in nonlinear resonators where the nonlinearity is of mixed reactive/dissipative type and rate-limited. We consider the mode of operation where the pump, signal and idler all lie within the bandwidth of the same resonant mode. The starting point is a large-signal model of the nonlinearity, derived either from theory or from measurements of the response of the resonator to a large signal tone, as discussed in our companion paper A. State-space representation of a nonlinear resonator coupled to a readout circuit Our model comprises a single resonator coupled to an N -port microwave readout circuit, as shown in Figure For a state-space representation, it is necessary to identify input, output and internal dynamical variables. To keep the analysis generic, we use variables normalized in terms of power and energy. At each port m of the coupling circuit we define input and output analytic signals a m (t) and b m (t), normalised so that P m (t) = |a m (t)| 2 -|b m (t)| 2 is the timeaveraged power flow into port m at time t. In the case of a transmission line port, a(t) and b(t) are the complex analytic-signal representations of the amplitudes of the incoming and outgoing power waves, respectively. For brevity, we group the input signals into a N -element column vector a(t), and likewise the output signals into an N -element column vector b(t). To characterise the state of the internal resonator, we use the complex amplitude u(t) of the resonant mode, normalised so that U (t) = |u(t)| 2 is the time-averaged total stored energy. First, consider the case where the resonator and coupling circuit are fully decoupled. Let f 0 and Q i be the resonant frequency and quality factor of the resonator in this limit. We refer to Q i as the internal Q-factor, as by definition it is associated solely with losses internal to the resonator. We assume that in this same limit, the readout circuit is reciprocal, lossless and that its behaviour for quasi-monochromatic signals having frequencies near f 0 can be characterised by a constant scattering matrix S 0 defined by The reciprocal and lossless conditions require S 0 be symmetric (S T 0 = S 0 , where T indicates matrix transposition) and unitary (S † 0 = S -1 0 , where superscript † indicates conjugate transposition). With the decoupled behaviour specified, for a linear resonator the state-space representation of the fully-coupled system follows immediately from temporal coupled mode theory and where k is an N -element vector determined by the coupling and We will refer to Q c as the coupling quality factor of the whole system, as it is associated with the power lost from the resonator through the now-coupled ports. For (2) and (3) to hold, we must have as shown in Section A 1 of the supplementary material, and discussed in detail in Section A 2 of the supplementary material provides a derivation of ( A nonlinear resonator can be modelled by modifying the right-hand sides of ( (3). A wide range of behaviour is possible, but most practical amplifiers satisfy two simple restrictions. First, the coupling is unaffected by the nonlinearity, and so the coupling vector k remains constant and (2) is unchanged. Second, the effect of the nonlinearity can be modelled as time-dependent shifts δf 0 (t) and δQ -1 i (t) in the resonant frequency and internal dissipation factor (reciprocal of the internal quality factor), with (3) becoming where Q r is the total Q-factor in the zero power limit, as given by According to where Q r is included as a normalising factor to simplify the algebra later. Second, the dynamical behaviour of the new variable is related to the time-averaged total energy U (t) stored in the resonator by a differential equation of the form: In this approach, g(ν) controls the nature of the nonlinearity, and h(v, U ) controls the dynamical behaviour of the solid-state process that drives the nonlinearity. Specifically, the real part of g(ν) controls the reactive response and the imaginary part the dissipative part, allowing both behaviours simultaneously. The function h(v, U ) has a dual role. Obviously, it determines the dynamical behaviour of v in response to changes in the energy in the resonator. However, since v must be constant in the steady state, its roots, as defined by solutions of h(v, U ) = 0, also determine the operating point(s) of the device. The rate limiting of the parametric modulation that occurs through the temporal filtering of (8) will be made explicit in the upcoming analysis. ( The most obvious are processes influenced directly by U , e.g. saturation of two-level-systems in the dielectric components of the device Examples include physical heating of the device (where v would be a temperature) and quasiparticle generation processes (where v would represent a quasiparticle excess and the power flow is the energy needed to break Cooper pairs at the necessary rate). In choosing the dependence to be based on the 'time-average' total energy, we have limited ourselves to considering 'slow' processes. This is consistent with our assumption that the processes of interest are rate-limited. 'Fast' processes exist that depend on u(t) 2 , i.e. the square of the complex amplitude of the field mode of the resonator. In this case, a resonator's parameters can be modulated at frequencies significantly greater than the pump and signal frequencies themselves. Although these effects can be included, we shall not, for brevity, discuss them here. Figure In this section, we will derive an alternative form of ( Define a new complex unit vector x by the relation for κ = |k|. The reason for defining a separate variable to denote |k| will become apparent shortly. ( (10) constrains x but does not define it uniquely, so we must find x either by circuit analysis (via k) or by measurement. Exploiting the fact S 0 is symmetric, then for an arbitrary vector v, From which we derive two special cases: The desired alternate form for ( where is the component parallel to x and a is the perpendicular component, so that x † • a (t) = 0. Similarly, define a new reflected signal b(t) corresponding to the component of b(t) parallel to x * by Consider substituting ( and From ( Going forward, it will be more convenient to work in terms of the active degrees of freedom a(t) and b(t) only, as described by ( so This form will prove particularly convenient when calculating the scattering parameters of the full circuit in the frequency domain. ( intuitively. Typically S 0 and k (and therefore x) will be known a priori from circuit analysis. If not S 0 , can usually be inferred from off-resonance measurements. Once S 0 is known, The nonlinear resonator described in Section II B can potentially operate as a parametric amplifier if it is driven into a nonlinear regime with a sufficiently strong 'pump' at frequency f p . If a much weaker input signal of frequency of frequency f s is applied simultaneously, nonlinear effects can produce a linearly amplified output at the 'signal' frequency f s , along with a new component at the 'idler' frequency 2f pf s . In this section we analyse this mode of operation. First we consider the response of the resonator to the pump alone, which determines the resonator's operating point. We then carry out a small-signal analysis about this operating point to derive expressions for the signal and idler gains. Finally, we consider how the quantities needed to predict these gains can be obtained from swept-frequency/power measurements of the steady state scattering parameters of the resonator. A. Response to the pump Assume a pump of the form is applied to the resonator, where a 0 is a constant. Given sufficient time the resonator will settle into a steady state where the nonlinear state parameter and total stored energy are constants: v(t) = v 0 and |u(t)| 2 = U 0 . Following Similarly, we would expect u( Expressions for b and u 0 in terms of a 0 can be found by solving (15)-( and Here y p = Q r (f pf 0 )/f 0 is the detuning of the pump frequency from the unpumped resonant frequency, measured in linewidths (in the limit of zero applied power). Expressing frequencies in terms of detunings will prove particularly convenient, as it removes the need to consider a specific resonant frequency, and we will find that the most interesting behaviour occurs when |y| is of order unity. Equations ( It is useful to define some new variables relating to the steady state behaviour that will simplify the subsequent analysis. Let and q r = Q r /Q c . The new variable p is a dimensionless parameter that will prove more convenient for characterising the operating point of the device than U 0 or v 0 directly. The second variable a * is a normalised form of the readout power relative to some chosen scale energy U * . In the rightmost part of (26), we have re-expressed |a 0 | 2 in terms of the total applied pump power P 0 = |a 0 | 2 , with the factor of |k T • a 0 | 2 /(|k| 2 |a 0 | 2 ) representing the fraction of this power contained in the active degree of freedom of the input signal. The third variable is simply Q r normalised to Q c . However, since we have the convenient result 0 ≤ q r ≤ 1 in general and Q i ≶ Q c for q r ≶ 0.5. Using these definitions in and for later use. The scattering matrix S p can be measured experimentally with a vector network analyser (VNA) that has controllable readout power. The only condition is that the frequency/power must be swept slowly enough to allow the internal state v to relax to its steady-state value at every point recorded. It is then possible to obtain Γ p from these measurements using Assume that a signal, a s (t), is applied in addition to the pump: The active input component then becomes for a s (t) = x † • a s (t). We will assume the signal is 'small' in the sense |a s (t)| |a 0 | for all t. Under this condition, we would expect all other variables to only differ slightly from their pump-only values. Approximate and where v 0 , u 0 and b 0 were defined in the previous section, and subscript s denotes the perturbation caused by the signal. We are now able find a new set of dynamical equations describing the relationships between the perturbations. Consider the behaviour of the state variable v characterising the internal process driving the nonlinearity. h(v, U ) in ( where the subscript 0 indicates that the derivatives are evaluated at the operating point: v = v 0 and U = U 0 . Substituting (31) and ( where we have retained only the terms to first-order in u s (t) and v s (t), and assumed that the higher order terms are small enough to ignore. In this form, the derivative of h with respect to v defines an effective relaxation time τ v for v s according to Similarly, the signal component of the mode amplitude, u s (t), acts as a forcing term for v s (t), with the derivative of h with respect to U determining the scaling factor. Rather than using the derivative directly, it will be more convenient to work with the dimensionless scaling factor Using ( An identical process can be carried out for the mode amplitude of the resonator. To do so, expand g(v) as a Taylor series around v 0 for (31), which gives where a second dimensionless scaling factor β has been defined: Substituting ( In the case of a purely linear device, the principle of superposition holds, and (41) would be the same as for the pump. In (41) we see two key differences as a result of the nonlinearity. First, the term g(v 0 )/Q r means the resonator behaves with resonant frequency and Q-factor determined by the pump, rather than the zero-power values. Second, there is an additional source term, proportional to e 2πifpt v s (t). Although we could carry both state parameters, u s and v s , forward in the analysis, it is simpler to use (38) to eliminate v s in (41), and solve purely for the mode amplitude, since only the latter directly affects the output. Under the assumption that the nonlinearity state parameter, v s , is zero at some time sufficiently far in the past, (38) has the solution We see that v s (t) has the form of a mixed signal: u s (t) multiplied by e -2πifpt . In the limit where the effective response time τ v is zero, v s (t) traces the mixed signal exactly, but for finite τ v the response is low-pass filtered down to a single-sided baseband of ≈ 2π/τ . Thus the nonlinear state parameter has frequency components at the difference between the pump and signal, which are generally slow. The low-pass filtered spectral content of v s is then mirrored in the resonant frequency and Q-factor. Substituting (42) into (41) gives which is the governing equation for the signal part of the mode amplitude. The last term on the right of (43), which characterises the effect of the nonlinear modulation on the resonator's parameters, will prove to be the key to providing amplification. Although explicit reference to the nonlinear state parameter has been removed, its role as an intermediate step is still apparent through the low-pass filtering. (43) allows the small-signal behaviour of the mode-amplitude to be calculated, but to complete the analysis we need a set of equations to relate it to the output signal. These follow by substituting (33) into ( C. Response to a sinusoidal signal Consider the response when the applied signal is a single tone: where the signal frequency is different to the pump frequency, f s = f p . To make progress, it is convenient to consider an intermediate function ψ(t) defined by Noting that and expanding out the real part , we can rewrite (43) in terms of ψ(t) as where p is as defined in ( (50) We will refer to q as the modulation factor ; its physical significance will be discussed in more detail in Section III D. The drive term and presence of ψ * in (49) together imply that ψ(t) must have a components at frequencies f sf p and -(f sf p ), with the latter corresponding to the idler frequency in the final signal. As such, we consider a solution of the form After substituting (51) into (49) and evaluating the integrals, decomposing the result into components at the two frequencies yields a pair of coupled linear equations for c i and c s . The latter can be expressed in matrix form as where is the detuning of the signal frequencies in linewidths and is the ratio of time of response time of nonlinearity state parameter v, at the operating point, to the ring-down time of the resonator. The parameter r provides a dimensionless measure of the significance of the relaxation time of v to the amplifier's performance: the larger r, the greater the effect. ( for The active component of the output signal must also contain the two frequencies. Let and define complex reflection coefficients Γ s = b s /a s and Γ i = b i /a * s as measured for the signal and idler frequencies respectively. Some care is needed in interpreting Γ i , as the reflection is between different frequency components. Note also the conjugation of a s in the definition of Γ i . Using (55), ( and These results fully characterise the scattering behaviour for the active field components at the signal and idler frequencies. It then follows from (45) that the full scattering matrix S s of the circuit at the signal frequencies, as defined by b s = S s • a s , is given by In the case of the idler frequency, we must define the scattering matrix by b i = S i • a * s in analogy with Γ i . There is no contribution from a s in (45) at idler frequencies, so we have (58)-(61) allow for power gain between the input and output signals under certain conditions, allowing the resonator to be used as an amplifier. The exact conditions and resulting behaviour are discussed in detail in Section IV. Previously, we introduced the dimensionless modulation factor q, defined by (50), and now we consider its physical interpretation. Using (37), ( where again we use the subscript 0 to indicate evaluation of the derivative at the operating point. To appreciate the significance of this combination, consider what happens when the pump is changed in some differential way; either in frequency or amplitude. The steadystate operating point moves from (U 0 , v 0 ) to (U 0 + δU, v 0 + δv). (21) must be satisfied at the new operating point, and so to first order, since h(U 0 , v 0 ) = 0 by definition. Hence and the change in the resonant frequency δ f 0 , and internal dissipation factor δ Q -1 i , with respect to the original operating point, are found to be using (62). We have used δ here to distinguish these changes in f 0 and Q i , measured relative to the operating point values, from those in E. Obtaining operating point parameters from measurements (58)-( We have already discussed the measurement of p at the end of Section III A and similar steady state measurements can also be used to recover the modulation factor q. The key is to measure the change δΓ p in Γ p after an infinitesimal change δP 0 has been made in the applied power and then the device allowed to settle to its new operating point. Under these conditions we would expect the resonant frequency, internal dissipation factor, total energy stored and state parameter p to also change by infinitesimal amounts δ f 0 , δ Q -1 i , δU and δp, respectively. The following set of relationships between these infinitesimal quantities can be found by forming the differentials of p, U and Γ p from ( Here δa * is the infinitesimal change in the normalised readout power, which is related to the change in readout power by δa * /a * = δP 0 /P 0 . (68) can be used to substitute for δp in the other two expressions to give Hence it follows from (65) that q can be calculated from Γ p and δP 0 using The remaining parameter r characterises the relaxation time of the internal variable that drives the parametric changes, and so we would not expect it to be recoverable from steadystate measurements. However, we will see in the next section that steady state measurements of p and q allow the bandwidth of the amplifier in the limit r → ∞ to be determined. The ratio of this value and the measured bandwidth can then be used to determine r. Consider the conditions on f s , p and q under which the pumped resonator can provide appreciable gain for a single tone. It will be sufficient to consider the behaviour of the active signal components, as characterised by the signal and idler reflection coefficients Γ s and Γ p , as only these components can be amplified. One approach would be to carry out a full pole-zero analysis on (58) and (59). Since the highest order polynomial appearing in both expressions is cubic, more specifically K(x), it is possible to write down general analytic expressions for the poles and zeros. However, the algebraic complexity of these expressions obscures the underlying physics. Instead we focus on the behaviour in the high-gain regions, where the expressions for the poles and zeros have simple forms. A particular strength of our formalism is that it takes account of the possibly finite response time of the nonlinear mechanism. A convenient measure of the operating regime of the device with respect to the speed of the nonlinearity is the dimensionless parameter r, as defined in (54) as the ratio of τ v , the linearised response time of the nonlinear mechanism at the operating point, to the ringdown time τ r = Q r /πf 0 of the resonator. The limit r = 0 corresponds to the resonator's characteristics changing instantaneously with stored energy. Here, or more generally when r 1, the overall response time is dominated by resonator's electrical behaviour. This regime is assumed, often implicitly, at the outset of most published analyses. Here we can also consider the case r > 1, where the behaviour of the amplifier is limited by the rate at which the resonator's parameters can change. Below, we start by analysing the simpler case r = 0 to determine the conditions for high gain, and then extend the analysis to determine how the behaviour is affected by finite r. Before preceding it is useful to highlight a number of constraints on x, p and q. First, it follows from (53) that x = 2iQ r (f sf p )/f 0 , and is therefore purely imaginary. Second, FIG. under the assumption that the parametric response of the resonator can only ever be passive, diminishes with time when the excitation is removed, then the power dissipated can only ever be reduced to zero at best. This imposes the restriction δQ Applying this inequality to at all operating points. The expressions for Γ s and Γ i simplify significantly when r = 0. K(x), defined in (56), reduces to the quadratic which can be factored as where After substituting (74) into ( and Useful amplification can be achieved when either the signal or idler gains are large: 1 for some value of x, where we remind the reader the latter is the scaled detuning of the signal from the pump frequency. From (76) and (77), we see this requires the existence of ranges of x for which |k + + x| or |k -+ x| is sufficiently small, and in what follows we will consider the conditions on p and q for such ranges to exist. In reality, we cannot control p and q independently, or indeed set them to specific values. However later, when considering a specific nonlinearity, we will be able to translate these conditions onto constraints on the parameters we can control, such as pump-frequency and readout power. The sign of the radicand |q| 2 -[p + q] 2 in (75) distinguishes two different regimes for the values of k + and k -depending on the values of p and q. The threshold between them is indicated by which can be rearranged to This defines a parabolic locus in the Argand plane of p + q for known p, as shown by the green line in Figure In Case I, we therefore look for values of p and q for which |k Using (75) and (72), we see this is only the case if both [p + q] = 0 and |q| = [p + q] together. We will shortly describe why these conditions are difficult to achieve in practice. In Cases III and IV, we look for the values of p and q for which respectively, with |q| 2 -[p + q] 2 < 0 in both cases. It follows straightforwardly from (75) that we require [p + q] = 0 in both cases. The locus of values of p + q satisfying this condition are shown the vertical section of the red line in Figure which shows the appropriate values of p + q for given p lie along a straight line in the Argand plane. Equation (80) corresponds to the diagonal section of the red line in Figure Based on this discussion, we expect large gain for given p whenever p + q falls sufficiently close to the red line in Figure Nevertheless, a TLS-based parametric amplifier is an interesting possibility. Despite this possibility, for the rest of the paper we will focus on operation of the device in Case II: The latter is more readily achievable in a real device, e.g. with a purely reactive nonlinearity. In Case II, the reflection coefficient takes a particularly simple form. Assume the device is operated sufficiently close to the condition |p It follows from (75) that we may approximate and The approximation also implies |k -| 1, k + . Similarly, Hence the signal reflection coefficient, as given by (76), is By definition, |p + q|/ [p + q] > 1 and the earlier condition |k -| 1 implies high gain at It is useful at this point to reintroduce the physical signal frequencies using (53). We may then rewrite (84) as where we may now identify as the maximum signal frequency power gain, as the phase shift when f s = f p and as the 3 dB bandwidth of the amplifier gain. Strictly, the physical interpretations of these quantities apply only when G s is sufficiently large that the effect of the first term in (86) can be ignored. We see that the pumped resonator can function as a high-gain, phaseinsensitive, reflection amplifier for a single tone, and that the corresponding gain has a single-pole response centred about the pump frequency. In addition, the maximum power gain and bandwidth are interrelated via their mutual dependence on k -; broadly speaking, the bandwidth is expected to be narrower the higher the gain. Now consider the effect of non-zero r, in which case the parametric process is slowed by the response time of the underlying physical mechanism driving the nonlinearity. Notice that r appears in the expressions for Γ s and Γ i scaled by x, i.e. as rx. As a result, if we distinguish different regimes based on the value of rx these will be achieved for different values of x for given r. In the regime where rx 1, the expressions for signal and idler gain reduce to those of Section IV A This is a crucial observation, as it means for any r there will always be some range of x where the device behaves as for r = 0 (even it is very small) and for which gain is possible if the conditions on p and q are met. In the opposite limit, rx 1, we expect that there will be sufficiently large rx for which and Certainly, this requires rx 1. In this limit the signal gain becomes Now, the limited response time nulls the dynamical nonlinear behaviour: Γ s traces out a resonance curve with the Q-factor and resonant frequency determined by the static power loading of the pump. It is also possible to show that no idler signal will be seen (Γ i = 0). Essentially, the signal frequency is beyond the band edge imposed by the finite response time of the nonlinearity. A key question is what happens between these two extremes? To investigate such effects we consider a device operating in the high-gain region described in the previous section, where |q| > | [p + q]| and |p + q| ≈ |q| and we expect gain for small x (Case II). To do so it is convenient to write K(x) in the form from which we may derive the following first-order Taylor series approximation for K(x) Likewise, we may approximate to first-order. Where these approximations are valid, the signal gain simplifies to where G s and exp(iφ s ) are as defined earlier and is the modified bandwidth when r is non-zero. (96) reproduces (84) up to an r-dependent factor in the bandwidth. Interestingly, in the limit of large r the bandwidth does not limit to 1/(2πτ v ), as might have been expected, but instead to where ∆f 0 bandwidth in the instantaneous limit, r = 0. The same analysis can also be repeated for the idler reflection coefficient as given by (59), in which case it is found that ∆f 3 dB is as for the signal, ( and Since the condition for high gain is |p + q| ≈ |q|, the signal and idler gains are approximately equal. To finish, consider the gain-bandwidth product. Taking the product of ( gives where the prefactor 2f 0 /Q c is the gain bandwith product of the unpumped resonator. Notice that the gain-bandwidth products falls when the parametric process slows the device. (95) and (98) are key results of this paper. They show that a pumped resonator that would be expected to produce gain when r = 0 will still produce gain when r is finite, i.e. when the parametric process is rate-limited. The gain for signal and idler frequencies are approximately equal, and show a single-pole response response centred on the pump. The achievable gain is not affected by r to first-order. Instead, it imposes a restriction on the bandwidth. To this point we have considered amplification of a single frequency tone. In the case of a signal with more complicated spectral content, each spectral component will be amplified in the same way as a tone of the same frequency. However, care must be taken if the spectral content spans the pump frequency. In this case it is possible for the idler tones generated by frequency components on one side of the pump frequency to interfere with the amplification of those components on the other side. Parametric amplification is often phase-sensitive, and in some way the behaviour just described is an example of this phenomena. To see this, it is helpful to consider the amplification of a signal of the form a s (t) = a m e iφ 1 e 2πifst + a m e -iφ 2 e 2πi(2fp-fs)t (102) for real a m , which comprises two tones of equal amplitude, but potentially different phase, evenly distributed around the pump frequency. Assuming the high-gain regime of the preceding section and superposing the signals generated by the two spectral components individually, we expect Remembering that G i ≈ G s in the high gain regime and assuming G s 1, we may further approximate which makes the dependence of the gain on the phase of φ 1 and φ 2 evident. This phasesensitivity may be advantageous or disadvantageous, depending on the application, such as squeezing. Phase-insensitive operation can always be achieved by operating with signals on one side of the pump only, i.e. contained only in either the upper or lower amplification side band. We will now illustrate the formalism described in the preceding sections with a specific simple model. Assume and where |φ| < π/2 and τ , U * and v * are real constants. (8) has a straightforward solution for (106), for which (7) yields From (107), we see that the model nonlinearity described by ( stored energy for both sign choices, while for φ < 0 it increases. These different possibilities are summarised in Figure (107) provides a good approximation to many parametric processes in superconducting resonators, which will necessarily be linear in the stored energy, U , to first order. For example, the kinetic inductance behaviour described by Swenson In what follows we will work in terms of Γ p and Γ s , as defined earlier, since these are general to any device. Γ p and Γ s can be related to the scattering parameters measured for the full device using ( The reasons for this are two-fold. First, (1 -Γ n ) is typically more directly experimentally accessible, being proportional to the difference between the measured scattering parameters and those expected for the readout circuit, e.g. The possible operating points under pumping are found by working through the analysis of Section III A for h(v, U ) and g(v) as given by ( Using ( The operating points of the device can then be found as the self consistent solutions of ( and for the model. Although we can solve directly for U 0 , it will prove more convenient to work with an alternate set of variables. Let and The problem of finding the operating point now becomes one of determining k for known k p (as determined by y p and φ) and known readout power. Using ( and Using (116) to substitute for p in (28) and then rearranging, we find k and k p at the operating point must satisfy where The main benefit of this transformation is that it puts the operating point equation for the mixed reactive-dissipative nonlinearity into the same form as that for a purely reactive nonlinearity. The latter has been discussed in the literature (118) results in either one or two stable operating states for given y p and a * . In the case of two stable states the device will display hysteresis, i.e. it is possible to measure different values of Γ p depending on whether the resonant frequency is swept upwards or downwards. Figure Generic form of |1 -Γ p | 2 as a function of y p in the hystereric regime and assuming negative sign in (105). The blue (solid) and orange (dashed) curves shows the behaviour that would be measured if y were swept in the the positive and negative y-directions respectively. y 1 , y sp and y 2 are all less than zero in this case. then see mixed behaviour, with shifts in resonant frequency accompanied by increasing dissipation, as indicated by decreasing |1 -Γ p | 2 . The presence of any degree of dissipative nonlinearity is seen to produce a characteristic effect in the Argand plane, whereby the resonance 'circle' becomes compressed into an oval at sufficiently high readout power. For φ ≥ 30 • we also then see the cessation of hysteresis and we will discuss this behaviour in more detail in the next section. The switching points of the pumped resonator, as introduced in the previous section, play a critical role in amplification. By graphical argument (e.g. Hence the values of k at the switching points must be solutions of the equation However, after some straightforward algebra it follows from (116) and (117) that This means |p + q| 2 -|q| 2 = 0 at the switching points, so by the arguments of Section IV A they must also be points of infinite small signal gain. Physically we would expect this, as at the switching points Γ p changes discontinuously for even very small changes in power or pump frequency. Crucially, this means the parameter space near the switching points is likely to be a good region in which to operate the device as an amplifier. Unfortunately, it is relatively complicated to calculate the values of y p at which the switching points will occur for given readout power. However, the inverse problem, that of determining the readout power necessary to make the device switch at a given frequency, has a straightforward solution. Assume we want there to be a switching point at a given value of y p and φ is known, so that k p is known. We can solve (121) for k to give then calculate the necessary power using where the latter result follows by rearranging (118). Note that the ± in (123) corresponds to the two possible solutions, rather than the choice of sign in (105). When there are two possible values of a * , the largest and smallest of the values correspond to operating at y 1 and y 2 in Figure At the value of a * above which the resonator response becomes hysteretic, there will exist a single value of y p for which the two solutions given by ( so Arg[z] must be π/3 and the critical point can only be accessed if φ ≤ π/6. It must also be the case that and that the threshold power for bifurcation is A critical point of preceding analysis is that it is not possible to drive the resonator into a hysteretic regime when φ > π/6 (30 • ), as seen in the data in Figure This analysis shows that gain is only possible if the amount of dissipative nonlinearity is smaller than the amount of reactive nonlinearity such that φ < π/6 (30 • ). This threshold is seen in all of our simulations, and is a valuable measure of when gain is possible. It should also be noted that if two nonlinear mechanisms are present simultaneously, then because the complex frequencies are additive, the overall process is characterised by the vector sum of the two perturbations to the operating point, pole of the pumped resonator, in the complex plane. Thus it may be that although one process does not allow gain, the inclusion of another process achieves φ < 30 • and allows gain to be achieved. Before considering amplification, it is instructive to consider ways of testing how well the model describes a real device. One way to do so is using swept frequency/power measurements of the type simulated in Figure where the sign is determined by that in (105). Using the definitions of y p , a * and p we can rewrite (128) in the more experimentally useful form where f sp is the measurement frequency corresponding to y sp and is a scale power. Hence we can test for compliance by taking a series of frequency sweeps at several different values of the pump power P 0 , plotting f sp versus |1 -Γ s | 2 P 0 and then checking whether the points lie on a straight line. If agreement is found, we can go further and determine model parameters. Values for f 0 and P * cos φ can be obtained by be obtained by fitting the straight line plot just described. Similarly, by fitting very low power data we can also obtain Q r , which can be used with f 0 to convert measurement frequencies into values of the detuning y p . Once we are able to do this conversion, by using the measured frequency location of the critical point and (126) we can then find φ. This in turn allows P * to be calculated, along with the scale energy U * if the coupling quality factor Q c is known. Once the operating points of the states of the resonator have been found, the analysis of Section III B can be used to calculate the behaviour as an amplifier. In practice we have control over the applied pump power a * and the pump detuning y p . In this section we will consider the achievable amplification as a function of these two variables, which will highlight operating regions for further discussion. Consider the case of a purely reactive nonlinearity (φ = 0) and negative assumed sign in (105). This is the behaviour that would be expected of a superconducting resonator in which the intrinsic kinetic inductance nonlinearity is dominant. For each choice of a * and y p , there will be some value of the signal detuning y s for which the small signal gain as given by |Γ s | 2 is maximised. Figure The colour scale in both panels has been cut off at 30 dB for clarity. Small regions with gain in excess of 30 dB exist in both plots, but much of the detail of the larger scale structure is lost if the colour scale is extended to accommodate them. Figure As discussed, highest small-signal gain is expected in the vicinity of the switching points in the behaviour of the pump reflection coefficient. Figure where G 0 is the real-valued power gain, θ 0 = Arg[(p + q)/ [p + q]] and ∆y 3dB is the 3 dB bandwidth of |1 -Γ s | 2 expressed in linewidths. (101) can be expressed in terms of ∆y 3dB as Further, it can be shown that and The derivation of (133) is purely algebraic; details are given in Section B 2 of the supplementary material. Similarly, the gain-bandwidth products follow by evaluating (132) at the switching points using the approximate relationships between k p , k and a derived in Section B 2. (133) shows that the achievable gain is approximately inversely proportional to the distance of the pump from the switching point in all cases. The case y 1 = y 2 in this result corresponds to Figure In addition to gain, it is important to consider the spectral response of an amplifier. The red solid line in Figure In the limit r → ∞ we would expect no amplification, but that the signal should still see the behaviour of the resonator as modified by the pump. The latter case is shown by the black dotted curve in Figure If the model described here is applied to superconducting resonators having quasiparticle generation processes, then φ is non-negative. The constraint that φ < 30 • to achieve gain, then defines an operating regime for the device. In this section we will consider the ability to achieve amplification using a superconducting resonator that generates quasiparticles by dynamical pair-breaking. Although discussions of parametric amplification in superconductors typically focus on the so-called 'intrinsic' kinetic inductance nonlinearity in superconductors, we will see that dynamical pair-breaking could be used as an alternate mechanism. resented by a device-averaged quasiparticle density n qp (see Appendix A 2 for a specific example). When a signal is applied to the resonator, a small excess quasiparticle density δn qp over the thermal value results. Following Zmuidzinas where S 1 and S 2 are dimensionless, and n 0 is a scaling density that depends on the material, kinetic inductance fraction of the resonator and the penetration of the resonator fields into the superconductor. For a near thermal starting distribution, S 1 and S 2 are approximately and where ρ = 2∆ 0 /(πk b T ), ξ = hf 0 /2k T , T is the temperature of the resonator, ∆ 0 ≈ 1.764k b T c is the gap energy of the superconductor at absolute zero, T c is the superconducting critical temperature, k b is Boltzmann's constant and h is Planck's constant. K 0 an I 0 are the zeroth order modified Bessel functions of the first and second kind, respectively. ( where φ = tan -1 (S 1 /S 2 ) and n * = n 0 /Q r S 2 1 + S 2 2 . This is of the form of ( The contour plots in Figure Results (135)-(138) follow from considering Owen's We have presented a general formalism for describing the behaviour of resonator parametric amplifiers. The model allows both reactive and dissipative nonlinear processes to be present simultaneously, and includes the effects of limiting the rate at which the parametric processes can act. Rather than describing parametric effects in terms of equivalent circuit elements (L,C,R), we describe them in terms of shifts in resonant frequency and reciprocal Q, or equivalently shifts in the pole of the resonator in the complex plane, driven by changes in stored energy. Within this formalism, amplifier performance is determined by three dimensionless complex parameters: p, which characterises the operating point established by the pump; q, which characterises the dynamical behaviour around the operating point; and r, which characterises the speed of the nonlinearity and determines amplifier bandwidth. We have shown how these quantities can be calculated from a model, how they can be measured experimentally and how they can be optimized for gain. Although we have couched our discussions in terms of physical processes in superconducting resonators, the results are generally applicable. Crucially, to our knowledge, this is the first time the effects of rate-limiting the non-linearity have been considered. We have shown that a nonlinear mechanism with finite response time can still produce the same gain as an otherwise equivalent mechanism with instantaneous response. However, the bandwidth over which it can do so is reduced. This observation is particularly relevant in superconducting devices, where different physical processes having similar nonlinear behaviour to first order can be distinguished by their different characteristic timescales. To illustrate the formalism, we have analysed in detail a generalisation of the Duffing model that allows for mixed reactive/dissipative nonlinear behaviour and finite response time. Although simple, this model and the analytic results obtained are highly valuable for explaining behaviour in real devices. Indeed, we have shown that there is no obvious reason why quasiparticle generation processes (e.g. readout power heating) cannot be used for amplification in the normal operating regime of most superconducting resonators. In an upcoming paper we will describe extensive measurements on a set of thin-film amplifiers fabricated from Al, Ti, Nb and NbN. These devices show behaviour that is entirely consistent with the dynamics revealed here, including the existence of bifurcation points, the procedures needed to bias on the different branches of the hysteresis, the different amplifier characteristics found at the different operating points, and the rate-limiting effects of quasiparticle relaxation. We are considering many extensions to the model, including the realisation of broad-band amplifiers, based on multi-pole filters. Finally, one assumption of the model should be restated explicitly. To this point we have only considered slow nonlinearities, i.e. those that depend on |u| 2 , as distinct from fast nonlinearities, i.e. those that depend on u 2 . This approach was adopted because for sufficiently slow response time, the fast terms could be ignored. However, in some real devices, both process will be present at some level, and this will affect the realisable gain. The interplay between these two types of nonlinearity is likely to be a fruitful area of future study. Before moving on it is useful to briefly comment on some of the less intuitive aspects of the model described. Firstly, it may at first seem physically counter-intuitive that the resonant mode described by (A22) and (A23), which results in no currents at the end of the line, is in fact driven by end currents. Secondly, the question then arises that if we excite this mode and it has no end currents, how can the original boundary condition imposed by the end currents be met? In the case of the first problem, mathematically the decomposition must necessarily leave the end currents undefined; they are constraints and the decomposition describes degrees of freedom. The second problem is resolved by considering the full sine series representation, i.e. (A14). A sine series can be made a finite value an arbitrarily small (but non-zero) distance from the ends of the domain by adding sufficient terms, ensuring continuity with the boundary conditions. If the full voltage and current decompositions are substituted into the Telegrapher's equations, it is found that any degree of coupling results in the excitation of all of the spatial harmonics to some extent, if even if the drive frequency is far from the natural resonant frequency. Physically, the coupling introduces loss in each mode that broadens its spectral response. The resultant pattern of harmonic excitation is such that it ensures the continuity with the impressed currents. or, equivalently, f p = f 0 + δf 0 , (B7) so at the stationary point the pump frequency is equal to the shifted resonant frequency. Case 2: The switching point is from the low-to high-energy (y 1 in Figure The gain becomes singular at the switching point because the denominator of this expression goes to zero. To understand the behaviour near this point, we would ideally like to Taylor expand the denominator to at least first order in the independent variables δk p and δa. The problem then becomes one of determining an expression for δk in terms of the independent variables. We can find such an expression by considering the operating point equation, (118). The latter can be rewritten as f (k p , a, k) = 0, where 2 . (B12)