We present a general approach to the bifurcation analysis of elastic frameworks with symmetry. While group-theoretic methods for bifurcation problems with symmetry are well known, their actual implementation in the context of elastic frameworks is not straightforward. We consider frames comprising assemblages of Cosserat rods, and the main difficulty arises from the nonlinear configuration space, due to the presence of (cross-sectional) rotation fields. We avoid this via a single-rod formulation, developed earlier by one of the authors, whereby the governing equations are embedded in a linear space. The field equations comprise the assembly of all rod equations, supplemented by compatibility and equilibrium conditions at the joints. We demonstrate their equivariance under the symmetry-group action, and the implementation of group-theoretic methods is now natural within the linear-space context. All potential generic, symmetry-breaking bifurcations are predicted apriori. We then employ an open-source path-following code, which can detect and compute simple, onedimensional bifurcations; multiple bifurcation points are beyond its capabilities. For the latter, we construct symmetry-reduced problems implemented by appropriate substructures. Multiple bifurcations are rendered simple, and the path-following code is again applicable. We first analyze a simple tripod framework, providing all details of our methodology. We then treat a hexagonal space frame via the same approach. The tripod and the hexagonal dome both exhibit simple and double bifurcation points. Group-theoretic methods in bifurcation problems with symmetry are well established. Sattinger was the first to introduce such ideas in the context of local bifurcation analysis We treat another class of nontrivial problems from nonlinear structural mechanics in this work, viz., elastic frameworks comprising assemblages of special Cosserat rods. The main difficulty here is that the description of even a single rod requires a nonlinear configuration-space field: The orientation of each ________________________ cross-section entails a rotation, i.e., an element of SO The formulation in The outline of the work is as follows. In Section 1 we first recall the equilibrium field equations for hyperelastic Cosserat rods, including their derivation via stationary potential energy. The latter is nontrivial, due to the presence of rotations; although ostensibly well known, we derive it here for completeness. More importantly, we use it to deduce group equivariance later in the work. We finish this section with a summary of the formulation presented in In Section 2 we consider a simple three-rod tripod, arranged symmetrically with a rigid or "welded" joint at the crest, where a dead load along the axis of symmetry is applied. We analyze this simple model in order to set the stage for the more realistic and complicated framework treated in the following section. We explicitly demonstrate the invariance of the total potential energy leading to the equivariance of the field equations and illustrate the use of group-theoretic ideas in a simple setting. We first make qualitative-generic predictions concerning potential bifurcations, cf. In Section 3 we take up the analysis of a hexagonal framework dome. This has the appearance of the simple, finite-dimensional space-truss dome considered in We also point out that a similar hexagonal framework dome was analyzed as part of a 2004 PhD dissertation Notation: As is common practice, we let 3  denote both Euclidean 3-space and its Euclidean innerproduct translate space. Vectors in 3  are denoted by bold-face, lower case symbols, e.g., , , x v and boldface, upper case symbols, e.g., , , A L denote linear transformations of 3  into itself. The inner product between vectors , a b is denoted ;  a b their right-handed cross product is written .  a b The transpose and determinant of A are denoted T A and det , A respectively. The set of all proper rotations is given by We now summarize the formulation for a single rod pertinent to our analysis of frameworks. Let { , , } e e e denote a fixed, right-handed orthonormal basis. We consider a straight, uniform rod occupying the reference configuration denote the position vector (with respect to some fixed origin) of the material point that occupies 1 xe in the reference configuration, while ( ) denotes the rotation of the cross-section of the undeformed rod contained in The field ( , ) r R on [0, ] L uniquely specifies the configuration of the rod in the deformed configuration. The last two vectors of the orthonormal field are called directors in the special Cosserat theory [A], employed here. Differentiation of (1.1) yields , 1, 2,3 where : is a skew-symmetric field and ( ):=d( )/dx.  Hence, there is a unique axial vector field We then write and . The six components , , 1, 2,3, comprise the strain measures of the theory. We assume that the rod is hyperelastic, viz., there is smooth stored-energy function ( , , , , , ), correspond to the contact force and contact couple fields, respectively. Moreover, the total internal potential energy of the rod is given by , where we have made use of (1.1) and Θ that vanish at the end points with , T   Θ Θ i.e., Θ is a skew-symmetric field. The former is an additive admissible variation for the field , r in contrast to the variation of the rotation field . R Rather, a finite perturbation of and an admissible first-order variation follows from ΘR The first-variation condition for (1.6) then follows from the calculation From and then Returning to (1.8), we now find where the last line follows from the use of (1.1) and Next, we suppose that the uniform rod has cross-sectional reflection symmetry across the plane spanned by e Ee e (1.12) From the formulation in . The negative sign in (1.13) follows from the fact that Eω is the axial vector of EΩE for any skewsymmetric transformation Ω with axial vector . ω Finally, we summarize the formulation presented in We write such components as triples of the form ( , , ), ( , , ), We assume that the 6 6  Hessian matrix 2 ( ) D W  is positive definite for each of its arguments on The substitution of (1.15) into Next, we express the placement fields , r R in terms of their components with respect to the fixed basis, viz., (1.17) where [ ] ij R represents the 3 3  matrix of components. We henceforth express all components with respect to the fixed basis with an overbar, as above in (1.17). According to Euler's theorem, there is an "instantaneous" axis of rotation corresponding to a real eigenvector n with . denote the counterclockwise angle of rotation about n (according to the right-hand rule), given by the trace formula we associate R with the quaternion ( , ), : cos( / 2), : sin( / 2) . and the matrix R admits the parametrization q q q q q q q q q q R q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q Where : ( , , , ). o q q q q  q Finally, as derived in where    is an unspecified (dummy) parameter and ( ) : . o o o q q q q q q q q q q q q The field equations comprise We first consider a simple tripod composed of three identical, straight, prismatic, unstressed, hyperelastic rods of length L all meeting at a perfectly rigid or welded joint at A, i.e., all rods have the same displacement and rotation at the joint. The rods are arranged symmetrically, the supports of the rods are identical, and we assume that the angle between the horizontal plane and each bar is / 3    radians, cf. Figure e e e be the fixed orthonormal local basis oriented along the th j undeformed rod, 1, 2,3, j  such that In what follows, repeated subscripts sum (Einstein convention) while repeated parenthetical superscripts, labeling the rods, do not. We assume that the th j rod has reflection symmetry across the plane spanned by { ), }. A configuration of the tripod is uniquely described by the placement and orientation field of each rod, represented by where ( ) denote the placement and rotation field of the deformed th j rod, respectively, 1, 2,3; j  each is presumed to be continuously differentiable. For compatibility at joint A, we require where , , r R the joint placement and orientation, respectively, are unknowns. If the supported ends of the rods are clamped, we then we require where I denotes the identity. For "ball-in-socket" supports, (2.5)1 still hold along with the vanishing of all end moments, viz.,  must also be incorporated. Of course, other compatibility/boundary conditions are possible, e.g., fixed supports (2.5) with a ball-insocket at joint A, implying vanishing torques as in (2.6) but evaluated at 0. x  Other "mixed" conditions (symmetrically arranged) are possible, the explicit details of which we do not present. We assume that the tripod is subjected to a dead, concentrated load at joint A of the form 3 .   i The total potential energy of the structure is then given by  is the stored-energy function, common to each of the rods. We now compute the first-variation condition. For simplicity, we assume the end conditions (2.4), (2.5). In consonance with (2.4), we consider smooth fields ( ) ( ) ( ), ( ) which we use to construct admissible variations of ( ) ( ) ( , ), respectively as in (1.10). We express this abstractly via where : ( , , , , , ), Then as in and in (0, ), j=1,2,3, (0) , (0) , where and , 1, 2,3. In order to employ the formulation (1.16), (1.21), we first replace (2.11)3 with and , 1, 2,3. Likewise, we write the system (1. respectively. We remark that a given a unit quaternion q q     q q q q corresponds to a unique rotation. However, there are two choices for a unit quaternion for a given rotation If q corresponds to , R then so too does q. Nonetheless, this causes us no problems: Once a choice has been made, we employ only continuous unit-quaternion fields as functions of continuation parameters. The tripod possesses the symmetry group 3 , v C generated by the rotation 2 /3  R and the reflection across the plane spanned by 1 3 { , }. i i We denote the latter transformation by , E which has the matrix relative to the global basis. More specifically, Observe that the transformation 2 /3 k ER represents a reflection across the plane spanned by denotes the clockwise rotation about 3 i through the angle / 3. k C on configuration space (2.13)1 is generated by  Er Er Er Eq Eq Eq u T where the actions on unit quaternions are defined as follows: Eq R q Eq:= (2.17) The group generated by the operations (2.16) is a faithful representation of 3v C on configuration space. Observe that (2.16)1 corresponds to a rotation of a configuration (2.3) about 3 i through the clockwise angle 2 / 3,  while (2.16)2 represents a reflection of a configuration across the plane spanned by The other elements in the group T T T have similar interpretations. For that reason, the representation is termed natural. Our first task here is to establish: Proposition 2.1 The potential energy (2.7) is invariant under the representation generated by the transformations (2.16), i.e., [ , ] for all . Proof: It is enough to show that (2.18) holds for the generators (2.16). First notice that (2.16)1 involves In view of (2.1) and (2.7)2, we deduce from ( with the understanding that (4) (1) , 1, 2,3. Obviously this goes the same way for the last three arguments of , W viz., and [ ] , 1,2,3. . In particular, the strains from the th j rod "move" to the ( 1) th j  rod under the transformation, and the invariance of the internal potential energy is now clear. The loading term is also invariant: Given that the compatibility and boundary conditions (2.4), (2.5), and (2.13) are unaffected by (2.16)1, we conclude that (2.18) holds for The demonstration for E T requires more care, due to the reflection symmetry of each individual rod. The first step is similar to (2.19): and , 1, 2,3. Next, we note Er i (2.26) where ( ) j E denotes the reflection across the plane spanned by ( ) ( ) { , }, 1, 2,3. Now use the fact that 3 3  Ei i along with cross-sectional reflection symmetry (1.13) to see that (2.26) becomes , (2.27) In this case, the strains from rod 3 move to rod 2 and vice-versa under the transformation. It is straightforward to demonstrate that the compatibility and boundary conditions (2.4), (2.5) and (2.13) are unaffected by (2.16)2. We conclude that (2.27) is precisely the same as We now use the invariance of the potential energy (2.18) to establish the equivariance of the governing equations (2.10), the proof of which is provided in Appendix A. Proposition 2.2 The equilibrium equations (2.10) are equivariant, i.e., [ , ], , and for all admissible , h as defined in (2.9). Here the generators of the action of G  T on and the inner product employed in (2.28) is defined by We express (2.28) abstractly in the strong form via represents the strong form of the equilibrium equations (2.11). It is well known that equivariance (2.31) implies that the nonlinear operator in (2.32) admits linear invariant subspaces, which we now outline. Let  denote configuration space, defined by (2.13)1, viz., where 3 S is the set of all unit quaternions, and let o  denote subset of all configurations satisfying the boundary conditions and joint-compatibility conditions, viz., (2.4)1, (2.5)1 and (2.13)2,3. Then where the target space is the linear vector space be a subgroup of the tripod symmetry group 3 , v C and define the  fixed-point space This is simply the set of all admissible configurations enjoying the symmetry characterized by the subgroup .  In any case, (2.31) implies ( , ) : where   is the target fixed-point space The main idea is to choose subgroups strategically, viz., in such a way that the symmetry-reduced bifurcation problem (2.32), (2.35) entails only a 1-dimensional bifurcation analysis, which is considerably simpler than the analysis of a multiple-bifurcation point. This is usually called the equivariant branching lemma. In particular, numerical branch switching is routine in the 1D case. We use generic, localbifurcation arguments (3) (2.36) respectively, cf. Irrep ( E    The single bifurcation equation -in the parameter  and the unknown amplitude -is odd in the latter variable. Consequently, the bifurcation will be a "pitchfork". Irrep (  matrices. Unlike the previous case, there are now two local bifurcation equations -in the parameter  and two unknown amplitudes. Moreover, the bifurcation equations are equivariant under the matrix representation (3) ,  the latter of which is the complete symmetry group of an equilateral triangle in the plane, denoted 3 . D There are three equivalent ways to break the symmetry leaving that of an isosceles triangle. For instance, one of these has the symmetry group { , }.   I E Accordingly, we expect three equivalent bifurcating branches. It is enough to compute only one; by virtue of (2.31), (2.32), the other two can be generated via consecutive actions of (2.16)1. One such branch of solutions can be computed efficiently as a 1-dimensional bifurcation via the restriction (2.35) employing the simple reflection subgroup  just mentioned. Finally, we mention that the equivariance of the bifurcation equations under  also implies that the bifurcation equations exhibit a quadratic term, and thus, a potential bifurcation will be transcritical in this case. For the purpose of numerical computations, we choose the following quadratic, "diagonal" complementary energy function for each of the rods in the tripod: (2.37) with Young's modulus torsional moment of inertia , J and bending moments of inertia 1 2 , . I I We choose 1 L  for the rod lengths. Although this appears trivial here, we leave the multiplicative factor " " L in (2.37), anticipating structures for which the structural members need not have the same lengths, e.g., in the Section 3. We assume square cross-sections with geometric properties summarized below in Table The field equations in local coordinates for each rod are given by (1.16) and (1.21), supplemented by Similarly, the compatibility equations (2.4)1, (2.13)2, the boundary conditions (2.5)1, (2.13)3, and the equilibrium conditions (2.11)2 at joint A all need to be written with respect to the local coordinate system of each rod. We first introduce (1) , 1, 2,3, where Q is the rotation with matrix relative to the global basis given by (2.39) The latter of which follows directly from (2.1)1. By virtue of (2.1)2 and (2.2), the compatibility equations (2.4)1, (2.13)2 become (2.40) respectively. Similarly, the boundary conditions (2.5)1, (2.13)3 now read / respectively. For joint equilibrium, we first recall from Section 1 that ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) , 1,2,3, Then by (2.1)2 and (2.38), (2.11)2 reads (2.42) The formulation from We note that (2.41) represents 21 boundary conditions at 1. s  The joint compatibility equations (2.40) provide 14 more at 0, s  say, by relating ( ) to (1) (1) (0),( (0), (0)) o r q q for 2,3. The joint equilibrium equations (2.42) together with (2.43) account for 7 more -for a total of 21 boundary conditions at 0. s  Altogether, we have 42 boundary conditions. This is precisely the number required for the boundary value problem comprising (1.16), (1.21) for each rod, totaling 39 firstorder equations in 42 unknowns (including the three dummy parameters ( ) , 1, 2,3). Note that we could easily express the system as 42 equations by simply appending ( ) 0, 1,2,3. We now discuss the results obtained via AUTO for the full structure. The symmetry-preserving solutions obtained, associated with irrep (1) ,  are depicted in Figure The primary and bifurcating solution branches along with a sample configuration on the latter are depicted in Figure Accordingly, symmetry reduction via (2.35), rendering the bifurcation simple, is needed. As discussed above, we choose the subgroup corresponding to reflection symmetry about the plane { , }, span i i cf. Figure In view of (2.4)1 and (2.13)2, we use (2.13)1, (2.16)2 and (2.17)2, to deduce and , for the reduced problem (2.35). Then again by (2.4)1 and (2.13)2, we employ (2.25)1 to find In keeping with the formulation of The conditions for rod 2 follow similarly. From (2.1) and (2.38), it follows that (2) 2 /3 , 1,2,3,    and thus, (2) (2) 2 /3 . In the same manner using (2.44)2, we obtain where we have made use of (2.48). From (2.29)2, the reduced problem (2.35) delivers (3) (2)  n En and (3) (2) . The joint equilibrium equations (2.11)2 then read Finally, we express (2.50) relative to the fixed global basis 1 2 3 { , , }. i i i Employing (2.1)2, (2.14) and (2.39), we find (2.51) Note that (2.45)-(2.49) and (2.51) comprise 14 boundary conditions at 0.  In addition, the fixed boundary conditions (2.42) for rods 1 and 2 specify 14 more at 1,  for a total of 28 boundary conditions as required for the analysis of two rods. We employ AUTO for the reduced problem. The numerical solution paths for 2 Z -symmetric configurations are presented in Figure Next, we consider the hexagonal space-frame dome depicted below in Figure The material properties and cross-section of each rod are the same. Each of the joints A-G carries an external load of 3 .   i Each of the six supports of the structure is clamped. Accordingly, the system possesses the complete symmetry group where E is the reflection as defined in Section 1, and  R is the proper, clockwise rotation about the global axis 3 . i We employ the same methodology employed in Section 2 for the tripod. In this case, we require twentyfour placement and twenty-four unit-quaternion fields to describe a configuration. We designate the rods via the numbering scheme shown in Figure The total potential energy of the structure is given by 3) where  is the stored-energy function, common to each of the rods. We assume fixed boundary support conditions for members (1)-( (11) Compatibility at joint A: (0) (0) ... (0), (0) (0) ... (0). The first-variation conditions for the potential energy deliver the equilibrium equations as in (2.11)1: and in (0, 37), j=1,2,...,18; in (0,6), j=19,...,24, and joint equilibrium, as in (2.11)2, at each of the joints A-G. For example, equilibrium at joint B reads To properly describe the symmetry-group action on configuration space in terms of the two generators of Eq Eq Eq Eq u T Eq Eq Eq Eq Eq Eq Eq Eq Eq Eq Eq Observe that the reflection reverses the orientations of rods 19-24 in this case, which explains the appearance of " "   in the arguments of those actions. The group actions on the support rods and the top rods do not affect orientations and thus do not act on the independent variable. As in Section 2, the total potential energy (3.3) is invariant under the group action, viz., Although we omit the tedious details, we observe that the invariance of the internal energy  is a consequence of the following: Given a configuration field u as in ( can be interpreted as either a rotation by an integer multiple of / 3  or a reflection of the configuration across a plane perpendicular to 1 2 { , } span i i making an angle of an integer multiple of / 6  with respect to In each of the three levels of the structure, the rods are all identical and have reflection symmetry in their cross-sections. Thus, the internal energy is invariant. For the loading term in (3.3), we deduce from the generators (3.8) that /3 ... ( ... ) T    R i Ei i and the invariance follows. As in Section 2, the first variation of the potential energy and integration by parts deliver the strong form of the equilibrium equations, again denoted abstractly by (2.32). Moreover, the equivariance of the equilibrium equations follows from (3.9) as in Proposition 2.2, viz., where the generators of the action G  T in (3.10) are defined as follows: For   The symmetry group 6v C has six irreducible representations As in Section2, the first irrep (1)  is associated with symmetry-preserving configurations. The 1dimensional irreps (2)-( 1 . In the potential case of bifurcation associated with the irreps (3.12)2-4, we expect pitchforks in each case. This follows from the equivariance of the bifurcation equation under the representation, which induces oddness in the amplitude variable. As noted before in Section 2, the software AUTO detects and computes such simple bifurcations -in particular, without symmetry reduction. Again, we take a practical approach here and analyze to the full structure. For each rod in the framework, we assume the material properties summarized in Table The results for the full structure (no symmetry reductions) are now presented. The symmetrypreserving primary solution branch is depicted in Figure The latter follows from the observation that the configurations possess a reflection symmetry corresponding to Remarkably the second solution branch, bifurcating at   1.22, is of the same type, viz., a 3v C subcritical pitchfork also associated with (4) . The global solution path and a typical configuration are shown in Figure The irrep (6)  is a faithful representation of 6 6 ( )  is not. But a comparison of the latter with (2.36)3 reveals that (5)  is associated (faithfully) with the symmetry  but with each element of the group appearing twice. As discussed in Section 2, there are three equivalent ways to break 3 -D symmetry (to that of an isosceles triangle) leaving reflection if there is bifurcation associated with (5) ,  we expect three equivalent bifurcating branches; it is enough to compute only one of these. As discussed in Section 2, we expect such a bifurcation to be transcritical. Symmetry-breaking bifurcation associated with (6)  is more interesting: There are two nonequivalent ways to break 6 D symmetry (that of a hexagon) leaving reflection symmetry. One of the symmetry subgroups comprises the 2 2  identity matrix and (6) , E  while the other consists of the identity and Notice that the former has a reflection symmetry about a line connecting two opposing vertices of the hexagon, while the latter has a reflection symmetry about that connecting two opposing edges of the hexagon. Each of these, in turn, can be accomplished in two other equivalent ways. Thus, if there is bifurcation associated with (6) ,  then we expect two non-equivalent bifurcating branches, each associated with two other equivalent branches -for a total of six bifurcating branches. Any such bifurcation is expected to be a pitchfork; the equivariance of the bifurcation equations under (6)  implies oddness in the amplitude of the reduced 1D bifurcation equation To capture potential double bifurcations here (via AUTO), we require reduced problems (2.35) such that the bifurcations become simple, as in the 2 -Z preserving solutions of Section 2. The main task is to obtain substructures (and boundary conditions) that admit only simple bifurcations. As in Section 2, we restrict the symmetry reductions only at the joints A-G. Based on the observations discussed in the Notice that the "slots" for rods 21 and 24 do not change in the actions (3.13), We choose the subgroup { , }   I K for the construction of the reduced problem P oP P P oP P q q   Kr Kq r q implying 1 1 0, 0, 0, 0, 2,3, the second set of which follows from the same arguments applied to rod 24 (evaluated at / 2).    Similar conditions result at joint A. For instance, (3.2) and (3.13) via the reduced problem imply that ( ),( , ) ( ) ( ),( , ) ( ) The equilibrium conditions at P, Q and A follow from joint equilibrium and reflection symmetry. For example, at mid-point Q we generally have the equilibrium conditions where , Q Q n m refer to the force and moment resultant on the substructure, while , Thus, the equilibrium conditions now read respectively. For the reduced problem via (3.11)1 and (3.14), we deduce (16) (0) (0),  n Kn and (0) (0).   m Km Hence, (3.18) reduces to [ ]( The results for the half-structure are shown below in Figures A typical configuration along with the solution path is shown in Figure The computed branch at hand, depicted in Figure Similar considerations lead to the same type of conditions at joints A and E: A respectively, where we employ the local arc-length coordinates of each rod. For the reduced problem, conditions (3.11)1,3 imply (20) Beginning with the general equilibrium conditions (3.7), the reflection symmetry of the reduced problem at joint B implies Finally, We present a general approach to the bifurcation analysis of elastic frameworks with symmetry in this work. While group-theoretic methods for bifurcation problems with symmetry are well known, their actual implementation in the context of elastic frameworks is not straightforward. The main difficulty arises from the nonlinear configuration space, due to the presence of (cross-sectional) rotation fields. We avoid this via the single-rod formulation of It is entirely possible to construct reduced problems via substructures for all simple bifurcations found as well -say for increased efficiency. For instance, this can be easily done for the tripod using a single rod. In the same way, each of the simple bifurcations for the hexagonal dome can be obtained via an appropriate substructure. But is no real need for such, given that AUTO easily handles these for the complete structure. Our formulation is not restricted to rigid (welded) joints. As indicated in (2.6) and the discussion immediately thereafter, other connection types are possible, e.g., ball-in-socket. Hinged connections (free rotation about one axis) and "mixed" connections at a joint are also possible. Moreover, our construction of reduced problems is not restricted to double bifurcation points; multiple bifurcation points arising from higher symmetry can be reduced in a similar manner. Finally, we point out that while our formulation is conveniently implemented via AUTO, it does not depend on it. Any two-point boundary solver -on a rod-by-rod basis, supplemented by joint equilibria and compatibility -can be employed as the basis for numerical continuation and for the detection/computation of simple bifurcations. Here we discuss the 2v C symmetry of the transcritical bifurcation, depicted in Figure As pointed out above, (2.36)3 and (3.12)5 reveal that (5)  is associated (faithfully) with 3 -D symmetry on 2 ,  but with each element appearing twice. Hence, the maximal isotropy subgroup of the fixed-point space 1 { } span i is actually { , , , }, , . then  is zero and (1. o  u cf. (2.34), (3.2). We now observe that     σ En Em En Em En Em En Em En Em En Em En Em