The generation of molecules with Artificial Intelligence (AI) is poised to revolutionize materials discovery. Potential applications range from development of potent drugs to efficient carbon capture and separation technologies. However, existing computational frameworks lack automated training data creation and physical performance validation at meso-scale where complex properties of amorphous materials emerge. The methodological gaps have so far limited AI design to small-molecule applications. Here, we report the first automated discovery of complex materials through inverse molecular design which is informed by mesoscale target features and process figures-of-merit. We have entered the new discovery regime by computationally generating and validating hundreds of polymer candidates designed for application in post-combustion carbon dioxide filtration. Specifically, we have validated each discovery step, from training dataset creation, via graph-based generative design of optimized monomer units, to molecular dynamics simulation of gas permeation through the polymer membranes. For the latter, we have devised a Representative Elementary Volume (REV) enabling permeability simulations at about 1,000x the volume of an individual, AI-generated monomer, obtaining quantitative agreement. The discovery-to-validation time per polymer candidate is on the order of 100 hours in a standard computing environment, offering a computational screening alternative prior to lab validation. So far, the discovery of new materials has been a time consuming and resource intensive effort. The following trial-and-error approach is typically employed: identifying known materials with properties similar to the new material's target properties and then modifying or combining them to achieve the desired outcome. The approach was driven by a specialist's knowledge, laboratory experimentation, and it could take years to yield results. The computer revolution has brought about powerful simulation techniques, such as the Density Functional Theory (DFT) The emergence of repositories with large sets of experimental and simulation data has enabled the application of AI methods as a data-driven pathway to materials discovery To exemplify the issue, let us consider the case of carbon dioxide separation in post-combustion applications. From a process perspective, polymer membranes Encouragingly, it was recently reported that machine learning applied to known polymer repeat units can predict gas separation performance of polymers that were not previously tested for these properties In Fig. The training dataset preparation sequence is shown in the left box of Fig. The AI generative design sequence is shown in the middle box of Fig. For molecular property prediction, we have trained and cross-validated regression models with respect to multiple sets of feature vectors and to each of the pre-defined target properties: halfdecomposition temperature T d,1/2 , glass transition temperature T g , and CO 2 -permeability P CO2 as shown in Fig. For generative design, we have then optimized the feature vectors through inversion of the prediction model within the pre-defined target property ranges which were set to: 550 K < T d,1/2 < 700 K; 400 K < T g < 600 K and 630 barrer < P CO2 < 4000 barrer. We have expanded the optimized feature vectors to molecular structures through an advanced version of the Molecular-Customized McKay's Canonical Construction Path Algorithm After completing the AI generative design sequence and screening our initial discovery results for target property range and discrepancies between predicted and calculated polymer property values, we have obtained a set of 784 new monomer candidates shown in Fig. The automated molecular dynamics simulation sequence is shown in the right box of Fig. To probe REV with regards to our polymer permeability simulations, we have investigated three representative polymers with relatively high permeability-values: TDA1-DMN, PIM-PI-EA and IBPA shown in Fig. For analyzing the filtration dynamics, we show as a representative example for one of the polymers in Fig. The main transport characteristics captured by the CPDMD simulations are (i) the interaction between gas molecules and polymer membrane which determines solubility and, consequently, the selectivity with regards to a specific gas molecule and (ii) the diffusion of gas molecules through the void spaces between packaged polymer chains which determines the membrane's permeability. We note that while the thickness of manufactured polymer membranes are typically on the order of micrometers, the much thinner simulated membrane predicts experimental permeability values reasonably well, within the same order of magnitude. As expected, the accurate and repeatable determination of gas permeability is limited experimentally as well as theoretically and large error margins are an intrinsic characteristic associated with the properties of amorphous materials Using a standard computational framework (one Intel Xeon E5-2667 CPU, one NVIDIA Tesla K80 GPU), the overall computation time, from dataset preparation to AI generation to physical validation, is of the order of 200 hrs for polymeric membranes with higher permeabilities (above 1000 barrer). A computational bottleneck currently exists for reaching gas saturation and steady state filtration in lower-permeability membranes as shown in Supplemental Fig. In summary, we have reported fully automated, end-to-end computational discovery of polymer membranes for carbon dioxide separation. We have demonstrated each discovery step, from automated training data and feature vector creation via generative inverse design of new monomers to non-equilibrium molecular dynamics simulation of gas filtration by the polymer membrane. Molecular dynamics simulations successfully predict a polymer's filtration dynamics and permeability if performed with a minimum representative volume of the complex material. For computationally designed polymers, we have obtained quantitative agreement between the CO 2permeability predictions by means of the AI models and the molecular-dynamics based, physical process simulations. Our work opens a pathway for advancing AI generative design beyond small-molecule applications and will substantially accelerate the discovery of complex materials for scaled applications. Polymer Property Calculation for Automated Training Dataset Generation For creating the training dataset, we have collected representative homo-polymers names in IUPAC nomenclature standard, from multiple polymer classes Best structure-property correlations were established with first-order (bond) connectivity index 1 χ V ; number of hydrogen atoms N H and number of vertices N vertices in the hydrogensuppressed graph representation of a polymer's monomer Fig. where Z V is the number of valence electrons of an atom, N H is the number of hydrogen atoms bonded to it, and Z is its atomic number. β V ij is the product of δ V at the two vertices (i and j) which define a given edge or bond. The first-order (bond) connectivity index 1 χ V of the entire molecule is defined through the summation over the edges of the hydrogen-suppressed graph: By combining Eq.1 and Eq.4, counting the number of vertices and the hydrogen atoms and calculating the molar mass of poly(vinyl butyral), we obtain T d,1/2 =646K which is in agreement with the experimental value of 645K The procedure referred to as feature selection identifies a subset of features for achieving accurate predictions, rather than using the entire set of the original features Hyperparameter optimization (HPO) is also key for enhancing the model performance. There are many HPO algorithms available in the literature, including grid search and Bayesian Optimization, see for example, reference We have optimized an average (R 2 ) score of the three-fold cross validation with 10 repeats.To that end, we have developed a systematic local search algorithm that simultaneously performs feature selection and HPO for a non-linear machine learning model. This approach leads to an optimized hyperparameter configuration specific to a selected feature set. To reduce the computational overhead, our approach focuses only on small, promising search spaces where optimized solutions are likely to occur. We discretize possible values for each hyperparameter and formulate feature selection and HPO as a variable-value assignment task. This means that each variable corresponds to another variable to which one value needs to be assigned. The variable for a feature is set to either true or false, while the variable for each hyperparameter is set to one of the discretized hyperparameter-values. Our approach is based on limited discrepancy search (LDS) Our current implementation calculates the initial solution passed to LDS as follows: It first calculates optimized hyperparameter configurations based on grid search with the whole feature set. With these hyperparameter configurations, it then computes the initial feature set based on so-called Sequential Backward Selection (SBS) The solution refinement step of LDS consists of a series of local search controlled by the notion of discrepancy. Given the current best solution bs, LDS assumes that a better solution exists in a search space whose solutions are similar to bs. In our implementation, the discrepancy for a solution s is defined as the number of variables whose assigned values have differences between bs and s. A smaller discrepancy indicates that s is more similar to bs. LDS introduces a discrepancy threshold d and performs local search in an iterative manner. After setting bs to the initial solution calculated by SBS, LDS performs depth-first search with d=1 and attempts to find a better solution than bs in a search space where solutions are located that have a different value than bs only for one variable. If no better solution is found, LDS increments d and performs local search with d=2. If no better solution is found again, LDS performs search with d=3, and so on. If a better solution is found, LDS resets d=1 and bs to the better solution and restarts a local search with d=1. LDS repeats these steps until the allocated time is used up or d reaches a preset, maximum value. There are several implementation choices for LDS to select a next variable for updating its value. Before performing a new iteration of local search, our current implementation orders variables in ascending order of the following formula: w 1 v(x) + w 2 u(x), where w 1 and w 2 are constants, v(x) is the number of times variable x is selected in local search, and u(x) is the number of times variable x fails to improve bs. This formula attempts to remain the values of the variables unchanged that have contributed to improving a score as well as to prioritize the variables that have not been explored sufficiently.For the purpose of this study, we have chosen w 1 =2 and w 2 =1. In Supplemental Fig. Feature Vector Optimization Based on graph theory and atomic configurations, there exist multiple feature types which can be combined for application of machine learning models, among them the number of heavy atoms, number of rings, substructures, fingerprints, Coulomb matrix, dipole moment, potential energy and experimental conditions Generative Molecular Design The Molecular-Customized McKay's Canonical Construction Path Algorithm creates molecular structures efficiently, exhaustively, and without isomorphic duplication, i.e., edge relations are preserved. A simplified version of the algorithm with an idealized construction example is visualized in Fig. The labeling algorithm assigns ordinals to all the vertices of the isomorphic graphs, providing a unique vertex addition or construction order for obtaining the graph. If a new vertex coincides with the last vertex in the construction order, the generation step continues. Otherwise, the generation step terminates -it is pruned -as its construction path generates a duplicate, isomorphic graph. Note, that the vertex here corresponds to a molecular structure and that adding a new vertex means adding an atom or a sub-structure in this application. The advanced version of the generative algorithm An example with a ring of six atoms is shown in Supplemental Fig. For the physical validation of AI predicted CO 2 -permeability, we have created a method to automatically design a polymer membrane representation which is suitable for molecular dynamics simulation, see right box in Fig. Once the chain building step is completed, PySIMM saves the LAMMPS The system then undergoes an equilibration process that consists of a nine-step compressionrelaxation sequence, similar to the approach in reference 22 : (1) energy minimization with isothermal and isochoric (NVT) MD simulation at 1 K for 100 ps, (2) NVT MD simulation at 300 K for 100 ps, (3) isothermal and isobaric (NPT) MD simulation at 300 K and 1 atm for 100 ps, (4) NPT MD simulation at 300 K and from 1 atm to 3000 atm for 100 ps, (5) NPT MD simulation at 300 K and 3000 atm for 300 ps, (6) NVT MD simulation at 800 K for 100 ps, (7) NVT MD simulation at 300 K for 100 ps, (8) NPT MD simulation at 300 K and 1000 atm for 300 ps, the steps ( To account for long-range electrostatic interactions, we have adopted the reciprocal space Particle-Particle Particle-Mesh (PPPM) method. For all calculations, we have used 1 fs time steps and a cutoff radius of 1.4 nm for van der Waals and Coulomb interactions, respectively. To control temperature and pressure, we have used Nose-Hoover thermostats and barostats with a relaxation time of 0.1 ps and 1 ps, respectively. All MD simulations were carried out with the LAMMPS package Automated Membrane Validation with Molecular Dynamics Simulation Two types of Molecular Dynamics (MD) simulations methods have been used to investigate transport through membranes: Equilibrium MD (EMD) and Non-Equilibrium MD (NEMD). NEMD is ideally suited to represent an experimental membrane system in which an external driving force, such as a chemical potential or pressure gradient, is applied to the membrane. Specifically, we have chosen CPDMD to evaluate membrane based gas filtration For benchmarking purpose, as shown in Supplemental Fig. To set up a CPDMD simulation, we have placed the membrane at the center of the simulation box with a fixed, rigid wall at each side of the membrance, 10 nm away from its surface, as shown in Fig. From the N CO2 -t slope, the permeability P CO2 can be estimated following where ∆N CO2 is the number of CO 2 molecules permeated within time duration ∆t, N A is Avogadro's constant, l and A are the membrane thickness and area, respectively, and p is the partial pressure -10 atm in this case -in the feed chamber. The termination criterion for CPDMD simulations is discussed in detail in the Supplementary Information and shown in Supplemental Fig. Hyperparameter Optimization and Limited Discrepancy Search We provide supplementary data, shown in Fig. Generative Molecular Design We provide supplementary graphics material, shown in Fig. Constant Pressure Difference Molecular Dynamics Protocol In this section, we discuss a series of studies that we have conducted for establishing the computational protocol outlined in the Methods Section of the main manuscript with regards to the Constant Pressure Difference Molecular Dynamics (CPDMD) simulations. This includes the determination of the equilibration process to obtain the morphology of the polymer membrane, the determination of the force field, the length of polymeric chain and, finally, the thickness of polymer membrane. For our benchmark studies we have chosen eight representative homo-polymers, shown in Fig. In a first step, we have studied the effect of force field on CO 2 -permeability. The atomic interactions in the polymer membranes are described by the following force fields: DREIDING In a second step, we have investigated the the equilibration process for obtaining the polymer membrane and the chain length which is shown in Fig. To confirm the choice of parameters, we have performed for six of the homo-polymers shown in Fig. In a final step, we have determined the stop criterion for the CPDMD simulations. In Fig. 