The conventional thermoelectric figure of merit and the power factor are not sufficient as a measure of thin film quality of thermoelectric materials, where the power conversion efficiency depends on the film dimensions. By considering the film size, the effective thermoelectric figure of merit and effective Seebeck coefficient are introduced to guarantee that the maximum energy conversion efficiency increases as the effective thermoelectric figure of merit increases. Similarly, the effective power factor is defined. By introducing typical material properties for Bi 2 Te 3 and PEDOT, we study the thickness dependence of the effective figure of merit and the effective power factor. Thermoelectric generators directly convert waste thermal energy into electrical power. Electric currents can be generated from temperature gradients by thermoelectric effect; the energy conversion efficiency is known to be characterized by the dimensionless thermoelectric figure of merit, given by where T m is the mean temperature between the cold side and the hot side, α is the Seebeck coefficient, ρ is the electrical resistivity, and κ is the thermal conductivity. The thermoelectric figure of merit zT b provides a measure of the quality of thermoelectric materials and can be used for the guide to compare thermoelectric properties of materials. The recent demand for thermoelectric generators for Internet of Things (IoT) and wearable devices has urged to develop thin film thermoelectric devices, which are flexible and could operate around room temperature. We first introduce the effective electrical resistivity using the intrinsic material electrical resistivity ρ Ωm and the contact electrical resistivity ρ c Ωm 2 . Since they are connected electrically in series, the effective resistivity can be expressed as ρ eff = ρ+ρ c /d. When the electrical contact resistivity of one side is given by ρ c0 and that of the other side is given by ρ cd , the total electrical contact resistivity is expressed as ρ c = ρ c0 + ρ cd . Similarly, we define the effective thermal conductivity κ eff by the intrinsic material thermal conductivity κ W/(mK) and the heat transfer coefficient h W/(m 2 K) as κ eff = (1/κ + 1/(hd)) -1 , where the heat transfer coefficient is inverse of the contact thermal resistivity; the effective thermal conductivity is given by the inverse of the sum of the intrinsic material thermal resistivity and the contact thermal resistivity. When the heat transfer coefficient of one side is given by h 0 and that of the other side is given by h d , the total heat transfer coefficient is expressed as Previously, the effective thermal conductivity was given by the sum of the intrinsic material thermal conductivity and the thermal interface conductance, which indicates parallel thermal flows of these components. We consider the case that the film of thickness d and the surface area of S is located between x = 0 and d in the x coordinate as shown in Fig. Figure around x = 0 is T h and the ambient temperature around x = d is T c ; we assume T h > T c . We also assume that systems operate under a constant temperature difference rather than under constant heat flux. where V and I denote the voltage across the film and the electrical current passing through the film, respectively; R and K denote the electrical resistance and the thermal conductance, respectively. The temperature at x = 0 and x = d is denoted by T (0) and T (d), respectively; T (d) differs from the environmental temperature denoted by T c if the heat transfer coefficient is low. We calculate T (0) and T (d) when the heat transfer coefficient at the hot side (x = 0) is h h and that at the cold side (x = d) is h c . T (0) reduces to T h in the limit of h h → ∞. As shown in Appendix A, we obtain where ∆T = T h -T c and h = (1/h 0 + 1/h d ) -1 . We also find When the thermoelectric power is generated, the external load with the resistance R ext is imposed. We introduce R ext = yR eff , where R eff = (ρ + ρ c /d)d/S for the film with the thickness d and the surface area of S facing to the environments. The power can be expressed as where α eff is defined by By introducing α eff , the thermoelectric power can be expressed in the conventional form as shown in Eq. ( where Z eff is defined by and we have R eff = (ρ+ρ c /d)d/S and K eff = (κ -1 + 1/(hd)) -1 S/d. Using dη(y)/dy = 0, where ∆T /T h is the Carnot efficiency; the maximum efficiency approaches the Carnot efficiency by increasing Z eff . By introducing α eff defined by Eq. ( The temperature difference at both ends of the material is given by T (0) -T (d) which is related to the ambient temperature difference ∆T by Eq. ( By taking into account the contact electrical resistivity and the heat transfer coefficient, the effective thermoelectric figure of merit for film conductors [Eq. ( = zT b S zT (d), The thickness dependence of zT eff (d) = Z eff T m can be studied using S zT (d); the size factor of the effective figure of merit [Eq. ( It should be stressed that the conventional figure of merit defined only by the material parameters [zT b in Eq. ( The condition y = 1 leads to R ext = R eff , where R eff = (ρ + ρ c /d)d/S involves the contact resistivity. In general, the external load resistance should match the effective resistance involving both the contact resistivity and the intrinsic material resistivity. Equation where P max is multiplied by d to eliminate the trivial thickness dependence originating from R = ρd/S, which remains even for ρ c = 0. As a result, the bulk power factor is expressed only by material parameters such as ρ and α. Using Eq. ( where the size factor for the effective power factor is given by The equivalent expression of Eq. ( Contrary to the size factor of the effective figure of merit [Eq. ( When κ/h > 8ρ c /ρ is satisfied, the above equation is simplified to The appearance of the maximum in the output power can be understood in the following way. When the film thickness is small, the actual temperature difference at the both ends of the film is smaller than the ambient temperature difference as shown in Eq. ( As shown in Fig. In Fig. In practice, thermoelectric generators may be composed of series connected many semiconductors. When the each unit is identical, S Pw (d) and S zT (d) of the N repeated units are independent of N as shown below. If the electrical resistivity, the thermal conductivity, the electrical contact resistivity, and the heat transfer coefficient of the unit are denoted by ρ u , κ u , ρ c,u , and h u , those for the electrically connected units in series are expressed as Nρ u , Nκ u , Nρ c,u , and Nh u . Because S Pw (d) and S zT (d) of the N repeated units are expressed in terms of the ratio such as κ/h and ρ/ρ c , they are independent of N. However, the dimensionless figure of merit for a single material should be generalized if thermoelectric power generator consists of series connected p-type and n-type semiconductors. We introduce the effective Seebeck coefficient α eff,p = α p /[1 + κ p /(h p d)], effective electrical resistivity ρ eff,p = ρ p + ρ c,p /d, and effective thermal conductivity κ eff,p = (1/κ p + 1/(h p d)) -1 of the p-type semiconductor, where the subscript p indicates the property of p-type semiconductor; the material properties for the n-type semiconductor are defined similarly. When the p-type semiconductor with the area S p and n-type semiconductor with the area S n are connected electrically in series and thermally in parallel, while the thickness d is common for both semiconductors, Z eff = (α 2 eff T m )/(R eff K eff ) given by Eq. ( where S p /S n = ρ p κ n /(ρ n κ p ) is obtained by d(R eff K eff )/dX using X = S p /S n . In the limit of d → ∞, the known result is recovered. In conclusion, the contact resistivity and heat transfer coefficient at the interface between the thermoelectric material and the environment influence the energy conversion efficiency and the electric output power if thermoelectric materials are thin and having a large surface area. The conventional thermoelectric figure of merit and the power factor are not sufficient as a measure of the thin film quality of thermoelectric materials. The effective thermoelectric figure of merit of thin film was introduced in such a way that the maximum conversion efficiency is a monotonically increasing function of the effective thermoelectric figure of merit regardless of the thickness of the thermoelectric material. The effective thermoelectric figure of merit thus defined can be expressed as a product of the conventional thermoelectric figure of merit and the size factor. The size factor of the effective thermoelectric figure of merit is shown to be an increasing function of the film thickness. Similarly, we introduced the effective power factor and the corresponding size factor; we showed the existence of the optimal film thickness. We studied the thickness dependence of the size factor of the effective thermoelectric figure of merit and the size factor of the effective power factor using the physical properties of inorganic materials (Bi 2 Te 3 ) and organic materials (PEDOT). We showed that PEDOT with the temperature gradient in the through-plane direction is advantageous over Bi 2 Te 3 as regards to the thinner optimal film thickness. b