Integrated photonics capable of incorporating rare earth ions with high optical coherence is desirable for realizing efficient quantum transducers, compact quantum memories, and hybrid quantum systems. Here we describe a photonic platform based on the SmartCut erbium-doped lithium niobate thin film, and explore its stable optical transitions at telecom wavelength in a dilution refrigerator. Optical coherence time of up to 180 μs, rivaling the value of bulk crystals, is achieved in optical ridge waveguides and ring resonators. With this integrated platform, we demonstrate tunable light-ion interaction and flexible control of optical thickness by exploiting long waveguides, whose lengths are in principle variable. This unique ability to obtain high optical density using a low concentration ions further leads to the observation of multi-echo pulse trains in centimeterlong waveguides. Our results establish a promising photonic platform for quantum information processing with rare earth ions. Atomic and atomic-like defects in solid crystals provide a robust avenue for light-ion interactions and have been promising candidates for a variety of quantum information processing technologies By directly doping REIs in the crystal growth stage, for example within a melt, uniform ion distribution at desired sites can be well-achieved in bulk hosts, granting high material quality. Integrated optical platforms, on the other hand, enable low-loss waveguides and high quality factor microresonators with small mode profile, making them appealing in REI applications to enhance light-ion coupling. This raises the interest of integrating well-studied bulk REI doped crystals with on-chip photonics. Evanescent coupling of REIs to optical nanostructures has been realized by placing doped crystals in close proximity via bonding or waveguide deposition technique In this work, we exploit a promising platform based on the SmartCut thin films prepared from bulk erbium doped lithium niobate (Er:LN). Thin film LN has garnered a vast interest in making efficient, compact and high-performance nonlinear integrated photonic circuits since its breakthrough in the thin-film nanofabrication technology The SmartCut bonding process is illustrated in Fig. A simplified experimental schematic is shown in Fig. To ensure good film quality and minimal fabrication impact, we measured the Q factors of the ring resonators. The average Q factors is ∼ 800 k. Multiple resonances with over a million Q are easily observable (Fig. The two photon echo technique is commonly used to extract the long phase coherence time as it is less influenced by the pump laser linewidth. As shown in the inset of Fig. where x > 1 represents the influence from spectral diffusion. The effective homogeneous linewidth is thus given by Γ h = 1/(πT m ). Fig. The optical thickness of a sample is dependent on the material doping concentration and the optical interaction length. Increasing doping concentration generally undermines coher-ence due to spectral diffusion from long range spin-spin interactions. For a bulk crystal, the optical interaction length depends on the Rayleigh range z R of the focusing lens and the sample dimension (Fig. where θ = ∞ ∞ Ω(t)dt is the pulse area (θ 1,2 are the first and the second pump pulses, θ e1,e2,e3 correspond to the first three echo signals), Ω(t) is the Rabi frequency of the complex electric field, and w 0 (z) is the initial inversion component of the Bloch vector (u(z), v(z), w(z)) describing the atomic system. In the two photon echo scheme, the atomic system is at the initial ground state w 0 = -1 before the first pump pulse and modified w 0 = cos θ 1 before the second pump pulse. The general equation of each individual echo pulse θ e,n can be obtained with the assumption of non-overlapping pulses (1/(πΓ inh ) ∆t 1,2 τ T m , where Γ inh is the inhomogeneous linewidth of the ensemble and ∆t 1,2 are the pump pulse durations) where v 0 (z) and w 0 (z) are the initial values (t = t e,n -(n + 1/2)τ) of the out-of-phase and inversion components of the Bloch vector for the n th echo. Numerical analysis of echo area with optical thickness based on Eq. 3 are shown in Fig. In conclusion, we characterize SmartCut Er:LN thin film at cryogenic temperature down to 20 mK. The Smartcut technique allows integrating and miniaturizing optical devices with a direct light-ion interface, which is desirable in quantum processing and sensing technologies. Our sample devices incorporate Er 3+ ions into photonic nanostructures, which is telecommunication (telecomm.) wavelength compatible, allowing easy integration with the existing fiber optics technologies. This approach can also be easily extended to other rare earth elements, offering freedom to optimize for specific needs. We demonstrate that the SmartCut thin film is able to preserve bulk Er:LN coherence properties. In particular, the measured coherence time T m can be as high as 180 μs, extending the knowledge of Er:LN optical coherence to the milli-Kelvin temperature regime. This long coherence time can be utilized to develop on-chip quantum memories at telecomm. wavelength 