Single-photon detectors are ubiquitous in quantum information science and quantum sensing. They are key enabling technologies for numerous scientific discoveries and fundamental tests of quantum optics. Photon-number-revolving detectors are the ultimate measurement tool of light. However, few detectors to date can provide high-fidelity photon number resolution at few-photon levels. Here, we demonstrate an on-chip detector that can resolve up to 100 photons by spatiotemporally multiplexing an array of superconducting nanowires along a single waveguide. The unparalleled photon number resolution paired with the high-speed response exclusively allows us to unveil the quantum photon statistics of a true thermal light source for the first time, which is realized by direct measurement of high-order correlation function g (N) with N up to 15, observation of photon-subtraction-induced photon number enhancement, and quantum-limited state discrimination against a coherent light source. Our detector provides a viable route towards various important applications, including photonic quantum computation and quantum metrology. The observation and application of intriguing quantum optical effects have long been relying on high-performance photonnumber-resolving (PNR) detectors Here, we demonstrate the design and experimental implementation of a waveguide-integrated and hybrid spatiotemporal-multiplexed SNSPD array, which features simultaneous photon number and position resolving capability, high scalability, and a simple readout scheme. In addition, the high timing resolution combined with the large-dynamic-range PNR capability of the detector allows us to analyze the photon number statistics of a true thermal light source. Thermal light has been playing a critical role in the development of quantum optics as it triggers the invention of intensity correlation g Operation principle of detector. Fig. ... We change the EOM pulse width τ to tune the timebandwidth product πBτ, which is labeled at the top of each panel. e, Comparison between the conventional method and our implementation to measure the high-order correlation function g We next use our detector to investigate the effect of pulse width on the quantum statistics of a true thermal light source and compare with that of a coherent counterpart. A simplified schematic of the experimental setup is shown in Fig. n . On the other hand, when πBτ 1, it becomes the Poisson distribution P P (n; n) = nn e -n/n!. The spectral filter used in our experiment has a bandwidth of B = 65 MHz, and the pulse width is tuned by the EOM from 0.24 ns to 100 ns. The photon number probability distributions for πBτ = 0.05, 0.52, 10.21 are shown in Fig. With the capability of the position resolving, our detector also allows a convenient and direct measurement of the high-order correlation function where • indicates the ensemble average. The previous conventional measurement of g where Γ(•) is the gamma function. In the limit of πBτ 1, we have g (N) → N!, which agrees with the result of the Bose-Einstein distribution It should be noted that the measurement of g (N) with higher N > 15 is limited by the slow data acquisition rate of the oscilloscope (∼30 Hz) used in our experiment, rather than the detector itself, since an exponentially larger sample number is needed to minimize the variance of g (N) as N increases. A dedicated GHz-level fast pulse counter could be employed in the future experiment to further unlock the performance of our detector. Photon subtraction experiment. We then further investigate the capability of our detector by performing photon subtraction experiment. The conventional photon subtraction entails using a beam-splitter to probabilistically subtract a certain number of photons at the reflection port as shown in Fig. where n R is the subtracted photon number at the reflection port. When R → 0, πBτ 1, and n R = 1, we have nT = 2 nin , which is the well-known result that the mean photon number of a thermal state at the transmission port will be doubled when a single photon is annihilated at the reflection port of a low-reflection beam-splitter We next investigate the photon number enhancement effect of photon subtraction, and we use nT to quantify the photon number enhancement, where M is the subtracted photon number at the reflection port. The experimental results of photon number enhancement are shown in Fig. Quantum-limited discrimination of photon states. As another application of our detector, we perform quantumlimited discrimination between a thermal state and a coherent state of light √ n α| is the density matrix of a coherent state, and || • || 1 is the trace distance. The most straightforward method for discrimination is the direct detection, which entails using a PNR detector to measure the photon number emitted by the source. When n photons are measured, its quantum state is discriminated to be a thermal state if P BE (n; n) > P P (n; n). On the other hand, if P BE (n; n) ≤ P P (n; n), the quantum state is discriminated to be a coherent state. The error probability of discrimination can thus be calculated as P err direct ( n) = ∑ n min(P BE (n; n), P P (n; n))/2. However, this method cannot approach the Helstrom bound. The Kennedy receiver can outperform the direct detection by using homodyne detection. A high-transmission beam- splitter (T ≈ 1) is used to reduce the loss for the signal to be discriminated. The Kennedy detection entails using a local oscillator with a mean photon number of nT /(1 -T ) and a relative π phase shift with respect to the coherent state light source, whose density matrix can be expressed as If the source is a coherent state, the transmission port will present a vacuum state due to the destructive interference. If the source is a thermal state, the state at the transmission port possesses a Laguerre statistics , where L n (•) is the Laguerre polynomial of order n. Therefore, the discrimination error probability is P err K ( n) = P L (0)/2. The Kennedy detection, however, can be further generalized to approach the Helstrom bound by changing α LO to α LO = √ n + ∆n, where the value of ∆n depends on n and can be computed by numerical optimization , and thus the discrimination error probability is P err GK ( n) = ∑ n min(P P (n; ∆n), P L (n, ∆n))/2. The experimental results measured by the different methods are shown in Fig. In this Article, we have demonstrated a waveguide-integrated and large-dynamic-range PNR detector that employs a hybrid spatiotemporal-multiplexing scheme to read out a 100-pixel SNSPD array. In addition to inheriting all aspects of the excellent performances of single-pixel SNSPDs, this scheme also enables readout of the position information on the fired detector pixels. This distinct functionality makes our detector a versatile platform to perform various quantum optics experiments on a chip at an unprecedented level, such as the photon statistics measurement, the direct measurement of high-order correlation function g Device fabrication. The fabrication of the device involves six steps of high-resolution (100 kV) e-beam lithography (EBL) and following etching or deposition/lift-off process. (1) Alignment markers are pre-fabricated on top of a 4-inch 330 nm-thick LPCVD-Si 3 N 4 / 3.3 μm-thick thermal oxide / Si wafer by standard double-layer polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) patterning process, e-beam evaporation of 10 nm Cr / 100 nm Au layers, and following lift-off in acetone. (2) High-uniformity 8 nm-thick NbN superconducting thin film is deposited by atomic layer deposition (ALD) Device design. As shown in Fig. By engineering the length and the distance of the nanowire from the edge of the waveguide, we could tune the photon absorption efficiency of each nanowire and thus ensure the input photons are evenly distributed over the detector pixels. In the etched clearance area for the waveguide, a 1.3 μmwide bridges are designed for the connection of each nanowire detector to the delay line sections that are positioned outside the waveguide area (Fig. The parts of NbN delay lines and the impedance tapers are capped by a high-dielectric-constant (high-k) AlO x layer and top metal ground made of Al layer (lighter area in Fig. The pulsed coherent light source is generated by gating a tunable continuous-wave (CW) laser (New Focus 6427 Vidia-Discrete) with the cascaded electro-optic modulators (EOMs) and acoustic-optic modulator (AOM), which guarantees sub-ns narrow pulse width combined with >100 dB extinction ratio to efficiently suppress the background photons. The thermal light source is generated by employing the same gating method but with the EDFA/narrow-bandwidth spectral filter chain to replace the CW laser part. A more detailed description on the measurement setup can be found in Supplementary Section I. The data that support the plots within this paper and other findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.