This paper aims to understand the role of directional material properties on the mechanical responses of origami structures. We consider the Miura-Ori structures our target model due to their collapsibility and negative Poisson's ratio (NPR) effects, which are widely used in shock absorbers, disaster shelters, aerospace applications, etc. Traditional Miura-Ori structures are made of isotropic materials (Aluminum, Acrylic), whose mechanical properties like stiffness and NPR are well understood. However, how these responses are affected by directional materials, like Carbon Fiber Reinforced Polymer (CFRP) composites, needs more in-depth understanding. To that end, we study how fiber directions and arrangements in CFRP composites and Miura-Ori's geometric parameters control the stiffness and NPR of such structures. Through finite element analysis, we show that Miura-Ori structures made of CFRP composites can achieve higher stiffness and Poisson's ratio values than those made of an isotropic material like Aluminum. Then through regression analysis, we establish the relationship between different geometric parameters and the corresponding mechanical responses, which is further utilized to discover the Miura-Ori structure's optimal shape. We also show that the shear modulus is a dominant parameter that controls the mechanical responses mentioned above among the individual composite material properties within the Miura-Ori structure. We demonstrate that we can optimize the Miura-Ori structure by finding geometric and material parameters that result in combined stiffest and most compressible structures. We anticipate our research to be a starting point for designing and optimizing more sophisticated origami structures with composite materials incorporated. Deployable structures can change their shape such that their size can be significantly altered. This is often achieved by the folding and unfolding process, which provides deployable structures the flexibility to expand or contract based on different geometrical and material properties. Deployable structures are mostly used for easy storage and transport and are deployed into their operational configuration when required Miura fold Past research has focused on exploring the mechanical responses of origami structures. Fisher et al. These previous studies on folded structures, especially Miura-Ori structures, have focused on investigating the relationship between geometric parameters and mechanical responses for isotropic materials. However, few researchers have focused on combining composite materials and origami patterns to harness the benefits of directional properties and high stiffness/strength-to-weight ratios, like in fiber-reinforced composites. Domber et al. In this paper, we focus on the following three objectives: 1. Understand how fiber directionality influences the mechanical responses of Miura-Ori structures. For the directional material, we consider the transversely isotropic material (Carbon Fiber Reinforced Polymer composites -CFRP composites We then perform compression analysis using the finite element method. We use Miura-Ori cells with isotropic material, Aluminium, as a baseline model to compare against the mechanical properties of different CFRP composite arrangements. We consider CFRP composites due to their inherent transversely isotropic material behavior. CFRP composites are extremely strong and lightweight compared to traditional isotropic materials and are widely used in engineering, including aerospace, automotive, marine, and construction Although the results shown in this paper are for the Miura-Ori structure, the same methodologies in this paper can be extended to the analysis and optimization of other types of origami structures. 2 Miura-Ori Model Setup Miura-Ori pattern consists of a 2D array of repeating units with four identical parallelograms in each unit, as shown in Figure where the dimensionless terms width and height can be expressed as: ξ = sinα sin(θ/2) and ζ = cosα (1 -ξ 2 ) -1/2 . Thus in this paper, only α and β as considered as independent geometric parameters. We consider α values can vary between 0°and 90°, while β values can vary between 0°and 180°. Miura-Ori patterns we have considered in this paper have dimensions of 10 mm x 10 mm for every parallelogram. These dimensions are based on that considered in Liu et al. In this study, we set the width of the hinge region in the flexible Miura-Ori models to be 0.5 mm. For modeling purposes, we assume a perfectly joined connection between the hinge regions and carbon fiber-reinforced laminates in our geometry. From a manufacturing point of view, we can introduce flexible hinges by different methods. These methods are: (1) For a structure with continuous hinges, we can use a dual matrix hand layup approach to arrange the laminate parallelograms with fiber directions along specified directions and locations based on the design. This can be done by placing a stencil on a dry fabric's hinge area and covering it with flexible resin, removing the stencil, and adding epoxy matrix everywhere else. (2) For a structure with discontinuous hinges, we can use mechanical hinges bonded/fastened to the stiff laminates. For rigid hinges, we can perform compression molding of polymer-infused carbon-reinforced fabric between molds of the desired design. Transversely isotropic linear elastic properties of unidirectional CFRP composites used in the Miura-Ori models shown in Figure This section describes the computational modeling of Miura-Ori structures under compression loading. We evaluate their response under external in-plane loading in the two in-plane principal directions. For compression analysis, we consider compressive load acting along each of the two orthogonal in-plane directions: X1 and X3. We determine two global mechanical responses of the Miura-Ori models: Poisson's ratio and in-plane stiffness. We select combinations of α = (15°30°45°60°75°) and β = (30°60°90°120°150°), and perform 25 simulations for each loading case. Miura-Ori patterns with combinations of extreme angles for α and β -(15°,30°), (15°,150°), (75°,30°), and (75°,150°), are shown in Figure Poisson's ratio is calculated using Equation where, transverse = ∆Ltransverse Ltransverse and axial = ∆L axial L axial . L axial and L transverse refer to the original length along the loading and the in-plane transverse directions. Correspondingly, ∆L axial and ∆L transverse are the length changes along these directions. To determine the physical properties described above, a Miura-Ori model is first discretized by meshing with 3-node (S3) and 4-node (S4R) shell elements in a finite element software -ABAQUS To determine optimal geometry that can possess both high stiffness and negative Poisson's ratio, we perform multiple regression analysis to establish a relationship between geometric parameters (α, β) and target effective properties. Multiple regression is a statistical method to determine the relationship between a single dependent variable and several independent variables. A regression coefficient β is calculated by minimizing the sum of squared errors 2 , given the estimation function f and {X i , Y i } for each i-th sample from a dataset. In this paper, the independent variables are the geometric parameters (α and β), and the dependent variable is an effective target property (stiffness K or Poisson's ratio ν). Wei et al. In order to fit a regression model with higher-order terms, we first expand our data from FEA results using interpolation. We interpolate the original 5-by-5 contour (as discussed in Section 3.1) onto a map with a denser 13-by-13 grid for additional intermediate values of α and β. Figure Figure With bilinear interpolation, we obtain the stiffness and Poisson's ratio contours with a denser grid and provide more data points for fitting the regression model. Since (K, ν) ∼ C + F 0.5 (α 0.5 , β 0.5 ) + F 1 (α, β) + F 1.5 (α 1.5 , β 1.5 ) + F 2 (α 2 , β 2 ) + ... + O(α n , β n ), we consider up to a third order polynomial in each variable α and β in order to select a regression model with reasonable complexity. For cross terms, we consider up to a second-order polynomial. However, the regression model is still complex and overfits the model. Hence, we conduct Stepwise Regression We first compare the global mechanical responses of flexible and rigid Miura-Ori structures for isotropic materials in Section 5.1. Then in Section 5.2, we proceed with further in-depth studies on rigid Miura-Ori structures with different values of geometric parameters -α and β and materials -Aluminum and CFRP composite. This helps us understand how CFRP composite models perform compared to Aluminum models, and how the optimal geometry differs. We use regression analysis to explore the relationships between geometric parameters and global mechanical responses. We further optimize the Miura-Ori structures by proposing parameter R that linearly combines different targets (like stiffness and Poisson's ratio), as shown in Section 5.3. Finally in Section 5.4, we analyze woven composite models by changing the weaving patterns to establish how individual material properties control the global mechanical behavior. In order to compare the mechanical responses between rigid and flexible Miura-Ori structures, we subject the two models to two different load conditions: horizontal (X1) and vertical (X3) in-plane compression. Specifically, we choose the origami model with α = 45°and β = 90°as a case study and compare the response between origami structures made of Aluminum and CFRP composites. Table Next, we explore how the optimal stiffness and Poisson's ratio change with respect to different geometric angles within rigid Miura-Ori structures with isotropic (Aluminum) and directional (CFRP composite) material. To explore such behavior, we consider the mechanical loading of Miura-Ori models in horizontal in-plane compression (X1) and vertical in-plane compression (X3). We calculate weight normalized properties, effective stiffness, and Poisson's ratio. For different values of angles α and β, the weight normalized value for any property is defined as S norm = S/m, where S is the property, and m is the weight of the geometry. We then investigate optimal origami structures by comparing the normalized mechanical properties between isotropic and directional materials. Figure From Figure 1. Figure As α decreases, the structure is compact in the X3 direction, which is perpendicular to X1. While, as β increases, the structure approaches a flat surface. Consequently, these two scenarios in combination result in a stiffer structure when compressed along the X1 direction. On the other hand, we notice that the optimal geometry that manifests the maximum value of negative weight normalized Poisson's ratio corresponds to α and β approaching 0°. 2. Compared to the isotropic model, the directional model has a similar optimal shape with respect to both stiffness and Poisson's ratio. Moreover, when fiber direction is in line with the loading direction, as in case 1 shown in Figure Figure From Figures In order to optimize the Miura-Ori structure, we introduce a regression analysis approach to mathematically represent the stiffness and Poisson's ratio of Miura-Ori structures as described in Section 4. In this section, we will first validate the accuracy of our proposed regression model by comparing it to FEA results. We will then use our regression model to establish the optimal geometric parameters of the Miura-Ori structure based on different stiffness and Poisson's ratio values. From the Stepwise Regression analysis discussed in Section 4.2, we observe that nine parameters related to α and β are significant for representing the regression model. However, after setting up the regression model, we noticed that where w ij refer to different regression coefficients. After obtaining the regression model, we further utilize the model to determine optimal geometry with respect to the model's stiffness and Poisson's ratio. To set up a model combining different regression models for stiffness and Poisson's ratio, we define an abstract parameter R, which is the linear combination of two normalized parameters: , is a coefficient that reflects the weights between stiffness and Poisson's ratio and can be arbitrarily adjusted. For example, c 1 can be set to a smaller value if we focus on Poisson's ratio's optimization. n is a value that controls the sign of the second term: n = 1 when we want maximum stiffness and maximum negative Poisson's ratio, and n = 2 when we want maximum stiffness and maximum positive Poisson's ratio. |K| max and |ν| max are the max absolute values of the stiffness and Poisson's ratio contours, which are constants and can be set as a value based on FEA analysis or user's knowledge. To determine the optimal geometry, we take the first derivative of the function R and set it to zero, as shown in Equation Equation 8 generates a system of equations with respect to α and β. Pairs of α and β could uniquely determine the Miura-Ori pattern. For example, here, we consider the weights between stiffness and Poisson's ratio to be the same, that is, c 1 = 0.5. In Figure To understand how different material properties affect the Miura-Ori structure given fixed geometric parameters α and β, we consider several structures with fixed geometries and test how different materials change the structure's mechanical Here we show an example of a Miura-Ori structure with α = 45°and β = 90°, but the same conclusion is valid for other combinations mentioned above. First, we investigate how a composite's individual material property controls the Miura-Ori structure's mechanical response. We consider six different artificial materials as shown in Table Moreover, to understand how individual shear modulus (G 12 , G 23 , G 13 ) controls the Miura-Ori structure's mechanical responses, we test different combinations of in-plane and out-of-plane shear modules and calculate the Increase Rate (IR) of K c and NPR for different shear modulus. Here IR is defined as the increase of targeting mechanical property based on the unit increase in shear modulus. We calculate the IR of the Miura-Ori structure with different values of α and β. Table According to the results in Table 