In order to control the grain structure of multi-crystalline (mc) silicon during directional solidification, the development process of grain boundaries (GBs) with respect to the temperature gradient should be understood. A phase-field model incorporated with anisotropic interface energy and anisotropic attachment kinetic coefficient has produced the faceted shape of a growing silicon crystal, which is in agreement with experimental observation. The growth of coupled silicon grains under various growth velocities has been simulated to see the morphology of the solid-liquid front and the development process of the GBs. It has been found that the direction of GB is governed by either the kinetic rule or the equilibrium rule at the grain groove, depending on the growth velocity and the orientation relationship between grains on two sides. The GB beneath a groove with facet-facet surfaces follows the bisector of the two surfaces, while the direction of a GB stays far from the bisector when the groove has a rough surface. This research provides a numerical approach to predicting grain boundary development and gaining insights from grain structure evolution in mc-silicon, which can be potentially applied for high-efficiency and low-cost solar cells. Understanding how the grain structure of multicrystalline silicon (mc-Si) evolves during directional solidification is important for improving the quality of the silicon ingots used for solar cells Most grain boundaries between two silicon grains do not follow the direction of temperature gradient in directional solidification. This is mainly due to the fact that the growth shape of silicon is faceted and the growth velocity varies sharply with the crystalline orientation. It has been observed experimentally In the present research, phase-field simulation of s i l i c o n g r a i n g r o w t h d u r i n g d i r e c t i o n a l solidification is conducted to elucidate how the direction of their grain boundary develops under varying cooling conditions. It has been carried out in the following steps: first, the faceted growth shape of single silicon grain in isothermal condition w i l l b e r e p r o d u c e d a n d c o m p a r e d w i t h experimental observation to verify the validity of the phase-field model; second, coupled grains will be put under varying temperature conditions to investigate the behavior of solid-liquid growth front and the grain boundary beneath; Third, future work will be discussed based on the current findings. This work clarifies the underlying mechanism of grain boundary development and the model can be easily extended for simulating the growth of multiple silicon grains in three dimensions. The findings are expected to provide guidance for experimenters to control the grain structure of mc-Si and improve the quality of mc-silicon ingots used for solar cells. The phase-field model is developed based on the multi-phase-field method The subscript letters in the phase-field equation are used as indexes of the local phases. A pair of indexes indicates the interface or interaction between two phases. The right-hand side of the above phase-field equation is composed of the interfacial term and driving force term. The gradient coefficient and the penalty coefficient in the interfacial term can be associated with interface energy and width of the diffuse interface by the following relations: The difference in bulk free energy between the two local phases acts as the driving force , which is proportional to the undercooling with a prefactor : Additionally, the attachment kinetic coefficient can be related to the phase-field mobility by Considering the anisotropy of interface energy and attachment kinetic coefficient, the gradient coefficient and the phase-field mobility should be expressed as anisotropic functions of the normal vector at the local interface, which is: In this work, the function which represents the cubic symmetry The anisotropic phase-field mobility is expressed as: in which the phase-field mobility of smooth and rough interfaces is denoted as and , respectively. is the angle between the normal vector of the local interface and the normal vector of the facet orientation. When is lower than 2°, the interface can be considered atomically smooth, and when is larger than , the interface can be regarded as atomically rough. The variable indicates the transition from a smooth to a rough interface and is chosen to be 2.87°. The phase-field mobility between the smooth and rough interfaces is interpolated by function Eq.9. The above phase-field model involved the anisotropy of the interface energy and attachment kinetic coefficient can describe the faceted shape of silicon crystal in the time and length scale comparable to experimental observation (3) following results and discussions do not exclude but are complementary to the CSL theory in determining the grain boundary direction. The key factor to the facet formation in the phasefield model is the anisotropy of the attachment kinetic coefficient. Two types of facets, including {111} and {110}, are considered in this research and the values of their attachment kinetic coefficient relative to the one of {100} rough surface are determined by decomposing the velocity of the rough surface in facet orientations (Fig. A model in two dimensions has been used to investigate how the extension direction of grain boundaries is affected by the misorientation angle between two adjacent grains and growth velocity. The width and height of the domain (Fig. In Fig. The bisectors of facet pairs with acute and obtuse angles are denoted as type-A and type-B, respectively. This means the grain boundary on the lower side may choose to develop by following either bisector A or B according to the kinetic rule. In Fig. The simulation also produces the same transition from CGS to ECS in the <100> orientation. The {110} facets in Fig. In Fig. The inclination of all the lower side GBs is far from that of the bisector including the one with 45° misorientation. The plot in Fig. , the upper GBs follow the type-A bisectors, while the lower GB is relatively close to the type-A bisector for small misorientation angle but follows the type-B bisector when the misorientation angle becomes large. When the growth velocity decreases to be as low as 10 , all the upper GBs deviate far from the type-A bisectors and the lower GB does not follow the type B bisector even for large misorientation angle. This suggests that the grooves may lose their facet-facet characteristic when growth velocity is low and the direction of GB may be governed by other rules in addition to the kinetic rule. Fig. . For this rough-facet groove, the GB direction is weakly governed by the kinetic rule, which states that the GB direction is aligned with the vector sum of surface velocities on two sides of the groove. It is most likely that the rule of force equilibrium at the triple junction plays a significant role in determining the upper GB direction when growth velocity is as low as 10 . The upper rough surface has larger interface energy and the lower smooth surface have smaller interface energy, the GB tends to incline counterclockwise. Although it still has a 1.5° clockwise direction, it can be reasonably e x p e c t e d t h a t t h i s G B w i l l t u r n counterclockwise when further decreasing the g r o w t h v e l o c i t y. A d d i t i o n a l l y, t h e counterclockwise upper GB in Fig. It can be also discerned in Fig. At the steady state, the rough and smooth surfaces on the growth front move at the same velocity in the direction of the temperature gradient, In the phase-field model, the velocity of the interface is the product of mobility and undercooling, thus, The temperature difference between the smooth and rough surfaces can be expressed as, The above temperature difference can also be related to the temperature gradient and displacement between smooth and rough surfaces, By relating Eq.11 and Eq. 12, in which the displacement is a quantity that can reflect the groove depth . Therefore, The above expression suggests that the groove depth is not only proportional to the growth velocity but also the mobility difference between the rough and smooth surfaces, which is related to the orientation relationship between the two adjacent grains. Fig. FIG. proportionality to the growth velocity due to the rough surface in the groove. It becomes apparent that the kinetic rule is effective in predicting the GB direction when the groove has facets and large depth, while the equilibrium rule appears to become dominant in determining the inclination direction when the groove is shallow and has a rough surface. The development of silicon grain boundary during directional solidification has been investigated using a phase-field model and the findings are listed as follows: -The shape of a silicon crystal responds to the undercooling due to the competitive relationship between the interface energy and attachment kinetic coefficient, which are anisotropic and have minima in the orientation of faceted and atomicallysmooth surfaces. -The grain boundary direction is closely related to the morphology and surface type of the groove, which depends on the cooling condition and orientation relationship. When the groove has a facet-facet characteristic, the GB direction follows the bisector of groove surfaces. When a non-faceted or rough surface appears in the groove, force equilibrium at the triple junction becomes dominant in determining the grain boundary direction at low growth velocity. The above simulation is conducted for a series of misoriented coupled grains, in which the <100> orientation of one grain remains aligned with the temperature gradient. However, more possible orientation arrangements between two grains with respect to the temperature gradient can be anticipated if both of the two grains can have arbitrary orientations with respect to the temperature gradient. In addition, the orientation arrangements of grains are complex in reality because the grain growth of multicrystalline silicon is in three-dimensional space and involved multiple grains. Therefore, in the future, the 3D simulation with multiple arbitrarily-oriented silicon grains is needed to see and understand how the grain boundaries develop and interact with each other. For this purpose, the current limited model can be improved by considering the following aspects: First, the present model uses 2D anisotropic functions to separately describe the attachment kinetic coefficients in <100> and <110> planes. An anisotropy function of attachment kinetic coefficient in 3D is required for producing a 3D faceted silicon crystal. Second, the anisotropic function with cubic symmetry is not enough to describe the anisotropic interface energy of silicon because only small anisotropic strength can be used to maintain the stability of numerical computation. A more realistic anisotropy function for interface energy with cusps at facet orientation and a small variation in other orientations is needed. Last but not least, the grain boundary energy should depend on the orientation relationship and grain boundary inclination 