We show that the oblique confinement states in the Cardy-Rabinovici model are superinsulators, not topological insulators. This is because their only bulk excitations are strings that completely prevent the separation of ± charges, causing a strictly infinite resistance (below a critical temperature and/or voltage). This is very different from the typical activated behaviour of topological insulators, caused by a finite bulk energy gap. Superinsulators In 3D, the compact QED action can be supplemented by the topological θ-term of axion electrodynamics The Cardy-Rabinovici model where n μ and m μ = (1/2)ǫ μναβ S αβ are singularities representing electric and magnetic currents, respectively and e is the usual dimensionless coupling constant. The second dimensionless parameter θ is an angle and the minimal coupling of the magnetic monopoles, endowing them with charge eθ/2π, is called the Witten effect There are three types of possible phases in the Cardy-Rabinovici model, a superconducting phase, when the electric charge condenses, a Coulomb phase, when no charge condenses and, finally, various oblique confinement phases when excitations carrying both electric and magnetic charge, so called dyons, condense. Importantly, if the (electric, magnetic) charge combination (n, m) condenses, all excitations with quantum numbers not in this condensate are confined. In particular, if m 0, electric charge is always confined. This is why these oblique confinement phases were originally identifed as oblique superinsulators The Cardy-Rabinovici model can be obtained The effective action for the Cardy-Rabinovici model in the phase with a monopole condensate (carrying automatically also electric charge due to the Witten effect) can be easily written down using the Julia-Toulouse prescription, as adapted to generic antisymmetric tensor gauge fields in where μν and the UV regulator mass scale Λ ∝ √ z with z the monopole fugacity. This is the action of the confining string Note that, as first derived in To do so we first note that, in presence of the θ parameter, the photon mass gap, describing the inverse length scale on which Coulomb interactions are screened becomes The string tension, however, is given by Because of the exponential factor, for strong coupling we have Since the inverse square root of the string tension describes the typical string length, while the photon mass is its typical width, this means that, when e becomes large, the strings are much longer than wide. Actually, the model can be renormalized by removing the cutoff Λ → ∞, in which case e also flows to infinity, e → ∞ with the string tension τ fixed The resulting IR model has two types of excitations, edge excitations and bulk strings of typical energy scale √ τ. This is not a topological model, the string action crucially depends on the metric. Nor is it an insulator. The insulating bulk gap m θ has been renormalized to infinity and the physical bulk string excitations prevent any charge transport below a critical temperature or a critical applied voltage which reduce the effective string tension to zero. In this regime the resistance is strictly infinite and the state is thus a superinsulator, a dual superconductor. Of course, if one chooses to consider exclusively energies below the string scale, only the topological edge excitations survive 