We numerically investigate the thermoelectric properties of a triangle quantum dot connected to metallic electrodes using the non-equilibrium Green's function method in the Anderson model. Exploiting the equation of motion method in the Coulomb-blockade regime, the thermovoltage, thermocurrent and heat dissipation are calculated. Results show that the thermovoltage and thermocurrent have nonlinear behavior, and the magnitude and sign of them can be controlled with site energy and coupling strength of quantum dots. Moreover, we find that the heat current is nonlinear and asymmetric respect to the sign of bias voltage for all of the site energies of quantum dots. Analyses show that the heat current can be positive or negative for all of the site energies and becomes zero for the nonzero voltages. These results can be useful to determine the performance of the nanoscale electronic devices to control the heat dissipations. The thermoelectric properties of quantum dots(QDs) have attracted th attention of both theoretical and experimental researchers in recent years Heat-to-electric converters operate through the Seebeck effect The cause of this nonlinear behavior is attributed to the renormalization of energy levels by temperature; Because the accumulated charge depends on the applied temperature gradient. Unlike the current caused by the application of voltage, which has a definite sign for voltages greater than zero, by applying a temperature gradient, the heat current can be positive or negative, depending on the sign of the heat power. For electron-like charge carriers, it is a positive and for hole-like carriers, it is a negative Considering the effect of Coulomb-blockade in low temperature physics is important for nanometer systems The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we first introduce the model and then give a detailed analytical derivation of transport properties with the combination of non-equilibrium Green's function and equations of motions. In Sec. III, we present numerical results and their interpretations. Conclusion are summarized in Sec.IV. Here we study three QDs setup in as a triangle structure attached to metallic leads. The leads are connected to the QD 0 , as shown in Fig. where d † jσ (d jσ ) are fermion creation (annihilation) operators at QD j , U is the Coulomb-interaction and the number operator is given by n 0σ = d † 0σ d 0σ with spin σ at QD 0 . Electron current can be measured through the time evolution of the expectation value of electron occupation in one of the leads I α = -e d dt n α , where n α = kασ d † kασ d kασ . Since the total density commutes with the Hamiltonian Eq. ( where G r σ,σ (E) is the model retarded Green function in the presence of both coupling to the continuum states and electron-electron interactions. Γ α (E) = 2πρ α (E)|V ασ (E)| represents the level broadening due to coupling to the leads ( with total line width Γ = α Γ α , and the density of states ρ α = k δ(Eαk ) in the α lead). We consider wide band limit in this paper, so Γ α (E) ≡ Γ α . We also consider the density of states and the probability of tunneling independent of spin (non-magnetic electrodes). -1 is the Fermi-Dirac function for lead α with electrochemical potential μ α = E F +eV α and temperature T α = T + θ α ( where E F is the Fermi energy and T is the background temperature). As stated before, we adapt the equation-of-motion technique and restrict it to the Coulomb-blockade regime where two energies scale of the model, namely k B T and Γ are much smaller than the U . Within such a restriction, ignoring the complex cotunneling process and working in temperature T > T K larger than the Kondo temperature, the equation-of-motion approach generates a good description of the transport properties of strongly interacting quantum dots. Retarded green function G r (τ, 0) of two fermionic operators A and B, and the corresponding equation of motion in energy domain given as where H is the total Hamiltonian Eq. ( (5) by inserting Eq. (1) into the above equation, we get where and to find , we only need to use Eq. ( with more simplification and by defining two new parameters we find a compact form where by substtituation it and Eq. ( with recasting and operating the wide-band approximation the Eq. ( In the above fomula still we need . Using Eq. ( where inserting Eq. ( wrapping all, we end a closed-form Green's function for QD 0 as where This shows G r σ,σ (E) depends on the dot occupation for reversed spin σ, n σ = 1 2πi dEG < σ,σ (E). Using the Keldysh equation for lesser green function 1 , and adapting the self-consistent approach we close the system of equations. Analogous to charge current, the heat current is derived from which satisfies the Joule law J R + J L = -IV . Now, we present the results obtained based on the formulation of the previous section. We select the level broadening of QD 0 due to coupling to the leads Γ L = Γ R = Γ 0 as a unit of energy. Interested in the Coulombblockade regime we appoint background temperature energy and the Coulomb interaction as k B T = 0.1Γ 0 and U = 10Γ 0 , respectively. We also consider all hopping integrals equal as t i = Γ 0 , (i = 1, 2, 3). Figs. 2(a) and (b) display the average occupation number and electric current of the QD 0 , respectively, in terms of voltage bias for different QD 0 's energy values in the absence of temperature gradient (θ = 0). The bias voltage applied in a symmetric way to the junction (μ L = -μ R = eV /2), and impose E F = 0 as the reference energy point. As it is clear from Fig. For negative (positive) current, the charge carriers are holes (electrons). The results show that the direction of the charge carriers depends on the energy of the QD 0 . For the energy 0 = -U/2, the heat current are not zero because the electronic density of states around the Fermi energy is asymmetric. To have a better insight of the charge carrier transport process, in Fig. At point A, due to the ordering of energy levels and the density of energy states, it is evident that the contribution of holes in the charge flow is greater than the contribution of electrons, and therefore the heat current is negative. With increasing θ, Fermi distribution extends its tail to higher energies and then make it possible to have more electrons get excited through the junction. By raising the temperature difference more, total heat current again becomes zero, which indicates the balance between the flow of electrons and holes in both directions (see point B on the Fig. Fig. At very low θs, thermovoltage is a linear function in terms of temperature that can be positive (for electrons) or negative (for holes) depending on the nature of the charge carriers. While at higher θ, V th shows a nonlinear trend. With raising θ, V th 's absolute magnitude increases and gets an extremum. With increasing more the temperature gradient, V th decreases and for a temperature θ = θ 0 , V th becomes zero, and V th changes the sign or θ > θ 0 . This result is in agreement with experiments on semiconductor quantum dots The linear part of the rectified heat is obtained through the linear response of the Peltier coefficient. Therefore, the power dissipation for positive bias voltage can be greater or less than negative bias voltage, which depends on the placement of resonant energy levels above or below the Fermi energy. Fig. In Fig. In this paper, we theoretically investigate the voltage, temperature current and heat dissipation through a triangular quantum dot (QD) attached to the metal electrodes. Calculations were performed using a combination of the non-equilibrium Green function and the equation of motion method in the Coulomb blockade regime. The results show that at the triangular quantum dot, the voltage and temperature current behave nonlinear, and their magnitude and sign depend on factors such as the dot energy level and the hopping parameter between QDs. Based on self-consistent calculations, we showed that the heat current is a nonlinear function concerning the applied voltage. Moreover, the heat current responsing the change of the applied voltage and for all quantities of dot energy levels is an asymmetric function. This feature is unlike the single quantum dot connected to metalic electrodes as reported by aothur in Ref. 