Solution-processed copper(I) thiocyanate (CuSCN) typically exhibits low crystallinity with short-range order; the defects result in a high density of trap states that limit the device performance. Despite the extensive electronic applications of CuSCN, its defect properties have not been studied in detail. Through X-ray absorption spectroscopy, pristine CuSCN prepared from the standard diethyl sulfide-based recipe is found to contain under-coordinated Cu atoms, pointing to the presence of SCN vacancies. A defect passivation strategy is introduced by adding solid I2 to the processing solution. At small concentrations, the iodine is found to exist as I -which can substitute for the missing SCN -ligand, effectively healing the defective sites and restoring the coordination around Cu. Applying I2-doped CuSCN as a pchannel in thin-film transistors shows that the hole mobility increases by more than five times at the optimal doping concentration of 0.5 mol%. Importantly, the on/off current ratio and the subthreshold characteristics also improve as the I2 doping method leads to the defect healing effect while avoiding the creation of detrimental impurity states. An analysis of the capacitance-voltage characteristics corroborates that the trap state density is reduced upon I2 addition. The contact resistance and bias-stress stability of the devices also improve. This work shows a simple and effective route to improve hole transport properties of CuSCN which is applicable to wide-ranging electronic and optoelectronic applications. Copper(I) thiocyanate (CuSCN) has arisen as a novel 3D coordination polymer (CP) with promising characteristics such as attractive hole transport properties, high optical transparency, and solution processibility. CuSCN is typically solution-processed at relatively low temperatures, resulting in low crystallinity which likely contains a high degree of structural disorder. To improve the hole transport properties of CuSCN, doping is one of the main approaches generally explored. The solution processability of CuSCN allows the doping procedure to be carried out simply by mixing dopants to the CuSCN solution. For example, molecular dopants with low-lying lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energy levels have been investigated. A fluorinated fullerene derivative C60F48 was shown to be effective at p-doping CuSCN, employed as a p-channel layer in TFTs (optimal doping level = 0.5 mol%) and a hole-transport layer (HTL) in OSCs (optimal doping level = 0.005 -0.01 mol%), respectively. Similarly, 2,3,5,6-tetrafluoro-7,7,8,8-tetracyanoquinodimethane (F4-TCNQ) was used as a dopant for a CuSCN HTL in PSCs (optimal doping level = 0.03 wt%, equivalent to 0.013 mol%); the results showed a closer energy alignment between the CuSCN HTL and the active perovskite layer, yielding improvements across all solar cell metrics. I2 doping of CuSCN has been attempted previously; however, the reported method proceeded by treating CuSCN films with halogen gases, The method reported herein is very simple; solutions of I2 beads and CuSCN powder, each dissolved separately using DES as a solvent at 10 mg ml -1 , were mixed with different volume ratios to yield various concentrations of I2 doping (Table To investigate the crystalline phases, we carried out X-ray diffraction (XRD) of the drop-cast samples. First, the results of the pristine sample and reference CuSCN (powder, 99%, Sigma-Aldrich, also used for CuSCN solution preparation) were compared against data of the reported structures. As shown in Figure The effects of I2 addition on the local atomic structures of CuSCN were investigated in detail by X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS). The samples were similar to those used for Raman and XRD experiments. The XAS measurements of the Cu K-edge and I L3-edge were conducted at the beamline BL5.2 SUT-NANOTEC-SLRI, Synchrotron Light Research Institute (SLRI), Thailand. The XAS spectra were recorded in both the X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES) and the extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) spectral ranges. The standard samples for reference were CuSCN powder (99%, Sigma-Aldrich), CuI powder (99.5%, Sigma-Aldrich), and I2 beads (99.9%, Wako). The XANES results of the Cu K-edge are shown in Figure Figure For the pristine sample, the amplitude of the main peak was significantly reduced when compared to that of the CuSCN standard. This can be attributed to a diminishing degree of bonding in the first coordination sphere around Cu, The absorption edges of CuI and I2 standards were located at 4561.0 and 4562.4 eV, which can be assigned to iodine in the oxidation state -1 and 0, respectively. The L3-edges of the I2-doped samples were located between the two standards, and by using a linear correlation analysis the oxidation state of iodine can be found as shown in Figure In addition, Figure By combining the Raman spectroscopy, XRD, and XAS findings, we deduce that adding a small amount of I2 (e.g., 0.5 mol%) to the CuSCN processing solution leads to the defect healing effect through I -filling in the vacancies of SCN -, passivating the structural defects and improving the crystallinity. I -is well-known to act as a ligand that coordinates with Cu + centers in coordination polymers or complexes. Although they still coordinate to Cu + centers, their large size leads to more disorder around Cu + and decrease the overall crystallinity. The effects of I2 addition on the surface morphology of CuSCN thin films at various doing concentrations were investigated by atomic force microscopy (AFM), and the topographic images are shown in Figure The converted absorption spectra are displayed in Figure To study the electronic energy levels of the samples, photoelectron spectroscopy (PES) was performed using synchrotron radiation at the Beamline BL3.2Ua, Synchrotron Light Research Institute (SLRI), Thailand. The evolution of μsat, Vth, and the subthreshold swing (Sth) with I2 concentration are visualized in Figure (1) a p-doping effect, i.e., an increase in the hole density in the semiconductor layer; or (2) a decrease in the hole-trapping states. To characterize the trap states in more detail, we studied the frequency dispersion of the capacitance-voltage (C-V) characteristics of metal-insulator-semiconductor (MIS) devices The reduction in the trap state density, evident from both Dit,tft (based on TFT subthreshold characteristics) and Dit,cv (based on the frequency dispersion of MIS C-V characteristics), was concurrent with the defect healing effect and improved crystallinity by I2 doping as discussed in the preceding sections. We surmise that the pristine CuSCN films prepared from the DES solution contain a large number of hole traps from VSCN (high Dit,tft and Dit,cv with under-coordinated Cu + centers). Indeed, excess SCN is known to increase the p-type conductivity of CuSCN; A recent study also reported on a similar passivation of iodine vacancies by Br -and Cl -in tin halide perovskite TFTs. We also analyzed the contact resistance (Rc) in CuSCN TFTs using the transmission line method (see Supporting Information). Figure We have shown that SCN vacancies are a major source of defect states in CuSCN processed from the widely used DES-based recipe. These defects act as hole-trapping states that restrict the hole transport properties of pristine CuSCN films. Though a simple method of adding I2 to the processing solution, the properties of CuSCN can be remarkably improved. At small concentrations, the added iodine exists as I -which can replace VSCN and effectively restore the coordination environment of Cu + . This defect-healing effect results in drastically enhanced hole transport properties, evident from the improvements of TFT parameters across the board at the optimal doping concentration of 0.5 mol%. Specifically, the hole mobility was increased from around 0.01-0.02 to 0.07-0.08 cm 2 V -1 s -1 while the on/off current ratio was simultaneously increased from 8×10 3 to 2×10 In addition, this work highlights that there is still a large room for CuSCN property optimization. Although I -is shown to recover the coordination environment around Cu + and passivate the hole-trapping states, the trap state density is still relatively high (on the order of 10 13 cm 2 V -1 s -1 ) compared to high-performance p-channel TFTs based on other semiconductor families, such as organics or oxides (with trap state density on the order of 10 11 -10 12 cm 2 V -1 s - 1 ). Full descriptions of the experiments are given in the Supporting Information. Raman Spectroscopy. Raman spectra of CuSCN and I2-doped CuSCN (prepared by drop-casting) were recorded using a Bruker Senterra Raman microscope with a dispersive Raman spectrometer. The excitation source was a 532-nm laser operated at 2 mW. All spectra were collected using a 10x objective lens and 20 s of acquisition time. The powder samples were prepared using the abovementioned drop-casting procedure. XRD spectra were recorded with a Bruker D8 Advance using a Cu Kα X-ray source (λ = 1.5406 Å). The spectra were collected in the 2θ range of 5° to 60° under ambient environment. Similar samples to those used for Raman and XRD measurements were also employed for XAS. The samples were manually ground before packing in Kapton sleeves for measurements. XAS was conducted at beamline BL5.2 SUT-NANOTEC-SLRI, Synchrotron Light Research Institute (SLRI), Nakhon Ratchasima, Thailand (electron energy 1.2 GeV, bending magnet, beam current 80-150 mA). The standard samples were CuSCN powder (99%, Sigma-Aldrich), CuI powder (99.5%, Sigma-Aldrich), and I2 beads (99.9%, Wako). The XAS measurements of both Cu K-edge and I L3-edge, covering both the near edge structure (XANES) and the extended fine structure (EXAFS), were conducted in fluorescent mode under ambient conditions. The spectra were averaged from five scans and analyzed by the standard procedure using the Demeter package (ATHENA and ARTEMIS) CuSCN films were characterized by a Park Systems NX10 atomic force microscope (AFM) operated in the non-contact mode with an Olympus OMCL-AC160TS cantilever (Si, 7-nm tip radius, 26-N m -1 stiffness, 300-kHz resonance frequency). Surface height (ZAFM) histograms and root-mean-square roughness (σRMS) values were obtained from 5×5 μm 2 images while average grain diameter values (Davg) were calculated from 0.5×0.5 μm 2 images. Gwyddion software (http://gwyddion.net/) was used to analyze the AFM images. CuSCN and I2-doped CuSCN thin-film samples were prepared using the method described above onto fused silica substrates (to minimize absorption in the UV range from the substrates). Optical transmittance and reflectance spectra were recorded in the range of 200-1400 nm using a PerkinElmer LAMBDA 1050 spectrophotometer equipped with an integrating sphere. The absorbance spectra α(λ) were calculated by considering the filmsubstrate interface effect using the equation: where Rtot and Rsub are the total reflectance of the sample and reflectance of the bare substrate, respectively, and Ttot and Tsub are the total transmittance of the sample and transmittance of the bare substrate, respectively. The optical band gaps were determined using Tauc plots. The secondary electron cutoff and valence band spectra were recorded at Beamline BL3.2Ua, Synchrotron Light Research Institute, Nakhon Ratchasima, Thailand, using a photon energy 60 eV. The samples were prepared onto ITO substrates in a N2-filled glove box before transferred to the vacuum chamber (base pressure of 10 -8 Pa). Au was used as a reference sample and all samples were biased at about 9.5 V to allow the measurements of low electrons at the secondary electron cutoff edge. The results were recorded with pass energy of 10 eV using a Thermo VG Scientific CLAM2 electron energy analyzer, yielding a total energy resolution of about 0.2 eV.The work functions of the samples were determined from the secondary electron cutoff edges. After aligning the Fermi level at 0 eV, the valence band edges were determined from the valence band onsets. The conduction band edges were estimated by adding the optical band gaps (from UV-Vis-NIR) to the valence band positions. of 1000 μm and a channel length (L) of 30 μm. The electrical characterizations of the TFT devices were carried out with a probe station under N2 atmosphere using a Keysight B2912A 2-channel sourcemeasure unit (SMU). TFT device parameters, i.e., linear and saturation mobility (μlin and μsat), threshold voltage (Vth), and subthreshold swing (Sth), were calculated using the standard gradual channel approximation. where Ci is the geometric capacitance of the dielectric layer. The interface trap density Dit,tft (expressed in eV -1 cm -2 ) was evaluated from Sth using the equation: The charge carrier transport mechanisms were analyzed based on the power law: where K is the proportional constant, VG the gate voltage, and γ the fitting exponent. A large exponent γ indicates that the conduction mechanism is dominated by the trap-limited conduction (TLC) in which carriers are trapped and released multiple times between the extended states (related to band states) and the localized tail states. In contrast, a small γ is associated with the percolation conduction (PC), which refers to the mechanism when charge carriers find the path with the least resistance (blocked by randomly distributed potential barriers) to move across the extended states. were deposited in between the bottom and top electrodes following the procedure described above to form the semiconductor and the insulator layer, respectively. The final structure was Au/CuSCN/P(VDF-TrFE-CFE)/Al. The C-V characteristics were measured with different AC frequencies using a Solartron Analytical 1260A impedance analyzer. All fabrication and characterization steps were carried out in a N2-filled glove box. From the C-V characteristics, the interface trap density Dit,cv (in eV -1 cm -2 ) can be estimated for an energy range between Ej and Ej+1 (where j = 1, 2, 3, ...) from the shift in the onset voltage (Vj and Vj+1) due to the frequency dispersion of the C-V curves (measured at different frequencies fj and fj+1, where fj > fj+1) using the equation: where Ci is the geometric capacitance of the dielectric layer. In short, the principle of the method is that the interface trap states closer to the mobile states (near the valence band edge in this case), which have faster time constants, can respond to high-frequency signals whereas states deeper in the gap (away from the valence band), which have slower time constants, cannot. The latter then respond to lower frequencies. The corresponding energy range ΔE = Ej+1 -Ej (where Ej+1 is farther away from the valence band than Ej, corresponding to fj+1 and fj, respectively) is calculated (in eV) from: Ej+1 -Ej = (kT/q)•ln(fj/fj+1). The average density of states (Dit,cv) is therefore: Dit,cv = Nit,cv/ΔE, which is Eq. S5. The resulting Dit,cv is plotted at an average energy (Eavg) between Ej and Ej+1: Eavg = Ej + (ΔE/2). By comparing pairs of C-V curves measured at successively lower frequencies (f1 vs f2, f2 vs f3, and so on, where f1 > f2 > f3 > ...), a spectrum of Dit,cv can be constructed. The frequencies employed for our measurements and the resulting onset voltages are listed in Table E1 can be calculated using the Shockley-Read-Hall statistics. The contact resistance (Rc) of the devices was determined by the transmission line method following the equation: where Rt is the total device resistance which can be found from the output characteristics in the linear region (ID,lin vs VD,lin). Rt has two components: contact resistance (Rc) which in this case combines the contribution from both the source and drain contacts; and channel resistance (Rch) which can be written in terms of semiconductor resistance (Rs) and device dimensions (L and W). By measuring Rt of devices with different L, a linear extrapolation to the limit L = 0 allows the determination of Rc. The normalization by the channel width (W), as in Eq. S7, allows for a comparison across devices with different geometry. The stability under gate-bias stress of TFTs based on pristine and I2doped CuSCN was measured by applying a negative VG bias of -20 V (using the same setup for the TFT measurements) under a N2-filled glove box. Transfer characteristics were collected at different times during the stressing period of 0 to 3000 s. a