The concept of alloy engineering has emerged as a viable technique towards tuning the bandgap as well as engineering the defect levels in two-dimensional transition metal dichalcognides (TMDC). Possibility to synthesize these ultrathin TMDC materials through chemical route has opened realistic possibilities to fabricate hybrid multi-functional devices. By synthesizing nanosheets with different composites of MoS2xSe2(1-x) (x = 0 to 1) using simple chemical methods, we systematically investigate the photo response properties of three terminal hybrid devices by decorating large area graphene with these nanosheets (x = 0, 0.5, 1) in 2D-2D configurations. Among them, graphene-MoSSe hybrid phototransistor exhibits superior optoelectronic properties than its binary counterparts. The device exhibits extremely high photoresponsivity (>10 4 A/W), low noise equivalent power (~10 -14 W/Hz 0.5 ), higher specific detectivity (~ 10 11 Jones) in the wide UV-NIR (365-810 nm) range with excellent gate tunability. The broadband light absorption of MoSSe, ultrafast charge transport in graphene, along with controllable defect engineering in MoSSe makes this device extremely attractive. Our work demonstrates the large area scalability with wafer-scale production of MoS2xSe2(1-x) alloys, having important implication towards facile and scalable fabrication of highperformance optoelectronic devices and providing important insights into the fundamental interactions between van-der-Waals materials. Broadband photodetectors are of particular importance due to their applicability in the large dynamic range of the electromagnetic spectrum, improving versatility in wide application fields, such as flexible image sensing, surveillance, communication and health monitoring This paper presents a systematic study of graphene-MoS2xSe2(1-x) hybrid phototransistors with x varying from 0 to 1. Using a simple hydrothermal synthesis followed by ultrasonication, composition-tunable ternary MoS2xSe2(1-x) alloy nanosheets are synthesized and their structural and optical investigations demonstrate that these 2D ternary alloys are of highly crystalline and exhibit composition-dependent band edge emission. Comparing to their binary counterparts, the higher photoresponsivity and faster response time in graphene-MoSSe phototransistor imply the reduced density of deep level defects. This fabricated hybrid phototransistor using the optimized alloy exhibits a gate tunable photoresponsivity (R) higher than 10 4 A/W and a noise equivalent power as low as ~10 -14 W/Hz 0.5 in the broad spectral region 365-810 nm. Also considering the low frequency 1/f noise measurement, the specific detectivity (D * ) of the device reaches ~10 MoS2xSe2(1-x) (x = 0 to 1) nanosheets are synthesized by using sono-chemical assisted hydrothermal technique Composition tunable vibrational modes can be studied from the Raman spectra of MoS2xSe2(1x) alloys (Figure The photoluminescence (PL) spectra, recorded by an excitation with 532 nm laser of MoS2xSe2(1-x) alloys reveal (Figure The photoresponsivity (R) Where, SI is the total noise spectral density consisting of 1/f noise, thermal noise and the shot noise Where, A is the effective device area of the hybrid device. Using this equation D * is calculated as high as ~ 3.06×10 Table To summarize, the composition tunable synthesis of MoS2xSe2(1-x) ternary alloy (x = 0 to 1) nanosheets has been demonstrated using a cost effective, eco-friendly hydrothermal approach. By fabricating three terminal heterostructure device with graphene, the phototransistor action has been studied systematically with three different composites of MoS2xSe2(1-x) (x = 0, 0.5, 1.0). The graphene-MoSSe hybrid phototransistor exhibits superior photo-sensing properties compared to the other two devices (i.e., MoS2 and MoSe2), which is attributed to the suppression of deep level defects and better structural stability in MoSSe. The broadband (UV-NIR) light absorption of MoSSe, ultrafast charge carrier transport in graphene and the improved interfacial property at graphene-MoSSe heterostructure make this device suitable for advanced optoelectronic devices. This graphene-MoSSe hybrid device exhibits extremely high photoresponsivity (>10 4 A/W), low noise equivalent power (~10 -14 W/Hz 0.5 ), higher specific detectivity (~ 10 11 Jones) in the wide UV-NIR (365-810 nm) wavelength range with gate tunability. Having large area scalability with bulk production of MoS2xSe2(1-x) alloys and CVD graphene are clear advantages, these results have an important implication towards facile and scalable fabrication of high-performance optoelectronic devices based on ternary 2D alloy materials, providing an insight into the fundamental interaction between the van-der-Waals materials. EDAX analysis and elemental mapping of the MoS2xSe2(1-x) alloys, TEM and AFM images of MoS2xSe2(1-x) alloys, characterisations of graphene-MoS2xSe2(1-x) alloy, electrical characterisations and the calculation of noise spectral density of graphene-MoSSe hybrid phototransistor, spectral photoresponse characteristics of graphene-MoSSe phototransistor, Noise equivalent power (NEP) and the specific detectivity (D*) of the graphene-based hybrid phototransistors, Stability of the hybrid graphene-MoSSe phototransistor. Chemicals: Sodium molybdate dehydrate (Na2MoO4•2H2O), Sulfur (S) and Selenium (Se) were purchased from Alpha Aser, and Sodium borohydride (NaBH4) was purchased from Sigma-aldrich. All these chemicals were directly used without further purification. Deionized water was purified using a Milli-Q system. Ternary alloy MoS2xSe2(1-x) nanosheets are synthesized in hydrothermal method followed by ultrasonication. In this typical procedure Na2MoO4•2H2O, S and Se are used as precursors of Mo, S and Se respectively and NaBH4 is used as reducing agent. For this synthesize procedure, first Na2MoO4•2H2O is dissolved in 15 DI water, S and Se powder of appropriate stoichiometric amounts are added to this solution and then the resulting solution is homogenized by continuous magnetic stirring. Then aqueous NaBH4 is added dropwise into the above mixture and the colour of solution is turned brown and after that the resulting solution is kept for magnetic stirring to get complete homogeneous uniform mixture. This brown coloured solution is transferred into a 40 ml teflon-lined stainless autoclave and placed in an oven at 200°C for 24 hrs. After the reaction is over, the autoclave is naturally cooled to room temperature and the finally obtained black powder samples are collected by repeated washing and centrifugation by DI water and IPA. The cleaned wet powder sample is dried and the resulting dried powder is dispersed in IPA and bath sonicated for followed by centrifugation to get the nanosheets. Finally, the ternary MoS2xSe2(1-x) nanosheet dispersed in IPA is used for characterizations and optoelectronic experiments. For comparison, MoS2 and MoSe2 are prepared by similar ultrasonication assisted hydrothermal route. The morphological and structural analysis of all the alloy components is carried out by using a field-emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM) equipped with an energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectrometer, with an electron energy of 20 keV. To further study the detailed morphology and surface profile a high-resolution transmission electron microscope (HRTEM) (FEI-TECNAI G2 20ST, energy 200 keV) and atomic force microscopy (AFM) (di INNOVA) in tapping mode are performed. The crystallinity of the as synthesized nanosheets is investigated by X-ray diffraction (Rigaku (Smartlab)). Absorption spectrums are taken by using a UV-Vis spectrometer (Shimadzu -UV-Vis 2600 Spectrophotometer) and micro-raman and micro-photoluminescence spectrums are recorded with a spectrometer (LabRam HR Evolution; HORIBA France SAS-532 nm laser). Device Fabrication: The phototransistor devices are fabricated by using commercially available single-layer CVD-grown graphene on p + doped Si/SiO2 (300 nm) substrates (purchased from Graphenea, USA). Then the Ti/ Au (5 nm / 60 nm) source and drain electrodes are deposited on top of the graphene film through a shadow mask by electron beam evaporation and formed a channel of W/L = 200 μm/70 μm. After the fabrication of the back gated graphene transistor, the chemically synthesized MoS2xSe2(1-x) alloys (~25 l) are drop casted on top of the graphene transistor to make the complete hybrid devices. All the devices are then annealed at 80o C for 45 mins to remove the interfacial residues. Device Characterisations: All the electrical and optical measurements are carried out at room temperature (in vacuum ~10 -5 mbar) in a homemade electronic setup having an optical window. MFLI lock in amplifier (Zurich Instruments) and a Keithley 2450 sourcemeter are used in all over the experiments with AC two-probe configuration at a carrier frequency of 226.67 Hz. For the photocurrent measurements we use well calibrated and collimated 365 nm, 410 nm, 535 nm, 633 nm, 735 nm, and 810 nm LEDs (Thorlab) sourced by DC2200 power supply with a spot size ~ 3 mm. The LED powers are calibrated by using Flame-Ocean Optics spectrometer with integrating sphere set up. Figure The field effect mobility (μ) of the hybrid graphene-WS2 QDs transistor can be calculated by simply introducing Drude model which gives Where, σ is the conductivity, n represents the charge carrier density and e is the electronic charge. Here, σ is calculated from the relation, Where, Cbg = 1.15×10 -8 F/ cm 2 is the backgate capacitance of 300 nm SiO2. Using the following equations, we have calculated the average field effect mobility of the charge carriers as ~ 216 cm 2 /VS for holes and ~ 92 cm 2 /VS for electrons in our hybrid device. The noise equivalent power (NEP) and the specific detectivity (D * ) of the phototransistor can be found by considering the total spectral density of noise (SI) of the device in dark current waveform. The spectral density of noise (SI) for a phototransistor is defined as SI = SI (Shot) + SI (Thermal) + SI (1/f) ............... (4) The spectral density of shot noise (SI (Shot)) can be calculated by the equation... SI (Shot) = 2qIdark ....................................... (5) Where, q is the electronic charge and Idark is the dark current of the hybrid device at Vds = 0.5V and VD -Vbg = 15 V. By using the above equation (equation 5), the calculated spectral density of shot noise (SI (Shot)) of the hybrid graphene -MoSSe phototransistor is 8.08 × 10 -23 A 2 /Hz. Also, the spectral density of thermal noise (SI (Thermal)) can be calculated by the equation... SI (Thermal) = 4K B T R ............................... (6) Where, KB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the room temperature and R is the device resistance at dark. In room temperature (T = 300K), the SI (thermal) is calculated as 8.35 ×10 -24 A 2 /Hz. The 1/f noise spectral density (SI (1/f)) of the hybrid device is measure directly in dark with Vds = 0.5 V, VD -Vbg = 15 V (Figure From these above results it is clear that the 1/f noise dominates over the total current noise spectral density of the hybrid phototransistor device. MoS2xSe2(1-x) alloy phototransistors: 