Out-of-equilibrium effects provide an elegant pathway to probing and understanding the underlying physics of topological materials. Creating exotic states of matter using ultrafast optical pulses in particular has shown promise towards controlling electronic band structure properties. Of recent interest is band renormalization in Dirac and Weyl semimetals as it leads to direct physical observables through the enhancement of the effective mass, or, in the shift of resonant energies. Here we provide experimental and theoretical signatures of photo-induced renormalization of the electronic band structure in a topological nodal line semimetal ZrSiS. Specifically, we show how the change of the transient reflectivity spectra under femtosecond optical excitations is induced by out-of-equilibrium effects that renormalize the kinetic energy of electrons. We associate the observed spectral shift to an enhancement of the effective mass and to a red-shift of the resonant frequency as a function of pump field strength. Finally, we show that the transient relaxation dynamics of the reflectivity is primarily an electronic effect with negligible phononic contribution. Our study presents the modifications of electronic properties in ZrSiS using ultrashort pulses, and demonstrates the potential of this approach in creating photo-induced phases in topological quantum mater through an all-optical route. Dirac nodal-line semimetals (NLSMs) of the family ZrSiX, with X = S, Se, or Te, have been the subject of intense research due to the presence of topologically nontrivial states Here, we use broadband visible (1.75-2.25 eV) and near infrared (0.8-1.4 eV) transient optical reflectively measurements to show the effect of ultrafast optical excitations on the electronic bands, as well as on the electronic relaxation times in ZrSiS. Our results demonstrate the energy shift and mass enhancement of the 1.10 eV and 2.06 eV peaks within few hundreds of femtoseconds following photoexcitation. We additionally observe a decrease in the electronic relaxation rate with pump fluence, in contrast to the observed coherent phonon (A 1g ) lifetime that remains independent. These findings are well captured within a tight-binding model, where the renormalization of the electronic kinetic energy due the ultrafast pump pulse leads to the observed changes of reflectivity. Our study combines an out-of equilibrium approach with a table-top, all optical experimental platform to demonstrate that band renormalization in ZrSiS is inherently an ultrafast effect that originates from the modification of the electronic spectrum due to the pump field. First, we measured the transient reflectivity spectra from a single crystal of ZrSiS following photoexcitation using a visible broadband (1.75-2.25 eV) 14-fs laser pulse centered around 2 eV, see Fig. Using the Drude-Lorentz model we fit the differential reflectivity spectra In order to confirm that the observed spectral feature is an ultrafast electronic effect, we performed an excitation density dependence study, where the pump fluence has been tuned between 0.3 to 1.45 mJ/cm 2 . The fluence dependence of the initial spectra is shown in Fig. Out-of-equilibrium treatment of the tightbinding model (see supplemental material sec. VIII for more details) shows that the observed spectral shift is induced by ultrafast processes that modify the density of states according to the strength of the pump, see Fig. In addition, the effective mass associated to this peak is shown to renormalize depending on the driving strength. Quasiparticle mass enhancement has been observed before in the presence of high magnetic fields Next, we study the time evolution of the transient reflectivity signal with pump fluences 0.30 mJ/cm 2 to 1.45 mJ/cm 2 and extract the relaxation time by observing the decay of the negative reflectivity feature centered at 2.1 eV. The data can be well fitted with a mono exponential decay, where the fitted relaxation time ranges between 90 fs to 280 fs depending on the pump fluence, see Figure Along with the transient change in the reflectivity, we additionally observe strong modulation of the transient signal as a function of time in the visible pump-probe measurements (near 2 eV), see Figure Fitting the oscillatory component with a sinusoidal wave multiplied with an exponential decay function, the extracted lifetime of the coherent phonon motion is 3.80±0.40 ps (see supplemental material sec. VII). Surprisingly, this is relatively long compared to the coherent vibration observed in similar topological material ZrSiTe, where the oscillation diminished within 1 ps Combining non-equilibrium formalism with broadband optical reflectivity measurements in the visible and NIR regions, we provide evidence of band renormalization in a topological nodalline semimetal ZrSiS. Our fluence-dependence study shows a red-shift in resonant frequencies and mass enhancement, along with an increase of the electronic relaxation time scales. These observations are inherently an ultrafast effect, as supported by a tight-binding model and by the behavior of long lived coherent phonons. Our study demonstrate the ability of all-optical manipulation of band structure properties, including mass enhancement and electronic relaxation, of ZrSiS, therefore, offering a unique platform to understand light driven photo-induced phases in topological materials.