The widely use of lithium-ion (Li-ion) batteries in various fields, from portable products to largescale energy storage systems, has revolutionized our daily life. The 2019 Nobel Prize in Chemistry has been awarded to John B. Goodenough, M. Stanley Whittingham, and Akira Yoshino for their contributions in developing Li-ion batteries. Although Li-ion batteries are currently on-growing research topics, lithium availability is still a problem for mass production. In contrast to lithium, sodium resources are almost unlimited on Earth, and sodium is one of the most abundant elements in the Earth's crust. Hence, sodium-ion (Na-ion) batteries as a counterpart of Li-ion batteries have the potential to serve as the next-generation batteries. In this work, a brief history and recent development of Na-ion batteries are described. The fundamental physical and electronic properties, such as geometric structures, band structure, density of states, and spatial charge distributions, of Na-intercalation compounds are discussed. The outlook of Na-ion batteries is given at the last. The widely use of lithium-ion (Li-ion) batteries in various fields, from 3C products to MWh-class grid-scale energy storage systems (ESSs), has revolutionized our daily life Currently, Li-ion batteries have exhibited many branches based on their active materials, performing various applications In 2019, the battery market is USD 25 billion and showing a growing tendency. By 2030 the battery market will be worth USD 116 billion annually according to BloomNEF's forecasts Although Li-ion batteries currently give an appropriate solution to overcome the challenges in realizing sustainable energy development, reflecting on the growing EV market and emerging ESS market, the lithium reserves must be taken into consideration Na-ion batteries are operable at ambient temperature, and metallic sodium is not used as the anode (negative) electrode, which is different from other commercialized high-temperature sodium-based technology, such as sodium-sulfur batteries (Na/S batteries) The abundance of materials is a straightforward reason for considering sodium ions as the charge carriers in secondary rechargeable batteries. There is an obvious disadvantage when compared between Li and Na metal electrodes, i.e., the theoretical gravimetric capacities of Na (1166 mAh/g) are much less than that of Li (3861 mAh/g), also the volumetric capacities of Na (1131 mAh/g) are much less than that of Li (2062 mAh/g) Early-stage studies of Li + and Na + ions as charge carriers for electrochemical energy storage at ambient temperature begun in 1970s. In 1980, lithium cobalt oxide (LiCoO 2 ), which is a lithium-containing layered structure, demonstrated the electrode performance for highenergy positive electrode materials in Li-ion batteries Two reasons stand for the disappear studies. The first reason is the available energy density. Li-ion batteries were believed to possess higher energy densities than their Na-ion counterpart. Although both systems have similar crystal lattice construction by sheets of edgesharing CoO 6 octahedra, the voltage of NaCoO 2 at the end of discharge is lower than that of LiCoO 2 . When both systems are charged to > 100 mAh/g, the voltage difference is dropped to approximately 0.4 V The second reason was the lack of appropriate anode (negative) electrodes for a long period of time. From the 1980s, carbonaceous materials have been found to be potential candidates for Li intercalation hosts. Carbonaceous materials are currently widely adopted as anode (negative) electrode materials for Li-ion batteries, such as carbon fiber As the first turning point in the Na-ion battery research field, in 2000, Stevens and Dahn reported a high capacity of 300 mAh/g for Na-ion batteries with hard carbon The Na-ion batteries with organic electrolytes are state-of-the-art technology. The development of renewable and environment-friendly organic-electrolyte-based Na-ion batteries has attracted researchers' attention in the past decade The energy and power density of the Na-ion batteries is directly related to the cathode materials. Analogous to Li-ion batteries, sodium cathodes can be divided into three major groups: layered, olivine (NASICON), and spinel. Currently, layered structure oxides Layered oxides are possible candidates as cathode materials for Na-ion batteries, possessing a common formula Na x XO 2 , where X is one or several transition metals (Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Ti, V, Cr, etc). 2D layered sodium transition metal oxides are extensively studied based on their electrochemical features. The 2D layered sodium transition metal oxides are classified as an O3 type and P2 type structure, where the O and P indicate the location of Na ion in the crystal structure (i.e., P-prismatic site and Ooctahedral site), and the numbers indicate the transition metal layer in the repeating unit cell in the structure In the P2-type materials, manganese-based (Na 2/3 MnO 2 ) cathode has attracted much attention based on the low cost of manganese, and it gives high discharge capacity (> 150 mAh/g) Clément et al. In NASICON type of cathodes, Na 3 V 2 (PO 4 ) 3 and its derivatives demonstrated great electrochemical performance The fundamental physical and electronic properties, such as geometric structure, band structure, density of states, and spatial charge distribution, of Naintercalation compounds (NaC 8 , NaC 18 , NaC 24 , and NaC 32 ) are discussed. Generally, it is well-known that graphite intercalation compounds exhibit the planar carbon-honeycomb symmetries and the well-characterized intercalant distributions, especially for metal atoms or even for large molecule ones For the stage-1 NaC x , where x = 8, 18, 24, and 32 (as shown in Fig. The rich crystal symmetries of 3D graphite intercalation compounds, which are clearly revealed in the graphitic and intercalant layers, as well as, their observable spacing, could be verified by the high-resolution measurements of X-ray diffraction peaks Pristine graphene, a single carbon-honeycomb crystal, is a well-known semiconductor with zero density of states at the Fermi level Band structures of sodium-graphite intercalation compounds, as clearly displayed in Fig. In the density of states (DOS), the critical points presented in the energy-wave-vector space are responded to the unusual van Hove singularities. Their special structures are diversified by the different band-edge states of the parabolic, linear, and partially flat energy dispersions. The calculated results are delicately decomposed into the specific contributions of active atoms and orbitals. As a result, significant orbital hybridizations are achieved from the merged unusual structures at the specific energies. These detailed analyses could be generalized to other complicated condensed-matter systems. The current predictions mainly depend on the intercalant concentrations, e.g., the different blue shifts of the Fermi level in sodium-graphite intercalation compounds. The atom-and orbital-decomposed van Hove singularities are very suitable in determining the active orbital hybridizations of carbon-carbon, intercalant-intercalant, and carbon-intercalant bonds. In general, a Moire superlattice has a lot of carbon atoms with four significant orbitals, compared with a single metal atom with one effective orbital sodium. This leads to the dominating/minor contributions from carbon-honeycomb lattices/the intercalant layers under any intercalation cases (as shown in Fig. According to four-orbital dominances of carbon atoms, the main features in the density of states could be classified into four specific energy ranges: e.g., for NaC 8 : Firstly, the σ-electronic energy spectrum of C-2s orbitals initiated from E ∼ -5.0 eV; secondly, the σ-valence subbands due to C-[2p x , 2p y ] orbitals driven from E ∼ -3.5 eV and dominant within -10.0eV ≤ E ≤ -6.0eV; thirdly, the π-electronic valence spectrum of C-2p z orbitals in -10.0eV ≤ E ≤ -6.0eV with dominance above -6.0 eV; fourthly, the π * conduction spectrum higher than -1.50 eV. There exist three obvious van Hove singularities, corresponding to the dominant carbon-2p zorbital contributions, respectively, at -3.5 eV, -1.5 eV, and 0.2 eV. Furthermore, the sodium 2s-orbital contributions are merged with them, clearly illustrating the 2p z -2s hybridization in each Na-C band. Similar chemi-cal bondings are revealed in NaC 18 , NaC 24 , and NaC 32 . The intercalant-decomposed contributions show the reduced amplitudes of van Hove singularities as their concentration decreases. This indicates 3s-3s single-orbital hybridizations for Na-Na bonds. The featured van Hove singularities have successfully identified the active orbital hybridizations of chemical bonds, being consistent with the previous development of the quasiparticle framework The spatial charge density (ρ(r)) and its variation (∆ρ(r)) after intercalation (as shown in Fig. From carrier distributions about each carbonhoneycomb lattice, the very strong σ bondings and the significant π ones, are respectively, observed in (x, y) and (x, z)/(y, z) planes. For example, ρ(r) and ∆ρ(r) of NaC 8 present the high charge density between neighboring carbon atoms (the red color between neighboring carbons) and the peanut-like profile (the light yellow-green color). The former is hardly affected by the sodium-atom intercalations. However, the latter is modified by the interlayer Na-C interactions, as clearly illustrated by the obvious changes of carrier density after interactions (the red color near atoms in Fig. On the experimental examinations, the spatial charge density distributions could be directly deduced from the close co-operation of measured X-ray patterns Several aspects might take account for the future development of Na-ion batteries, such as low dimensional materials as potential additives, as well as reuse and recycling of repurposing batteries. The discovery of graphene The successful commercialization and popularization of EVs worldwide Safety and performance are important in using retired power batteries, i.e., repurposing batteries. Underwriters Laboratories (UL), a global safety certification company established in 1894, published the standard for evaluating the safety and performance of repurposing batteries in 2018 (UL 1974) Ground state energy (eV) intralayer C-C ( Å) Na-C ( Å) Na-Na ( Å) Interlayer distance ( Å) Blue shift of EF (eV)