Performing analog computations with metastructures is an emerging wave-based paradigm for solving mathematical problems. For such devices, one major challenge is their reconfigurability, especially without the need for a priori mathematical computations or computationally-intensive optimization. Their equation-solving capabilities are applied only to matrices with special spectral (eigenvalue) distribution. Here we report the theory and design of wave-based metastructures using tunable elements capable of solving integral/differential equations in a fully-reconfigurable fashion. We consider two architectures: the Miller architecture, which requires the singular-value decomposition, and an alternative intuitive direct-complex-matrix (DCM) architecture introduced here, which does not require a priori mathematical decomposition. As examples, we demonstrate, using system-level simulations tools, the solutions of integral and differential equations. We then expand the matrix inverting capabilities of both architectures toward evaluating the generalized Moore-Penrose matrix inversion. Therefore, we provide evidence that metadevices can implement generalized matrix inversions and act as the basis for the gradient descent method for solutions to a wide variety of problems. Finally, a general upper bound of the solution convergence time reveals the rich potential that such metadevices can offer for stationary iterative schemes. Naturally occurring or artificially designed systems are often modeled by linear equations, which can be expressed through simple algebraic entities, e.g., vectors and matrices. Building on these entities, numerical linear algebra describes the methods for performing a large variety of operations, such as vector-matrix multiplications and matrix inversions, which enable the extraction of valuable information regarding the system under study In the very mature electronic domain, there are examples of reconfigurable memristive devices that implement non-von Neumann/neuromorphic In parallel, waveguided systems, such as integrated photonics, are proving to be a suitable platform for analog -classical The majority of the aforementioned wave-based approaches, including the neural network approaches The scheme converges only for square matrices with eigenvalues inside the unit circle The DCM architecture can be regarded either as a generalized form of a tunable beamforming/beamsteering network or the wave-analog of a crossbar architecture with complex algebra abilities. The DCM architecture is then used to find the solutions of a set of differential equations (DE). Finally, we use both architectures to perform the generalized inversion of a complex-valued singular and a binary-valued rectangular matrix, i.e., implementing the generalized Moore-Penrose inverse. The second part of this work relates to the choice of the DE problems, highlighting that even well-studied DEs may yield matrices that cannot be inverted with a naively applied Jacobi iteration method. For these purposes, we rethink the algorithm, introducing a mathematical modification inspired by the definition of the pseudoinverse To begin with, we consider the following integral equation: which is known as the Fredholm integral equation of the second kind programmable. With high reconfigurability, it can perform multiple functions such as solving linear integral and differential equations, and performing matrix inversion. Second, contrary to inhomogeneous materials, an MZI mesh that implements a kernel operator can be trained by simple progressive algorithms To test the performances of the proposed MZI-based computing platform, as an example here we employ it to solve Eq. ( characterized by the following kernel (Fig. where H Using the SVD technique, K is then written as the product of three transmission matrices: K = VSU * , where * denotes the complex conjugate transpose operation. U and V are unitary transmission matrices and are respectively implemented by the left and right triangular-shaped MZI sets of Fig. It is worth noticing that the proposed computing platform can also be applied to kernels that do not satisfy the convergence condition. As indicated in literature The MZI structure, the waveguide feedback network, and in/out couplers with 1% coupling coefficient were numerically simulated with a system-level software As can be seen, the MZI-based structure's solutions agree well with the corresponding linear equations' exact solutions and the exact almost continuous solutions derived by oversampling the kernel 50 . The adaptation of the Miller architecture for a metastructure that is able to solve integral equations introduces a compact, elegant and self-configuring realization for any given operator, provided a preliminary SVD decomposition of the operator itself is performed beforehand. However, its elegance comes at a cost, since performing the SVD for a matrix is as computationally involved as inverting the same matrix. In the context of solving a set of linear equations (i.e. matrix inversion), preferably one might desire to implement and solve any kernel without incurring this cost. This section describes the DCM network architecture that allows the realization of any matrix in a simple, intuitive, and direct manner, without the need for any a priori calculations. As seen in Fig. stages. The input signal vector is directed at the ingress stage, where each one of the m inputs is split into m outputs to yield m 2 distinct values (m lines, split m times), each of them with relative amplitude 1/ √ m. The ingress stage can be implemented in a multitude of ways. For example, one could use either m signal-splitters (using x = (I -K) -1 c) method, the solution (crosses) with n = 7 also calculated directly using linear algebra, and the solution (circles) calculated via the simulation of our MZI mesh. All three show excellent agreement. inverse-designed waveguides or RF lumped elements, etc.) or m cascades of m -1 properly connected directional couplers or MZIs. In either case, these devices are fixed and are not dependent on the choice of the kernel. Note that any amplitude or phase change that the ingress stage introduces can be compensated by the proper adjustment of the components at the middle stage. The m Finally, the m 2 outputs of multipliers are directed to the final egress stage. This stage operates similarly to the ingress but in the reverse direction. For example, it combines m 2 input signals into m output signals (as the output vector), which are then directed to the feedback-coupling modules. The m outputs are consequently directed to the feedback loop stage, that essentially enables the extraction of the main matrix inversion. of problems, ordinary differential equations, even with non-constant coefficients. As we mentioned above, the existence of a feedback loop with a certain initial excitation c along the main kernel K = I -A yields to the matrix inversion of the following problem A = I -K, hence the solution of any linear set of equations can be obtained. The key for solving differential equations (DE) is the proper discretization and the formulation of the equivalent linear problem, akin to the case of integral equations. For reference, the 1D (in terms of x) DE problem of 2nd order can be generally expressed as where the functions r(x), p(x), q(x), and g(x (∆x) + q(x j ) f j (∆x) 2 = g(x j )(∆x) 2 , j ∈ {1, ..., m} where x is the unknown variable and ∆x In this way it is possible to express the problem as Ax = c, where A ∈ C m×m is the difference matrix, c ∈ C m×1 is the input vector (including the boundary conditions) and x ∈ C m×1 is the unknown solution vector. As before, the solution vector x can be found once the kernel of the metadevice reads K = I -A. It is worth noticing that the matrix inversion is affected by the eigenvalues of the kernel, i.e., the eigenvalues should be strictly within the unit circle in order for the iterative method to converge. The behavior of the kernel follows the spectral behavior of A. In general 50 , the combination of the arbitrary complex functions r(x), p(x), q(x) with A ∆x (diagonally dominant 51 ), P ∆x (skew symmetric) and I (unit matrix) can lead to A matrices with arbitrarily distributed complex eigenvalues. The above point can affect the convergence of the implemented iterative method. Previous reports on solutions of integral and differential equations with hardware-accelerated approaches Let us first extract and examine the peculiarities of certain well-known DE equations. For these examples we considered an 11 × 11 network consisting of ideal directional couplers and MZIs using the AWR Microwave Office® This particular equation is useful in a multitude of fields since it is the basis of the Hermite polynomials where H n (x) is the Hermite polynomial and 1 F 1 (x)(a, b, x) is the confluent hypergeometric function of the first kind The second example examines the solution of Helmholtz's equation, i.e., on x ∈ [0, 1] with f (0) = 1 and f (1) = 0. For this particular example we assume k = 5. In this case the solution reads f (x) = c 1 e ikx + c 2 e -ikx with c 1 = 1 1-e 10i and c 2 = -e 10i 1-e 10i . Although this is a seemingly simple equation we observe that with a proper choice of k and ∆x the difference matrix A can have eigenvalues with real parts both positive and negative (inset plot at Fig. where α λ = 0.1415 is a properly chosen scaling factor. In this case we can extract the solution once we apply the following input vector, c new = α λ A * b. As we can see in Fig. Finally, we examine the solution of the Airy equation, i.e., This is a function with non-constant coefficients with an analytical solution that is expressed in terms of the Airy functions of the 1st and 2nd order, i.e. where c 1 and c 2 are arbitrary constants Let us first examine some of the details and implications of the preconditioning that we described above. In all the works where the solution of equations is desired, essentially the following basic iterative scheme is utilized, where A is the desired square operator/matrix to be inverted and n is the iteration number. This scheme can indeed lead to a solution for the linear problem when the unknown vector x has sufficiently close values for two iterations, i.e., ||x n+1 -x n || < ε, where ε is the desired accuracy error. Once this criterion is achieved, then we may conclude that Despite the conceptual simplicity of Eq. ( From the solution of DE it became apparent that even well-defined problems can yield matrices with eigenvalues beyond the unit circle, making the convergence of the implemented feedback scheme challenging. While for some cases a simple scaling of the kernel suffices, we examined some examples where the solution is possible only after the proper preconditioning of both the kernel and the input of the system. Here we examine that the A * A modification, introduced in for optical systems in In full form, this simple modification reads which is nothing but a version of the well-known Richardson iteration At this point, a couple of observations can be made for the above expression. First, the quantity A * A forms a positive semidefinite matrix for any rectangular matrix A, hence all of its eigenvalues reside in the positive real plane. Moreover, the factor α λ can scale all the positive eigenvalues of A * A, hence the new modified kernel K = Iα λ A * A always satisfies the convergence condition. As before, when x n+1 ≈ x n we have that the iteration yields to the solution This approach coincides with the definition of the generalized inverse or pseudoinverse of a matrix For the second case (Fig. Finally, the implementation of GDM (even in its simplest form) allows the extraction of a convergence bound that depends on both the properties of the matrix (eigenvalues) and the iteration timing (hardware). Assuming the case of a positive 12/21 semidefinite matrix A, the convergence of iteration in Eq. ( where κ(A) is the condition number of the matrix and ε is the desired approximation error (see Methods section). For either of the suggested wave-operated architectures, each iteration requires a total of t = L λ c time to complete, where c is the speed of light, λ the operating wavelength, and L is the overall network length (dimensionless quantity, i.e., expressed in wavelengths). The overall network length varies depending the waveguiding systems that are used for either the Miller or the DCM. Assuming photonic implementations the network length can be 2 or 3 orders of magnitude larger than the wavelength (a single MZI operating at 1550 nm has a typical physical length at several μm scale). A possible reduction of this length can be achieved with emerging ultracompact dielectric metamaterial approaches In conclusion, in this work, we theoretically demonstrated the matrix inversion capabilities of a structure that utilizes the Miller architecture and the introduced DCM architecture for solving IE and DE problems in the complex domain. In particular, the DCM architecture (the wave-analogous of the crossbar architecture in electronics) can intuitively implement any required matrix, without the need for the a priori calculations required by the Miller architecture. We then performed the inversion (i.e., Moore-Penrose inverse) of complex-valued singular and binary-valued rectangular matrices using both architectures. The introduced mathematical modifications required for performing the above tasks revealed that the proposed device could perform the equivalent form of the gradient descent method. Finally, where possible, we extracted the upper convergence bounds of the inversion method. Those bounds depend on both the iteration time (platform dependent), the condition number of the matrix, and the required numerical accuracy of the computation. This bound revealed that matrix inversion could have the potential of ultrafast enhancement with the proper platform choice. However, the proposed metadevice and the presented methodology are platform-independent, offering a fertile path for RF and photonic experimental implementation. Therefore, the ideas presented here can further investigate compact, parallel, ultra-fast platforms for solving general numerical linear algebraic problems and other hardware-enhanced generic numerical linear algebraic methods with metadevices. Currently, we are in the midst of an experimental investigation of our DCM architecture for matrix inversions and other advanced mathematical functionalities using an RF implementation. the discrete variables u and v, respectively, can be rewritten as where the integral has been replaced by a sum of areas of rectangles with width ∆ v and heights equal to the integrand value at midpoints. Eq. ( with the proposed platform. The finite difference method is a widely used method for the solution of differential equations result in the following difference equation (∆x) + q(x j ) f j (∆x) 2 = g(x j )(∆x) 2 , j ∈ {1, ..., m} The discretization of the differential of first and second order can be either by applying central (CD), forward (FoD), and backward (BD) differences. As shown in the previous section the resulted difference matrix reads In particular, the second difference matrix reads 15/21 where the first and last row implement the FoD and the BD scheme, respectively. This matrix is almost diagonally dominant with real and positive diagonal entries, hence all (or the majority) of the eigenvalues are positive. The matrix R(x) = diag (r(x 1 ), r(x 2 ), ..., r(x m )) is a diagonal matrix derived by the values of r(x). Similarly, the first difference matrix reads where the same FoD/BD scheme is used and P(x) = diag (p(x 1 ), p(x 2 ), ..., p(x m )). The first difference matrix is skew-symmetric with real entries, implying that its eigenvalues are imaginary. The last matrix is a diagonal matrix Q(x) = diag (0, q(x 2 ), ..., 0) The input vector b for this particular Dirichlet-type boundary conditions reads Note that the input vector c changes depending on the boundary-type problem that is used. In our case the FoD/BD scheme was used as a way to increase the accuracy of the results at the boundaries. Assuming a much denser discretization (larger than the 11 points), then a uniform CD scheme could also be used without affecting the accuracy of the results. The optimal choice of the scaling factor α λ is when it is proportional to the minimum and maximum eigenvalues of the operator, i.e., α λ = 2 λ 1 +λ n , where λ 1 and λ n are the largest and smallest eigenvalues of the matrix. Knowledge of the operator's larger and smallest eigenvalues requires certainly some calculations. In order to avoid these calculations, one can utilize some of the eigenvalue inclusion theorems that are available, such as Schur's or Gershgorin theorems Finally, the iteration used above have been invented multiple times carrying a multitude of names such as Richardson's iteration For this type of scaling value the x n converges to the desired solution x when the norm is less than the desired accuracy level ε, i.e, after n iterations we have that the value is bounded by iterations. Assuming that each iteration requires time t then we reach Eq. ( As a side note, in realistic implementations (assuming noise and other intrinsic system imperfections) the kernel matrix is followed by (I -A * A + δ N), where N is a random noise matrix while δ is a small pertrubation. In the ideal case we have δ → 0. Assuming a certain stochastic dependecne of the noice matrix the above generic quantity could be simplified to be (I -A * A + δ I), implying that the Kernel represents a Tikhonov regularization scheme Following the numerical algebra nomenclature, boldfaced capital and lowercase latin variables indicate matrices and vectors, respectively, while greek and unboldfaced latin letters indicate scalar quantities. It is important to note the egress stages is not a power combiner. The output amplitude of each of the m egress parts is proportional to the fraction (i.e., 1/ √ m) of the algebraic sum of complex-valued amplitudes of m input signals to it, and consequently the output power is usually less than the sum of the input power. As a result, the remaining power goes out of the system in unused channels in the MZI mesh in egress. After the egress stage we need to have amplifiers