Interfacing superconducting microwave resonator with rare earth doped crystals presents a promising hybrid quantum system for applications including spin-assisted transducers and memories. The coupling strength between spins of rare earth ions and the microwave photons is characterized by the cooperativity. Here we report an ultra-high cooperativity C ∼ 650 between rare earth spins and a planar superconducting microwave resonator that features a highly uniform magnetic field for harnessing the strong anisotropic coupling strength of erbium doped yttrium orthosilicate. This cooperativity rivals that from a bulk dielectric resonator and paves a path for efficiently coupling of spins with microwave photons on an integrated platform. Rare earth ions (REI) have been an attractive candidate for quantum information processing thanks to their favorable optical and spin properties. Stable optical transition and high fluorescence quantum efficiency allow spin control and detection through optical photons Common choices of host crystals for REIs include yttrium orthosilicate (Y 2 SiO 5 ), yttrium orthovanadate (YVO 4 ), and lithium niobate (LiNbO 3 ). Yttrium orthosilicate (YSO) gains its popularity thanks to its weak environmental nuclear magnetic moments. Efficient long-lived multimode photonic memories Strong microwave coupling with spins is essential in enabling efficient quantum state manipulation In this work, we present an ultra-high cooperativity of C ∼ 650 between Er 3+ ions and a niobium nitride (NbN) superconducting microwave resonator through designing the parallel nanowire strips for homoegenous B field and utilizing the anisotropic coupling strength in an erbium doped yttrium orthosilicate (Er:YSO) crystal. We use flip chip bonding techniques to integrate the Er:YSO crystal on a NbN superconducting resonator with a Q factor Q > 10 5 . Electron spin resonance (ESR) spectra are measured at different orientations to demonstrate strong coupling and high cooperativity. A commercial bulk 10 ppm natural abundance Er:YSO crystal (Scientific Materials) was cut into a cuboid (5 mm × 4 mm × 3 mm) along the three dielectric axes (D 1 , D 2 , b) and flip chip bonded on a NbN superconducting microwave resonator with the b axis perpendicular to the bonding interface. The thin film of 50 nm NbN is grown on a high resistivity silicon substrate using atomic layer deposition (ALD), with a sheet resistance R sq ∼ 45 Ω/sq. We fabricate microwave resonators by patterning hydrogen silsequioxane (HSQ) on NbN thin film with electron beam lithography (EBL) and etching in reactive ion etching (RIE) with chlorine. The resonator has a shape of a racetrack for strong coupling with the hoop antenna. The width, radius, and straight section length of the racetrack resonator are 100 μm, 800 μm and 1500 μm, respectively. Three parallel 1 μm-wide strips act as inductors that replace one straight section of the racetrack resonator. These inductor strips are connected to the racetrack resonator through interdigitated (IDT) capacitors. This design allows the generated vortices inside the racetrack resonator to traverse out, hence stabilizing the cavity frequency under a strong external B field. The final flip chip bonded device is housed in a copper cavity box to reduce radiation loss to the environment. Fig. where μ B (μ n ) is the electron (nuclear) Bohr magnetron, g n = -0.1618 is the nuclear g-factor, g is the anisotropic electron g-factor tensor, Q is the nuclear quadruple tensor and A is the hyperfine interaction tensor. The first two terms of the spin Hamiltonian are electron and nuclear Zeeman splittings, which are proportional to the applied B field B 0 . The third and the fourth term are the nuclear quadruple interaction and the hyperfine interaction, independent of B 0 . Based on the published tensor values The crystal structure of Er:YSO is described by space group C 6 2h , where Er 3+ ions substitute Y 3+ ions at two distinct crystallographic sites, both characterized by C 1 symmetry. For each crystallographic site, the crystal's C 2 rotation symmetry and inversion symmetry give rise to four subclass sites in the crystal with different local orientations. Based on their response to the applied B field, these subclass sites can be further divided into two groups. The group related to the inversion symmetry is magnetically equivalent as it responds to a B field of arbitrary direction identically. The other group related to the C 2 symmetry is magnetically inequivalent. These two subclass sites interact with an applied B field differently, except for two special cases, when the B field is either applied along the b axis or in the D 1 -D 2 plane. During the measurement, a static B field B 0 is applied parallel to the inductor strips in the D 1 -D 2 plane to minimize the vortex-induced loss. The oscillating B field B 1 from the inductors is perpendicular to B 0 . Fig. The length of the arrows are selected to match the microwave resonance frequency to demonstrate the positions of level anti-crossing. This level anti-crossing is manifested as the coupling of the microwave field to the spins and hence an additional loss channel of the resonator, resulting in a drop of Q factor of the microwave resonance. In the case of perfect alignment, only one level anti-crossing for Er 3+ ions, and therefore one dip of the Q factor at each site, should be observed when sweeping the B field strength. However, two dips are observed (see Supplementary Information for details), indicating a small misalignment between the applied B field and the D 1 -D 2 plane. By utilizing an additional balance coil with applied B field in the perpendicular direction, we are able to cancel the out-of-plane component of B 0 . The deviation angle is estimated to be ∼ 1.05 • , which is comparable to the expected uncertainty in the crystal orientation. Fig. where ∆ = ωω 0 is the detuning, γ s is the spin inhomogeneous linewidth, and κ c is the initial microwave cavity decay rate. Fig. For a large cooperativity, we rotate the Er:YSO crystal so that the angle between B 1 and the D 1 axis is 112 • , near 120 • for maximum g. Fig. The resonator frequency and decay rate are fitted with a modified model to account for the double level anti-crossings from the subclass levels. where ν 1(2) and γ 1(2) are the collective coupling strength and the linewidth for ions at subclass level 1 (2) respectively. The cooperativity of C ∼ 650 is one order of magnitude larger than the literature values from cases with planar superconducting microwave resonators, rivaling that from the 3D cavity with high spin number enhancement. Yet, this cooperativity can be further optimized. Our current manual alignment during the flip chip bonding process is not perfect, causing the crystal orientation to deviate from the optimal angle for the g-factor. The lifting of degeneracy due to the out-of-plane B field can be suppressed with a larger balance coil, bringing about a two-fold improvement as spins from both subclasses contribute. Further improvement could come from the reduction of vortex-induced microwave loss, hence a smaller κ c . These improvements are evidenced by the fitting results from the double level anti-crossings without a balance coil at 20 • (see Supplementary Information for details). Fitting with Eq. 4 and 5 yields ν 1 (20 ) = 11. Notice that the spin linewidth γ s is higher when the balance coil is applied. This is likely due to the imperfect cancellation of the out-of-plane B field so that the two level anti-crossings do not overlap completely. The flip chip bonding process may still leave a small gap between the crystal and the superconducting resonator, reducing the geometry overlapping factor ξ . The theoretical estimation of the coupling strength with zero gap and g = 12 at ξ ∼ 0.25 is ν theo ∼ (2π)28.7 MHz, which is more than two times higher than the current extracted value, resulting in a cooperativity of thousands. Direct deposition and fabrication of superconducting resonators on the Er:YSO crystal In conclusion, we realize high cooperativity coupling between an Er 3+ spin ensemble and the microwave resonator by producing a more homogeneous B field and exploiting the anisotropic g-factor tensor. An ultra-high cooperativity of C = 650 is achievable, which is comparable to that from large 3D resonators with high spin number enhancement. This result marks an important step towards a high efficiency microwaveto-optical transducer, an essential component in building a coherent link between a superconducting quantum circuit and optical quantum network. The strong coupling also paves the way for spin manipulation and detection such as cooling of spin ensembles and high sensitivity spin detection. An efficient state transfer and mapping in and out of the spin states with strong coupling is highly desired in a quantum memory device.