This paper presents a detailed study of the hydrogen adsorption properties of small silicon-lithium binary nanoclusters. The stabilities of H2 adsorbed binary clusters are assured by maximum hardness and minimum electrophilicity principle. Detail computational studies demonstrate that each Li in Si4Li, Si4Li2 and Si4Li3 binary clusters can adsorb a maximum of 5H2, 4H2 and 3H2 molecules respectively, resulting in a total gravimetric density of 7.8%, 11.3% and 12%. The adsorption energy is observed to be in the range of 0.12eV-0.17eV, indicating that the adsorption of H2 molecules occurs in a quasi-molecular fashion via physisorption. Hence, our study concludes that the studied silicon -lithium binary clusters can be considered as potential candidates for hydrogen storage systems. Globalization, industrialization, increased population, and demand for sustainable development has heightened our energy need to a large extent. As a result, the consumption of prime sources of energy, i.e., fossil fuels, has also increased at an alarming rate Studies also report that conventional hydrogen storage methods like storing gaseous hydrogen in cylinders at high pressure (>700 bar) and storing liquid hydrogen at very low temperature (~20K) are quite costly and can cause safety issues during transportation In this paper, we have addressed the hydrogen storage capacities of small silicon-lithium binary clusters Si4Li, Si4Li2, and Si4Li3, the structural and stability of which are already studied by E. Osorio et al. The DFT calculations are computed using m06/6-311+g(d,p) using Gaussian09 software The stability of host and hydrogen adsorbed clusters are determined using conceptual density functional theory where I and A are the vertical ionization energy and electron affinity of the clusters calculated using Koopman's theorem Here E Host , E H 2 and E complex are the global minimum energy of the host, adsorbed H2 molecules, and the hydrogen adsorbed complexes respectively. The host binary clusters Si4Li, Si4Li2, and Si4Li3 and their sequential hydrogenated systems are optimized using the basis set and functional mentioned in the computational details to get the minimum energy structures. Vibrational analysis indicates the absence of imaginary frequencies, confirming that these binary clusters are stable. It is found that the optimized geometry of Si4Li, Si4Li2 and Si4Li3 have Cs, C1 and Cs symmetry which is well in agreement with that reported by Osorio et al. The optimized geometries of both hosts and their saturated hydrogen adsorbed clusters are depicted in Fig. Reactivity descriptors hardness (η), electrophilicity (ω) and electronegativity (χ) of the bare hosts and their saturated hydrogenated clusters are calculated using expressions (1), ( H2 molecules are added sequentially over the binary clusters to get a detailed insight into the hydrogen adsorption over the studied Si4Li, Si4Li2, and Si4Li3 binary clusters. Analysis reveals that each Li present in Si4Li, Si4Li2, and Si4Li3 binary clusters can hold up to 5H2, 4H2 and 3H2 molecules, thus making the final hydrogenated systems as Si4Li-5H2, Si4Li2-8H2 and Si4Li3-9H2 respectively. The gravimetric density for Si4Li, Si4Li2 and Si4Li3 binary clusters are thus found to be 7.8%, 11.3% and 12% respectively. In addition, the adsorption energy per H2 molecule of the saturated hydrogen adsorbed Si4Li, Si4Li2 and Si4Li3 binary clusters is found to be in the range of 0.12eV-0.17eV, which confirm that the H2 molecules are adsorbed over the host in quasi-molecular fashion via Niu-Rao-Jena type of interaction Electrostatic potential maps of bare silicon-lithium binary clusters and their sequential hydrogenated complexes are plotted to understand the variation of electron density and charge transfer as a result of sequential adsorption. It is plotted by surface mapping of the electrostatic potential on total electron density. In ESP maps, the electron density variation is given in terms of various colour codes where the red and the blue colour represent maximum electron density and minimum electron density respectively. The yellow colour code, which lies precisely in between the red and blue zones, represents a neutral region. The ESP maps of sequential H2 adsorption over Si4Li, Si4Li2, and Si4Li3 binary clusters are depicted in Fig. The figure clearly shows that the colour code over the Li in the binary clusters is bluish, which means that this region is deficient in electron density. However, as sequential adsorption of H2 molecules over these clusters proceeds to saturation, the dark bluish colour over Li fades, demonstrating electron density redistribution due to adsorption phenomena. Moreover, it also indicates polarization of H2 molecules due to the dipole's electrostatic field, consisting of partially positively charged Li atoms and partially negative charged Si atoms. Topological studies have been carried out using Bader's Quantum Theory of Atoms In Molecules (QTAIM) to investigate the interaction between the Li sorption centers and the adsorbed H2 molecules. At the bond critical point (BCP) of a bond between two atoms, the electron density distribution is mainly characterized by the electron density (ρ), Laplacian of electron density (∇ 2 ρ), and the total energy density (H). Bader's analysis demonstrates that if ∇ 2 ρ > 0, i.e., Laplacian of electron density is positive, it indicates electron density depletion near the bonding region and the interaction is considered a closed-shell type or non-covalent interaction. Besides this, the positive value of total energy density also confirms non-covalent interaction. Since our interest is confined to studying the Li-H2 interaction, so, in Table In conclusion, we have investigated the hydrogen storage capacities of Si4Li, Si4Li2, and Si4Li3 binary clusters. The stability of hydrogenated clusters was checked and confirmed by global reactivity descriptors. Sequential adsorption of H2 molecules over Si4Li, Si4Li2 and Si4Li3 reveal that each of Li in the mentioned clusters can adsorb 5H2, 4H2 and 3H2 molecules resulting in a total gravimetric density of 7.8%, 11.3% and 12% respectively which is well above the target set by US-DOE (5.5% by 2020). It is also found that the adsorption energy of H2 molecules lies in the range of 0.12eV-0.17eV, which gives a clear indication of the adsorption of H2 molecules in a quasimolecular fashion via Niu-Rao-Jena type of interaction. In addition, electrostatic potential maps demonstrate redistribution of electron density during sequential adsorption of H2 molecules. Topological studies reveal that interaction between Li sorption centers and the adsorbed H2 molecules is non-covalent type. Hence, our findings confirm that the studied binary clusters can be considered potential hydrogen storage materials.