The electronic structure, phonons, electron-phonon coupling, and superconductivity are theoretically studied in noncentrosymmetric superconductor ThCoC2 as a function of pressure, in the pressure range 0 -20 GPa. We found that the electronic band splitting induced by the spin-orbit coupling is enhanced under pressure. In spite of the overall stiffening of the crystal lattice, the electron-phonon coupling constant λ increases with pressure, from 0.583 at 0 GPa to 0.652 at 20 GPa. If the isotropic Eliashberg electron-phonon coupling theory is used to simulate the effect on the critical temperature Tc, such an increase in λ results in a substantial increase of Tc from 2.5 K at 0 GPa to 4 K at 20 GPa. This shows that examining the effect of pressure offers a chance to resolve the pairing mechanism in ThCoC2. ThCoC 2 is a low-temperature noncentrosymmetric superconductor with the critical temperature T c 2.5 K Very interesting results were also obtained when the material was doped with nickel To shed more light on the nature of superconductivity in ThCoC 2 , we have recently presented two theoretical works Electron-phonon coupling hypothesis was further strengthened by calculations of the effect of Ni doping presented in Ref. In this work, we study the effects of pressure on the electronic structure, phonons, electron-phonon interaction, and superconductivity in ThCoC 2 , which should help to determine the pairing interaction if the experimental studies are undertaken. In this context, it is important to recall the interesting pressure dependence of superconductivity in the sister isostructural superconductor LaNiC 2 . The external pressure initially increases the critical temperature from 2.8 K at 0 GPa to 3.8 at 4 GPa and later decreases T c to suppress superconductivity above 7 GPa Calculations were done for p = 5, 10, 15, and 20 GPa, and to be consistent with our earlier work for ambient pressure, all computational details were kept unchanged. Some of the results for p = 0 GPa are recalled here for a convenient comparison. The Quantum Espresso package Crystal unit cell parameters and atomic positions were theoretically optimized, starting from the p = 0 GPa experimental values A. Crystal structure ThCoC 2 crystallizes in the base-centered orthorhombic structure Amm2, spacegroup no. 38, shown in Fig. Evolution of the electronic dispersion relations in ThCoC 2 with pressure is presented in Fig. Orbital characters of the main Fermi surface sheet for pressures of 0, 10 and 20 GPa are shown in Supplemental Material The average value of E(k) splitting due to SOC for the states located around the Fermi level as a function of pressure is shown in Fig. The electronic density of states (DOS) near the Fermi level is presented in Fig. As we found for the zero pressure case Before moving to the discussion of the electron-phonon coupling, it is worth to recall how the quantities important for the interaction strength depend on the phonon frequencies. The electron-phonon coupling matrix elements g qν (k, i, j) are defined as where s enumerates atoms in the unit cell, i, j are band indexes, M s is the atomic mass, dVSCF dûνs is a change of electronic potential calculated in self-consistent cycle due to the displacement ûνs of an atom s, ˆ νs is the ν-th phonon polarization vector and ψ i,k is the electronic wave function. In eq.( ( This multiplication cancels the direct frequency dependence, thus the linewidths do not directly depend on ω qν , rather than on the wavefunction matrix elements, which enter eq.( which is then inversely proportional to ω qν . Finally, the EPC constant λ is calculated as the integral of the Eliashberg function, again divided by frequency which results in the proportionality of λ ∝ γqν ω 2 qν , thus for majority of the electron-phonon superconductors pressure-induced lattice stiffening (increase in ω qν ) dominates, reducing λ. To have a convenient single-number parameter which shows how the electronic contribution to the electronphonon coupling changes with pressure, cutting off the direct dependence on the phonon frequency, one might calculate the sum of all phonon linewidths. The more straightforward way to do it is to calculate the integral of the Eliashberg function multiplied by frequency: as it carries similar physical information. Substituting eq.(1-3) to the above formula, one can see that I does not explicitly depend on phonon frequency In Fig. Analyzing the increase in λ in more details, Fig. The second important parameter in terms of T c is the characteristic phonon frequency, which sets the energy window for the electron-phonon interaction, and to which T c is proportional to. That is the Debye frequency in the BCS theory and in the McMillan T c formula Increases in both the average phonon frequency and the EPC constant λ results in a non-monotonic evolution of ω ln , shown in Fig. The results obtained in the preceding sections allow to simulate the pressure effects on superconductivity in ThCoC 2 for the electron-phonon coupling scenario. As we have discussed in Ref. That gives μ * = 0.195, see Refs. Starting with T c computed using the Allen-Dynes formula, T c increases almost linearly with pressure, as shown in Fig. Further on, we simulate how the T c and other thermodynamic properties would change with pressure when computed using the Eliashberg isotropic gap equations. That will allow to conclude on the deviations of superconductivity in ThCoC 2 under pressure from the isotropic state once the experimental works are reported. A full description of the applied theoretical model with mathematical formulas can be found in Ref. The temperature dependence of ∆ n=1 (T ) for different pressures are presented in the inset of Fig. with Γ which only slightly depends on p, Γ = 3.28 ± 0.01, remaining close to that predicted from the BCS theory, Γ BCS ≈ 3.0. When increasing the pressure, the dimensionless ratio R ∆ = 2∆(0)/k B T c changes in the range 3.55 -3.58, being close to the BCS value of 3.53. The self-consistent solution of the Eliashberg equations can then be used to calculate the electronic specific heat in the superconducting state C S e The temperature dependences of the specific heat for different pressure values 12. Critical temperature Tc as a function of the pressure p, determined from the Allen-Dynes formula (blue squares) and from the numerical solving of Eliashberg equations (red dots). In both cases μ * was adjusted to reproduce the experimental zero-pressure Tc value. Inset: Temperature dependence of the superconducting order parameter ∆n=1 for different values of p. are presented in Fig. Although electronic specific heat exhibits a temperature dependence close to ordinary BCS theory, the London penetration depth λ L behaves differently. In Fig. The obtained temperature dependence of the upper critical field normalized to H c2 at T = 0 and p = 0 is shown in Fig. We have analyzed the pressure evolution of the electronic structure, phonons and the electron-phonon coupling in ThCoC 2 in the range p = 0 -20 GPa. Calculations showed that the density of states at the Fermi level slowly decreases with p. The band splitting induced by the spin-orbit coupling increases with p, reaching the value of 185 meV at 20 GPa. This suggests that un-der elevated pressure the non-BCS features in the thermodynamic properties of the superconducting phase in ThCoC 2 may be even more pronounced than at ambient pressure. The electron-phonon coupling is enhanced under pressure due to the increase in the phonon linewidths. The overall EPC parameter λ increases from 0.583 at 0 GPa to 0.652 at 20 GPa, which is strongly related to the softening of the lowest acoustic phonon mode. If the superconducting pairing in ThCoC 2 is based on the electron-phonon coupling, this should raise the superconducting critical temperature and the upper magnetic critical field. When the isotropic Eliashberg formalism is used to calculate T c , enhancement of the electron-phonon coupling strength results in a significant increase of T c , with a rate of 0.064 -0.073 K/GPa. V. SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIAL Supplemental Material contains: Fig. Orbital characters of the main Fermi surface sheet for pressures of 0, 10 and 20 GPa are shown in Fig. The average splitting at p = 0 GPa reported here is 162 meV is slightly larger than the (rounded down) value of 150 meV reported in Ref.