Hydrogen concentrations in thin self-supporting samples of polyphenylene sulfide and muscovite have been determined by nuclear-elastic recoil detection analysis of transmission layout. The analysis procedure is based only on the database of stopping power and recoil cross section for material analysis, without using any reference sample of known H content. For the polyphenylene sulfide sample, the determined value of (2.87 ± 0.26) × 10 22 H/cm 3 is in good agreement with the calculated value of 3.01 × 10 22 H/cm 3 . For the muscovite sample, the H concentration originating each from bound water and absorbed water is uniform over the entire thickness of the sample. The determined concentration (9.43 ± 0.75) × 10 21 H/cm 3 of the muscovite agrees excellently with the value of 9.36 × 10 21 H/cm 3 obtained from other quantitative analyses typically applied for minerals. The present results demonstrate the capability of accurate determination of H contents in materials and minerals by transmission ERDA. Knowledge about behavior of hydrogen in solids is of scientific and also of practical importance since hydrogen can seriously affect physical and, especially, mechanical properties of materials For analysis of hydrogen in solids, possible experimental methods, in particular, of non-destructive type are extremely restricted because analysis techniques based on electronic transitions of atoms are hardly applicable in this case. A notable and unique feature of elastic recoil detection analysis (ERDA) using a fast ion beam is non-destructive detection of light atoms in a solid sample In our developing stage of nuclear-elastic T-ERDA, the main factors determining the spatial and depth resolutions typically in the μm range were studied using test samples Therefore, the present analysis method is based fully on the open database of stopping power and recoil cross section for material analysis using ion beams. In the present experiments, the measured samples are stacked PPS-Al layers and muscovite, which are on the Al foil of 50 μm thickness to prevent the incident He from entering the particle detector. The PPS-Al stacked samples are those used in the previous work The muscovite sample was prepared by cleaving the bulk muscovite which was collected from a granitic pegmatite rock at Ishikawa, Fukushima Prefecture, Japan. The precise thickness of the muscovite sample on the order of 10 μm can be determined af- Figure Under fixed beam conditions, we have repeated to measure H spectra several times at several fixed beam positions on the samples and confirmed that there is only negligible difference among these spectra. This indicates not only negligible loss of H from the samples by the He irradiation, but also uniformity of atomic composition and thickness of the samples. According to the previous study where N is the number of incident He, t = 1.35 μm is the thickness of the PPS sample, dσ/dΩ is the He-H differential recoil cross section in the laboratory frame, which depends on the He energy at recoil E r and the solid angle Ω, and the integral is performed for the solid angle of acceptance of the detector. E r can be calculated using the stopping powers for He. Equation (1) leads to where the cross section σ(E r , φ 0 ) is expressed as where φ is the polar angle with respect to the He beam axis, and φ 0 = 3.78 • , as noted in §II. Figure , there are several substituted atoms in the muscovite sample. However, such difference, including the different H contents, hardly affect the stopping powers. Actually, the stopping powers of the muscovite sample for He and H in the energy ranges under consideration are less than those of pure muscovite by only 0.2%. In the straight-path approximation, the measured H energy E can be converted to the depth z where the recoil occurs in the muscovite of thickness L mus . We start with writing down the He energy at recoil, which was introduced in §III.1, i.e., where E in = 8 or 9 MeV is the kinetic energy of incident He in the present case, and the notation S mus-He indicates the stopping power of muscovite for He. Since recoil H passes through the Al foil of thickness L al = 50 μm before entering the detector, the relation between E and z is written in terms of the integral along z which is also the beam axis of incident He, i.e., where α = 4M H M He /(M H + M He ) 2 = 0.64 with M H and M He being the atomic masses of H and He, respectively, and the stopping powers are written with the same notation as in equation ( For a given value of L mus , E decreases with increasing z from z = 0 because of the larger stopping power for He than for H. It is obvious that E at z = 0 decreases with increasing L mus and, accordingly, L mus can be determined from such a condition that the calculated value of E at z = 0 reproduces the high-energy edge of the measured spectrum. Similarly, the low-energy edge of the measured spectrum can also be used to determine L mus , which allows to reconfirm the value of L mus obtained from the high-energy edge. Actually, the high-and low-energy edges are given by the H energies at half-heights of the right and left steps of the spectra shown in figure where N is the number of incident He, dσ/dΩ is the He-H differential recoil cross section in the laboratory frame, which depends on the He energy at recoil E r and the solid angle Ω, and the integral is performed for the solid angle of acceptance of the detector. Notably, equation ( where the recoil cross section σ(E r , φ) is expressed as It is straightforward that n(z) for ∆z = 1 μm can be determined using equation H/cm 3 at z = 6.5 μm for 8 MeV results from ∆Y = 20, 179 counts for 6 ≤ z ≤ 7 μm, N = 1.054 × 10 12 , and σ(E r , φ 0 ) = 20.10 mb. We see in figure H/cm 3 is obtained. The uncertainty of n has been estimated as ±8% in the similar manner to the case of PPS, except that the possible error of the PPS thickness is replaced by that of the muscovite thickness, 0.5/12.5 = 4%, as noted earlier. In figure a possible H content lies in a relatively limited range. Hence, hydrogen in the sample makes only minor contribution to the stopping powers evaluated for a fixed value of the known target density, and therefore, we can determine yet unknown H concentration in the sample. The following analysis of the experimental data is based on the physical backgrounds mentioned above. must be chosen by considering the balance between the efficiency and sensitivity required for hydrogen analysis of a given sample. Comparing the values of σ(E r , φ) for φ = 3.78 • and 4 • , we notice the appreciable difference by ∼10% only for the small angular change of 0.22 • . This is the reason that special care was taken for the acceptance angle of the detector in the experimental setup. shows the determined values of the H concentration of PPS, for which the experimental data used are in the ranges of ∆Y =(1.4-2.4)×10 4 and N =(1.2-2.8)×10 11 .