We observe rich phenomena of two-level random telegraph noise (RTN) from a commercial bulk 28-nm p-MOSFET (PMOS) near threshold at 14 K, where a Coulomb blockade (CB) hump arises from a quantum dot (QD) formed in the channel. Minimum RTN is observed at the CB hump where the high-current RTN level dramatically switches to the low-current level. The gate-voltage dependence of the RTN amplitude and power spectral density match well with the transconductance from the DC transfer curve in the CB hump region. Our work unequivocally captures these QD transport signatures in both current and noise, revealing quantum confinement effects in commercial short-channel PMOS even at 14 K, over 100 times higher than the typical dilution refrigerator temperatures of QD experiments (<100 mK). We envision that our reported RTN characteristics rooted from the QD and a defect trap would be more prominent for smaller technology nodes, where the quantum effect should be carefully examined in cryogenic CMOS circuit designs. Random telegraph noise (RTN) refers to twolevel single-charge signal fluctuations and has been intensively studied for many decades in metal-oxide-semiconductor field-effect transistors (MOSFETs) Among several foundry 28-nm PMOS and NMOS devices, we present our experimental data with a PMOS transistor with gate width W = 1.2 μm and gate length L = 28 nm as the device under test (DUT). The device sits at 14 K in a dry cryostat (Advanced Research Sys-tems, Inc). The average current-voltage (I D -V ) characteristics are measured along with the temporal drainsource current I D fluctuations at given gate-source voltage V GS and drain-source voltage V DS using a parameter analyzer (HP4156). The hump shapes in the transfer characteristics (Fig. Following similar procedures of the standard CB data analysis as described in The where g m is the transconductance and ∆V GS is the equivalent fluctuation with respect to V GS caused by the capture and emission behavior of the trap. Under this picture, the capture and emission behavior causes a constant shift to the DC transfer curve (Fig. One prominent observation is the high ∆I RTN /|I D |, over 50% of |I D |, which implies the significant RTN impact the charge transport, in particular when the number of charges N in the channel is small. N is estimated theoretically by the inverse of ∆I RTN /|I D | described in We observe quantum footprints in the RTN behavior of foundry 28-nm bulk PMOS devices even at 14 K arising from CB and resonant tunneling through systematic analysis of fluctuating currents in both time and frequency domains to quantify the RTN parameters. A uniform potential fluctuation model is proposed to explain the dramatic RTN switching behavior around the CB hump. Our complete DC and noise studies of commercial MOSFETs support potential cryo-applications including CMOS quantum computers.