A spin-triplet superconducting state mediated by ferromagnetic (FM) spin fluctuations has been suggested to occur in the newly discovered heavy-fermion superconductor UTe2. However, the recent neutron scattering measurements revealed the presence of antiferromagnetic (AFM) spin fluctuations in UTe2. Here, we report the 125 Te nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) studies of a single-crystal UTe2, suggesting the coexistence of FM and AFM spin fluctuations in UTe2. Owing to the two different Te sites in the compound, we conclude that the FM spin fluctuations are dominant within ladders and the AFM spin fluctuations originate from the inter-ladder magnetic coupling. Although AFM spin fluctuations exist in the system, the FM spin fluctuations in the ladders may play an important role in the appearance of the spin-triplet superconducting state of UTe2. The interplay between magnetic fluctuations and superconductivity (SC) is one of the central issues in unconventional superconductors such as iron-based superconductors, high T c cuprates, and heavy fermions. UTe 2 is a newly discovered heavy-fermion superconductor with a superconducting transition temperature T c ∼ 1.6-2.0 K Initially, FM spin fluctuations have been understandably considered to play an important role for the triplet paring, as suggested by muon spin relaxation The nature of the magnetically ordered state as well as the SC phases under pressure is also still an open ques-tion. With the application of pressure, two SC phases appear around 0.25 GPa NMR is a powerful technique to investigate low-energy spin fluctuations and superconducting properties from a microscopic point of view. The temperature (T ) dependence of the nuclear spin-lattice relaxation rate (1/T 1 ) reflects the wave vector q-summed dynamical susceptibility at nuclear sites. On the other hand, NMR spectrum measurements, in particular, the Knight shift K, give us information on local static magnetic properties. Furthermore, in the SC state, the temperature dependences of K and 1/T 1 provide important information about the SC gap structure. In fact, recent NMR measurements on single crystals revealed strong and slow spin fluctuations in the normal state In this paper, we have carried out 125 Te NMR measurements using a 125 Te-enriched single crystal of UTe 2 to investigate the evolution of magnetic fluctuations in UTe 2 under pressure. The most striking result obtained here is the observation of the possible coexistence of AFM and FM spin fluctuations in UTe 2 . Owing to the two different Te sites in the compound, the FM spin fluctuations are considered to be dominated within the ladders while the AFM spin fluctuations originate from the inter-ladder magnetic couplings. The observed results are consistent with the recent NS data where intra-ladder and inter- ladder magnetic couplings are ferromagnetic and antiferromagnetic, respectively The 125 Te-enriched single crystal (3 × 1 × 0.2 mm 3 ) of UTe 2 with T c = 1.6 K at zero magnetic field (H) at ambient pressure was synthesized by chemical vapor transport method using iodine as the transport agent UTe 2 crystallizes in a body-centered orthorhombic structure with the Immm space group The temperature and pressure dependences of full width at half maximum (FWHM) of lines for Te1 and Te2 are shown in Fig. The T dependences of 125 Te Knight shift for Te1 [K(Te1)] and Te2 [K(Te2)] sites determined by the peak positions of the NMR lines are shown in Fig. At ambient pressure, Ks for both Te sites show a similar temperature dependence with a broad maximum around T max ∼ 35-40 K, similar to the magnetic susceptibility data We notice that the T dependences of K(Te1) and K(Te2) are slightly different below ∼30 K, a little bit lower than T max under p < 1.0 GPa. This can be seen in Fig. Under pressure, the crossover temperature decreases down to T FL ∼ 20 and ∼ 10 K for p = 0.52 and 1.0 GPa, respectively. At the same time, the values of 1/T 1 T = constant increase to 260 (390) 1/sK for Te2(Te1) at 0.52 GPa and to 510 (765) 1/sK for Te2(Te1) at 1.0 GPa, suggesting the increase of the density of states at the Fermi energy and/or the enhancement of electron correlations in the FL state. The CW behavior of 1/T 1 T above ∼40 K is nearly independent of p, how-ever, we observed a different T dependence of 1/T 1 T for the two Te sites at low temperatures. With decreasing T below ∼40 K, 1/T 1 T for Te1 is enhanced more than 1/T 1 T for Te2, which is clearly recognized under p = 1.57 GPa. Even for the case of p = 0.52 and 1.0 GPa, one can see difference in the T dependence of 1/T 1 T below ∼40 K. The different T dependence between Te1 and Te2 is more clearly seen in the 1/T 1 vs. T plots in Figs. 3(e)-3(h). 1/T 1 for Te2 is nearly T independent at high temperatures and shows a FL behavior below T FL ∼ 20 K and ∼ 10 K for p = 0.52 and 1.0 GPa, respectively. 1/T 1 for Te1 shows an enhancement where a clear difference in the T dependence can be detected below ∼40 K down to T FL . A similar difference in the T dependence of 1/T 1 between Te1 and Te2 is also observed at p = 1.57 GPa where the ground state is magnetic. Those results indicate that Te1 and Te2 pick up different magnetic fluctuations. The CW behavior in 1/T 1 T has been pointed out to be scaled with the T dependence of the magnetic susceptibility under H parallel to the a axis (the magnetic easy axis), expected for FM spin fluctuations with q = 0 As mentioned above, Te2 is surrounded by four U atoms forming a ladder and picks up magnetic fluctuations originating from each ladder. Thus our results indicate that FM spin fluctuations are dominant within the ladders. On the other hand, since Te1 is surrounded by four U atoms belonging to three different ladders, it is possible to pick up magnetic fluctuations originating from not only intra-ladder but also inter-ladders magnetic couplings as schematically shown in Fig. It is noted that the NS measurements detect the AFM spin fluctuations at ambient pressure while our NMR data do not show clear AFM spin fluctuation at p = 0. Although the reason for the difference is not clear at present, it may be possible to explain by taking into consideration the different energy scale between the two experimental techniques because NMR may not detect the magnetic fluctuations if those energy (frequency) are much higher than NMR frequency. If this were the case, our NMR results might suggest that the fluctuation frequency of the AFM spin fluctuations gets lower with increasing pressure. Further NS experiments under pressure are required to clarify this. Finally it is interesting to point out that the energy scale of ∼40 K (below which the AFM spin fluctuations develop under p) has been detected in other experiments even at ambient p such as the observation of peak in the magnetic excitation spectrum by inelastic NS measurements In summary, we performed 125 Te NMR measurements on UTe 2 under pressure up to 1.57 GPa. From the different temperature dependence of 1/T 1 T between the two different Te sites, Te1 and Te2, we suggest the coexistence of AFM and FM spin fluctuations in UTe 2 . The FM spin fluctuations are considered to exist inside each ladder while the AFM spin fluctuations are assigned to originate from the inter-ladder magnetic interactions. We point out that the FM spin fluctuations inside the ladders may play an important role in the appearance of the spintriplet superconducting state in UTe 2 , although AFM spin fluctuations start to develop below ∼40 K which are clearly observed under pressure. Further detailed investigations of the relationship between the magnitude of AFM/FM fluctuations and T c , the magnetic ordered states, and also about the superconducting properties under pressures are highly called for.