The synthesis of the photochromic YHO films is based on the oxidation of deposited yttrium hydride in ambient conditions. The actual state of the films during the deposition process, which is influenced by the deposition pressure and the oxidation caused by the residual gases, is not completely known. We report on the YHxOy thin films deposited by reactive pulsed-DC magnetron sputtering. Since the visible light transmittance is closely related to the phase and chemical composition of the films, in-situ transmittance measurements during and after deposition are performed. Ex-situ spectroscopic ellipsometry is used to determine the optical constants of YHxOy throughout the film thickness. In order to obtain metallic YH2-x films, the densest possible structure with a high deposition rate is required, otherwise the films could already be partially transparent during the deposition. The transmittance is higher if deposition pressure is increased. This is because of the oxidation promoted by more porous growth of the microstructure that is observed at the surface and cross-section images of the films. The films exhibit a refractive index gradient perpendicular to the substrate surface, which is related to the porosity and variation of the chemical composition. Thin films of oxygen-containing rare-earth hydrides (RE: Y, Gd, Dy, Er They could be used in the next generation energy-efficient windows to provide dynamic and situational solar-controlled properties. In general, due to the higher physico-chemical stability of inorganic compounds over organic compounds, they are more suitable for smart window and sensor applications. The photochromic activity of oxygen-containing RE hydrides strongly depends on the composition Despite the extensive research on these compounds in recent years, neither the mechanism responsible for the observed photochromism nor the exact phase of oxygen-containing RE hydrides have been completely understood. Based on the charge neutrality principle, the single phase of rare-earth oxy-hydride (REH3-2xOx, 0.5 ≤ x ≤ 1.5) is proposed for the photochromic films, where O 2-or H -anions occupy common lattice sites in a face-centred cubic structure The muon spin rotation technique The photochromic YHxOy films can be prepared by the simple exposure of β-YH2-x films deposited by reactive magnetron sputtering to ambient air atmosphere. During this process, the films oxidise to a certain level due to the high reactivity towards oxygen, and become transparent and photochromic In this paper we use in-situ transmittance measurements to study the state of the films during the deposition by reactive magnetron sputtering and the changes in optical properties after the process in the oxygen containing atmosphere. More information about the deposition process and its influence on the performance of films helps to master the synthesis of photochromic YHxOy. Magnetron sputtering is among the most widely used types of deposition by the glazing industry because it can be scaled up to large area substrates together with a high growth rate, which is highly important for the large-scale production of smart windows. The synthesis at room temperature also enables deposition on flexible substrates and roll-to-roll production. Spectroscopic ellipsometry (SE) is used to determine the optical constants throughout the YHxOy films' thickness as a function of the deposition pressure. X-ray diffraction (XRD), electron microscopy, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) are also used to study the films. This paper is organised as follows: experimental details, oxidation dynamics, kinetics of photo-darkening and bleaching, structural analysis using XRD and electron microscopy, optical properties -spectroscopic ellipsometry (SE), depth profiling by XPS, and conclusions. The film deposition was performed using a vacuum PVD coater G500M (Sidrabe Vacuum, Ltd.). The films were deposited on soda-lime glass, Ti, and Si substrates by reactive pulsed-DC magnetron sputtering from a Y (purity 99.9 %) target in an Ar (6N) and H2 (5N) atmosphere (H2 to Ar gas flow ratio of 1:2). The YHxOy phase was obtained by the intentional introduction of oxygen (5N) gas into the chamber up to ≈ 400 Pa in 30 min (dosage ≈ 10 9 Langmuir) after the deposition. The capping layer (except for the FTIR measurements) was not used to protect the films from further oxidation; however, the samples were stored in an Ar containing atmosphere for most of the time. The characterisation was performed within a few hours to a few days after the synthesis of the YHxOy samples. The exception was some measurements in which the stability of the films was tested on purpose. The samples for the FTIR measurements were deposited on Si substrates. Some of them were covered with approximately 300 nm Al film without breaking the vacuum. The substrates were ultrasonically cleaned with acetone, 2-isopropanol for 15 min each, rinsed with distilled water, and then dried under a flow of N2 gas before deposition. A planar balanced magnetron with target dimensions 150 mm × 75 mm × 3 mm was used. The magnetron was placed against the grounded substrate holder at a distance of 10 cm (the substrate facing the target axis). The substrates were not heated intentionally during the deposition. Before the deposition process, the chamber (≈ 0.1 m 3 ) was pumped down to 6 × 10 -4 Pa by a turbo-molecular pump backed with a rotary pump. The target was sputtered at a constant average power of 200 W. The pulse frequency was set at 80 kHz with the reverse time of 2.5 μs. The deposition was performed for 20 min at different sputtering pressures from 0.40 to 2.65 Pa. The pumping speed was altered by a throttle valve to set the necessary sputtering pressure. The thickness of the films was in the range from 330 to 460 nm. The in-situ transmittance of the films during the deposition and oxidation process was measured using CMOS detector Avantes StarLine AvaSpec-ULS2048CL-EVO, and a tungsten-halogen light source Avantes AvaLight-HAL-S-MINI. The ex-situ photochromic response was tested using UVA light from a 15 W (≈2.4 mW/cm 2 ) lamp under ambient conditions (Fig. The thickness of the films was determined by a profilometer, CART Veeco Dektak 150. The structure of the samples was examined by an X-ray diffractometer with Cu-Kα radiation, Rigaku MiniFlex 600. The film surfaces were characterised by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The lamellae were prepared by focused ion beam (FIB) and visualised by scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) using a Thermo Scientific Helios 5 UX dual-beam microscope. Before lamellae preparation, the surface of the samples was sputtered with a 30 nm thick Au layer and a 1.5 μm thick Pt layer to protect the surface from FIB exposure. Ex-situ transmittance spectra, optical properties and film thicknesses were obtained by means of spectroscopic ellipsometer (SE) WOOLLAM RC2 in the spectral range from 210 to 1690 nm or from 5.9 to 0.7 eV. The main ellipsometric angles Ψ and Δ were measured at incident angles from (45-75)° with a 5° step. The complex dielectric function dispersion curves (refractive index n and extinction coefficient k) were modelled with Drude oscillator (DO) and 3-4 Lorentz or Gaussian oscillators (GO) for conductive thin films (absorbing in the whole spectral range), and with one Tauc-Lorentz (TLO) and one GO for semiconducting thin films (transparent in the VIS region up to around 3 eV). SE modelling was performed by CompleteEASE software. The optical constants of surface roughness were derived by mixing the optical constants of the underlying materials with the optical constants of voids (n = 1, k = 0). The Bruggeman's model -Effective Medium Approximation (EMA) is used to calculate the optical constants of this mixed layer, assuming 50% void content. While the effective roughness layer approach is certainly an approximation to the actual samples, this approach works extremely well for modelling SE data when the size of the surface is much less than the wavelength of light used to measure the samples. Optical gradient (n and k variation within the depth of the film) was modelled by applying the parameterised gradient (variation of the oscillator fitting parameters with the film thickness) and a simple graded model with percentual variation of n, k (inhomogeneity) considering the films as a stack of 11-13 slices (lowest MSE observed). The porosity of the films was obtained by modelling the film as graded EMA -percentual mixture of material and voids optical properties and their variation with the film thickness. The MSE (mean square error) values for the conducting films were between 2 and 5. The MSE for other films were higher, ranging from 5 to 12. The inhomogeneity models showed high efficiency, reducing the MSE on average from around 50-60 to 8. The thickness and porosity of some films were evaluated by SEM images analysis with ImageJ software. FTIR absorbance spectra were measured by a VERTEX 80v vacuum FTIR spectrometer. The experiments were performed in the range from 1000 to 4000 cm -1 , with the interferometer working in vacuum and with a resolution of 4 cm -1 . Uncoated Si was used as a background. The non-capped films were measured in transmittance mode and the Al capped films in reflectance mode by the irradiation through the substrate. Details on X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis are described in Since the transmittance of YHxOy films is closely related to the O/H atomic ratio, it was measured in-situ during the deposition and the post-oxidation. These measurements show the influence of sputtering pressure (including hydrogen partial pressure) and residual gases on the state of the films and the optical properties. In the deposition pressure range of 0.40 to 2.65 Pa, the hydrogen partial pressure varied from 0.07 to 0.45 Pa, respectively. The residual gas composition at the base pressure of 6 × 10 -4 Pa can be found in Fig. The transmittance spectra of the films measured immediately after the deposition are shown in Fig. Although the (β-YH2)-(γ-YH3) coexisting phase plateau at the pressure-composition isotherm (at room temperature) is observed at the hydrogen partial pressure of approximately 0.1 Pa In addition, the γ-YH3 phase cannot be detected ex-situ for the non-capped films because it is unstable and dissociates at room temperature into YH2 and H2 The main reason for the increase in transmittance at deposition pressures above 1 Pa should be the oxidation at given residual gas (H2O and O2) levels due to the more porous structure of the films. Yttrium is able to dissociate water or oxygen to form stable yttrium oxide (Y2O3). The transparent Y2O3 films can be prepared by the reactive magnetron sputtering using oxygen partial pressure as low as 1 × 10 -3 Pa The composition of our samples has not been directly measured, but comparing the transmittance spectra with other studies In some cases, the films produced at around 0.90-0.95 Pa exhibit both transparent and dark areas when removed from the chamber. This is due to lateral variation of density. The dark areas slowly decrease over time. The newly opened (transparent) areas show a high photochromic activity. The films deposited at lower pressures (< 0.90 Pa) do not oxidise to the level to become transparent, however, a minor increase in the transmittance around 700 nm is detectable for the films deposited at 0.90 and 0.80 Pa. These metallic films do not turn photochromic with time either. We can conclude that in order to produce the purest possible yttrium hydride film, the lowest possible pressure with a high deposition rate should be used. The ex-situ transmittance spectra can be seen in Fig. The transmittance at several wavelengths was measured over time to evaluate the rate of change. An example at 420 nm (other wavelengths can be seen in Fig. Pa. In addition, there is also a tendency for the time constant to reduce at higher wavelengths. The time constant of 29 s at 420 nm decreases to 7 s at 980 nm (both for 1.35 Pa). The composition shortly after the exposure to air ranges approximately from YH1.25O0.90 to YH0.55O1.25 according to the ex-situ SE analysis and literature, see Section 3.4. We conclude that high oxygen uptake occurs within a few minutes. The gradual change in the composition over several months is shown in Ref. Films grown by e-beam evaporation oxidise and lose their photochromic effect much faster after air exposure than magnetron sputtered films. In general, this is due to a less dense microstructure. From the perspective of our measurements, it must also be taken into account that transmittance is not a linear function of O/H ratio. Although photochromic activity is observed over a wide range of O/H ratio, the photochromic contrast can decrease rapidly depending on the oxygen content This points out the stability issues and the consequential loss of the photochromic activity if this material is not protected to stabilise the composition. The photochromic contrast of approximately 10% after 20 min of UVA irradiation is measured for the 750 nm thick YHxOy film deposited at 0.95 Pa (Fig. that the respond times are shorter at higher O/H ratios The X-ray diffractograms for the YHxOy films on soda-lime glass were recorded over a range for 2θ of 10°-70° and can be seen in Fig. When the pressure is increased to 2.65 Pa, a fine-grained structure is only observed within the initial stage of the YHxOy film, which evolves into a columnar growth with the vertical voids perpendicular to the substrate surface. The results obtained by the electron microscopy are clearly in line with the Thornton structural zone model The film deposited at 2.65 Pa is highly transparent due to its more porous microstructure, which allows oxygen to penetrate the film more easily and promotes the oxidation process. High surface porosity has been predicted in the study of the oxygen-containing yttrium hydride films deposited at 6 Pa by elastic recoil detection analysis Fig. eV with an optical band gap around 2.5-3.5 eV (Fig. Pa. This is due to the changes in the density of the material and, consequently, in its composition. XRD analysis revealed that with the increase of the sputtering pressure the texture changed and maximums slightly shifted towards lower 2 values (Fig. It can be seen that in the spectral region from 0.7 eV up to  4.0 eV, the n increases and k decreases with the increase of the sputtering pressure from 0.40 Pa to 0.90 Pa (Fig. n decreases for the films sputtered at pressure > 1.00 Pa (Fig. The n and k values at 400 nm wavelength as a function of sputtering pressure are given in Fig. The n near the substrate (n Bottom) is higher with respect to the n values near the surface (n Top) for the films sputtered at pressure > 0.95 Pa. While k decreases with the increase of sputtering pressure, n reaches its maximum value for the films sputtered at  1.00 Pa. There is no difference in the values of n near the top and near the bottom of the films sputtered at pressure < 0.95 Pa. There is a slight variation of k comparing the corresponding k values for the top and for the bottom of the films sputtered at pressure of (1.20 -1.35) Pa: k has higher values near the bottom of the films respect to the k near the top of the film. The optical depth profile (at 1.669 eV or 742.8 nm) of the thin films sputtered at different pressures is given in Fig. Using Eg and data from Ref. 9, we can conclude that the composition ranges from YH1.25O0.87 to YH0.56O1.22 when the sputtering pressure is increased from 0.90 to 2.65 Pa (Fig. The XPS depth profiling measurements were performed to determine the atomic concentration ratio between O and Y throughout the thickness of the YHxOy films (Fig. Ref. In this paper, the optical properties of the oxygen-containing yttrium hydride films (YHxOy) have been studied in-situ and ex-situ. The in-situ transmittance spectra during the deposition showed that the phase of the films strongly depends on the deposition pressure, even before the exposure to air or pure oxygen. The oxidation due to the residual gas (H2O and O2) levels during the deposition is responsible for this phenomenon. The enhanced oxidation is due to the formation of a more porous structure at higher deposition pressures, confirmed by the electron microscopy images. The time constants of transmittance increase range from a few seconds to two minutes with the tendency to decrease with deposition pressure. The constants reflect the rapidness of the formation of the composition, which ranges approximately from YH1.25O0.87 to YH0.56O1.22. The incorporation of oxygen into the films expands the lattice and could lead to the deterioration of the material quality and cause problems in the smart window applications. The chemical composition of these films must be stabilised for long-term use. The YHxOy films deposited below 1 Pa remain highly absorbing after exposure to air, and β-YH2-x is expected to be the main phase. We recommend structure densification and high deposition rates to obtain the purest possible β-YH2-x films. The optical properties ex-situ have been studied by spectroscopic ellipsometry. The films can be clearly divided into the two groups: transparent semiconductors/insulators and metallic conductors from the SE analysis. The gradient of refractive index n was found by the optical depth profiles for the transparent YHxOy, and is dependent of the deposition pressure. This is caused by the gradient of porosity and the consequential gradient of composition, which is confirmed by the XPS depth profiles.