There has been a recent surge of interest in UTe2 due to its unconventional magnetic field (H) reinforced spin-triplet superconducting phases persisting at fields far above the simple Pauli limit for H ∥ [010]. Magnetic fields in excess of 35 T then induce a field-polarized magnetic state via a first-order-like phase transition. More controversially, for field orientations close to H ∥ [011] and above 40 T, electrical resistivity measurements suggest that a further superconducting state may exist. However, no Meissner effect or thermodynamic evidence exists to date for this phase making it difficult to exclude a simple low-resistance metallic state. In this paper, we describe a study using thermal, electrical, and magnetic probes in magnetic fields of up to 55 T applied between the [010] (b) and [001] (c) directions. Our MHz conductivity data reveal the field-induced state of low or vanishing electrical resistance; simultaneous magnetocaloric effect measurements (i.e. changes in sample temperature due to changing magnetic field), show the first definitive evidence for adiabaticity and thermal behavior characteristic of bulk field-induced superconductivity. The recently discovered actinide superconductor UTe 2 has been predicted as a promising candidate for the realization of chiral spin-triplet superconductivity with equal-spin pairing. Support for this picture comes from its close proximity to magnetic order, its unusually large critical magnetic field (far exceeding the Pauli limit for a weakly coupled BCS superconductor in the absence of spin-orbit coupling), as well as the observation of only a small change in the Knight shift below its superconducting transition temperature T c ≈ 1.6 -2.1 K When a magnetic field is applied along the magnetically hard b-axis, a reinforcement of superconductivity is observed above 15 T, which is extended up to μ 0 H m ≈ 35 T On rotating the magnetic field from H ∥ [010] towards H ∥ [001], the metamagnetic transition at H m shifts upwards in field. Interestingly, when the field lies in a narrow angular range around the [011] direction i.e., ≈ 23.7 • away from the [010] axis), transport measurements suggest that a state with an undetectable low resistance emerges within the field polarized paramagnetic phase above H m . This state has been interpreted as superconductivity Here we report complementary proximity detector oscillator (PDO) Examples of sample temperature T versus field curves for H ∥ b (θ = 0) and θ = 33 • are shown in Fig. Turning first to the MCE data at θ = 0 [Fig. The simultaneous PDO data at θ = 0 [Fig. The MCE and PDO data for θ = 33 • [Fig. Having described the signatures of the various phase boundaries in the PDO and MCE data, we now turn to Fig. Corresponding derivatives (1/μ 0 )(df /dH) of the down-sweep data are shown in Fig. The MCE measurements are summarized in Fig. At the close of this section, we emphasize that though the corresponding features in the PDO and MCE data are weak, there are distinct indications of the boundary between the SC PM and SC RE phases. This seems to confirm that though both states are superconducting, they are distinct phases with subtly different properties Before treating the thermodynamics of the onset of the high-field SC FP state in more detail, it is worth considering whether there is an alternative explanation for the previous (non-thermodynamic) data used to identify the apparent superconductivity of this phase. One possibility might be a low (but nonzero) resistivity metallic phase caused by a field-induced Fermi-surface reconstruction at H m that occurs over a restricted range of field orientations. However, existing experimental data provide a number of objections to such an interpretation. 1. As mentioned in the Introduction, Hall-effect and thermopower measurements 2. To counter the previous point, one might argue that a significantly different change in electrical properties (i.e., a large increase in carrier density and/or mobility) occurs at H m , but only over a special, restricted range of θ. In such a case, one would expect that the metamagnetic transition would also change in character for these angles. However, torque magnetometry data (Fig. 3. An increase in the charge-carrier density at H m (such as due to the closing of an energy gap) leads to cooling (see 4. The observation of reversible heating upon entering the high field SC FP phase indicating the opening of an energy gap in excitations, is accompanied by sample thermal decoupling (adiabaticity). This is the consequence of an increase in the sample thermal relaxation time constant τ ∝ C/K, where C is the sample heat capacity and K is its thermal conductance. Since the opening of an energy gap leads to a reduction of C, the observed increase in τ points to a significant drop in K reminiscent of a superconducting state, as seen in numerous U-based compounds such as UBe 13 , UPt 3 , UCoGe, and URhGe 5. The PDO data used to detect the SC FP state in Ref. 6. The typical energy scales associated with the transition at H m are ∼ 40 K (see Introduction above). Any phenomenon associated with increased (normal-state) conductivity due to a Fermisurface change at H m would be expected to persist (or slowly die away) over a temperature range similar to this. By contrast, the upper-temperature limit of the SC FP phase is about 1.9 K Yet another proposal for the field-induced state is that of an sliding density wave (sDW), as observed in lowdimensional materials In view of the above points, the following discussion of the thermodynamics occurring at and around H m assumes that the SC FP phase is superconducting. As shown in a previous study (ii) ∆T FP increases for θ between 25 • and 35 • as the sample transitions into the SC FP state. (iii) ∆T FP decreases with θ once again when the SC FP state is suppressed at larger θ. During the down-sweep of the field, ∆T FP (Fig. In making a quantitative description of the thermodynamics of the metamagnetic transition, we assume that the overall entropy change is a sum of reversible and irreversible processes, where ∆S rev describes the latent heat released during the transition, which is recovered when the field crosses H m in the opposite sense; and C P is the heat capacity at constant pressure. The small field width of the metamagnetic transition leads us to assume adiabatic conditions and extract the temperature change ∆T directly from the magnetocaloric measurements. The time to cross the transition at H m is ∼ 0.6 ms -significantly shorter than the thermal relaxation timescale τ of the sample in the FP state which is around 10 ms for our equipment. τ was estimated the T (t) behavior above H m [Fig. [38] Therefore, entering the SC FP phase releases an additional ≈ 50 mJmol -1 K -1 in latent heat. Assuming (as justified above) that the SC FP represents a field-induced superconducting state, the additional latent heat is likely to result from the formation of a gap at the Fermi energy and an entropy reduction due to pair condensation The irreversible component ∆S irr mainly consists of hysteretic losses during the first-order metamagnetic transition and, bearing in mind the similarity of the behavior of the PDO data in the SC FP state to that in the SC PM phase (see also Ref. Finally, we remark that the boundaries between the various low-temperature/high-magnetic-field phases of UTe 2 derived in this work from PDO and MCE data match those for CVT-grown samples in the literature The simultaneous zero-electric current magnetocaloric effect, MHz conductivity measurements, and angular dependent torque magnetometry are carried out on single crystals of UTe 2 as a function of magnetic field magnitude and orientation, using pulsed magnetic fields of up to 55 T. A pronounced and fully reversible magnetocaloric effect characteristic of a thermally decoupled (adiabatic) state is observed close to the metamagnetic transition into the proposed high field SC FP phase. This amounts to compelling evidence for the stabilization of a fieldinduced energy-gaped state of concurrent high electricaland poor thermal conductivity, i.e., the first thermodynamic evidence that the SC FP state represents a fieldstabilized bulk superconducting phase of UTe 2 , of likely node-less order parameter. Additionally, with the magnetic field aligned close to the b-axis, a more subtle feature is observed around 15 T, supporting the notion that the superconducting SC PM and SC RE states represent separate, distinct phases. Single crystals of UTe 2 are grown using chemical vapor transport; the conditions are the same as for sample s4 described in Ref. Fig. The PDO measurements employ equipment similar to that described in Refs. Additionally, we conducted piezo torque magnetometry measurements in pulsed magnetic fields up to 75 T by using membrane-type surface-stress sensors at the NHMFL at LANL with a high-frequency (≈ 300 kHz) AC excitation current of ≈ 500 μA. The angular dependent torque measurements were performed at 0.7 K with the sample immersed in liquid 3 He. In the experiments, we used a balanced Wheatstone bridge between the piezoresistive pathways. Crystals were mounted with the b axis perpendicular to the cantilever plane. 