Long and thin scanning force cantilevers are sensitive to small forces, but also vulnerable to detrimental non-contact interactions. Here we present an experiment with a cantilever whose spring constant and static deflection are dominated by the interaction between the tip and the surface, a regime that we refer to as "overcoupled". The interactions are an obstacle for ultrasensitive measurements like nanoscale magnetic resonance imaging (nanoMRI). We discuss several strategies to overcome the challenges presented by the overcoupling, and demonstrate proton nanoMRI measurements of individual influenza virus particles. Introduction -Scanning force microscopy (SFM) is a wide and mature field that finds applications in physics, biology, chemistry, as well as the materials and surface sciences In order to realize zeptonewton force detection, the internal damping and stiffness of nanomechanical sensors must be reduced as much as possible. Many groups are striving to optimize different devices as force sensors, including cantilevers Dissipative non-contact forces have been the subject of intense research efforts for more than two decades In this paper, we experimentally investigate the impact of conservative non-contact forces in the overcoupled regime. Our measurement setup is a Magnetic Resonance Force Microscope (MRFM) factor of Q = 25000 in vacuum and at the base temperature T = 4.7 K of our helium bath cryostat. These numbers translate into an intrinsic spring constant of k 0 = 50 μN/m and a friction coefficient of γ 0 = 10 -13 kg/s . The sensor displacement is detected via a laser interferometer with a power of 10 nW -100 nW directed onto a paddle near the cantilever tip. The interferometer has a displacement detection sensitivity of roughly 2 × 10 -12 m/ √ Hz around the cantilever resonance frequency. Importantly, the interferometer can also be used to monitor slow deflections of the cantilever tip through the total reflected power To attach the influenza virus particles to the cantilever, we use a two-step approach. First, a silicon chip containing cleanroom-fabricated nanorods with a bottom cross section of ca. 500 nm × 500 nm is dipped into a lowconcentration virus suspension. The concentration is adjusted to result in a small number of well-separated virus particles on the bottom surface of the nanorod. After a chemical fixation step, a single nanorod is glued manually to the end of a cantilever. This process conserves the three-dimensional structure of the virus and does not degrade the mechanical properties of the cantilever Figure As the cantilever approaches the nanomagnet, it experiences strong conservative non-contact forces that bend its tip away from the nominal position, cf. Fig. In MRFM, spins are coupled to the cantilever via a nanomagnetic field gradient To visualize the impact of conservative non-contact forces on our MRFM measurements, we show an example of a two-dimensional MRFM scan at constant z position in Fig. Figure In the following, we discuss three strategies to overcome the problems arising from the blind spots, and to perform nanoscale MRI even in the presence of strong non-contact forces. The strategies are illustrated in Fig. Strategy (i): increasing the tip-surface distancenon-contact forces usually drop off quickly as a function of the distance between tip and surface. In our case, increasing the height over the nanomagnet surface from 30 nm to 100 nm leads to significantly smaller blind spots. At a separation of 150 nm, the influence of conservative non-contact interactions is negligible. In Fig. Strategy (ii): combining different scan directions -in general, the blind spots for scans in positive and negative scan directions do not overlap fully, cf. blue and red petals in Fig. Strategy (iii): changing the shape of the PSF -in MRFM, the fact that the spin signal is not collected from a single point but from an extended point-spread function (PSF) opens a third possibility to avoid the blind spots. On the one hand, any spin inside the sample can be detected at various tip positions that place the spin in different parts of an active resonant slice. On the other hand, different resonant slices can be activated by changing the carrier frequency. For the example shown in Fig. In our MRFM experiment, we selected strategy (i) to obtain an optimal compromise between high magnetic field gradient and small blind spots. Strategies (ii) and (iii) are potentially more powerful, but the reconstruction algorithm we currently use cannot efficiently handle the large differences in the point-to-point separations. Further, we chose the y-axis as fast scanning direction in order to reduce the number of discontinuities in one line and the mechanical hysteresis, cf. Fig. The blind spots decrease significantly at distances greater than 100 nm above the magnet surface, leading to a maximum static deflection of less than d max = 70 nm and a mean deflection of d mean = (30 ± 16) nm, compared to d max,10nm = 170 nm and d mean,10nm = (61 ± 39) nm at a distance of 10 nm. In Fig. The measured image I m does not directly correspond to the spin density O of the attached sample. The measured signal at one measurement position is given by the convolution of O with the PSF, which in turn is controlled by the nanomagnet shape and the pulse parameters. In our image-formation model, we write where I m is the measured image. To recover the object structure from the measured data, we use a regularized least-squares optimization. The approach we chose, along with a possible algorithm, is described in the Appendix D. Figure While static deflection presented a problem for our MRFM experiments, it can potentially be a useful probe in some surface studies. With a root-mean-square position uncertainty of 0.2 nm and a spring constant of 50 μN/m, our cantilever is sensitive to static forces down to 30 fN, which is close to the performance of other force sensors read out at much higher laser powers Conservative non-contact forces will become increasingly important in future generations of nanomechanical scanning probes with optimized sensitivity. Operating such devices in the overcoupled regime changes the resonance frequency, alters the mode structure, and, specifically for MRFM, can dramatically reduce the inversion pulse efficiency. In combination, these effects can significantly reduce the resonator's force sensitivity. It is therefore important to be aware of this potential issue, monitoring the relevant signatures (like large frequency shifts), and implementing counter-strategies when necessary. Our work outlines the basic problem and demonstrates how it can be handled even in a very complex type of experiment. conservative forces over the magnet vary over ranges of several 100 nm and they have different spatial signatures. We also note that the non-contact damping coefficient is orders of magnitudes larger than in our previous experiments FIG. The first term of the optimization problem in Eq. 2 is minimized in order to reduce the quantitative difference between the measured data planes and the corresponding signal generated by the reconstruction model. To further reduce the effect of measurement noise on the result, the two regularization terms are added. Selecting a large value for the weight λ leads to sparser solutions and increasing λ TV suppresses fast changes in the reconstructed object and thus reduces high-frequency noise. The chosen weights for the results in Fig. To solve the optimization problem in Eq. 2, it can be rewritten as min or,v,w ( This allows to use the framework developed by Gao et al. A topography scan of the cantilever tip with the virus samples is shown in Fig. 