Visible wavelengths of light control the quantum matter of atoms and molecules and are foundational for quantum technologies, including computers, sensors, and clocks. The development of visible integrated photonics opens the possibility for scalable circuits with complex functionalities, advancing both the scientific and technological frontiers. We experimentally demonstrate an inverse design approach based on superposition of guided-mode sources, allowing the generation and full control of free-space radiation directly from within a single 150 nm layer Ta2O5, showing low loss across visible and near-infrared spectra. We generate diverging circularlypolarized beams at the challenging 461 nm wavelength that can be directly used for magneto-optical traps of strontium atoms, constituting a fundamental building block for a range of atomic-physicsbased quantum technologies. Our generated topological vortex beams and spatially-varying polarization emitters could open unexplored light-matter interaction pathways, enabling a broad new photonic-atomic paradigm. Our platform highlights the generalizability of nanoscale devices for visible-laser emission and will be critical for scaling quantum technologies. Addressing matter with visible lasers enables a wide range of applications, including facilitating quantum computer technology To motivate integrated photonics development, we take ensembles of atoms as an essential and widespread system at the frontier of quantum information Beyond the development of new physical standards, the extreme measurement precision of Sr clocks Given the importance of generating free-space laser beams, various approaches have been developed. With the specific aims and requirements of interfacing lasers to quantum systems, recent advances with nanoscale patterning have generated large-area In this work, we leverage nanoscale devices to demonstrate a versatile PIC platform for laser emission across the visible and near-infrared spectral ranges. We experimentally demonstrate that leveraging coherent superpositions of waveguide modes (Fig. In a typical structure for free-space laser emission outcoupling, a fundamental waveguide mode is guided towards a grating. The mode is scattered into free space, with the resulting polarization typically lying parallel to the grating lines. The spatial-field distribution is achieved using grating apodization since the amplitude and phase of the guided mode change with propagation and partial scattering along the grating. The apodization is typically achieved via maximizing a field distribution target by selecting teeth from a pre-simulated grating library, assuming periodic structures and exponential propagation decay inside the gratings. To achieve two-dimensional beam control, it is, in principle, possible to add an orthogonally oriented waveguide arriving at the outcoupling grating. Superimposing the outcoupling port with an orthogonally oriented grating would combine the orthogonally-polarized guided modes as they scatter into free-space beams. Then, by controlling the relative amplitude and phase of the guided modes, one could control the polarization in the output according to equation ( The alternative strategy we take here is a direct optimization of the structure to maximize a chosen output beam target via inverse design. Inverse design is an optimization approach that achieves local optimal values for a given objective function over vast parameter spaces. Once a physical framework is set to provide enough degrees of freedom, including, specifically, nanoscale feature control in photonics platforms, the operation of inverse design can result in devices with optimal performance where is an objective function to be maximized, is the electric field distribution, is the distribution of the electric permittivity, and is some parametrization of the permittivity containing the fabrication constraints Where ( ), ( ) are the permittivity-dependent electric and magnetic vector fields, = 0.5 ⋅ ∫ × * ⋅ , and the integral is calculated over the region of interest of sufficiently non-vanishing fields. Circular polarization states are central to preparing optimized ensemble spin states in quantum applications. Therefore, as the first example, we explore the generation of circularly polarized beams propagating at = 210 azimuthal and = 20 polar angles with a high divergence diameter of 20 . We explicitly formulate this objective beam configuration as an overlap with a circularly polarized Gaussian beam with the above properties and set two orthogonally propagating guided fundamental TE modes with a /2 relative phase as simultaneous inputs. To demonstrate low footprint devices, we define a beam having a 1.5 μm waist located 300 nm above the top surface of the device layer, where we evaluate the overlap integral. In addition, this allows us to minimize optimization and simulation times and generate devices with a tiny footprint of 6 μm . To characterize the properties of the beams generated by the structures, we first conduct finite difference time domain (FDTD) simulations. We calculate the far-field intensity distribution and show the beam's angular propagation and divergence properties (Fig. To experimentally characterize our nanophotonic design principle for visible laser emission, we fabricate devices using electron-beam lithography with tantala films The system provides the angular far-field intensity distribution and pixel-wise polarization information (Fig. where ( ) are the individual optimization objectives. We demonstrate the approach by designing a grating structure allowing for a controllable polarization state. Our objective function now becomes where ( ) and ( ) are two overlap integrals with two different orthogonally polarized Gaussian beams sharing the same spatial properties (divergence, propagation orientation). The objectives are maximized jointly, where each objective is now achieved by a single guided mode source. This is contrary to the previous case where both sources are simultaneously active to maximize the single objective. As depicted in Figure A critical tool in atomic physics is the magneto-optical trap (MOT) To further demonstrate the versatility of our approach, we show that we are not restricted by spatially-uniform polarizations and allow the generation of spatially-varying vector fields, Finally, to demonstrate the control over the spatial phase distribution of the generated beams, we create a beam carrying a phase singularity (Fig. A platform providing the versatility to support diverse laser-beam emission objectives and the overall application space for visible integrated photonics requires a full palette of devices to control waveguide propagation. We introduce the desired functionalities and implement them using inverse design, fabricating the devices on the tantala-on-oxide platform. We created waveguides of varying lengths to characterize the propagation losses exhibited by the tantala waveguides (Fig. Modeling. The modeling is done using, Lumerical, Spins, and Matlab. Fabrication. 150 nm of tantala is deposited on thermally oxidized Si substrates via ion beam sputtering. A layer of Ma-N 2404 e-beam resist is spin-coated onto the sample, patterned using electron-beam lithography, and etched in an inductively coupled plasma reactive-ion etcher using fluorine-based chemistry. After stripping the resist, the chip outlines are patterned using the optical lithography step defines the individual chip outlines, which are then diced via deep reactive ion etching. A final sulphuric-acid-based cleaning step is performed before annealing in the air for approximately 10 hours at 500° C. Experiment. A 461 nm laser (Toptica) is delivered via a polarization-maintaining fiber (Thorlabs). The power and polarization are stabilized using a noise eater (Thorlabs NEL01A) and coupled via a custom lens fiber (Nanonics Imaging) into a chip. The light from the chip is gathered with a high NA objective (NA 0.9 CFI Plan Achromat NCG 100X). The collimated light passes through a constant polarizer and is followed by a rotating quarter waveplate (QWP), and the far-field image is collected by a camera. The polarization data is collected by rotating the QWP with a 1 degree angular step completing a full 360 degree revolution. The spatial polarization distribution is extracted by pixel-wise fitting and described in more detail in the SI. Disclaimer: Mention of specific products or trade names is for technical and scientific information and does not constitute an endorsement by NIST.