Ultrafast optical excitations trigger in materials a range of dynamics. An interesting range of dynamics is the ones that unfold within the picosecond timescale, corresponding to the THz frequency range. Within this short timescale, the material's properties, and therefore its response to electromagnetic fields, dynamically change. For this reason, any THz radiation used to probe the material will interact with the multilayer undergoing time-dependent modifications of the dielectric responses within a single optical cycle (a very similar situation arises for THz radiation produced in spintronics THz emitters). Such interaction goes beyond typical quasistatic approaches. It is, therefore paramount to be able to describe accurately all the interaction of THz radiation with out-of-equilibrium multilayers. We develop here a theoretical framework called PTMM (Perturbative Transfer Matrix Method) to model the production of THz accurately and its interaction with multilayers undergoing ultrafast changes in their dielectric properties. That analysis allows us to propose two novel ways to utilize Terahertz time-domain spectroscopy. We will first show that a simple analysis of the time resolved Optical-Pump-Terahertz-Probe spectra can provide not only the time scale of processes that are slower than the THz pulse time-width, but it can accurately measure the timescale of sub-picosecond and faster processes as well. Further, we will apply our method to THz probed spintronics THz emitters, and compute the interference between the produced THz and the THz probe. We will show that an analysis of the delay-resolved transmission spectra allows for a direct measurement of the time distance between the laser excitation and the peak of the spin current, allowing an unprecedented insight into the ultrafast spin-to-charge conversion mechanism. Terahertz Time-Domain Spectroscopy (THz-TDS) emerges as a compelling experimental approach operating within the frequency spectrum of 0.1 THz to 10 THz. Its versatile application spans diverse domains. In OPTP experiments, the optical pump drives the system into an out-of-equilibrium state. Subsequently, a THz probe is sent onto the sample with variable delays, to investigate its properties. The out-ofequilibirum dynamics can be used to access specific information like hot carrier lifetime, In this manuscript, we will present a comprehensive approach that will allow to describe consistently the propagation and production of THz radiation within optically excited multilayers. The approach, the perturbative transfer matrix method (PTMM), is based on a perturbation expansion of the Maxwell-Drude system in the change of material properties compared to equilibrium. Theoretical analysis of the OPTP technique is usually performed under the assumption of quasistatic regime, which applies only when the changes in the material properties of the multilayer happen over a timescale longer than the period of the used THz probe. This limits the application to the study of the de-excitation dynamics. Our PTMM is not limited to quasistatic regime and allows for an accurate description of the interaction of THz pulses with materials with properties changing in time in the sub-picosecond regime. The Transfer Matrix Method (TMM) is often used to describe propagation of electromagnetic waves through multilayered systems, as it can provide accurate results by incorporating all left and right propagating waves into a single matrix. A full description of such effects requires a number of steps. Assuming that the optical excitation still happens in the linear regime and that no saturation processes in absorption are to be accounted for, the deposition of optical photons' energy throughout the material can be obtained by using a standard TMM. Assuming the time t dependence of the Drude carrier density n[t], and the inverse scattering lifetime γ[t] known, the final step is to compute the propagation of a THz probe pulse through a multilayer in which one or more layers are undergoing that dynamic. Standard TMM cannot be used since a frequency-dependent total permittivity ε T [ω] cannot be written in such case. We then revert back to the Maxwell's equations. Before addressing the propagation through the entire multilayer, we first focus on a single layer at a time. In the above situation, the electric E and magnetic H fields propagating along the z axis are described by the Maxwell-Drude system: where μ is the permeability of the medium, J[z, t] is the current density (along the same direction as the electric field) induced by the Drude response, e is the electron charge, and m the effective mass, n is the number of carriers, and γ the inverse scattering lifetime. In the case n and γ are constant in time, the last equation leads to the known expression for the Drude conductivity:σ D [ω] = ne 2 /(m (γ -iω)). The total permittivity ε T [ω] (i.e. the background contribution and the Drude contribution) then reads ε On the other hand, the case where the number of carriers n and the inverse scattering lifetime γ depend on time represents a material in an out-of-equilibrium state. For example, an increase in the number of carriers may describe the transient photodoping of a semiconductor during a femtosecond laser excitation, while its decrease could be due to the subsequent carrier recombination. Similarly, a change in γ may describe the increased number of scatterings triggered by the increased phonon temperature after an excitation. We write the Drude parameters as the sum of their equilibrium values, γ In this way, the 0-th order fields will satisfy the unperturbed Maxwell-Drude system with constant equilibrium Drude parameters (as shown in Appendix.A, Eq. A4), and it can be solved using the standard Transfer Matrix Method. where the source term is given by ×F n and has the dimensionality of a volume current. Here we assume γ n is present. To solve Eqs. 2 we first construct the general solution. The construction of the general solution is similar to the derivation of the Transfer Matrix with an additional source term developed in Ref 37 (for more detail, please refer to Appendix. B). We count the layers from left to right using an index n starting from 1 up to the number of layers N . We assume the multilayered system to be sandwiched by air. The air on the left (right) has index 0 (N+1) and is assumed to be semi-infinite. With this approach, the 1-st order correction to the fields within a given layer n is where fn is a vector constructed using the right propagating waves amplitude f > n and the left propagating waves amplitude f < n in the n-th layer. Using the expression in Eq. 4, the field continuity conditions at all the layers' interfaces can be written. We obtain that the wave intensities in any two layers n < M < m are linked by the expression, where T[n,m] is the transfer matrix from the n-th layer in the system to the m-th layer, ā is the element matrix of the transfer matrix, and b is a coefficient collection vector, the thickness of the layers is denoted by d n , and k l is the spatial Fourier component (for detailed derivation and forms please refer to Ref. 32 and 37 and the Appendix. B). With the above expression and the final expressions from Ref. 32 Eq. 9 for the standard THz transmission and Ref. 37 Eq. 21 for the THz emission, we can show that the overall THz transmission results up to the first perturbative order can be written into one single expression as: where, with the further subscriptions of T[0,N+1] refer to the matrix elements. The first term in Eq. 6 refers to the THz transmission through the unperturbed sample (the transmission of the THz probe with pump off, E of f trans ), which can be used to describe the THz-TDS results. The second term refers to the THz emission from one single layer (E emit ), which can be used to describe the STE results. Finally, the third term refers to the correction of the transmission during the OPTP case (the transmission difference of the THz probe through a sample with the pump on and pump off, E on trans -E of f trans = ∆E). Finally, the 0-th order and 1-st order electric fields can be calculated as, where the further index for ā is the element of the matrix. (For a more detailed calculation of f please refer to the Appendix. B) A summary of the relationships between the equation and the experiment labels can be seen in Table . I. To show the capabilities of the framework developed above, we apply the approach to two test cases. Firstly we show how a THz probe traverses a laser excited sample. We choose a quartz(1mm)/Fe(3nm)/Pt(3nm) heterostructure, as an example, but of course the proposed approach can be applied to any stack of materials. Although the chosen heterostructure is a commonly used spintronics THz emitter, in the first test case, we initially ignore the THz that is produced within the sample. The produced THz will be then explicitly treated and its interference with THz probe pulse accounted for in the second test case. We set the dielectric response of quartz at equilibrium by using a real frequency-independent refractive index of 2.01 In the following example, we will explicitly address only the case of γ where h controls the maximum scattering rate change, τ rise is the increase time and τ decay is the following decrease time, t 0 is the time position of the excitation. We stress that the focus of this work is to describe the propagation of THz waves through an optically excited system. Eq. 11 is meant purely as an example, mimicking common excitation and thermalization dynamics. However, as already mentioned earlier, a proper form for γ The OPTP technique is usually used to have information on the de-excitation dynamics of a laser-excited sample We assume the temporal shape of γ At sufficiently large negative delay times in Figs. Conversely the situation is very different when the delay is such that the probe pulse overlaps with the fast rise dynamics in the excitation (small delays in Figs. Here we notice two important features. The timescale over which the differential spectrum shows overlap between the fast timescale τ rise and the probe pulse is rather independent on the rise time τ rise itself. This is indeed because the overlap time is mostly controlled by the THz pulse time-width. For this reason the temporal duration of this feature does not give any insight into the time evolution of the material's dielectric properties. What is instead evident is that the spectrum during the overlap is strongly affected by the τ rise time (see Figs. The analysis of the spectrum map reveals two interesting findings. Firstly, it is observed that the spectrum is the broadest when the excitation overlap with the central time position of the probe. Secondly, a faster increase time for the excitation profile results in a broader spectrum map. We find that it is possible to obtain a fairly accurate estimation of the fast rise time τ rise . This can be achieved by selecting the delay time at which the spectrum is the widest. At that time delay one should identify the frequencyf 1% at which the spectrum has 1% of its maximum amplitude. The fast rise time τ rise can then be estimated using where f c is the central frequency of the THz probe. To prove that the formula above provides a good estimation of the fast rise time τ rise even when it is much shorter than the THz probe time-width, we fix the delay time between the probe and excitation at the point of overlap and compute the differential spectrum for varying rise times τ rise (as shown in Fig. The above-mentioned correspondence, although very convenient due to its simplicity, is not perfect. For an accurate extraction of the excitation time, a comparison between experiments and theory is needed. It is however important to note how the method can clearly resolve timescales (hundreds of fs) that are shorter than the period and the time width of the employed radiation (≈ 2ps in the presented example). The analysis above can be conducted easily on any excited multilayer that does not produce THz upon laser excitation. It is however possible to perform the above analysis in heterostructures used for spintronics THz emitters. In this case, the time-resolved spectra cannot be simply constructed by subtracting the THz probe transmission with pump on by the THz probe transmission without pump: the THz radiation internally generated by the sample must be subtracted as well. This can be achieved because THz signal produced by the inversespin Hall effect is proportional to the optical pump intensity, but not to the THz probe, while the spectral maps in Fig. We here focus completely on the analysis of spintronics THz emitters (STE): these are (in their simplest configuration) a bilayer system with a ferromagnetic (FM) layer and a nonferromagnetic (HM) layer, where after excitation, a spin current transfers from FM to HM, undergoes ISHE to become a charge current, and eventually emit terahertz radiation. In this analysis, we obtained an overall spectrum map of changing time delay between the excitation and probe, only that now the THz emission has not been subtracted (as shown in Fig. In the spectrum map we observe that when we send the probe in after the excitation, more than one peak will exist in the overall spectrum (red dots in Fig. Interestingly, the frequency difference between the peaks (∆f ) of the overall spectrum for case 1 is going to give us valuable information about the time difference between the emission pulse and the correction pulse (∆t 2 in Fig. IV. CONCLUSIONS In this study we have provided a robust framework for the description of THz radiation propagating through optically excited systems beyond the quasi-static approximation. More specifically, our approach can be used to describe the spectral changes in the transmitted THz probe when it traverses a multilayer undergoing ultra-fast changes in its dielectric properties. We have shown that OPTP spectral maps provide a large amount of information and shown how to extract, for instance, the ultrafast excitation time constant, even when it is shorter than the THz probe time-width. Our approach can also be extended to incorporate the THz emitted by spintronics THz emitters. We have then shown how. We have shown that by incorporating the results from the analyses above, our study can provide important insights into the temporal dynamics of ultrafast laser excitations via OPTP experiments. Furthermore, we have shown how, by using the analyses above, we were able to determine two crucial time delays: the time delay between the probe and the excitation ( ∆t 1 in Fig. This set of equations can be solved analytically using a standard Transfer Matrix Method approach ∂ z H In relation to this first-order set of equations, we perform the Fourier Transforms on the final equation of Eqs. A5. This transformation allows us to simplify the system into the Maxwell equations, as demonstrated in the main text from Eq. 2 to Eq. 3. For ease of reference, we subsequently represent Eq. 3 using its spatial Fourier transform: It's important to highlight that k l represents the spatial Fourier wavevector of the source term's spatial distribution, distinct from the light wavevector. Thus, in general, k l ̸ = ω √ εμ. To maintain conciseness, we will omit the Fourier summation in the subsequent formulas and reintroduce it solely in the final expression. Before addressing the Perturbative Transfer Matrix Method (PTMM), our discussion commences with a brief revisitation of the traditional Transfer Matrix Method (TMM) and its expansion into the Transfer Matrix Method with Source (TMMS). Detailed derivations employing symbols consistent with this article can be found in Ref. 32 and Ref. 37, but the fundamental results of TMM and TMMS are outlined below for the reader's convenience. For the analysis of electromagnetic radiation propagation within a multilayered heterostructure under normal incidence, we adopt specific notation. The layers are sequentially numbered from 1 to N, oriented left to right, with an index denoted as n. The heterostructure is encapsulated by air layers, indexed as 0 on the left and N+1 on the right, both extending infinitely. The thickness of each layer is symbolized by d n . Furthermore, we work under the assumption that negligible current accumulates between layers, ensuring the uninterrupted continuity of electric and magnetic fields across interfaces. 1. TMM: 0-th order propagation At the 0-th order, we adhere to the standard TMM approach. Within a specific layer indexed as n, the 0-th order electric and magnetic fields can be represented as the product of a 2 × 2 matrix and a vector containing the amplitudes of the rightward propagating waves f [0]> n and leftward propagating waves f where ān [ω, z] = e iω √ εnμnz e -iω √ εnμnz εn μn e iω √ εnμnz εn μn e -iω √ εnμnz . (B2) By imposing the necessary continuity equations for the fields at the interfaces between layers, one deduces a relationship linking the field amplitudes in the air layers situated on the left and right sides of the sample: where T[0,N+1] is the Transfer Matrix given by, Furthermore, when contemplating the transfer matrix between any two layers (indexed as n and m, with n < m) within the system, it can be formulated in a more general manner: By solving the set of linear equations presented in Eq. B3 and utilizing the field expressions from Eq. B1, we can compute the 0-th order E n fields within any layer. The set of equations at the 1-st order, as given in Eqs. A5, cannot be resolved through the conventional TMM. These equations are non-homogeneous and incorporate a source term that hinges on E n . To address Eqs. A5, we initiate by establishing a comprehensive solution, akin to the approach undertaken in Ref. 37. The solution can be formulated by combining the general solution related to the homogeneous system with a particular solution. The general solution of the corresponding homogeneous system is achieved by: This can be readily constructed using the standard TMM. We look for a particular solution in the form, H We substitute the above in Eqs. A5 and obtain the amplitudes of the fields for the particular solution, The particular solution reads, With this approach, the 1-st order correction to the fields within a given layer n can be expressed as the Eq. 4, and the wave intensities can be expressed as Eq. 5. Finally, considering the two semi-infinite air layers, Eq. 5 can be recast as, The equation given as Eq. B13 consists of a pair of linear, frequency-dependent equations. For any fixed source term and for a known incoming field, Eq. B13 can be applied to compute the transmitted and reflected waves in any layer. When accounting for both the emission source (THz emission from spintronic THz emitter) and the correction source (THz transmission change from OPTP experiments) concurrently, the comprehensive expression becomes: (B14) We take f [0]> 0 (ω) as the incoming THz probe (from the left), and we assign f , the profiles of the 0-th order transmitted and reflected waves are determined, as shown in Appendix. B 1. Similarly, when solving Eq. B13, we assign f , the firstorder correction to the transmitted and reflected waves can be deduced, respectively. Notably, the correction to the transmission is: T[0,N+1],22 where the further subscriptions of T[0,N+1] refer to the matrix elements. Similarly, if both the THz emission source and the correction source are considered, then the equation can be further written into And if the THz transmission shown in Eq. B3 is considered, the final simplified results, which contains the transmitted THz, the emitted THz, and the correction of the THz transmission from the OPTP, can be expressed as Eq. 6 in the main text. Remaining contribution to the equilibrium dielectric response of the material for each layer (layer index suppressed) Modification of materials' properties γ and n We assume that the THz probe pulse impinges on the sample from the left. Therefore f [0]>0 represents the incoming THz pulse E-field profile, which is supposed known. These are all 0.