Understanding and actively controlling the spatio-temporal dynamics of non-equilibrium electron clouds is fundamental for the design of light and electron sources, novel high-power electronic devices, and plasma-based applications. However, electron clouds evolve in a complex collective fashion on nanometer and femtosecond scales, producing electromagnetic screening that renders them inaccessible to existing optical probes. Here, we solve the long-standing challenge of characterizing the evolution of electron clouds generated upon irradiation of metallic structures using an ultrafast transmission electron microscope to record the charged plasma dynamics. Our approach to charge dynamics electron microscopy (CDEM) is based on the simultaneous detection of electron-beam acceleration and broadening with nanometer/femtosecond resolution. By combining experimental results with comprehensive microscopic theory, we provide deep understanding of this highly out-of-equilibrium regime, including previously inaccessible intricate microscopic mechanisms of electron emission, screening by the metal, and collective cloud dynamics. Beyond the present specific demonstration, the here introduced CDEM technique grants us access to a wide range of non-equilibrium electrodynamic phenomena involving the ultrafast evolution of bound and free charges on the nanoscale. Modern ultrafast spectroscopy and microscopy strive to explore how electronic and crystal structures evolve on timescales of a few femtoseconds An exemplary scenario involving complex charge dynamics is the process ensuing electron cloud emission from a solid target upon irradiation by highfluence femtosecond laser pulses (see Fig. In our experiment, an electron cloud is photoemitted from a corner of a metal structure, expanding with drift kinetic energies of a fraction of eV. We find that the acceleration observed in the e-beam is predominantly caused by cloud charge motion along transverse directions, as schematically depicted in Fig. A typical temporal evolution of the measured e-beam acceleration is presented in Fig. where v e is the e-beam velocity vector, taken to be approximately constant in the evaluation of Eq. ( To better understand the origin of the acceleration and estimate the effect of free and image charges, experimental geometry, and material properties, we compare the measured data with simulations based on a comprehensive account of the different microscopic physical processes involved in the generation and evolution of the electron cloud, as well as its interaction with the probing electron (see details of the theory in Methods and S.M. [28]). Figure To quantitatively capture both the amplitude of the acceleration and the observed timescales, two different emission processes need to be considered: thermionic, due to the raise in electron temperature, which stays elevated during a ps time scale; and three-photon photoemission, which occurs within the 50 fs duration of the laser pulse (see Methods for details). At each time step in the simulation, the force exerted on every individual electron by the remaining electrons and their associated induced surface image charges is evaluated, and its position and velocity are evolved accordingly (see Extended Data Fig. As shown in Fig. The presence of free-space and image charges drastically affects the expansion and evolution of the electron cloud The spatial extension of the expanding charged plasma, its initial velocity, and the deceleration due to interaction with the image charges are all pivotal elements of information that can be extracted by studying the spatial variation of the e-beam probe acceleration in CDEM. In Fig. Figure Due to the interaction with image charges, most of the emitted electrons slow down in the immediate vicinity of the surface and are eventually reabsorbed. This is confirmed upon inspection of individual particle trajectories in our theory (Fig. Expansion and reabsorption of the electron cloud result in a reduction of the cloud density (see Fig. In perspective, CDEM covers a previously unexplored regime of ultrafast interaction between e-beams and near fields, as emphasized in Fig. In contrast to PINEM and elastic scattering, the CDEM approach allows us to follow the formation and evolution of dense plasma with femtosecond/nanometer space/time resolution. From a technological viewpoint, access to spatially-resolved information offers the possibility to develop customized nanostructures that can be optimized to operate on ultrafast timescales Through the insight gathered from CDEM on free-space electron clouds, combined with a predictive degree of theoretical insight, we introduce a powerful tool for the quantitative optimization of electron sources operating under extreme space-charge conditions. This has potential application in nanopatterned radiofrequency-gun electron emitters, where 100 nm-sized features have been demonstrated to produce 100-fold electron yield enhancement The intense nanoscale THz fields produced by the diagnosed plasma hold strong potential for use in the spatial, angular, and spectral compression of e-beams, enabling finer spatio-temporal control with respect to traditional THz-based approaches For the experiments reported, we used a copper 100 Mesh PELCO grid. The grid was tilted by 45 • with respect to the z direction (parallel to the TEM column axis) in order to expose the corner of a rectangular copper rod with a cross section of ∼ 50 × 25 μm 2 (see Extended Data Fig. To generate the charged plasma, we irradiated the copper rod with nearinfrared laser pulses of 1.55 eV central photon energy and 50 fs temporal duration at a repetition rate of 100 kHz. Light entered the microscope through the zero-angle port and was focused under normal incidence on the copper rod via an external plano-convex lens. In such a geometry, the light beam was also perpendicular with respect to the electron propagation direction. The dynamics of the photoemitted electrons was then probed by means of electron pulses with a temporal duration of about 600 fs, with controlled delay between electron and laser pulses. All the experiments were performed in a modified JEOL 2100 TEM microscope at an acceleration voltage of 200 kV Our transmission electron microscope was equipped with EELS capabilities coupled to real-space imaging. Energy-resolved spectra were recorded using a Gatan-Imaging-Filter (GIF) camera operated with a 0.05 eV-per-channel dispersion setting and typical exposure times of the CCD sensor from 30 to 60 s. For the acquisition of space-energy maps (see Fig. The acquired position-dependent spectra were analysed as a function of delay between the laser and electron pulses, with the time-zero being determined as the peak of PINEM signal observed within 100 nm close to the sample surface at relatively low fluence (∼50 mJ/cm 2 ). Camera noise and signal from cosmic events was reduced by applying a median filtering. Distortions of the spectrometer were corrected by aligning the spectrum according to the negative delay energy-space spectrographs (-2 ps). First and second moments of the spectrum were calculated in a reduced energy window, which is taken 10 eV larger than the region in which the electron signal is above 10% of the peak value (i.e., the maximum value among all delays and positions measured for a given fluence). This procedure helped to reduce contributions from the CCD background noise. We derive a classical limit for the interaction between a collimated free electron and a classical electromagnetic field starting from a quantum-mechanical expression that bears general validity in the nonrecoil approximation. Under the experimental conditions, the free electron probe has a small energy spread relative to its average kinetic energy both before and after interaction. We can therefore adopt the nonrecoil approximation where an implicit dependence on transverse coordinates (x, y) is understood. The evaluation of Eq. ( where represents the energy change experienced by a classical point electron moving along the noted trajectory. In the derivation of this expression, the first term in the second line cancels upon integration by parts for a field of finite extension along the electron trajectory (i.e., localized at the interaction region), and we have identified -(1/c)∂ t A z (z, t) = E z (z, t) with the electric field component along the beam direction to obtain the third line. In summary, the wave function in Eq. ( In this section, we describe the main aspects of the theoretical model employed to simulate the experimental results presented in this work. Additional details can be found in the SI. First, we model the temperature dynamics T (t, s) in the inner surface of the copper bar as a function of time t and surface position s using the twotemperature model (see Extended Data Fig. We then model electron emission as a function of local temperature T from two different channels: thermionic emission, due to the heightened temperature of the surface electrons, which extends over a few ps and we evaluate using a surface-barrier model; and three-photon photoemission, resulting from the absorption of three photons by one electron during the duration of the pumping < 100 fs, calculated using the Fowler-Dubridge model (see SI for details). Combining these results, we simulate the emission of photoelectrons at each instant of time and surface position, which gives rise to a density of photoemitted electrons ρ e (R, t) as a function of spatial position R and time t. The evolution of the plasma density is then simulated by discretizing time and considering, at each time step, the force acting on each of the photoemitted electrons by all the remaining ones, as well as the interaction with the copper bar. The latter is introduced by rigorously accounting for the accumulation of positive image charges at the copper surface due to the presence of the negatively-charged electrons in its vicinity. The position and velocity of each electron is then evolved according to the net force exerted on it. The eventual collision of the photoemitted electrons with the surface gives rise to partial reabsorption according to the barrier model, as well as specular reflection of the non-absorbed electrons. This procedure allows us to determine ρ e (R, t) for the full duration of the simulation (see Extended Data Fig. Finally, we calculate the energy variation by a probe electron passing with velocity v e at a distance b from the copper bar along a trajectory r e (t) = r 0 + v e (t + τ ), where r 0 is the nearest point to the copper bar and τ is the delay of the probe electron with respect to the laser pump. At each time t, we calculate the electric field E at the probe electron position r e (t) generated by all of the plasma electrons and their corresponding surface charges, taking into account retardation effects and averaging over the time-duration of the electron wave packet (see SI for additional details). The net energy variation by the probe electron, which is a function of b and τ , is finally obtained by using Eq. (1). 