Two-dimensional (2D) materials van der Waals heterostructures (vdWHs) provides a revolutionary route towards high-performance solar energy conversion devices beyond the conventional silicon-based pn junction solar cells. Despite tremendous research progress accomplished in recent years, the searches of vdWHs with exceptional excitonic solar cell conversion efficiency and optical properties remain an open theoretical and experimental quest. Here we show that the vdWH family composed of MoSi2N4 and WSi2N4 monolayers provides a compelling material platform for developing high-performance ultrathin excitonic solar cells and photonics devices. Using first-principle calculations, we construct and classify 51 types of MoSi2N4 and WSi2N4-based [(Mo,W)Si2N4] vdWHs composed of various metallic, semimetallic, semiconducting, insulating and topological 2D materials. Intriguingly, MoSi2N4/(InSe, WSe2) are identified as Type-II vdWHs with exceptional excitonic solar cell power conversion efficiency reaching well over 20%, which are competitive to state-of-art silicon solar cells. The (Mo,W)Si2N4 vdWH family exhibits strong optical absorption in both the visible and ultraviolet regimes. Exceedingly large peak ultraviolet absorptions over 40%, approaching the maximum absorption limit of a free-standing 2D material, can be achieved in (Mo,W)Si2N4/α2-(Mo,W)Ge2P4 vdWHs. Our findings unravel the enormous potential of (Mo,W)Si2N4 vdWHs in designing ultimately compact excitonic solar cell device technology. Solar-to-electricity conversion offers a promising clean energy source to power a more sustainable technology landscape in the future. Despite the widespread deployment of conventional silicon-based solar cell, the continual improvement of the solar-to-electricity conversion efficiency remains a formidable challenge. Conventional crystalline silicon pn junction solar cell is plagued by nonradiative recombination of photogenerated electron-hole pairs, 1 which severely limits its solar-to-electricity conversion efficiency. Excitonic solar cell has recently emerged as a compelling candidate for high-efficiency solar-to-electricity conversion. In contrast to conventional semiconductor-based pn junction solar cell where light-to-electricity conversion occurs exclusively within the same bulk material, excitonic solar energy conversion is an interfacial effect that arises from the band discontinuity across a heterojunction. Computationally, the design space of vdWHs is enormously large due to nearly unlimited material combinations and the continual discovery of new 2D materials. The maximum power conversion efficiency (PCE) of vdWHs is predicted to lie within the range of 10% to 20%, with only a minority of vdWHs In this work, we show that the vdWH family composed of septuple-layered MoSi2N4 and WSi2N4 monolayers 29the recently discovered archetypes of the emerging MA2Z4 monolayer familyoffers a versatile material platform towards high-efficiency solar energy harvesting, optoelectronics and photonics applications. Using first-principle density functional theory (DFT) simulations, we constructed 51 types of (Mo,W)Si2N4-based vdWHs and characterized their electronic and optical properties. The vdWHs are systematically classified according to their contact types and band alignments. Nearly all vdWHs exhibit peak optical absorption in the UV regime, thus suggesting their potential in UV photonics applications. Our work unravels the enormous potential of (Mo,W)Si2N4-based vdWHs in UV photonics, optoelectronics and solar energy harvesting applications, and call for a more comprehensive computational and experimental search of vdWHs with exceptional physical properties in the expansive MA2Z4 material family. QuantumATK 32 is used to construct the heterostructures with lattice mismatch of less than 5% The discovery of MoSi2N4 and WSi2N4 open an exciting avenue towards the development of novel two-dimensional (2D) material device technology. Such unusual built-in atomic-layer protection mechanism renders MoSi2N4 as exceptional robust against environmental coupling effects and enables the formation of highly energy-efficient Ohmic contact without severe degradation of its electronic properties. We first consider (Mo,W)Si2N4-based vdWHs of MS contact type. In this case, either Ohmic or Schottky contacts can be formed at the interface. where ħ, e, m e is the Planck's constant, charge magnitude and mass of the free electron respectively. The calculated ρ t lies in the order of 10 -9 which are comparable to those of metal/MoSi2N4 and metal/WSi2N4 contacts (i.e. from 0.1 × 10 -9 to 3.85 × 10 -9 Ωcm 2 ) 37 and that in the semimetal contact of Bi/MoS2 contact ( 1.81 × 10 -9 Ωcm 2 ). We classify all SS vdWHs according to the relative location of the conduction band minimum (CBM) and VBM in the energy space, i.e. the three conventional band alignment types: The band gap values, the direct or indirect nature of the band gap, and the band alignment types (i.e. Type-I, II and H) are summarized in Figure For Type-II band alignment, 15 species of vdWHs are identified. Optically excited electron-hole pairs are spatially well-separated in Type-II vdWHs, which enables the efficient dissociation of these carriers to form conduction current. Such vdWHs are thus practically useful for applications where long-live and/or delocalized electron-hole pairs are needed, such as photodetector, excitonic solar cell and photocatalytic water splitting. where E g d is the bandgap of the donor monolayer, ΔE c is the conduction band offset (CBO) between the two monolayers, P( ħω) is the solar spectral irradiance as a function of photon frequency ω, and the 0.3 eV term in Equation ( The calculated PCEs are listed in Figure Recent high throughput screening of 581 Type-II vdWHs 26 based on Anderson rule has uncovered 17 candidate vdWHs with exceptional PCE higher than 20%, and the highest being that of HfSe2/GeO2 (PCE = 22.6%). In our case, the PCE of MoSi2N4/InSe and MoSi2N4/WSe2 vdWHs reaches 20.5% and 22.0% respectively, which is comparable to that of HfSe2/GeO2 and higher than many other vdWHs, such as phorphorus-based vdWHs (e.g. MoS2/Phosphorene with PCE of 17.5%). Furthermore, MoSi2N4/InSe and MoSi2N4/WSe2 are indirect band gap Type-II heterostructures in which the recombination of excitons is expected to be less effective due to the need of phonon-assisted process to compensate the momentum-mismatch between CBM and the VBM states. 98 MoSi2N4/InSe and MoSi2N4/WSe2 are thus expected to host long-live interlayer exciton that are highly beneficial for highly efficient light-to-electricity conversion. For the four MoSi2N4-based Type-II vdWHs with PCE over 15%, we calculated the real and imaginary parts of their dielectric function as well as the optical absorption spectra The optical properties of the 51 vdWHs are calculated based on quantum mechanical interband transition process from the valence bands to the conduction bands. The macroscopic frequencydependent complex dielectric function ε() is calculated based on the random phase approximation formalism (RPA). In summary, we investigated 51 types of MoSi2N4 and WSi2N4 vdWHs and categorized these heterostructures based on their contact and band alignment types. For MS Ohmic contacts, the tunnelling-specific resistivities are comparable or lower than many of the previously reported 2D semiconductor electrical contacts. Multiple Type-II heterostructures are identified. Particularly, MoSi2N4/InSe and MoSi2N4/WSe2 exhibit excellent solar cell energy conversion efficiency greater than 20% and substantial optical absorption in the visible light regime, making them potential candidates for photovoltaic applications. In terms of optical absorption, the family of (Mo,W)Si2N4-based bilayer van der Waals heterostructures generally exhibit much enhanced ultraviolet optical absorption when compared to their isolated counterparts. The (Mo,W)Si2N4/(α2-MoGe2P4,α2-WGe2P4) heterostructures have an exceedingly high ultraviolet peak absorbance of over 40% that approaches the theoretical maximum absorption limit of a free-standing monolayer, thus revealing their strength in ultraviolet photonics applications. Our findings reveal the promising role of (Mo,W)Si2N4-based van der Waals heterostructures as a versatile platform for designing novel optoelectronics and photonics applications, and call for a more comprehensive screening of the expansive MA2Z4 vdWH family to fully unlock their potential as building blocks of high-performance nanodevice technology. 