We have performed inelastic neutron scattering measurements on optimally-doped Fe0.98Te0.5Se0.5 and 10% Cu-doped Fe0.88Cu0.1Te0.5Se0.5 to investigate the substitution effects on the spin excitations in the whole energy range up to 300 meV. It is found that substitution of Cu for Fe enhances the low-energy spin excitations (≤ 100 meV), especially around the (0.5, 0.5) point, and leaves the high-energy magnetic excitations intact. In contrast to the expectation that Cu with spin 1/2 will dilute the magnetic moments contributed by Fe with a larger spin, we find that the 10% Cu doping enlarges the effective fluctuating moment from 2.85 to 3.13 μB/Fe, although there is no long-or short-range magnetic order around (0.5, 0.5) and (0.5, 0). The presence of enhanced magnetic excitations in the 10% Cu doped sample which is in the insulating state indicates that the magnetic excitations must have some contributions from the local moments, reflecting the dual nature of the magnetism in iron-based superconductors. We attribute the substitution effects to the localization of the itinerant electrons induced by Cu dopants. These results also indicate that the Cu doping does not act as electron donor as in a rigid-band shift model, but more as scattering centers that localize the system. In both copper-and iron-based high-temperature superconductors, understanding the interplay between superconductivity and magnetism has been a central issue In another widely investigated iron-based superconductor system iron chalcogenide Fe 1+y Te, where superconductivity can be induced by substituting Te with Se (Refs. 31 and 32), similar Cu substitution effects have been found. At both ends of the phase diagram of the Fe 1+y Te 1-x Se x system, the increasing doping of Cu will gradually drive Fe 1+y-z Cu x Te (Refs. 33 and 34) and Fe 1+y-z Cu x Se (Refs. 35 and 36) from a metallic to an insulating phase, as well as induce a spin-glass state. Different substitution effects of Cu and Co/Ni on optimally-doped superconducting Fe 0.98 Te 0.5 Se 0.5 were also observed In this paper, we investigate the effects of copper substitution on the spin excitations by performing comparative INS measurements on 10% Cu doped Fe 0.88 Cu 0.1 Te 0.5 Se 0.5 (labeled as Cu10) and copper-free Fe 0.98 Te 0.5 Se 0.5 (labeled as Cu0). With the large energy and momentum coverage of the time-of-flight spectrometers, we are able to uncover the full magnetic excitation spectrum. To analyze the data quantitatively, we have performed cross normalization of the data and obtained absolute values for the scattering intensities. From the normalized data, we find that the excitation up to ∼100 meV has been enhanced in Cu10, while the highenergy spectrum shows negligible difference. This gives rise to an effective moment of 3.13 μ B /Fe in Cu10 than that of 2.85 μ B /Fe in Cu0. Since Cu10 is insulating, the magnetic excitations must have contributions from local moments. On the other hand, the itinerant electrons are believed to give rise to incommensurate excitations including the magnetic resonance feature around (0.5, 0.5) in Cu0 (Refs. 39-43). These results indicate the dual nature of the magnetic excitations and support that the Cu doping induces localization of the itinerant electrons and enhances the magnetic correlations. Single-crystal samples of Fe 0.88 Cu 0.1 Te 0.5 Se 0.5 and Fe 0.98 Te 0.5 Se 0.5 (labeled as Cu10 and Cu0) were grown by the horizontal Bridgman method, as mentioned in our previous works The INS experiments were performed on the time-offlight spectrometers ARCS and HYSPEC, both located at SNS of Oak Ridge National Laboratory. On ARCS, multiple incident energies of E i = 60, 180, 400 meV were used with corresponding chopper frequency of 420, 600, and 420 Hz, respectively. The energy resolution for each E i is about 5% at E = 0 meV. Since the wave vector Q and energy E are coupled with fixed incident neutron momentum and sample orientation in the time-of-flight experiments, to cover a large range in the (Q, E) space, the samples were rotated about the [010] axis by 90 • with a step of 5 • on ARCS. For the Fe 0.98 Te 0.5 Se 0.5 sample, extra data with a step of 1 • for E i = 60 and 180 meV were also collected. Data were further folded and averaged along the [100] axis to reduce noise and instrumentinduced streaks by DAVE software. On HYSPEC, an incident energy of E i = 35 meV and a Fermi chopper frequency of 240 Hz was used with the energy resolution ∆E ≈ 3 meV at E = 0 meV. Both samples were rotated in the a-b plane by 90 • with a step of 1 • on HYSPEC. The data obtained on HYSPEC covered approximately one quadrant of the (H, K, 0) plane and had been symmetrized to be four-fold to be compared with the higherenergy data collected on ARCS. On both spectrometers, the crystals were mounted on aluminum sample holders and loaded into a closed-cycle refrigerator. All neutron scattering measurements were performed at 100 K, which was well above the T c of Fe 0.98 Te 0.5 Se 0.5 to avoid any effects from the superconducting correlations. When presenting the INS data in the reciprocal space, we used the configuration of two-Fe unit cell, of which the lattice constants at room temperature were a = b ≈ 3.8 Å and c = 6.1 Å for both samples. The wave vector Q was expressed as (H, K, L) reciprocal lattice unit (rlu) of (a * , b * , c * ) = (2π/a, 2π/b, 2π/c). As the magnetic excitations in Fe 1+y Te 1-x Se x are reported to be of two-dimensional nature because of the much weaker interplanar correlations A prerequisite process of quantitatively comparing the magnetic excitations of different samples is to normalize their intensities. In practice, the measured intensity should be converted to the dynamical spin-spin correlation function S(Q, E) with the absolute unit of μ B 2 eV -1 /Fe, which has been introduced in Ref. 45 in detail. In this work, we measured the acoustic phonon branches to perform the cross normalizations. To numerically describe S(Q, E) by the measured four-dimensional intensity I(Q, E), one has: where 1 b = 10 -24 cm 2 is the unit for neutron scattering crosssection. Here, g, f (Q), and e -2W are Landé g-factor, magnetic form factor, and Debye-Waller factor, respectively. The instrument resolution volume N R 0 can be obtained by measuring acoustic phonons: TABLE I. Parameters of normalization for Fe0.98Te0.5Se0.5 (Cu0) and Fe0.88Cu0.1Te0.5Se0.5 (Cu10) with the phonon data obtained on the HYSPEC spectrometer. Sample Constant-energy contour maps and line cuts of the magnetic excitations at 100 K for Fe0.88Cu0.1Te0.5Se0.5 and Fe0.98Te0.5Se0.5. Panels (a-f ) and (g-l) present constant-energy contours for Cu10 and Cu0 samples, respectively. The measurements in (a) and (g) were carried out on HYSPEC and the data were symmetrized to be four-fold symmetric, while the data on ARCS in the other panels were folded along the H axis to the K ≥ 0 side and then the folded data were duplicated on the K ≤ 0 side to represent the four-fold symmetry. The streaks across the excitations in panels (g), and (h) to (j) were due to the lack of detector coverage wherein. Panels (m-r) are linear cuts of the spin excitations through (-0.5, 0.5) along the [110] direction, illustrated as the dashed line in panel (a), at the corresponding energies labeled in the same column. The errors through data points represent one standard deviation throughout the paper. Solid lines through data are fitted with Gaussian functions. The data integration range for the linear cuts are H = K = ±0.025 rlu. Here q = Q -G is the reduced wave vector, and n q = 1/(1 -e -E/kBT ) is the Bose factor. m, M , F N (G), and β are the neutron mass, atomic mass of one unit cell, the acoustic phonon structure factor at Bragg peak G near Q at which the acoustic phonon is measured, and the angle between Q and phonon polarization direction. By performing constant-Q scans, one can fit the scans and obtain the final integrated phonon intensity I(Q, E)dE. To improve the reliability of our data, we chose the data from HYSPEC with better energy resolution as the reference points for cross-normalization. The data on ARCS had also been normalized with phonons measured with E i = 60 meV and then cross checked with the HYSPEC data where they had overlapping energy ranges. The determined parameters for the normalization of the HYSPEC data are presented in TABLE To understand how the spin excitations of Cu10 sample evolve with energy, we begin with a series of constantenergy cuts of the magnetic spectra as shown in Fig. From the energy slices of both samples, we can find differences in the peak intensities and pattern shapes at energies below ∼65 meV. At higher energies, the scat-FIG. To follow the change of the excitations in more detail, we perform Q scans in the second-quadrant of the constant-energy cuts in Fig. To further characterize the dispersion, we have obtained a series of such Q scans from 6 to 190 meV, and plot the dispersions along the [110] direction for both samples in Fig. To further investigate the evolution of the magnetic excitations with doping, we have calculated the wavevector-integrated correlation function S(E) by integrat- ing the intensity in one Brillouin zone. Since the data are nosier in the H ≥ 0 zone, we choose the second quadrant (-1≤H≤0, 0≤K≤1) as the integrated area. In Fig. In addition to the enhancement of the peak intensity from the linear cuts, the Q-integrated correlation function S(E) also exhibits an enhancement with the Cu doping. The enhancement induced by the Cu substitution is sketched by the dashed guide line. The existence of a cut-off energy ∼100 meV above which S(E) is the same for both samples is in contrast to the idea that the enhancement happens homogeneously in the whole energy range. This cut-off energy is in accordance with the energy where the dispersions of Cu10 and Cu0 samples overlap as shown in Fig. With the integrated correlation function S(E), we can also calculate the fluctuating instantaneous effec-tive moment μ eff immediately, by the sum rule and their relationship where Landé factor g = 2 and S is the effective local spin. The determined μ eff for Cu10 and Cu0 samples at 100 K are 3. From our comprehensive magnetic excitation spectra in the whole energy scale on both Cu10 and Cu0 samples, we have found that while the high-energy magnetic excitations, which are likely to be the remnant of the spin waves from the parent compound, remain intact, the low-energy excitations (< 100 meV) are substantially enhanced. In addition to the intensity enhancement at the incommensurate peaks in the Cu10 sample at low energies, there is more spectral weight filling in around the commensurate position (0.5, 0.5). The velocity of the low-energy excitations and the kink energy where the low-energy excitations become dispersive are both larger in the Cu10 sample, indicating the strengthened magnetic interactions. As a result, the effective magnetic moment increases from 2.85 ± 0.06 μ B /Fe in Cu0 to 3.13 ± 0.06 μ B /Fe in Cu10, corresponding to an effective spin of 1.01 ± 0.02 and 1.14 ± 0.02 for Cu0 and Cu10, respectively. These results are in contrast to the expectation that the Cu doping will dilute the magnetic moment. Instead, it is indicated that the Cu doping will enhance the magnetic correlations around (0.5, 0.5). This resolves the uncertainties of the low-energy data in our previous works We believe the enhancement of the low-energy magnetic excitations around (0.5, 0.5) is at the expense of the itinerancy of the Fe electrons. In our previous works, we have shown from the resistivity measurements that the Cu doping will suppress the itinerancy of the system dramatically Overall, our results indicate that the rigid-band shift model is not universally applicable in describing the substitution effect. One of the ingredients that needs to be taken into account is the different scattering potentials of the dopants. For example, from Co to Ni and to Cu, the scattering potential of the element is increasing. As a result, the suppression on the superconductivity and enhancement on the low-energy magnetic excitations become more significant. Another factor that makes the doping effect more complicated is the presence of multiple Fe d orbitals. Because of their different characters, how they respond to the doping can also be different. Furthermore, Co, Ni, and Cu have roughly the same size, but Cu is Jahn Teller active and possibly can induce a different local distortion in the host lattice compared to Co and Ni (Ref. 57). Therefore, the Jahn Teller distor-tion can also play some role, which is to be examined with more detailed structural studies. In summary, we have investigated the substitution effects of transition metal Cu in the iron-based superconductor Fe 0.98 Te 0.5 Se 0.5 . It is found that, with 10% Fe substituted by Cu atoms, the low-energy magnetic excitations up to ∼100 meV are significantly enhanced, while the high-energy spectra show negligible difference. The Cu substitution induces an enhancement of the effective moment from 2.85 ± 0.06 μ B /Fe in Cu0 to 3.13 ± 0.06 μ B /Fe in Cu10, which correspond to a spin of of 1.01 ± 0.02 and 1.14 ± 0.02, respectively. The enhancement is at the cost of the itinerancy of the Fe electrons. These results depict the dual nature of magnetic excitations and interesting and complex doping effect beyond the rigid-band shift model in Fe 1+y-z Te 1-x Se x in specific, and likely in iron-based superconductors in general.