The impurity is inherently manifest in cuprate superconductors, as cation substitution or intercalation is necessary for the introduction of charge carriers, and its influence on the electronic state is at the heart of a great debate in physics. Here based on the microscopic octet scattering model, the influence of the impurity scattering on the electronic structure of cuprate superconductors is investigated in terms of the self-consistent T -matrix approach. The impurity scattering self-energy is evaluated firstly in the Fermi-arc-tip approximation of the quasiparticle excitations and scattering processes, and the obtained results show that the decisive role played by the impurity scattering selfenergy in the particle-hole channel is the further renormalization of the quasiparticle band structure with a reduced quasiparticle lifetime, while the impurity scattering self-energy in the particle-particle channel induces a strong deviation from the d-wave behaviour of the superconducting gap, leading to the existence of a finite gap over the entire electron Fermi surface. Moreover, these impurity scattering self-energies are employed to study the exotic features of the line-shape in the quasiparticle excitation spectrum and the autocorrelation of the quasiparticle excitation spectra, and the obtained results are then compared with the corresponding experimental data. The theory therefore also indicates that the unconventional features of the electronic structure in cuprate superconductors is generated by both the strong electron correlation and impurity scattering. The single common feature in the crystal structure of cuprate superconductors is the presence of the squarelattice CuO 2 layer The impurity scattering in cuprate superconductors is specially unconventional, and manifests a variety of † E-mail address: spfeng@bnu.edu.cn the phenomena depending on the strength of the electron correlation, charge-carrier doping, temperature, and magnetic field Although a number of consequences from the impurity scattering In this paper, we start from the homogenous part of the electron propagator and the related microscopic octet scattering model obtained within the framework of the kinetic-energy-driven superconductivity The rest of this paper is organized as follows. We derive explicitly the dressed electron propagator in Sec. II, and then employ this dressed electron propagator to discuss the impurity dependence of the electronic structure in Sec. III, where we show that in addition to the suppression of the spectral weight in the quasiparticle excitation spectrum, the position of the low-energy coherent peak at around the antinodal region is shifted towards to EFS when the impurity concentration is increased, while the position of the low-energy coherent peak at around the nodal region moves away from EFS. In particular, the sharp peaks in the ARPES autocorrelation spectrum are directly correlated with the scattering wave vectors q i connecting the tips of the Fermi arcs, and then the key signature of the Fermi-arc-tip quasiparticle correlation appears in the ARPES autocorrelation spectrum, which is essentially quasiparticle scattering interference. Finally, we give a summary and discussions in Sec. IV. In the Appendix, we presents the details of the derivation of the dressed electron propagator. superconductors, we first give an account of the model and homogenous electron propagator used to describe the intrinsic aspects of the pure cuprate superconductors. As we have mentioned above, all the essential important in cuprate superconductors are contained in the doped CuO 2 layer. Shortly after the discovery of superconductivity in cuprate superconductors 1 , it was proposed that the t-J model on a square lattice is an appropriate model to describe the essential physics of the doped CuO 2 layer 54 , where the double electron occupancy is no longer allowed, i.e., σ C † lσ C lσ ≤ 1, C † lσ and C lσ are creation and annihilation operators for the constrained electrons with spin orientation σ =↑, ↓ on lattice site l, respectively, S l = (S x l , S y l , S z l ) is spin operator, μ is the chemical potential, and J is the exchange coupling between the nearest-neighbor (NN) sites η. In this paper, the hopping of the constrained electrons t lâ is restricted to the NN sites η and next NN sites τ with the amplitudes t lη = t and t lτ = -t , respectively, while the summation lâ denotes that l runs over all sites, and for each l, over its NN sites â = η or next NN sites â = τ . Hereafter, the parameters are chosen as t/J = 2.5 and t /t = 0.3 as in the previous discussions with the spinful fermion operator h lσ = e -iΦ lσ h l that represents the charge degree of freedom of the constrained electron together with some effects of spin configuration rearrangements due to the presence of the doped hole itself (charge carrier), while the spin operator S l describes the spin degree of freedom of the constrained electron, and then the local constraint of no double occupancy at each site is fulfilled in actual analyses. In this fermion-spin representation, the original t-J model (1) can be rewritten explicitly as, where S - l = S x l -iS y l and S + l = S x l + iS y l are the spinlowering and spin-raising operators for the spin S = 1/2, respectively, J eff = (1 -δ) 2 J, δ = h † lσ h lσ = h † l h l is the charge-carrier doping concentration, and μ h is the charge-carrier chemical potential. Concomitantly, the kinetic-energy term in the t-J model (1) has been transferred as the coupling between charge and spin degrees of freedom of the constrained electron, and therefore dominates the essential physics in the pure cuprate superconductors. For a microscopic description of the SC-state in the pure cuprate superconductors, the kinetic-energy-driven SC mechanism has been established based on the t-J model (3) in the fermion-spin representation where τ 0 is the unit matrix, τ 1 , τ 2 , and τ 3 are Pauli matrices, ε k = -4tγ k + 4t γ k + μ is the energy dispersion in the tight-binding approximation, with The homogenous self-energy Σ pp (k, ω) in the particle-particle channel is identified as the energy and momentum dependence of the d-wave SC gap 61 , while the homogenous selfenergy Σ ph (k, ω) in the particle-hole channel represents the quasiparticle coherence. In particular, Σ pp (k, ω) is an even function of ω, while Σ ph (k, ω) is not. However, in the above expression of the homogenous electron propagator (4), Σ pp (k, ω) has been separated into its real and imaginary parts as: Σ pp (k, ω) = Σ 1 (k, ω) -iΣ 2 (k, ω), while Σ ph (k, ω) has been broken up into its symmetric and antisymmetric parts as: Σ ph (k, ω) = Σ 3 (k, ω) + Σ 0 (k, ω), and then both Σ 0 (k, ω)/ω and Σ 3 (k, ω) are an even function of ω. In this case, the components of the homogenous self-energy in the particle-hole channel Σ 0 (k, ω) and Σ 3 (k, ω) satisfy the following identities, In the framework of the kinetic-energy-driven superconductivity ] is actually a δ-functions, broadened by a small damping used in the numerical calculation for a finite lattice. The calculation in this paper for Σ ph (k, ω) and Σ pp (k, ω) is performed numerically on a 120 × 120 lattice in momentum space, with the infinitesimal i0 + → iΓ replaced by a small damping Γ = 0.05J. With the above homogenous electron propagator (4), the homogenous electron spectral function A(k, ω) now can be obtained explicitly as, where ReΣ tot (k, ω) and ImΣ tot (k, ω) are the real and imaginary parts of the total homogenous self-energy, respectively, and then the homogenous quasiparticle excitation spectrum in the SC-state can be obtained as, with the fermion distribution n F (ω) and the dipole matrix element M (k, ω). However, the important point is that M (k, ω) does not have any significant energy or temperature dependence With the help of the above homogenous electron propagator ( where as the homogenous self-energy Σ(k, ω) = 3 α=0 Σα (k, ω) in Eq. ( Moreover, in corresponding to the homogenous selfenergies Σ 1 (k, ω), Σ 2 (k, ω), Σ 3 (k, ω), and Σ 0 (k, ω) in Eq. ( where Starting from the homogenous part of the BCS-like electron propagator with the d-wave symmetry, it has been shown that the self-consistent T -matrix approach is a powerful tool to treat the impurity scattering in the SC-state for an arbitrary scattering strength 4-6,26-28 . In the following discussions, we employ the self-consistent T -matrix approach to analyze the impurity scattering self-energy ΣI (k, ω) in Eq. ( where n i is the impurity concentration, N is the number of sites on a square lattice, and Tkk (ω) is the diagonal part of the T-matrix, while the T-matrix is given by the summation of all impurity scattering processes as, with the impurity scattering potential V kk , where we have followed the common practice In the octet scattering model shown in Fig. (k and k at the adjacent-tips of the Fermi arcs); (iii) and the impurity scattering potentials for the scattering at the opposite-tips of the Fermi arcs V kk = V 4 , V kk = V 5 , and V kk = V 6 (k and k at the oppositetips of the Fermi arcs). This approximation based on the octet scattering model is so-called as the Fermi-arctip approximation. It should be emphasized that in this Fermi-arc-tip approximation, the influence of the impu-rity scattering on the electron pair strength can be explored directly, which is much different from the case in the nodal approximation where the matrix elements are given by: with the corresponding j = 7, 4, 5, 8, respectively, V jj = V j j = V 3 for j = 1, 2, 3, 4 with the corresponding j = 8, 7, 6, 5, respectively, V jj = V jj = V 4 for j = 1, 2, 3, 4 with the corresponding j = 6, 5, 8, 7, respectively, V jj = V j j = V 5 for j = 1, 2, 3, 4 with the corresponding j = 5, 6, 7, 8, respectively, V jj = V j j = V 6 for j = 1, 2, 4, 5 with the corresponding j = 3, 8, 6, 7, respectively, V jj = V j j = V 7 for j = 1, 2, 5, 6 with the corresponding j = 4, 3, 8, 7, respectively, and V jj = V j j = V 8 , for j = 1, 3, 5, 7 with the corresponding j = 2, 4, 6, 8, respectively. At the case of zero temperature and zero energy, the Fermi arc collapses to the point at the tip of the Fermi arc, leading to form the Fermi-arc-tip liquid where j, j , and j are labels of the tips of the Fermi arcs, the summation k is over the area around the tip j of the Fermi arc, and then the impurity scattering self-energy ΣI (k, ω) in Eq. ( and therefore is also dependent on the momenta at the tips of the Fermi arcs only. It should be noted that the typical feature of the octet scattering model shown in Fig. respectively, where With the help of the above dressed electron propagators G(A) I (k, ω) and G(B) I (k, ω), the self-consistent T-matrix equation (15) can be further reduced as, where Ĩ(A) G (ω) and Ĩ(B) G (ω) are the integral propagators, and can be expressed explicitly as, respectively. To coincide with the separation of the region of the location of the Fermi-arc tips, the matrix of the impurity scattering potential Ṽ in Eq. ( with the 4 × 4-matrices of the impurity scattering potentials VAA , VAB , VBA , and VBB that are given by, respectively. According to the above impurity scattering potential Ṽ in Eq. ( where μ (ν) denotes region A or B. After a quite complicated calculation, the above T-matrix equation now can be evaluated as [see Appendix A], with the matrix Λ(α) , where the matrix M is obtained as, and then the elements in the matrix Λ(α) are given by, with i (i )=1,3, 5, • • • , 15. The solution of this T-matrix equation ( Following this solution of the T-matrix equation, the impurity scattering self-energy ΣI (ω) = AA AA and in the region B is given by, BB BB The above impurity scattering self-energies in Eqs. ( and then the dressed quasiparticle excitation spectrum now can be obtained as, where the dressed electron spectral function A I (k, ω) is obtained directly from the dressed electron propagator (11) as, , (33) with ReΣ (IM) tot (k, ω) and ImΣ (IM) tot (k, ω) that are the real and imaginary parts of the total dressed self-energy, respectively, where μ = 1, 2 for the regions A and B, respectively, Σ are the impurity scattering self-energies in the particle-hole and particle-particle channels, respectively. In the previous studies based on the nodal approximation of the quasiparticle excitations and scattering processes and V 6 = 0.75V 1 , respectively, to compare with the previous discussions in the nodal approximation of the quasiparticle excitations and scattering processes The studies of the influence of the impurity scattering on the electronic structure can offer insight into the fundamental aspects of the quasiparticle excitation in cuprate superconductors In the framework of the kinetic-energy-driven superconductivity More importantly, we have also found that the isotropic s-wave component of the gap at around the nodal region presents a similar impurity concentration dependent behavior at around the antinodal region shown in Fig. To reveal how the impurity scattering affects the ARPES spectrum is important to understand how the quasiparticle excitation behaviour is significantly affected by the impurity scattering The emergence of the PDH structure in the quasiparticle excitation spectrum can be attributed to the notable peak structure in the quasiparticle scattering rate originated from the interaction between electrons by the exchange of spin excitations except for the impurityinduced a broadening of the spectral line together with a shift of the position of the coherent peak at the low binding-energy. As the case in the pure system We now turn to discuss the ARPES autocorrelation of cuprate superconductors for a further understand- ing of the nature of the quasiparticle excitation. Experimentally, ARPES probes directly the momentumspace electronic structure of the system The ARPES autocorrelation of cuprate superconductors is described in terms of the quasiparticle excitation spectrum in Eq. (32) as which measures the autocorrelation of the quasiparticle excitation spectra in Eq. ( We are now ready to discuss the ARPES autocorrelation in cuprate superconductors. In Fig. In addition to the results plotted in the above Fig. Starting from the t-J model in the fermion-spin representation, we have rederived the homogenous part of the electron propagator with the d-wave symmetry based on the kinetic-energy-driven SC mechanism, and shown that the formation of the Fermi arcs is due to the EFS reconstruction, where a large number of the low-energy electronic states is available at around the tips of the Fermi arcs, and then the most physical properties of cuprate superconductors are controlled by the quasiparticle excitations at around the tips of the Fermi arcs. These tips of the Fermi arcs connected by the scattering wave vectors q i naturally construct an octet scattering model. With the help of this homogenous electron propagator and the associated octet scattering model, we then have investigated the influence of the impurity scattering on the electronic structure of cuprate superconductors within the standard perturbation theory, where although the impurity scattering is treated in terms of the self-consistent T -matrix approach, the impurity scattering self-energy is evaluated firstly in the Fermi-arc-tip approximation of the quasiparticle excitations and scattering processes. The obtained results show that (i) the quasiparticle band structure is further renormalized by the real part of the impurity scattering self-energy in the particle-hole chan-nel, while the quasiparticle lifetime is further reduced by the corresponding imaginary part of the impurity scattering self-energy, with the renormalization strength and reduction extent that increase as the impurity concentration is increased; (ii) the impurity scattering self-energy in the particle-particle channel generates a strong deviation from the d-wave behaviour of the SC gap, where with the increase of the impurity concentration, the magnitude of the SC gap along EFS is progressively reduced except for at around the nodal region, where the gap that vanishes in the pure system opens with the magnitude of the gap that smoothly increases, which therefore leads to the existence of a finite gap over the entire EFS. Furthermore, we have employed these impurity scattering self-energies in the particle-hole and particle-particle channels to study the influence of the impurity scattering on the complicated line-shape in the quasiparticle excitation spectrum and the ARPES autocorrelation spectrum, and the obtained results are well consistent with the corresponding experimental observations. Our theory therefore indicates that the unconventional features of the electronic structure in cuprate superconductors are generated by both the strong electron correlation and impurity scattering. The theoretical framework, especially the Fermi-arctip approximation, developed in this paper for the understanding of the influence of the impurity scattering on the electronic structure of cuprate superconductors can be also employed to study the influence of the impurity scattering on other various properties of cuprate superconductors both in the SC-and normal-states. In particular, based on this theoretical framework, we have also discussed the energy dependence of the SC-state quasiparticle transport in cuprate superconductors by the consideration of the contributions of the vertex correction where the matrix M has been given in Eq. ( 