We present a general analysis for finding and characterizing nonlinear exceptional point (EP) lasers above threshold, using steady-state ab-initio Maxwell-Bloch equations. For a system of coupled slabs, we show that a nonlinear EP is obtained for a given ratio between the external pumps in each resonator, and that it is associated with a kink in the output power and lasing frequency, confirming coupled-mode theory predictions. Through numerical linear stability analysis, we confirm that the EP laser can be stable for a large enough inversion relaxation rate. We further show that the EP laser can be characterized by scattering a weak signal off the lasing cavity, so that the scattering frequency spectrum exhibits a quartic divergence. Our approach can be applied to arbitrary scatterers with multi-level gain media. Exceptional points (EPs) are special singularities of certain non-Hermitian systems where at least two eigenvalues and their eigenvectors coalesce and become degenerate. The influence of EPs on lasers has already been explored with respect to certain lasing properties, such as demonstrating lasing turn-off with increasing pump power, a) Corresponding author: medbenz@stanford.edu Currently at Ginzton Lab, Stanford. For a system with two coupled resonators, as we show by CMT (Sec. II) and confirm by steady-state Maxwell-Bloch solution (Sec. III), a nonlinear lasing EP occurs at a specific ratio D 2 /D 1 of the pump in each resonator, which depends on the loss rate and coupling strength. For such a laser, the EP corresponds to a transition between a PT-broken phase (where the lasing mode resides mainly on a single cavity) and a PT-symmetric phase (where the mode is spread in both cavities). We also show that this EP laser can be stable for a large enough population-inversion relaxation rate, and is characterized by a kink (discontinuity of derivative) in the laser frequency and output power. Our analysis further shows that the previously observed laser turn-off with increasing pump Although we look at a more a complete model later, we start here by studying a simple dimer laser using a CMT model with two scalar degrees of freedom. For two coupled resonators with nonlinear gain saturation, steady state solutions can be described by We show that the lasing solutions (real ∆) for this coupled system of nonlinear equations are of two types (see details in the Supplementary Material; similar results to ours can be recovered from Refs. 16,17 in special cases). First, there are PT-symmetric modes, characterized by (2) One sees that these modes are detuned from the resonator frequency, with either sign of detuning possible. The second equation above implies that the resulting operator has PT symmetry: the net gain in one cavity equals the net loss in the other so that interchanging the cavities and complex conjugating leaves the operator unchanged. The squared modal amplitude is the same in each cavity and given by |ψ n | 2 = (D 1 +D 2 )/(κ 1 +κ 2 )-1. The pumps at threshold (|ψ n | = 0) do not need to be equal, but must satisfy There is also a PT-broken mode characterized by with zero detuning, and with the corresponding condition at threshold (D th 1 -κ 1 )(D th 2 -κ 2 ) + g 2 = 0. This implies that one cavity has net gain and the other net loss, but they need not be balanced, and the lasing mode will reside mainly in the gain cavity, with only small penetration into the lossy cavity. The limit g → 0 corresponds to independent lasing in each cavity. Together these two solutions give the following picture (Fig. The transition between the two phases occurs at which requires κ 1,2 ≥ g. When crossing each of these boundaries, the two PT-symmetric modes coalesce at a single solution, then transition into the PT-broken phase with a lasing mode and an additional non-lasing solution (with complex ∆). The transition then corresponds to a nonlinear EP, with (5) The ±π/2 phase difference between the amplitudes ψ n in each resonator indicates a chiral behaviour. When the previous condition on D 1 is not satisfied, we can still have a virtual EP, which corresponds to a formal solution of Eq. (1) Of course, this does not correspond to a physical solution since the laser turns off when |ψ n | = 0. However, formally tracking this mathematical solution allows for a very nice interpretation of the suppression and revival of lasing, , where κ n,r denotes the radiative loss rate. In particular, we find that, when transitioning between the PT-symmetric and PT-broken phases, there is a kink (discontinuous first derivative) in P out (D 2 ), due to the switch betwen the two types of solutions. For simplicity, we compute this derivative at the EP assuming equal loss rates κ 1 = κ 2 ≡ κ in the two cavities (and maintain this assumption from here on), (6) The largest discontinuity is observed for the smallest possible D 1 (= κ ± g), in which case we have a slope ∓κ r /g in the PT-broken side, compared to κ r /κ in the PT-symmetric phase. Physically as one starts equalizing the pumps from the broken phase, the laser becomes less efficient because it has more intensity in the lossy cav-ity, and the power slope is negative; before the pumps become equal the laser jumps to the symmetric phase, where pumping harder now helps, and the power slope becomes positive (Fig. The previous coupled mode theory is a nice tool to obtain qualitative and semi-quantitative results, but it does not take into account other effects such as spatial mode profile and spatially varying gain saturation, gainmedium lineshape, and, importantly, gain medium dynamics which can affect the stability of the system. Here, we obtain numerical ab-initio results, within the framework of the semi-classical Maxwell-Bloch equations (with the rotating-wave approximation) where E + is the positive-frequency component of the electric field (the physical field being given by 2Re[E + ]), P + is the positive-frequency polarization describing the transition between two energy levels (with frequency ω a and linewidth γ ⊥ ), D is the population inversion (with relaxation rate γ ), D 0 is the pump strength profile, c is the cold-cavity real permittivity, and σ c is a cold-cavity conductivity loss. Here, we are assuming that the orientation of the atomic transition is parallel to the electric field, and have written all three fields in their natural units. where It is important to realize that the operator Θ depends nonlinearly on spatially varying E due to gain saturation and hole burning above threshold. In particular, even if the system has an EP in the linear regime below threshold (E → 0), the EP will typically disappear above threshold since the operator changes. So, the parameters of the system need to be carefully chosen and varied to take into account these nonlinearities and obtain a lasing EP above threshold. We now consider a 1d system formed by two coupled slabs with non-saturated pump strengths D 1 and D 2 as a realization of the system described by CMT (see inset and caption of Fig. Following the CMT analysis, we can now try to observe a nonlinear EP laser by first increasing D 1 to a fixed value, then increasing D 2 to the value given by Eq. ( We pump the first slab until D 1 = 0.95, which, as required, is larger than κ + g ≈ 0.91. We then keep D 1 fixed and increase the pump D 2 along the line shown in Fig. As noted above, during the first stage of increasing D 2 , the output power steadily decreases to reach a minimum value at the EP. This minimal value becomes smaller as D 1 is decreased, and reaches zero when D 1 = κ + g. When D 1 takes smaller values, the laser shuts off before reaching the nonlinear EP. However, formal mathematical solutions of Eq. ( Finally, a crucial point that should be studied carefully is the stability of the lasing solution at the EP. Rigorous stability analysis has been previously done by linearizing the Maxwell-Bloch Eq. ( We have seen that the nonlinear EP is typically associated with a kink in the lasing frequency and output power (at least for a small enough D 1 ). However, even if the system is only near the EP, the previous trends are expected to persist, but the kinks are changed into smoother variations. We show here that we can characterize and confirm the EP using a scattering setup. In particular, we scatter light off the laser cavity using an infinitesimal external source at frequency ω s with a detuning σ = ω s -ω . We can compute the scattered field by linearizing the Maxwell-Bloch Eq. ( FIG. The EP laser (D2/D1 ≈ 0.566) is clearly associated with an inverse quartic variation of the transmitted intensity with detuning from the laser line. We first note that in the limit ω s → ω , we have ω i → ω and α → β. In this limit, (δE s , δE i ) → (E , -E ) is a source-free (δJ s → 0) solution of Eq. ( In the limit γ → 0, we have α, β → 0, so signal and idler fields become decoupled, and Eq. ( The results presented here describe general properties of stable nonlinear EP lasers above threshold, and represent general guidelines for experimental demonstration. It can also be relevant beyond optics, such as in nonlinear PT-symmetric circuits recently considered for wireless power transfer. We then have a discontinuity in ∂P out /∂D 2 at the EP. The largest discontinuity is obtained for the smallest possible D 1 (i.e., κ ± g). In the limit of large D 1 , there is no discontinuity, as Eq. (S7) goes to κ r /κ for D 1 → ∞. Our results here can also be used to interpret the experiments in Ref. 12 showing an EP laser in coupled photoniccrystal cavities. There, changing the position of the optical pump is equivalent to tuning D 2 /D 1 . But since the size of the pump-laser spot is large compared to the separation between the two cavities, D 2 /D 1 could only be tuned slightly. The authors of Ref. 12 used a graphene sheet to partially cover one of the two cavities and increase its loss factor (equivalent to κ 2 ). In absence of the graphene sheet, the small loss gives a negative EP-ratio D 2 /D 1 [Eq. ( We consider the coupled-slabs cavity described in the main text. We solve the steady-state Maxwell-Bloch equation [Eq. ( For a steady-state solution (E e -iω t , P e -iω t , D ) of Maxwell-Bloch equations, it has previously been shown that linearizing for additional perturbation (δEe -iω t , δPe (Re(δE), Im(δE), Re(δP), Im(δP), δD) and A, B and C are real operator matrices defined in previous literature. The sign of Re(σ) determines the stability of the steady-state solution. In Fig. We assume a single-mode lasing solution to Maxwell-Bloch equations with field E (x, t) = E (x)e -iω t . We scatter light off the laser cavity with an infinitesimal external source δJ s (x, t) = δJ s (x)e -iωst at a frequency ω s . To solve this problem, we linearize Maxwell-Bloch equations around the lasing solution, which gives (S9) The presence of the nonlinear terms means that an idler field with frequency ω i = 2ω -ω s will be generated. Using σ = ω s -ω , we consider solutions of the form δE = δE s e -iωst + δE i e -iωit , δP = δP s e -iωst + δP i e -iωit , δD = δD s e -iσt + δD i e iσt . (S11) Now using the expression of δP s and the fact that P = Γ D E , we can compute δD s as We can finally use this to compute δP m as a function of the electric fields where a is an arbitrary unit length. '+' marker (resp. red solid line) shows the numerical Maxwell-Bloch equation (resp. CMT) threshold. A good fit is obtained using a loss factor κ ≈ 0.71 and coupling coefficient g ≈ 0.2. Blue solid (dashed) lines show the EP (virtual EP) as predicted by Eq. ( -iω t , δD) gives C d 2 dt 2 + B d dt + A u(x, t) = 0, where u = i D 1 + β *