The origin of ice slipperiness has been a matter of great controversy for more than a century, but an atomistic understanding of ice friction is still lacking. Here, we perform computer simulations of an atomically smooth substrate sliding on ice. In a large temperature range between 230 and 266 K, hydrophobic sliders exhibit a premelting layer similar to that found at the ice/air interface. On the contrary, hydrophilic sliders show larger premelting and a strong increase of the first adsorption layer. The non-equilibrium simulations show that premelting films of barely one nanometer thickness are sufficient to provide a lubricating quasi-liquid layer with rheological properties similar to bulk undercooled water. Upon shearing, the films display a pattern consistent with lubricating Couette flow, but the boundary conditions at the wall vary strongly with substrate's interactions. Hydrophobic walls exhibit large slip, while hydrophilic walls obey stick boundary conditions with small negative slip. By compressing ice above atmospheric pressure, the lubricating layer grows continuously, and the rheological properties approach bulk-like behavior. Below 260 K, the equilibrium premelting films decrease significantly. However, a very large slip persists on the hydrophobic walls, while the increased friction on hydrophilic walls is sufficient to melt ice and create a lubrication layer in a few nanoseconds. Our results show the atomic scale frictional behavior of ice is a combination of spontaneous premelting, pressure melting and frictional heating. The slipperiness of ice has been exploited since ancient times as a means of transportation in cold regions But despite many advances on tribology A hypothesis dating back to the 19th century is that a self-lubricating water film on the ice surface is formed due to pressure melting Here we report Molecular Dynamics simulations of ice sliding past an atomically smooth substrate. Our results show that an interfacial premelting film formed spontaneously upon compression or frictional heating, exhibits hydrodynamic properties similar to bulk undercooled water. This illustrates that a hydrodynamic theory of Couette flow supplemented with slip boundary conditions can explain the friction of ice at smooth contacts. In our study, we simulate explicitly ice sliding past an atomically smooth substrate under pressure (Fig. The wall atoms interact with water oxygens via a Lennard-Jones potential. This allows us to tune the hydrophobicity of the substrate merely by changing the strength of wall-oxygen interactions. The quality of the substrate is monitored by measuring the contact angle of FIG. water droplets, θ, which is varied in a range spaning both hydrophobic (θ = 120 • ) and hydrophilic (θ = 50 • ) walls (SI Appendix Text and Methods). Under skating conditions, the slider does not step on a perfectly terminated ice surface. Instead, the ice surface has been previously exposed to air, and exhibits a significant premelting layer After equilibration, we model sliding by moving the top and bottom sliders with equal sliding speed U = 5 m/s and opposite direction. Although the properties of premelting layers of ice exposed to vacuum are often invoked as a proxy to explain ice friction For the hydrophobic substrate, θ = 120 • , the slider slips past the premelting film, and generates an extremely small velocity field. Molecules tagged in blue in Fig. The large difference in the frictional behavior can be anticipated from the plot of equilibrium density profiles We expect the hydrogen bond network on the first adsorption peak of hydrophilic substrates to have a significant impact on the mobility of water molecules For temperatures above 260 K, the premelting layer develops a well defined quasi-bulk region between the adsorption layers, as observed in Fig. In practice, sliding occurs at contact with surface asperities, and the pressure on the contact zone can well reach several hundred atmospheres As a result of this surface-pressure melting, the diffusion coefficient and the corresponding Stokes-Einstein viscosity of the films approach bulk-like conditions as illustrated in SI Appendix Fig. In order to check how bulk-like is the sliding hydrodynamics of a quasi-liquid layer barely one nanometer thick, we study the shear response of the premelting film upon sliding the wall with a constant lateral velocity U = 5 m/s at T=262 K and p = 1 atm for a period of 10 ns (Fig. Averaging the velocity components in the x direction parallel to the slider, we obtain the hydrodynamic flow profile u(z) as a function of the perpendicular distance to the wall. For the hydrophobic wall (Fig. If the hydrodynamics of the premelting film follows a model of Couette flow, we expect the shear stress, τ , should obey τ = η us d C , Slip and stick boundary conditions of premelted films. As wall hydrophilicity increases, the premelting film dynamics evolves from large to negative slip. Blue circles are Couette slip lengths, bC estimated from the average flow profile. Green diamonds are hydrodynamic slip lengths, bH calculated from the shear force. S7). As a rule of thumb, we see that the Couette flow is established between the wall and ice adsorption layers of liquid-like water, so that the location of the hydrodynamic boundary conditions may be inferred with little cost from equilibrium simulations. Put together, our results strongly support that the shear force of the slider on thin premelting films hardly one nanometer thick may be described approximately by a very simple model of Couette flow with slip: where h H = σ 1 + d H is the hydrodynamic film thickness, b is a slip length and η is an effective viscosity similar to the viscosity of undercooled bulk water (SI Appendix Fig. We can estimate a Couette slip length b C for use in Eq. ( A figure of the slip length as a function of wall strength illustrates the large difference of frictional behavior. For θ = 120 • , b is about 5 times larger than the actual film thickness, consistent with observations of giant slip lengths in confined undercooled water and water at hydrophobic substrates To further check the consistency of the model, we can invoke the Navier slip boundary condition, which assumes a shear stress proportional to the velocity drop at the hydrodynamic boundary, i.e. τ = λ(U -u s ), where λ = η/b is the interfacial friction coefficient Since increasing the temperature or pressure increases the equilibrium film thickness, Eq. ( In practice, ice friction is a multiscale problem, and both the slider and ice are atomically rough Based on these considerations, and the model of Eq. ( , where p is the pressure of the high pressure zone At T = 262 K, moderate sliding speeds of the order of mm/s, assumed film thicknesses of ca. 1 nm and zero slip, this gives already a small friction coefficients at a pressure of one atm, ca. μ f = 0.1. Considering instead that the sliding contact is exercised at the indentation hardness limit of ca. p = 100-1000 atm Our model is also consistent with the temperature dependence observed for the friction coefficient Overall, we find our results lend strong support to the hypothesis of lubricated ice friction that has been put into question in recent experiments based on milimeter scale probes We emphasize, however that our results describe the frictional behavior at atomically smooth contacts. At a larger scale, both the slider and ice exhibit microscale roughness, and the total load of the slider is supported by a small amount of asperities. Accordingly, the friction coefficient is not only given by the shear at the smooth contacts, but also, by the indentation hardness of ice, which sets the fractional area supporting the slider's load In summary, we have shown that a very small extent of interfacial premelting in ice provides a lubricating quasiliquid layer that can be described close to quantitatively by a model of bulk Couette flow with slip. The premelted layer can further grow by compression and frictional heating. Our results reconcile the long-standing controversy on the origin of ice slipperiness and show that equilibrium premelting, pressure melting and frictional heating operate simultaneously. Molecular Dynamics simulations on the Np z AT ensemble were performed using LAMMPS Notice we have chosen a generic model substrate with an FCC crystalline order. This choice is a matter of convenience, since the FCC lattice in the (111) direction can be made to match perfectly the hexagonal ice lattice in the basal direction (c.f. SI Appendix Methods). However, many metals such as Pt, Pd, and Ru exhibit close match with ice, c.f. Ref. In practice, we set the value of the Lennard-Jones range parameter, σ wo = 3.1668 Å, equal to that of TIP4P/Ice water for convenience. This is somewhat larger than the usual values for metals (c.f. 2.55 Å for Cu and Fe), and somewhat smaller than those of CH2 and CH3 groups in united models of alkanes (ca. 3.9 Å and 3.7 Å for the OPLS or TraPPE models, SI Appendix Ref. Indeed, the main role of the wall-water interactions is to tune the relevant hydrodynamic boundary conditions via the slip length. According to a large body of theoretical and computer simulation results, the slip length of crystalline surfaces is a universal function of the variable ξ = S(q * ) < F 2 x >, where S(q * ) is the in-plane structure factor of the first adsorption layer at wall's smallest wave-vector; while < F 2 x > is the average lateral wall-fluid squared force, c.f. Ref. Another concern with the choice of the wall model is the commensurability with the ice lattice. In principle, this could have two undesirable effects: a. It greatly stabilizes the wall/ice interface, so that it could inhibit premelting. In practice, our simulations show that compressing the ice/vapor interface results in a stable premelted layer even with a perfectly commensurate wall. Using an incommensurate wall will enhance this effect. Whence, the stabilization of the premelting layer that we report remains robust whether the substrate is commensurate or not. b. It removes strain on the ice lattice. If ice is in direct contact with the wall, the perfect match will remove spuriously the strain that would result otherwise. However, we have seen above that approaching the solid substrate to the ice/vapor interface results in the stabilization of the premelting layer, and more likely so if the wall were incommensurate with the ice lattice. Therefore, the possible strain will be relaxed within the liquid layer, and strain effects are therefore not a concern. In principle, our results for the shear stress displayed in Tables III-IV can be used to estimate friction coefficients. However, a quantitative comparison of such results with experimental friction coefficients is not possible. The reason is that friction is a multiscale problem and the actual coefficients that are measured depend not only on the substrate's properties, but also on the ice and slider surface preparation and roughness, the slider's length and geometry, as well as the length of the track, the time of sliding and past history, c.f. Ref. Calculations of the shear stress in our simulation have been performed for significantly smaller applied pressure. However, our model of shear stress, Eq.( Figure As noted in the main text, shear rate dependent viscosities can occur at low temperature for shear rates larger than a temperature dependent threshold value, a phenomenon known as shear thinnig, c.f. Ref. According to the Eyring theory of shear thinning (SI Appendix Ref. where η(0) stands here for the bulk Newtonian viscosity, and τ 0 is a threshold shear stress above which shear thinning becomes significant. The shear threshold depends on the temperature as τ 0 = k B T va , where k B is Boltzmann's constant and v a is an activation volume in the order of the molecular volume. As shown in Fig. Since sinh -1 (x) ≈ ln(x) for large x, the Eyring model predicts a shear stress τ = τ 0 ln( γη(0)/τ 0 ) which, in view of γ ≈ U/d C , yields a logarithmic dependence of shear stress with sliding velocity, as found in Ref. For the hydrophobic slider at temperatures below 250 K, some amount of strain is observable in the simulation snapshots (c.f. Movie S3). Inspection of the molecular configurations shows a lateral displacement of about one lattice position in the direction of the slider. This corresponds to ca. 1 4 b, where b is the crystal unit length in the sliding direction. This deformation is propagated over roughly 24 unit cells in the z-direction, of size 24c (with b ≈ 7.9 Å and c ≈ 7.4 Å). This yields a small shear strain of γ = 1 96 b c ≈ 0.01. The shear modulus of ice in the temperature range studied is about G = 3 MPa, according to Ref. Water was modeled with the TIP4P/Ice force field, Ref. The CHILL+ order parameter was employed to label water molecules in liquid-like and solid-like categories. Molecules labeled as bulk crystalline or interfacial crystalline (mainly Ih, Ic and interfacial Ih ice) were assigned as solid-like, and the remaining molecules were assigned as liquid-like. Parallel diffusion coefficients of the interfacial layer were calculated by monitoring the mean squared displacement of liquid-like molecules within the assigned interfacial region. Bulk transport coefficients were calculated using equilibrium Molecular Dynamics in the NVT ensemble. Diffusion coefficients were evaluated from mean square displacements and shear viscosity from Green-Kubo relations. Velocity profiles were smoothed using an unweighted moving average with spatial extent of 4 Å. In order to characterize the premelting film, each water molecule in the system is labeled according to the CHILL+ algorithm, Ref. The ice sample was compressed by imposing a force F z = ±P A/N w perpendicular to the interface in the direction of bulk ice on each of the wall atoms, c.f. Ref. The pressure exerted by the wall on the fluid must be balanced by the corresponding force exerted by the fluid on the wall. Whence, it must follow (c.f. SI Appendix Ref. where φ is the potential energy between wall atoms and water molecules and ρ(r) is the density profile. For an atomically resolved density field, this amounts to the calculation of: where f z is the z component of the force exerted by the wall on a water molecule at r i , and the sum runs over all water molecules within the cutoff distance from the wall. We use this result as a test of consistency for the barostat and find excellent performance as illustrated in Table Likewise, the shear stress τ is calculated from the total force exerted by the wall atoms on the water molecules in the direction of the slider. Whence, τ = p x , and with the sum convention as explained in the previous equation. The wettability of the substrates is characterized by the contact angle of water sessile droplets at ambient temperature, T=298 K. Unfortunately, measuring contact angles is not a trivial matter, because they exhibit a very large system size dependence due to line tension effects (SI Appendix Ref. where τ is the line tension and γ lv is the liquid-vapor surface tension. Based on the values of the contact angles extracted from these simulations (cf. Table To measure the equilibrium contact angles of small spherical droplets we first simulated samples of a bulk liquid water in the N pT ensemble for 15 ns at T = 298 K and p = 1 atm. Then, the water parcel was placed on the solid surface and allowed to equilibrate. The relaxation of the initial configuration is very slow. Simulations were carried out over 60 to 100 ns at T = 298 K in N V T ensemble in order to attain meaningful averages. From the trajectories collected over the final 10 ns of the simulations average density profiles ρ(x, y) have been evaluated following the procedure described elsewhere (SI Appendix Ref. Similarly to all previous simulations, the charge structure factors were evaluated with a grid spacing of 1 Å and the fourth order interpolation scheme. It resulted in the 54 × 48 × 30 (72 × 64 × 40) vectors in the x, y, z reciprocal directions, respectively, for 2304 (5120) water molecules. In the case of the simulations for droplets sitting on a solid surfaces, the number of vectors were equal to 150 × 144 × 100 (200 × 180 × 120) in the x, y, z reciprocal directions, respectively, for 2304 (5120) water molecules. ) at p = 1 atm in a range of temperatures. The equilibrium density profile in g cm -3 (left axis) is shown as a continuous line, with blue colour for the region where liquid-like water is the majority phase and black colour where ice is the majority phase. Green dashed lines describe the total density profile at the ice/air interface (results from SI Appendix Ref. 