The combination of interaction-free measurement and the quantum Zeno effect has been shown to both increase the signal-to-noise ratio of imaging, and decrease the light intensity flux through the imaged object. So far though, this has only been considered for discrimination between translucent and opaque areas of an object. In this paper, we extend this to the polarimetry of a given sample. This will allow the identification and characterisation of these samples with far less absorbed energy than current approaches-a key concern for delicate samples being probed with high-frequency radiation. Polarimetry is the task of identifying the effect a given thin sample has on the polarisation of light transmitted through that sample Interaction-free detection involves using single-particle interferometry to detect whether or not there is a block on the arm of an interferometer the particle didn't travel down. Elitzur and Vaidman initially described this phenomenon in their famous 'bomb detector thought experiment', where there is a chance to see whether a potentially faulty bomb works without detonating it Classically, we treat a polarised monochromatic light wave travelling in direction k as where h and v are complex constants, and ĥ and v are unit vectors orthogonal to both each other and k. We categorise the polarisation properties of this wave E using the Stokes parameters [2] Note S 2 0 = S 2 1 + S 2 2 + S 2 3 , meaning we can define a vector S ≡ (S 1 , S 2 , S 3 ), which, when normalised by S 0 , spans the surface of the unit Poincaré sphere. In this way, we can associate S 1 with the H/V basis, S 2 with the D/A basis, and S 3 with the R/L basis. When dealing with stochastic (semi-unpolarised) light, this vector S/S 0 lies inside the Poincaré spheretherefore, we can use this to give us the degree of polarisation: All classical light rays can be decomposed into p times a perfectly polarised ray, plus (1 -p) times a perfectly unpolarised ray. Using this, we can now formally define polarimetry, as identifying how a material linearly transforms the Stokes parameters of an incoming light ray. For a given material, this transform will be by the 4 × 4 Mueller matrix M , where arXiv:2207.13539v2 [quant-ph] 16 Aug 2022 Therefore, the goal of polarimetry is to identify the components of the Mueller matrix of our object. This is typically done classically by shining bright, perfectly polarised light onto the object, repeating this for different polarisation orientations (to cover the two orthogonal polarisation states of each of the three mutually unbiased bases (MUBs) for polarisation-i.e., H/V , D/A and L/R), and then using matrix inversion. For this, we require the output Stokes parametersthankfully, these can be obtained by summing various intensities of light output after different polarisers: where I X is the intensity of the output beam after then being completely polarised in a given direction. Using the 36 parameters we get (6 output parameters for each of the 6 input polarisations), we can obtain the Mueller matrix for any generalised optically-transmissive medium. In this paper, we aim to replace this bright polarised light with polarised single photons, so as to make use of interaction-free measurement and the quantum Zeno effect to reduce light incident on the object being investigated. An arbitrary Mueller matrix for a given object can be decomposed into the product of the three generalised Mueller matrices: a retarder, a diattenuator, a the depolariser, in a unique decomposition for each given ordering of the three components (i.e. Practically, this can be viewed as any transparent object being representable as a retarder, a diattenuator, and a depolariser in some order being applied in sequence to the light ray. A diattenuator is an object which allows light through in different proportions depending on the direction of the light's polarisation; therefore, it takes perfectly polarised light to perfectly polarised light of a different intensity, while potentially depolarising further semi-unpolarised light. The generalised form for Mueller matrices for pure diattenuators is where I 1 and I 2 are the intensities measured from the two orthogonal input polarisation states of the input MUB. In this paper, due to the limitations of interaction-free probing, we focus on the polarimetry of diattenuating samples. To achieve interaction-free polarimetry, we start with an apparatus similar to that used to counterfactually ghost image objects in In this protocol, we use a polarisation and positionmomentum entangled pair of photons, split at our π/4 (50:50) beamsplitter. We send one photon to our chained multi-pixel Michelson interferometer array, with the object to be imaged in one path (the imaging photon). We send the other photon goes to our variable polarising beamsplitter (PBS), where we can choose a polarisation basis to image the object in (the heralding photon). On exiting the π/4 beamsplitter, the imaging photon enters a multi-pixel version of the chained interactionfree measurement device, designed to maintain pixel coherence. Here, it enters a π/4n beamsplitter, where we define a θ beamsplitter as performing a Pauli-Y rotation between two path modes of rotation angle 2θ: This sends some probability amplitude of the photon to the object (where it is either absorbed, or travels through it, to a mirror, back through it, and back to the beamsplitter, or some combination of the two), and some via an empty path to a mirror and back to the π/4n beamsplitter. These two paths are the same length, to ensure no phase difference between the two components-they interfere at the beamsplitter, some parts reflecting and some transmitting, and on both transmitted and reflected path are reflected off the switchable mirrors. Therefore, these components return to again interfere at the π/4n beamsplitter. This constitutes one cycle. After n cycles, the switchable mirrors go from reflective to transmissive, and so the photon, if not absorbed, travels to either ICCD0 or ICCD1 depending on interference. These two outputs corresponding to the photon being blocked (ICCD1) or not blocked (ICCD0) by the object, and have variable polarisers placed in front of them, to allow us to choose a detection polarisation (H, V , D, A, R or L). The variable-PBS (heralding) arm uses a quarter wave, then half-wave, then another quarter wave plate to rotate FIG. the photon from the imaging basis (either H/V , D/A or R/L) into the H/V basis. We then split the two orthogonal polarisations for separate detection using a normal (H/V ) PBS. We record the correlations between either of the two ICCDs and either of the two polarisation-basis detectors (DX and DY ). By building up correlationbased images of the object in each of the three mutually unbiased bases (MUBs) which exist for polarisation (e.g. H/V , D/A, L/R), we can slowly build up polarisation statistics for the object-allowing us to derive the Mueller matrices for each of the pixel-regions of the object. Note, unless n goes to infinity, the protocol itself will reduce the overall intensity of light returning compared to light inserted. However, this reduction in intensity will be the same regardless of polarisation, so will not affect the results of the protocol. A useful way to prove the metrological benefits of combining polarisation-detecting protocols with interactionfree and quantum Zeno modifications, alongside pixelmode imaging like in To do this, we consider a single polarisation-mode for a single pixel. We model the diattenuation of this polarisation mode for a single pass through the object probabilistically, as p times the object blocking the mode, plus 1 -p times the object not blocking that mode (identity). This gives us the probability of the object absorbing the photon (Fig. As we can see from √ N , the square root of the average number of photons emitted into that mode. This is a function of n, the number of interferometer cycles in the run. Given the standard SNR for polarimetry here is normalised to 1, an SNR here better than 1 indicates the protocol is better than standard polarimetry. The signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) where ∆ Ī is the maximal difference in average intensity values observed by a detector, and σ(|∆ Ī|) is the standard deviation in this difference. For standard polarimetry, an average of N photons (those generated in a given time interval by a SPDC source) interrogate an object. This spontaneous parametric down-conversion has thermal statistics for rate of emission (which look Poissonian averaged over many temporal modes). Therefore, considering each polarisation- Given the standard SNR for polarimetry here is normalised to 1, an SNR here better than 1 indicates the protocol is better per photon absorbed than standard polarimetry. pixel mode, if we take ∆I as the difference in number of photons arriving at our detector between when the object is maximally transmissive to that polarisation in that pixel, and when it is maximally absorptive to that polarisation in that pixel ( N ), the signal to noise ratio (SNR) is For our above model, we define ∆N D0 (∆N D1 ) as the difference in photon numbers received at D0 (D1) between the object being transmissive to that polarisation in that pixel, and maximally absorptive to that polarisation in that pixel (which in each case is N , the average number of photons emitted into that mode, times the difference in probability of a photon reaching that detector in each of those two cases). Note, ∆N D0 and ∆N D1 will have opposite signs. Therefore, In this paper, we gave an extension of counterfactual imaging to imaging of polarising objects, and then to full polarimetry of a given sample. This allows far better imaging of these samples than is currently available, with far less absorbed energy-a key concern for delicate samples being imaged with high-frequency radiation. While this protocol still needs to be formally analysed (to show the Fisher information), we can infer from the benefits previously shown for counterfactual/interaction-free based protocols, that this protocol will provide an advantage for low-energy polarimetry.