We summarize the recent developments in the model design and computation for a few representative quantum many-body systems, encompassing quantum critical metals beyond the Hertz-Millis-Moriya framework with pseudogap and superconductivity, SYK non-Fermi-liquid with self-tuned quantum criticality and fluctuation induced superconductivity, and the flat-band quantum Moiré lattice models in continuum where the interplay of quantum geometry of flat-band wave function and the long-range Coulomb interactions gives rise to novel insulating phases at integer fillings and superconductivity away from them. Although the narrative choreography seems simple, we show how important the appropriate model design and their tailor-made algorithmic developmentsin other words, the scientific imagination inspired by the corresponding fast experimental developments in the aforementioned systems -compel us to invent and discover new knowledge and insights in the sport and pastime of quantum many-body research. CONTENTS I. Introduction 1 II. Lattice model and simulations for quantum critical metals 3 A. Antiferromagnetic and ferromagnetic quantum critical metal models 3 B. Pseudogap and superconductivity near ferromagnetic critical point 5 C. nFL behavior and fermionic self-energy analysis 7 D. Bosonic dynamics 8 III. Yukawa-Sachdev-Ye-Kitaev Model 11 A. Spin-1/2 Yukawa-SYK model and its phase diagram 11 B. Normal-state results at N, M → ∞ 13 C. nFL Green's functions 13 D. Self-tuned quantum criticality 15 E. Superconductivity emerging from nFL 15 F. Planckian metals, spin glass and open questions 16 IV. Quantum Moiré lattice models and their computation 18 A. Real-space lattice models 19 B. Momentum-space models and quantum Monte Carlo method 21 C. Dynamical and thermodynamic signatures of the flat-band correlations 22 D. In the 200 pages short novel "A Sport and a Pastime" Set in provincial France in the 1960s, through the wanderings of a young American middle-class college dropout Philip Dean and an even younger, small-town French girl, Anne-Marie, the novel reveals the country's "secret life • • • into which one can not penetrate". It is "the life of photograph albums, uncles, names of dogs that have died". The green, bourgeois and rural France would be inaccessible, remote, and lifeless to Philip Dean without his affair with the beautiful, though cheap, Anne-Marie. In a way she becomes Philip, and together they become the person who illuminates travel, the person the readers always dream of meeting, and without whom the museums are tedious, the roads empty, the rivers are dry and the food and drinks a necessity. Anne-Marie provides Dean, twenty-four and a dropout from Yale, a perspective, rescuing him from the lost ranks of student sightseers and together they provide the readers a personal reference, in which the architechture, mountains, great rivers, villages and green scenery can be easily understood from an emotional as well as numerical scale The book, as has been praised as "what appears at first to be a short, tragic novel about a love affair in provincial France is in fact an ambitious, refractive inquiry into the nature and meaning of storytelling, and the reasons artists are compelled to invent. That such a feat occurs across a mere 200 pages is breathtaking, and though its narrative choreography seems simple, the novel is anything but minor." Our interests in the quantum critical metals lie in the rich history of the Hertz-Millis-Moriya(HMM) theory These fundamental discussions are not only for the curiosities of theorists, the quantum critical nFL behaviors have been observed in a variety of materials In Sec. II, we will review our model design and quantum Monte Carlo (QMC) simulation technique developments upon the antiferromagnetic The itinerant QCP models, require the coupling between the critical bosonic modes with the Fermi surface (FS) such that inside the quantum critical region there emerges nFL from the quantum critical fluctuations, but in the ordered or disordered phases of the bosons, the fermions are essentially in a FL state with different FS geometry and systems are essential noninteracting. In Sec. III, we focus on another type of nFL systems, the spin-1/2 Yukawa-Sachdev-Ye-Kitaev (Yukawa-SYK) model Another way to generate the all-to-all strong interaction such as those in the SYK models is via the truly longranged Coulomb interactions. Usually in the condensed matter materials, the Coulomb interaction is screened and becomes short-ranged, but in the quantum Moiré materials, such as twisted bilayer graphene (TBG) and twisted metal transition metal dichalcogenides (TMD), due to the perfect 2D setting with flat-bands, these systems are bestowed with the quantum geometry of wavefunctions -manifested in the distribution of Berry curvature in the flat bands -and strong long-range Coulomb electron interactions, and they exhibit rich phase diagram of correlated insulating and superconducting phases thanks to the high tunability by twisting angles, gating and tailored design of the dielectric environment Finally, in Sec. V we point out several immediate directions along the main content of this review, some of which are being actively pursued by us and other members of the community, and it is with these collective efforts that we firmly believe the sport and pastime of the model design and computation for quantum many-body systems shall expand and prevail. The lattice models of such quantum critical metals have generic form. For example, in the Ref. where, H f is the free fermion Hamiltonian with σ =↑, ↓ and λ = 1, 2 the spin and layer indices. Intralayer fermions are subject to nearest, second and third neighbor hoppings t 1 = 1.0, t 2 = -0.32 and t 3 = 0. is the fermion spin along z. The parameters are chosen according to Ref. In a series of works Ref. Compared with the model of the antiferromagnetic Ising quantum critical metal, the ferromagnetic quantum critical metals we studied consist of three similar terms. Here, we introduce two similar ferromagnetic models, with quantum Ising spin Likewise in Eq. ( Without the coupling term, the bare rotor model exhibits quasi-long-range ferromagnetic order at small U/t b . Conversely, at large U/t b , the rotors degenerate to individual degree of freedom on each lattice site, which represents the disordered phase. The two phases are bridged via a Kosterlitz-Thouless transition. The quantum Monte Carlo simulation of the quantum rotor model has been discussed thoroughly in Ref. First, we show the phase diagram at K = 1, 4 in Fig. It is feasible to calculate the paring susceptibility using dominant paring channels ∆ by defining P s = 1 L 2 β 0 i (∆ † (r i , τ )∆(0, 0)). P s reflects the correlation between cooper pairs, and there is quasi-long-range order at two dimensional cases. Utilizing the Kosterlitz-Thouless form )) for T > T c , with η c = 1/4, the authors in Ref Subsequently, we focus on the temperature scales higher than T c . Former studies showed nFL behavior The most direct way is to examine the single particle density of states. Nonetheless, in our model, due to strong bosonic fluctuation, we assume there exists a pseudogap region surrounding the superconducting phase. To clarify this in a most direct way, the authors in Ref It must be stressed that the pseudogap region here is not directly comparable with the pseudogap phenomenon in cuprate high temperature superconductors, since we are working in a ferromagnetic QCP regime rather an antiferromagnetic one. Besides, the cooper pairs in this model possess s-wave symmetry, instead of p-wave symmetry near nematic QCP, or d-wave near antiferromagnetic QCP, which results from the isotropic FS, in contrast with the nodal-antinodal structure. Generally, the first appearance of the high-temperature gap at the antinodal momentum is identified as the onset of pseudogap behavior. In view of this, we determine the upper boundary by observation of density of states curve to find whether there exists a minimum near fermi energy. In Fig. Another way to estimate the upper boundary of the pseudogap region comes from the Eliashberg equation. Within this theory, one solves the set of self-consistent equations for fermionic self-energy and bosonic propagator, with the latter as the input information and obtained by the numerical simulation. We further map the whole model with the γ-model of theoretical analysis and find T PG = 0.08. Note here, γ-model are theoretical quantum-critical models for which the dynamical four-fermion interaction V (q, ω n ) = ḡγ /|ω n | γ , where ḡ represents effective four-fermion interactions. Our model corresponds to γ = 1/3 model Between T PG and T c is the region, which we regard as the pseudogap phase. In contrast with the conventional superconductors, the temperature evolution of the fermion spectral gap follows a gap-filling regime, instead of a gap-closing regime. The density of state remains finite at ω = 0. To further study the temperature scales of the pseudogap region, we calculate the superfluid density ρ s . In To sum up, we identify a pseudogap region above T c and determine its phase boundary primarily by observing single particle spectrum structure, assisted with other observables. C. nFL behavior and fermionic self-energy analysis FIG. Above T c , the fermions near QCP exhibit incoherent properties, which is regarded as the nFL state. To construct this state in a lattice model, reminiscent of prior chosen coupling strength K, we expect it is more convenient to study the nFL in the small K regime, where the superconducting fluctuation is greatly suppressed. We take K = 1 rotor coupled fermions model in Eq. (3), accompanied by Ising coupled fermion model in Eq. In early studies, the ferromagnetic critical point was explored by integrating out fermions departure from FS in the effective action and obtaining the effective Lagrangian for bosonic degrees of freedom, known as HMM theory versus fermionic Matsubara frequency ω n = (2n + 1)πT in Fig. where ω F /ω b is fermionic/bosonic crossover frequency scale, where the self-energies change its power law behavior. ω F ω b guarantees the studied Matsubara frequencies ω n is much smaller than ω b . Therefore, shown as following, one can expand Σ with the power of ωn ω b . Besides, ḡ is the effective fermion-boson coupling, and satisfies ḡ E F , which provides data for Σ(ω n ) for a substantial number of Matsubara points in the range ω n Σ(ω n ). For this reason, vertex corrections that contribute to Σ can be neglected in this regime. These conditions simplify the solving process of Eliashberg equations Our way to deal with the divergence is to separate the contribution of quantum part and thermodynamics part, ωn . Simply speaking, the finite temperature due to the Monte Carlo simulation characters introduces a finite gap, with the gap being the coefficients, playing the role of α(T ). Therefore, at zero temperature, Σ T term vanishes. The 1 ωn behavior can be examined by a few smallest frequencies. For Σ Q (ω n ), the quantum part contribution comes from dynamical bosonic fluctuations. At zero temperature, Σ(ω n ) = Σ Q (ω n ) is just fermionic self-energy at QCP, indicating nFL behavior. One needs to solve the following self-consistent Eliashberg equation, Here, N f = 2 is the number of fermion flavors. Π(q, Ω m ) is the bosonic self-energy solving by free fermions propagator. D(q, Ω m ) is the bosonic propagator, which can be extracted by calculation of dynamic susceptibility, along with Π(q, Ω m ), while G(q, ω n ) is the free fermionic propagators. On the condition when total spin along z-axis is conserved, e.g. Hamiltonian like Eq. ( which indicates the fermionic self energy is ∼ ω 2/3 n and deviates from the Fermi liquid behavior. In view of such behavior emerging near nFL region, we further consider a more general case, where total spin along z-axis is not conserved. The origin comes from the unexpectable dynamical structure factor measured in the uranium metallic materials, e.g. UGe 2 and UCoGe (v F q) 2 +Ω 2 , and we have Π(q) ∼ |Ω| v F q = |Ω| Γ(q) at |Ω| v F q, thus Π(q = 0, Ω) = 0 due to canceling out of the localized and itinerant fermions. Actually in UGe 2 and UCoGe, experiments found Π(q = 0, Ω) remains a finite value Applying the results in the calculation of the selfconsistent Eliashberg equation. The input bosonic has following form, where χ 0 , M 0 , Γ 0 are all extracted from the Monte Carlo simulation results. Note in the next subsection, we will give a detailed description of such formula. Eq. ( in Fig. In antiferromagnetic model, it was hard to directly reveal the scaling form of the nFL self-energies. At h < h c , trival gap leads to the divergence at small ω at hotspots. Near QCP, we find the finite value of ImΣ(ω), when approaching ω = 0. This is in contrast with the previous analysis, which separating the thermal part and the quantum part. Therefore, we conclude that the result for fermionic self-energy at antiferromagnetic QCP needs further explored. The bosonic propagators or bosonic dynamic susceptibility χ(q, Ω m ) also reveal important information about the quantum critical metals. Their definitions for the Ising and rotors are, Generally, in such spin-fermion model, we couple free fermions to the bosons, which have their own dynamics. For the bare Ising or rotors, they both satisfy the dynamic critical exponent z = 1, i.e., the susceptibility reads, where r is the tuning parameter, M r represents the distance towards the QCP. Q = (0, 0) for ferromagnetic and (π, π) for antiferromagnetic models, is the ordered wave vector. When tuning on the coupling between boson and fermion, the bosonic dynamics change their behavior. Previously, HMM theory predicts the dynamic critical exponents at ferromagnetic and antiferromagnetic QCP FIG. change to z = 3 and z = 2, respectively. Several recent simulation results found the difference with the universality of Hertz-Millis-type exponents, indicating nonuniversal behavior near QCP Besides bare nFL state, in Sec. II.B, we discuss the case for K = 4 rotor model and find the bosonic sus- ) has a small but finite value as ωn goes to 0, which is the signature of a non-Fermi-liquid, but still different from the HMM expectation discussed in Sec. II.C and therefore remains to be explained. The figure is adapted from Ref. ceptibility is influenced by superconducting fluctuation and the distance from the QCP. Below, we briefly discuss that even in this case, where the QCP is masked by the superconducting dome, the bosonic susceptibility can still reveal the different scaling behavior. Fig. The behavior is reminiscent of Ising coupled fermions model, as the similar non-analytic function ∆(q, ω) in Tab. I 1a. At small frequencies, χ deviates from the nonzero extrapolation, since the fermions enter the pseudogap region at low temperature. Similar thing manifestes at U = 3.0, where on log-log scale, the slope of 2(corresponding z = 1) behavior is proper description of ferromagnetic phase. Due to the spin gap, the coupled model evolves like bare rotor model, and have no intercept in ferromagnetic phase. However, at U = 6.0 near QCP, we separate the Ω region into three parts according to the temperature region. At large Ω, corresponding T > 0.1, the bosonic self-energies follow non-Landau damping regime and satisfies z = 2(slope is of 1), similar to the expression of Tab. I 1b. Towards low frequencies, the dominant pseudogap region drives z = 2 to z = 1. At lowest temperature studied, because of the superconducting gap, the behavior goes back to bare rotor model with z = 1. There are still many open questions in the study of quantum critical metal. The results summarized in Tab. I for dynamical critical exponent z, are largely consistent with the HMM prediction, for example, when the bosonic 11 Bosonic dynamical susceptibilities χ -1 (q = 0, Ωm) -χ -1 (q = 0, Ω0) at U = 3, 6, 8, corrsponding subfigure (a), (b), (c), respectively. The subfigure (a) and (b) is plotted on log-log scale. (a) At ferromagnetic phase U = 3.0, the lowest frequencies follows the red line guided to the eye, whose slope is of 2, indicating z = 1 behaviors. (b) Near QCP at U = 6.0, The fermionic parts go through nFL, pseudogap, superconducting state from higher to lower temperatures. On account of this, the bosonic dynamical susceptibilities exhibits non-landau damping behavior, transition period, and bare rotor model from higher to lower frequencies, corresponding the crossover from z = 2(slope of 1) to z = 1(slope of 2), descibed by the red and blue line. (c) At disorder phase U = 8.0, the behaviors is similar to that in ferromagnetic phase with both z = 2. The red line is the best fit of the data at Ωm > 0.5, which possess square behaviors. While, a finite intercept exhibits at extrapolation of Ω = 0, as the RPA calculation, where one use free fermionic propagators TABLE I Summary of quantum critical bosonic self-energies for the systems in the review. q is the momentum measured with respect of the ordered wave vector Q = Γ for ferromagnetic and nematic QCPs and Q = Q AF for antiferromagnetic QCP. Ω is the bosonic Matsubara frequency. FM / AFM / Nematic quantum critical scaling obtained from QMC 1. Ferromagnetic QCP Q = Γ 1a. Square lattice, Z2 bosonic symmetry 1b. Square lattice, O(2) bosonic symmetry order parameters are conserved (Ising spin), one obtains the z = 3 for ferromagnetic QCP, z = 2 for antiferromagnetic QCP bosonic self-energies, and only when the bosonic order parameters are not conserved (rotors with O(2) symmetry), one would need higher order perturbative calculation beyond the HMM theory to obtain the z = 2 bosonic self-energy Recently there are hybrid Monte Carlo simulation results As discussed in Secs. I and II, the nFL behavior of interacting electron systems, is widely believed to be relevant to the microscopic origin of the "strange metal" behavior in unconventional superconductors Due to the lack of a natural small control parameter, the analytical solution to these models remains challenging. And in order to see nFL behavior numerically, such models always require us to turn the mass of the boson to the critical value, as seen in the examples in Sec. II. But the system will go back to FL behaviors once away from the QCP. The position of QCP and region of nFL are model dependent and affected by the finite-size effect. In addition, we also need to deduct the non-negligible thermal contributions to the fermionic self-energy and control the strength of effective coupling Recently, nFL behaviors in Sachdev-Ye-Kitaev (SYK) models In this Section, we will discuss our model design and computation for Yukawa-SYK model and the nFL, self-tuned quantum criticality and superconductivity therein Compared with the SYK model that only involves interacting fermions, our Yukawa-SYK model, which is also analytically solvable in the large-N limit, has a dynamical bosonic degree of freedom. As shown in Fig. where M and N are the indices of quantum dots and fermion flavors in Fig. We find the high-rank randomness of the Yukawa coupling t iα,jβ in our model is important for stabilizing the nFL behavior. Also the spinful fermions, with the Pauli matrix σ z in Yukawa coupling term, actually help us to avoid the sign problem in the QMC simulation. Since t iα,jβ is symmetric matrix and φ αβ is antisymmetric, the Hamiltonian is invariant under the antiunitary transformation T = iσ y K, where K is the complex-conjugate operator. Or to put it simply, the matrix elements of different spins are all Hermitian to each other, so no sign problem in the evaluation of the fermion determinants The major difference between the Yukawa-SYK model and those in Sec. II is the random all-to-all coupling. Within the large-N approximation Yukawa-SYK model is "self-tuned" to quantum criticality. The system becomes critical, independent of the bosonic bare mass m 0 . This means we don't need to adjust the parameters close to QCP to study nFLs. Despite this benefit, there are also costs: all-to-all coupling makes the computational complexity of QMC increase from O(βN 3 ) to O(βN 5 M 3 ). Since it is not onsite boson-fermion coupling, the Sherman-Morrison formula for efficiently computing the matrix inversion Through numerical simulation of QMC and large-N calculation, we obtained the global phase diagram of Yukawa-SYK model, as shown in the Fig. B. Normal-state results at N, M → ∞ One can slove the Yukawa-SYK model at the N, M → ∞ limit analytically where Σ and Π are fermionic and bosonic selfenergies. The fermionic Green's functions is -1 are bosonic Green's functions. Since we are considering large N, M limit, only the ratio M/N matters in Eq. Fig. The two types of solutions become smoothly connected at a chemical potential μ c above a certain temperature T c . Here (T c , μ c ) is a thermal critical point of the system, for that the compressibility dn/dμ diverges. The parameter transformation range in Fig. In Refs. where c is a nonuniversal constant, the function α(x) is: and 0 < x < 1/2 is determined by In the time domain, after a Fourier transform we have: Here it's worth noting that the Fourier transform for Π(Ω) shall be carried out carefully, this is because the positive power-law |Ω| 1-2x does not have a Fourier transform in the common sense as the Fourier integral is UV divergent for 0 < x < 1/2. This divergence is canceled by the Fourier transform of the m 2 0 term in Π(Ω) with the UV information. In our Yukawa-SYK model, at a finite but low temperature T = 1/β ω F = ω 3 0 /m 2 0 , the long-time correlated behavior persists where N α,β=1,α =β φ αβ (τ )φ αβ (0) . The Eq. ( It was already well known that in SYK model, the fermion Green's function is incoherent 1/2 The question for the QMC simulation of the Yukawa-SYK model is to explore whether at small and finite M and N , where the perturbative analysis no longer works, the system could still exhibit the nFL behavior as in Eqs. ( According to Eqs. ( In addition, when we consider μ = 0 case, the agreement is also excellent. It is shown in Fig. Self-tuned quantum criticality means the system becomes critical due to the strong mutual feedback between the bosonic and fermionic sectors, independent of the bosonic bare mass m 0 . From Eq. ( which means the boson is critical/gapless no matter what the bosonic bare mass m 0 is, the system renormalizes it to zero via interaction effects. This has been proved to be true in Refs. We can see that in the phase diagram shown in Fig. The leading pairing instability mediated by the critical boson mode is toward a spin-singlet, intra-dot, and intraflavor channel i,α c † iα↑ c † iα↓ and the system has an instability and a low-temperature pairing phase. The FIG. Eliashberg equation is given by: For μ = 0, the pairing problem was analyzed in Ref. However, for μ = 0, now the mismatch between G (±iω n ) leads to a reduced pairing tendency. Now we can consider the weak-coupling limit ω 0 0 , and the value of μ sc beyond which pairing vanishes. At zero temperature, the Schwinger-Dyson equations gave an insulating solution approximated ) and at very weak coupling, with the ansatz Φ(ω) = const In QMC simulation, we can study superconducting phase transitions by measuring pairing correlation. The pair susceptibility is defined as P s = β 0 dτ ∆(τ )∆ † (0) , where ∆ is the pairing field: At finite N , the pairing susceptibility P s does not diverge and can be represented as Here N (and M for a fixed ratio) plays the role of the system size -v and hence the functional dependence of f (x). In the large-N limit, all fluctuation effects are suppressed by 1/N , and such a phase transition is mean-field-like One can see in Fig. In the original SYK model, people use the replica trick and then take the replica diagonal ansatz to formally obtain analytical results of the nFL behavior. The Replica trick is ln Z = lim M →0 ln Z M M and replica diagonal means replacing the quenched disorder with annealed disorder. The justification for it is that replica nondiagonal processes are usually suppressed by 1/N On the other hand, we have the following understanding: if the system breaks replica symmetry, the true ground state is then a spin glass. For example, in some bosonic SYK models To properly address this question, we can construct a model in a similar form of Eq. ( we note now t ij = 0, t ij t kl = (δ ik δ jl + δ il δ jk ) ω 3 0 . In Fig. In contrast, we can see that in Fig. Besides the Yukawa-SYK QMC studies presented in Secs. III.C, III.D and III.E, there is also new QMC re- search on complex SYK model Overall, there are still many interesting open questions in the study of SYK and SYK-like models. For example, planckian metal Quantum Moiré systems such as TBG and TMD systems, bestowed with the quantum geometry of wavefunctions -manifested in the distribution of Berry curvature in the flat bands -and strong long-range Coulomb electron interactions, exhibit rich phase diagram of correlated insulating and superconducting phases thanks to the high tunability by twisting angles, gating and tailored design of the dielectric environment. The extremely active research field of 2D quantum Moiré materials is developing very fast The theoretical efforts, from model design to the computation solutions in the quantum Moiré lattice models are also moving forward rapidly. The real space effective lattice models gave rise to the proper description of the ground state insulating phases with various symmetry breakings patterns and topological nature have been obtained both from the mean-field type analysis and quantum Monte Carlo and tensor-network many-body computations Later on, it was understood that due to the quantum metric in the flat-band wavefunction and the 2D longrange Coulomb interactions, the proper description of the quantum Moiré lattice model shall be constructed in continuum in momentum space. And it is from here the exact solutions at the chiral limit Many interesting properties of the quantum Moiré lattice model have been discovered ever since and people gradually find many evidence Since the field of quantum Moiré materials is developing very fast, it is nevertheless not the purpose of this section to present an exhaustive survey of all the efforts in the understanding of the rich physics of quantum Moiré materials, but mainly focus on the model design and computation solutions inspired by the fast development of the field, and in a mutually constructive manner, demonstrate how our attitude of a sport and a pastime The interactions act on every hexagon and consist of the cluster charge term Q and the assisted-hopping interaction term T . (Right) Ground-state phase diagram, spanned by the U/W and α axes, obtained from QMC simulations. The y-axis at U = 0 (dashed line) stands for the Dirac semimetal phase. At small U , the ground state is a QVH (quantum Valley Hall) phase characterized by emergent imaginary nextnearest-neighbor hopping with complex conjugation at the valley index, as illustrated by the red and green dashed hoppings with opposite directions. Upon further increasing U , an IVC (inter-valley-coherent) insulating state is found, which breaks the SU(4) symmetry at every lattice site by removing the valley symmetry. Since it preserves the lattice translational symmetry, it is ferromagnetic-like. The cVBS insulator, which appears after the IVC phase, breaks the lattice translational symmetry and preserves the on-site SU(4) symmetry. The IVC phase is stable at strong coupling limit. This figure is adapted from Ref. of doing so, actually either solve the present mysteries or point out the new directions that await to be explored. To properly take the long-range Coulomb interactions into consideration in the Moiré system and explain various correlated insulating phases at the integer fillings such as the quantum anomalous Hall and intervalley-coherent insulators, one would need to start with the continuum model at momentum space, i.e., the Bistritzer-MacDonald (BM) But before going directly to the continuum model, one can still construct real-space lattice effective model at the Moiré scale which captures the extended interactions beyond the Hubbard-type local interaction As shown in Fig. here the Wannier orbitals, denoted by the operators c ilσ , live on the sites i of the Moiré superlattice and are labeled by spin σ =↑, ↓ and two orbital degrees of freedom l = 1, 2 (roughly corresponding to the two valleys). U sets the overall strength of the Coulomb interaction. The two interaction terms in Eq. ( The QMC simulation results are summarized in the Fig. While the precise value of U/W in TBG is not known, a widely used estimate is that this ratio is of order 1 Furthermore, we also initiated the DMRG simulation at the filling factor of 3/4 of the same real-space model with extended interactions and found the quantum anomalous Hall (QAH) insulator where U = 1 sets the energy unit (∼ 40 meV in realistic system A quantum anomalous Hall (QAH) topological Mott insulator (TMI) with spontaneous time-reversal symmetry breaking and nonzero Chern number and a chargedensity-wave (CDW) insulator have been discovered in the DMRG computation of Eq. ( It has been found that the CDW and QAH phase are separated by a first-order transition extending from the transition point α 0.12 Fig. When T = 0.08, a representative temperature, the renormalized spectral function quasi-particle gave us the information of the correlated band in Fig. In order to consider the long-range Coulomb interaction and the Wannier obstruction problem, recently there have been a lot of studies to simulate TBG and other Moiré lattice models in momentum space q,G,|q+G| =0 V (q + G)δρ q+G δρ -q-G (25) and where 1 q 1 -e -qd is the long-ranged single gate Coulomb interaction, with d/2 is the distance between graphene layer and single gate and is the dielectric constant. Here the Moiré lattice vector L M = a0 The BM model in plane wave basis e -ik•r e ik /r where and , with u 0 and u 1 are the intra-sublattice and inter-sublattice interlayer tunneling amplitudes. τ = ± is the valley index and σ τ = (τ σ x , σ y ). K τ 1 and K τ 2 are the corresponding Dirac points of the bottom and top layers of graphene, and k ∈ mBZ and G 1 and G 2 are the reciprocal vectors of mBZ. We set v F /a 0 = 2.37745eV, with a 0 = 0.246 nm and u 1 = 0.11eV. The twist angle θ = 1.08 • is the first magic angle, which can result in flat band in chiral limit(u 0 =0 eV). Adding back to the flat-band dispersion, the Hamilto- Here u0 = 60 meV is a realistic case nian in Moiré lattice model in continuum reads, and m,τ (k) is the bare dispersion With the method developed, we can now compute the detailed static, dynamic and thermodynamic propers of the Moiré lattice models in continuum. As shown in Fig. Although the ground state of the Moiré lattice models at integer fillings are exactly solvable For example, to properly study the symmetry break- . The dashed lines are the exact solution of the single-particle dispersion at the flat-band limit following Ref. (e) and (f). Dynamical spectra of VP and IVC with the same parameters. We obtain sharp and ferromagnetic-like valley waves in both channels near q = Γ. The black line gave the q 2 fitting. At the energy scale of twice the single-particle gap, ∼ 20 meV, valley waves are over-damped into the particle-hole continuum. Again the dashed lines are the analytic computation of the Goldstone mode at the flat-band limit following Ref. ing phases in the charge-neutrality point of TBG, we can define the valley polarization (VP) and intervalleycoherence (IVC) order parameters as O a (q, τ ) ≡ k d † k+q (τ )M a d k (τ ), with M a = τ z η 0 (η 0 for band index) for VP and M a = τ x η y or τ y η y for the IVC states When we add the kinetic energy term, the degeneracy of IVC/VP will be broken, since an IVC state breaks the continuous U (1) symmetry while a VP state breaks the discrete Z 2 symmetry. The difference will results different behaviors of dynamics fluctuations in VP and IVC states. In the QMC simulation, we can compute the correlation of VP/IVC order parameters and investigate their difference. The correlation functions of order parameters are defined as: and their results, S(q = Γ, τ = 0) of VP/IVC for various temperatures, are shown in Fig. We can further compute the dynamic correlations of the IVC and VP fermion bilinears, and their spectra with the system size of 9 × 9 for the realistic case with kinetic energy at u 0 = 60 meV at low temperature T = 0.667 meV, are shown in Fig. k θ = 8π sin(θ/2)/ (3a 0 ) and the lattice constant of the monolayer graphene a 0 = 0.246 nm). What needs to be noted is that the sharp quadratic Goldstone-like modes means an approximate SU (2) symmetry survives, but it is an approximate SU (2) symmetry. At very small q and ω, there's no such symmetry and no dominant ferromagnetic Goldstone modes, and then we will see a linear dispersion ω ∝ q, corresponding to the SU(2) symmetry breaking and magnon-like excitation In addition, we can see damping of collective modes above the energy scale of ∼ 20 meV. Such results beyond mean-field type of calculations have the following possible origins: The TBG model in Eq. -λ m,n,-τ (k, k + q + G)d † k,m,-τ d k+q,n,-τ (30) which accounts to an inter-valley attraction and intravalley repulsion in this new model, while the original model in Eq. ( We find for the new model, at the flat band limit, the single-particle correlation function are still fully gapped, the same as in TBG model at the charge neutrality point. But the difference is that now this gap is the Cooper pair gap, instead of an insulating gap. For T V , all electrons are paired into Cooper pairs, which means the system is a fluid of Cooper pairs without unpaired fermions. In addition, the bosonic fluid has a high compressibility, which diverges at zero temperature limit. We label this state as SCBF (for super-compressible bosonic fluid) in our phase diagrams Fig. We then compute the correlation function of the Cooper pairs ∆(t)∆ † (0) and the corresponding susceptibility to determine the superconducting phase transition temperature, where ∆ = k,m d -k,m,-τ d k,m,τ , note here t is the imaginary time and τ is used as the valley index. The QMC obtained diagrams are shown in Fig. . Here n 0 is the particle density and Np = k,m,τ d † k,m,τ d k,m,τ is the particle number operator of flat bands. We see the large compressibility above the superconducting dome. In Fig. The three categories of systems, the quantum critical metals, the Yukawa-SYK models and the quantum Moiré lattice models, are all at the heart of the frontier quantum many-body research of novel and highly-entangled matter. Their intrinsic difficulties, such as the precise treatment of the quantum critical fluctuations, the allto-all couplings in Yukawa-SYK models and the fruitful interplay between the quantum geometry in the flat-band wave function and the long-range Coulomb interaction in the Moiré materials, are all the quintessential characteristics of modern strongly correlated electron problems and it is in their gradually analytic and numeric solutions lie the future of the condensed matter and quantum material research. Complicated as they are, these problems are also extremely interesting, and it is here in this review we try to present efforts in the spirit of "A Sport and A Pastime" It is well-known that not only all the quantum manybody problems are difficult, with different lattice geometry, interaction form, computation complexity, etc, but a particular quantum many-body system is difficult in its own way, as have been avidly shown in the three categories of models in this review. Yet we still would like to convey a message that with the spirit of a sport and a pastime, these difficult problems can still be solved with the principal organ of scientific activities -the inspired curiosity, imagination and persistent efforts -that is, as long as we are compelled, by the rich and beautiful and everlasting discoveries in quantum many-body systems, to invent and discover, in this context the numerical methodologies and theoretical understandings in the pursuit of the model design and computation, the even richer understanding and brighter frontiers in quantum many-body systems are yet awaiting us to explore. We are in great debt to the former group members Xiao Yan Xu, Zihong Liu, Yuzhi Liu, Wei Wang, Yuan Da Liao and Chuang Chen for having the pleasure and wonderful experience to work together on the works mentioned. We thank Avraham Klein, Yuxuan Wang, Kai Sun and Andrey Chubukov for close collaborations on the topics of quantum critical metals and Yukawa-SYK models over the years. We acknowledge Xiyue Li, Yi Zhang, Clara Breiø, Jian Kang, Oskar Vafek, Brian Anderson, Rafael Fernandes, Tao Shi, Wei Li, Xu Zhang, Bin-Bin Chen, Hongyu Lu, Heqiu Li and Kai Sun for stimulating collaborations on the topics related with quantum Morié material models. GPP, WLJ and ZYM acknowledge support from the Research Grants Council of Hong Kong SAR of China (Grant Nos. 17303019, 17301420, 17301721 and AoE/P-701/20), the K. C. Wong Education Foundation (Grant No. GJTD-2020-01), and the Seed Funding "Quantum-Inspired explainable-AI" at the HKU-TCL Joint Research Centre for Artificial Intelligence. We thank the Computational Initiative at the Faculty of Science and HPC2021 system under the Information Technology Services at the University of Hong Kong, and the Tianhe platforms at the National Supercomputer Centers for their technical support and generous allocation of CPU time. Ising is the bosonic Hamiltonian realized in the form of a transverse field quantum Ising model with antiferromagnetic nearest neighbor coupling J = 1. H Int is the coupling term between the Ising spin and the fermion via an inter-layer onsite Ising coupling ξ = 1 and σ