Continued advances in superconducting qubit performance require more detailed understandings of the many sources of decoherence. Within these devices, two-level systems arise due to defects, interfaces, and grain boundaries, and are thought to be a major source of qubit decoherence at millikelvin temperatures. In addition to Al, Nb is a commonly used metalization layer for superconducting qubits. Consequently, a significant effort is required to develop and qualify processes that mitigate defects in Nb films. As the fabrication of complete superconducting qubits and their characterization at millikelvin temperatures is a time and resource intensive process, it is desirable to have measurement tools that can rapidly characterize the properties of films and evaluate different treatments. Here we show that measurements of the variation of the superconducting critical temperature T c with an applied external magnetic field H (of the phase boundary T c -H) performed with very high resolution show features that are directly correlated with the structure of the Nb films. In combination with x-ray diffraction measurements, we show that one can even distinguish variations quality and crystal orientation of the grains in a Nb film by small but reproducible changes in the measured superconducting phase boundary. Two-level systems (TLSs) in superconducting devices form significant sources of qubit decoherence at millikelvin temperatures, The ultimate test of these mitigation strategies would be to fabricate superconducting qubits with processed Nb films and measure their coherence times at millikelvin temperatures. However, this is a time consuming and expensive process which severely limits the throughput of materials development. Alternatively, materials science characterization tools such as scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM), Conversely, macroscopic electrical transport measurements are well suited for evaluation of process changes to superconducting films. For example, simple temperature dependent resistivity measurements can determine T c , and the low temperature sheet resistance and residual resistivity ratio (RRR) provide information about the amount of disorder in the film. More sophisticated measurements can provide important microscopic parameters of the superconductivity itself. Here, we focus on one such technique which measures the superconducting phase boundary T c -H rapidly and with high precision. From Ginzburg-Landau (GL) theory, T c of a superconducting film with an external field H applied perpendicular to the plane of the film varies with H as where ξ 0 is the zero-temperature GL coherence length, T c0 is the zero-field transition temperature, and Φ 0 = h/2e is the superconducting flux quantum. When applied to the study of arbitrary superconducting films, this analysis is most frequently performed by tracing the resistive transition of the film at various fixed fields, defining T c as T at a fixed fraction of the normal state resistance, and plotting this T c as a function of H. This approach suffers from several drawbacks. First, in cryogenic probes used for such measurements, there is always a thermal lag between the temperature of the thermometer and that of the sample. Thus it is important to sweep slowly both up and down in temperature through the resistive transition so that the hysteresis in the traces is minimized. This is time consuming and incurs additional cryogen and operational costs. Second, the discrete nature of the magnetic fields at which T c is determined may result in features of the phase boundary being missed. To avoid these issues, we have used a feedback technique that allows for the measurement of T c as a continuous function of H. Our results show non-linear deviations from GL theory in the phase boundary that, via comparison with XRD measurements, appear correlated with the crystal grain structure and disorder in the films. The Nb films examined in this work were deposited via High Power Impulse Magnetron Sputtering (HiPIMS) at a nominal base pressure ≤ 10 -9 Torr. To study the role of the film/substrate interface 40 nm or 155 nm films were deposited on three different substrates: 1) intrinsically doped (001) oriented Si; 2) a-plane Al 2 O 3 with (110) termination; and 3) cplane Al 2 O 3 with (006) termination. These substrates were chosen to qualify and improve upon current fabrication techniques, as (001) oriented Si is the substrate used for commercial production of many superconducting qubits, In addition, separate 40 nm thick films deposited on a-Al 2 O 3 substrates were vacuum annealed at 1000 • C for 30 minutes at 10 -10 Torr. This treatment resulted in enhanced epitaxy of the Nb, with the [1 10] Nb plane oriented along the[100] direction on the (110) Al 2 O 3 surface. X-ray diffraction (XRD) rocking curve data show that this treatment results in the average grain size of the Nb increasing from 7 nm to 124 nm, with columnar growth extending from the substrates to the surface oxide (see Supp. S2). Figure The devices were measured in a custom probe inserted into a He dewar with a 3 T maximum field perpendicular to the plane of the films. In the probe, the devices were mounted in vacuum and thermally anchored to a variable temperature stage that is weakly coupled to the 4K flange of the probe. By controlling the power through a heater mounted on this stage, the temperature of the stage could be varied with a short response time. The accuracy of the thermometer was verified by measuring the transition of a 99.99% pure Nb wire, which showed a T c of 9.22 K. The resistance of the devices were measured by custom modified Adler-Jackson ac resistance bridges, To initially qualify the superconducting transition of the films, the power to the stage heater was ramped slowly under computer control. Fig. To accurately measure T c -H, we use a feedback technique to maintain the resistance of the sample at a specified value along the superconducting transition by adjusting the set-point resistance of the bridge to the desired value as an applied magnetic field is swept. The error signal from the bridge is then used as the input to a homemade analog proportional-integraldifferential (PID) controller which controls the power to the stage heater to maintain the sample resistance. By fixing the bridge resistance at R n /2, the temperature as read from the thermometer directly gives T c when the error signal is minimized by the PID under feedback. To define the transition width, one can additionally measure T -H at other values of resistance, such as 5% R n and 95% R n to measure the transition width (see Fig. Figure Fig. As noted before, Nb films grow with a (110) termination on a-Al 2 O 3 , with the [1 10] direction of the Nb films oriented along the [100] surface direction on the a-Al 2 O 3 . XRD measurements (Supp. S1) show that UHV annealing yields columnar grains reaching from substrate to surface with lateral sizes as large at ∼120 nm, much larger the ξ 0 . To explore the dependence of the superconducting properties as a function of the angle between the in-plane crystal direction and the current direction, Hall bars oriented with their lengths at specific angles to the Nb [1 10] orientation were fabricated from the film. T c -H curves for these samples are shown in Fig. In summary, we observe unexpected nonlinearities in the superconducting phase boundaries of thin polycrystalline Nb films fabricated on different substrates. These nonlinearities are due the distributions of critical temperatures and coherence lengths of crystal grains in the films. Careful measurements of the superconducting phase boundary as demonstrated here, thus enable a rapid means of determining the quality of Nb films used in the fabrication of superconducting qubits. The as-deposited film shows a wide Bragg Nb (110) peak suggesting low crystallinity and a large offset with the Nb(110) bulk value as seen in Fig. A. Premkumar, C. Weiland, S. Hwang, B. Jäck, A. P. M. Place, I. Waluyo, A. Hunt, V. Bisogni, J. Pelliciari, A. Barbour, M. S. Miller, P. Russo,