The domain dynamics and spin-spin correlation of 2D ferromagnets Cr2X2Te6 (X=Si, Ge) are investigated by a composite magnetoelectric method. The magnetic field-temperature phase diagrams for both in-plane and out-of-plane magnetic fields disclose a triple point around TC and 1 kOe, where ferromagnetic, paramagnetic, and spin-polarized phases coexist. The magnetoelectric signal shows peak features at the phase boundaries and reaches the maximum at the triple point, suggesting significant enhancement of spin-spin correlations at this point. A comparison between two systems reveals that the spin-spin correlations in Cr2Si2Te6 are stronger than that in Cr2Ge2Te6. Recently, the easy-exfoliated layered 2D magnetic materials such as CrI3 [1], Cr2Ge2Te6(CGT) [2], Cr2Si2Te6 (CST) Chromium tellurides CST and CGT are uniaxial ferromagnetic (FM) semiconductors [6] and belong to the class of layered transition metal trichalcogenides, which are crystallized in the trigonal space group R3 (148). Figure Fluctuations and correlations in these systems play a decisive role in phase transitions and critical phenomena. In previous studies, the spin-spin correlations above TC in CGT and CST are clearly revealed in static magnetic susceptibility [7], X-band electron spin resonance [6], second harmonic generation (SHG) In principle, the piezomagnetic coefficient (=d/dH) is also closely related with magnetic interactions and often discussed in terms of strain-dependence of free energy. Clear differences in the magnitude of spin-spin correlation between CST and CST were revealed in ferromagnetic resonance (FMR) measurements Recently, an ac technique of piezoelectric transducer Single crystals of CGT and CST with a typical size of 9.0×4.5×0.5 mm 3 were grown by self-flux method We first reveal that the different microscopic domain dynamics in the magnetization processes between H1 and H3 configurations can be reflected in the magnetostriction curve. As an example, the magnetic field and temperature dependence of magnetostriction λ 3 of CST single crystal for both magnetic field directions are measured, as shown in Figs. In H1 case, Selter et al. From the direct magnetostriction measurements, it is hard to determine the microscopic mechanisms in each configuration. In contrast, the composite magnetoelectric method is a very sensitive ac technique for probing magnetostrictive properties, and thus provides more information on the dynamics of magnetization process. To apply the composite ME method in both systems, we mechanically bond the single crystals with PMN-PT to form a ME composite, as shown in Fig. where V MEij is the voltage measured along i-axis for H applied along j-axis, d31 is the transverse piezoelectric coefficient, qij are the piezomagnetic coefficients, i.e., dλi/dHj, where λi is the magnetostriction along i-axis for H along j-axis. According to these equations, VME33(H) and This line was attributed to a phase boundary between FM and other phases in literature Judging from thermodynamic criteria, the phase boundary between FM and PM is a second order in nature To examine the influence of TP on the magnetostrictive properties, we draw the contour plot of Vx -T as the background of each phase diagram. From TP, the Vx becomes smaller towards lower temperatures in the FM phase due to the freezing of spin fluctuation. Towards higher temperatures in the PM phase, Vx slowly decays due to the suppression of short-range spin-spin correlations by thermal fluctuations. With increasing magnetic field from TP, Vx is governed by volume magnetostriction and decays towards higher H due to the increase of Zeeman energy. All the tendencies point to an enhanced Vx signals around the TPs in both systems. The enhancement of ME signal at TP can be understood from its phase coexistence nature. This is very similar to the morphotropic phase boundary in ferroelectrics The peak behavior of Vx in T scan data can be understood from the perspective of thermodynamics, where the expression of the piezomagnetic coefficient •Sg> can persist well above TC together with different decaying speed Finally, our previous studies based on magnetic resonance technique show that the spin fluctuations in CST are much stronger than those for CGT In conclusion, our results demonstrate that the composite ME technique is a highly sensitive probe for domain dynamics and spin-spin correlation and their associated magnetostrictive properties. It is complementary to the capacitance dilatometry method and other methods due to the existence of imaginary part that provides extra information. This technique is particularly superior for studying the quasi-two-dimensional magnetic materials with a thin thickness, because they have a tiny absolute change along thickness direction and is hard to be loaded in the capacitance dilatometry for in-plane measurements. It is also a fast and low-cost technique for mapping the magnetic phase diagram of bulk magnetic materials. We anticipate that this approach can be further applied to investigate spin-spin correlation in other magnetic systems such as antiferromagnets or spin glasses. ∂T