We present a model of a strongly correlated system with a non-Fermi liquid high temperature phase. Its ground state undergoes an insulator to superconductor quantum phase transition (QPT) as a function of a pairing interaction strength. Both the insulator and the superconductor are originating from the same interaction mechanism. The resistivity in the insulating phase exhibits the activation behavior with the activation energy, which goes to zero at the QPT. This leads to a wide quantum critical regime with an algebraic temperature dependence of the resistivity. Upon raising the temperature in the superconducting phase, the model exhibits a finite temperature phase transition to a Bose metal phase, which separates the superconductor from the non-Fermi liquid metal. Quantum phase transition between the superconducting and insulating phases is observed in a variety of experimental systems, notably high-T c materials Here we investigate a rather simple model, where the non-Fermi liquid strange metal state undergoes the superconducting instability upon lowering the temperature. The origin of the superconductivity is in a certain pairing mechanism The model consists of an array of Sachdev-Ye-Kitaev (SYK) Here the first term describes the set of isolated SYK+U grains labeled by r, H (r) SYK+U = N i jkl;σσ J (r) i j;kl c † r,iσ c † r, jσ c r,kσ c r,lσ - where J (r) i j;kl is a real tensor with the following symmetry properties: J (r) i j;kl = -J (r) ji;kl = -J (r) i j;lk = J (r) lk; ji . The non-zero elements must have all four indexes i, j, k, l distinct. Up to these symmetries, the matrix elements J (r) i j;kl are assumed to be real independent random variables (uncorrelated between different grains), drawn from the Gaussian distribution with the zero mean, J (r) i j;kl = 0, and the variance J (r) i j;kl 2 = J 2 /(4N) 3 . The last term in Eq. ( where t (r,r ) i j are real Gaussian variables with zero mean and t (r,r ) i j 2 = t 2 0 /N. Here r, r denotes nearest neighbor positions of SYK+U grains within the array and i, j = 1, . . . , N denote orbital labels within each grain. Before tackling the array geometry, let us briefly remind the physics of a single SYK+U grain, as described by Eq. ( Solution of Eqs. ( The mean-field treatment fails to account for fluctuations of the low-energy degrees of freedom represented by phases of local pairing amplitudes, c j↓ c j↑ = ∆e iφ j , with j = 1, . . . , N. Dynamics of these phases is governed by an effective Hamiltonian which represents the quantum version of the classical Kuramoto model of oscillator's synchronization where and ω m = 2πmT is bosonic Matsubara frequency. The correlation function Eq. ( The fact that the fluctuations of the order parameter exhibit a single resonant mode is a peculiarity of the Kuramoto model ( Notice that the local self-energy, c), involves tunneling of the pair out and back in the selected grain. Having summarized the behavior of a single SYK+U grain, we turn now to our main subject -the array of such grains. We start from the insulating phase, U < U c . Due to the Kuramoto phase desynchronization, the supercurrent between the grains is absent. In the lowest (second) order in the tunneling amplitude, t (r,r ) i j , the normal conductivity is given by the diagram Fig. The dressed retarded(advanced) propagators, are given by D In the limit T, γ < 1 , one finds with the help of Eq. ( Therefore the pair transport in the insulating state of the array exhibits the activation dependence on the temperature. The corresponding activation exponent, 1 (U), Eq. ( These power laws represent Gaussian exponents of the QPT. We do not attempt here to discuss if fluctuation corrections affect the critical exponents. The quantum critical regime extends above the T = 0 QPT point, Fig. We turn now to the superconducting side of the QPC. Here the ground state of each isolated grain is superconducting. The grains thus form the Josephson junction array with the inter-grain Josephson energy E J ∼ t 2 0 /J. Since the individual phases of N orbitals within each grain are locked φ (r) i = φ (r) , the grain's charging energy is In other words, the effective electric capacitance of the whole grain is N times larger than the quantum capacitance of the single orbital. By raising the temperature, the array undergoes the classical phase transition to the incoherent state at the critical temperature of the order of the Josephson energy E J . At temperatures higher than the Josephson energy but still below the superconducting energy gap, the phase coherence between the grains in the array is lost, while each grain in the array remains superconducting. Therefore the single particle transport is suppressed and the normal current is carried by incoherent Cooper pairs. It is thus denoted as Bose metal in Fig. In Bose metal regime the conductivity of the array can be calculated from the conductivity of a single junction with simple circuit theory rules. We thus evaluate the conductivity of one junction, considering the rest of the array as an effective dissipative medium. Within this approach an escape of a Cooper pair from a grain through (Z -1) other junctions provides a mechanism for the loss of the phase coherence across the junction of interest. The single Josephson junction is governed by the action The resulting equation of motion φ = E C E J sin(φ) describes dynamics of the superconducting phase of an isolated junction. For a junction embedded in the incoherent array, the equation of motion above is amended with the relaxation term and the corresponding Langevin noise The dissipation coefficient σ and the Langevin noise ξ are tied by the fluctuation-dissipation relation Consequently σ is identified with the Ohmic conductivity of the junction, which is in turn related to the circuit RC relaxation rate γ as σ = (2e) 2 γ/E C . The RC relaxation rate is given by a pair escape into the rest of the array evaluated in the Supplemental material Parametrically it is the same as conductivity in the low temperature, T < t 2 0 /J, Fermi liquid regime of the normal SYK array where the Kuramoto synchronization within the grain is lost. At higher temperature the array enters the quantum critical region described above, see Eq. ( In conclusion, we proposed an array of SYK+U grains as a microscopic model that reproduces some crucial parts of the high-T c phase diagram. Despite simplicity of its Hamiltonian, the model exhibits a rather rich phenomenology. At zero temperature it features QPT between the insulating and the superconducting states, both induced by the Hubbard U. The insulating phase reminds the pseudogap physics of preformed incoherent Cooper pairs, described by the quantum Kuramoto picture. The low-temperature resistivity here obeys the Arrhenius law with the activation energy, which smoothly goes to zero approaching the transition. At yet a higher temperature the Cooper pairs melt giving way to a non Fermi liquid metal with the linear in temperature resistivity. This features qualitatively agree with a non-monotonous temperature dependence of resistance in the pseudogap phase observed in several experiments We are grateful to A. Chubukov, L. Glazman, A. Goldman, C. Marcus, and A. Schnirman for useful discussions. AK was supported by the NSF grant DMR-2037654. Here we provide detailed derivation of the phase correlation functions Eq. ( This is the action for N particles on the ring interacting by the cosine potential. We employ Hubbard-Stratonovich decoupling, introducing the order parameter field for the phase synchronization transition which results in the following partition function where To obtain the correlation function of the phase exponents at different sites, we introduce site-local source fields ητ i , η τ i , thus obtaining the generating functional where Further we expand ln Z φ up to quadratic order in ρ in the non-synchronized phase ( e ±iφ = 0) to get where Note that Z 0 is the partition function of a free quantum rotor, hence it can be calculated exactly using the energy spectrum , where denotes z-projection of the angular momentum. Going over to Matsubara frequency space, the total generating function can be written as where D 0 (ω n ) denotes the on-site correlation function of phase exponents in the absence of Kuramoto interaction, where T τ denotes the time-ordering in the imaginary time τ, The normalization factor N ensures the condition e iφ τ e -iφ τ = 1. At low temperatures, T E 1 , D 0 (ω n ) can be approximated by the term with = 0, This approximation is used in the main text of the paper. Integrating out the fields ρ, ρ, we obtain where Explicitly Eq. The second term in Eqs. ( This is exactly the correlation function of phase exponents in Eq. ( The one particle Green function of the SYK+U model has been determined analytically in the limiting cases of low and high temperature in Ref. where ∆ denotes the absolute value of the local Cooper pair amplitude given by the solution of the mean field equation. In contrast to the conventional BCS superconductor, the one particle energy gap is strongly reduced due to the non-Femi-liquid ground state of the underlying SYK model. The presence of the gap leads to the exponential decay of the one particle Green function with the decay time τ For further calculations we adopt simplified form of the one-particle Green functions, replacing the decay on the time-scale τ ∆ by a hard cutoff. With that approximation, the imaginary time one particle Green function at zero temperature reads where θ(τ ∆ -|τ|) denotes the Heaviside step function. In this subsection we present the approximate evaluation of the Josephson coupling between two SYK+U grains. The diagram for the interaction between the superconducting order parameters in the two grains is shown in Fig. where we defined Evaluation of the integral in Eq. ( Taking into account that the integration kernel depends only logarithmically on the difference ττ with maximum at small time-differences, we can write the action Eq. ( , we obtain Finally, separating the superconducting order parameter at each site of each SYK+U grain into the constant mean field amplitude and fluctuating phase, ∆ ri = ∆e iφ ri (τ) , we can represent Eq. ( where the Josephson energy is obtained as In this section we calculate tunneling contribution to the broadening of the Cooper pair resonant state (the Cooperon) at the energy 1 . The broadening of the Cooper pair resonance is calculated using the Dyson equation for the propagator of the phase correlations, which is represented by diagrams in Fig. where 1 = E 1 (E 1 -2g). The thick wavy lines in Fig. where Z denotes the coordination number of the array. The formal solution of Eq. ( Substituting the explicit form Eq. ( Therefore, due to the escape of Cooper pairs, the resonant state at the energy 1 broadens into the semi-circular band. For |ω -1 | 1 we approximate For the calculation of conductivity represented in the next Section, we use the simplified expression Comparison of Eqs. ( The solution Eq. ( To evaluate the broadening γ close to the critical point for 1 Z 1/4 √ E J E 1 , we consider the equality between Eqs. ( To estimate a typical value of γ at low frequencies ω < 2Z 1/4 √ E 1 E J , we choose ω such, that the solution for γ is real. Then we obtain from Eq. ( at ω = √ 2γ. At different values of ω, γ acquires an imaginary part, which corresponds to the real part of the self-energy. However, due to the continuity of γ as a function of frequency, we accept Eq. ( Here we calculate the conductance between the two Kuramoto grains coupled by the Josephson coupling E J . Assuming that the quantum coherence is lost after a single act of the inter-grain tunneling, the conductivity of the array is obtained form the conductivity of the single junction using the electric circuit theory. The action for two Kuramoto grains reads Here the source vector potential A(τ) is introduced in such a way that is creates the voltage difference between the two grains (A = vτ corresponds to a constant voltage v between the grains). The partition function is given by The conductivity is calculated as the response to the source vector potential Here Q(ω) is the retarded response function, which is obtained by analytic continuation to real frequencies of the derivative with respect to the source vector potential The derivatives with respect to the source vector potential generate correlation functions of phase exponents, which are given by the following expressions j e ±iφ r j (τ) = 0, (57) j, j e iφ r j (τ) e -iφ r j (0) = ND(τ)δ r,r . where the Fourier-transform of D(τ) is given by Eq. 5. Integration contour in the complex plane iΩ n → z for calculation of the AL response Q(iω n ) in Eq. ( The response function Q(iω n ) is calculated by the analytic continuation of the Matsubara frequency iΩ n to the complex plain as shown in Fig. Finally, performing the analytic continuation to real frequency iω n → ω + io and using Eq. ( In the insulating phase at low temperatures, γ 1 , Eq. ( 6. Aslamasov-Larkin (AL) contribution to the conductivity. of the second order poles, which results in Eq. ( Close to the quantum phase transition, for 1 γ the dissipation-induced broadening cuts off the divergence in Eq. (63) for 1 → 0. Evaluation of the integral in Eq. (62) in the quantum critical regime 1 /T 1 gives 8 , for T/γ 5π 16 (2T/γ) 7 , for T/γ 1, which results in the approximate temperature dependence of the conductivity provided in the main text of the paper T for T/γ 1, γ for T/γ 1. (64) F. Escape rate of a Cooper pair in the incoherent JJ-array The array of Josephson junctions is determined by the conventional Hamiltonian where the sum runs over the nearest neighbor grains. The regime of the incoherent Josephson array is characterized by the relation T E J E C , where T denotes the temperature, E J is the Josephson energy, and E C is the charging energy of a single superconducting grain. In that regime, each grain has a well defined local superconducting order, although the phases of different grains are uncorrelated due to large temperature fluctuations. It is then reasonable to adopt a set of isolated grains at finite temperature as a zero approximation and treat the Josephson coupling as a perturbation. The eigenstates of the isolated grain are quantized according to the angular momentum canonically conjugated to the superconducting phase φ (physically those states correspond to a fixed number of Cooper pairs in the grain). At high temperature, each grain is in the mixed state that is characterized by the diagonal density matrix determined by the thermodynamic Boltsmann distribution where the normalization The Josephson coupling acts as a hopping amplitude for Cooper pairs between neighbor grains. Because the superconducting phases of different grains are uncorrelated, the escape of a Cooper pair from the grain results in the relaxation of the superconducting phase. In this section we estimate the escape rate of a Cooper pair from a grain as the broadening of the angular momentum energy levels. The latter can be evaluated self-consistently, using the Dyson equation (see Fig. Here D R (ω) = (ωδ + io) -1 denotes the retarded Green function of the single superconducting grain in the excited state with the angular momentum , δ = E C ( + 1/2), and Z denotes the coordination number. The function D R (ω) is easily obtained from Eq. ( one obtains from Eq. (68) the self-consistency condition for γ, which reads where erfc(x) denotes the complementary error function. Finally, we represent the self-consistent equation for the level broadening in the form Eq. ( We obtain G. Conductivity in the incoherent Josephson array In this section we evaluate the temperature dependence of conductivity for the incoherent Josephson array at temperatures much exceeding the superconducting transition temperature T E J . We adopt the picture of the array as an electric circuit of Josephson junctions, for which the total conductivity can be calculated from the conductivity of a single junction using circuit theory rules. Therefore, the temperature dependence of the total conductivity is determined by that of the single Josephson junction. The dynamics of the relative superconducting phase of the Josephson junction is governed by the action where C denotes the capacitance of the junction related to the charging energy in Eq. ( Here σ introduces the phase relaxation and ξ(t) is the Langevin source related to the relaxation by the fluctuation-dissipation relation Taking into account the relations between the phase φ, the voltage v, and the total charge of the grain Q, φ = 2ev, Q = Cv, Eq. (77) can be rewritten in form of the prominent resistively and capacitively shunted junction (RCSJ) where I C = C v = C 2e φ, I R = v/R = σ 2e φ, and I S = -2eE J sin(φ). Here we assume that the phase coherence of a Cooper pair is lost along any indirect path connecting the two grains of the junction. Therefore, the escape of a Cooper pair into the rest of the array acts as the source of the resistive current I R . For the current-biased RCSJ, rhs of Eq. (79) should be amended with the external current In turn, the external dc current can be eliminated from RCSI equation Eq. ( 