Understanding (de)lithiation heterogeneities in battery materials is key to ensuring optimal electrochemical performance and developing better energy storage devices. However, this remains challenging due to the complex three dimensional morphology of microscopic electrode particles, the involvement of both solid and liquid phase reactants, and range of relevant timescales (seconds to hours). Here, we overcome this problem and demonstrate the use of benchtop laser scanning confocal microscopy for simultaneous three-dimensional operando measurement of lithium ion dynamics in single particles, and the electrolyte, in batteries. We examine two technologically important cathode materials that are known to suffer from intercalation heterogeneities: LixCoO2 and LixNi0.8Mn0.1Co0.1O2. The single-particle surface-tocore transport velocity of Li-phase fronts, and volume changes -as well as their inter-particle heterogeneity -are captured as a function of C-rate, and benchmarked to previous ensemble measurements. Additionally, we visualise heterogeneities in the bulk and at the surface of particles during cycling, and image the formation of spatially non-uniform concentration gradients within the liquid electrolyte. Importantly, the conditions under which optical imaging can be performed inside absorbing and multiply scattering materials such as battery intercalation compounds are outlined. A key factor in enhancing the performance of Li-ion batteries is the development of high energy density cathode materials such as Ni-rich Lithium Nickel Manganese Cobalt Oxides (NMCs). A long debate still remains into the nature of ion (de)intercalation in such materials In the life-sciences, optical reflection microscopies are a ubiquitous tool for low-cost, non-invasive, microscale characterisation of evolving systems Here, we overcome these limitations by first understanding, how, and under what conditions, optical imaging can be performed in batteries whilst avoiding false conclusions from optical artifacts. In contrast to other high-resolution optical microscopy studies, which have used 2D WF imaging, we focus on LSCRM, where sectioning allows single particles in 3D to be studied. We apply LSCRM to examine Li-intercalation in both Ni-rich NMC811 (LixNi0.8Mn0.1Co0.1O2) and LCO (LixCoO2), both known to experience heterogeneities in Li occupancy during cycling, as characterised by other operando imaging techniques For many metal oxides, including LCO and NMC811, their reflectivity (and thus refractive index) To understand how ex-situ observations relate to changes in reflectivity during cycling, we perform operando reflection (confocal) microscopy measurements at several wavelengths on a single LCO particle (see methods and below), plotting the total reflected intensity and potential during charging in Figure Interestingly, when focussing/collecting light from inside (I) the particle -an advantage offered by confocal sectioning -the reflectivity at 800 nm decreases linearly with x (Figure The difference between the 'S' and 'I' response at 800 nm can be reconciled by noting that the reflectivity at the interface of two media of RI n1 and n2 will be proportional to the difference, (n1-n2) The results above suggest that the choice of the imaging plane plays a critical role when imaging such electrolyte/particle systems. Different combinations of the red and dotted blue curves in Figure The refractive index, n, also plays a role on the imaged size of an object via the optical path length, (OPL) OPL = n • s, where s is the geometric path length. Hence, before using optical microscopy to also investigate particle size changes during cycling For x = 1 (in LixCoO2), LF1 and LMIP (L is the particle length; dashed red and blue lines in Figure Having understood the limitations and conditions under which optical reflection imaging can be performed, we turn to applying these methods. LSCRM, as schematically depicted in Figure To first benchmark our LSCRM methodology, we monitor volume changes of individual particles during a cycle. By calculating the number of voxels occupied by particle containing regions within the reconstructed volumes, volumes at the single particle level can be obtained. In Figure Nevertheless, the results in Figure To further understand how structural inhomogeneities might be related to (de)lithiation asymmetries, we examine the transport velocities of Li-ion containing phase fronts from the exterior to the centre of particles. The surface-to-core transport velocity is indeed a parameter of fundamental interest as local inter-and intra-particle heterogeneities in ion transport can limit the overall (dis)charging rate and potentially cause irreversible material changes For NMC811, in Figure Because the velocity of phase fronts (vp) will depend on the state-of-charge, values extracted in Figure We note that anisotropy in the transport is not expected due to the random orientation of primary particles and their polycrystalline nature (see supplementary information 7). Finally, the linear scaling of vp with C-rate in both NMC811 and LCO suggests that phase transport is kinetically rather than thermodynamically limited for both layered oxides Having shown that the velocity of phase fronts from the surface to the core of particles can be tracked using LSCRM, we push further the technique to spatially separate (de)lithiation inhomogeneities between the surface and bulk of single particles. For that, we compare using mathematical reconstructions, at different points during a charge-discharge cycle, the spatial distribution of reflected intensity (lithiation state) between the particle exterior, and core for LCO particles cycled at different C-rates (C/2 and 2C). For both the exterior and core the reflection contrast is derived from refractive index changes within the material (see supplementary information 8). LCO particles are first computationally 'unwrapped' into shells (~25) of thickness ~500 nm for each time point in the cycle. The minimum volume ellipsoid -a close approximation of the particle shape -enclosing points of the shells is then calculated For 2C, at the particle exterior, the pristine and discharged states do not show a similar spatial distribution of lithiation phases. For the particle core, no rearrangement of lithium domains at the end of charge is observed, unlike at C/2. Only minimal changes in both the contrast and spatial distribution of lithium domains occur between the pristine, charged and discharged states. This observation suggests that (de)lithiation does not occur throughout the entire particle volume, in agreement with the limited cycling capacity measured at 2C when compared to C/2 (see Figure Our results do suggest that LSCRM, combined with mathematical/computational treatments, can spatially distinguish phase inhomogeneities simultaneously at different surfaces within a single cycling particle. However, for such a non-trivial technique heavily relying on data treatment, more remains to understand the implication of these observation, with for instance NMC811 showing a much more complex behaviour (see supplementary information 9). Thus far, optical and other operando imaging methods such X-Ray microscopy have been limited to visualising particles of active material. However, we can show that LSCRM offers the opportunity to image both lithium transport in solids, as demonstrated above, simultaneously with concentration gradients forming in the liquid electrolyte upon polarisation. Indeed, LiPF6, the Li-conducting salt in the electrolyte used, has previously been observed to be a source of fluorescence at visible wavelengths, with the exact origin albeit debated (see discussion in Laurence et al. Our attention is then turned to examining the spatial distribution of salt concentration upon cycling. To do so, LSCRM experiments are repeated with an excitation of 1020 nm with two separate detectors, one for collecting particle reflectance and another for 2PEF (see Figure We note that on charging the electrode and allowing it to relax to OCP, the polarisation gradient rapidly disappears (see supporting information 10). Switching to a greater C-rate, i.e. 2C, during the initial charge up to 3.9 V (A panels), the 2PEF of the electrolyte is brightest around LCO particles with the intensity decaying quasi homogeneously away from the particles. Increasing the potential to 4.2 V (B, C, D and E) results in a drastic increase in 2PEF intensity but the distribution of electrolyte 2PEF also becomes heterogeneous around both particles and in regions of the electrode ~20 -50 μm away from LCO particles (bottom row of Figure In NMC811, similar behaviour is observed as for LCO but with subtle differences requiring further indepth analysis (see supporting information 10). Figure This paper demonstrates that high-resolution LSCRM is a powerful tool for 3D microscopic tracking of single particle structural transformations, Li-ion intercalation and electrolyte dynamics in operating batteries. Applying LSCRM to LCO and NMC811 important functional parameters, such as the velocity of Li-containing phase fronts from the surface to the core of individual particles and the single-particle volume change during a cycle, are obtained. These parameters are shown to agree well with ensemble measurements, but also display a large degree of interparticle heterogeneity not captured by ensemble techniques. A unique advantage of LSCRM is the ability in-operando to simultaneously visualise electrolyte concentration gradients and lithiation heterogeneities at the particle surface and particle bulk in 3D, setting it aside from not only other optical methods, but also X-Ray and electron microscopies. Further work measuring even more particles of different size Although LiPF6 is the source of intrinsic electrolyte fluorescence, particular attention is needed to unravel the exact compound responsible, with both trace organic molecules bound to LiPF6 and halophosphates derivatives suggested to be responsible Limitations remain in-terms of depth, speed and chemical specificity of the optical methods. However, using mid-infrared photo-thermal techniques Lithium Cobalt Oxide, Lithium Nickel Manganese Cobalt Oxide and Lithium Iron Phosphate (LFP) LCO, NMC811 and LFP powder synthetized or purchased as previously described above were ballmilled for 20 minutes with 10% in weight of carbon Super P. Swagelock cells were assembled in Arfilled glovebox with approximatively 10 mg of powder, using two whattman separators filled with LP30 electrolyte and with metallic lithium as counter electrode. Cells were cycled with fixed capacity, before powder was recovered and washed two times with DMC, and then centrifuged and dried for 1 hour under vacuum. This allowed for the preparation of LCO, NMC811 and LFP powders with different states of charge/lithium fraction for ex-situ experiments. Lithium hexafluorophosphate solutions in 1:1 vol.% ethylene carbonate/dimethyl carbonate In an argon-filled glovebox, 3.1, 15.2, 30.4, 151.9, 303.8, 607.6 and 1215.2 mg of LiPF6 were dissolved in 2.0 mL of 1:1 vol.% ethylene carbonate/dimethyl carbonate (EC/DMC) mixture to respectively yield 0.01, 0.05, 0.1, 0.5, 1.0, 2.0 and 4.0 mol.L -1 LiPF6 solutions in EC/DMC. Reflection microspectroscopy of individual battery particles was performed on a customised Zeiss Axio microscope. Illumination was provided using a halogen lamp (Zeiss HAL100) focussed by a 50x/0.4 objective (Nikon, T Plan SLWD). Reflected light was spatially filtered (collection spot diameter <5 μm) using a 100 μm-diameter optical fibre (Avantes FC-UV100-2-SR) mounted in confocal configuration and connected to a spectrometer (Avantes AvaSpec-HS2048). Particles were pressed onto glass microscope slides before measurement and encapsulated with a second cover glass inside any Ar glovebox to avoid aerial oxidation/hydrolysis. A minimum of 20 individual particles (well separated from any carbon) were used to obtain spectra. Time-domain optical coherence tomography (TD-OCT) was used to generate the MIP and F1 images discussed in the main text. F1 was taken from the position in the time-gate position where there was maximum electric field. For the TD-OCT setup, a beam delivered from a Ti:sapphire laser (MaiTai HP, Spectra-Physics) was divided into two paths by a polarizing beam splitter. On one path the light was focused onto the back focal plane of a 0.8 N.A. objective (Olympus) which delivers collimated light on the sample. The reflected light from the sample is collected by a beam splitter and recombined with the second path on another beam splitter. Light on this second (reference) arm does not pass onto the sample but onto a delay stage (Newport) which controls temporal overlap between reference and signal arms. The combined signal and reference light are imaged onto is a charged coupled device camera (Manta G-046B, Allied Vision). A polarizer in front of the camera ensures that only light with a selected polarization is measured. The reference arm is scanned to measure the electric field amplitude as a function of time-delay (focal positon) within the sample. From this trace and the MIP and F1 images can be generated. For liquid measurements 1 mm path length glass cuvettes were filled with Lithium hexafluorophosphate solutions in 1:1 vol.% ethylene carbonate/dimethyl carbonate of a predefined concentration. Cuvettes were sealed in an Argon containing glove box before measurement. For measuring the solid LiPF6, powder was sandwiched between two microscope coverslides. The coverslides were sealed together with epoxy resin inside an Argon glove box before measurement. For one photon excitation light from a 532 nm laser (Laser Quantum Gem, CW, 532 nm, 100 mW) was focussed on to the sample with a 50 mm focal length lens (Thorlabs). The fluorescence was collected collimated and focussed onto the fibre port of a spectrometer (Ocean Optics, Ventanna 532 nm). The exciting laser light was separated from the fluorescence using a dichroic mirror (Semrock 532 nm RazorEdge). For two photon excited fluorescence experiments the same configuration was used except the exciting light was the 1020 nm output of a Ti:sapphire laser (MaiTai HP, Spectra-Physics) and an additional 1000 nm short pass filter (Thorlabs) placed in front of the spectrometer to remove any of the exciting beam. We note that the 2PEF efficiency dramatically decreased with wavelength and when exciting below 900 nm (450 nm one photon excited fluorescence) very little emission was observed. For 1PEF the laser power at the sample was ~200 mW and for 2PEF the power at the sample was ~145 mW. Laser scanning confocal microscopy was performed using a custom-built microscope. The output of a Chameleon Ultra II Ti:Sapphire laser (Coherent), was directed to a laser (galvo-) scanning microscope body (Scientifica), with x-y-z piezo control. The reflected light from the sample was collected and focussed through a 0.7 A.U pinhole for spatial filtering. Dichroic mirrors (500-620 nm and >650 nm) spectrally filtered the light which was focussed onto two silicon avalanche photodiodes (APDs). Recording was performed using the Abberior Instruments Imspector 16 software. Depending on the exact experiment and signal magnitude the pixel dwell time was varied between 10 and 20 μs, with regions of between 300 × 300 and 600 × 600 pixles scanned again depending on the particles of interest. Pixels ranged between 40 and 80 nm in size. Overall this resulted in z-stack acquisition times of between 100 and 220s. The coherence length of the laser used here is <2 μm such that reflection interference contrast effects can be minimised. In all experiments a laser power at the sample of <200 mW was used. For experiments shown in shown in Figure The operando half-cell (ECC-Opto-Std; El-Cell GmBH) was modified to accommodate a 1.4 N.A objective and 0.15 -0.17 μm thickness coverslips (see supporting information 11). All cycling was performed using a Gamry Reference 600 potentiostat, with homebuilt software to control synchronisation between the potentiostat and microscope. Throughout the manuscript a C-rate of 1 C corresponds to a charge in 1 h. Image processing was performed with custom Python, Matlab and ImageJ 105 scripts (see supporting information 2 to 7 for further details of algorithms). Before performing any analysis or image correction, xyz image registration was performed using the ImageJ registration plugin 106 .