To harness the intriguing properties of two-dimensional van der Waals (vdW) ferromagnets (FMs) for versatile applications, the key challenge lies in the reliable material synthesis for scalable device production. Here, we demonstrate the epitaxial growth of singlecrystalline 1T-CrTe2 thin films on 2-inch sapphire substrates. Benefiting from the uniform surface energy of the dangling bond-free Al2O3(0001) surface, the layer-by-layer vdW growth mode is observed right from the initial growth stage, which warrants precise control of the sample thickness and atomically smooth surface morphology across the entire wafer. Moreover, the presence of the Coulomb interaction at the CrTe2/Al2O3 interface serves as an effective tuning parameter to tailor the anomalous Hall response, and the structural optimization of the CrTe2based spin-orbit torque device leads to a substantial switching power reduction by 54%. Our results may lay out a general framework for the design of energy-efficient spintronics based on configurable vdW FMs. Featured by the inherent long-range magnetic order and a high-degree of magnetism tunability under external stimuli, the discovery of two-dimensional (2D) van der Waals (vdW) ferromagnets (FMs) has brought about a new platform for the advancement of energy-efficient non-volatile spintronics In this work, we report the wafer-scale growth of uniform CrTe2 thin films and Bi2Te3/CrTe2 heterostructures by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE). Owing to its low-energy physical deposition nature and non-equilibrium growth dynamics Wafer-scale epitaxial growth of vdW FM CrTe2 thin films. Experimentally, 2-inch Al2O3(0001) wafers were chosen as the substrate. The absence of dangling bonds at the substrate surface and the weak bonding energy between CrTe2 and Al2O3 guarantee a uniform surface energy distribution, which in turns promotes the van der Waals epitaxial growth of CrTe2 Next, we conducted atomic force microscope (AFM) measurements in order to examine the conformity of the CrTe2 film, and Fig. In terms of film crystallinity, Fig. Tunable anomalous Hall response driven by temperature and dimensionality. To determine the magnetic properties of the epitaxial 1T-CrTe2 thin films, we fabricated mm-scale six-probe Hall bar devices on the 2-inch wafers (Fig. Given that the reduced dimensionality can help to modify the electronic band structure and magnetic properties of vdW 2D FMs 1, 2, 5, 24 , we subsequently conducted systematic magneto-electric transport measurements on three CrTe2 samples with d = 5, 9, and 14 MLs. Remarkably, the AHE results show a distinct thickness-dependent trait. As evidenced in Fig. To understand this dimensionality-and temperature-induced anomalous Hall response, we applied density-functional theory (DFT) calculations to elaborate the underlying physics Under such circumstances, the potential energy U created by the Coulomb repulsion effectively increases, which thereafter modulates the Berry curvature near the Fermi level (Fig. Likewise, we can attribute the temperature-dependence of the anomalous Hall resistance in the thick CrTe2 samples (i.e., d  9 ML) to the modulation of Berry curvature associated with the magnetization change Energy-Efficient SOT switching in Bi2Te3/CrTe2 heterostructures. Spin-orbit-torque (SOT) has been utilized for next-generation magnetic random-access memory (MRAM) technology, owing to its low power consumption and logic-programmable capability Accordingly, to fully explore the potential of CrTe2 for SOT-MRAM applications, we adopted the same vdW growth procedure to prepare Bi2Te3/CrTe2 heterostructures by MBE (i.e., in order to make a fair comparison, the top Bi2Te3 layer thickness is fixed to 18 nm in all samples investigated in this work). As shown in Fig. Most intriguingly, the (Bx-fixed, IDC-dependent) anomalous Hall data in Fig. To appreciate such a positive ISW-d correlation, it is recalled that the reduced dimensionality of the CrTe2 film would not only weaken its perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (Fig. Acm -2 as long as the bottom CrTe2 layer exceeds 9 ML, while it drops to 1.93  10 6 Acm -2 for the d = 5 ML case, again highlighting the unique advantage of vdW FMs in the 2D limit. Finally, we have evaluated the reliability of the SOT devices fabricated on the same Bi2Te3/CrTe2 (5 ML) wafer. As summarized in Fig. In conclusion, we have achieved the epitaxial growth of uniform 1T-CrTe2 films on a wafer-scale by MBE, and established a vdW integration strategy that allows for the in-situ construction of Bi2Te3/CrTe2 heterostructures. Endorsed by the co-existence of the intrinsic PMA, atomically-sharp interfaces, and strong SOC, we showcase the compelling SOT device performance of this simple bilayer stack with lower switching power than the heavy metal-based FM multi-layer systems (green bars in Fig. Moreover, its tunable vdW ferromagnetism makes CrTe2 a competitive building block to directly pair with topological quantum materials without invoking an additional PMA-assisted layer (orange bars in Fig. Wafer-scale CrTe2 thin films and Bi2Te3/CrTe2 heterostructures were grown on 2-inch Al2O3(0001) substrates by MBE in a vacuum of 1 × 10 -10 mbar. Prior to the sample growth, the Al2O3 substrate was pre-annealed at 600 C in order to remove any absorbed contamination. During the MBE growth, the growth temperature for CrTe2 and Bi2Te3 was kept at 200 C, and the sample manipulator was constantly rotated to ensure uniformity; high-purity Cr and Bi atoms were evaporated from standard Knudsen cells, while the Te atoms were evaporated by a thermal cracker cell. A beam flux monitor was used to measure the flux ratio, and RHEED was used to monitor the real-time growth process. After sample growth, slices of CrTe2 with different crystal orientations were milled out using the FIB technique (TESCAN LYRA3 FIB-SEM, TESCAN, Czech Republic), and a probe aberration-corrected scanning transmission electron microscopy (Cs-STEM, Themis Z G2 300, FEI, USA) was employed to resolve the crystal structure. The STEM was equipped with energy-dispersive X-ray analysis (EDX, Bruker Super-X, Bruker, USA), allowing for the determination of the Cr-to-Te stoichiometric ratio. Additionally, X-ray diffraction and reflectivity were used to confirm the lattice constant and to calibrate the thickness. The CrTe2 thin films were etched into a six-probe Hall bar geometry with typical channel size of 2 × 1 mm 2 . The electrodes were made by welding small pieces of indium onto the contact areas. The magneto-transport measurements were performed in a He Element-specific X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) and X-ray magnetic circular dichroism (XMCD) measurements were performed on beamline I06 at the Diamond Light Source (Oxfordshire, UK), allowing for the probing of the magnetic ground state of the CrTe2 layers. The base temperature was 2 K and a magnetic field of ± 6 T was applied along the surface normal direction (out-of-plane). The spectroscopic data was acquired in total-electron-yield detection mode which has an 1/e sampling depth of ~5 nm The ab initio calculations were performed within the framework of density functional theory (DFT) as implemented in the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) 