Linking structure is a new concept characterizing topological semimetals, which indicates the interweaving of gap-closing nodes at the Fermi energy (EF ) with other nodes below EF . As the number of linked nodes can be changed only via pair-creation or pair-annihilation, a linked node is more stable and robust than ordinary nodes without linking. Here we propose a new type of a linked nodal structure between a nodal line (nodal surface) at EF with another nodal line (nodal surface) below EF in two-dimensional (three-dimensional) spinless fermion systems with IT symmetry where I and T indicate inversion and time-reversal symmetries, respectively. Because of additional chiral and rotational symmetries, in our system, a double band inversion creates a pair of linked nodes carrying the same topological charges, thus the pair are unremovable via a Lifshiftz transition, which is clearly distinct from the cases of the linked nodes reported previously. A realistic tight binding model and effective theory are developed for such a linking structure. Also, using density functional theory calculations, we propose a class of materials, composed of stacked bilayer graphene with Kekulé texture, as a candidate system hosting the new type of the linked nodal structure. Introduction: Topological semimetals and nodal superconductors indicate the gapless topological phases with nodal points (NPs)/ nodal loops (NLs)/ nodal surfaces (NSs) near the Fermi energy (E F ) . Normally, such a node is characterized by its primary topological charge defined in a lowest-dimensional manifold enclosing the node such as a two-dimensional (2D) surface/onedimensional (1D) loop/zero-dimensional (0D) point enclosing a NP/NL/NS, respectively, in a three-dimensional (3D) momentum space Recently, it is found that there are a class of doubly charged (DC) nodes with two distinct topological charges, which are more robust than ordinary singly charged nodes More recently, it is found that a doubly charged NS at E F is linked with a NL below E F in AZ class BDI systems with inversion symmetry In this letter, we propose a new class of linked nodal structures between two concentric NLs (NSs) at E F and another NL (NS) below E F in 2D (3D) spinless fermion systems belonging to the AZ+I class BDI with two extra symmetries: one is a three-fold rotation C 3z about the z-axis, and the other is a chiral symmetry C that is different from the intrinsic chiral symmetry C of the class BDI. As both C and C anticommute with the Hamiltonian, their combination gives a commuting symmetry O L ≡ iCC which is local in the momentum k. In 2D systems, O L is nothing but the mirror M z : (x, y, z) → (x, y, -z) symmetry about the basal plane of the system or a layer exchange symmetry of a 2D bilayer structure. When such 2D bilayers are vertically stacked with weak inter-bilayer coupling, O L still remains as an excellent k-local symmetry of the resulting 3D structure, which supports linked NSs. Interestingly, in this class of systems, a double band inversion (DBI) creates two concentric NLs or NSs at E F that carry two distinct 0D topological charges: one is Z 2 type (Z 0D 2 ) while the other is Z-type (Z 0D ). As the two NLs (NSs) at E F have the same Z-type charges, their pair-annihilation through a Lifshitz transition is forbidden. Such a stability against the pair-annihilation of DC nodes does not exist in any other DC nodes known up to now. We construct a realistic model and symmetry-based effective theory considering a Kekulé textured bi-layer graphene (BLG) and the related layered 3D structure as an example. Also, using the ab-initio band structure cal- culations, we propose a class of materials with the chemical formula AC 12 (A =Zn,Al,Be) in which the interplay of two distinct chiral symmetries and C 3z protects the linked cylindrical NSs near E F . We also show that breaking the chiral symmetries transforms the NSs to NLs as realized in materials BC 12 (B =Li,B,Mg) in which NLs are protected by IT and M z symmetry where T indicates time-reversal (T ) symmetry. Double band inversion (DBI) and linking structure.-A pair of DC nodes with linking structure can be created via a DBI process in which two valence and two conduction bands are simultaneously inverted. For instance, in a 3D system belonging to the AZ+I class AI or CI, a DBI creates a pair of monopole NLs at E F that carry both a 1D Z 2 charge Z 1D 2 (equivalent to the π Berry phase) and a 2D Z 2 monopole charge Z 2D 2 as described in Fig. Continuum Hamiltonian.-A general DBI process of 2D systems belonging to the AZ+I class BDI can be described by the following 4-band continuum Hamiltonian. where the functions p(k), q(k), r(k), s(k) are even in the momentum k. Using the Pauli matrices τ x,y,z , σ x,y,z , 2 × 2 identity matrices σ 0 , τ 0 , and the complex conjugation operator K, we choose the symmetry representation I = σ 0 τ 0 , T = Kσ 0 τ 0 , and C = σ x τ 0 , which satisfy (IT ) 2 = C 2 = 1. Also the combination of IT and C gives a k-local particle-hole symmetry P = IT C. Then the Hamiltonian satisfies, (IT )H(k)(IT ) -1 = H(k), PH(k)P -1 = -H(k), and CH(k)C -1 = -H(k), which are the defining property of the AZ+I class BDI. We also impose I symmetry as the DBI occurs at the Γ point. When an additional chiral symmetry C = σ y τ 0 exists, we find s(k) = 0 and [H(k), O L ] = 0 where O L = iCC . To describe a DBI process, we assume p(k) = M , q(k) = k 2m, r(k) = s(k) = 0 where M > 0 and m are constants. As shown in Fig. To implement C 3z symmetry, we take a matrix representation xk 2 y ). Assuming α > 0, we have a gapped band structure when M > 0 as shown in Fig. One can easily show that Z 0D = +1 for both NLs at E F in Fig. Another charge Z 0D 2 is defined as follows is defined as It is straightforward to show that the two concentric NLs at E F in Fig. We consider the following 12 × 12 tight-binding Hamiltonian for KABLG, H KABLG = σ 0 ⊗ H KSLG + σ x ⊗ H c , where the Pauli matrices σ x,y,z denote the layer degrees of freedom and σ 0 is the related identity matrix. H KSLG indicates the Hamiltonian for a Kekulé-textured single layer graphene (KSLG) given by H KSLG = -<i,j> t ij c † i c j + h.c, where c i denotes the electron annihilation operator at the i-th site, and t ij = t 1 (t ij = t 2 ) for the intracell (intercell) hopping between nearestneighboring sites. H c = diag[t 3 , t 3 , t 3 , t 3 , t 3 , t 3 ] describes the interlayer hopping with the amplitude t 3 for nearest neighboring atoms between layers. H KABLG has I, T , C, C symmetries represented by I = σ x ⊗ τ x ⊗ I 3 , T = Kσ 0 ⊗τ 0 ⊗I 3 , C = σ z ⊗τ z ⊗I 3 , C = σ y ⊗τ z ⊗I 3 where I 3 is a 3 × 3 identity matrix related to the trimerization of the graphene unitcell induced by Kekulé-O distortion. The Pauli matrices τ x,y,z denote the sulattice degrees of freedom and τ 0 is the related identity matrix. Depending on the type of metal ions, the textured lattice can be in a phase with t 2 < t 1 (anti-Kekulé distortion) or t 2 > t 1 (Kekulé distortion) as shown in Fig. As t 3 increases, the size of the outer NL at E F becomes larger, and after touching the BZ boundary, it splits into two NLs encircling K and K , respectively. Interestingly, each of this NL develops another type of the linked nodal structure with a NP below E F 50 . As each NL at K or K is DC, it cannot be annihilated separately (see SM Candidate materials.-We propose a class of 3D materials with chemical formula MC 12 (M: a metal ion) as a candidate system that exhibits the linked nodal structure discussed above. We note that although the discussion up to now has been focused on 2D bilayer systems, the same idea can be applied to 3D systems obtained by vertical stacking of 2D bilayers. The linked concentric NLs in 2D bilayer systems can be naturally extended to the linked concentric NSs, as long as the coupling between neighboring bilayers are weak enough so that the system preserves the same symmetries including C and C . MC 12 has a hexagonal crystal structure with space group P6/mmm, composed of Van der Waals (VdW) stacking of BLGs with intercalated M ions. Specifically, in ZnC 12 shown in Fig. Discussions.-Finally, let us discuss the experimental feasibility of our proposed model and related materials. The main ingredient of our model Hamiltonian is Kekulé-O order which can be realized in BLG-like systems with proper intercalation of atoms such as Li,Ca,Zn, etc. Such Kekulé-O ordered BLG systems have been synthesized and studied using angle-resolved photo-emission spectroscopy (ARPES) and transport measurements 2 ŷ. To get the spectrum, we write the Hamiltonian H KSLG by taking the Fourier transform of the electron operators as, We express the electron wave functions for the Hamiltonian in six component spinors as ( The Hamiltonian Where has inversion (I), time reversal (T ), chiral (C), additional chiral (C ) symmetries which are represented by where I 3 is a 3 × 3 identity matrix related to the trimerization of the graphene unitcell induced by Kekulé-O distortion. The Pauli matrices τ x,y,z denote the sublattice degrees of freedom and τ 0 is the related identity matrix. We can construct AC 12 (A=Zn,Al,Be) lattice by vertically stacking the KABLG along z-direction. Corresponding Hamiltonian can be constructed by adding a term I 6 ⊗ t 4 e ikz with the coupling Hamiltonian H c in Eq. 1 where I 6 is a 6×6 identity matrix and t 4 represents the hoppings between the NN of the two KABLG. The energy dispersion of the Hamiltonian gives concentric nodal cylinder about the k z axis, as long as the coupling between neighboring bilayers are weak enough so that the system preserves the same symmetries of KABLG including C and C . The product of these two chiral (iCC ) gives a conserved local in ) which stabilized the nodal structure when two bands cross each other with opposite eigen values of O L . In KABLG, O L = σ x ⊗σ 0 ⊗I 3 , which physically represents the layer exchange symmetry between the layers in KABLG. The band structures of MC 12 (M=Zn,Al,Be) are shown in Fig. We then the construct the Hamiltonian for BC 12 (B=Li,Mg,B) by further adding chiral symmetry breaking hoppings t 5 and t 6 as shown in Fig. given by and FIG. The electronic structures for the the Hamiltonian without chiral symmetry (which represents the band structure of LiC 12 , BC 12 , MgC 12 ) are shown in Fig. We project the 12 × 12 tight binding KABLG Hamiltonian on the four low energy bands which effectively take part in the nodal structure. First, we compute the eigen function of the KABLG TB Hamiltonian (Eq. 1) for t 1 = 1, t 2 = 0.6 and t 3 = 0.8 at Γ point. Then we project the 12 × 12 Hamiltonian on the four low energy bands around the E F . Expanding it up to second order of k, we obtain the 4 × 4 low energy Hamiltonian as, ) Two chiral, Inversion and time reversal symmetries are present in the above Hamiltonian which are given by, Please note that the representation of the symmetries apparently changes when projecting the 12×12 bands TB Hamiltonian on the four low energy bands around the Γ point. It is because we lose some degrees of freedom in the process. However, as the projection operator always has an ambiguity, we can choose suitable unitary operation (U r ) to rotate the basis to see the sameness of the representation of the 12 × 12 bands TB Hamiltonian and projected 4 × 4 low energy Hamiltonian. For instance, choosing U r as U σ ⊗ τ 0 where U σ works on the layers and given by and τ 0 is 2 × 2 identity matrix, the basis can be rotated as σ x → σ y → σ z → σ x . In the rotating basis, representation of projected low energy model becomes Even though some degrees of freedom become obsolete after low energy projection, one can see the some similarity between the symmetry representation of the TB and projected low energy Hamiltonian after rotating the basis. For instance, the layer exchange symmetry (O L = iCC ) is represented by σ x in both model. A system belonging to the AZ class BDI respects three symmetries, which are time-reversal symmetry (T ), chiral symmetry(C), particle-hole symmetry (P) 1,2 . In the presence of an additional inversion symmetry (I), a local in k antiunitary constraints is imposed on T and P. Apart from the non-local nature in k space, the combine symmetries T I and PI fulfill the similar symmetry constraints like T and P which are given by We also impose the I symmetry as the double band inversion occurs at the Γ point in KABLG. To find out a matrix representation of these symmetries, we have to consider some conditions. First, (T I) 2 = (PI) 2 = 1 since KABLG belongs to the inversion symmetric class BDI. Second, I is commute with T since I is a spatial symmetry. Also, C of KABLG comes from the sublattice symmetry. This means C is a spatial symmetry and it is commute with T . From the above conditions, we can choose a matrix representation which is given by where K is the complex conjugation operator. The general 4-band Hamiltonian is given by the linear combination of σ i τ j matrices with (i, j) = 0, x, y, z. But some of them should be removed due to the symmetries. To check which terms will be survived, let us consider the symmetry constraints arising from the local symmetries in the momentum space. There are two independent local symmetries in class BDI+I, which are T I, C. Since T I = K, only 10 real-valued matrices among σ i τ j will be survived. Those matrices are given by Also matrices commuting with C should be removed. Then the remaining matrices are given by So the general Hamiltonian is given by The coefficients of each matrices are also affected by a non-local symmetry I. Since I = σ 0 τ 0 , all the coefficients in Eq. ( In KABLG, there is one more chiral symmetry C = σ y τ 0 . This put an additional condition that is s(k) = 0. Let us consider a Hamiltonian, Eq. ( where M, m are constants with a condition M > 0. Increasing m, we can see the double band inversion process from the Hamiltonian with coefficients Eq. ( To find a robust linking structure, we need to consider a C 3 symmetry like KABLG. Let us impose a matrix representation C 3 = e I 2π 3 σ0τy , which satisfies (C 3 ) 3 = 1, [C 3 , T ] = 0. Then the C 3 symmetry relation is given by where To impose this symmetry, the coefficients p(k), q(k), r(k) in the Hamiltonian should be changed. Let us define new C 3symmetric coefficients by Note that constant terms of q(k) and r(k) are zero due to the C 3 symmetry. From the coefficients (17), ( -(M + αk 2 ), ( Note that bands Eq. ( When M > 0, there is no nodal line at E F . But M becomes negative, two nodal lines appear at E F with radii |M |/α and |M |/3α, respectively. Each nodal line is topologically protected due to the O L symmetry eigenvalues. In the same time, a nodal line below E F appears with a radius |M |/2α. This nodal line is also topologically protected due to the same reason. Therefore, we can get a robust linking structure from this model. In the main paper, the process is illustrated. Based on the intrinsic symmetries, the topological space of Hamiltonian was classified (AZ-classification) 2 . The classification scheme further extended to centrosymmetric systems (AZ + I-classification) 1 . The Kekulé texture bilayer graphene belongs to BDI class of AZ + I classification. Here, we briefly discuss about the symmetries and topological charges of BDI class. In 2D (3D) system, BDI symmetries allow NLs (NSs) at E F which are linked with a NP (NL) below the E F 3 . In general, the topological charge of NP (NL) below the E F is equivalent to Berry phase which can be computed using smooth and complex wavefunctions. Another way to compute this charge is to check the orientation of the wavefunctions using a real gauge (formally know as Stiefel-Whitney class 6 ). The reality condition of the wavefunctions is enforced by the PT symmetry. The charges of the NL (NS) at E F can be defined using the notion of homotopy equivalence of the classifying space of the Hamiltonian. We calculate the 0D (1D) homotopy charges (π 0 and π 1 ) on the 0D (1D) manifolds (S 0 and S 1 ) enclosing the NL (NS) at E F in a 2D (3D) system. The general strategy to compute the homotopy charges are as follows 4,5 ; We consider a non-contactable n th sphere S n as the manifold enclosing the node. All the possible S n ⊂ BZ with a gaped spectrum can be continuously mapped to a topological space M . Here, M represents the Hilbert space spanned by all occupied bands. Hamiltonian (H(k)) represents the mapping function. Continuous deformation of S n or H(k) correspond to different mapping which can be classified by equivalence class. All the mapping in equivalence class are isomorphic to each other. The elements of the homotopy group π n (M ) are represented by the distinct equivalence class of such mapping 4,5 . For instance, if π n (M ) contains only identity element (say, homotopy group of a sphere), all the mapping are trivial mapping. However, if the homotopy group is Z 2 , two non-equivalent class correspond to trivial and non-trivial mapping. The NL (NS) at E F in class BDI may have two charges; 0D and 1D charge. The interpretation of these charges are as follows. class BDI possess chiral symmetry. If we choose chiral symmetry C = σ z , the Hamiltonian takes the block off-diagonal form as Because of the additional PT symmetry, A(k) can be represented by N×N real matrix for a 2N bands Hamiltonian. The 0D charge for such Hamiltonian is defined as 1,3 , where, S 0 = {k in , k out }, represent two point inside and outside the NL (NS). Because of the chiral symmetry, N occupied bands are related to N unoccupied bands. For instance, an occupied states |u occ nk with energy -E nk possess corresponding chiral symmetric states C |u occ nk at energy +E nk . Lets express the eigen states of occupied and unoccupied states as where u ↑ nk and u ↓ nk represent the N-dimensional vector and satisfy the following relations, The Hamiltonian becomes real because of the PT symmetry and the off-diagonal block can be express in terms of N-dimensional vectors outside the NL (NS) as However, the relative orientation of the state vectors of the highest occupied and lowest unoccupied states change after the band inversion at NL (NS). For instance, suppose that highest occupied and lowest unoccupied are given by After band inversion, i,e inside the NL (NS), the offdiagonal block becomes, Therefor, the sign of the det A(k) changes relative to the side of the NL (NS) because of the relative change of the orientation of the state vectors u ↑ 1k and u ↓ 1k . Thus the sign of the detA(k) defines the 0D π 0 charge for the NL (NS) at the E F in class BDI. To calculate the 1D π 1 charge of the NL (NS) at E F , we follow the spectral flattening technique. First we choose a S 1 surrounding the NL (NS) then decompose the Hamiltonian on the S 1 by its eigen system as which can be deformed continuously to a flat-band Hamiltonian as In class BDI, A F B (k) ∈ O(N ) on the S 1 where A F B (k) is the off-diagonal block of the flattened Hamiltonian H F B (k) in Eq. 32. We restrict A F B (k) in certain k within the SO(N ) by taking the composition with mirror symmetry if detA F B (k) = -1. Otherwise we keep it unchanged. The π 1 charge of the NL (NS) on S 1 is defined by the relation 1,4,5 , which means the homotopy equivalence of SO(N ) group. When an additional chiral symmetry (C ) is supplemented, we can define a k local symmetry O L . Z 0D is defined by the eigenvalues (±1) of O L symmetry. At a given momentum k, we denote the number of occupied bands with the positive (negative) For a given NL, we pick two momenta k in and k out , which are inside and outside of the loop, respectively. Then we define the Z 0D charge as The linking structure is given by the following conditions 3,6 . (i) Nodes at the E F have to have two distinct topological charges. (ii) The charge of the nodes at and below the E F have to be equivalent. (iii) The charge of nodes at E F is non-trivial if a linking node is present below the E F . In other words, if we trivialize the charge of the linking node below the E F , the nodal structure at E F becomes unrobust. For KABLG, C impose a condition on the flattened Hamiltonian (Eq. 32) that the off-diagonal block A F B (k) ∈ O(N ). O(N ) group have to be disconnected space, determined by the determinant ±1. This defines the Z 0D Z 2 0D charge charge of the NL (NS) at E F . Please note that this definition is invalid for the nodes below the E F as the chiral symmetry only a good symmetry at E F . It is easy to show that the other two conditions (ii and iii) are full filed naturally in DBI class when additional chiral symmetry (O L ) and C 3 rotation symmetries are supplemented. Both the NL (NS) at and below the E F have Z 0D charge whose origin is O L symmetry. Also, if we trivialize the Z 0D charge of the NL (NS) below the E F in a four bands model, it opens up a gap along the NL (NS) and band structure effectively becomes a two bands system. Nonetheless, in two bands case, NLs (NSs) are not robust as shown in main paper. Now we ask a question how can we trivialize the Z 0D charge of the NL (NS) below the E F to open up a gap. To do that the O L eigen values have to be distributed as (-1,+1,-1 and +1) for the four bands above and below the E F in the a order from low energy to high energy (S3(a)). For this configuration of O L eigen values, the Z 0D charge of the NLs (NSs) at E F are opposite i.e, +1 and -1 (S3 (b)). As such the NLs are not robust against pair annihilation. However, such distribution of O L eigen values are forbidden in KABLG under the relevant symmetries of the system. In KBLG, O L eigen values are distributed over the four bands as follows; two occupied bands take (-1,-1) and two unoccupied bands take (+1,+1) O L eigen values respectively as shown in Fig. Let us discuss the symmetry constraints on the nodal structure and distribution of O L eigen values over the bands in KBLG under the relevant symmetries to understand this unusual robustness. KABLG possess C 3 , PT , and two chiral symmetries C and C . C 3 rotation has three eigen values. For spinless case, they are e i 2π 3 p (p=0,1,2). We denote the complex eigen values (e i 2π 3 p (p=1,2)) as λ and λ * . Bands with In this section, we focus on the linking structure of nodal systems belonging to BDI class of AZ + I classification. In BDI class, a pair of NLs (NSs) at E F are linked with a NP (NL) below the E F . Let us consider S 1 be is a charge calculating circle which enclose the NL (NS) at the E F and c 1d (S 1 ) be the corresponding 1D homotopy charge on this loop. c1d ( S1 ) is the charge of NP (NL) below the E F on the loop S1 the nodal line which enclose the NP (NL) in 2D (3D). The linking structure is present if c 1d (S 1 ) = c1d ( S1 ) and the 0D charge of NL (NS) at Let us define the off-diagonal block of the 2N bands flattened Hamiltonian inside and out side the nodal line at E F as, where states. We also define a function A F B (k) inside the nodal line on S 1 which has similar form as )) is defined as the homotopy equivalence of the SO(N ) group. Now by assumption, A F B-(k) can be continuously connected to A F B (k). So π 1 (S 1 ) can alternatively defined by the homotopy equivalence 3 ; where by assumption, S 1 and S 1 are continuously connected by smooth deformation. Now we check whether the S 1 can smoothly deformable to a point or not. It is impossible if there is a nodal point below the E F where |u occ n and u occ n+1 become degenerate and A F B (k) is not well define on the deformed S 1 . This means the loop S 1 has an topological obstaction for the nodal point below the E F . This argument establish the underlying linking structure between the NL (NS) at E F and NP (NL) below E F . Let us show mathematically for a 4 bands Hamiltonian that the charge of NL (NS) at E F (c 1d (S 1 )) and the charge of the NP (NL) below E F (c 1d ( S1 )) are equivalent. The generic form of A ± (k) for 4 band BDI Hamiltonian can be parameterized by θ and φ as 3 where ±E 1 and ±E 2 (0 ≤ E 1 ≤ E 2 ) are the band energies. A + (k) and A -(k) are related by band inversion between highest and lowest occupied and unoccupied bands which are defined outside and inside of the nodal line. The sign of the determinant define the π 0 charge as discussed previously. The flattened Hamiltonian outside the NL (NS) depends on θ only. As such the 1D charge on a loop outside the NL (NS) is given by Now we can compute the charge of the NP (NL) below the E F on a circle S1 inside the NL (NS) at E F . We write an effective Hamiltonian as We then find the explicate from of |u occ 1k and |u occ 2k from Eq. 38 and use them in Eq. 40. The effective Hamiltonian possesses chiral symmetry. Rewriting the effective Hamiltonian in that chiral symmetry basis, we obtain the expression for off-diagonal block as Using this A ef f (k), we can compute the charge of the nodal point as Since θ(k) is continuous across the NL (NS) at E F , Eq. 42 and Eq. 39 represent the equivalence between the charge c 1d ( S1 ) and c1d ( S1 ). A four bands Hamiltonian for AA-stacked bilayer graphene (ABLG) can be written as, where H SLG (k) represents the Hamiltonian for single layer graphene which is given by 0 where 2 )). H SLG represents the single layer graphene Hamiltonian and t c is the coupling parameter between the two layers. The band and nodal structures are shown in Fig. The sign of detA(k) can be changed by band inversion 3 . We have discussed in previous section that the 0D π 0 charge of the nodal line is defined by the properties of the two disconnected components of the O(N ) group. i.e, the sign of detA(k) changes inside and outside of the nodal line at E F . We verify this for the BLG Hamiltonian which confirms the π 0 charge of the nodal line at E F . However, to calculate the 1D π 1 charge of the nodal loop at the E F , we parameterize the flattened Hamiltonian by angle φ and then plot the phase of eigenvalues of the off-diagonal block A(k). We also use a mirror symmetric transformation on A(k), if detA(k) < 0, to make it an element of SO(N ) group. Being an element of SO(2) (in case of BLG), A(k) has two eigenvalues in the form exp(±iφ). Therefor the phase of the eigen values of A(k) (represents the Euler angle (θ) of SO(2)) represents the topological charge of S 1 which have been shown in Fig. The 1D charge of the nodal point below the E F can be checked by investigating the orientation of the wave functions. Below the E F , the nodal point is protected by PT symmetry which enforce nontrivial Berry phase corresponding to the node. To check the 1D charge, we plot the components of u 1 occ of the Hamiltonian, parameterized by φ ∈ [0, 2π] as shown in Fig. Such doubly charge (π 0 and π 1 ) nodal line at E F and nontrivial nodal point below the E F arise together and form a robust linking structure. The linking structure in BLG is that the π 1 charge of a nodal line at E F is non-trivial if and only if there is a nodal point, which is below the E F , inside the nodal line 3 . In this section, we compute the topological charges and check the robustness of the nodal structure of KABLG under strong deformations. Let us first formally define the π 1 charge of BDI class for 2N (N>2) bands system. For a 2N system, the π 1 charge is defined as the homotopy equivalence class of the A F B (k) ∈ SO(N ) where A F B (k) is N×N off-diagonal block of the flattened Hamiltonian. The element of SO(N ) group can be generated by using N(N-1)/2 number of SO(N ) generators which are defined as where i < j. A F B can be written as 3 where matrix M N is given as M N -2 = e γL12 .e γ2L23 .....e γN-3LN-3,N-2 . . . Here the matrix exponential e αLi,j of a generator L i,j represents the element of Lie group SO(N ), i.e, M i ∈ SO(N ) (i = N, N -1, ...., 2). The π 1 charge of the nodal line is defined as To determine the π 1 charge, we lift the close loops from SO(N ) to its universal covering space i.e, Spin(N ). Spin(N ) is the doubly covering space of SO(N ) which is also simply connected. If the image of lifted loop in Spin(N ) is open (close), the element of π 1 in SO(N ) correspond to non-trivial (trivial) topology. The lifting can be achieved by changing the SO(N ) generators in Eq. 44 into Spin(N ) generators Let us now apply the above idea on the 12-bands KABLG graphene Hamiltonian. As we discussed in the main paper the KABLG can be in a phase with t 2 < t 1 (anti-Kekulé distortion) or t 2 > t 1 (Kekulé distortion). In both cases, the nonzero interlayer hopping (t 3 ) pushes the gapped band structure of each textured graphene layer, upward and downward in energy, respectively, which generates linked NLs. Here, we discuss the robustness in the both case explicitly under strong deformation. As shown in Fig. First principle calculations were carried out using projector augmented wave (PAW) 8 formalism based on Density Functional Theory (DFT) as implemented in the Vienna Ab Initio Simulation Package (VASP). We compute band structures of similar compounds such as AlC 12 , BeC 12 , BC 12 and MgC 12 . These materials have similar nodal structures like ZnC 12 or LiC 12 . For instance, AlC 12 , BeC 12 show double band inversion at every points along the k z direction (Γ-A path) as shown in Fig. J. Liu and D. Vanderbilt, Weyl semimetals from noncentrosymmetric topological insulators, Phys. Rev. B 90, 155316 (2014). 4 Hongming Weng, Chen Fang, Zhong Fang, B. Andrei Bernevig, and Xi Dai, Weyl Semimetal Phase in Noncentrosymmetric Transition-Metal Monophosphides, Phys. Rev. X 5, 011029 (2015). 5 Su-Yang Xu, Ilya Belopolski, Nasser Alidoust et al. , Discovery of a Weyl fermion semimetal and topological Fermi arcs, Science 349, 613 (2015). 6 Alexey A. Soluyanov, Dominik Gresch, Zhijun Wang, QuanSheng Wu, Matthias Troyer, Xi Dai, and B. An-