High-harmonic spectroscopy of solids is a powerful tool, which provides access to both electronic structure and ultrafast electronic response of solids, from their band structure and density of states, to phase transitions, including the emergence of the topological edge states, to the PetaHertz electronic response. However, in spite of these successes, high harmonic spectroscopy has hardly been applied to analyse the role of coherent femtosecond lattice vibrations in the attosecond electronic response. Here we study coherent phonon excitations in monolayer graphene to show how high-harmonic spectroscopy can be used to detect the influence of coherent lattice dynamics, particularly longitudinal and transverse optical phonon modes, on the electronic response. Coherent excitation of the in-plane phonon modes results in the appearance of sidebands in the spectrum of the emitted harmonic radiation. We show that the spectral positions and the polarisation of the sideband emission offer a sensitive probe of the dynamical symmetries associated with the excited phonon modes. Our work brings the key advantage of high harmonic spectroscopy -the combination of sub-femtosecond to tens of femtoseconds temporal resolution -to the problem of probing phonon-driven electronic response and its dependence on the dynamical symmetries in solids. Strong-field driven high-harmonic generation (HHG) is a nonlinear frequency up-conversion process, which emits radiation at integer multiples of the incident laser frequency band defects Availability of mid-infrared light sources also enables coherent excitation of a desired phonon mode by tuning the polarisation and frequency of the laser pulse Various spectroscopic methods have been developed to excite and probe phonons, see e.g. One difficulty in tracking lattice vibrations via highly nonlinear optical response stems from their small amplitude. If the corresponding changes in both the band structure and couplings are similarly small, the high-harmonic response hardly changes. Yet, large distortions are not needed if the excited phonon mode dynamically changes the symmetry of the unit cell. Here we show how coherent phonon dynamics and the associated changes in the lattice symmetry are encoded in the electronic response and the harmonic signal, and how the sub-cycle temporal resolution inherent in the harmonic signal can be used to track the interplay of electronic and lattice dynamics. We analyse monolayer graphene, which belongs to D 6h point group symmetry, see Fig. Out of the three optical phonon modes, one is out-of-plane, the two others are in-plane modes. We will consider only the in-plane modes. The lattice vibrations corresponding to the in-plane Longitudinal Optical (iLO), and the in-plane Transverse Optical (iTO) E 2g modes are shown in Fig. Coherent lattice dynamics should in general introduce periodic modulations of the system parameters and thus of its high-harmonic response. In the frequency domain, such modulations add sidebands to the main peaks in the harmonic spectrum. We shall see that their position and polarisation encode the information about the frequency and the symmetry of the excited phonon mode, respectively. Carbon atoms are arranged at the corners of a hexagon in the honeycomb lattice of the graphene. The unit-cell of graphene has a two-atom basis, usually denoted as A and B atoms. The corresponding Brillouin zone in momentum space is shown in Fig. The electronic ground-state of the graphene is described by the nearest-neighbour tight-binding approximation and the corresponding Hamiltonian is written as Here, the summation is over the nearest neighbour atoms. γ 0 is the nearest-neighbour hopping energy, which is chosen to be 2.7 eV. d i is the separation vector between an atom with its nearest neighbour, such that |d i | = a = 1.42 Å is the inter-atomic distance, for a lattice parameter a 0 of 2.46 Å. â † k ( bk ) is creation (annihilation) operator for atom A (B) in the unit cell. The low-energy band-structure of graphene is obtained by solving Eq. ( We treat lattice dynamics classically, and assume that atoms perform harmonic oscillations for short displacements from their equilibrium positions. The displacement vector for a particular phonon mode is expressed as q(t) = q 0 ê Re e iω ph t . (2) Here, q 0 is the maximum displacement of an atom from its equilibrium position, ω ph = 194 meV is the energy of the E 2g phonon mode , and ê is the normalised eigenvector for a particular phonon mode. From Figs. in which the first (last) two elements are components of A (B) atom. Due to coherent phonon excitations, lattice dynamics causes temporal variations in the relative distance between atoms (d i ). In this case, the corresponding time-dependent Hamiltonian within the tight-binding approximation can be written as Here, the hopping energy is modelled as an exponentially decaying function of the relative displacement between nearest-neighbour atoms as γ(t) = γ 0 e -(|d i (t)|-a)/δ , in which δ is the width of the decay function chosen to be 0.184a 0 The interaction among laser, electrons and coherently excited phonon mode in graphene is modelled by solving following equations of the single-particle density matrix. By updating the modified Hamiltonian as a result of the lattice dynamics, semiconductor Bloch equations in comoving frame |n, k + A(t) , is extended and equations of motion read as Here, E(t) and A(t) are, respectively, the electric field and the vector potential corresponding to the laser field, which are related as E(t) = -dA(t)/dt, and k t is the shorthand notation for k + A(t). ε cv (k) and d cv (k) are, respectively, the band-gap energy and dipole matrix elements between valence and conduction bands at k. d cv (k) is defined as , and ρ k vc (t) = ρ k * cv (t). A phenomenological term to take care of the interband decoherence is added with a constant dephasing time T 2 . We calculate the matrix elements at each time-step during temporal evolution of the coherently excited phonon mode, which results in the additional time-dependence in the matrix elements. As long as the maximum displacement of the atoms are small and the time-step is too small compared to the phonon time-period, the matrix elements at consecutive time-steps are smoothly updated. We solve the coupled differential equations described in Eq. ( Here, p nm are the momentum matrix-elements defined as p nm (k) = n, k|∇ k Ĥk |m, k . The total current, J(t) can be calculated by integrating J(k, t) over the entire Brillouin zone. The high-harmonic spectrum is simulated as Here, FT stands for the Fourier transform. High-order harmonics are generated from monolayer graphene, with or without coherent lattice dynamics, using a linearly polarised pulse with a wavelength of 2.0 μm and peak intensity of 1×10 11 W/cm 2 . The pulse is 100 fs long and has a sin-squared envelope. The laser parameters used in this work are below the damage threshold of graphene However, our findings remain valid for displacements ranging from 0.01a 0 to 0.05a 0 with respect to the equilibrium positions. High-harmonic spectra for monolayer graphene, with and without coherent lattice dynamics, are presented in Fig. shown by grey shaded area as a reference. Owing to the inversion symmetry of the graphene, the reference spectrum in grey colour exhibits only odd harmonics (consistent with earlier reports, e.g. Refs. We assume that coherent phonon dynamics is excited prior to a high harmonic probe. When one of the E 2g phonon modes in graphene is coherently excited, the harmonic spectra display sidebands along with the main odd harmonic peaks as reflected from Fig. Here we present the case of the amplitude equal to 0.03 of the lattice constant. As E 2g phonon modes preserve inversion centre, only odd harmonics are generated. When the coherent iLO mode and the probe harmonic pulse (along Γ -K) are in the same direction, the even-oder sidebands are polarised along Γ -K (red colour), whereas the odd-order sidebands are polarised perpendicular to Γ -K (blue colour), i.e., along Γ -M direction [see Fig. We now investigate how the dynamical changes in symmetries differ from similar static variation in the high-harmonic spectra. Consider the static case with the maximum displacement of atoms, along a particular phonon mode direction, 3% of the lattice parameter from their equilibrium positions. Figure When the graphene is deformed along the iLO phonon mode, odd harmonics are generated along parallel and perpendicular directions with respect to the laser polarisation as shown in The emergence of parallel and the perpendicular components in the first case and the parallel component in second case can be explained as follows: the monolayer graphene has σ x and σ y symmetry planes, in addition to the inversion centre. When the polarisation of the probe laser is along the high symmetry direction (Γ -K or Γ -M), there is no perpendicular component of the current. However, if the polarisation of the probe pulse is along any other than these high-symmetry directions, symmetry constraints allow the generation of odd harmonics perpendicular to the direction of the laser polarisation. Recently, same symmetry concept is employed in twisted bilayer graphene to correlate the twist angle with its high-harmonic spectrum To understand the symmetry constraint on the polarisation of sidebands, let us consider dynamical symmetries (DSs) of the system, accounting for the coherent lattice dynamics and the probe pulse. We apply the Floquet formalism to a periodically driven system, represented by the Hamiltonian described by Eq. ( Here, F n is the quasi-energy corresponds to the n th Floquet state, and |φ F n (t) is the time-periodic part of the wave function, such that |φ F n (t + τ ph ) = |φ F n (t) . The DSs in a Floquet system are the combined spatio-temporal symmetries, which provide different kinds of selection rules as discussed in Ref. In the presence of the probe pulse, the laser-graphene interaction within tight-binding approximation can be modelled with the Peierls substitution as Ĥk (t) → Ĥk+A(t) (t). For the sake of simplicity, we employ a perturbative approach to understand the polarisation of the sidebands as the strength of the sidebands is much weaker in comparison to the main harmonic peaks. Let us expand Ĥk+A(t) (t) in terms of iA(t) The second term in the above equation can be treated as perturbation as Ĥ k (t) = A(t) • Ĵ(t) with Ĵ = ∇ A(t) Ĥk+A(t) is the current operator in the Bloch basis. In Eq. ( By following Ref. Here, χ F μν (t, t ) = φ F i (t)| Ĵμ (t)|φ F e (t) φ F e (t )| Ĵν (t )|φ F i (t ) . From the above equation, it is apparent that the second term correlates to the generations of the sidebands via Raman process. The symmetry constraint for the m th -order sideband can be written as Xt E s,m (t)[ Xt E(t)] † = E s,m E † (t), provided spatial symmetries of Xt and are same There are two DSs corresponding to the coherent iLO phonon mode as shown in Fig. When the probe laser is polarised along X-axis, the invariance condition for the Raman tensor The selection rule for the m th -order sideband is as follows: when m is odd (even), the polarisation of the sideband will be along the Y(X) direction. Our observations in Fig. When the iLO phonon mode is excited and the probe pulse is along Γ -M direction, σy • τ 2 , and Ĉ2Z are the DSs, which leave the Raman tensor invariant. It is straightforward to see that the selection rules for the m th -order sideband are deduced as: when m is odd (even), the polarisation of the sidebands will be along the X(Y) direction. On the other hand, when the iTO phonon mode is excited and the probe pulse is along Γ -K (Γ -M) direction, σx (σ y ) is the DS, which yields Raman tensor invariant [see Fig. To summarise, we have established that high-harmonic spectroscopy is responsive to the coherent lattice dynamics in solids. The high-harmonic spectrum is modulated by the frequency of the excited phonon mode within the solid. Both in-plane E 2g Raman-active phonon modes of the monolayer graphene lead to the generation of higher-order sidebands, along with the main harmonic peaks. In the case of iLO phonon mode excitation, the even-and odd-order sidebands are polarised parallel and perpendicular to the polarisation of probe harmonic pulse, respectively. In the case of iTO phonon mode, all sidebands are polarised along the probe harmonic pulse's polarisation. The polarisations of the sidebands are dictated by the dynamical symmetries of the combined system, which includes the phonon modes and probe laser pulse. Therefore, the polarisation properties are a sensitive probe of these dynamical symmetries. The presence of high-harmonic signal perpendicular to the polarisation of the probe pulse is a signature of lattice excitation-driven symmetry breaking of the reflection plane. The present work is paving a way for probing phonon-driven processes in solids and non-linear phononics with sub-cycle temporal resolution.