We have carried out a comprehensive high-resolution angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) study of the pseudogap interplay with superconductivity in La-based cuprates. The three systems display slightly different pseudogap critical points in the temperature versus doping phase diagram. We have studied the pseudogap evolution into the superconducting state for doping concentrations just below the critical point. In this setting, near optimal doping for superconductivity and in the presence of the weakest possible pseudogap, we uncover how the pseudogap is partially suppressed inside the superconducting state. This conclusion is based on the direct observation of a reduced pseudogap energy scale and re-emergence of spectral weight suppressed by the pseudogap. Altogether these observations suggest that the pseudogap phenomenon in La-based cuprates is in competition with superconductivity for anti-nodal spectral weight. Strange metal behavior Tuning the van Hove singularity by hydrostatic pressure is one way to manipulate the pseudogap phenomenon Here, we study the pseudogap in the limit p → p * , where T * approaches T c . We chose to examine La-based cuprates, in which the pseudogap energy scale is much larger than the superconducting gap amplitude Single crystals of LSCO (p = 0.145, T c = 37 K We studied three different La-based compounds (LSCO, Nd-LSCO, and Eu-LSCO). Consistent with existing ARPES literature, the data quality obtained from LSCO and Nd-LSCO crystals The Nd-LSCO and Eu-LSCO compounds (space group 138 Complementary to our observation of spectral weight loss, we find a peculiar temperature dependence of the pseudogap. The vertical dashed lines in Fig. Spectral weight: A defining property of the pseudogap is the partial suppression of anti-nodal spectral weight I(k AN , ω). We define the integrated spectral weight as FIG. W i = dω[I(k i , ω) + I(k i , -ω)] with i = AN, N being anti-nodal or nodal. Our integration window of the symmetrized EDCs is -0.2 < ω < 0.2 eV. The nodal spectral weight W N is essentially temperature independent (see circles in Fig. Gap analysis: To extract the amplitude of the antinodal spectral gap, we employ the spectral function convoluted with a Gaussian distribution to mimic experimental resolution There are several experimental indications that the pseudogap is not associated with superconducting fluctuations It is interesting to compare our results on La-based cuprates with previous ARPES studies in (Bi,Pb) 2 (Sr,La) 2 CuO 6+δ (Bi2201) Inside the superconducting state, the systems also behave differently. Both Bi2201 and Bi2212 display socalled coherence peaks In summary, we have carried out a high-resolution ARPES study of the pseudogap inside the superconducting state. Three La-based systems (Eu-LSCO, Nd-LSCO, and LSCO) were investigated for doping concentrations just below the critical doping p * , above which the pseudogap phenomenon vanishes. We observe that the total anti-nodal spectral weight is suppressed below the pseudogap temperature and begins to recover already above the superconducting onset T c . The pseudogap energy scale grows with decreasing temperature until T c is reached and is partially suppressed inside the superconducting state. Our results are different from what has been reported in single- Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 097005 (2008).