We experimentally study a semiconductor laser subject to two optical feedbacks in a free space setup. We show that the time delay signature, manifesting itself in the chaotic output intensity, can be better suppressed than in a laser with single feedback. We demonstrate that the control of the feedback phase is essential to suppress the time delay signature, in contrast to the onedelay case, and that the feedback phase also impacts the chaotic bandwidth. By optimizing the feedback phase the time delay signature can be reduced by a factor of 2 while maintaining a large chaotic bandwidth. Optical feedback in semiconductor lasers can give rise to rich nonlinear behavior in terms of intensity, phase, and carrier dynamics The experimental setup used is shown in figure We now turn to the main experiment to investigate the impact of the feedback phase on the TDS. The injection current is 30 mA, all other parameters are the same as in the threshold reduction measurement. Figure These results show that the two-delay system dynamics depend more strongly on the feedback phase. To study how this influences the TDS we calculate the autocorrelation function (ACF) ρ and Delayed Mutual Information (DMI) from the time series of the intensity of the laser The above results demonstrate that the suppression of the TDS with a second delay at a slightly different time-delay and strength from the first is only feasible when the feedback phase can be controlled. To investigate the effect systematically, we look at the height of the largest peak of the absolute ACF for all the feedback phase steps in the experiment, shown in figure Our results shed new light on the observations of ref. To conclude, we show that the relative feedback phase or small subwavelength changes of the mirrors' position are important to understand the dynamics of a semiconductor laser coupled to two optical feedback loops. We demonstrate that the threshold reduction, a measure for the feedback strength, is strongly influenced by the feedback phase. Moreover, the increased sensitivity to a small change in the mirror position manifests itself strongly in the chaotic dynamics. We confirm that a second delay close to the first, on a scale corresponding to the relaxation oscillation period 