The optimal use of resources has motivated the engineering community to employ controlled distribution of material within their structural designs, often relying on cellular and lattice porous structures. In this research work, a computational method is implemented to generate porous lattice structures conforming to surfaces with complex geometry. This method allows solving the problem of integrating cellular structures in engineering applications with complex macro-geometries. Examples of surface transformation are shown in this report. In addition, an applied model is shown where the effects of the transformation on the mechanical properties are analyzed. Cellular materials are based on unit cells that reproduce in space, similar to the concept of unit cells in crystallography On a laboratory scale, the surface of freely cellular material is an arrangement of flat surface elements. These surface elements are characterized by their normals which are oriented perpendicular to the surface elements. Thus, the orientation of a particular surface element is given through the angles which its normal makes with the normals of the other surface elements. However, the surfaces that define the boundary of an engineering part are not flat, on the contrary, these are surfaces with variable curvatures A solution is to start from the second situation and trim the areas of the remaining unit cells to meet the outer geometry Another solution is that the unit cell's geometry conforms to the engineering device boundary, ensuring that all unit cells are complete, giving a smoother end-effect condition. This type of solution creates a challenge in the modeling of cellular materials. In order to achieve this, it is necessary to perform a transformation of the curve or surface that defines the unit cell to the curve or surface that defines the boundary of the engineering device. A mathematical concept that allows this transformation is that of homotopy. This concept refers to the mapping of one continuous function into another and it is achieved through the continuous deformation of one function into another Hence, the homotopy concept allows the transformation of the curves and surfaces that determine the unit cell to the surface of the edges of a final application piece. This work aims to start a framework for modeling the mechanical properties of conforming cellular materials. To achieve this, continuous homotopic (algebraic topology) and conformal geometry will be implemented on unit cell design so that the initial mechanical properties are maintained. This methodology produces a functional geometric spatial gradation in the growth of the macro-structure topology. Due to the above, it is necessary to develop laws to homogenize and scale that applies to spatially heterogeneous structures. Finally, the failure mechanisms (plastic deformation and fracture) of these architecture structures will be analyzed using hybrid computational and analytical methods. In this case, the architectural structures will be elasto-plastically modeled using the Finite Element Software Abaqus®. Definition of transformation: Figure Definition: Let f, g : XY be maps where X and Y are topological spaces. If there exists a map F: X × IY such that F(x, o) = f(x) and F(x, 1) = g(x) for all x ∈ X, I = [0,1], then the map F is called a homotopy from f to g. In the case of applying the definition to the pentagon problem, the function f corresponds to the contour parameterized by the straight line and the function g corresponds to the contour parameterized by the arc of the circle. Therefore, the homotopic function defines continuous deformation of contour f into g as t varies from 0 to 1. The homotopic function for a contour (1D) can be expressed as follows (equation.1): F(x, t) = (1 -t)f(x) -tg(x) eq.1 In the case of a 3D surface the homotopy function is expressed as follows: In this equation, C(u, v) corresponds to the homotopy function in generalized coordinates u and v. R n (v) corresponds to the generalization of the parameter t which is in charge of continuously transforming the initial contour C 1 (u) to the objective contour C 2 (u), this function has the name the flexing function. I 2 corresponds to the 2 × 2 identity matrix. The function S(v), called the scaling function, determines the number of internal contours that will exist between the initial contour and the target contour. The initial shape, represented in parametric form with parameter t, can expressed as : The target cross-section in parametric form with the same t domain (t a , t b ) is represented as: Therefore, the initial and terminal cross-section can be expressed as follows: Initial cross-section Final cross-section Table .1 Parameterized cross sections. Step. In this step the bending function is determined by means of a polynomial function: The function c n [x n (x)]is usually specified to be smooth and monotonic. A typical expression for c n might be: c n (x n ) = x n m eq.5 with m as an adjustable design parameter. After that, a transition surface representing a smooth blending of the two end shapes is defined by the functions: y(x, t) = [1 -c(x)]y 1 (t) + c(x)y 2 (t) eq.6 z(x, t) = [1 -c(x)]z 1 (t) + c(x)z 2 (t) eq.7 Finally, the size variation of the surface is prescribed by introducing an independent scaling function λ(x), which is specified to be smooth and nonnegative but not necessarily monotonic: y(x, t) = λ(x){[1 -c(x)]y 1 (t) + c(x)y 2 (t)} eq.8 z(x, t) = λ(x){[1 -c(x)]z 1 (t) + c(x)z 2 (t)} eq.9 The scaling function λ(x) is defined by: λ(x n ) = λ 2 (1.6x n -5.3x n 2 eq.10 After applying this algorithm, the determined cellular structure is generated by using the functions mentioned above: Figure 2. The conforming design gives higher stress concentrations. 3. The stress distribution in the conforming system is more uniform. This last point is observed in the red circle in the non-conforming structure. In this red circle, an area is observed in which the stresses are low compared whole system. On the other hand, the conformal structure presents a similar stress distribution throughout the design; there are no areas with minor deformation. Comparison in the stress distribution between a conforming structure and a non-conforming structure From these results, the following can be concluded: a) The conformal structure generates a homogeneous distribution throughout the entire structure. This allows achieving one of the objectives of the methodology, which is that all unit cells throughout the structure deform uniformly. A conformal structure generates geometric alterations in the unit cell concerning the original unit cell. In this case, a pseudo-periodic structure is obtained that can decrease the mechanical rigidity of the structure. For this reason, the system changes the mechanical behavior initially expected for the original unit cells. Therefore, it is necessary to include a section in the transformation algorithm that allows controlling the mechanical behavior of the unit cell while it is transformed. According to those mentioned above, it is necessary to generate a complement to the algorithm that allows controlling the transformation of the structure while maintaining a specific mechanical property. Therefore, the unit cell transformation modeling was divided into two categories to achieve the above objective. Figura.11 Two ways in which a unit cell is transformed. First, the unit cell is deformed at its angles, and second the size of the unit cell changes as it approaches the boundary. In the first instance, the figure shows that the unit cell changes shape, more specifically the angles and edges, which are coupled to the geometry of the outer edge. Second, once the unit cell takes on a particular geometry, the size increases as it gets closer to one of the edges. The change in shape is represented by the Jacobian operator J, as shown in eq. 11. On the other hand, the changes in size are represented using the function w(x Eq. 13 shows the definition of mechanical property gradient in terms of a global variable and a microscale variable. In addition, it is essential to include the J term from the Jacobian. Finally, it is possible to arrive at an expression for the energy E H ~1 2 ∫ [(c ijkl H[0] -δc ijkl H [1] ) ∂x l ] dx Eq.14 The perspective of this work is to implement these constitutive models in the homotopic transformation algorithm and be able to control the changes in the mechanical behavior of the transformed cell structures. In this work, it was possible to determine a solution methodology for implementing cellular structures in engineering devices with complex geometry. This methodology is based on the concept of homotopy by transforming the geometry of a unit cell into the geometry of an exterior cellar. This methodology is computationally efficient because it allows unit cells to be modeled as functions and not as objects in CAD software. On the other hand, a deep analysis of the transformation dynamics of the cells was made, and their limitations were evaluated from a mechanical point of view. In this case, it was determined that the transformed structure allows obtaining a more homogeneous stress distribution than a nonconforming structure. On the other hand, it was shown that the deformation mechanisms of the conforming unit cell differ from the deformation mechanics of the structure based on the undeformed unit cells. This showed the need to optimize the algorithm because it does not consider the mechanical behavior of the system. It is necessary to build a constitutive model that models the conformal structures' mechanical behavior to perform this optimization. In this case, the transformation of the structure generates changes in the morphology of the unit cell, and to generates a size gradient as it approaches the edge of the target surface. To model these changes, we implement a property function that contains a Jacobian function and a function that describes the transformation in size. Finally, as a perspective of this work, this constitutive model must be implemented in the original algorithm to generate a homotopic transformation that allows controlling the mechanical behavior of the structure. The perspective of this work is to implement these constitutive models in the homotopic transformation algorithm and be able to control the changes in the mechanical behavior of the transformed cell structures.