We investigate the role of polarization-photon coupling (specifically, polarization-oscillationinduced radiation electric field) in the excitation of ferroelectric thin films by an ultrafast terahertz (THz) electric-field pulse. Analytical theory is developed to predict how the frequencies and relaxation time of three-dimensional soft mode phonons (intrinsic polarization oscillation) are modulated by radiation electric field and epitaxial strain. Ultrafast THz-pulse-driven excitation of harmonic polarization oscillation in strained single-domain ferroelectric thin film is then simulated using a dynamical phase-field model that considers the coupled strain-polarization-photon dynamics. The frequencies and relaxational time extracted from such numerical simulations agree well with analytical predictions. In relatively thin films, it is predicted that the radiation electric field slightly reduces the frequencies but significantly shortens the relaxational time. These results demonstrate the necessity of considering polarization-photon coupling in understanding and predicting the response of ferroelectric materials to ultrafast pulses of THz and higher frequencies. Ultrafast light-matter interaction is a promising route to understanding and controlling quantum materials where the four fundamental degrees of freedoms (charge, spin, orbit, and lattice) are dynamically intertwined Among these mechanisms, the use of THz electric-field pulse to drive soft mode phonons is most straightforward In this article, we computationally demonstrated the necessity of considering bidirectional polarization-photon coupling in understanding and predicting ultrafast THz excitation of ferroelectrics. This paper is organized as follows. In Sect. II, we analytically calculate the frequencies and relaxation time of the soft mode phonon by considering a harmonic polarization oscillation in single-domain ferroelectrics. Influences of polarization-oscillation-induced radiation electric field on the frequencies and relaxation time of the soft mode phonons are analytically predicted. Effects of epitaxial strain in ferroelectric thin films on the soft mode phonon frequencies are also calculated. In Sect. III, we numerically simulate the excitation of a single-domain, inplane-polarized (100)pc BaTiO3 thin film (pc: pseudocubic) by applying an ultrafast THz electricfield pulse. This is achieved using an in-house dynamical phase-field model that considers coupled dynamics of strain, polarization, and EM waves, where Graphics Processing Unit (GPU) acceleration was performed to mitigate the high computational cost. The simulations results confirmed the analytical predictions. Since our analytical and numerical models are independent from each other, the consistency in the prediction results simultaneously demonstrates the physical validity of our analytical theory and high numerical accuracy of our dynamical phase-field model. The paper is concluded with discussion in Sect. IV. In this section, we derive analytical expressions for the frequencies of three-dimensional soft mode phonons, i.e., the intrinsic oscillation frequencies of the Px, Py, Pz of the spontaneous polarization P, as well as their relaxation time. Our analytical formulations are developed partly based on the work by Morozovska and colleagues As an example, let us consider a (100)pc BaTiO3 film epitaxially grown on a (110)O PrScO3 substrate (O: orthorhombic), as shown in Fig. To derive the frequency and relaxation time of the soft mode phonons, we start by considering a harmonic polarization oscillation in single-domain ferroelectric materials and write the equation of motion of the polarization, given as, where Pi (i = x, y, z) are the three components of the spontaneous polarization in Cartesian coordinates; μ and γ are the mass and damping coefficient of the polarization dynamics, respectively; is the total effective electric field, where f tot is the total free energy density. For a single-domain strained ferroelectric thin film, f tot = f Landau + f elas + f elec is a sum of the Landau, elastic, and electrical free energy density, respectively. For BaTiO3, an eighth-order Landau free energy density is utilized, and its expression can be found in ref. where i = x, y, z, and j ≠ i, k ≠ i, j; α are Landau-Devonshire coefficients among which α 1 =α 0 (T-T c ) is a linear function of temperature, and Tc is the Curie temperature. The values of these coefficients are also provided in ref. The E i elas is contributed by the elastic energy f elas and calculated as - , and the expression of f elas can be found in ref. Here q11=c11Q11+2c12Q12, q12 = c11Q12+c12(Q11+Q12) and q44 = 2c44Q44, where c and Q are the elastic stiffness and electrostrictive tensor, respectively with i = x, y, z, and j ≠ i, k ≠ i, j. For a strained single-domain ferroelectric film, the total strain ε(P 0 ) at the initial equilibrium state can be analytically obtained by solving the mechanical equilibrium equation ∂σ iz ∂z =0 (i=x,y,z) with the stress σij=cijkl(εkl-ε kl 0 ). After some algebra, one has, Here ε mis is the mismatch strain in the ferroelectric film induced by the substrate, and, ε yy (P 0 ) = ε yy mis +ε yy 0 (P 0 ), (5e) Strictly speaking, the total strain in Eq. ( The electrical energy density f elec =-(E ext +E d ) • P, where the external electric field E ext =E app +E EM is the sum of the applied electric field and the radiation electric field inside the ferroelectric thin film. E EM describes the backaction of the emitted EM wave on polarization dynamics. For a film that is infinitely large in the xy plane, E EM propagates along the film thickness direction in the form of a plane wave with E z EM = 0. We have now derived a complete analytical expression of the E i eff in Eq. ( Next, we linearize Eq. ( Regarding the effective fields on the right-hand side, the depolarization field can be written as E d = E d (P 0 )+ΔE d (t), where E d (P 0 )=(0, 0, - ) is the field at the initial equilibrium state and ΔE d (t)=(0, 0, - ) describes its temporal variation. The radiating electric field can be rewritten as To extract the terms of different orders of ∆P i (t) from the E i Landau and E i elas , we perform Taylor expansion for the function of these two effective fields near the equilibrium point P 0 using ΔP i as the only variable, where the third and higher order terms are not shown for simplicity. For near-equilibrium excitation, ∆P i 2 and higher orders are negligibly small and can be omitted. As a result, the linearized equation of motion for polarization (Eq. 6) can be further rewritten as Note that E i Landau (P 0 ) + E i elas (P 0 ) + E i d (P 0 ) + E i app , which refers to the total effective field at initial equilibrium state, equals to 0. By letting the imaginary terms on the left-hand side of Eqs. (9a-b) be 0, the expression for the auxiliary damping coefficient λ can be derived as, for Px and Py (i = x, y), and for Pz. Equation (10a) indicates that the in-plane polarization dynamics is subjected to both the intrinsic damping (described by γ) and an additional term associated with the radiation electric field E EM , and that such radiation-induced damping is more significant in thicker films. As shown by Eq. (10b), the out-plane polarization oscillation in the film is not subjected to radiation-induced damping. This is reasonable because E z EM =0. The angular frequency of oscillation is given as for Px and Py (i = x, y), and for Pz, where, ), (12a) with i= x, y, z, and j ≠ i, k ≠ i, j. Based on Eqs. . The relaxation time i is the time for the polarization variation Pi(t) to decrease from its peak amplitude ∆P i 0 to 1/e of that value. i can be calculated as i=1/λ i , where the expressions of λ i are in Eqs. (10a-b). Figure For completeness, we note that fz = 20.66 THz is thickness-independent (not shown in Fig. In order to demonstrate the analytically predicted effects of radiation electric field on both the frequency (Fig. where the term ∂P ∂t describes the time-varying polarization as the source of electric dipole radiation. The polarization and strain dynamics are coupled since the elastic effective electric field E elas is a function of the polarization P, stress-free strain ε 0 , and total strain ε, as shown in Eq. ( ( ), where Δu(t) is the temporal variation of the mechanical displacement u with i, j = x, y, z. The Δu(t) is obtained by solving the elastodynamics equation for the entire film-on-substrate heterostructure, where ρ and c are phase-dependent mass density and elastic stiffness tensor, respectively; Δε 0 (t) = ε 0 (t)-ε 0 (P 0 ) is the temporal variation of the stress-free strain. Free surface mechanical boundary condition σ iz =0 (i = x, y, z) is applied on the top surface of the ferroelectric film during the dynamics. The entire heterostructure is discretized into one-dimensional computational cells along z axis with the cell size being 1 nm. The (110)O PrScO3 substrate and the free space above the ferroelectric film are discretized into 100 and 10 cells, respectively. Absorbing boundary condition (ABC) is applied on both bottom and top surfaces of the computational system when solving the Maxwell's equations for the generation and propagation of EM waves. The ABC is also applied at the bottom surface of the substrate for making the substrate a perfect sink for elastic waves. Central finite difference is used to calculate spatial derivatives in all dynamical equations (Eqs. To numerically demonstrate the analytical prediction for in-plane-polarized (100)pc BaTiO3 film, harmonic oscillation of both the Px and Py component needs to be excited. Here, this is achieved by applying the THz electric-field pulse E app (t) along the y axis. The waveform of E app (t), as shown in the inset of Fig. w 2 ] cos[ω app (t-t 0 )] following ref. Figure Both curves show a single peak at the 1.36 THz, which is consistent with analytical prediction but the predicted frequency shift from 1.363 THz to 1.357 THz (0.006 THz discrepancy) is too small to resolve numerically. However, our simulations using thicker BTO film and adjusted materials parameters clearly confirms the analytically predicted frequency shift (see Supplementary The numerically simulated ΔPx(t) in the 10-nm-thick (100)pc BTO film is analyzed in a similar manner to ΔPy(t). The results are summarized in Fig. From the frequency spectra in Fig. In summary, our results show that an accurate modeling of ultrafast THz-field excitation of ferroelectrics requires considering the polarization-photon coupling. Using ultrafast THz-fieldinduced harmonic polarization oscillation in single-domain ferroelectric thin film as an example, we analytically and numerically demonstrate that the polarization-oscillation-induced radiation electric field can reduce the frequency and relaxation time of soft mode phonons by increasing the effective damping. We have derived the analytical expressions on the variation of the soft mode phonon frequencies as a function of epitaxial strain and thin film thickness, which can be utilized to guide the synthesis of thin films and shape engineering of THz pulse for achieving more efficient resonant excitation. The soft mode phonon (i.e., intrinsic polarization oscillation) frequency is analogous to ferromagnetic resonance (FMR) frequency in ferromagnetic system, which describes the intrinsic precession frequency of uniform magnetization and can likewise be modulated by epitaxial strain 