A recently presented model is adapted to predict the effects of strain path change on the strain aging (bake hardening) behaviour of an ultra low carbon (ULC) steel. Samples pre-deformed by rolling were aged and then tested in uniaxial tension at 0, 45 and 90 • degrees to the prior rolling direction. The results show that aging changes not only the yield strength of the material but also the work hardening rate. The increase in yield strength is interpreted to be dominated by a reduction in mobile dislocation density, this reflecting the classic ideas of Hahn and others. The change in work hardening behaviour is treated as arising from the different role played by solute 'loaded' dislocations compared to dislocations generated by straining after aging. Ultra-low carbon (ULC) steels rely primarily on two phenomena to achieve strength in formed parts; work hardening and strain aging. These two features work in tandem in the bake hardening process; steel is first deformed, to work harden it, followed by annealing to allow for a further increase in strength due to interstitial solute re-arrangement and segregation to dislocations (strain aging or bake hardening) (see e.g. Commercially, bake hardening (BH) is quantified as the increases in yield stress following the aging treatment. This definition uses the difference between the flow stress at the end of pre-deformation and the upper or lower yield stress measured after aging. The aging time-temperature dependence of BH has been studied in detail with a number of analytical models that allow for a phenomenological description of this behaviour, see e.g. When strain aging is performed between deformation steps where a strain path change is involved, the most common observation, for a range of steels, has been that strain aging acts to reduce, though never totally eliminate, the Bauschinger effect What is consistent among all studies where strain aging is conducted with a change in strain path is that the strong yield point phenomena characteristic of strain aged samples subjected to monotonic tension-tension tests is not present. However, aging conducted with a strain path change does result in a significant change in the work hardening behaviour. This was noted by Ballarin et al. For this study a 1 mm thick ULC steel sheet (composition in Table In both cases, following aging, the second deformation (to measure the strain aging effect) was performed in uniaxial tension. For all tensile tests the same dog-bone shaped tensile samples were used (gauge length of 40 mm, gauge width of 6 mm). These were tested at room temperature in an Instron load frame with a fixed cross-head speed of 0.21 mm/s, corresponding to a nominal strain rate of approximately 6 × 10 -2 s -1 . Strains were measured using a clipon extensometer. For the tensile tests performed to pre-strain the material, the tests were stopped at 10% total strain, this being just beyond the end of the Lüder's plateau in the stress strain curves. For samples pre-deformed by rolling, the deformation was conducted using an unlubricated laboratory rolling mill. The rolling direction was kept the same as that used in the commercial production of the sheet. All sheets were cold rolled in 4-5 passes to a reduction in thickness of 9 ± 1%. The reduction in thickness was measured using a digital micrometer at several locations in the as-rolled sheet. From these rolled sheets, tensile samples were cut parallel (0 • ) to the sheet's rolling direction (RD), transverse (90 • ) to RD, and at 45 • to RD. Tensile samples cut at 0 and 90 • to RD were processed in two sheets rolled at the same time, meaning that the same reduction per pass and total reduction were achieved. Samples cut at 45 • to RD were taken from a sheet rolled separately. Following pre-deformation in tension or in rolling, samples were aged in a stirred silicone oil bath. The bath temperature was monitored using a K-type thermocouple submerged next to the samples. For the samples pre-deformed in tension, the aging treatment was performed within 10 minutes of the end of the pre-deformation step. For samples pre-deformed in rolling, a longer delay between deformation and aging was required owing to the need to machine tensile samples. In this case, aging was limited to long times/high temperatures so as to minimize the effects of further aging at room temperature. Two-dimensional digital image correlation (DIC) was performed on selected samples during tensile testing to clarify the homogeneity of strain in the gauge section. For DIC measurements a single camera was used with the LAVISION DIC system for image capture and subsequent processing. A random speckle pattern was deposited on the surface of these samples using black paint and an airbrush. During DIC image acquisition the measured load from the load cell was recorded on each image. This allowed for a direct correlation between the DIC measurements and the stress-strain response. As a validation of the technique, the average axial strain in the gauge section of the sample was used, along with the recorded load, to calculate the Young's modulus of samples during unloading. The results were found to always fall between 204-208 GPa. Finally, to assist with the prediction of the stress-strain response under conditions where non-uniform strains were observed during tensile testing (due to Lüders bands), simulations of tensile tests were performed using ABAQUS CAE version 6.14 FEA software Strain aging tests were first performed under conventional tension-agingtension conditions to assess the aging kinetics under the conditions used here. Aging was conducted at 50, 100 and 150 • C for times ranging from 1 min to 220 min. Figure Using the data here it was found that a good prediction could be obtained using ∆σ max = 55 MPa and t * = 2.34 × 10 -16 /D where kJ/mol, as used in Based on the above results, an aging condition of 10 min at 150 • C was selected for the rolled samples, as it represented the maximum BH effect observed in figure 1. As noted above, this 'peak' strain aged condition was selected so as to minimize the affect of the samples needing to be left at room temperature for several hours prior to aging so that tensile samples could be machined. Like with the results shown in figure Additional data which can help reduce this ambiguity comes if we compare the work-hardening/flow stress relationship (Kocks-Mecking plot Of course, it is impossible to compare the stress-strain response of the as-rolled material tested at 90 • to RD with the as-annealed material at higher strains as the ultimate tensile strength occurred just after yielding. In this case, however, since the samples taken at 0 and 90 • to RD were cut from the same rolled sheet we have applied the same ̄ = 0.14 to both cases. A final point regards the onset of yielding following rolling and aging. While the classic response following strain aging is the one shown in figure As noted above, the classic approach to modelling the impact of strain aging on the mechanical response of ULC steel considers only the yield strength evolution. Clearly this is insufficient to explain the changes shown in figure Here we test this approach to predict both the yield strength and work hardening response of the materials described above. Rather than provide a detailed description of the model, we will focus on providing a basic overview, readers interested in a more detailed description are directed to The flow stress of the ULC steel is considered to be a function of the forest dislocation density (ρ f ) and the imposed strain rate ( ̇ ) according to, In equation 3, σ 0 is taken to be the yield strength of the as-annealed material without the impact of strain aging, M is the Taylor factor, α is the Saada constant. As-annealed samples tested at 0, 45 and 90 • to RD were seen to have different (upper) yield stresses but the effect was small compared to those we hope to capture following aging, thus in this case a single value M = 3 was used for all samples and no intrinsic anisotropy due to texture has been accounted for. The reference strain rate, ̇ 0 , is assumed proportional to the mobile dislocation density ̇ 0 = β * ρ m where ρm = ρ m /ρ sat m . The evolution of the forest dislocation density, in the absence of aging, is taken to obey the classic Kocks-Mecking phenomenological evolution equation With strain aging, however, one needs to consider the role that solute 'loaded' dislocations have on this equation for dislocation storage. In this case, we additionally separate forest dislocations into two types, those which have been 'loaded' with solute (density ρ * f ) and those that are not (ρ f ). As in In Taking the above points into consideration, a single test on a solution treated sample, allows one to establish values for σ 0 , k 1 and k 2 , the values found for the alloy studied here being given in Table dislocations is allowed to be reduced by deformation, this obeying the simple law, The results of this are a model which requires the evaluation of σ 0 , k 1 , k 2 , k 3 , k 4 , m, η, ρ sat m and ρ * f at the end of strain aging in order to predict the stressstrain response of a sample after deformation and aging. While the number of parameters seems large we will show here that several of these must be held constant over all conditions considered and that others are relatively insensitive to model predictions. We can first obtain estimates for σ 0 , k 1 and k 2 by considering the behaviour of the as-annealed material. Specifically we assume a condition where ρ m ≈ ρ sat m and ρ * f = 0. This implies that rather than deal with fitting to the full stressstrain response in figure As in For the as-rolled samples, the initial values of the dislocation densities ρ f , ρ * f and ρm were established in the following way. The initial value of ρ f was computed by evaluating the above model for the as-annealed material to ̄ = 0.14 for the samples rolled at 0 and 90 • to RD and ̄ = 0.16 for the sample rolled at 45 • to RD. The value of ρ f at the end of these simulated tensile tests was taken as the starting value for the subsequent predictions of the rolled tensile samples (see table For the rolled and aged samples we follow a similar process for predicting the value of ρ f at the pre-strain levels introduced by rolling. The best-fit values obtained here are reported in table The resulting fits to the stress-strain behaviour of the rolled and rolled and aged samples using the parameters outlined in Tables As a final illustration of the utility of this model, we return to the 'classic' case of strain aging under monotonic loading (figure In the case of prediction for aging a sample at 150 • C for 10 minutes, the model also does an excellent job of predicting the stress-strain response. In this case, to obtain the observed results the fraction of forest dislocations converted to loaded forest dislocations (ρ * f ) had to be taken to be lower than that for the rolled and aged samples (70% in this case, compared to 90% in the case of the rolled and aged samples, cf. table It is interesting to reflect upon the difference in behaviour observed in the case of the tension-aged-tension and rolled-aged-tension (particularly 0 • to RD) tested samples. Clearly the minimal model applied here is unable to capture all of the complex physics involved in strain path changes and the results on the stress-strain behaviour, yet it is able to reproduce key aspects of the stressstain response. As the level of pre-strain (in rolling) is increased it may be expected that the model will have difficulty capturing the increasing load-pathchange induced transients on loading Alternatively, microscopic models have been developed (e.g. A recently developed model for strain aging 