One of the universal features of unconventional superconductors is that the superconducting (SC) state is developed in the proximity of an antiferromagnetic (AFM) state. Understanding the interplay between these two states is one of the key issues to uncover the underlying physics of unconventional SC mechanism. Here, we report a pressure-induced flipping of the AFM state to SC state in the quasi-one-dimensional AMn6Bi5 (A = K, Rb, and Cs) compounds. We find that at a critical pressure the AFM state suddenly disappears at a finite temperature and a SC state simultaneously emerges at a lower temperature without detectable structural changes. Intriguingly, all members of the family present the AFM-SC transition at almost the same critical pressures (Pc), though their ambient-pressure unit-cell volumes vary substantially. Our theoretical calculations indicate that the increasing weight of dxz orbital electrons near Fermi energy under the pressure may be the origin of the flipping. These results reveal a diversity of competing nature between the AFM and SC states among the 3d-transitionmetal compounds. The 3d-transition-metal compounds with various magnetic ordered states can often be tuned into an unconventional superconductor by adopting non-thermal control parameters, such as chemical doping, external pressure, and magnetic field. Notable examples include cuprates Structurally, these compounds possess a monoclinic structure with the unique [Mn6Bi5]-A-[Mn6Bi5] aligning along the b axis CsMn6Bi5 shares the same Q1D structure motif as AMn6Bi5 (A = Na, K, and Rb), as shown in Fig. First, we performed in-situ resistance measurements on the CsMn6Bi5 sample in the pressure range of 2.7-11.6 GPa by using a diamond anvil cell (Fig. The onset SC transition temperature (Tc) and the critical pressure (Pc) for such a transition is similar to what has been seen in K/RbMn6Bi5 compounds To further characterize the pressure-induced superconductivity, we performed the measurements for the smaple#3 and observed the same results -the CsMn6Bi5 compound undergoes a SC transition at 12.6 GPa (Fig. . The estimated values of Hc2 are ∼22.9 T at 13.3 GPa and ∼23.8 T at 17.0 GPa, which are higher than the value of Pauli limit (μ0Hp = 1.84Tc) To investigate whether the pressure-induced SC transition is associated with any structural phase transition, we performed high-pressure x-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements for the CsMn6Bi5 sample at the beamline 15W of the Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility. The XRD patterns collected at different pressures are shown in Fig. We summarize the high-pressure transport results for the AMn6Bi5 (A = K, Rb, and Cs) family in Fig. However, the AFM-SC transition observed in the AMn6Bi5 compounds is exotic, which has not been seen before. To understand the possible physical origin, we plot the pressure dependence of the  angle that represents the lattice deformation degree of the monoclinic phase in Fig. To further understand the correlation between the AFM and SC states for this family, we performed first-principles calculations on the electronic structure for the CsMn6Bi5 sample, based on our high-pressure XRD results. The details about the calculations can be found in the SI Since the changes of TN and the P-DOS from the dz 2 orbital electrons as a function of pressure has the same trend, we propose that the change in the DOS contributed by the dz 2 orbital electrons is likely associated with the stability of the AFM order state. While an increase of the DOS contributed by the dxz orbital electrons favors the emergence of SC state. Therefore, such pressure-induced changes in the weight of the P-DOS from the dz 2 and dxz orbital electrons seem to play an important role in the flipping of the AFM and SC states, for which the pressure-induced lattice distortion is considered to be a physical origin. In summary, we report the first observation of the pressure-induced superconductivity in CsMn6Bi5, and the analysis on the generic flipping of an antiferromagnetic (AFM) state to a superconducting (SC) state in the quasi-onedimensional AMn6Bi5 (A = K, Rb, and Cs) compounds. We find that these three 