Transition metal oxides have generated significant interest for their potential as catalysts for the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) in alkaline environments. Iron and nickel-based perovskite oxides have proven particularly promising, with catalytic over-potentials rivaling precious metal catalysts when the alignment of the valence band relative to the OER reaction potential is tuned through substitutional doping or alloying. Here we report that engineering of band alignment in LaFeO3/LaNiO3 (LFO/LNO) heterostructures via interfacial doping yields greatly enhanced catalytic performance. Using density functional theory modeling, we predict a 0.2 eV valence band offset (VBO) between metallic LNO and semiconducting LFO that significantly lowers the barrier for hole transport through LFO compared to the intrinsic material and make LFO a p-type semiconductor. Experimental band alignment measurements using in situ X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy of epitaxial LFO/LNO heterostructures agree quite well with these predictions, producing a measured VBO of 0.3(1) eV. OER catalytic measurements on the same samples in alkaline solution show an increase in catalytic current density by a factor of ~275 compared to LFO grown on n-type Nb-doped SrTiO3. These results demonstrate the power of tuning band alignments through interfacial band engineering for improved catalytic performance of oxides. Interfaces in complex oxide thin film heterostructures are particularly interesting because of their non-equilibrium electronic properties, which usually do not exist in the bulk or even in uniform films. These unique properties emerge as a result of interfacial interactions, such as an offset in the band alignment for occupied states accompanied by charge transfer across the interface Transition metal (TM) oxide thin films, heterostructures, and interfaces have emerged as ideal model systems for understanding catalysis in energy conversion devices (electrochemical cells) by splitting of water via the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) and hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) LaNiO3 (LNO) and other perovskite nickelates have been reported to exhibit excellent catalytic performance for OER In this work we characterize the enhanced catalytic performance of heterostructures formed with LNO/LFO grown using molecular beam epitaxy (MBE). The band alignment at LFO/LNO interface is characterized from first principles calculations using density functional theory (DFT). Taking the Zhong and Hansmann model for band alignment via continuity of the O 2p bands across an interface as a basis Computational descriptions of these heterostructures were carried out on a LaFeO3/LaNiO3 superlattice comprised of 4 layers of each material with a 22 in-plane configuration assuming periodic boundary conditions in all directions. G-type antiferromagnetic polarization for LFO We synthesized epitaxial thin film heterostructures using oxide molecular beam epitaxy (MBE, Mantis Deposition). All samples were grown on 10 mm square 0.7% Nb-doped SrTiO3 (STO) substrates (MTI Crystal) that served as a conductive bottom electrode for XPS and catalysis experiments. STO has a cubic lattice parameter of 3.905 Å while pseudocubic lattice parameters of LFO and LNO, obtained from experimental data are 3.93 Å For LNO growth, the Nb:STO substrates were heated to 600 °C in oxygen plasma generated by a 300 W-RF plasma source (Mantis Deposition) and kept at the same temperature until completion of the LNO layer. Immediately after, the substrate was heated to 750 °C for the LFO growth. Metallic fluxes were obtained by heating elemental sources in effusion cells to the evaporation or sublimation point. Elemental fluxes were calibrated using a quartz crystal microbalance (QCM). By controlling the individual shutters, LaO and NiO2/FeO2 layers were deposited alternately, as described previously Chemical composition and electronic valence state of synthesized samples were established using an appended XPS system (PHI 5400, refurbished by RBD Instruments) furnished with a monochromatic Al Kα X-ray source. The absolute core level positions cannot be referenced to the Fermi level of the system owing to a electron flood gun used to mitigate charging. Thus, XPS analysis was performed by aligning O 1s peak to 530eV to provide a consistent reference for all spectra. Band alignment measurements were performed via the Kraut method using the Fe 3p and Ni 3p core level spectra, as described previously To fabricate electrodes for catalytic studies, the samples were diced using a standard dicing saw to 5mm5mm pieces. These LFO/LNO MBE films were used as electrodes and connected to a glassy carbon electrode (GC, Pine Instruments) as described in our previous work Cyclic voltammetry (CV) experiments were performed with a Pine WaveDriver 20 bipotentiostat using a three-electrode setup. The working, reference, and counter electrodes for the electrochemical setup were LFO/LNO, Hg/HgO (0.1 M KOH, Pine Instruments), and platinum coil respectively. All measurements were carried out under saturated O2 conditions in water (18 MΩ, Millipore) with 0.1 M KOH electrolyte (pH 12.7) while rotating the working electrode at 2000 rpm to remove bubbles from the electrode surface. All potentials were converted from Hg/HgO to RHE using [Fe(CN)6] 3-/4-as an external standard. CV experiments were performed by sweeping the potential at 20 mV s -1 from 0.83 to 2.23 V vs RHE for 25 cycles to equilibrate the electrode surface. The anodic trace of the 25 th cycle was used for analysis of electrocatalytic performance for OER. We first employ first principles calculation to establish the band alignment and charge transfer across the LFO/LNO interface and better understand how the heterostructures will function as OER catalysts. Strain and bonding environment may alter the electronic properties significantly between a bulk material and heterostructure, necessitating care to decouple interfacial effects from the structural changes imposed by the superlattice In general, quantitative prediction of band offsets at complex oxide interfaces using computational methods is challenging due to electron correlations, various magnetic states and symmetry considerations In these heterostructures, p-doping of the semiconductor is expected to be emerge as in bulk the O 2p-band center of LNO and LFO reside at approximately 2.20 eV and 2.82 eV below the Fermi level, respectively. Once the interface is formed, O 2p-band centers obtained from orbital projections on different layers tend to align, as shown in Figure To test the theoretical results determined from DFT, a series of films were grown via MBE and measured using in situ XPS Initial LFO and LNO films were grown separately and used as references for determination of the energy difference between core levels and the valence band maximum in each material. These results are shown in Figure The valence band offset is calculated as ∆E V = (E CL -E V ) LNO -(E CL -E V ) LFO -(E CL Ni 3p -E CL Fe 3p ) LFO/LNO , where ECL is the chosen core level energy and Ev is the position of valence band maximum. The core level and VBM binding energy difference is measured in LFO and LNO thin films, and the core level energy difference is measured in the heterostructure. The individual LFO (~6nm) and LNO (~3nm) thin films used to determine the core level and VBM energy difference for band offset measurement. The Fe 3p and Ni 3p XPS regions are shown in Figure Interfacial band engineering with epitaxial films can have a significant impact on functional properties, including electrocatalysis. To examine this impact, we studied the OER electrocatalysis using the epitaxial LFO/LNO thin film samples above. Films were converted into electrodes through back contact with a commercial glassy carbon disk and assembled into a rotating-disk shaft electrode. Figure The two samples exhibit a 130-fold increase (LFO/LNO-1) and 275-fold increase (LFO/LNO-2) in catalysis observed for the LFO/LNO films compared to LFO alone is remarkable. We attribute this result to the interfacial hole doping due to the smaller VBO observed for the LFO/LNO interface (0.28-0.33 eV) than the LFO/STO interface reported previously (2.2 eV). The approximate band alignment diagram based on our experimental and theoretical determination of VBO based on our previous work It is also noteworthy that we do not see evidence of significant formation of Fe 4+ formal charge states based on either the DFT predictions or the XPS analysis of the interfaces. Previous analysis by Wang et al. of alloy La(Fe,Ni)O3 thin films had showed evidence of Fe 4+ and Ni 2+ formal charges in some samples with strongly enhanced electrocatalytic performance We have investigated the electronic structure of the epitaxial LFO/LNO interface theoretically and experimentally and related these insights to the strong OER activity of these heterostructures. Theoretical predictions indicate that the LFO VBM should lie ~0.2 eV below the Fermi level when pinned by an interface with LNO. Comparisons with experimental VBO measurements are in good agreement with these DFT predictions. We find that the OER activity of the heterostructure is much higher (~275 times for the best performing sample) when compared with the LFO and LNO thin films of same thicknesses. The small VBO offers low energy barriers for charge carriers and promotes charge transfer from LFO valence band to LNO. This minimal charge transfer results in partial oxidation of Fe 3+ and partial reduction of Ni 3+ , which leads to high OER activity. Thus, our study highlights the importance of band engineering in developing a highly efficient OER catalyst. a Department of Physics, Auburn University, Auburn, AL 36849 USA b Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Auburn University, Auburn, AL 36849 USA