We present physics-based nozzle design rules to achieve high-throughput and stable jetting in drop-on-demand liquid metal 3D printing. The design rules are based on scaling laws that capture the change of meniscus oscillation relaxation time with geometric characteristics of the nozzle's inner profile. These characteristics include volume, cross-sectional area, and inner surface area of the nozzle. Using boundary layer theory for a simple geometry, we show that the meniscus settles faster when the ratio of inner surface area to volume is increased. High-fidelity multiphase flow simulations verify this scaling. We use these laws to explore several design concepts with parameterized classes of shapes that reduce the meniscus relaxation time while preserving desired droplet specs. Finally, we show that for various nozzle profile concepts, the optimal performance can be achieved by increasing the ratio of the circumferential surface area to the bulk volume to the extent that is allowable by manufacturing constraints. Metal additive manufacturing (AM) is emerging as a viable alternative to traditional methods such as casting to make supply chains more resilient and cost-effective for small-batch, multi-variety, and spare parts To enable fast and reliable/repeatable builds, it is important to produce droplets with consistent volume, shape, and velocity distributions, which, in turn, strongly depend on the rate at which the post-ejection energy in the liquid in the nozzle dissipates. One way to quantify this rate is by observing the decay of the oscillations of the meniscus membrane at the tip of the nozzle. After a brief initial transient, the amplitude of these oscillations decay exponentially with a characteristic relaxation time. Ideally, the meniscus should settle before the next droplet starts forming. The most common nozzle concepts are axisymmetric due to their ease of manufacturing (e.g., via micro-drilling). The resulting circular cross-sections lead to an inevitable tradeoff between droplet parameters, target throughput, and relaxation time. A nozzle with a smaller diameter has a smaller relaxation time, but it is harder to push the liquid through it due to the need for larger fluid speeds to achieve a target throughput and the increased viscous resistance. As a result, a higher pressure is required to meet the target throughput. Reducing the diameter of the nozzle may also lead to either smaller droplets or, through the use of an increased flow velocity, to an elongated droplet that breaks apart after the ejection. The critical question is to design a nozzle that ejects a largely spherical droplet with a target velocity and mass while minimizing the relaxation time of post-ejection oscillations. Analysis of the meniscus damping rate has been known as a challenging problem in multiphase fluid mechanics To demonstrate the application of the design rules, we performed physics simulations of multiphase flows capturing the oscillatory dynamics of the liquid-gas interface on several nozzle geometries. We used a multiphase flow solver in OpenFOAM ® , which employs the algebraic volume-offluid approach for tracking gas-liquid interfaces. Our simulation results validated our hypothesis on the formation of a thin boundary layer near the nozzle wall, and demonstrated a successful decrease of the relaxation time in nozzles with increased surface-area-to-volume ratio. The paper is organized as follows: In Section II, we present the problem definition including the geometry, quantities of interest, governing equations, and non-dimensional parameters. In Section III, we present an analytical investigation of physical mechanisms that determine the nozzle performance, apply it to a simple cylindrical nozzle, and extend it to more complex shapes. In Section IV, we describe the simulation setup used in our study. In Section V, we validate the identified scaling laws applying numerical simulations to solve the dynamics for a few nozzle concepts. Section VI summarizes and concludes the current findings. Lastly, in Section VII, we elaborate on the numerical method we adopted to solve the governing equations and on the validation of the multiphase flow solver. We consider a nozzle in a domain V = A × [0, L], where A ⊂ R 2 is an open planar set that defines the cross-section of the nozzle, and L is its length. For A, we adopt either Cartesian coordinates (x, y) or cylindrical coordinates (r, θ ). The coordinate along [0, L] will be denoted by z. The nozzle is filled with a viscous fluid with density ρ, dynamic viscosity μ, and kinematic viscosity ν = μ/ρ. We assume that the dynamics in the nozzle starts with the fluid at rest at time t = 0, and that the next droplet is ejected at time t = T . The nozzle outlet radius and diameter are denoted by R and d, respectively. After a droplet ejection, surface tension drives the meniscus fluctuations and viscous dissipation dampens its deformation. The vertical meniscus displacement in the z direction is denoted by η(x, y,t), and it is measured from the planar plane at the nozzle outlet (z = 0). The contact line, where the liquid-gas-solid phases meet, is pinned at the sharp nozzle outlet, so η = 0 at r = R, as shown in Fig. Our goal when designing a nozzle for high-speed jetting is to reduce the relaxation time of the meniscus while retaining the ability to eject droplets with a desired geometry and speed. We will describe the long-time dynamic behavior of the meniscus deformation, η, with that of a damped harmonic oscillator model η(x, y,t) = η t=0 (x, y)e -γt cos(ωt + φ ), where η t=0 is the initial meniscus displacement, γ > 0 is the damping rate, ω is the oscillation frequency of the meniscus and φ is a phase. The relaxation time is 1/γ. Shortly after a droplet is ejected, the dynamics of the meniscus is non-linear and cannot be fully described by a single mode damped harmonic oscillator model. After the initial transient, in which high wavenumber modes decay fast, we find that the longtime behavior of the meniscus can be well captured by the damped harmonic oscillator model with a single wavenumber mode. In the end, we aim to find a nozzle design geometry for which γ is large enough to damp the oscillations within the ejection period (e.g., e -γT ∼ 10 -2 ). In the long-time behavior, the value of γ appears to be a feature of the geometry and the fluid only, and independent of the specific way in which a droplet is generated. The dynamics of liquid and gas in and around the nozzle are governed by the Navier-Stokes (N-S) equation, where u is the velocity field, p is pressure, g is the acceleration of gravity, and σ is the surface tension coefficient. ρ f is density of fluid either being ρ for liquid metal and ρ g for gases. μ f is viscosity of fluid, either being μ for liquid metal and μ g for gases. The locus of the liquid-gas interface is described by a surface x s , κ is its mean curvature, n is the local surface normal vector, and δ ( xx s ) is the three-dimensional Dirac delta function. The last term in the right hand side of the equation represents the surface tension force, which is a concentrated force and non-zero only at the interface. We consider the algebraic Volume-of-Fluid (VoF) framework and introduce a three-dimensional scalar field α(x, y, z,t), defined as the volume fraction of liquid ranging from 0 to 1, to track the interface location x s . The (diffuse) interface between liquid and gas is algebraically described by setting α = 0 in the spatial domain filled with gas, and α = 1 in the spatial domain filled with liquid. In this way, the interface curvature and the surface normal vector can be calculated by relations such as κ = -∇ • n and n = ∇α/|∇α|. The time evolution of the scalar field α, and hence of the gas-liquid interface, is governed by the phase transport equation Finally, the system of equations is completed by stating the equation for mass conservation at all points of the domain. This states the incompressibility of the liquid metal, and for simplicity, of the surrounding gas. We assume that the contact line is effectively pinned at the nozzle outlet rim. The nozzle outlet is macroscopically sharp, but assumed to be rounded at the microscale, so that the slope of the interface is not limited by the contact angle imposed by the material properties We proceed to derive dimensionless numbers to estimate the relative importance of different physical phenomena based on orders of magnitude approximations to typical material properties for a liquid metal and a gas. Typical values of mass density of liquid metals considered in metal AM is ρ ∼ O(10 3 )kg/m 3 , and the kinematic viscosity is ν ∼ O(10 -7 )m 2 /s (e.g. aluminum alloy) The droplet ejection rate for the droplet-on-demand liquid metal jetting is assumed f Jet ∼ O(10 2 )Hz. Based on the capillary flow theory Based on these values, we find that the Reynolds number associated with the oscillatory dynamics of the meniscus is Re = ωd 2 /ν O(1). Therefore, we expect the flow inside nozzle to involve inertial effects forming a thin boundary layer near the nozzle wall. A rough estimate of boundary layer thickness resulting from oscillating flow is δ ∼ ν/ω ∼ O(10)μm, which is thinner than the nozzle radius, δ /R O(1). The flow inside the nozzle cannot be regarded as fully developed. The micro-scale nozzle size leads to capillary-forcedominant meniscus dynamics, in which the capillary length l c = σ /∆ρg = O(10 -3 )m is comparable or larger than the nozzle diameter, where ∆ρ is the difference in densities in the two fluids. Likewise, the Bond number is small, Bo = gd 2 ∆ρ/σ O(1), therefore the relative importance of the gravitational force on the meniscus deformation is negligible. The Weber number is We = ρU 2 d/σ ∼ O(1), for U ∼ ωd a characteristic speed, and the ejected droplet shape is determined by both inertial effect and the surface tension force. In sum, the dynamics of meniscus oscillation will strongly depend on the interplay between surface tension, inertia, and viscous forces in the liquid metal. We use the boundary layer theory for oscillatory flows In this section we present an analytical study of the physical mechanisms that determine the nozzle performance, and their scaling relations to the geometric parameters of the nozzle design. After deriving an analytical expression for the viscous dissipation from the Navier-Stokes equation, we develop scaling laws for the relaxation time 1/γ (alternatively, damping rate γ) for the cylindrical nozzle geometry, and introduce modified geometries with faster relaxation times based on these law. From the dimensional analysis in Section II D, we assume that a thin viscous boundary layer is formed near the nozzle wall responding to the oscillatory fluid motion after the ejection of a droplet. A standard approach in potential flow analyses of classical fluid mechanics on multiphase flows where γ bulk is the damping rate from the bulk of the fluid and γ bl is the damping rate from the boundary layer. These damping rates stem from the contribution in each region to the dissipation of the kinetic energy of the fluid. To estimate them, we adopt standard flow structures (velocity fields) for the bulk of the fluid and the boundary layer. The damping rate can be estimated by the energy dissipation rate over the total energy of the system where ε is the mean (in time) viscous dissipation rate and E is the mean (in time) total energy in the system. Multiplying the N-S equation ( where ∇ S u is the symmetric gradient of the velocity field, and A : B is the Frobenius inner product between tensors A and B. The total energy of the system is which is twice the kinetic energy We first evaluate the scaling of the dissipation rate in the bulk of the fluid, away from the wall. Following Eq. ( where U is the characteristic speed in the system, in our case, a characteristic speed of the meniscus, and V the volume of the fluid. Given that the mean energy scales as the damping rate in the bulk of the fluid scales This indicates that perturbed flow structures with smaller size will decay faster. Our major focus will be on the largest wavenumber mode, which stays in the system for the longest time. For the boundary layer dissipation near the wall, the surface integral form of Eq. ( where S is the surface area exposed to solid surface and δ is the boundary layer thickness formed near the solid surface. Under the oscillatory flow with frequency ω, a dimensional analysis on the boundary layer thickness δ estimates Finally, the damping rate at the boundary layer of the fluid scales as where Eq. ( Using the insights from the scaling, we draw the following nozzle design rules for high speed droplet jetting: • Given the inverse scaling of γ bulk and γ bl with the size of the system (with both λ and V S ), both damping rates can be controlled by shaping (i.e. constricting) the crosssection of the nozzle. • Given that γ bl ∼ S/V , the damping rate can be controlled by maximizing the surface area of the nozzle. In the next subsections, we apply these ideas to estimate the expected scaling of the damping rate upon a design change of the nozzle. As expected, the scaling of the damping rate identifies the diameter of the nozzle as the parameter that most significantly defines the damping rate for a cylindrical nozzle. This naturally motivates the design of a nozzle with a smaller diameter, for damping control. However, the diameter of the nozzle is limited by the targeted droplet size. To account for this constraint, we consider nozzles with two distinct sections: a constricted section destined to control the damping rate, separated from another section that controls the droplet shape. An example of a nozzle with these two sections is found in Fig. Based on the scaling relation, Eq. ( To show the proof-of-concept of this design rule, we considered an (idealized) cylindrical nozzle with n total concentric cylinders identically spaced in the radial direction, as shown in Fig. The total surface area of nozzle with n ≥ 1 number of cylinders 15 is S n = 2πRLn, therefore, the resulting dissipation rate scales We expect that the bulk dissipation will not change significantly if the axial component of the velocity is the dominant flow feature associated with the damping. To demonstrate the effectiveness of our design rule, we employed the open-source CFD software OpenFOAM ® and conducted multiphase flow simulations of the meniscus dynamics in the nozzle with several different designs. We studied the relaxation time of the meniscus suspending at the outlet of the nozzle responding to a pressure pulse at the nozzle inlet. The meniscus was initially flat and pinned at the nozzle outlet. We chose material properties and nozzle dimensions inspired by 3D printing scenarios. We set the material properties to those of a liquid aluminum alloy 9 ρ = 2435kg/m 3 , ν = 4.16 × 10 -7 m 2 /s, and of argon gas ρ g = 1.6kg/m 3 , ν g = 2.6 × 10 -5 m 2 /s, and surface tension 10 σ = 0.85N/m. In this study, we considered R = 250μm as the nominal radius of the outlet of the nozzle. For the constricted nozzle (Fig. The OpenFOAM thin wedge geometry was employed to represent planes in the swirl direction for 2-D rotationally symmetric cases. The axi-symmetric wedge geometries (shown in Fig. The simulations were performed until 4.5 millisecond after the initial transident time period. We conducted highperformance parallel computing simulations with 48 processors on the Amazon AWS clusters. Figure While the velocity gradient inside the boundary layer is governed by the no-slip condition on the wall, the bulk region of the fluid has almost flat velocity profiles with negligible velocity gradients. The plug-like oscillatory flow is driven by the motion of the meniscus. This clear difference in velocity gradient in the bulk and the boundary layer indicates that the boundary layer dissipation is the major source of damping. Our main quantity of interest is the damping rate of the amplitude of the meniscus motion, γ. We post-processed the time history of the interface location at the center of the nozzle, η 0 (t) = η(t, r = 0), in Fig. The time evolution of the meniscus amplitude for standard and constricted nozzles is plotted in Fig. This result demonstrates that only a fraction reduction of the nozzle radius (here 20%-40%) was effective to increase the decay rate by approximately factor of 2-7. The higher dissipation rate at more constricted nozzle can be explained by the trends from both γ bl and γ bulk . The constricted cylinder has higher boundary dissipation rate due to larger surface area to the volume ratio as well as higher bulk dissipation rate due to smaller diameter against the standard cylindrical nozzle. The relationship between γ and R i is non-linear due to combination of these two factors and the contribution from the intermediate section between the shaping and the dissipative section. The direct proportionality between the surface area to volume ratio and γ bl is investigated via the concentric cylinders in the following section. The time evolution of the meniscus amplitude for nozzles with different number of concentric cylinders inside is plotted in Fig. The nozzle geometry with equally spaced concentric cylinders is a successful example of dissipation control without introducing a cross-sectional area constriction. However, the concentric cylinders are a concept geometry and not a favorable geometry for fabrication. Practical nozzle design should be able to consider ease of manufacturing. In Fig. The other class of nozzle geometry has a cross-section extruded along the flow direction (e.g., the star-or cross-shaped geometry shown in Fig. Advancing the concept of the cross or the star crosssections further, cross-sections with n straight channels of width w separated by the same angle stemming from the center of the cross-section can be considered (Fig. Drop-on-demand liquid metal jetting is an emerging technology that enables the creation of quality products and provides a safe printing process. To enable reliable high-speed printing, it is required to develop a nozzle that promotes fast decay of the meniscus oscillation after a droplet ejection. Design guidelines for high-speed jetting need a physical understanding of the energy dissipation mechanisms that controls the relaxation time of the fluid in the nozzle. Dimensional analysis reveals that the oscillatory flow inside the nozzle, driven by the meniscus motion, is in the inertial flow regime, and that it forms a thin boundary layer near the solid wall. In this paper, we propose physics-based design rules to speed up the decay of the meniscus fluctuations, based on scaling relations derived from the Navier-Stokes equation and the viscous boundary layer theory. These scaling relations informs that nozzles with smaller diameters and nozzles that maximize the surface area to volume ratio have faster damping rates. These dimensional considerations need to be balanced by the need to obtain droplets of a given shape and size, so we focus on the design of nozzles with an outlet of a given cross sectional area. To demonstrate these ideas, we performed multiphase flow simulations for several nozzle designs. We used a class of idealized geometries that include multiple equally spaced concentric cylinders perpendicular to the nozzle meniscus movement. The simulation results showed that the damping rate increases as the surface area of the nozzle does, and displays the linear growth with the number of concentric cylinders predicted by the scaling relations. Probing the vertical velocity profiles inside the nozzle confirmed the formation of a thin boundary layer near the wall. Finally, we discussed a class of manufacturable nozzle designs inspired by the discussion herein. To the best of our knowledge, our study is the first investigation of the damping rate in a liquid metal jetting printer nozzle using oscil- latory viscous boundary layer theory. Also, our study is the first demonstration of dissipation control by introducing design changes in the nozzle shape. We note that an accurate estimation of the meniscus damping in numerical simulations is challenging due to the multiple sources of dissipation, including the boundary layer, bulk, contact line, and numerical dissipation. A systematic and rigorous analysis of the sources of viscous dissipation, and a demanding numerical convergence study, were crucial prerequisites for the results herein. This study also suggests a number of questions for future investigation. First, guidelines for the design of the shaping section are needed, in which its shape should promote the homogenization of the velocity field prior to droplet formation. This would minimize the likelihood of appearance of multiple droplets as a result of a single pressure pulse. Second, experimental validation of the ideas herein is pending. Finally, accurately computing the damping rate of non-axisymmetric nozzles (fully three-dimensional geometries) is very computationally demanding, and hence was left for future studies. We describe the numerical tools we used to discretize the governing equations and to perform the simulations of multiphase flows shown here. All of them were computed with the interfoam solver in the OpenFOAM version 2106. In interfoam, the algebraic Volume-of-Fluid (VoF) interface tracking method is applied to track the dynamics of the gas-liquid interface. In a discretized domain with VOF, the fraction of volume of liquid, α, can take a value between 0 and 1 near the interface. As a result, in numerical simulations the gas-liquid interface has a finite thickness, instead of the sharp interface described as a Dirac delta function in Eq. ( Given the volume fraction of fluid, α( x,t), computed at each time t and position x, the viscosity and the density fields are updated as μ f ( x,t) = α( x,t)μ + (1α( x,t))μ g , and ρ f ( x,t) = α( x,t)ρ + (1α( x,t))ρ g , and used to solve the N-S equation. We refer to Desphande et al. OpenFOAM employs a cell-centered finite volume discretization. The spatial domain is discretized with hexahedral meshes generated by the built-in meshing tool, blockMesh and snappyHexMesh. We chose the linear scheme for cell center-face interpolation, and the Gauss linear scheme for divergence, gradient, and Laplacian operators. The time discretization was performed via the explicit Euler time scheme. A variable time-step method was chosen to ensure numerical stability, and controlled by the time step restrictions based on a Courant-Freidich-Lewis(CFL) number derived from the momentum equation and the surface tension The solution of the momentum equation was obtained by constructing a predicted velocity field and correcting it using the Pressure Implicit with Splitting of Operators (PISO) algorithm We turned off the interface compression method in interfoam by setting cAlpha=0 in fvSolution. Instead, we created extra refined meshes near the region of the interface to avoid numerical diffusion of the interface thickness. The interfoam solver has been validated in previous studies Although details are not presented here, we independently performed validation studies to assess the quantitative predictive ability of the interfoam solver on two-phase problems with oscillating liquid-gas interfaces. We evaluated extensive simulation results from interfoam against reference solutions in canonical multiphase flow test cases in the high capillarity limit, obtained by analytical investigations Nozzle type