Relative permeability is commonly used to model immiscible fluid flow through porous materials. In this work we derive the relative permeability relationship from conservation of energy, assuming that the system to be non-ergodic at large length scales and relying on averaging in both space and time to homogenize the behavior. Explicit criteria are obtained to define stationary conditions: (1) there can be no net change for extensive measures of the system state over the time averaging interval; (2) the net energy inputs into the system are zero, meaning that the net rate of work done on the system must balance with the heat removed; and (3) there is no net work performed due to the contribution of internal energy fluctuations. Results are then evaluated based on direct numerical simulation. Dynamic connectivity is observed during steady-state flow, which is quantitatively assessed based the Euler characteristic. We show that even during steady-state flow at low capillary number (Ca ∼ 1 × 10 5 ), typical flow processes will explore multiple connectivity states. The residence time for each connectivity state is captured based on the time-and-space average. The distribution for energy fluctuations is shown to be multi-modal and non-Gaussian when terms are considered independently. However, we demonstrate that their sum is zero. Given an appropriate choice of the thermodynamic driving force, we show that the conventional relative permeability relationship is sufficient to model the energy dissipation in systems with complex pore-scale dynamics that routinely alter the structure of fluid connected pathways. Relative permeability provides the fundamental basis to model immiscible fluid flow through permeable media. While the concept of relative permeability has been well-established for decades, an adequate theoretical justification has remained elusive. Canonical arguments are based on the form of Darcy's law and established on a phenomenological basis. The lack of theoretical support means that experimental measurements must be performed and interpreted without a complete picture of the physical assumptions needed to observe the intended behavior The conceptual basis for the relative permeability consid-ers the situation where each fluid forms a connected pathway through the material, which are the conduits through which fluid flow occurs Laboratory measurement of the relative permeability is most typically performed based on fractional flow experiments Slow fluctuations indicate that the timescale for experimental observations is too fast compared with the relaxation dynamics of the system In this study, we derive the standard relationship for relative permeability based on time-and-space averaging and conservation of energy. Explicit consideration for both time and space has been previously developed, from without full consideration of global energy conservation In this work, we derive the standard equation for relative permeability on the basis of conservation of energy. We consider the multiphase extension of Darcy's law in the form, qi = - where K is the permeability tensor, p is the average pressure, μ i is the dynamic viscosity for fluid i, qi is the associated volumetric flow rate and k r i is the relative permeability. In the results that follow we will derive Eq. 1 from first principles, providing scale consistent definitions for all quantities in the process. In particular we will show that the average pressure p must be the volume-averaged total pressure, including contributions due to both fluids. Eq. 1 can be considered as a linear phenomenological equation to predict the flow rate based on the thermodynamic driving force -∇ p, with the coefficient tensor k r i K/μ i relating to the rate of energy dissipation in the system. Efforts to derive the conventional relative permeability form based on volume-averaging theory have been largely unsuccessful, instead leading to cross-coupling forms Consistent with the non-equilibrium theory developed by Onsager, the result will be determined from a flux-force product that is obtained under stationary conditions where Ω i ∩ Ω j = 0 for j = i are non-intersecting subsets of Ω. The union of Ω i forms Ω, i.e. the subsets represent a spatial decomposition of the system. For immiscible flow through porous media, three subsets are sufficient: Ω w corresponds to the part of space occupied by the wetting fluid, Ω n to the nonwetting fluid and Ω s to the solid, such that It is important to note that the structure of any subset will not be independent from the others. Measures of the system behavior that are dependent on the structure of subsets must obey additional constraints that do apply to the global system. It is not trivial to formulate the geometric constraints, since any subset Ω i can undergo discontinuous transformations The intensive thermodynamic conjugate variables are defined as In a spatially heterogeneous system, the chemical potentials μ k can vary within the system, for example due to the surface excess potential at interfaces. In many situations, spatial heterogeneity can be treated based on the Gibbs adsorption isotherm, leading to the forms derived in reference To disambiguate the reversible and irreversible contributions, the energy dynamics must be considered from a more detailed level, incorporating the thermodynamic description. In statistical approaches, ergodicity is often assumed to hold explicitly at large length scales, since the system will then have attractive statistical properties where m k is the mass for a molecule of type k, and N k is the number of molecules contained within a spherical reference volume of size V . The number of molecules N k may vary in both space and time, but V is independent of both time and space. Away from equilibrium, the system must obey the general expression for conservation of energy, which is derived from standard conservation principles, where u is the rate of mass flux, σ is the stress tensor, and q h is the heat flux. For immiscible fluid flow, we assume that there are no significant contributions due to chemical reactions, so that body sources for heat can be ignored, q s = 0. The constant reference volume V corresponds to a sufficiently small region where the ergodic hypothesis is assumed to hold. This means that deviations from equilibrium should be locally linear across V . The stress tensor σ can be decomposed into the mean and deviatoric components, where p is the pressure and τ is the deviatoric stress tensor. Eq. 6 can be rearranged to find the form Let Λ be a time interval with duration λ . Conservation of energy for the region as a whole is given by the integral of 8, To guide the averaging strategy used for Eq. 9, we first identify extensive properties of the system and define averages for each quantity. Scale-consistent definitions are established to average the non-equilibrium dynamics over a larger region of time and space based upon the time-and-space averaging operator, Note that this definition is distinct from an ensemble average, since it is fully deterministic and accounts for the complete path of the system over the regions of space Ω and time Λ. The extensive thermodynamic quantities from Eq. 3 are U, S and N k . Since these quantities are additive, The intensive thermodynamic quantities are then defined The total mass and total momentum are also additive, and are necessarily defined as where m k is the mass of molecule of type k. The average velocity corresponds to the rate of mass flux, which is given by the ratio Since volume is an additive measure, the definition of volume fraction for any entity must be scale consistent. Note that while the domain Ω is independent of time, the sub-region occupied by either fluid Ω i for i ∈ {w, n} may be time dependent. The time-averaged saturation and porosity are given by si Finally, noting that forces are additive, the average pressure should be obtained as an integral of the microscopic pressure field. If some sub-region of Ω is occupied by solid, then the pressure should be weighted based on the porosity φ to correspond with the region of space occupied by fluids. The average pressure is therefore given by where V is the volume of Ω. Based on these definitions, we now proceed to express Eq. 9 in terms of these quantities. A simplified form will be obtained when the energy dynamics are stationary over the timescale associated with Λ. First we consider the energy inputs and outputs, which are boundary fluxes of heat, work and internal energy. These fluxes are easily identified by applying the Gauss divergence theorem, where the vector-valued surface element dA is a normal vector that points outward from the boundary surface Γ. For a stationary process the energy inputs must be zero, since otherwise there will be a net accumulation of energy within the system. The first constraint on stationary conditions is therefore associated with the energy inputs, The time interval Λ must be sufficiently large that any fluctuations to the energy inputs will cancel. The internal work due to the pressure gradient can be formally averaged to obtain an averaged expression in terms of ū and p, The velocity deviation is defined as u = uū, which will vary in time and space based on the pore structure and any dynamic changes to the flow field The internal energy dynamics are averaged as previously described Deviation terms are defined based on the difference between the local value for intensive thermodynamic properties with their time-and-space averaged values, Stationary conditions further require that there be no change to extensive thermodynamic state variables, Note that the average entropy S should be constant within the sample based on this constraint. The implication is that any entropy produced due to irreversible events is removed based on the heat flux ∇ • q h . This is captured based on the first constraint stated in Eq. 19. Combining Eqs. 20 and 21, along with the constraints for stationary dynamics given in Eqs. 19 and 23 and rearranging terms, we can obtain a form where the viscous energy dissipation is linked to a flux-force product, This form is obtained only in the situation where the work due to the fluctuation terms cancels This equation implies that there must be no net work done due to fluctuations in the pressure and chemical potential when considered over the time interval Λ. Eq. 25 can be considered as an alternative expression for Onsager's assumption of molecular reversibility effectively stating a criterion for detailed balance in the system based purely on classical thermodynamic concepts. The advantage of this form is that it is straightforward to study from the perspective of either mesoscopic or continuum scale simulation techniques. Fluctuations associated with heterogeneity related to intensive thermodynamic properties are in equilibrium when no net work is performed due to their effects. Note that this is a less scrict criterion as compared to detailed balance, which would imply statistical indistinguishability. Based on these results, conditions for the validity of Onsager theory can be established based for systems that may be non-ergodic when considered at the timescale where measurements are taken. An alternative interpretation is that the finite time interval Λ can also be considered to define the length of time needed for the system to behave as an ergodic system, which can be evaluated quantitatively based on Eqs. 19, 23 and 25. In the Results section we will evaluate Eq. 25 directly based on simulations of immiscible displacement through porous media. A. Darcy's Law (Single phase) The previous result can be immediately applied to derive Darcy's law. The right-hand side of Eq. 24 accounts for the heat generated due to viscous dissipation. Considering a Newtonian fluid with constant viscosity μ, where the strain rate tensor is E = 1 2 ∇u + ∇u T . Note that μ can only be taken outside of the integral if it is constant over the region of space and time specified by Ω and Λ. This assumption will fail in a system with compositional heterogeneity, and also in situations where the stress depends nonlinearly on the strain rate tensor. To derive Darcy's law, we use the fact that the positive heat is generated due to viscous dissipation, leading to an inequality As the driving force ∇( φ p) goes to zero the corresponding flux ū will go to zero also; any stationary fluctuations must obey Eq. 25 due to conservation of energy in the system. This tells us the timescale required to homogenize the system dynamics. For sufficiently small driving forces, causality leads us to approximate the flux based on a linear expansion in terms of the driving force where the tensor L contains linear phenomenological coefficients, consistent both with the approach of Onsager as well as results obtained using volume-averaging techniques For a system with homogeneous porosity, Darcy's law is obtained in the standard form where the flux q = φ ū. For a Stokes flow, the velocity field depends only on the geometry, and K is directly determined from this based on the right-hand side of Eq. 26. Since the Stokes solution does not depend on time, there is no advantage to time-and-space averaging to derive the single phase Darcy's law. We expect that a single fluid flow will satisfy macroscopic ergodic requirements. However, this breaks down in immiscible displacement, due to slow fluctuations that are caused by pore-scale events The standard conceptual model for the relative permeability considers the situation where two fluids flow simultaneously through a porous medium through separate flow pathways. Emerging models also consider the situation where fluid pathways rearrange dynamically. Our model accounts for both possibilities, since any dynamics will be captured explicitly based on the time average. To account for the flow rate of each fluid component, it is necessary to represent the mass flux separately for each fluid. To obtain Eq. 1, flow behavior must be associated with each fluid, which is accomplished by applying a subset operation to sub-divide the integrals given in Eqs. 13 -15. The sub-setting operation is applied to affiliate the mass and momentum with a particular phase based on the location of the Gibb's dividing surface within the microscopic system Mi ūi = 1 Defining the mass fraction as ωi = Mi / M and inserting these definitions into Eq. 24, we obtain Since the right-hand side is positive, Note that because the two fluxes ω i ūi have the same driving force, they cannot be treated independently. Nevertheless, since the driving force causes a corresponding response for each flux, where L i is a phenomenological coefficient tensor for fluid i ∈ {w, n}. The choice to normalize the coefficient based on the viscosity μ i is strictly conventional, i.e. to be consistent with the expectation that k i → K as ω i → 1. Note that L i is not necessarily symmetric and positive definite, since the constraint due to Eq. 35 applies only to their sum, If the fluids are perfectly immiscible and incompressible then the mass fraction will simply track the fluid volume fraction based on the saturation si and porosity φ , where qi is the Darcy flux for fluid i. This expression is written as an approximation to account for compressible fluids since the mass flux does not necessarily coincide with the volumetric rate. The conventional relative permeability is defined such that which will be satisfied in an isotropic material with constant porosity, in which case Eq. 1 can be recovered. To obtain the conventional relative permeability relationship, the driving force must be the total pressure gradient and not the pressure gradient within a particular fluid. Many previous theoretical efforts have developed cross-coupling forms to describe two-fluid flow in porous media At a basic level cross-coupling forms are a consequence of a choice to separately represent the driving forces based on the pressures for each fluid. Defining the driving forces according to Eq. 40 will lead to cross-coupling forms. In this case, the total pressure gradient includes contributions from both fluids, each weighted by their respective volume fraction. Steady-state simulations of immiscible fluid flow were performed using lattice Boltzmann method based on the color simulator in the LBPM software package Instantaneously measured values for the relative permeability are reported in Figure The effects of intermittent connectivity can be assessed based on the Euler characteristic, which can be used to ascertain the topology of fluids within the system. The Euler characteristic for each fluid region i is where N i is the number of connected components, L i is the number of loops, and C i is the number of cavities. As long as there are no free solid particles such that a single con-FIG. The density corresponds to the residence time associated with a particular connectivity state in the system. The dashed line corresponds to the time-average value of the Euler characteristic. Transitions between these states will cause corresponding fluctuations to the energy modes. nected solid structure is formed along the grain contacts, cavities within fluid n will be due to the connected components of fluid w, and vice versa. Figure The role of capillary events and intermittent connectivity can be further considered based on their impact on nonequilibrium fluctuations. Based on the arguments presented previously, stationary conditions should ensure satisfaction of the constraints given by Eqs. 19 and 23. Because the simulation domain is fully periodic, there is no net change in the energy due to boundary fluxes, and Eq. 19 will be satisfied. Since the lattice Boltzmann method is isothermal, the energy fluctuation due to temperature heterogeneity is identically zero, Subject to this restriction, for immiscible fluid flow through porous media, the stationary constraint given in Eq. 25 can be expressed in the alternative form (see McClure et al. for complete details ) where p i is fluid pressure for i ∈ {w, n}, γ s is fluid-solid surface energy along the solid material, and Π s is disjoining pressure, φ i is fluid volume fraction for i ∈ {w, n}, A s is surface area for the solid material, and h s is the film thickness along the solid material. This form is obtained when the internal energy is presumed to depend on an alternate set of extensive variables based on position of the Gibbs dividing surface in the system. The two representations are necessarily equivalent. Within the simulation, the wetting energy and fluid pressures are computed directly and are are numerically integrated to obtain averages. Time derivatives for time-and-space averaged quantities are determined as described in Appendix B. Defining relative permeability as a stationary process leads to the fluctuation constraint stated in Eq. 43. If this expression does not hold, then the flow process cannot be considered to be stationary. This distinction is illustrated in Figure Based on simulation data, we can accurately characterize the essential contributions to the fluctuating energy dynamics. Figures Figure For the simulations considered here, mechanical fluctuations due to u • ∇p are the most significant contribution to the energy dynamics, which are due to pore-scale events. The distribution for these contributions are depicted in Figure In this work we have shown that the standard expression for relative permeability can be derived from conservation of energy using averaging in both time and space and assuming that the dynamics are stationary. In conventional homogenization theories, it is generally assumed that the contribution of capillary fluctuations will be negligible at large length scales based on the ergodic hypothesis. Our approach explicitly considers the timescale needed to obtain stationary conditions for a particular system, meaning that relative permeability coefficients can be obtained that accurately represent the rate of energy dissipation. We mathematically define a stationary process as one for which there can be no net change to extensive measures of the system state when considered over the timescale of the average. Furthermore, there can be no accumulation of energy based on the rate of work and heat exchange at the boundary of the system. Due energy conservation, energy fluctuations defined based on classical thermodynamics must also cancel, which is required to observe detailed balance in the macroscopic system. Subject to these constraints, a flux-force form is obtained that can be used to derive the conventional relative permeability relationship. This derivation shows that the thermodynamic driving force should be the total pressure (potential) gradient, which is a simple average over the considered region of time and space. We further show that if the spatial region is segregated into sub-regions associated with the wetting and non-wetting fluids, cross-coupling forms become necessary. Previous derivations that have arrived at cross-coupling forms as the general approximate form for momentum transport are a consequence of this spatial subdivision. Compared with cross-coupling forms, fewer unknowns are required by the conventional relative permeability, representing a significant practical advantage in terms of measurement. We conclude that there is no disadvantage to using the conventional relative permeability; provided that the driving force is appropriately identified the relative permeability coefficients will accurately predict the rate of energy dissipation in the system. Results derived in this work do not assume that the flow behavior is ergodic at large length scales. Instead, ergodicity is assumed at small length scales, and a fluctuation criterion is established to evaluate the proper scale of a time average. For a stationary process, the contribution of fluctuations can be entirely removed provided that a sufficiently long averaging timescale is used. Using simulation data performed at low capillary number (Ca ∼ 1 × 10 5 ) for multiple different saturation and wetting condition, we show that individual fluctuations are not necessarily symmetric or Gaussian. However, it is sufficient for the sum of the fluctuations to cancel, since this implies that the associated thermodynamic modes do not perform net work on the system over the timescale for the average. This timescale is physically linked to the effect of dynamic connectivity, which is assessed based on the Euler characteristic for the connected pathway for each fluid. Our analysis suggests that typical multiphase flows permute through a variety of connectivity states, each of which is likely to be unstable. The time average can be thought of as accounting for residence time that the system spends in each particular connectivity state. Since the Euler characteristic is an observable extensive measure of the system state, we assert that this topological measure should be included when making a determination as to whether or not flow behavior meets the stationary requirements derived in this work. An important area for future work are experimental studies that consider how fluctuations to the fluid volume fraction impact the the internal energy dynamics. To evaluate the fluctuation terms in Eq. 43, the derivative of the macroscopic pressure is needed. For averages of intensive measures Y i with associated extensive variable X i , the derivative is determined from The quantities in brackets can be easily obtained, since the derivative of a definite integral is given by the fundamental theorem of calculus ∂ ∂t Note that the fluctuation term for an intensive property Y i will be zero if the associated extensive conjugate property X i is constant with time. The energy fluctuation is expanded as Now suppose that X i = Xi , which do not depend on time In this situation Eq. A3 is zero. The energy fluctuation terms thereby only contribute when both the extensive measure and the associated intensive conjugate measure are co-fluctuating.