In a previous work, we presented a model that integrates cancer cell differentiation and immunotherapy, analysing a particular therapy against cancer stem cells by cytotoxic cell vaccines. As every biological system is exposed to random fluctuations, it is important to study its stochasticity. The influence of demographic and multiplicative noise in the system is carry out on the parameters of reproduction and death in cancer cells. On the other hand, we incorporated fluctuations by adding multiplicative noise. In both cases, we analysed the dynamics for different values of the parameters involved. The final amount of cancer cells decreases for different combinations of these parameters and noise intensity is found. Bearing in mind that cancer and the associated diseases are well studied, we will briefly describe this concept so as not to get sidetracked. For each tissue, cells have specific characteristics, stipulated times of death (apoptosis) and their rates of birth or reproduction. Cancer is a consequence of a tumour (neoplasm) in which there is uncontrolled growth of abnormal cells or when the cells lose the ability to die. In this case, the neoplasm is said to be a malignant neoplasm. These cells accumulate, affecting the normal functioning of the organ that contains them and those surrounding it. Besides, they can spread to other organs generating a new malignant tumour, a phenomenon known as metastasis. For several decades, cancer has been one of the leading causes of death worldwide. For example, in 2020 there were around 10 million deaths in the world caused by cancer The usual treatments such as chemotherapy, radiation therapy, and surgery generally do not completely eliminate cancer cells. Recently, a new therapy has been used that consists of stimulating the immune system. The immune system is able to recognize tumours and eliminates many malignant cells at an early stage. But, tumours evolve to evade immune attack. Therefore, it could be possible to change or boost the immune system in order to strike cancer cells Developing a model for any biological system as a deterministic system, or at least not exposed to small random events, is something that can lead to a representation that is far from reality. Many times, for the modelling of biological processes, such as a process of tumour development and cancer, stochastic models are used but with the addition of different appropriate types of noise Based on a model developed previously This paper is organized as follows: in Sec.2, we give a description of the model is given; Sec.3 and Sec.4 are devoted to study the effect of the Multiplicative and Demographic noise on the system, respectively; the combined effects of cytotoxic cell vaccines and noise is studied on the Sec.5; and, in the last section, the conclusions are drawn. In a previous work For sake of clarity, Fig. The initial condition for all the simulations were S(0) = 100, P (0) = 2000, T S(0) = T P (0) = DS(0) = DP (0) = N K(0) = M (0) = 1000. In Fig. One way to incorporated fluctuations to the system is by adding multiplicative noise to the system equations as a source of stochasticity where Ẋi = F i (t, X i , X i+1 , . . . , X N ) represents the deterministic system2; X i is the population cell i; i is a Gaussian white noise satisfying the conditions i (t) = 0 and i (t) i (t ) = δ(t -t ); and D is the multiplicative noise intensity. In order to study the influence of the multiplicative noise, we varied the fraction of the parameters and the noise intensity D. On the Fig. Demographic noise or demographic stochasticity is the change in the composition of a population due to random births and deaths even though all individuals have identical birth and death rates. Usually, it is given by where α i and δ i are the reproduction rate and the death rate, respectively; i (t) = 0 and i (t) i (t ) = δ(t -t ); and D is the demographic noise intensity. We analysed the influence of the demographic noise in two in different cases: first, when it is present on the parameters related to the reproduction rate of S and P (α S and α P ) and the death rate of S and P due to natural processes (δ S and δ P ); then, when it is present on α S and δ P . • α S -α P -δ S -δ P Here we considered that all four parameters are affected with the same noise intensity. Fig. On a previous work the function F (t) is given by where T is the vaccination period and K = 1, 2, 3, . . . , n. Thus, a treatment of period T , amplitude A and decay β is simulated. It is important to mention that the therapy begins on day 90. Here, we wondered whether this treatment could be enhanced by the presence of noise. That is, if both demographic and multiplicative noise have a positive effect on the cytotoxic cell vaccines. In other words, if it is possible to make a transition from a region where J > 1 to another where J < 1. In all cases, we chose the fraction of the parameters where J > 1 and we changed the noise intensity D. We setted the value of the amplitude A to 1 and simulated when the decay β is equal to 1 and when is equal to 2. Here it can be seen that from a critical value (D = 0.02) the total amount of cancer cells is less than at the basal conditions. It should be noted that the proportion J increases with time but it does so at a lower rate than in the deterministic case (D = 0). Fig. In general, it can be seen that the effect of multiplicative noise on the system is greater than that of demographic noise. Namely, external fluctuations have a greater influence on cancer cells. Through this work, we developed an stochastic analysis of an integrative cancer model, by finding relations between relevant parameters and eventual biological fluctuations. Particularly, we studied the influence of multiplicative and demographic noise, commonly in biological systems Then, we analysed how immunotherapy by cytotoxic cells is affected by these type of noises. As we can see in Fig. The treatment of the immune system should be modified to achieve a greater decrease in tumour cells, in order to reach a remission phase. Therefore, this will be the objective of the future work. S