Approximate density functional theory (DFT) has become indispensable owing to its cost-accuracy trade-off in comparison to more computationally demanding but accurate correlated wavefunction theory. To date, however, no single density functional approximation (DFA) with universal accuracy has been identified, leading to uncertainty in the quality of data generated from DFT. With electron density fitting and transfer learning, we build a DFA recommender that selects the DFA with the lowest expected error with respect to gold standard but cost-prohibitive coupled cluster theory in a system-specific manner. We demonstrate this recommender approach on vertical spin-splitting energy evaluation for challenging transition metal complexes. Our recommender predicts top-performing DFAs and yields excellent accuracy (ca. 2 kcal/mol) for chemical discovery, outperforming both individual transfer learning models and the single best functional in a set of 48 DFAs. We demonstrate the transferability of the DFA recommender to experimentally synthesized compounds with distinct chemistry. With rapid advancements in computing power, density functional theory (DFT) has become an indispensable companion to experiments as well as a primary tool in virtual high throughput screening (VHTS) For simplicity, a single DFA is typically selected to screen through a large chemical space in VHTS Here, we demonstrate an alternate route. Instead of developing a new DFA, we leverage transfer learning (TL) and use a "regress-then-classify" strategy to develop a recommender Overview of the DFA recommender. Electron density lies in the core of Kohn-Sham (KS)-DFT and can derive any ground state property of interest for a system. However, it is less commonly used as representations in ML models due to its non-local nature in KS orbitals and its cumbersome to fulfill translational and rotational symmetries when discretized to 3D cubes. Here, we perform density fitting on the electron density 13 of a TMC obtained from the representative B3LYP calculation. The resulting coefficients of the basis functions, which preserve the required physical (i.e., translational, rotational, and permutation) symmetries, are used as the representations of the TMC (Fig. With the overarching goal of recommending a DFA in a system-specific way, one may expect that the optimal approach is to treat the learning task as a multi-class classification problem In this "regress-then-classify" strategy, we first build Behler-Parrinello-type neural networks to predict |DDEH-L[f]| using our B3LYP density fitting coefficients separately for a pool of pre-selected candidate DFAs (Fig. There are two approaches to evaluate the performance of the DFA recommender. The first is the absolute error as a result of using the recommended DFA relative to the reference DLPNO-CCSD(T) method. This measure serves as a practical metric for evaluating the accuracy obtained by the recommender in VHTS. The second is the rank ordering of the recommended DFA among the pool of candidate DFAs. This statistical measure quantifies how well the recommender distinguishes top-performing candidate DFAs. Throughout our work, we will consider both perspectives. Performance of TL models. We first consider a set of 452 octahedral TMCs composed of 3d mid-row transition metals and small common organic ligands in spectrochemical series (VSS-542, Supplementary Fig. Interestingly, the ranking of TL model MAEs does not have the same order as the error ranking of the underlying DFA results relative to DLPNO-CCSD(T). For example, the DFA with the lowest TL MAE is a double-hybrid functional DSD-PBEB95-D3BJ, which only has the fifthlowest MAE relative to the reference calculation (Supplementary Figs. Performance of the DFA recommender. We then utilize the predicted |DDEH-L[f]| from all 48 TL models to recommend a "best" DFA. We compare the vertical spin splitting energy obtained by the recommended DFA and the DLPNO-CCSD(T) reference to evaluate the performance of the recommender (see Methods). The recommender achieves an MAE of 2.1 kcal/mol on the setaside test set of VSS-452, outperforming all 48 TL models. This MAE is only 2.5 times the theoretical lower bound (0.8 kcal/mol), which is the performance we would achieve if the DFA that gives the lowest error is always selected (Supplementary Fig. With this recommender, we are able to select DFAs that give errors within the 3 kcal/mol threshold required for transition metal chemical discovery in 77% cases (Fig. One distinct advantage of this recommender approach is that its performance is likely to improve systematically with increasing number of DFAs under consideration, despite using the same training data set and TL models. For example, the recommender would achieve an MAE of 3.0 kcal/mol if we had used the smaller pool of 23 candidate DFAs introduced in our previous work The other distinct feature of our recommender approach is its system specificity. Compared to the widely used strategy of selecting DFAs based on the statistically averaged performance over a benchmark data set Next, we investigate the statistics of the recommended DFA performance to determine when our recommender correctly selects the top-performing functional. We focus on DFAs that are within the top-5 choices as they usually result in the accuracy required for studies in transition metal chemistry Lastly, we compare the statistics of most probable DFAs that reside in top-5 choices obtained by the ground truth and our recommender. Out of the 48 DFAs, MN15-L with 50% HF exchange (i.e., MN15-L:50%) appears most frequently as a top-5 DFA, with a likelihood of 43% for the 152 set-aside test TMCs in VSS-452 (Fig. Moreover, for each base semi-local functional (i.e., BLYP, PBE, SCAN, M06-L, and MN15-L), the DFA recommender successfully picks the HF exchange fraction that is most accurate for VSS-452. As a result, our recommended DFAs maintain the rank ordering of probable top-5 DFAs compared to the ground truth, leading to a Spearman's r of 0.95. This extremely high correspondence demonstrates that our DFA recommender is capable of identifying DFAs that are most likely to be accurate in a given chemical space. Interpreting TL model and recommender predictions. We use virtual adversarial attack For example, the rvadv of the B3LYP TL model on Co(II)(SH2)4(SCN -)2 mostly concentrates on Co and S atoms, suggesting that the B3LYP TL model focuses mostly on the metal and first coordination sphere when predicting |DDEH-L| (Fig. Intuitively, one would expect the accuracy of a DFA for predicting spin splitting energy to depend on the ligand field strength of the ligands in the TMC Among the five DFAs, each DFA has a ligand field strength range over which it performs the best (Fig. Transferability of the DFA recommender on diverse CSD complexes. A more challenging test of the DFA recommender is on its application of chemically distinct out-of-distribution complexes. For this purpose, we construct CSD-76, a set of 76 TMCs randomly sampled from Cambridge Structural Database (CSD) Using the predicted |DDEH-L[f]| from all 48 TL models, the recommender has a MAE of 3.0 kcal/mol, which still slightly outperforms the best TL model (3.1 kcal/mol from M06-2X, Fig. We next proceed to comparing the statistics of recommended DFAs for the out-ofdistribution CSD-76 and the set-aside test set of VSS-452. The recommender gives comparable ranking statistics of selected DFAs on CSD-76: 62% of the recommended DFAs are in the top 5 and 86% are in the top 10 (Supplementary Fig. Similar to the case of VSS-452, the DFA recommender is also able to identify the topperforming DFAs and correctly predict the relative likelihood of a DFA to be accurate for CSD-76 (Fig. Due to the drastically different chemistry present in VSS-452 and CSD-76, it is no surprise that the top-performing DFAs will vary for the two data sets (Supplementary Table These observations suggest that our DFA recommender can be reliably applied to explore diverse transition metal chemical spaces with high accuracy. Percentage likelihood obtained by the recommender on the set-aside test set of VSS-452 (red circles) is also shown as a comparison. DFT has become indispensable in both mechanistic study and in accelerated, automated chemical or materials discovery. Its accuracy, however, can highly depend on the choice of DFA. The single-DFA approach widely used in VHTS leads to bias in data acquisition, and expert knowledge and heuristics cannot be expected to be predictive of a single best DFA across large chemical spaces. In this work, we developed a general recommender approach to select DFAs in a system-specific manner. Distinct from traditional classification tasks where the label is certain, the "best" DFA can be expected to be ambiguous due to the similarities between candidate DFAs. We devise a "regress-then-classify" strategy to select DFAs with low error instead of forcing a model to directly classify the "best" DFA. By partitioning the electron density difference onto each atom within a system, we build Behler-Parrinello-type neural networks for transfer learning the differences between a DFA and the coupled cluster reference. The recommender then selects the DFA that gives the lowest predicted difference from the reference. We demonstrated this recommender approach on evaluating the vertical spin splitting energy of open shell transition metal complexes. Trained only on 300 TMCs with common monodentate ligands, our recommender achieves an accuracy of 2.1 kcal/mol, outperforming both the conventional, single DFA and TL approach. This recommender also accurately captures the rank ordering (Spearman's r=0.96) of the likelihood of a DFA residing in the top-5 choices relative to the ground truth. When directly applied on experimentally synthesized complexes with diverse and unseen ligand chemistry and symmetry, the recommender maintains its stellar performance despite the fact that the top-performing DFAs for the CSD complexes are significantly different than the top-performing DFAs in the training data. The recommender still provides the accuracy needed for transition metal chemistry exploration (i.e., MAE=3.0 kcal/mol) and is able to select top-5 DFAs 62% of the time and capture the rank ordering (Spearman's r=0.90) of the likelihood of a DFA residing in the top-5 choices. The recommender approach has two limitations in its current implementation. First, since it uses the B3LYP electron density as inputs, this recommender is not "zero cost", and its advantage is therefore greatest in transfer learning tasks where a property prediction with "beyond DFT" accuracy is needed. The use of ML-predicted density, semi-empirical densities, or guess densities (e.g., superposition of atomic potentials) can reduce the cost further. Second, a DFA may not be universally accurate across all properties for a system. Generalization of the current recommender may include redefining the loss function in the TL models to explicitly encode all relevant objectives. In its present form, this recommender approach does not introduce additional computational cost when combined with existing DFT-based VHTS workflows that natively output an optimized geometry and electron density of a molecule. Therefore, it can be directly used in conjunction with traditional VHTS for improving the data quality from VHTS at no additional cost. In addition, our recommender approach is not restricted to predicting a single electronic energy of a molecule and thus can be generalized to more complex applications such as catalysis. Although we demonstrate the recommender to select from a pool of conventional DFAs, it is a general approach for method selection, including among semi-empirical theories, ML-derived DFAs, or wavefunction theories. We expect this recommender approach to be broadly useful in light of continuing advances in the methods available in the computational sciences. Density fitting procedure. In Kohn-Sham (KS) DFT, it is known that the ground state energy of any interacting system is captured by a universal functional of the electron density where D is the density matrix and μ and n are indices for one-electron basis functions. The electron density in Eq. 1, however, is not expressed in an atom-centered basis and thus cannot be directly used as representation in neural networks. Thus, it is common to use density-fitting (DF) basis functions to rewrite the electron density as an expansion of atom-centered densities, & where fQ(r-rA) is the Q th DF basis function for atom A Therefore, p A L satisfies rotational, translational, and permutation symmetry and correspondingly can be used as a set of features into any neural network architectures (Fig. Here, we consider the vertical spin-splitting energy DEH-L as our property of interest, which is the electronic energy difference between the high-spin (HS) and low-spin (LS) states of open-shell TMCs. We focus on the spin-splitting energy because it identifies the quantum mechanical ground state, which is an essential property of an open-shell system 4 . Because our target property involves two distinct spin states in open-shell systems, we decomposed the difference between the HS and LS electron densities for both the majority spin and minority spin separately (Fig. For an atom A, we obtained and concatenated the power spectra of C (A,a) Q and C The number of DF features for different atoms can vary due to the differences in the auxiliary basis functions used by atoms. Here, we zero-padded the DF features for all atoms to the maximum dimension of 58 for each atom density, which is the size of the DF basis set for the transition metal atom (i.e., Cr, Mn, Fe, or Co) in a TMC. Behler-Parrinello-type neural networks for transfer learning. We built Behler-Parrinellotype neural networks using the DF representation of the TMCs in this work where X l A is the representation of atom A at layer l, W l AÎg is the l th -layer weights for the network of elements in group g, and s is the activation function. Specifically, X 0 A is the set of concatenated DF features of atom A (see density fitting procedure). The last layer of the network outputs, X n A , are summed for each chemical element (e), These X n e of different elements are then concatenated and passed to a fully-connected neural network to obtain the final output (Fig. Our model has three main differences from the original Behler-Parrinello neural network. First, we replace the symmetry functions that describe the local geometric environment of an atom therein by the DF representation, which is derived from the electron density and is thus a more transferable representation. Second, we use the same local network for chemical elements that are in the same group of the periodic table (e.g., O and S) to promote inter-row learning Lastly, we keep the latent vector X n e for each element and use a neural network to obtain the final output because our final target is not an single electronic energy of the ground state. We adopted TL strategies and chose our target to be the absolute difference of vertical spin-splitting energies between the result from each DFA (f) and a reference calculation (|DDEH- Cr(III) and d 7 Co(II). For VSS-452, we used 20 monodentate ligands from both the spectrochemical series and common organic ligands to obtain properties of complexes with ligand fields ranging from weak to strong (Supplementary Fig. We used k-medoids sampling to obtain 750 TMCs in this space as our starting data set. To test the transferability and practical usefulness of our recommender, we collected 100 experimentally synthesized TMCs with diverse ligand chemistry and connectivity from CSD as the starting point for CSD-76. DFT geometry optimization. Since we are interested in vertical spin splitting, only one structure needs to be geometry optimized. In this case, we chose to optimize only the HS state. For each HS complex, a DFT geometry optimization with the B3LYP 27 global hybrid functional was carried out using a developer version of graphical processing unit (GPU)-accelerated electronic structure code TeraChem Geometry checks were applied to eliminate optimized structures that deviated from the expected octahedral shape following previously established metrics without modification Open-shell structures were also removed from the data set following established protocols if the expectation value of the S 2 operator deviated from its expected value After these two filtering steps, we converged 452 HS TMCs for VSS-452 and 76 HS TMCs for CSD-76 with good octahedral geometries and electronic structures (Supplementary Table Single-point energy calculation. We followed our established protocol for the computation of HS and LS electronic energies with multiple DFAs for the optimized TMCs using a developer version of Psi4 1.4 The range of 23 DFAs used in the development of the protocol 7 were chosen to be evenly distributed among the rungs of "Jacob's ladder" CCSD(T) has been treated as the "gold standard" for quantum chemistry and is frequently used as benchmark for DFT Train/test partition and model training. We randomly partitioned VSS-452, with 300 points (66%) as the training set and 152 (34%) points as the set-aside test set. For all TL models, the hyperparameters were selected using HyperOpt GGA GGA ------no TPSS 