Orthoferrites are a class of magnetic materials with a magnetic ordering temperature above 600 K, predominant G-type antiferromagnetic ordering of the Fe-spin system and, depending on the rare-earth ion, a spin reorientation of the Fe spin taking place at lower temperatures. DyFeO3 is of particular interest since the spin reorientation is classified as a Morin transition with the transition temperature depending strongly on the Dy-Fe interaction. Here, we report a detailed study of the magnetic and structural properties of microcrystalline DyFeO3 powder and bulk single crystal using neutron diffraction and magnetometry between 1.5 and 450 K. We find that, while the magnetic properties of the single crystal are largely as expected, the powder shows strongly modified magnetic properties, including a modified spin reorientation and a smaller Dy-Fe interaction energy of the order of 10 μeV. Subtle structural differences between powder and single crystal show that they belong to distinct magnetic space groups. In addition, the Dy ordering at 2 K in the powder is incommensurate, with a modulation vector of 0.0173(5) c*, corresponding to a periodicity of ~58 unit cells. Materials with two or more mutually interacting ferroic orders in the same crystalline phase are known as multiferroics (MF) The spin reorientation in DyFeO3 is related to the Dy-Fe interaction and depends on the bond distance and angle The DyFeO3 powder was prepared by a standard solid-state reaction route by mixing stoichiometric amounts of dried Fe2O3 and Dy2O3 powders (99.99 % purity), grinding, and subsequent sintering of the mixture as a pressed pellet. No single Dy-isotope enrichment has been done to correct for absorption effects in neutron powder diffraction experiments For the structural characterization of the powder and single crystal, a Seifert HR and a Bruker D8 Advance four-circle x-ray diffractometers were used with Cu Kα1 monochromatic x-ray sources and an instrumental resolution of 0.003° calibrated with reference Si and Al2O3 single crystals. Additional powder diffraction measurements were done at the Materials Science (MS) X04SA beamline (wavelength λ = 0.5653 Å) at the Swiss Light Source (SLS, PSI Switzerland) Temperature-dependent magnetic measurements were performed in a Quantum Design, MPMS® 3 SQUID magnetometer with the magnetic field aligned along the crystalline axes for the single crystal sample. Zero field (ZFC) and field cooled (FC) magnetization measurements were carried out between 2 K and 300 K with applied fields varying between 10 mT and 100 mT. Magnetization hysteresis curses (M-H were typically measured up to a field of 5 T. In addition, field cooled measurements upon heating or cooling (FCH, FCC) have been performed. Neutron diffraction studies were performed at the spallation neutron source SINQ, Paul Scherrer Institute (Villigen, Switzerland). The powder neutron diffraction measurements (PND) were conducted at the cold neutron powder diffractometer DMC with incident wavelength λ = 2.458 Å. The powder sample was placed in a double-walled Al-container and measured at 450, 315, 200, 100, 10 and 2 K in the angular range of 5-87° with 0.1° steps and data were absorption corrected for a double-walled cylinder with 10 mm outer and 8 mm inner diameter. Data analysis and Rietveld refinements were performed with software tools from the Fullprof suite Symmetry analysis was carried out using the Bilbao Crystallographic Server The zero-field experiments were done in a He-cryostat to reach temperatures down to 1.5 K with the sample mounted in the (0kl) scattering plane. Experiments with magnetic fields were performed with either a vertical field pointing along [100] or a horizontal field along [010] and [001] and all field dependent measurements are ZFC measurements. Additional measurements to determine the temperature dependence of the relative change of the lattice constants of the DyFeO3 single crystal were conducted at the two-axis neutron diffractometer MORPHEUS (λ = 2.445 Å) at SINQ at 300, 200, 100, 50 and 10 K. The instrument was calibrated by measuring a Si crystal standard at room temperature. The X-ray absorption (XAS) measurements of the powder and single crystal were performed at the SIM beamline at the Swiss Light Source The sintered DyFeO3 crystalizes in an orthorhombic structure (space group Pbnm) with lattice parameters a = 5.304(6) Å, b = 5.598(2) Å, and c = 7.624(1) Å as determined by XRD at room temperature. These values are in good agreement with the results of the neutron powder diffraction measurements (see Table The temperature dependence of the magnetic moment for the powder and the single crystal [Fig. With increasing temperature, one finds a first transition at TN,Dy~6 K, where a sudden increase in the magnetic moment is observed; we identify this transition with the Dy ordering temperature. Above 6 K, the magnetization along the [100] and , there is a very small or no hysteresis, demonstrating the presence of a strong uniaxial anisotropy along Depending on how the magnetisation measurements are carried out (ZFC, FCC), differences in the temperature dependence for the [100] direction are observed [Fig The observation of a rising slope in the moment with decreasing temperature [Figs. The SQUID measurements described above indicate that, for the single crystal, the Fe magnetic moment (mFe) direction is in the ab-plane and is expected to be along [100] above TSR and along [010] below, with the Dy ordering in the ab-plane below TN,Dy (Fig. The temperature dependence of the maximum peak intensity of the (031) and (011) Bragg peaks of the single crystal, presented in Fig. The spin system is more susceptible to fields applied along [001], for which less energy is required to suppress the SR. In particular, we find that 10 mT is already enough to noticeably change the temperature dependence of the ( Whereas the spin orientations for the single crystal agree with previous reports In the temperature region between TN and TSR (100 -450 K), Le Bail fits of the powder data show that all reflections can be described by the nuclear unit cell, i.e., the magnetic propagation vector is k = (0, 0, 0). We find that the high temperature phase is described by Γ4 (Table Refined magnetic moments are given in the Supplemental Materials To gain further insights as to the mechanisms that may be responsible for the presence of a net magnetic component in the powder samples, we probed the electronic structure of the systems by means of x-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) at the Fe L3,2, O K and Dy M5,4 edge at room temperature for the powder and single crystal in total electron and fluorescence yield. For qualitative analysis, spectra taken with left and right circular polarized x-rays were averaged to yield isotropic spectra. Measuring both TEY and TFY gives us insight into surface related properties (TEY) whereas the fluorescence signal probes bulk properties Comparing the spectra qualitatively for M5,4 Dy of the powder and single crystal we find very little spectroscopic differences: peak positions, intensities and line shapes for TFY spectra are almost identical. The TEY intensity for the powder, however, is larger as compared to the crystal and probably related to differences in self-absorption between bulk and powder (not shown). These results are expected, since the M5,4 edge probes transitions from 3d core-level into 4f final states, which do not play a leading role in the chemical bonding in the lanthanines. The situation for Fe is different (Fig. The results presented above provide evidence for a complex evolution of the magnetic and electronic states of DyFeO3 in powder and single crystal forms with temperature. In particular, we show that the single crystal and powder samples exhibit strong differences in the Fe spinreorientation temperature and different directions for the Fe and Dy spin reorientations. Since both crystalline forms exhibit similar lattice parameters at room temperature but different coefficients of thermal expansion, one may conclude that at the micrometer scale, new degrees of freedom are available that permit different magnetic equilibrium states, in particular, a lower Fe-Dy interaction of the order of 10 μeV (a factor of 10 lower than that for the single crystal) and the presence of an incommensurate Dy ordering at low temperatures. Unexplained so far is the persistent magnetic component for the DyFeO3 powder below TSR and why mFe for the powder below TSR points along [001] instead of the expected [010] observed for the single crystal. The magnetic field dependent single crystal neutron diffraction and magnetization measurements clearly show that small external stimuli have a large effect on the magnetic properties of DyFeO3. A noticeable difference between powder and single crystal is the very different value for TSR, ~56 K for the powder and 41 K for the crystal. Also, the c-axis lattice parameter for the single crystal is longer (7.658 Å) than the expected 7.623 Å We have studied the magnetic and structural properties of the orthoferrite DyFeO3 as microcrystalline powder and bulk single crystal using x-ray and neutron diffraction, TEM electron diffraction, SQUID magnetometry, and XAS of the Dy M5,4 and Fe L3,2 edges at room temperature. Whereas the magnetic properties of the single crystal are largely consistent with previous reports, including for TSR, TN,Dy, and the Fe and Dy spin directions and ordering plane, the properties of the powder are distinct. The direction of the moment mFe extracted for the powder is along [100] above TSR and along [001] below TSR, whereas for the single crystal it is [100] above and [010] below TSR. The Dy ordering plane for the powder is the bc-plane, while for the single crystal it is the ab-plane. In addition, we observe a coexisting incommensurate magnetic contribution in the powder with a modulation of 0.0173(5) c*, corresponding to a modulation periodicity of ~58 unit cells. The 4 (AxGyCz) state of the single crystal below TSR fully compensates the FM contribution, whereas the 2 (FxCyGz) state of the powder results in partial compensation giving rise to a FM component that can be measured, absent in the single crystal. The magnetic field dependent single crystal neutron diffraction measurements with H||c and H||a set an experimental energetic limit of approx. 10 μeV for the Fe-Dy interaction, whereas at least 100 μeV are needed to significantly overcome the Dy-Dy interaction. A similar value for the exchange interaction has been determine for HoFeO3 (Fe-Ho: 26 μeV) by inelastic neutron scattering We also would like to thank Nicola Casati (PSI) for his help with the synchrotron powder measurements, Anja Weber (PSI) with the SEM measurements, and Simon Fluri (PSI) for his help with aligning and cutting the single crystal. We also would like to thank Frank Lichtenberg and Kaszimirz Conder for discussions on properties of single crystals and powders. Figures: 