Recently, we introduced a Portable HAndheld Spectral Reflection (PHASR) Scanner to allow THz Time-Domain Spectroscopic (THz-TDS) imaging in clinical and industrial settings using a fiber-coupled and alignment-free telecentric beam steering design. The key limitations of the version 1.0 of the PHASR Scanner were its field-of-view and speed of time-domain trace acquisition. In this paper, we address these limitations by introducing a heliostat geometry for beam scanning to achieve an extended field-of-view, and by reconfiguring the ASynchronous OPtical Sampling (ASOPS) system to perform Electronically Controlled OPtical Sampling (ECOPS) measurements. The former change improved the deflection range of the beam, while also drastically reducing the coupling of the two scanning axes, the combination of which resulted in a larger than four-fold increase in the FOV area. The latter change significantly improves the acquisition speed and frequency domain performance simultaneously by improving measurement efficiency. To accomplish this, we characterized the non-linear time-axis sampling behavior of the electro-mechanical system in the ECOPS mode. We proposed methods to model and correct the non-linear time-axis distortions and tested the performance of the high-speed ECOPS trace acquisition. Therefore, here we introduce the PHASR Scanner version 2.0, which is capable of imaging a 40×27 mm 2 FOV with 2000 traces per second over a 100 picosecond TDS range. This new scanner represents a significant leap towards translating the THz-TDS technology from the lab bench to the bedside for real-time clinical imaging applications. well suited for common techniques such as spectral "fingerprinting" Portable THz spectroscopy has been demonstrated for singlepoint measurement using the battery-powered Micro-Z Here, we present the new THz PHASR Scanner 2.0, shown in Fig. The schematic of a general telecentric THz-TDS imager is shown in Fig. The simplified model of a generalized gimbal in Fig. To improve this range, we have redesigned the mirror gimbal layout as shown in Fig. To demonstrate the decoupling of the imaging axes of rotation in the heliostat design, we derive the scanning coordinate system from the axial deflections. We define the zaxis to be aligned antiparallel with the optic axis of the f-θ lens, and the xand y-axes as shown in Fig. where α and β are the angles rotated by the azimuthal and elevation motors, respectively, and defined in Fig. respectively, where (x, y) is the location of the beam at the lens plane. Reflecting -b in about m to get the direction of b out and scaling such that the z coordinate is equal to -f, so that xand y-coordinates represent the location at the lens plane, it can be seen that ) . ( Similarly, the y-coordinate is only dependent on h and β. That is, the angle within the xz-plane is determined only by α and the angle away from the xz-plane is determined only by β. The basic scanning algorithm for this design is then as follows. The face of the mirror must point in the direction bisecting the incident and reflected beams: The axes of the gimbal must rotate to Our previously demonstrated linear correction can be applied to account for slight deviations due to the f-θ lens Variations on this design using different lenses might provide better performance for different applications, albeit with some tradeoffs. For instance, a lens with a larger focal length provides a greater field of view for the same angular range of travel at the gimbal, but at the cost of a larger spot size at the focus, reducing the spatial resolution of the device. The particular f-θ lens used here has been developed to suit the needs of a compact scanner. Thus, the vertical scan range of the PHASR Scanner 2.0, limited by the ±10° travel of the goniometer, is approximately 27 mm at the center, whereas the horizontal scan range is limited only by the lens area (e.g., here to approximately 40 mm). The imaging rate of our previous scanner was limited by the measurement speed of the commercial ASOPS system used for generation and detection of THz pulses. Although faster than using a mechanical delay line, the THz-TDS acquisition rate was slower than speeds provided by the ECOPS technique. ECOPS trace acquisition rates of 2.5 kHz In both techniques, the difference in repetition rate of the two lasers causes the sampling laser to progressively record sequential THz pulses in time, building a representative time-domain acquisition. Here, we call the laser generating the THz pulses "Laser A," which has a constant repetition frequency f rep and will thus produce THz pulses separated by a period of T rep = 1 f rep ⁄ . The laser sampling the THz pulses is called "Laser B" and has its repetition frequency set to f rep -Δf, where Δf is small compared to f rep . In general, the difference frequency Δf can be set by the user and is dependent on time, t. As a result, the THz pulse samples occur at a period of 1 (f rep -Δf) ⁄ . Assuming no variation in the beam path, each of these THz pulses is essentially identical at the detector so the different repetition periods of the two lasers mean that, in comparison to the previous sampling location of the THz pulse, each subsequent sample will be delayed by where values of τ refer to the effective time axis intervals of the THz pulse and are usually in picoseconds. The actual sampling interval in lab time, t, is T rep = 1 f rep ⁄ and is equal to the period T-TST-REG-04-2022-00056 of the femtosecond laser pulses. Each successive pulse from Laser B will sample the corresponding THz pulse generated by Laser A at a time-point shifted by Δτ. Starting at an arbitrary sampling time τ(0) = Δτ 0 at time t = 0, the effective sample time at t is given by: In ASOPS measurements, illustrated in blue in Fig. The ECOPS technique can be understood as ASOPS measurement with an alternating Δf, such as the illustrations shown in Fig. THz waveform, ECOPS's measurement range, T THz , is linked to the speed through both Δf and f M . Thus, while the THz acquisition window and its starting point, τ 0 , can be adjusted in ASOPS by simply recording a different section of the 1 |Δf| ⁄ period, for ECOPS this requires more coordinated adjustment of the modulation parameters. Despite these differences, the two techniques can be implemented using the same equipment. The variation in Δf can be created by taking advantage of the existing ASOPS hardware. The repetition rate of each of the lasers is controlled by the length of the laser cavity using stepper motors and piezoelectric actuators for coarse and fine adjustment of the laser cavity. A feedback system monitors the pulse rates and compares them to a reference oscillator and then adjusts the cavity length accordingly in real time. In our system, the reference for Laser B is generated by a Keysight 33500B Series waveform generator, allowing a user to select different values of Δf for different speeds of ASOPS. ECOPS operation is achieved by modulating the frequency of this reference and relying on the same feedback system to correctly adapt the repetition rate. Practical hardware limitations mean that if the target Δf is modulated too aggressively the system introduces errors in the repetition rate or will lose phase-locking between the two lasers entirely. For this reason, we found it preferable to use sinusoidal modulation, illustrated by the green traces in Fig. Drift occurs if the system responds differently to the two forward and backward directions of time-domain scanning, e.g., through a hysteresis in the piezo. In that case, the two directions will cover different amounts of τ, leading to an apparent drift of the THz signal due to the drift of the ECOPS sampling range. Left unchecked, this drift will quickly cause the region of interest to shift out of the scanning window. To counteract this effect, a small offset (typically on the order of tens of mHz) to the base repetition rate of laser B, f B , is required to bias the modulation by the same amount opposite to the drift. However, in our system, using a constant offset value is insufficient as the drift varies over time, as much as 5 ps/s within minutes. To address this issue, we have implemented a state control model for real-time drift compensation described by the flowchart in Fig. In addition to the drift described in the previous section, other time-axis distortions are present as a result of the electronic and mechanical systems response to the frequency modulation. For example, any inaccuracy of the modulation electronics, mechanical responses of the piezos to the electronic waveform, or drift correction will modify the modulation from the nominal sinusoid and thus deviate the sampling from the expected points. The extent of this distortion is illustrated by T-TST-REG-04-2022-00056 measurements from a multi-layer reference target, shown in Fig. The full extent of the timing error can be seen in Fig. where C P are the coefficients of the P th polynomial term. If we label the landmark features a, b, c, ... and associate their ECOPS locations in lab time: t a , t b , t c , ... with their ASOPS timelocations: τ a , τ b , τ c , ... then the set of C P values and τ 0 can be found using a least-squares fitting algorithm produced by numerically solving the matrix equation, given by The initial sampling point, τ 0 , depends on the starting point of the window thus in general will be different for each acquisition. The polynomial coefficient terms, C P , model the shape of the ECOPS time sampling and, excluding jitter, are expected to be the same for each acquisition. The accuracy of this approximation will be limited by the number and distribution of sampling points used to generate the fit. We further increase the number of reference points by using multiple acquisitions with different τ 0 values, and thus different time window locations. In order to find the correct coefficients for all acquisitions, we fit a system of equations, in which the constant terms (0 th order) are unique to acquisitions of the different time windows, but non-constant (1 st and greater order) T-TST-REG-04-2022-00056 polynomial terms remain the same. That is, for M different ECOPS acquisitions, we extract the time-locations, t i,m and τ i,m , where i = a, b, c, ... and m = 1, 2, ... , M, for all "landmarks" time sampling locations. The system of equations can be represented by the matrix equation given by, Solving this equation gives the single set of coefficients for the mapping, C N , C N-1 , ... , C 1 as well as the τ 0 's. Furthermore, simultaneous fitting to multiple M acquisitions reduces the impact of jitter on the calculated value of the coefficients. While this transformation could be applied independently for each direction of ECOPS scan, in practice we have found that this is best done using ECOPS measurements which have been "unwrapped", as in Fig. subsequent sections, we will use an 8 th order polynomial function in Eq. Figure When using different ECOPS frequency modulation parameters, i.e., f M and Δf values, following the method described in this section resulted in different 8 th order polynomial time-axis corrections, however with similar accuracy in modeling the non-linear time-domain sampling (data not shown). Although results shown in Fig. In order to validate the imaging capabilities of the PHASR Scanner 2.0 and the accuracy of our THz-TDS measurements in the ECOPS mode, we compare measurements against ASOPS data of the same type. In particular, four aspects of the THz-TDS measurements were examined: jitter, dynamic range, usable bandwidth, and spectroscopic accuracy. The first three values were calculated from measurements of a flat mirror while the spectroscopic accuracy was calculated based on the well-studied resonance of lactose at 0.53 THz Consistent timing is vital to time-of-flight and phase-based measurements common to THz-TDS techniques such as material parameter extraction and thickness determination. A T-TST-REG-04-2022-00056 representative comparison between the ASOPS and ECOPS time-domain measurements obtained at the center of a flat mirror placed at the focal point is shown in Fig. In addition to time-resolved measurements, much of the strength of the THz-TDS imaging is due to the ability to measure broadband spectra. Representative frequency domain reference measurements for both ASOPS and ECOPS are shown in Fig. The effect of measurement speed on bandwidth is not as easily defined. Two series of water absorption lines beginning at approximately 1.1 and 1.7 THz To characterize the ability of our modified system to accurately measure frequency spectra, we calculated the measured location of the resonance of lactose, theoretically expected at 0.53 THz. The sample consisted of an approximately 4 mm thick pellet consisting of equal parts by T-TST-REG-04-2022-00056 mass of α-lactose monohydrate and high-density polyethylene (for binding). The two components were mixed as powders with mortar and pestle and then compressed for 3 hours. The sample was placed on a mirror and the reflection from the back surface (that is, the signal which has passed through twice the sample thickness) was captured. The location of the resonance was then determined by finding the location of the minimum spectral amplitude in the area between 0.45 and 0.65 THz. This test provides additional insight into how well the nonlinear timeaxis sampling correction performs over large sections of the signal, as incorrect scaling will lead to frequency shifts. Figures Finally, we show the overall improvement of our PHASR Scanner 2.0 by demonstrating its scanning capabilities in situ. A video demonstrating a scanning time of approximately 8 seconds over a 27×27 mm 2 FOV with 1 mm pixel sizes, (i.e., a 729-pixel image) is presented in the supplemental materials. The scan was acquired at f M = 1000 Hz, Δf = ±32 Hz, for a 2000 THz-TDs trace/s acquisition rate. The acrylic target and peak-to-peak amplitude image of the scan is shown in Fig. A 1951 USAF Resolution Test Target provides a demonstration case for the full field of view of the scanner. The area containing elements 4-6 of group -2 (line widths ranging from 1.41 to 1.12 mm) and the resulting THz peak-to-peak image are shown in Fig. Our first effort at a portable handheld scanner, the PHASR Scanner 1.0, addressed many of the problems present in current applications of THz-TDS imaging but it also had clear limitations in field of view and scanning speed. Implementing T-TST-REG-04-2022-00056 a heliostat gimbal geometry drastically reduced the inherent distortion from the scanning system and improved the scanning range from 12×19 mm 2 to 40×27 mm 2 . This is combined with small modifications to the commercial ASOPS system, which allowed ECOPS operation of up to 2000 trace/s measurement rate. To implement this change, we used the existing ASOPS hardware, though specific attention is required to reduce signal drift and non-linear time-axis sampling inherent to this upgrade. In particular, we used a state model to make real-time corrections to the time-window and a polynomial time-axis calibration to an ASOPS measurement based on Fabry-Perot reflections for accurate time-axis scaling. The resulting polynomial fit can then be used for further measurements within that session or until the ECOPS modulation parameters are changed. We demonstrated the performance metric of the new ECOPS-based PHASR 2.0 Scanner. We show that we can use the ECOPS mode to take measurements with similar or better frequency-domain performance in significantly less time. These improvements make the PHASR Scanner 2.0 much more practical to use in scenarios such as biomedical imaging where scanning field of view and scanning speed significantly affect the patient experience. Our future work with the PHASR 2.0 scanner is intended to demonstrate its ability "in the field" for clinical and industrial applications. Results of these studies have already been implemented to extend the FOV and speed of our PHASR 1.0 Scanner for imaging large burns with 1" diameter in several preclinical in vivo studies 