Building on an analogy to ductile fracture mechanics, we investigate the energetic cost of debris particle creation during adhesive wear . Macroscopically, Reye proposed in 1860 that there is a linear relation between frictional work and wear volume at the macroscopic scale. Earlier work suggested a linear relation between tangential work and wear debris volume also exists at the scale of a single asperity, assuming that the debris size is proportional to the micro contact size multiplied by the junction shear strength. However, the present study reveals deviations from linearity at the microscopic scale. These deviations can be rationalized with fracture mechanics and imply that less work is necessary to generate debris than what was assumed. Here, we postulate that the work needed to detach a wear particle is made of the surface energy expended to create new fracture surfaces, and also of plastic work within a fracture process zone of a given width around the cracks. Our theoretical model, validated by molecular dynamics simulations, reveals a super-linear scaling relation between debris volume (V d ) and tangential work (W t ): This study provides a theoretical foundation to estimate the statistical distribution of sizes of fine particles emitted due to adhesive wear processes. Adhesive wear is an unavoidable phenomenon at contacting surfaces subjected to strong adhesive bonds Different mechanisms have been put forward to explain adhesive wear. These include wear debris formation with experiments dating back to Archard where λ is an order-1 prefactor that encapsulates the influence of the geometry, τ is the shear strength, μ is the material's shear modulus and ∆w is the per-crack decohesion work, which is in general equal to the critical energy release rate G Ic for crack opening in mode I, but can be replaced by two times the surface energy 2γ s in the case of brittle materials. The insight provided by this length scale for adhesive wear has been used to elucidate nanoscale friction The connection between friction and wear has always been intriguing. Archard #1: Bowder and Tabor's frictional force argument #2: Effective sliding distance: in order to form a debris particle, the two surfaces must slide relatively over a distance equal or close to the junction size, S ef f ≈ d. #3: Tangential work: the work necessary to create the particle, W t , is approximately equal to the effective sliding distance times the peak force, W t ≈ F max S ef f . #4: The volume of the debris particle is proportional to the junction size: V d ∼ d 3 . Moreover, assuming that the prefactor connecting the two quantities is close to unity, one reaches Thus, mathematically, where F t represents the tangential force, leading to the proposed volume estimator Vd = W t /τ . The salient feature of this model is that it predicts a linear scaling between debris volume and frictional work. However, despite Vd comparing satisfactorily to simulations when d ≈ d * The text is structured as follows. In Section 2, we detail the numerical models that enabled the simulation results presented in Section 3. These results show a super-linear scaling of debris size with frictional work. Section 4 outlines a new framework to resolve the contradiction with the previous theory that argued for a linear scaling. Further implications are commented in Section 5, while Section 6 presents the final conclusions. We performed molecular dynamics simulations on different model asperity geometries in LAMMPS We estimate the debris volume by counting the number of atoms in the debris particle and multiplying them by the average atomic volume in the bulk. We also estimate the shear strength of the material via independent simulations, finding τ = 7.9 GPa =49.31 eV/nm 3 . Numerical simulations were visualized using OVITO We conducted several sliding simulations of asperity-asperity contacts using the 3D setup. Examples of differently-sized wear particles with θ = 30 • are shown in Fig. The numerical results reveal the necessity to extend the current theory. We note that the details of the crack propagation process are not explicitly accounted for during the derivation of eq. ( where K I is the mode I stress intensity factor, which reaches its critical maximum value at the initiation of crack growth, Poisson's ratio) in plane strain, and G Ic is a material parameter termed "critical energy release rate" (in mode I). Thus defines the characteristic size of this plastic region. The condition of small-scale yielding (SSY) sets the range of validity of brittle fracture in terms of the plastic radius and a characteristic geometric length of the system. A generally agreed-upon test is checking if L ≥ 25r p Notice that r p and d * scale the same but differ in their prefactors due to the difference in geometry and loading mode (tension versus shear). In the case of single-asperity wear, L is taken as the junction size d, and SSY will not hold when There is yet another parameter that appears in this context This parameter represents the size of the damaged region that either eventually nucleates a crack or along which the crack extends; it is characterized by stress concentrations, micro-crack formation and/or other degradation processes. The fact that the critical junction size scales in the same fashion as the fracture process zone suggests a reinterpretation of the former: stress concentrations around small asperities can only nucleate cracks if the asperity itself is large enough to host a fracture process zone within it, thus d * can be thought as characterizing the minimal geometry of the system formed by interlocked asperities that can fit a FPZ that nucleates a crack, which leads to third-body formation. Figure d where stress concentrations can only lead to plasticity and surface smoothing (Holm's mechanism), in (b) F P Z ≈ d so substantial plasticity gives rise to cracks and eventually leads to third-body creation, and (c) represents a brittle material with F P Z d wherein fractures nucleate before inelastic deformation takes place (but plasticity still appears around the crack path). One of the premises that led to both eq. ( Resorting again to the 3D simulations, let us visualize the extent of plastic deformation as the asperity size increases. Figure The latter hints at a ductile fracture, in which substantial plasticity accompanies the crack tip trajectory, the volume of the plastified region at the end of the crack propagation process being V p ∼ d 2 F P Z , as the full crack path area is equivalent to the asperity base (∼ d 2 ). Note that this is a simplification, as the actual shape of the plastified region is more complex, but we assume that the scaling of the plastic zone size is still valid. Therefore, we find that In order to understand that, we decompose the tangential work into W plastic (work gone into permanent deformation anywhere in the asperity) and W debonding (work invested in bond breaking). Energy dissipated as heat in other processes can be neglected assuming close to quasi-static loading conditions. The step-by-step reasoning goes as follows: start from A volume around the crack tip is plastified while the crack propagates. We assume a characteristic local plastic strain ε p after which the crack propagates one step further, plastifying a new volume up to a strain ε p , and so on (cf. Fig. Recall that along the full crack path a volume of V p ∼ d 2 F P Z will be plastified, so we can express the total plastic work as W plastic ≈ τ V p ε p . Under the further assumption that ε p = const. (which is likely material dependent), we obtain the scaling The first term thus decays as the size increases, consistent with what we have already seen in Figure where A created is the total new area created by the fractures. The factor inside the parenthesis does not change if the material remains the same, so if only the size changes Thus, both parts of the tangential work have the same scaling and we reach This result means that the estimate can perform well for the smallest asperities (d ≈ d * ⇒ Vd ≈ V d ), but it may underpredict the debris volume as the size increases (d We supplement the previous discussion with an analytical continuum model presented in Assuming low-velocity, displacement-controlled loading conditions, we grant that most of the elastic energy is released much faster than the time that it takes for the remote loading to change once the failure conditions are attained, i.e., we assume a sliding-force relation as in Figure Each asperity can be considered independently exploiting antisymmetry conditions where κ is the shear coefficient thus the critical sliding u = S ef f that triggers crack propagation can be computed as the displacement at which the critical energy release rate G Ic is attained: If we further assume, on top of low aspect ratio, that the asperities are initially defect-free (so a/d → 0) and that unstable crack growth happens immediately after G Ic is attained, see Figure where the second addend represents terms that will be meaningful only if the assumption of low aspect ratio was removed. The total tangential work done over the system (two asperities) to the point when sudden failure by unstable crack growth happens is that is, the energy necessary to grow two cracks over an area td (the cross-section area) on each asperity. See that if we further assume that t ∼ d (the out-of-plane thickness being of the same order as the other cross-section length) we reach W t ∼ d 2 . This result indicates that the energy invested in sliding leading to debris creation can be controlled by fracture and be proportional to area, instead of being controlled by plasticity and proportional to volume. It is clear that the second assumption eq. ( Likewise, Figure This indicates that the maximum force still seems to be dictated by the significant plasticity that can be observed at the simulation sizes studied here (see for example Fig. In conclusion, given the appraisals obtained from eqs. ( • Small junctions, d ∼ d * , strength-controlled propagation: the stress intensity factor is strongly influenced by the surroundings' geometry, and its stiffness by extension. The process is driven by the remote sliding condition, and the strain energy stored during prior deformation (along with the stiffness of the system) is lost gradually at a rate proportional to the imposed velocity. • Large junctions, d d * , toughness-controlled: even though the crack nucleation will depend on the local geometry of the system, most of its growth will take place far from the model's edges, being effectively independent of the geometrical features. The stored energy is released at a fast rate (related to rapid crack propagation), as assumed in Figure As the size of the system is increased (greater d) from an initial size d * , the relative level of toughness-controlled propagation will in turn also increase, in detriment of ever smaller portions of strength-controlled. We further substantiate this point in the supplementary discussion around The system approaches a continuum-like situation similar to the one studied in the prior section as the size of the junction increases over the threshold value, hence the energy released at the crack tip becomes the dominant source of dissipation, i.e., where A created represents the total new area, the sum of the two new surfaces, one in each asperity. This work must be approximately equal to the strain energy stored during sliding, it does not account for the extra work that goes into the next stage: "rotating out" the particle. Extrapolation of the attested scalings V d ∼ d 3 (3D) and A d ∼ d 2 (2D) Here, t is the thickness of the 2D system. These scaling relations are the main contribution of this article. The corresponding pre-factors require the estimation of the total crack area, which in turn must depend on the specific geometry of the junction and the asperities (its size and presence of the stress concentration spots). Assuming that both the prefactors (called k in both cases) and the fracture toughness were known, we would write for the 3D case, and the 2D one See how eq. ( In conclusion, a super-linear scaling of debris particle volume with tangential work is observed at the nanoscale as the size of the asperities and the junction patch increases over d * . Figure We have been chiefly concerned with the qualitative trends in the tangential work -debris volume relation, but we have also proposed new estimators eqs. (17a) and (17b). However, it remains to assess the fracture toughness G Ic via independent MD simulations to fully gauge their ability to predict numerical outcomes, instead of considering it a fit parameter. There is still no consensus as to how to estimate this material parameter using molecular dynamics but a number of options are currently being investigated We have shown in eq. ( with k being the wear coefficient, F n the normal load, S the sliding distance, and H the material hardness. So if F n can be related linearly to the tangential force F t (via any linear macroscopic friction law), then it follows that A way to reconcile these facts is by accounting for the actual, statistical process of wear particle formation during sliding on a rough surface containing many asperity-asperity contacts. Contact simulations of rough surfaces combined with the application of eq. ( Even if the initial wear particle sizes were not restricted to the regime where linearity holds, it could still be the case that this non-linear micro-behavior gives rise to a linear relation as we upscale and more and more contacts are considered simultaneously (from asperities to clusters, from clusters to whole surfaces). Such a phenomenon, i.e., non-linear interactions at the microscale resulting in a linear relation at the macroscale, is not unheard of in the field of tribology. For instance it is well known since Archard An additional, important aspect is the effect of loading rate on the FPZ under dynamic fracture conditions. It is well-known that the size of the FPZ depends on the rate, so the effect of loading rate over wear should also be treated in the framework presented here, for instance by adding correction terms. A preliminary study on the influence of this parameter is carried out in the appendix using idealized 2D simulations. Finally, the possibility of other regimes where the volume-work scaling relation changes is not ruled out. We have ascertained that the fracture arrests before carving out the new particle completely, and that plastic hinges form in the ligaments left between the arrested crack tip and the free surface to finish the debris formation process (regard the strain distribution in Figure We have analyzed three-dimensional molecular dynamics simulations, at a single asperity contact, resulting in the formation of adhesive wear particles. The simulations revealed a super-linear scaling of debris size with tangential work, contradicting a previous theoretical estimate with a linear scaling This has motivated the development of a new theoretical model, inspired by ductile fracture mechanics, as the process of debris formation is always accompanied by the propagation of cracks. The model accounts for two sources of energy dissipation, the new surfaces formed along the crack path area and a plastic volume around this crack path. The theory was shown able to explain the trends observed in simulations. It is important to highlight that in the limit of contact junction size approaching the critical junction size, then the linearity between debris volume and tangential work is fully recovered. The rationale is that the critical junction size and the fracture process zone are essentially the same length scale. This results in a total plastification of the contact junction. Our findings provide a roadmap towards a quantitative framework to relate wear debris volume and frictional work and should be further informed with experimental observations. The next task would be to devise independent MD simulations to assess the fracture toughness. A particular point of interest is that irrespectively of the asperity level mechanisms, a global linearity between total wear volume and frictional work is generally observed. This disconnection between asperity level mechanisms and global response requires further studies and would certainly be enriched by considering the sliding history. B Further evidence of propagation regimes See that, as the junction width increases, gradients in the force profile become acuter; for the two largest sizes, there is a sudden drop, which entails drastic loss of stiffness and fast energy release, coherent with unstable crack propagation. The following bump represents work invested not in separation, but in rotating the already-formed particle out of the hollow left behind by the atoms that now belong to the contour of the debris. The qualitative change evidences the transition between the strength-controlled regime and the toughness-controlled one.