More-versatile memory is strongly desired for end-users to protect their information in the information era. In particular, bit-level switchable memory, from rewritable to read-only function, allows end-users to prevent any important data from being tampered with. However, no such switchable memory has been reported. We demonstrated the rewritable function can be converted into a read-only function by a sufficiently large current pulse in a U-shaped domain-wall memory composed of an asymmetric Pt/Co/Ru/AlOx heterostructure with strong Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction. Wafer-scale switchable magnetic domain-wall memory arrays on 4-inch Si/SiO2 substrate were designed and fabricated. Furthermore, we confirmed the information can be stored in rewritable or read-only state at bit-level according to the security-needs of end-users. Our work not only provides a solution for personal confidential data, but also paves the way for developing multi-functional spintronic devices. With the unprecedented expansion of the information technology, a large amount of data produced by ubiquitous terminals calls for more-versatile memory not only with advantageous performance but also with high security, particularly demanded by end-users. CMOS-based memory, as the current mainstream memory, is the main bottleneck of computer system Researchers have made great efforts on versatile memory with high-performance and low-power operation, such as resistance change memory Here we report on experimental realization of wafer-scale domain-wall memory arrays combined with high performance and high security, electrically switchable from rewritable to readonly function at bit-level. In a U-shaped domain-wall memory composed of an asymmetric Pt/Co/Ru/AlOx heterostructure with strong Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction, the rewritable function can be realized by field-free current-induced domain-wall reciprocating motion by spin orbit torques (SOTs). The stored information can be converted to read-only state bit by bit through domain-wall annihilation after applying a sufficiently large current. Thus, the read-only bits become immune to electric current pulses, ensuring information integrity under the threat of being exposed to hackers or impostors. To effectively create and control the magnetic domain-wall by SOTs, a U-shaped device was designed consisting of asymmetric Pt(4 nm)/Co(0.85 nm)/Ru(1.2 nm) multilayers. An AlOx(0.5 nm) capped layer was deposited on the curved region to locally weaken the perpendicular magnetic anisotropy where ħ is the reduced Plank constant, e is the electron charge, M s is the saturation magnetization, t is the thickness of the ferromagnetic layer, θ SH is the spin Hall angle of heavy metal, m x is the x-component of magnetization orientation and J x is the x-component of charge current density. The H z SOT direction is defined by both directions of J x and m x . In the U-shaped device, the J x changes its direction as passing the centerline of the curved section. Therefore, the H z SOT for the up-and down-regions of the device will be opposite with the same direction of m x determined by an in-plane magnetic field, leading to opposite domains formed at both sides of the centerline of the curved section, which is confirmed by the pMOKE images in Fig. We then investigate the field-free current-induced magnetization switching with the domainwall motion using both anomalous Hall effect and pMOKE for different initialized magnetic To achieve error-free rewritable domain-wall memory and robust read-out, the average change in resistance (ΔR) from the low-to high-state should be at least 12σ to have working memories with bit counts of Mb or more , R ave is the averaged anomalous Hall resistance R i of each state, and n=2000 is the total number of pulse cycles. For all the four types of the initializations, we realize the rewritable function with high reproducibility using alternately current pulses (Fig. Similarly, a -21mA current pulse leads the device to the low resistance state. Therefore, after a large current pulse applied, the device entered into the read-only function associating with the annihilation of the domain-wall, as confirmed by the pMOKE images in Fig. Interestingly, with the assistance of an in-plane magnetic field, the device in read-only function was electrically re-converted to rewritable function along with the regeneration of the domain-wall (Fig. Except for being demonstrated in spin torque-driven race-track memory The films were deposited on Si/SiO2 substrate by magnetron sputtering at room temperature. DC magnetron sputtering was used to deposit the Ta, Pt, Co, Ru and AlOx layers. The base pressure of the chamber was less than 2.010 -6 Pa. The pressure of the chamber was 1.0610 -1 Pa during deposition. The deposition rates for Ta, Pt, Co, Ru and AlOx layers were controlled to be 0.022, 0.0240, 0.0124, 0.017 and 0.002 nm/s, respectively. For a single device, two steps of UV lithography and magnetron sputtering deposition were used. First, the Ta (1 nm)/Pt (4 nm)/Co (0.85 nm)/Ru (1.2 nm) film was patterned into U-shaped devices with channel width of 16 μm and inner diameter of 30 μm. Then, using photolithography engraving and magnetron sputtering deposition, AlOx layer with thickness of 0.5 nm was grown in the curved section. Finally, argon ion beam etching is used to make trenches with width of 5 μm in both straight sections, where Co/Ru bilayers were precisely etched away. For the wafer-scale domain-wall memory arrays, every U-shaped device has channel width of 10 μm and inner diameter of 20 μm. Additional process of lift-off is needed to make the row electrodes (Ta(10 nm)/Au (50 nm)) and column electrodes (Ta(10 nm)/Au (150 nm)). To prevent the electrical contact between the two layers of electrodes, a layer of SiOx with thickness of 100 nm is deposited by PECVD (plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition) to separate them. We then investigated the current-driven domain-wall motion in the symmetric U-shaped device. In Fig. The switching probability of the device from rewritable to read-only function was measured after initialization of Hx=3600 Oe & Ix=22 mA. First, ten cycles of alternately current pulses with amplitude of 9 mA and duration of 10 ms were applied to confirm the realization of rewritable function. Then, a current pulse I was applied to switch the device to read-only function, and followed by a set of pulses (-9mA and +9 mA) to detect whether the switching was successful or not. After each pulse, a small current of 0.1 mA was applied to detect the anomalous Hall resistance. To investigate the switching probability, we counted the number (n) of successful switching to read-only function in 10000 pulses, and took n/10000 as the switching probability. The switching probability for the measured current pulse ranged from 14.5 to 22 mA is shown in Fig. 