Two-dimensional (2D) water, confined by atomically flat layered materials, may transit into various crystalline phases even at room temperature. However, to gain full control over the crystalline state, we should not only confine water in the out-of-plane direction but also restrict its in-plane motion, forming 2D water clusters or ribbons. One way to do this is by using an electric field, in particular the intrinsic electric field of an adjacent polar material. We have found that the crystalline phases of 2D water clusters placed between two hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) nanoribbons are crucially determined by the nanoribbons' edges, the resulting polarity of the nanoribbons, and their interlayer distance. We make use of density functional theory (DFT) with further assistance of molecular dynamics (MD) simulations to establish the comprehensive phase diagrams demonstrating transitions between liquid and solid phases and between the states of different crystalline orders. We also show that the crystalline orders are maintained when water flows between h-BN channels under external pressure. results open a promising pathway towards the control of water structure and its flow by the use of the microscopic electric field of polar materials. Water has always been a subject of interest in account of its unusual properties and its universal importance across the fields of science and engineering. Its phase diagram contains at least 18 ice phases in addition to the most known I h ice, When a polar crystal such as h-BN is finite, it can have a permanent dipole moment, depending on its geometry. As we will describe in the present article, monolayer 2D water can exhibit different crystalline phases if it is confined by finite boron nitride ribbons. Most of the 2D ice forms predicted so far have no macroscopic electric dipole, We start by examining the energetics of water confined between finite layers using DFT calculations. We then use equilibrium MD simulations to describe the structure of 2D water between finite or infinite h-BN or graphene sheets in a wider range of conditions, and offer a qualitative explanation of the edge effect along with an effective electrostatic model. Finally, we examine the structure of water in stationary flow. Previous studies of 2D water have usually assumed a structure that is periodic along both in-plane directions. However, in reality both the confining layers and the water in between are finite and have edges. We can use this effect to our advantage as a mean to further control the structure of the water. We will consider a water channel formed by two semi-infinite graphene or boron nitride layers. The channel's in-plane width (W ), along the x direction is assumed to be infinite (periodic), and the channel's height (the interlayer distance D), along the y direction, is a few Å. If the distance between edges (i.e. the channel's length L, along the z direction) was comparable to the size of the water molecules, the system would become 1D. In contrast, if L was infinite, the system would become 2D. We study systems with 10 < L < 400 Å, which are at the 1D→2D transition. For the purpose of illustrating the effect of the h-BN polarization on the water, we will use stoichiometric, semi-infinite nanoribbons with asymmetric zigzag edges, i.e. one edge is N-terminated, whereas the opposite one is B-terminated, such as the one represented in Figure The nanoribbons used were semi-infinite and, unless otherwise specified, consisted of a total of 168 atoms with a width of 11.3-11.5 Å for the AA-stacked structures, and 140 atoms with a width of 10.0 Å for AB-stacked structures. The supercell size used was 17.5×35.0×30.0 Å 3 . The relative energies were found to change less than 1 meV when the vacuum spacing was increased by 5 Å along y or z. Spin polarization of the edges was taken into account (for more details, please see the Methods section). A single water molecule confined between h-BN nanoribbons spontaneously reorients itself so that its dipole is anti-parallel to the polarization of the ribbons. The difference in energy between the parallel and anti-parallel dipoles, for a water molecule placed at equal distance from the two borders (site 'O' in Figure However, close to the border of the h-BN confining layers, the orientation of the water molecule is no longer dictated by the polarization but rather by the local atomic environment. The energy and orientation of the water molecule at different distances from the border, obtained by fixing the oxygen position to different coordinates along the z axis, are shown in Figure A comparison between different stackings and between polar/non-polar NRs shows that the polarization (iii) is the most important factor shaping the potential energy landscape (Figure The respective energy profile is nearly identical for the water molecules confined between AA-or AB-stacked graphene sheets (Figure The lowest energy position for adsorption of a water molecule on a single graphene sheet In the case of AA-stacked h-BN, the lowest energy position for the oxygen is also close to the centre of the hexagonal ring. For z < 0, the energy profile resembles that of the water molecule between graphene sheets. However, there is now a strong asymmetry in z due to the polar nature of the h-BN nanoribbons. The variations of the potential energy of the molecule across the surface are more pronounced for the smaller inter-layer distances (Figure The water molecule prefers different orientations with respect to the confining layers, depending on the distance to the border and to the confining layer atoms. In the case of confinement by h-BN, the water molecule always prefers to be parallel to the confining layers, except when it is close to a border nitrogen atom, in which case it can orient itself perpendicularly to the layers, in order to form hydrogen bonds with the nitrogen atoms. In the case of graphene, however, the water molecule adopts different orientations depending on the closest graphene lattice sites. This difference, as we will see, contributes to the increased order in water phases formed at the 1D↔2D transition in h-BN channels. We now use tetra-water clusters to investigate the relative strength of the water-water interactions. These small water clusters share the same square or rhombic local motifs as the most relevant 2D water phases, a consequence of the maximization of the number of hy- Tetra-water clusters are confined by semi-infinite nanoribbons with zigzag edges similar to those described in the previous section. The most relevant configurations are shown in Figure We estimate the average hydrogen bond energy as is the energy of the tetra-water cluster, at fixed atomic positions, without the presence of BN, and E 1H 2 O is the energy of a single water molecule. E H is larger for SQ1 and SQ2, indicating that the larger the number of hydrogen bonds established by a water molecule, the weaker they become. Comparing our estimates of the energy scales of the interactions involved in the water layer formation, we find that hydrogen bonds are the strongest, with energies in the range 50-250 meV, followed by the dipole reorientation energy (< 110 meV) and border proximity effects ( 100 meV). Comparatively, the local changes of potential energy due to proximity to the B,N/C atoms far from the border, is small (<50 meV), specially for inter-layer distances of 7.0-7.5 Å. Taking this into account, it is not surprising that 2D water forms water phases that maximize the formation of hydrogen bonds. At room temperature, it favours square and rhombic phases, instead of forming phases commensurate with the confining lattice. In the following sections, we will study such 2D water phases and how they change at the 2D↔1D transition. We used classical molecular dynamics simulations to explore the phase diagram of 2D water at 300 K. AA-stacked h-BN layers and AB-stacked graphene layers were chosen as model systems. The phase diagrams are calculated at room temperature, for different distances between plates (D) and lateral pressures. The molecular dynamics simulations are performed at constant number of particles (N ), with water covering given area A, determined by the size of the h-BN supercell. For a given N , we calculate the pressure on the (virtual) supercell walls perpendicular to the walls separation, P (D). Phase transitions between the different phases accessible to the system can be identified by a non-monotonic change of P (D) with D at constant N . A comparison between the classical potentials and DFT for the system studied in the previous section can be found in Supporting Information S2. While the classical potentials perform poorly when comparing the energies of water clusters with on or two hydrogen water molecules, they perform better for fully bonded water phases. We have chosen the classical potential SPCE. Infinite boron-nitride sheets, modelled using periodic boundary conditions along both in-plane directions, have no net intrinsic electric field, and the phases of water confined by such sheets are identical to those found when water is confined by graphene (Figure The main crystalline phase encountered is the square phase (S), shown in Figure We now consider 2D water nanoribbons, which can be viewed as a quasi-1D system, obtained by confining the 2D water in between h-BN nanoribbons. These ribbons, in the xOz plane, are finite along z and infinite along x. The channel's length (L) is approximately 42 Å. The supercell is 65.1 and 63.9 Å wide (the channel's width W ) along the x direction for h-BN and graphene, respectively. The water is kept in the confined region by perfectly reflective wall boundaries placed parallel to the nanoribbon edges. Two-dimensional water confined between h-BN nanoribbons shows two distinct solid phases. These are a rhombic polar phase (RP) and a square polar (SP) phase. For a density of about 12 molecules/nm 2 (the density of the 2D square ice observed experimentally 6 ), the transition between the two solid phases occurs at D = 6.75 Å. Below D = 6.50 Å, there is a rhombic phase where the oxygen atoms arrangement shows rhombus motifs (Figure Water confined by the graphene nanoribbon, in contrast, only shows a solid-liquid transition at D =7.75 Å(Figure water confined by infinite graphene planes 8 (see Supporting Information S1). The phase transitions give rise to anomalies in the P (D) plots (Figure The diffusivity is also different for the rhombic and square polar phases, being higher for the latter, and it dramatically increases in the liquid state (Figure In order to quantify the presence of the polar phases for the 2D water, we have calculated the average electric dipole per water molecule, p (Figure For the water confined by the h-BN nanoribbons, there is a noticeable increase of the value of p z towards its maximum value at the phase transition from the rhombic polar phase to the square polar phase (Figure Further, to help differentiating between the rhombic polar and the square polar phases, we calculated |p mol x | , the ensemble average of the absolute values of the molecular polarization component along x. This is zero for the perfect square polar structure, since all the molecules have a mirror symmetry plane parallel to xOy, but it is non-zero for the rhombic polar structure. Thus, an abrupt decrease of |p mol x | is observed at the phase transition from the rhombic polar phase to the square polar phase (Figure x | remains constant for graphene. We note that the stabilisation of polar 2D water phases in the case of h-BN confinement is not an artifact of the choice of classical potential since, according to our tests for strictly planar 2D water phases, in Supporting Information S2.2, this model slightly penalizes the polar water phases, compared to DFT. In Supporting Information S3.1, we show that the presence of polar solid phases and the solid to liquid transition near D ∼ 7Å are independent of the choice of classical potentials. We have shown that water confined by finite h-BN nanoribbons acquires new phase states which are not present in water confined by infinite h-BN layers. We have attributed this difference to the macroscopic polarization of the nanoribbon system associated with an intrinsic electric field. The energy of a water molecule in the resulting electric field, E dip , is given by E is the electric field, which is assumed to be along the z direction, E = E z e z , and θ is the angle between p and E. We now analyse quantitatively the electric field produced by the nanoribbon, and how it varies in-plane and within the nanoribbon width. where e y,z are the unit vectors, and is the dielectric permittivity. Since the water flow is restricted to the plane, the water molecules are most sensitive to the in-plane electric field (along e z ) in the middle of the interlayer gap (y = 0). The total in-plane electric field at mid-gap in the case of AA stacking can be written as where l = 3a/2, z 0 = a/2 with bondlength a = 1.44 Å, The total in-plane mid-gap electric field is maximal near the edges and decreases in the middle of the channel (Figure In an MD simulation for water confined by h-BN nanoribbons of a longer length (L=368 Å), we are able to see the ordered, polar phase within 100 Å of the edges, while at the centre of the water layer the electric field vanishes, and the water layer becomes disordered (Figure Near the centre of the water layer, the 2D water is still polarized, although less than near the edges (see Supporting Information S4). In the case of AA stacking (with top and bottom edges aligned) the situation is completely different because each term originating from a line at y = +D/2 is explicitly compensated by the term with y = -D/2 as having an opposite sign. Hence, the total in-plane mid-gap electric field vanishes in the case of AA stacking. From this model, we can also see that if L → ∞, then the average electric field tends to zero, in agreement with the molecular dynamics results shown earlier for the infinite h-BN sheet. This is therefore a nanoscale effect. We considered pressure differences between the two reservoirs from 5 to 208 atm. In all cases, the water layer was in the solid state with a structured oxygen sublattice, but the O-H bonds were polarized for the water flow through the h-BN channel. This is illustrated in Figure atm. The density was in the range 10.8-14.9 molecules/nm 2 for graphene and 11.7-12.4 molecules/nm 2 for h-BN. The value of p z is close to the maximum polarization for h-BN, but nearly zero for graphene. There is a mixture of rhombic polarized and square polarized phases (the latter featured in Figure Density functional theory calculations, together with molecular dynamics simulations, indicate that 2D water confined by finite h-BN nanoribbons is more ordered than confined by identical graphene nanoribbons. The difference is mainly due to the presence of an intrinsic electric field in finite, asymmetric h-BN layers, and is not observed for water confined by infinite h-BN layers which have no net electric field. The reorientation energy of the molecules is higher close to the edges than at the centre of the nanoribbon, and its average value over the whole surface vanishes as the nanoribbon width tends to infinity. At room temperature, water confined by AA-stacked, polar h-BN layers less than 7.5 Å apart is crystalline and can assume one of two polar phases, RP and SP. The regions of confining distance where RP or SP dominate depend on the classical potential employed. When flowing due to a pressure gradient a strong polarization of the water molecules is maintained during flow. The qualitative results obtained here can be generalized for nanoribbons of different nanoscale widths, as long as the polarity of the top and bottom layers is the same. If they have inversion symmetry, however, no difference is expected as in the case of graphene. The edges of the nanoribbons give us the ability to control the crystalline states of water confined in between. This approach can be further explored considering different polar materials. Even though an external electric field can change the water structure and dynamics in nanotubes Nevertheless, the polar 2D water phases described here can potentially be found in regions of water intentionally or unintentionally intercalated between BN sheets during the assembly of heterostructures. First-principles DFT calculations were carried out using the Quantum ESPRESSO package. The classical molecular dynamics simulations were performed using the lammps code. (WWA) We employed the SPCE water model, which is known to give very good structural parameters and self-diffusion constant for 3D water. The water-BN interaction parameter of Wageman et al. drogen bonds between water molecules. However, different from an infinite 2D water layer, water molecules are not all fully bonded, with four hydrogen bonds per molecule.