The conductance of electrostatic wire junctions in bilayer graphene, classified as trivial-trivial or trivial-topological regarding the confinement character on each junction side, is calculated. The topological side always corresponds to a kink-antikink system, as required for a proper connection with a trivial side. We report a conductance quench of the trivial-topological junction, with a conductance near quantization to 4e 2 /h, which is only half of the maximum value allowed by the Chern number of a kink-antikink system. The analysis allowed us to uncover the existence of a chiral edge mode in the trivial wire under quite general conditions. A double junction, trivial-topologicaltrivial, displays periodic Fano-like conductance resonances (dips or peaks) induced by the created topological loop. Electrostatic confinement in bilayer graphene (BLG) induced by microelectrodes acting at a distance from the top and bottom sides of the graphene planes has attracted a notable attention in the graphene community. Smooth electrostatic confinement in BLG avoids difficulties introduced by atomically rough edges made when parts of the graphene system are physically etched, such as strong intervalley scattering induced by edge roughness. Two qualitatively different types of electrostatic confinement in BLG can be considered: a) trivial confinement when all top gates have the same potential, which is opposed to that of all bottom gates, Our main finding is a conductance quench of the trivial-topological junction (Fig. Next, the work addresses the double junction systems. In the trivial-topological-trivial double junction closed loops can be formed in the central part for specific energies. We find that these closed-loop states yield conspicuous quasi periodic resonances, conductance peaks or dips of Fano type, as a function of energy or length of the central part. Overall, our work suggests the conductance quench of the single junction and the periodic Fano resonances of double junctions as characteristic features signalling topological confinement in BLG electrostatic wire junctions. Our modelling of BLG nanostructures in based on the low-energy multiband Hamiltonian with continuum space operators for position (x, y) and momenta (p x , p y ), as well as three pseudospin vectors, σ, τ and λ for sublattice, valley and layer, respectively. 1 In detail, the Hamiltonian reads where v F = 660 meV nm and t = 380 meV are the BLG Fermi velocity and interlayer coupling, respectively. We stress here that our notation of using different symbols for Pauli matrices in different subspaces while being more compact is also equivalent to other approaches using always the same symbols for Pauli matrices, irrespectively of the subspace, but keeping track of the strict ordering of operators to define generalized matrices. Symbol ⊗ is used to indicate tensor product of different subspaces and the last equivalence in Eq. ( Notice that the asymmetry potential vanishes in the 2Dbulk region of trivial confinement, in the central part (y a < y < y b ) of the trivial wires. Our junction modelling is based on complex-band structure theory. A. Wire single junctions Figure In sharp contrast, the conductance of the trivialtopological junction (green, Fig. The conductance quench of Fig. Next, we validate our above interpretation by analysing the physical character of the modes of a trivial wire with numerical and analytical results. Figure The results of Fig. Assuming wave numbers k and q along x and y, respectively, and a constant V a in Eq. (1) the eigenmode equation becomes an algebraic 4 × 4 matrix problem for each valley, i.e., replacing τ z → s τ with s τ = ±1 for valley K (K ). In the purely homogenous case we can assume a spinorial wave function (σ, λ = 1, 2) with a 4-component spinor of constants Φ σλ for each k and q. These constants are determined from the eigenvalue problem HΨ = EΨ with the Hamiltonian of Eq. (1). We rewrite the eigenvalue problem as and with the Ψ of Eq. ( Equation ( Straightforward algebra yields Equation ( A surprising behavior for unbiased (V a = 0) BLG is that Eq. ( The shaded area in Fig. Having identified an edge chiral mode in a trivial wire from the conductance of a trivial-topological junction, a natural question to address next is whether this mode is also present or not in a semi infinite interface between unbiased and biased BLG (Fig. As a final item of this work, we address the study of the double junctions with trivial leads and a scattering center which is either also trivial or topological. Sketches of the two types of double junctions can be seen in Fig. The conductance of the double junction with a topological center (Fig. Fano resonance profiles are characterized as where q is the Fano parameter and the energy dependence is contained in ≡ (E -E R )/Γ, with E R and Γ the resonance energy and width. Different values of the Fano parameter q yield varying resonance profiles, from symmetric dips (q → 0) to intermediate asymmetric profiles (finite q's) and symmetric peaks (large q's). Figure Junctions of electrostatically confined BLG wires show outstanding transport features feasible to be detected. A trivial-topological junction is characterized by a conductance quench with respect to a trivial-trivial junction. A single mode of edge chiral character, per valley and spin, is transmitted from the trivial to the topological side causing a near quantization G ≈ 4e 2 /h when the number of incident modes is low (N tri < 4). With larger values of N tri the conductance deviation from the quantized value becomes increasingly visible. The edge chiral character of the lowest mode of a trivial BLG wire is surprising, more so in the absence of any magnetic field. Such mode is also present at a semi infinite interface between unbiased and biased BLG planes. It is characterized by a locking between valley and momentum and there is an analytical critical value of momentum k c for the presence of such mode when k > k c , which is otherwise damped in the continuum of bulk states. Double junctions of electrostatic BLG wires with trivial leads and a topological center show conspicuous Fano resonances, dips or peaks in the conductance. They are due to an energy-dependent coupling of the closed loop around the topological center and the scattering states. Altogether, the above features may help to place hybrid trivial-topological BLG graphene wires with electrostatic confinement as a useful and controllable platform for graphene electronics. one could intuitively expect. We have also obtained (not shown in the figure) that the probability distributions are unchanged when reversing the momentum (k ↔ -k) for a given valley, or reversing the valley (K ↔ K ) for a given momentum. In case of a sharp transition interface s = 0 we have solved the matching condition at the interface considering exponentially decaying solutions towards both sides. The q wave numbers and Φ wave functions are determined from Eq. ( mode. We also stress that the two methods prove that there is only one branch for K and one branch for K , differently to the result for kink states yielding two branches per valley. Finally, the dependence on V a is analyzed in Fig. Edward McCann and Mikito Koshino, "The electronic properties of bilayer graphene," Reports on Progress in Physics 76, 056503 (2013).