Fourier-accelerated micromechanical homogenization has been developed and applied to a variety of problems, despite being prone to ringing artifacts. In addition, the majority of Fourier-accelerated solvers applied to fast Fourier transform (FFT)-accelerated schemes only apply to convex problems. We here introduce a first order approximation incremental energy functional (FAIEF) that allows to employ modern efficient and non-convex iterative solvers, such as trustregion solvers or Low memory Broydon-Fletcher-Goldfarb-Shanno (LBFGS) in a FFT-accelerated scheme. These solvers need the explicit energy functional of the system in their standard form. We develop a modified trust region solver, capable of handling non-convex micromechanical homogenization problems such as continuum damage employing the FAIEF. We use the developed solver as the solver of a ringing-free FFT-accelerated solution scheme, namely the projection based scheme with finite element discretization. Mechanical homogenization, motivated by the idea of representing a heterogeneous micro-structure as an equivalent homogeneous medium, aims to calculate effective mechanical properties of micro-structures, including homogenized elastic constants and the stress-strain response given the micro-structure and constitutive laws of the individual components. For simple micro-structures (e.g. micro-structures containing only linear elastic phases) the effective properties of a heterogeneous material can be estimated analytically However, when the micro-structure of a material gets more complex, analytical methods are generally no longer suitable for the determination of the effective properties. Computational homogenization, on the other hand, is an effective method in up-scaling the behavior of complex micro-structures specially those consisting of, i. highly nonlinear, or ii. evolving phases One of the primary applications of computational homogenization is in multiscale simulations, where it enables resolving the full micro-structure and studying the influence of parameters at microscale on the solution of a structural problem As fast and reliable RVE solvers, FFT-based methods have gained much attention in the last 20 years Increasing the resolution and improving solution accuracy is straightforward in spectral methods. As a result, large-scale micro-structures simulations are more efficient using spectral methods compared to conventional FEM. The computational complexity of FFT-based solution in the Fourier-Galerkin (FG) scheme Spectral methods, in addition to their original scheme (iterative solution of an integral equation of the Lippmann-Schwinger type) as introduced by Moulinec et al. Several approaches have been used to address Gibbs-ringing in spectral methods, e.g. Use of Newton-CG due to its quadratic convergence properties is common in FFT-based solution schemes A possible solution, called sequential linear algorithm (SLA) Non-convex iterative solvers, for instance nonlinear CG, quasi-Newton solvers such as Low memory Broydon-Fletcher-Goldfarb-Shanno (LBFGS) In this paper, we introduce a first order approximation incremental energy functional (FAIEF) that enables application of non-convex solvers for problems whose objective function explicit form is not available. The introduced FAIEF is a first order approximation and is only valid for small load steps. However, this is typically not an issue because many homogenization problems, such as nonlinear computational homogenization problems, already meet this condition as for solving them the load increments are chosen to be small. We opted for trust-region Newton-CG solver to illustrate the applicability of the introduced FAIEF for solving non-convex problems whose energy functional evaluation is not easy. In addition, we demonstrate how the projection-based scheme with FE discretization The projection-based scheme with FE discretization as well as the employed non-convex solvers are explained in Section 2. In Section 3, we show that the modified trust region Newton-CG, developed and introduced in this paper, yields identical results compared to the standard trust region Newton-CG solver in a simplistic 1D example. The convergence properties of the modified trust-region solver are resolution independent, as we show by presenting the modified trust region Newton-CG solver performance for variation of RVE sizes. In addition, we show that the modified trust region solver can solve a realworld damage homogenization problem that suffers both from SNPSD stiffness and sharp phase interface with unbounded contrast. We have implemented all methods in the open source code μSpectre In the following, we consider a rectangular periodic RVE; see Figure The governing mechanical equilibrium equation in this domain reads as: where ∇ 0 is the nabla operator (∇ 0 is gradient operator and ∇ 0 • is the divergence operator) in the reference coordinates and ∇ 0,s stands for the symmetrized nabla operator ∇ 0,s = 1 2 (∇ 0 + ∇ T 0 ) in the reference coordinates. The compatibility equation (2b) dictates the strain field to be a gradient field. In the projection-based spectral scheme, in order to solve the equilibrium equation, the local equilibrium equation in its weak form after applying Gauss divergence theorem casts to: Note that the boundary term cancels out due to periodic boundary condition. The strain is taken to be from the compatible gradient space E. The test function in the projection-based spectral methods ( ζ in (3)) is in strain space while in the FEM formulation, the test function is a displacement field. Therefore, the test function of projection-based spectral methods is not an arbitrary field (unlike FEM). Proceeding with the Galerkin discretization necessitates having a fully arbitrary test function. Therefore, in order to apply the Galerkin discretization on (3), it is necessary to impose compatibility condition on the test variable ζ(x). Zeman et al. In the following of this section, after elaborating the projection operator G and the resulting discretized equilibrium equation, the remedy of the ringing artifact developed by Leute et. al The key element of projection-based spectral solvers is the projection operator G which enforces compatibility on an arbitrary field ζ(x) as: Applying projection yields compatible contribution ζ(x) of the original field ζ(x). In (4), is the convolution operator. The convolution format of (4) makes its application in Fourier space convenient, since convolution in real space is equivalent to contraction in Fourier space. Accordingly, (4) can be rewritten as: where G(k) is the compatibility operator in Fourier basis, ζ(k) = F{ζ(x)}, and k is the discrete frequency vector in the Fourier domain. Considering that G is a fourth order block diagonal tensor, the equilibrium equation ( Using Newton's method to solve the nonlinear system of (6) iteratively, the (i + 1) th update of the strain field ε i+1 in the iterative scheme can be calculated from the previous approximation of the strain field ε i incremented by a finite strain increment δε i+1 , Starting from an initial strain approximation ε 0 the strain increment at each step is given by solution of the linear system: at the (i + 1) th nonlinear solution step, where B i is the constitutive tangent matrix of the system evaluated at discretization points. Leute et al. where D is the derivative operator in Fourier space, and * denotes the Hermitian transpose. The form of the projection operator G as a function of g is different in small strain and finite strain formulation (further details can be found in In the original projection based method developed by Zeman et al. in index notation, where ks are normalized discrete Fourier wave-vectors. Leute et al. Choosing different D in a projection based spectral method is equivalent to choosing different element types and shape functions in the conventional FEM formulation. The operator D, for a FE discretization, is calculated using the derivative of the corresponding shape functions. Similar to a FE scheme, the strain, stress, and the constitutive tangent are evaluated at the quadrature point of the FE discretization. Optimal spectral characteristics of the system matrix in (8) The projection-based spectral scheme explained in Subsection 2.1 due to the optimal spectral characteristics of its linearized system Therefore, in order to be able to benefit from the computational speed-up offered by the projection based spectral scheme for problems with SNPSD system matrices, we need to employ other iterative solvers. Possible candidates capable of handling non-convex problems are nonlinear CG, quasi-Newton solvers, and Trust region Newton solver. In this paper, a trust region Newton solver as a robust and memory efficient solver capable of handling non-convexity in an iterative fashion is adopted to be used in homogenization problems. The potential of trust region solvers (as well as quasi-Newton solvers) has not been exploited in computational homogenization, since in a considerable part of the literature, conventional FEM employing direct solvers used to be the defacto for computational homogenization. As a result, the main challenge of using trust region and quasi Newton solvers in computational homogenization, namely missing an explicit expression of the objective function in the equivalent energy minimization counterpart of the equilibrium solution, has not been addressed to the authors' best knowledge. This problem is addressed in the following of this section after a review over the standard trust region Newton solver. In contrast to conventional line search algorithms, in a trust region solver, the approximate model (sub-problem) "trusted" within a bounded region (trust region) near the current iterate is minimized iteratively until a minimizer of the original function is reached There is no a-priori knowledge of the radius of the region in which the model can adequately approximate the objective function. In addition, the model's accuracy declines by moving away from the current iteration. Therefore, it is crucial to determine the "trust region" of the model function and to regulate it consistently during the solution process. To this end, based on the model's match with the original objective function, the trust region is adjusted in each iteration. As a general rule, the trust region can be expanded if the approximate model fits the original problem well. In contrast, the trust region shrinks if the approximate model fails to estimate the original function adequately Let us consider the total energy function, equivalent to the original objective function of a homogenization problem, of the RVE as: where w denotes energy at Qs, which are the discretization quadrature points, and g(x) represents the internal variables of the material. The solution of the equilibrium equation (2a) is, in particular, corresponding to the critical point of the total energy function One possible sub-problem model (and probably the most common form) of the trust region solver is a quadratic energy function approximation in form of: where in the Newton trust region solver, B i is taken as the Hessian matrix of the energy evaluated (B) at quadrature points at i th load step and R i is the radius of the trust region. p i is a solution step in the strain space. Here, the energy functional is taken as a direct function of strains at i th solution step as in the projection based formulation the equations are solved in strain space. Other trust region solvers are also possible using different choices for the matrix B i . The agreement of the actual objective function (W (ε i + p i )) and the model (m i (p i )) at the new iterate is evaluated by a scalar variable at the i th iterative step, defined as: In the trust region algorithm, the value of ρ i , as set forth in It is relatively simple to calculate the denominator of the right hand side of the according to the definition of m i (p i ) given in Subtracting (16a) from (16b) and dropping higher order terms yields: Truncating The terms in the right hand side of (18) consist of the stress tensors at the previous and current trial steps which are already evaluated at all of the quadrature points. To take ∆W as a valid estimation of ∆W , it is necessary to keep the load increments small. Furthermore, it is vital that the variation of resulting displacement field remains bounded. For instance, problems such as buckling under prescribed growing force does not satisfy boundedness of displacement field around the critical load; and therefore does not converge using the modified trust-region solver presented here. On the other hand, problems such as mechanics damage modeling are solvable using the modified solver presented here given that the applied load increments are controlled to be small. The actual system energy reduction in the nominator of ( It is notable that the evaluation of ρ i needs the stress of the previous solution step to be stored. Introducing the first order approximation of the energy functional enables us to use the robust trust region algorithm in cases that the explicit expression of W function is missing. The pseudo-algorithm of the projection-based trustregion solver is presented in Algorithm 2 which shows how the scalar value ρ (or its estimated counterpart ρ i ) is used to make decisions of accepting or rejecting trial step (δF) as well as shrinking or expanding the trust region. As shown in Algorithm 2, the memory overhead of using Trust region Newton-CG is storing the flux (stress) field at the previous solution step which does not impact the overall required for the solution compared to Newton-CG. The predicted reduction of the model (m i ) will always be non-negative since the step p i is calculated by minimizing the model m i over the region that includes p = 0. Therefore, if ρ i is negative, the value of the objective function at the new iterate W (ε i + p i ) is greater than the current objective value W (ε i ) , thus the step must be rejected. Alternatively, if ρ i is close to 1, it is safe to expand the trust region for the next step since the model m i and the original objective function W are in good agreement over the solution step p i . In the case when ρ i is positive but smaller than one, the trust region is not altered, however in the case when ρ i is close to zero or negative, the trust region is shrinked by reducing R i at the next iteration. How these decisions are made is depicted in details in Algorithm 2. The solution of the subproblem (minimizing m within the ball of radius R) is easy to find when B is positive definite and the minimizer is located within the trust region (equivalent to finding an unconstrained minimizer of the quadratic function m). There is no such simple solution to the subproblem in other cases. For these cases the minimzer resides on the boundary of the trust region. The constrained linear solver used here as the sub-problem solver is based on the solver introduced by Steihaug In addition, in order to make the linear solver robust to numerical rounding error problems a reset algorithm based on the work of Powell Comparing the measure r by a constant value in the range of (0.1, 0.9) has been proposed as the decision criteria for restarting CG. We chose 0.2 as suggested in In the following, three examples are presented to demonstrate the solver developed above are presented. We first compare the performance of the modified trust region solver with that of the Newton-CG solver and the standard trust region solver on a very simple example. This example deals with a 1D damage spring system where the potential energy functional of the system is known. The trust-region solver can therefore be used on this system. Second, we test the correctness of the solution of the solver considering a convex system. The Eshelby inhomogeneity, whose analytical solution is available, is selected, so we can compare the generated solution of the modified trust region solver with the analytical solution of the problem. Finally, the capability of the solver for solving non-convex problems is demonstrated in a real world damage mechanics problem. As illustrated in this example the modified trust region solver can handle damage mechanics homogenization problems with rather complex constitutive laws. As a simple mechanical system with non-convex energy functional, a periodic 1D spring system (schematic shown in Figure whose eigenvalues are λ 1 = 0, λ 2 = 3k, λ 3 = (2α + 1)k . The third eigenvalue can be either positive or negative and for values α < -1 / 2 , the system is not positive semi definite (PSD) anymore, since it has one negative eigenvalue. The problem has been solved with k = 1.0, γ 0 = 0.1 and for different values of α. The boundary condition of mean stretch equal to x = 0.11, large enough to invoke post peak behavior of the k 0 spring, is imposed. Three different solvers listed in Table The strain energy functional of the system as a function of the independent variable x 0 for the imposed boundary condition of x = 0.11 is represented in Figure This simple example can clearly show the equivalence of the obtained results with that of the standard trust region algorithm. The availability of the energy functional of this example makes the standard trust-region solver applicable. However, in general non-convex homogenization problems, the energy functional is not always available and therefore the standard trust-region solver is not an option and one can use the modified version with the approximated energy functional. In order to examine the introduced modified trust-region solver solving convex problems, a small-strain Eshelby inhomogeneity elasticity problem is chosen here as the second numerical example. The Eshelby inhomogeneity is an ellipsoidal body embedded in an infinite elastic medium, where the material properties of the inhomogeneity differ from those of the matrix. The analytical solution of the problem is known The schematic of the RVE geometry is presented in column (a) of Figure The number of Krylov solver and nonlinear solution steps needed to solve for equilibrium versus trust radius variation (maximum trust region radius) is plotted in Figure Figure As the third example, we will discuss an interesting real-world example, namely alkali-silica reaction (ASR) damage homogenization. ASR is one of the most widespread causes of internal concrete deterioration This example deals with RVE scale ASR damage modeling, in which we solve equilibrium equation of a problem with a non-convex energy functional, where y-position shows solution of cylindrical Eshelby inhomogeneity with Newton-CG and Trust region Newton-CG as they look the same. The column (c) consists the difference of Newton-CG and Trust region Newton-CG solutions scaled by a factor of 10 7 to make the difference visible. The first row shows the variation of the shear strain all over the solution domain. Second row shows the same variable zoomed around the inhomogeneity. The third row shows the variation of shear strain over the green, purple and orange cuts (located at the center-line, r / 2 below and above of the center-line of the inhomogeneity) in subfigure a. The third row also corresponds to the zoomed area around the inhomogeneity. the explicit expression of the functional is missing. The extremely high computational costs of this problem, namely ASR damage simulation has made it really challenging to conduct a comprehensive multi-scale modeling of ASR In order to be able to compare our results with available ASR damage mesoscale simulation results In 2D RVEs of this example, cement paste and aggregates are explicitly resolved as two different phases. Aggregates are placed inside a cement paste matrix in RVEs according to Fuller size distribution The constitutive laws of both aggregate and cement paste phases are a bilinear crack band damage with an isotropic damage measure where the damage variable D can vary between 0 for intact material to 1 for The parameters of the constitutive law, listed in Table We model the expansion of the ASR product sites by applying eigenstrain on the pixels containing them. Growing eigenstrain is added to the strain associated to these quadrature points before their constitutive law evaluation. These specific pixels are modeled as a linear elastic phase and assumed to contain the growing ASR gel pockets inside them. Line 28 of the Algorithm 2 is where eigenstrain is actually applied on the system. The mean value of stress is imposed as a boundary condition to be zero (free expansion) for the RVE. Imposing mean stress value as the boundary condition is implemented by means of modifying the projection operator following Crack pattern advancement inside a sample RVE of physical size of 0.1m × 0.1m is depicted in Figure Next, we conducted the discretization study and the load step study on a RVE with free expansion and growing gel pixels. In order to be able to realize nominally equivalent load scenarios by variation of the discretization size we have kept the area expansion of the pixels containing ASR gel pockets constant. The effective stiffness reduction for a micro-structure subjected to similar area expansion of gel pocket pixels is presented with different discretization in Figure According to the results of the discretization study we have chosen the medium grid size and a load step size of 5.00 × 10 -4 (the medium value of the considered load steps) to conduct the simulations with different randomly generated micro-structures in the following of the paper whose results are depicted in Figure In addition, the results obtained by Cuba Ramos In this paper, we present a first order incremental approximation of the strain energy functional, which makes it possible to use fast ringing-free spectral solvers for non-convex problems, such as damage mechanics. We have derived the approximated energy functional based on the Taylor expansion of the energy functional of the system. Using the introduced incremental energy functional enables employing modern optimization techniques such as quasi-Newton and trust-region solvers in problems without easy access to the explicit objective function, for instance non-linear mechanical homogenization problems. As an example, we show, in this paper, how the introduced incremental energy functional makes the use of trust-region Newton-CG for computational homogenization possible. We used the modified trust region sovler to solve a minimal 1D non-convex problem where the obtained solution was shown to be in agreement with that of standard trust region Newton-CG solvers. Next, we used it to solve a convex homogenization problem; finally, we simulated and studied a real-world homogenization problem with non-convex energy functional, namely meso-scale ASR damage, was simulated and studied by means of the presented modified trust region solver. The obtained results were compared to those reported in the literature Return p i 16: if r j+1 ≤ η cg then convergence satisfied Return p i = r j+1 18: if r j+1 • r j /r j+1 • r j+1 > 0.2 then successive steps are not conjugate for i = 0, 1, 2, . . . , i NR,max do Newton-Raphson iteration Trial step rejected Go to line 14 next Newton loop iteration which can cause singularity in case ij tends to 0. In order to resolve this problem, we have reformulated the ε (t) by defining a so called masking matrix M (t) based on the spectral decomposition of ε (inspired by where M (t) is defined as: Working out the differentiation of ε (t) expression with respect to ε according to (A.5) and (A.6) singularity is avoided in the explicit stiffness tangent formulation. r j+1 ← r j + α j d j update the iterate 13: