X-ray ptychography utilizes overlapping illuminations to reconstruct the object's phase and absorption signal with spatial resolutions much smaller than the focus size. Usually, the illumination overlap is chosen to be between 50 % and 60 % in order to ensure high quality reconstructions at reasonable scan times and/or doses. Here, we experimentally demonstrate that ptychographic iteration with object instead of flat initialization allows for a significant reduction of the overlap with only a modest loss in reconstruction quality. This approach could prove beneficial for dose sensitive experiments and for rapid feedback overview scans. X-ray ptychography constitutes a rapidly developing imaging technique Recently, we have shown that instead of using a flat initialization for ptychographic iteration a low resolution object representation, directly accessible from the measured diffraction patterns, can be utilized to initialize the iteration In the following, we will investigate the performance of object initialization on ptychographic scans with smaller than recommended overlaps. Object initialization for ptychographic iteration refers to the utilization of a low resolution estimation of the object's complex wave field, which is constructed from the diffraction pattern D j (q) measured at scan position R j via moment analysis. The moments of the diffraction patterns M uv with the integers u and v can be calculated by (1) with q = (q x , q y ), the reciprocal coordinates. The M 00 moment contains the absorption signal. By normalization to a region without sample and appropriate interpolation, the squared modulus of the object transmission |o(r)| 2 is retrieved in the object coordinate system r = (x, y). The next-higher moments M 10 and M 01 can be used to calculate the center-of-mass of the diffraction images Here, the moments M 10 and M 01 are assumed to be corrected by the corresponding moments in a scan region without sample. The center-of-mass signals are proportional to the beam deflection, which is mainly caused by the phase gradients ∂ Φ/∂ x and ∂ Φ/∂ y of the object. However, in case the wavefront of the probe is not flat (e.g., the object is located out of focus) the probe will also contribute to the deflection of the beam which can be used as a starting guess for subsequent ptychographic reconstruction. In this study, we have used the recently introduced refractive frame work for ptychographic reconstruction To demonstrate the benefits of object initializing, we use the ptychographic dataset of a fluid catalytic cracking particle (FCC_particle_FZP_11_dataset_id1.mat) available online In the original scan, the scan points are close enough that the probe covers each point of the scan area, as shown in Fig. The results for the ptychographic reconstruction without object initialization (i.e., flat initialization) are shown in Fig. To assess the reconstruction quality more rigorously, we use Fourier Ring Correlation (FRC) to compare the reconstructions of two independent scans. For the correlation, we use a second dataset which comprises an identical scan (FCC_particle_FZP_11_dataset_id1.mat). We repeat the steps from before: we create two quick scans containing a quarter and half of the diffraction images and we reconstruct all three scans. The correlations between all three reconstruction pairs and the 1-bit-criterion As described in the previous section, the image moments provide access to the absorption and phase gradients of the object. Fig. Using object initialization allows all three reconstructions to converge reliably, as shown in Fig. To calculate the FRC curves for the reconstructions with object initialization, we repeat the procedure for the three scans of the second dataset. The results are plotted in Fig. We have confirmed that reducing the overlap of pytchographic illuminations severely degrades the quality of retrieved phase signals if a flat initialization for the object's complex wave field is used. We demonstrated that this degradation can be significantly alleviated if a low resolution estimate for the object wave field is employed to initialize the ptychographic reconstruction. In fact, the visual appearance of retrieved phase signals was almost not affected even when reducing the overlap from 51 % to 3 %. However, we observed a reduction in the achieved spatial resolution compatible with the expectation from photon shot noise for 31 % overlap and an additional impact of under-sampling for 3 % overlap. Nevertheless, we showed a significantly increased robustness of the ptychographic reconstruction with object initialization. Overall the spatial resolution only declined from ≈35 nm for 51 % overlap to ≈56 nm for 3 % overlap for object initialization. This allows more flexibility to trade between scan speed, sample coverage, and reconstruction quality and could prove beneficial for dose sensitive experiments or quick overview scans for rapid feedback.