Polyaniline and graphene nanoplatelets (PANI-GNP) nanocomposites are synthesized by in situ oxidative polymerization of polyaniline using an oxidizing agent, ammonium peroxydisulphate (APS). The mass of GNP in the nanocomposites varied by 5, 10, and 15 wt% compared to PANI. The synthesized polyaniline coated graphene nanoplatelets (PANI-GNP) nanocomposites are chemically characterized and using Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR), Raman spectroscopy, Scanning electron microscopy (SEM), UV-Vis spectroscopy, and X-ray diffraction analysis (XRD). FTIR and Raman spectroscopy analysis confirmed the uniform coating of polyaniline on GNP. The SEM micrograph and XRD pattern demonstrate the polymerization quality and crystallization degree of samples. UV-Vis analysis showed a decrease in the bandgap of polyaniline, which confirms that nanocomposites are more suitable for optoelectronic application because of variation in the bandgap. TGA analysis showed the thermal stability of PANI is increased with the increased mass of GNP. This study suggests the potential of GNP as a filler for efficient modification in the morphological, electrical, optical, and thermal properties of PANI. Polyaniline is one of the most promising organic semiconducting materials among intrinsically conducting polymers. Polyaniline has several advantages over other conducting materials, such as ease of preparation, low cost, non-toxic, tunable electrical conductivity, and interesting intrinsic redox properties Carbon allotropes, including carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and graphene, have successfully blended with PANI using various processing methods. Examples of processing methods for the fabrication of PANI and carbon nanocomposites include solution blending, melt blending, in situ polymerization, and chemical modification processes. Almasi et al. studied the bandgap variation of PANI by adding MWCNT by in situ polymerizations of PANI Modification of PANI by GNP forming PANI-GNP nanocomposite achieved promising performance in many applications such as sensors, actuators, microelectronics, electrochromic devices, smart fabric, supercapacitors, energy storage devises, conformal antenna systems, and electromagnetic shielding devices In this study, the GNP surface was modified with PANI by in situ polymerization of aniline. The synergetic effect between PANI-GNP was evaluated for the overall electrical, physical, optical, and thermal properties enhancement mechanism. The PANI-GNP hybrid material was chemically characterized using Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR), Raman spectroscopy, x-ray diffraction (XRD), Scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and UV-Vis spectroscopy. The thermal stability of the material was evaluated using thermogravimetric analysis (TGA). Graphene nanoplatelets (average surface area 120 -150 m 2 / g and average particle diameter of 5 μm (Grade M particles)) were purchased from XG Science. Sulfuric acid (H2SO4), hydrochloric acid (HCl), aniline (99.5 % pure), and ammonium persulfate (APS) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. All the chemicals and reagents were used without further modification or purification. The PANI-GNP nanocomposites were synthesized by in situ anionic polymerization of aniline in the presence of GNP. In a typical procedure, different weight percentages of GNP (5, 10, 15 wt% ) were dispersed in 100 mL of 1M HCl using an ultrasonicator and magnetic stirrer. After 20 min, 1.92 g of aniline was added into GNP dispersion with continuous stirring. The pre-cooled APS solution (4.56 g of APS dissolved in 100 mL of 1M HCl) was added dropwise into the reaction mixture. The reaction was carried out under constant stirring for 4 h in an ice bath; ice bath was used to increase the polymerization reaction rate by keeping the temperature about 0 -5 °C. After 4 h, the resulting dark green mixture was kept in the refrigerator overnight for complete polymerization of aniline. The PANI-GNP composites were filtered and washed with deionized water, HCl, and acetone two times each to remove unreacted aniline. Finally, the product was dried in an oven at 80 °C for 10 h to obtain a PANI-coated GNP nanocomposite. The weight ratio of PANI in composites was measured for a different set of samples in the final product of PANI-GNP nanocomposites. The pure PANI was also prepared with the same procedure adding no GNP to the solution. The probable reaction mechanism of cationic polymerization of aniline in the presence of HCl and APS is shown in Fig. Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) was used to investigate the chemical interaction between PANI and GNP. FTIR spectrum was recorded using Nicolet iS10 FTIR spectrometer with 64 scans and 4.0 cm -1 at room temperature. Raman spectroscopy was observed by WITec alpha 300R Raman microscope with a 532 nm laser, spot size 5 μm. The microscope has a 20x objective lens of 0.40 numerical aperture, 600 lines/mm grating, and 100 μm confocal aperture. XRD spectra were collected using a Bruker AXS D8 Discover X-ray Diffractometer with a general area detector diffraction system (GADDS) Vantec 500 2D detector. Fixed wavelength (1.54056 Å) was used for the experiment scanning angle of 2θ from 10° to 40°. The surface morphology of the GNP, PANI, and PANI-GNP nanocomposites was investigated using an FEI Quanta 600 field-emission gun environmental scanning electron microscope (FESEM). UV-Vis spectroscopy analysis was used to study the optical properties of all samples. The absorption spectra were collected at the wavelength range of 200 -800 nm at room temperature. Thermogravimetric analysis of PANI, pristine GNP, and PANI-GNP nanocomposites was performed using a high-resolution TGA analyzer (model Q-50, TA Instruments). During the analysis, all the samples were heated at a rate of 20 °C/min from room temperature to 800 °C under 50mL/min of continuous airflow. The surface functional groups of GNP, PANI, and PANI-GNP have been verified by using FTIR spectroscopy, and each spectrum is shown in Fig. In the PANI spectrum, the signals at 3425 cm -1 , 1563 cm -1 , and 1466 cm -1 are ascribed to the N-H stretching vibrations, C=C stretching vibration for the quinoid ring, and benzenoid ring, respectively Raman spectroscopy provides a molecular fingerprint to characterize carbon-containing materials. Raman spectra of GNP, PANI, and PANI-GNP nanocomposites are shown in Fig. For PANI, C-H bending deformation in the benzenoid ring at 1163 cm -1 , C-N + stretching vibration in bipolaron structure at 1337 cm -1 , C=C stretching vibration at 1479 cm -1 , and C=C stretching of quinoid at 1592 cm -1 were observed The X-ray diffraction patterns provide the crystallinity information of the materials. The XRD spectra of PANI and PANI-GNP nanocomposites are shown in Fig. Pristine GNP showed a single high intense characteristic peak at 2θ of 26.5°, corresponding to (002) crystal plane of graphite nanoplatelets The SEM images of pristine GNP, PANI, and PANI-GNP are demonstrated in Fig. UV-visible spectroscopy of PANI, pristine GNP, and PANI-coated GNP nanocomposites are shown in Fig. The bandgap energy of all the samples was calculated using a Tauc plot relation as shown in equation 1, which is a plot of energy (hν) against the square of absorption (αhν) 2 (αhν) 2 = A(hν -E g ) where A is the edge width parameter, ν is the frequency of the incident photon, Eg is the bandgap energy, and α is the absorption coefficient. Energy (hν) was plotted against the square of absorption (αhν) 2 . The bandgap energies were calculated by extrapolating a straight line over the slope of the main peak where the absorption is near zero, as shown in Fig. Thermal stability is an important parameter in determining the manufacturing and applications of materials under different environmental conditions. The thermal stability of polymeric materials highly depends on the process parameters and their loading states Polyaniline-coated graphene nanoplatelets were successfully fabricated by in situ polymerizations of aniline. The chemical characterization and surface analysis of PANI-GNP composites were confirmed by FTIR, Raman spectroscopy, and SEM analysis. The occurrence of (002) and (021) XRD peaks verified the existence of GNP and PANI in PANI -GNP nanocomposites. The more graphenic character of the nanocomposites was observed by XRD with the higher loading of GNP in nanocomposites. The UV-Visible studies showed a decrease in the optical bandgap of PANI, confirming the interaction between GNP and PANI. It is observed that the addition of a higher volume of GNP decreases the bandgap of PANI from 4.26 to 3.65 eV. Similarly, TGA results showed an increase in char yield from ~2% to ~ 38% inferring the enhancement in thermal stability of polyaniline due to the addition of GNP.