Using first-principles density functional theory calculations, we investigate the pressure-induced quantum phase transition (QPT) from the charge density wave (CDW) to the pristine phase in the layered kagome metal CsV 3 Sb 5 consisting of three-atom-thick Sb-V 3 Sb-Sb and one-atom-thick Cs layers. The CDW structure having the formation of trimeric and hexameric V atoms with buckled Sb honeycomb layers features an increase in the lattice parameter along the c axis, compared to its counterpart pristine structure having the ideal V 3 Sb kagome and planar Sb honeycomb layers. Consequently, as pressure increases, the relatively smaller volume of the pristine phase contributes to reducing the enthalpy difference between the CDW and pristine phases, yielding a pressure-induced QPT at a critical pressure P c of ∼2 GPa. Furthermore, we find that (i) the superconducting transition temperature T c increases around P c due to a phonon softening associated with the periodic lattice distortion of V trimers and hexamers and that (ii) above P c , optical phonon modes are hardened with increasing pressure, leading to monotonous decreases in the electron-phonon coupling constant and T c . Our findings not only demonstrate that the uniaxial strain along the c axis plays an important role in the QPT observed in CsV 3 Sb 5 , but also provide an explanation for the observed superconductivity around P c in terms of a phonon-mediated superconducting mechanism. Recently, the kagome metals AV 3 Sb 5 (A = K, Rb, Cs) have attracted tremendous attention because of their intriguing electronic properties involving nontrivial band topology, charge density wave (CDW) order, and superconductivity (SC). These kagome metals consisting of three-atom-thick Sb-V 3 Sb-Sb and one-atom-thick A layers [see Fig. The intimate relationship between the intertwined CDW order and SC in AV 3 Sb 5 has been further explored by applying pressure We performed first-principles calculations within the density functional theory (DFT) as implemented in the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) codes A. Pressure-induced QPT between the CDW and pristine phases in CsV 3 Sb 5 We first optimize the structures of the pristine and CDW phases of CsV 3 Sb 5 as a function of pressure using DFT calculations. The pristine phase crystallizes in the hexagonal space group P6/mmm (No. 191) with the stacking of one-atom-thick Cs triangular layer and three-atom-thick Sb-V 3 Sb-Sb layers where Sb atoms in the upper and lower Sb honeycomb layers are covalently bonded to V atoms in the middle V 3 Sb kagome layer containing a triangular Sb sublattice centered on each V hexagon [see Fig. Hereafter, we consider the 2×2×1 TrH structure that captures the key features of the CDW order in the 2D kagome lattice, as discussed below. Figure The QPT between the CDW and pristine phases at zero temperature is determined by the variation of their enthalpies (H = E + PV ) as a function of pressure. At pressures below P c , the CDW phase has lower total energy E than the pristine phase. Figure By contrast, many experimental To investigate the SC of CsV 3 Sb 5 beyond the QCP, we calculate the phonon spectrum of the pristine phase as a function of pressure using the density functional perturbation theory Next, we calculate the electronic band structure of the pristine phase as a function of pressure. The calculated band structures at 3, 6, and 9 GPa are displayed in Figs. To estimate the EPC and T c of the pristine phase under pressure beyond the QCP, we calculate the Eliashberg function α 2 F(ω) and the integrated EPC constant λ(ω) as a function of phonon frequency ω using the isotropic Migdal-Eliashberg equations It is worth noting that, as pressure approaches P c from higher pressure, the phonon softening around the L point is enhanced and the DOS at E F increases [see Fig. Our first-principles DFT calculations for CsV 3 Sb 5 have shown that the QPT from the CDW to the pristine phase is accompanied by a volume contraction in the pristine phase. We found that the relatively smaller volume of the pristine phase contributes to reduce the enthalpy difference between the CDW and pristine phases with increasing pressure, leading to a pressure-induced QPT around ∼2 GPa. It was revealed that the discontinuous volume change at the QCP is due to the structural distortion in three-atom-thick Sb-V 3 Sb-Sb layers: i.e., the formation of trimeric and hexameric V atoms with the buckling of Sb honeycomb layers is vanished to yield a discontinuous decrease in the lattice parameter along the c axis. Furthermore, we found that the phonon modes associated with the periodic lattice distortion of V trimers and hexamers are softened around the QCP, thereby increasing the EPC and T c . It is thus likely that the phonon-mediated pairing mechanism is responsible for the SC around the QCP. Therefore, our findings not only demonstrate that the volume contraction of the pristine phase plays an important role in inducing the pressure-induced QPT in CsV 3 Sb 5 , but also shed light on the phonon-mediated SC around the QCP.