The Kohn-Sham (KS) system is an auxiliary system whose effective potential is unknown in most cases. It is in principle determined by the ground state density, and it has been found numerically for some low-dimensional systems by inverting the KS equations starting from a given accurate density. For solids, only approximate results are available. In this work, we determine accurate exchange correlation (xc) potentials for Si and NaCl using the ground state densities obtained from Auxiliary Field Quantum Monte Carlo calculations. We show that these xc potentials can be rationalized as an ensemble of a few local functions of the density, whose form depends on the specific environment and can be well characterised by the gradient of the density and the local kinetic energy density. The KS band structure can be obtained with high accuracy. The true KS band gap turns out to be larger than the prediction of the local density approximation, but significantly smaller than the measurable photoemission gap, which confirms previous estimates. Finally, our findings show that the conjecture that very different xc potentials can lead to very similar densities and other KS observables is true also in solids, which questions the meaning of details of the potentials and, at the same time, confirms the stability of the KS system. Density Functional Theory More information is available in low-dimensional, of-arXiv:2207.03919v2 [physics.comp-ph] 24 Apr 2023 ten finite, systems, where ways have been proposed to invert the KS equations and find the KS potential starting from a given density In realistic three-dimensional periodic systems, the density of beryllium obtained from x-ray diffraction experiments has been used to determine an auxiliary noninteracting system The probably simplest algorithm to obtain the KS potential from a given density n ref has been proposed for finite systems by van Leeuwen and Baerends where a is a parameter that avoids instabilities in regions of very low density as suggested in The negative sign of the potential that is updated in (1) is crucial for the algorithm to work, because a positive sign would drive the result in the wrong direction. However, contrary to the HEG, a real system can also exhibit regions of positive v xc . Moreover, while in a lowdimensional system one can impose that the potential tends to zero at large distances, in a three-dimensional solid the zero of the potential is not defined. One cannot even use the ionization potential theorem, which would force the eigenvalue of the highest occupied state to be minus the ionization energy, since this theorem does not hold in extended systems We have tested the algorithm using known functionals. As documented in Appendix B, the inversion works straightforwardly for the LDA, but two further aspects have to be verified. On one side, the true functional, unlike the LDA, is non-local, which might influence the behavior of the algorithm. This is sorted out in Appendix C. Second, the QMC data contains statistical noise; this aspect is deepened in Appendix D. Finally, Appendix E shows that the inversion starting from the QMC density behaves as expected. It also demonstrates that the final results do not depend on the starting point of the iterative procedure, including starting points as far from the final result as, e.g., 0.1 × v LDA xc . For the results shown in the following, we use as starting point 0.3 × v LDA xc with a rigid downwards shift of 0.2 Hartree for silicon and 0.4 Hartree for NaCl. In the following, we report results in atomic units for both densities (expressed in bohr -3 ) and xc potentials (in Hartree). A. Kohn-Sham potential of silicon and sodium chloride We have applied the algorithm to obtain the exchangecorrelation potential from the charge density obtained by AFQMC calculations. For silicon, we have used the results of Ref. The xc potentials are compared in the third panel of Fig. Results for sodium chloride show similar trends, with even better convergence properties of the potential due to the fact that our QMC density for NaCl is less noisy than the one of silicon in the important regions of high density (see also App. D). For the density, we obtain a MeAPE of 0.03% and a MaAPE of 0.29% at i = 200. Here, analogous to Fig. In order to appreciate the non-locality of the QMC derived potential, we will again compare it to known functionals. It is interesting to add the Tran-Blaha modified Becke-Johnson potential In the LDA, v xc (r) is a monotonic function of n(r). The exact KS potential is a functional of the density ev- erywhere, which means that it can take different values in different points r where the density, instead, is the same. This expresses the fact that v xc (r) depends not just on the local density, but also on the environment. In order to highlight how the true v xc differs from a function of the local density, we create a map of v xc (r) with respect to n(r): for each point r in real space, we add a point [v xc (r) ↔ n(r)] to Fig. The QMC xc potential in the middle panels is also blurred. However, this cannot be interpreted as a reliable feature of the true KS potential, since the QMC data is noisy, which may also cause blurring, as we have demonstrated in App. D. The overall shape and branches of the QMC xc potential, instead, are significant. Similarly to the PBE and TBmBJ, one can identify a dominant curve, and, with respect to the LDA, two main changes are seen: the curve is steeper than that of the LDA, and at low densities an additional branch appears. The change in slope of the main branch with respect to the LDA goes in the same direction as in the PBE and TBmBJ results, and it is more pronounced than in the case of PBE, similarly to TBmBJ. Also the branching happens in a similar region as in the case of PBE and TBmBJ. However, the branch departs in the opposite direction. In all cases, the extra branch is characterized by a very different gradient and kinetic energy density with respect to the main branch at the same local density. Indeed, the region in space where the potential lies on the extra branch is close to the center of the atoms, where the density varies rapidly. It should therefore be noted that it will be particularly sensitive to details of the pseudopotential. This, together with the fact that the inversion error on the density is largest on the atoms (see Fig. The modifications of the different branches with respect to the LDA v LDA xc may be translated in different ways, for example: v e xc (r) = F e (n(r))v LDA xc (n(r)) with a correction factor F e that depends on the local density and on an environment e, which must be characterized. Another possibility would be v e xc (r) = v LDA xc (F e (n(r)) × n(r)). The GGAs, for example, are an attempt to characterize the environment by the local gradient of the density (see, e.g., Consistently with the fact that the QMC density for NaCl is less noisy than in the case of silicon, the map for NaCl in Fig. Similarly, points 3 and 4 on the chlorine atom explain the extra branch at lower density. These results show that the potential-density relation presented as maps such as the one in Figs. It is most interesting to look at KS observables other than the density, in particular, KS eigenvalues: even though, as discussed above, these do not by themselves have direct physical meaning in an exact sense, they can still be seen as an approximation to the physical quantities With the fact in mind that errors of the potential can be much larger than errors of the density, the quality of the gap resulting from inversion has to be checked separately. To this end, we show in Fig. Results for the converged band gaps of silicon and NaCl are shown in Table There is another interesting aspect to this study of the band gap: while in certain cases (in particular, the noisy LDA) the potential can develop huge spikes during the iterations, the gap, similarly to the density, remains close to the reference value. This means that very different xc potentials can yield not only very similar densities, but also very similar KS observables more in general. Fig. In conclusion, we have shown that a simple algorithm allows one to obtain the Kohn-Sham xc potential for periodic semiconductors and insulators, given their ground state density. The precision that can be obtained is limited by the quality of the input data. Here, we use densities taken from AFQMC calculations, and the limiting factor is the stochastic noise. Nevertheless, meaningful results are obtained, with an error bar smaller than the difference between the resulting potentials and their LDA PBE, or TBmBJ counterparts, which allows us to safely draw conclusions. In particular, for the materials studied here, namely bulk silicon and NaCl, the xc potential functional of the density everywhere can be represented in terms of two or three functions of the local density, each of which is determined by a specific environment. These environments appear to be characterized by the local gradient of the density or, even more clearly, by the local kinetic energy density. The function that represents most of the data points is close to the LDA, but with slight material-dependent deviations. PBE also predicts deviations and the existence of the additional functions, although it does not always describe them well. On the other hand, our results clearly illustrate that very different potentials may lead to very similar densities, and more generally, to very similar KS observables. In particular, the KS band gap converges rapidly with the number of iterations of the inversion process, while the xc potential still undergoes violent modifications. More work is needed to discern important features of the xc potential from those that do not influence KS observables; sum rules and other exact constraints may be helpful for this one, 100 × max r 1 -n LDA,i (r)/n LDA (r) , is shown as a function of the iteration number i. It decreases smoothly and very fast. The same is true for the Mean Absolute (over the unit cell) Percentage Error (MeAPE), given in the inset. In Fig. The upper panel gives 100 × n LDA,i (r)/n LDA (r) -1 , the Local Percentage Difference (LPD) along a path through the unit cell (the same as in Ref. To conclude on the reliability of the results, we also have to take into account the fact that the QMC results have statistical errors. In order to elucidate the influence of the QMC stochastic noise on the results, we have taken the LDA density n(r) and added point-wise Gaussian noise, which is obtained from a normal distribution with mean zero and standard deviation given by the characteristic AFQMC statistical error bar scaled by n(r). To appreciate what this means, the yellow curve in the upper panel gives the relative difference of the noisy LDA density with respect to the clean one. Fig. The observations concerning the behavior of the noisy LDA are strictly analogous to our QMC-based results, as we will also discuss in the next section. This gives strong evidence for the fact that the inversion problem of the QMC data after a certain number of iterations is indeed due to the stochastic noise of the QMC. Moreover, it suggests that a sufficiently reliable xc potential is obtained by taking the result in the range where a stable and relatively smooth potential is obtained, and before the MeAPE on the density stops to decrease. In the present case, this confirms the choice i = 20, for which the QMC xc potential is given in Fig. Of course, one could think to continue the iterations, since Fig. Visibly, the algorithm does not succeed in improving the result any further and introduces unexpected features when trying to do so. Difficulties with the inversion procedure have also been reported for finite systems, and they have been attributed to the finite basis set which may introduce an inconsistency between density and external potential Finally, it is important to note that the results of the inversion do not depend on the starting point. This is true both for the shape and for the average value of the starting potential. The latter is important for the convergence behavior: Fig. FIG. 3. LPD of self-consistent LDA nLDA (orange), PBE nPBE (green) and TBmBJ (light blue) densities with respect to nQMC. The grey area is the stochastic error bar of the QMC density. (Top panel) Silicon. (Bottom panel) NaCl.