I present a simple view of nonlinear optical phenomena as being determined mostly by the length of interaction time between photons and matter. This may explain why in the last decades the progress in developing better nonlinear materials has been not as rapid as wished. A few tentative routes towards possible improvements in the efficiency of nonlinear optical phenomena are suggested. The field of Nonlinear Optics as we know it, was born shortly after the first demonstrations of lasers in early 1960's • nonlinear polymers • semiconductor quantum wells • quantum dots • nanotubes • nonlinear photonic crystals • nonlinear plasmonics • slow light • electro-magnetically induced transparency • nonlinear metamaterials (both metallic and dielectric) • metasurfaces • graphene • other two-dimensional materials such as transition metal dichalcogenides • topological photonics and the list may go on. With a few notable exceptions (photonic crystal Before continuing, I want to emphasize that this discourse is neither a comprehensive review nor a tutorial. Also, it is not an attempt to divine the future of all-optical processing and other mind-catching applications as, sadly, I do not belong to the category of "visionary" scholars who can foresee what future portends. While the visionary scientist's role is alike that of an architect conceiving inspiring designs of magnificent edifices, I see my role as that of a structural engineer coldly assessing whether the conceived design will stand on its own and the roof will not leak at first rain. So, what follows is nothing but my own, and very subjective at that, opinion formed by more than four decades of experience, opinion with which many readers may disagree. Some of the analysis presented here is known, so a better-informed reader may skip it, but a significant part is original and may be useful to the reader, a novice, or an old hand alike. Also, it is worth mentioning that here I focus exclusively on nonlinearities associated with the real part of the refractive index (i.e., switching, modulation and frequency conversion), because it is these phenomena that tend to arouse imagination and portend alloptical networks in which the optical signals shuffle smoothly between the optical components while changing wavelengths and modulation formats with lightning speed, and performing these feats with not a single wire attached. Thus, important, even though less futuristic and more developed areas of saturable absorption The established metric for the nonlinear properties is nonlinear susceptibility ( ) n χ , and in case of third order nonlinearity nonlinear index 2 n closely related to (3) χ . Essentially, either one of these measures refers to the permittivity change imposed by unit electric field ( (2) E χ ) or square of it ( (3) 2 ). If modulation of index is time dependent, this modulation results in frequency conversion. However, the index modulation per se means very little unless it is accomplished over sufficient length. Indeed, the efficiency of frequency conversion increases as . Thus achieving 100% conversion efficiency in sum or difference frequency generation, or in four-wave mixing, just as achieving 100% switching in nonlinear interferometer or coupler requires nonlinear phase shift on the order of at least π (or / 2 π for push-pull arrangement) as shown schematically in Fig. Intuitive understanding of why nonlinear phenomena are so weak. Having settled the issue of boosting nonlinear susceptibility using the magic of division by zero, let us turn attention to the issue of why the nonlinearity is, well, so weak? On the most fundamental level the answer is simple: photons happen to be bosons that carry no charge and are not subject to Pauli exclusion principle, so they do not interact with each other directly, but only via intermediary short-lived states of the matter (typically electrons and holes). One can also frame this answer in a different way, that that photons in the medium are no longer pure photons, but polaritons -coupled field-matter excitations (quasi-particles) that do interact with each other albeit very weakly. The fact that the interactions are so weak is the main reason why photons are just about perfect for unimpeded longdistance transmission of information, but, at the same time it makes manipulation of information with photons a daunting task, in confirmation of the universal principle of unavailability of free lunch. One way to quantify the weakness of nonlinear interactions is to consider a typical anharmonic potential as shown in Fig. In this most primitive model, polarizability as well as the linear susceptibility (1) 1 χ ε = -depend on the curvature of the potential and the curvature changes substantially (factor of ~2) when the energy of electron is commensurate with 0 U . To achieve roughly 100% change in susceptibility either each valence electron must acquire energy commensurate with 0 U ,or, one can also change curvature by factor of ~2 by distorting the lattice so that 0 U is changed by that factor. Either way, one can then make a following conjecture -if the energy density stored (not necessarily absorbed!) in the material is roughly where N is the density of valence electrons, then the electronic part of susceptibility (1) 1 χ ε = -changes by roughly 100% and it follows that change of index can be roughly estimated as The question of what value of energy should be taken as 0 U does not have an unambiguous answer, but it should be noted that in the most simple potential well model the depth 0 U is commensurate with the split between the lowest and the first excited statse -in semiconductors and dielectrics this split corresponds to the "mean" splitting of valence and conduction band and commonly referred to as Penn gap Material Material parameters Value of u0 (J/cm 3 ) Thermal 2 nd order nonlinear which is more or less similar in every nonlinear material (for the same wavelength range), but the power density can be changed by orders of magnitude by changing the "energy storage" time, τ . This time can be the lifetime of electron on a given energy level or band, thermal diffusion time, photon lifetime in the resonator, or photon propagation time among many others. As we shall see, engineering the storage or interaction time τ and accepting (almost inevitable) bandwidth limitation is what all the conceivable pathways to higher nonlinearity amount to in the end. Before continuing with impact of interaction time, let us estimate the scale of nonlinear susceptibility the same model of Fig. . For a typical solid state medium linear susceptibility (1) 1 χ ε = -is on the order of 2-20 with lower values and corresponding to materials transparent all the way into UV and higher one to the materials transparent only in the IR range. Note that this expression assumes that the entire lattice participates in optical process -if one is looking for the response of a material due to dopant then nonlinear susceptibility gets scaled down by the fraction of "active" entities. Since the order of magnitude of 0 E is between 10 10 and 10 11 V/m and permittivity ranges between 2 and 20, typical value of (3) χ is . Note that typically material with wide bandgap, transparent throughout visible and near UV range are stronger bound, i.e., the energy 0 U in them is higher and the bond length is shorter, hence the nonlinear index in them is lower than in narrower bandgap materials, that are transparent only in IR region. Therefore, when comparing different nonlinear materials, it is important to compare them in the same spectral region. When doing that, one, non-surprisingly discovers that for materials with comparable transparency ranges the off-resonant (i.e., not associated with absorption) nonlinear indices are also comparable with not much room left for engineering "giant" nonlinearities. For the second (and other even) order nonlinearity the situation is more complex as lack of inversion symmetry is required and different materials have vastly different (2) χ s -hence there still exists opportunity to engineer higher (2) χ s, however, the optimization is still bounded by hard limit of , once again in the absence of resonance. Note that this limit is achieved in near IR region (III-V semiconductors) Overall, the simple picture presented here indicates that no dramatic enhancement of off-resonant nonlinearity is possible unless one can "engineer" a potential that is not as smooth as in Fig. ( ; , , ) We shall now turn from the classical model for nonlinearity to the quantum one and invoke the language of Feynman diagrams ω ω ω = + and so on. (The order of absorption and emission processes can be permuted, and then summation over all possible permutations, or pathways as they are called, must be made, but this important fact is not pertinent to the qualitative discussion here). As an example, consider the cross-phase modulation process, schematically shown in Fig. Now, the probability of m-th step when electron makes transition from energy level E m to the level Now, the interaction rate m Ω with which the electrons make transition from one level to the next one depends on just one material parameter , 1 m m+ d whose maximum value is limited, essentially by the size of the bond, i.e. the aforementioned a (of the order of 1-3Å). One can also apply the oscillator sum rule (assuming that most of the strength is associated with a transition at frequency ≤ × . And this leaves but one parameter that can be changed within a very wide range, spanning orders of magnitude -the effective interaction time τ at each step. One can think of the importance of interaction time using an analogy of a climber on the wall in a gym whose odds of successful climb and descend look better if he or she takes a rest at each step. Let is us now see how it plays out for a typical example of nonlinear phase modulation, and what trade-offs are involved in the process of enhancing nonlinearity via increase in the interaction time. So, it appears that the obvious way to enhance nonlinearity is to increase the interaction time by reducing the detuning ω ∆ , i.e., by taking advantage of the intrinsic resonance of the matter as for instant in atomic vapors , where α is absorption coefficient and I is power density of propagating light (it can be the power of the signal for the self-phase modulation case, or the power of control light 2 I for the crossphase modulation case of Fig. Let us now find the phase shift imposed by the "fast" nonlinearity, i.e. far away from resonance, where 0 377 η = Ω is vacuum impedance and L is the propagation length, which, in the absence of absorption can be arbitrarily long. The "fast" nonlinearity occurs on a time scale of 1/ ω ∆ i.e., far from resonance on sub-femtosecond scale, and, for all practical reasons can be considered nearly "instant". We can now establish a connection between "fast" and "slow" phase shifts. Since linear susceptibility away from the resonance can be estimated as (1) The ratio of nonlinear phase shift achieved by fast and slow mechanisms is then where is the transit(propagation) time. Therefore, no matter whether the nonlinearity is instant or "slow" the nonlinear index change can always be written as where the effective interaction time eff τ is either a propagation time in case of fast ("instant") nonlinearity or some actual intrinsic relaxation time in case of "slow" nonlinearity. The switching intensity that provides the required / 2 π -shift is then The key feature of ( with lower numbers corresponding to mid-IR and higher numbers to visible-UV. Here we need to emphasize that while for "slow" nonlinearity (8) can be interpreted as switching energy (per unit area), no such connection can be made for fast nonlinearity in traveling wave geometry where the switching energy would be simply determined by the bit length When it comes to enhancement of nonlinearity via increase of interaction time, one may distinguish between intrinsic and extrinsic methods. For "fast" nonlinearity the intrinsic enhancement consists of using the resonances inside the material. As we have already discussed, approaching resonance, and still staying away from absorption requires very narrow resonances, attainable in such media as atomic vapors, but not in condensed matter. Even using excitonic resonances At the same time, in slow nonlinearity engineering the characteristic relaxation time τ makes perfect sense. When the required switching time is sw t , it makes sense to keep τ equal to a fraction of it, say ~0.2 0.5 sw t τ and not to any shorter, as shortening will only reduce the nonlinearity. With today's requirements of ~10 sw t ps (for 100GBps communications) and prospectively going to ~1 sw t ps , most of the nonlinearities based on interband transitions are too slow, although one may consider low temperature grown materials that are defect rich in which recombination times are reduced to within a picoseconds range. On the other hand, the intraband relaxation in most materials occurs on the scale of 100's of femtoseconds. For example, hot carriers in transparent conductive oxides (TCO's. A different (and complementary) approach to interaction time enhancement is doing it externally. The most straightforward method is using the so-called "slow light effect" What is important to mention is that recent years have seen multiple sophisticated resonant schemes designed to achieve "giant enhanced nonlinearity". One can mention Fano resonances , and Q factor in most of the sophisticated schemes does not exceed Q of a simple micro resonator Before turning to conclusions, it is instructive to emphasize the importance of interaction time using the example of "cascaded" nonlinearity, i.e., using the second order processes sequentially, rather than third order process In this (originally intended to be short) discourse I have attempted to emphasize the role of what can be broadly defined as an interaction time in the nonlinear optics. Since photons do not interact with each other directly but only via excitation of matter (real or virtual) and the strengths of this interaction, depends only on value of the Hamiltonian determining the interaction and the lifetime of the excitation (real or virtual) referred here as interaction time. The strongest photon-matter interaction is the dipole transition, and its maximum value is limited by what is typically a bond length, at most a couple of Angstroms. That leaves only the interaction time as a flexible parameter capable of enhancing effective nonlinearity. This enhancement can be achieved intrinsically, typically by operating in the absorption region and exciting real carriers with characteristics lifetimes that can vary by orders of magnitude. The inevitable tradeoff then reduces the switching speed, but even though the nonlinearity is "slow" it can be sufficiently fast for a given application. TCO materials capable of operating at less 1ps is a prime example of such nonlinearity. It is far less feasible to intrinsically enhance interaction time for the so-called "ultra-fast" nonlinearities operating away from absorption, i.e., with only virtual carriers being excited, mostly because in practical nonlinear medium the resonances are very broad as individual energy levels broaden into the bands. The broadening is inevitable, because the photon-matter interactions are weak, and many atoms(ions) are required to achieve appreciable effect without absorption. This last fact also causes me to be a bit skeptical about the prospects of widely lauded low-dimensional materials as well as topological materials -a few states in a single atomic layer or in the vicinity of a special point in Brillouin zone may have extraordinary nonlinear properties, but since there are only a few of them, the overall yield y of nonlinear process (phase shift) remains pitifully low. With both slow and especially with ultrafast nonlinearities, it is the extrinsic enhancement of interaction time that is bound to yield the best results. The enhancement can be achieved in both propagating (travelling wave) and localized geometry. The most obvious way to achieve enhancement is by simply using long propagation lengths as in fibers, where, despite all the hype surrounding other methods, the best results for all-optical switching, modulation, and frequency conversion have been achieved to date. To reduce the actual physical length while keeping interaction time long one may revert to various photonic structures low group velocity ("slow light"), a good example being photonic crystal waveguides I have also shown that cascaded second order nonlinearity may achieve the same goals as third order nonlinearity with significant enhancement due to longer interaction time. But implementation of cascading requires phase-matching and thus significantly complicates the effort. In the end one always should be able to judiciously choose which ("slow" or "fast") nonlinearity to use and how to enhance it based on demand of each concrete application, for example whether the emphasis should be placed on speed, size, or low loss. As far as new entrants into the rather stale menu of practical nonlinear materials are concerned, there is plenty of room for development of materials that have very desirable properties of high damage threshold, low insertion loss, low cost, ability to be integrated on Si platform, and many others. But it is my view that fundamental laws of physics would not allow enhancements of efficiencies (or reducing power requirements) for a given wavelength and required speed by orders of magnitude, notwithstanding all the anticipated future claims of "giant nonlinearities" that will sure continue to appear with admirable regularity. Not to sound too dire, perhaps one way to look at the enhancement of strength rather than interaction time is to investigate exploiting phase transitions in which case the effective potential (Fig. To summarize, the goal of this write-up has been to provide a view from a less familiar angle at the state of developments in nonlinear optics and point out the key factors that limit the efficiency of nonlinear optical phenomena and prevent nonlinear optics from entering new applications, especially in all optical data processing. It is my hope that this goal has been to a certain degree realized, and that the universal language of "interaction time engineering" introduced here will be used to enhance and customize nonlinear phenomena in the future. On whether all optical switching and processing based on nonlinear optics will ever materialize I will withhold my opinion as many unexpected discoveries may occur and new demands may arise in not-so-distant future. constant, n2 -nonlinear refractive index, I-optical power density, c-speed of light, χ