In van der Waals heterostructures, the relative alignment of bands between layers, and the resulting band hybridisation, are key factors in determining a range of electronic properties. This work examines these effects for heterostructures of transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) and hexagonal boron nitride (hBN), an ubiquitous combination given the role of hBN as an encapsulating material. By comparing results of density functional calculations with experimental angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) results, we explore the hybridisation between the valence states of the TMD and hBN layers, and show that it introduces avoided crossings between the TMD and hBN bands, with umklapp processes opening 'ghost' avoided crossings in individual bands. Comparison between DFT and ARPES spectra for the MoSe2/hBN heterostructure shows that the valence bands of MoSe2 and hBN are significantly further separated in energy in experiment as compared to DFT. We then show that a novel scissor operator can be applied to the hBN valence states in the DFT calculations, to correct the band alignment and enable quantitative comparison to ARPES, explaining avoided crossings and other features of band visibility in the ARPES spectra. Ultrathin films of layered transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) form an important class of twodimensional (2D) material. They have provided important results both in studies of fundamental physical behavior and in the development of optoelectronic and spintronic technological applications Hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) frequently plays a crucial role in the fabrication and function of heterostructures and devices based on TMDs. It is used as a dielectric barrier when gating a system, as a substrate, and as an encapsulator which is particularly important when a high-quality device is to be protected from atmospheric degradation In this work, we investigate the latter assumption above using electronic structure simulations. Comparison of band alignments between TMDs and graphene Using linear-scaling density functional theory (LS-DFT), we are able to consider large-scale 2D material heterostructures with minimal strain. Furthermore, unfolding of energy bands back onto the primitive TMD and hBN unit cells allows direct comparison with spectral functions obtained experimentally using angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) techniques. The prediction of these LS-DFT calculations is that hybridisation between the bands of hBN and those of the TMD gives substantial avoided crossings in the unfolded spectral functions of the heterostructures, with 'ghost' avoided crossings appearing in individual band spectra due to umklapp processes, similar to those previously observed in InSe/graphene heterostructures However, band alignments between materials obtained from theory, even using advanced techniques, are often quite different from those found experimentally, such as using ARPES. They can change further upon creation of heterostructures, leading to very different conclusions about suitability for encapsulation. To obtain a quanti-tative picture of the true band alignment from experiment, we analyze ARPES data for MoSe 2 /hBN heterostructures. These show the band edges to be further separated in reality compared with the predictions of DFT. We therefore apply a scissor operator to the hBN valence states of the MoSe 2 /hBN heterostructure to move them down in energy and correct the alignment of the MoSe 2 and hBN valence bands. The resulting unfolded linear-scaling DFT spectra are then much more consistent with the ARPES results, with the relative positions of the MoSe 2 and hBN bands being in good agreement. We are then able to show that avoided crossings in the DFT bandstructure correspond to regions where the ARPES bands decrease significantly in visibility, suggesting a means to identify hybridised bands in heterostructures, even in the absense of a clearly-visible anticrossing in the ARPES results. This article is structured as follows: In Section II we set out the first-principles methods and supercell details for the theoretical calculations of heterostructure properties in this work. In Section III the results of these calculations are presented, including charge-transfer induced potential drops across TMD/hBN heterostructures, and unfolded spectral functions showing avoided crossings in the band structure. In Section IV A we show ARPES data for heterostructures of MoSe 2 and hBN, and we discuss the application of a scissor operator to correct the band alignment. Finally, we apply the scissor-operator correction to other TMD/hBN pairings, informed by experimental band alignments of TMD/TMD heterostructures, to predict the band crossings that can be observed in such systems. We conclude our findings in Section V. We utilise two complementary approaches to DFT: for smaller structures and simulation cell optimisation we use traditional plane-wave DFT calculations, whereas for large-scale heterostructures we utilise linear-scaling DFT Since the properties of thin films of TMDs are sensitive to strain, the crystal structure parameters of the constituent TMD and hBN monolayers are taken from experiment To determine the interlayer distance between the TMD and hBN layers, we used the plane-wave based VASP code Supercells for interlayer distance optimisation were generated using the code Supercell-core software Having fixed the monolayer structures and interlayer distances as set out above, we proceed to generate larger heterostructure supercells with very low strain and specific choices of relative twist. The resulting sizes necessitate calculations using the linear-scaling ONETEP code where K αβ is the density kernel, a generalisation of occupancy numbers to a nonorthogonal representation. The NGWFs are kept strictly local with a chosen spherical cutoff radius centered on their parent atom. The ground state Kohn-Sham energy can be expressed as the minimum of a functional of the NGWFs and the density kernel, expressed as E[{φ α }, {K αβ }]. The NGWFs also provide a useful localised representation for the construction of projectors to uniquely identify the states associated with each layer of a heterobilayer. This is utilised both in spectral function unfolding and in the application of the scissor operator to shift states associated with one of the subsystems. For the ONETEP calculations in this work we use a psinc-grid energy cutoff of 800 eV, a cutoff radius of 12a 0 for the NGWFs, with 13 NGWFs on W and Mo atoms, 4 on S and Se atoms and 5 on B and N atoms. No truncation is applied to the density kernel. Repeated images of the slab are placed 60 Å apart, with a cutoff applied to the Coulomb interaction in the out-ofplane direction to suppress any interaction between the repeated slabs To correct band alignments in light of ARPES results in Sec. IV, we find it necessary to apply a layer-dependent scissor operator to the Kohn-Sham states where N v is the number of occupied orbitals in the valence band, and σ v and σ c are shifts of the valence and conduction bands respectively, and |ψ ik are the Kohn-Sham eigenstates, here constituting sets of projectors which act to select an energy range. It is often the case for a heterostructure that the two subsystems (i.e. layers) have unphysical offsets in their DFT bandstructure when compared to experiment. This is well-known to be the direct result of limitations of the predictive power of approximate exchange-correlation functionals, particularly in representing energy gaps, and the different extent to which such errors affect different materials. In modelling heterogeneous systems, then, we may need to be able to make a different adjustment to each subsystem, or in the simplest case, to adjust the energy alignment of one layer with respect to another. In this case it is necessary to individually adjust the subspaces associated with each of two layers, where L = 1, 2 labels the layers, and P L v and P L c are projectors for the valence and conduction states respectively of layer L. In many forms of DFT it is not straightforward to separate out these states, since the real space volume in which they exist overlaps significantly in the region between the layers. Fortunately, as long as the degree of hybridisation is not extreme, then for a localised basis, suitable projectors may be constructed using the same basis functions from which we construct the Kohn-Sham eigenstates. In particular, for an LS-DFT calculation, we can use the set of support functions (NGWFs, in ONETEP) which are used in the construction of the density matrix. Because NGWFs are atom-centered, a layer index is automatically associated with each function corresponding to the layer of the atom. The projectors are thus: and where |φ α are the non-orthogonal generalised Wannier functions, the support functions from which the density matrix is constructed in ONETEP, K αβ and S αβ are the valence density kernel and the inverse overlap matrix in the NGWF representation, and K αβ L and S αβ L are the components of those corresponding to NGWFs localised on the atoms of layer L. Summation over repeated Greek indices is implied. This approach works well in systems where the manifold associated with the two layers are suitably disjoint, so that states in one layer are not to any significant degree built out of orbitals from the other. In Table We first investigate the magnitude of interlayer charge transfer by examining the electrostatic potential in the heterostructure. In Fig. The result of this charge transfer is a shift of the band energies going from isolated monolayers to the heterostructure. In Fig. The bands in Fig. The orbital decompositions and symmetries of the wavefunctions in the various conduction and valence band valleys of the monolayer TMDs is such that stronger interlayer hybridisation occurs between states near the valence band Γ-point, and the conduction band Q-point, than at the K-point. This interlayer hybridisation pushes Γ-point hole states and Q-point electron states lower in energy with increasing number of layers in few-layer TMDs, and is a key contributor to the direct-to-indrect bandgap transition observed on going from the monolayer to thicker films in the TMDs To understand whether interlayer hybridisation, here between a TMD monolayer and hBN, would affect the energy splitting between the TMD valleys, we show in Table Given the challenges inherent in the theoretical modelling of 2D material heterostructures discussed above, we present in this section results from ARPES experiments on MoSe 2 /hBN and WSe 2 /hBN heterostructures, in order to extend our understanding of band alignments and resulting interlayer hybridisation at TMD/hBN interfaces. The samples were fabricated by standard mechanical exfoliation and polycarbonate-film-based dry transfer μARPES spectra from a MoSe 2 /hBN heterostructure are shown in Fig. Since the positions of avoided crossings between bands in reciprocal space, and those of their 'ghost' counterparts, depend on the twist angle between the layers In Table Ideally, the incorrect valence band offset between MoSe 2 and hBN in the DFT results would be ameliorated by utilising a higher level of theory than the semilocal DFT employed here. However, for the largescale models under investigation here, methods based on the GW approximation would be highly computationally expensive The positions of the 'ghost' crossings are marked in panels a and b of Fig. where k a.c. hBN/MoSe2 and G hBN/MoSe2 are the k-space positions of the 'ghost' avoided crossings and reciprocal lattice vectors of MoSe 2 /hBN, respectively, and R rotates the position of the hBN avoided crossing by 120 • about K hBN . The hybridisation resulting in the avoided crossings discussed here is substantial, opening gaps ∼ 200 meV. This arises due to the favourable orbital character of the bands involved at the crossings, with strong p z contributions from both MoSe 2 and hBN In Fig. The behaviour seen in the MoSe 2 /hBN pair is repeated in a similar manner in Fig. In this work we have highlighted several features which must be taken into account in order to obtain an accurate knowledge of band alignment and the effects of hybridisation in 2D material heterostructures. These include the need for a large simulation supercell, to minimise strain which would otherwise significantly modify bandstructures. The large sizes required are made feasible here through the use of linear-scaling DFT. Charge transfer between the layers of the heterostructure will modify the band alignment of the materials, and this effect may be overestimated at DFT level, since the quasiparticle band gaps are underestimated. Finally, an accurate description of the band alignments themselves is necessary. Estimates obtained from DFT will suffer from band-gap underestimation, while GW calculations will be extremely computationally expensive at the supercell sizes needed to minimise strain, and may in some cases overestimate the band misalignment. From the experimental perspective it is possible to visualise the valence band spectra of heterostructures using ARPES, and we take advantage of this approach to correct our DFT band energies using a scissor operator with parameters estimated from the alignment of MoSe 2 bands with hBN in ARPES results. Care must be taken in using ARPES for this, as the resolution of spectra is reduced away from band edges due to lifetime effects, and quasiparticle band energies can be affected by doping In conclusion, we have combined plane-wave and linear-scaling DFT with μARPES experiments to examine and understand the band alignment and interlayer hybridisation in TMD/hBN heterostructures. We find that the energy differences between the valence bands of hBN and the TMDs allow for hybridisation between them, with avoided crossings appearing in unfolded DFT spectra as a result. 'Ghost' avoided crossings appear in the spectra of the constituent layers away from the bands of the other material due to umklapp scattering where the point is a reciprocal lattice vector away from a band crossing The observation of these anticrossings in a 2D material system other than the InSe/graphene heterobilayer studied previously FIG. 