Accurate theoretical prediction of the band offsets at interfaces of semiconductor heterostructures can often be quite challenging. Although density functional theory has been reasonably successful to carry out such calculations and efficient and accurate semilocal functionals are desirable to reduce the computational cost. In general, the semilocal functionals based on the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) significantly underestimate the bulk band gaps. This, in turn, results in inaccurate estimates of the band offsets at the heterointerfaces. In this paper, we investigate the performance of several advanced meta-GGA functionals in the computational prediction of band offsets at semiconductor heterojunctions. In particular, we investigate the performance of r 2 SCAN (revised strongly-constrained and appropriately-normed functional), rMGGAC (revised semilocal functional based on cuspless hydrogen model and Pauli kinetic energy density functional), mTASK (modified Aschebrock and Kümmel meta-GGA functional), and LMBJ (local modified Becke-Johnson) exchange-correlation functionals. Our results strongly suggest that these meta-GGA functionals for supercell calculations perform quite well, especially, when compared to computationally more demanding GW calculations. We also present band offsets calculated using ionization potentials and electron affinities, as well as band alignment via the branch point energies. Overall, our study shows that the aforementioned meta-GGA functionals can be used within the DFT framework to estimate the band offsets in semiconductor heterostructures with predictive accuracy. Over the past three decades, semiconductor heterostructure engineering has greatly influenced the development of nanoelectronic, optoelectronic, and other multifunctional devices One of the most important parameters in heterostructures is the band offset or band alignment at the interface. The band offset critically controls the out-of-plane electrical transport and capacitance behavior in heterostructure based devices. Naturally, the control and tunability of band offsets are highly desirable since it renders the control of the overall device performance and functionality In fact, motivated by those improved reliabilities for band gaps, in this paper we use meta-GGA functionals to study the band offsets at 14 semiconductor heterojunctions composed of Zincblende and diamond structures with (110) interfaces. We assess the performance of the functionals by considering both homovalent (e.g. GaAs/AlAs and GaP/AlP) and heterovalent heterojunctions (e.g., Ge/GaAs, Si/GaP, Ge/AlAs, ZnSe/GaAs, and Ge/ZnSe). We calculate the band offsets using (i) the ionization potential (IP) 39 , (ii) the branch point energy (BPE), or charge neutrality level (CNL) At the meta-GGA level of approximation, we mainly focus on the r 2 SCAN 62 (revised strongly-constrained and appropriately-normed (SCAN) This paper is organized as follows. In sec. II, we briefly present the meta-GGA functionals considered in this study. In section III, we discuss all results. The conclusions are presented in Sec. IV. Here, we briefly discuss the exchange-correlation (XC) functionals considered this study, starting from the standard GGA-PBE functional In addition to the XC approximations listed above, which are based on an energy functional, we will also consider the potential-only LMBJ In this paper, we calculate the band offsets using three different schemes, namely: (i) Ionization potential (IP) based, (ii) Branch-point energy (BPE) based, and (iii) Average potential (APM) based. The IP and BPE based methods involve calculation of bulk and surface components only. On the other hand, the APM requires calculation for entire superlattice. Therefore, the APM or average potential based calculations are typically the most expensive, followed by the IP-based and BPE-based ones. One may also note that the interface contribution to band offsets may only be estimated using average potential method as discussed later. In the following we briefly discuss these methods. We first define the ionization potential (IP), electron affinity (EA) and their connection with the band alignments of the heterostructure. For solids, the IPs are defined as the difference between the vacuum level of the electrostatic potential and the valance band maximum (VBM), where Vac,s -Ref,s is calculated for the surface supercell constructed in the ( It should be noted that this method neglects the effects occurring during the actual formation of the interface, such as charge transfer, interface dipole, or atomic relaxations. Still, it can be applied to interfaces of semiconductors with similar lattice constants where such effects are expected to be weak and can thus be neglected. Finally, we did not calculate the IPs and EAs using the LMBJ potential, since some of us recently demonstrated in Ref. 85 that the band edges of semiconductors are predicted to be located too high with respect to the vacuum level by the LMBJ potential. In the context of band alignment, another important quantity that serves as an energy reference level is the branch point energy (BPE) where N k is the number of k points in the Brillouin zone, v i (k) and c j (k) denote the i th highest VB and j th lowest CB at wave vector k, respectively. The sum over i and j runs over N CB lowest CBs and N VB highest of VBs. In Ref. 39, for the zincblende and diamond phases N VB = 2 and N CB = 1 was considered. Here, we include spin-orbit coupling in bulk calculations and we consider a (110) oriented bulk unit cell with four atoms. Therefore, we chose N VB = 8 and N CB = 4. Finally, given the IP and BPE of two materials A and B, the VBO of the A/B heterojunction is calculated using the linear model where S is the dimensionless pinning factor To estimate the band offsets, we also consider the average potential method (APM). The band offset in this case is determined using the lineup of the local electrostatic potential in the supercell including the interface and the position of the VBM in bulk calculations of the materials A and B forming the interface. We calculate the VBO as where VBM,b is the VBM position and Ref,b the reference potential (unit cell average) of bulk material A/B. ∆V is the difference of the macroscopic averages of the electrostatic potential in the bulk-like regions of the A and B parts of the supercell. To obtain the average potential, we first calculate the in-plane average of the local potential and then obtain the macroscopic average from its Gaussian average. The macroscopic average is almost constant in the two bulk-like regions of the supercell. This method is different from the other methods discussed above in that it takes into account the atomic and electronic structure of the interface which may critically influence the band offset. It should be further noted that to evaluate band offsets from Eq. ( From the accuracy point of view, the average potential method (APM) can be considered the "state-of-art" of band offset calculations, since it includes the effects of the interface atomic structure, such as the interface dipole. These are neglected in the BPE-and IP-based methods. Nevertheless, for lattice-matched heterostructures with no significant interface reconstructions, the latter two methods can yield reasonable results. For lattice mismatched systems, the APM method should be chosen. For benchmark calculations of band offsets, we consider in total 14 heterostructure interfaces between zincblende (zb) (AlAs, AlSb, CdTe, InSb, GaAs, GaP, ZnSe, and ZnTe) and diamond (Si and Ge) structures. We consider nonpolar (001) surfaces and interfaces, including the Si and Ge diamond structures. This set is chosen so that there is minimal strain at the interfaces We perform DFT calculations using the plane-wave code Vienna Ab-initio Simulation Package (VASP) For all the considered methods, bulk, and interface calculations are carried out using the r 2 SCANoptimized geometries and ionic positions. Note that the r 2 SCAN geometries are very accurate for bulk crystals, being much closer to experimental values than PBE ones For the construction of the heterostructure supercell, we follow the method of Refs. 39 and 76. For the in-plane lattice parameter we take the average value of the bulk lattice parameters (r 2 SCAN-optimized) of the two materials forming the (110) interface. After that, the out-ofplane lattice parameter and internal coordinates of the heterostructure are allowed to relax at the fixed in-plane parameters. This means that the bulk-like regions in the A and B parts of the supercell do not agree with the cubic bulk structures of materials A and B. Therefore, to evaluate Eq. ( Spin-orbit coupling is considered in the bulk calculations only since its inclusion in surface and interface calculations has almost no influence on the electrostatic potential. In Figs. In addition, the improved VBM positions from rMG-GAC are also very much evident from Fig. Here, we finally discuss the valence band offsets (VBO) obtained by the three methods: IP-based, BPE-based, average potential based. The VBOs obtained from the IPs and BPEs using different meta-GGA semilocal XC functionals for chosen 14 pairs of semiconductors with small lattice mismatch are reported in Table The first and most remarkable finding is the fact that the BPE method yields overall the best results, despite being the numerically cheapest one. This is partially attributed to the choice of semiconductors that have quite similar structures and only a small lattice mismatch. In such situations, the quality of the description of the bulk electronic structure in the vicinity of the VBM and CBM becomes important. It is thus not surprising that LMBJ yields the best result here (mean absolute percentage error (MAPE) of 11%), since the original MBJ was shown to predict the band gaps with high accuracy We also obtain fairly good results from the APM for all the tested meta-GGAs r 2 SCAN, rMGGAC, mTASK, and LMBJ, with MAPE slightly above 20%, performing better than PBE-APM (MAPE of 30%). It should be noted that in presence of larger lattice mismatch, interface reconstructions, and other inhomogeneities, the APM is expected to be the most accurate since it is the only one that takes into account the details of the interface. Finally, the worst results overall are obtained using the IP-based method. Only for mTASK, the MAPE is moderate (26 %). r 2 SCAN yields VBOs with the same accuracy as PBE (MAPE of ∼35%). Interestingly, we obtained the worst result for rMGGAC with the IP-based method (MAPE of 64 %), even though the individual IPs were calculated with the best accuracy with this functional. The systematic underestimation of the IPs in the case of PBE and r 2 SCAN works favorably here when compared with rMGGAC. To further quantify the quality of the chosen meta-GGA functionals for the calculation of VBOs, we plot the statistical quantities MAPE, root mean square error (RMSE), mean absolute error (MAE), standard deviation (σ) in Fig. Roughly from the radar plots, it can be understood that the smaller the area, the better the performance of the method. This analysis further confirms our overall results. The IP-based method is the worst in all cases. On the other hand, the BPE-based method and the APM performs fairly similarly. Moreover, r 2 SCAN, rMGGAC, mTASK, and LMBJ all outperform PBE. However, it should be kept in mind that we only studied rather ideal interfaces of similar semiconductors with VBM and CBM with mainly s-and p-character. Larger deviations of these two methods for heterostructures involving highly localized d-electrons close to the Fermi energy and interfaces with larger lattice mismatch are possible. In particular, it is known that MBJ and LMBJ are sometimes not very accurate for the band gap of non-magnetic systems with d-electrons (e.g., Cu 2 O Since accurate GW calculations for band offsets using the APM and sometimes even with the IP-and BPEbased methods might be too expensive, as an alternative, we show that modern meta-GGA functionals may be the choice for the calculation of band offsets in heterostructure systems. In summary, we have shown that the performance of the meta-GGA functionals is quite promising and reliable in calculating the band offsets. Overall analysis shows that PBE, r 2 SCAN, and mTASK provide too high VBM positions (underestimates IPs), while mostly agreeing well for the CBMs (or EAs), with the exception of mTASK, which puts the CBMs too high in energy. rMGGAC results agree quite well for VBMs and CBMs, but no clear trend was observed, as some of the band edges are overestimated and some are underestimated. For the chosen test set of semiconductor heterostructures with small lattice mismatch, we observed improved performance of the meta-GGA functionals in comparison with PBE. For all meta-GGAs, the BPEbased method yields the smallest error with respect to theoretical GWΓ 1 @HSE values from Ref. 39. The error from the APM is found to slightly higher than that from BPE method. Finally, the IP-based method proved successful only in the case of mTASK. For most of the interfaces, we obtain a good agreement of the VBOs from r 2 SCAN, rMGGAC, mTASK, and LMBJ. Furthermore, our comparison of the VBOs obtained from BPE and APM shows that in most cases all these methods give quantitatively reasonable results and a possible alternative to the expensive GW calculation. We hope that the present study will stimulate further benchmark comparative studies of heterogeneous systems forming a common interface, as well as for interfaces of 2D systems, a growing topic of present day electronic structure theory. See the supplementary material for the complete results reported in this paper.