In this work, we the study magnetization dynamics in superconductor-ferromagnetsuperconductor thin-film structures . Results of the broad-band ferromagnetic resonance spectroscopy are reported for a large set of samples with varied thickness of both superconducting and ferromagnetic layers in a wide frequency, field, and temperature ranges. Experimentally the onedimensional anisotropic action of superconducting torque on magnetization dynamics is established; its dependence on thickness of layers is revealed. It is demonstrated that experimental findings support the recently-proposed mechanism of the superconducting torque formation via the interplay between the superconducting kinetic inductance and magnetization precession at superconductorferromagnet interfaces. Advantages from hybridization of antagonistic superconducting and ferromagnetic orders in electronics and spintronics have been repeatedly demonstrated in past decades The interplay between ferromagnetic and superconducting spin orders enables manipulation with spin states and leads to a development of various electronic and spintronic elements, including superconductor-ferromagnet-superconductor (S-F-S) Josephson junctions Recently application capabilities of S-F hybridization have been expanded by demonstrations of its prospects in magnonics. Magnonics is a growing field of research which offers approaches for the transfer and processing of information via spin waves. A good overview of various potential applications and recent advances in magnonics can be found in Refs. Various wide-range manipulations with the spin-wave dispersion have been demonstrated at cryogenic temperatures when coupling magnonic systems with superconductors. For instance, interaction of a magnonic media with the superconducting vortex matter allows to form and tune forbidden bands at sub-micrometer wavelength which matches the parameter of the vortex lattice A striking phenomenon in S-F hybrid structures was reported recently in Ref. In this work, we report a comprehensive experimental study of the phenomenon. We report results of FMR spectroscopy for a large set of samples with varied thickness of both superconducting and ferromagnetic layers in a wide frequency, field, and temperature ranges. We establish an anisotropic one-dimensional action of hybridization-induced torque acting on magnetization dynamics and the dependence of this superconducting torque on the magnetic field. Experimental results support the recently proposed model by M. Silaev Magnetization dynamics in S-F-S structures is studied by measuring the ferromagnetic resonance absorp- The Ha and M ef f correspond to parameters obtained at T > Tc with Eq. 1. The Hs0, Tc, and p are obtained by fitting Hs(T ) in Fig. FIG. tion spectrum using the VNA-FMR approach Microwave spectroscopy of samples was performed by measuring the transmission characteristics S 21 (f, H) in the closed-cycle cryostat Oxford Instruments Triton (base temperature 1.2 K) equipped with the home-made superconducting solenoid. Spectroscopy was performed in the field range from -0.22 T to 0.22 T, in the frequency range from 0 up to 20 GHz, and in the temperature range from 2 to 11 K. Magnetic field was applied in-plane along the direction of the waveguide in Fig. At T > T c FMR curves f r (H) in Fig. where μ 0 is the vacuum permeability, γ = 1.856 × 10 11 Hz/T is the gyromagnetic ratio for permalloy, H a is the uniaxial anisotropy field that is aligned with the external field, and M ef f is the effective magnetization, which includes the saturation magnetization M s and the out-of-plane anisotropy field. For all studied samples the fit of FMR curves at T > T c with Eq. 1 yields negligible anisotropy field H a , the effective magnetization 2 T, which is close to typical values of the saturation magnetization of permalloy μ 0 M s ≈ 1 T, and no noticeable dependence of H a and M ef f on temperature. Magnetic parameters H a and M ef f for all studied samples are provided in Tab. I. The fit of f r (H) curves for the S5 sample with Eq. 1 at temperature T = 9.5 K> T c is show in Fig. , where H s is the field of the superconducting torque. A satisfactory fit with such expression can be obtained for all samples in Tab I at temperatures T ≪ T c , while for the sample S8, which is based on thin superconducting layers with d s < λ L , this expression is valid in the entire temperature range. Here λ L ≈ 80 nm where H a and M ef f are constants and are derived at T > T c (see Tab I), H s is the field of one-dimensional superconducting torque at zero applied field, and the parameter α s reflects the dependence of the superconducting torque on applied magnetic field. We confirm that for all studied samples FMR curves at all temperatures T < T c can be fitted with Eq. 2. Examples of such fit are shown for the S4 sample in Fig. Temperature dependence of the torque field H s (T ) can be characterized by fitting it with the following expression where H s0 is the superconducting spin-torque field at zero field and zero temperature, T c is the superconducting critical temperature of S-F-S trilayers, and p is a free exponent parameter. The fit of H s (T ) with Eq. 3 for all samples is shown in Fig. The original explanation of the phenomenon in S-F-S trilayers suggested the role of spin-polarized spin-triplet Cooper pairs in formation of the superconductivityinduced anisotropy via the spin-transfer-torque mechanism The first hint on inductive origin of the phenomenon in S-F-S trilayers was reported in Ref. where λ L is the London penetration depth and L is the length of the structure. The theory in Ref. In fact, Eq. 5 demonstrates the linear dependence of the superconducting torque on thickness d F at small d F , which is consistent with Fig. Summarising, we report a comprehensive experimental study of magnetization dynamics in S-F-S trilayers. We report results of FMR spectroscopy for a large set of samples with varied thickness of both superconducting and ferromagnetic layers in a wide frequency, field, and temperature ranges. Experimentally we establish an anisotropic one-dimensional action of hybridizationinduced torque acting on magnetization dynamics and the dependence of this superconducting torque on the magnetic field. Experimental results confirm the recently proposed model by M. Silaev 