The review is devoted to the fundamental aspects and characteristic features of the magnetoelectric effects, reported in the literature on Josephson junctions (JJs). The main focus of the review is on the manifestations of the direct and inverse magnetoelectric effects in various types of Josephson systems. They provide a coupling of the magnetization in superconductor/ferromagnet/superconductor JJs to the Josephson current. The direct magnetoelectric effect is a driving force of spin torques acting on the ferromagnet inside the JJ. Therefore it is of key importance for the electrical control of the magnetization. The inverse magnetoelectric effect accounts for the back action of the magnetization dynamics on the Josephson subsystem, in particular, making the JJ to be in the resistive state in the presence of the magnetization dynamics of any origin. The perspectives of the coupling of the magnetization in JJs with ferromagnetic interlayers to the Josephson current via the magnetoelectric effects are discussed. Since the discovery of the Josephson effect in 1962 Theoretical investigations of hybrid structures involving superconductors and ferromagnets and subsequent experimental realization of superconductor/ferromagnet/superconductor Josephson junctions Here our goal is to review of current understanding of fundamental aspects of magnetoelectric effects in Josephson junctions, which potentially open new perspectives in superconducting spintronics. As an introduction, we discuss the fundamental aspects of the related magnetoelectric effects in nonsuperconducting systems briefly and then their analogues in superconducting materials and structures. The main part of the review is devoted to the magnetoelectric effects in a particular type of superconducting hybrids -Josephson junctions (JJs). In Sec. II we discuss the manifestations of the direct and inverse magnetoelectric effects in different types of JJs, Sec. III is devoted to the role of the magnetoelectric effects in the magnetization dynamics and electrical control of the ferromagnet magnetization in the JJs via ferromagnets. A specific for superconductivity magnetoelectric effectgeneration of triplet superconductivity by a moving condensate is discussed in Sec. IV. Sec. V provides a short summary of the current situation in the field. Studies of magnetoelectric effects have a long history The effect is known for a wide class of systems. It is theoretically investigated and measured for spin-orbit coupled materials The direct magnetoelectric effect has also been predicted and measured in topological insulators which results in the well-known spin transfer torque where M is the saturation magnetization in the ferromagnet, J sd is the coupling constant of the exchange interaction between the s-band conduction electrons and d-band localized electrons responsible for the magnetism. S ⊥ means the component of the current-induced spin polarization, perpendicular to the magnetization direction, because it is this component that leads to a torque on the magnetization. There is also an inverse magnetoelectric effect (it is also called by the spin-galvanic effect), which consists of generating a charge current j k by a steady spin imbalance, which can be induced, for example, by a time-dependent magnetic field via the paramagnetic effect 45 : where g is the Lande factor, μ B is the Bohr magneton, and Ḃa is the time derivative of the magnetic field component along the a axis. The inverse magnetoelectric effect effect has been observed in experiments with spin-orbit coupled materials The inverse magnetoelectric effect also takes place in spin-textured metallic ferromagnets. In this case, it man-ifests itself as the so-called electromotive force (emf) induced by the magnetization dynamics where m(r, t) is the unit vector in the direction of the magnetization and β is a phenomenological parameter. Due to the existence of the electromotive force the magnetization dynamics leads to appearance of an additional voltage drop. This voltage can vary in the range from nV to μV 59 and in special situations can be used for electrical detection of the presence of magnetization dynamics Conceptually the same magnetoelectric effects also take place in superconducting systems. However, here the physical situation is somewhat different because of the presence of the superconducting condensate. In contrast to the normal case, in a superconductor an equilibrium electric supercurrent can flow in the absence of an external electric field and is directly related to the gauge invariant superconducting condensate phase j ∝ v s ∝ ∇φ -(2e/c)A, where v s is the condensate velocity, φ is the phase of the superconducting order parameter and A is the vector potential. That leads to two consequences: (i) a supercurrent can generate an equilibrium spin polarization in the presence of intrinsic SOC where h a = (1/2)gμ B B a . This effect has been obtained for a case of a 2D superconductor with Rashba SOC The helical state is a kind of inverse magnetoelectric effect, which is realized in the simply connected superconducting systems. Similar effects occur also in an S-X-S Josephson junction, between two superconductors and a normal or ferromagnetic interlayer X with an intrinsic SOC or if the interlayer is a spin-textured ferromagnet. In a Josephson junction the supercurrent depends on the phase difference φ between the superconducting electrodes. Similar to the simply connected superconductors a Zeeman field may induce a supercurrent through the junction at zero phase difference between the superconductors according to Eq. ( The φ 0 -junctions have been predicted in a wide class of systems including S/F/S junctions with intrinsic SOC, S/N/S junctions with intrinsic SOC under applied Zeeman field Naturally, the equilibrium direct magnetoelectric effect discussed above can also occur in Josephson junctions. Indeed, it has been predicted for JJs via normal interlayers with Rashba SOC in diffusive 125 and ballistic 126 systems and via TI interlayers For completeness, we briefly mention other reported effects in superconducting hybrids, which can also be viewed as magnetoelectric ones but are not discussed in detail in this review. One group of effects is related to different types of quasiparticle nonequilibrium in the system. Among them are spin-charge conversion effects in superconducting hybrids. They involve a nonequilibrium spin polarization and spin current pumped into a superconducting system by some external source. It has been shown that for the Rashba SOC and SOC caused by spin-orbit impurities such a nonequilibrium spin distribution can generate the electric current and electric potential in superconductors A. Anomalous phase shift -a realization of inverse magnetoelectric effect in Josephson junctions with spin-orbit coupling and Zeeman field The minimal form of the current-phase relation (CPR) characterizing the dc Josephson effect is given by j(φ) = j c sin φ. Here j is the total superconducting current flowing across the junction, |j c | is the critical current and φ is the phase difference between superconducting electrodes Even more exotic situation occurs in systems with magnetoelectric effects where the φ 0 -junctions are realized. They are described by the CPR 92 j(φ) = j c sin(φ + φ 0 ) . (7) with anomalous (spontaneous) phase shift φ 0 = 0, π. In this case there is a finite supercurrent at zero phase difference j an = j c sin φ 0 called the anomalous (spontaneous) current. The Josephson energy E J = j c [1cos(φ + φ 0 )] yields the ground state with non-trivial phase difference φ = -φ 0 and zero current j(φ 0 ) = 0. Such a phase-shifted ground state is analogous to the helical state in the homogeneous superconductor discussed above. The general symmetry requirements for obtaining the φ 0 -Josephson junctions are the same as for having magnetoelectric coupling in the homogeneous superconductor. That is, we need to combine the two symmetry breaking mechanism. First, the time-reversal symmetry is to be broken by the Zeeman field h inside the Josephson junction. Second, the orbital and spin degrees of freedom should be coupled so that it is impossible to invert the magnetic moment by spin rotation independently from the orbital coordinates. By analogy with spontaneous current (6) one can construct the phenomenological expression for the anomalous phase shift φ 0 ∝ χ a x h a , where x is the axis across Josephson junction. This type of symmetry breaking is enabled e.g. by Rashba-type SOC χ a c ∝ ε cba n b with anisotropy vector n. In this case the spontaneous current is j ∝ n × h and the anomalous phase shift is Theoretical description of the φ 0 -junctions is significantly more challenging than that of the 0 and π-junctions. To obtain the anomalous phase shift one has to include the magnetoelectric coupling which is beyond the standard quasiclassical approximation where d is the length of the Josephson junction interlayer and v F is the Fermi velocity of the electrons in the interlayer. In the diffusive regime for weak α, highly transparent interfaces and neglecting spin-relaxation, the predicted result for the anomalous anomalous phase shift is where τ is the elastic scattering time, m * is the effective electron mass and D is the diffusion constant One scheme of measurements, which was realized in Refs. 120-122, is based on the asymmetric SQUID configuration. The SQUID consists of two junctions in parallel with very different critical currents I c1 I c2 , where I c1 is the critical current of the reference JJ and I c2 is the critical current of the investigated JJ. The sketch of the asymmetric SQUID is presented in Fig. where δ 0 = (φ 0 is the total anomalous phase built in the interferometer. With the geometry realized in Ref. 153 and shown in Fig. 2(b), the two junctions experience the same in-plane magnetic field orientation but the supercurrents flow in opposite directions resulting in φ 0 and φ tot = 2φ 0 . The stable state configuration of the SQUID is achieved by minimizing the total Josephson free energy obtained at δ 0 = π/2. Therefore, the maximum supercurrent, which can be sustained by the system, is Therefore, the dependence I S (Φ) contains the anomalous phase shift. Notably, there is a replica of the I S (Φ) oscillations in the voltage drop ∆V (Φ) when I > I S , and the SQUID operates in the dissipative regime, as conventionally realized with strongly overdamped JJs. This replica is used in Ref. 153 for measurements of the anomalous phase shift. The results, adopted from Ref. 153, are represented in Fig. As it was mentioned earlier, in all the discussed experiments, the exchange field generating φ 0 has been created by the externally applied field. Refs. 121 and 119 report the linear dependence of the anomalous phase shift on the in-plane magnetic field, as it is predicted by Eqs. (8) and (9). The experimental results reported in Ref. 153 are more complicated. The nonmonotonic dependence of the anomalous phase shift on the applied in-plane field with a maximum shift at B y ≈ 5mT and saturation for |B y | > 30mT has been observed, see Fig. 4(b). The authors suggest that this behavior is due to magnetic Kondo impurities in the nanowire. Due to the antiferromagnetic nature of the Kondo interaction, the effective exchange field created by these unpaired spins is opposite to the Zeeman field generated by B y so that the two contributions are competing in the anomalous phase with a partial cancellation. The total anomalous phase shift is divided into two contributions φ 0 (B y ) = φ int (B y ) + φ ext (B y ), where φ int (B y ) is an intrinsic phase shift, which is present even in the absence of the in-plane magnetic field if a finite B y has been previously applied. Since it stems from a ferromagnetic ordering, φ int depends only on the history of B y and shows a hysteresis in the back and forth sweep direction. The extrinsic contribution to the phase shift, φ ext stems directly from the external magnetic field. The dependence φ ext (B y ) is characterized by a linear increase at low magnetic fields up to a maximum phase shift of ±π/2. Based on the diffusive theory The 3D TI surface states host Dirac quasiparticles, exhibiting full spin-momentum locking: an electron spin always makes a right angle with its momentum. The sketch of the system under consideration and the Fermi surface of the conducting electrons in the 3D TI surface states are demonstrated in Fig. It is assumed that the magnetization M (r) of the ferromagnet induces an effective exchange field h(r) ∼ M (r) in the underlying conductive surface layer. The discussed theory is also applicable if the Zeeman term in the hamiltonian of the TI surface states is induced by the applied magnetic field. The hamiltonian that describes the TI surface states in the presence of an in-plane exchange field h(r) reads: where Ψ = (Ψ ↑ , Ψ ↓ ) T , v F is the Fermi velocity, e z is a unit vector normal to the surface of TI, μ is the chemical potential, and σ = (σ x , σ y , σ z ) T is a vector of Pauli matrices in the spin space. It was shown is the unit vector perpendicular to the direction of the quasiparticle trajectory n F = p F /p F and ĝ is the spinless 4 × 4 matrix in the particle-hole and Keldysh spaces containing normal and anomalous quasiclassical Green's functions. The spin structure above reflects the fact that the spin and momentum of a quasiparticle at the surface of the 3D TI are strictly locked and make a right angle. It was demonstrated where τ x,y,z are Pauli matrices in particle-hole space with τ ± = (τ x ± iτ y )/2. ∆ = ∆(x)τ + -∆ * (x)τ -is the matrix structure of the superconducting order parameter ∆(x) in the particle-hole space. We assume ∆ Our derivation closely follows Ref. 148. To obtain the simplest sinusoidal form of the current-phase relation we linearize Eq. ( where the subscript ± corresponds to the trajectories sgn v x = ±1. The density of electric current along the x-axis is where φ is the angle, which the quasiparticle trajectory makes with the x-axis. φ ± is the distribution function corresponding to the trajectories sgn v x = ±1. In equilibrium Taking into account that g A ± = -g R * ± the following final expression for the Josephson current has been obtained: where ε n = πT (2n + 1). It is seen that the CPR Eq. ( where ). Similar expression has also been obtained for Dirac materials 158 . Eqs. ( Let us consider a pair travelling in the TI surface states in the interlayer region of the JJ and carrying the Josephson current. The pair consists of electrons with opposite momenta and opposite spin directions. At first, we assume that the exchange field is along the y-axis, that is h = he y . Because the spin of an electron is strictly perpendicular to its momentum, each of the electrons forming the pair "sees" its own effective exchange field, which is equal to the projection of h onto its spin direction. If the electron momentum makes an angle φ with the xaxis, the effective field seen by the electron is h cos φ, see Fig. exchange field and, therefore, acquires the same phase. The total phase gained by the pair is (2h cos φ/v F,x )x in agreement with Eq. ( In summary, we can see that the Josephson current via the 3D TI-based S/F/S junction depends strongly on the exchange field direction. The physical reason for this dependence is the spin-momentum locking. In particular, the Josephson current exhibits the anomalous phase shift χ 0 = 2h y d/V F . It is determined by the exchange field component perpendicular to the current direction analogously to the case of Rashba materials, described above. However, the anomalous phase shift in TI-based Josephson junctions is much larger than in the materials with Rashba SOC because it does not contain the reducing factor ∆ so /ε F ∼ αp F /ε F . It is directly connected to the fact that the 3D TI has only one helical Fermi surface [see Fig. The interaction of conduction electron spin with a magnetic texture can be described using an artificial spinorbital coupling potential. In general the local transformation Û (r) = e iσθ(r)/2 rotates spin axes to the local frame where h z. It is parametrized by the spin vector θ = θn defined by the spatial texture of the exchange field distribution h(r) = R(θ(r))h, where R is the spatially-dependent rotation matrix and we choose h = hz. This transformation generates the spin-dependent potential σa {M a k , pk }/2 with pure gauge SU( The anomalous phase shifts has been studied in Josephson junctions through various noncoplanar magnetic textures, including the threelayer systems Let us consider the system shown in Fig. where ǧk for k = 1, 2 are the matrix Green's functions in the superconducting electrodes S k . The spin-polarized tunnelling matrix has the form Γ = t + σ0 τ0 + t -(mσ)τ 3 , where m is the direction of barrier magnetization, t ± = (1 ± √ 1 -P 2 )/2 and P being the spin-filter efficiency of the barrier that ranges from 0 (no polarization) to 1 (100% filtering efficiency). The matrix Green' functions are determined by the equation Here ω n = (2n + 1)πT is the Matsubara frequency, ∆ = ∆τ 1 e iτ3φ is the order parameter with the amplitude ∆ and phase φ, h is the exchange field. We include the spin-orbital (SO) scattering process which lead to the spin relaxation described by The solution of Eq. ( The terms diagonal in Nambu space (τ 3 ) correspond to the normal correlations which determine the den-sity of states. The off-diagonal components (τ 1 ) describe spin-singlet g 01 and spin-triplet g 31 superconducting correlations which appear as a result of the exchange splitting 173 . The CPR ( where χ = P (h 1 × h 2 ) is the spin chirality, h i⊥ are the projections of h i on the plane perpendicular to P . Expressions (24, 25) show that the anomalous current j an is mediated by spin-triplet component g 31 . Physically the phase-shifting term j an appears as a result of the additional phase picked up by the spin-triplet Cooper pairs when tunnelling between two superconductors with non-collinear exchange fields through the spin-polarising barrier. Therefore φ 0 Josephson effect is the directly observable signature of the spin-triplet superconducting current across the junction. For the ideal spin filter P = 1 Eqs. ( The direct magnetoelectric effect was predicted for superconducting systems in the presence of spin-orbit coupling, where it represents the generation of an equilibrium spin polarization in response to supercurrent. The spin-orbit coupling can be both of intrinsic type, that is arising due to the inversion symmetry breaking where j s,k is the k-component of the supercurrent density. However, in this review we describe the effect and the used theoretical approaches focusing on the Josephson junctions. The direct magnetoelectric effect was considered both for ballistic 126 and diffusive Josephson junctions 125 via spin-orbit coupled materials. We will focus on the case of ballistic S/NSO/S junction with Rashba-type spin-orbit coupling in the interlayer and discuss the value of the electron spin polarization induced by the applied supercurrent and the theoretical approach used for solving the problem in Ref. 126. The sketch of the system under consideration is shown in Fig. where ∆(r) is the superconducting parameter, which is nonzero only in the superconducting leads. Ĥ0 is the Hamiltonian of the normal metal in the presence of the spin-orbit coupling (NSO). The general linear in momentum SO is expressed by the term 1 2 Â p = 1 2 A α j p j σα , where σα are Pauli matrices in spin space. Ψ = (Ψ ↑ , Ψ ↓ ) T , μ is the chemical potential. For particular case of the Rashba SOC A y x = -A x y = α and for the Dresselhaus SOC A x x = -A y y = β. In the superconducting systems under the applied supercurrent the Cooper pairs acquire nonzero total momentum, which leads to the analogous shift of the Fermi surfaces in the momentum space, as it was discussed in the introduction fot nonsuperconducting materials. But in the superconducting case the polarization is provided by the averaged polarization of triplet pairs, as it supported below by the corresponding expression of the polarization in terms of the anomalous Green's function. Therefore, the supercurrent-induced polarization is intimately connected to another manifestation of the magnetoelectric effect in superconducting systems: generation of triplet pairs under the applied electric current. Now our goal is to describe this effect in Josephson junctions. Superconducting hybrid mesoscopic systems are often considered within the framework of the quasiclassical theory, which makes it possible to effectively solve spatially inhomogeneous problems. The SOC can be treated in the quasiclassical approximation when its characteristic energy ∆ so is much less than the Fermi energy ε F . This situation is typical. However the quasiclassical consideration does not capture the magnetoelectric effects, which are of the first order with respect to the parameter ∆ so /ε F . In particular, it is known that the standard quasiclassical equations in the presence of SOC and in the absence of an exchange field do not provide a transformation of singlet correlations to the triplet ones The generalized quasiclassical equation for the quasiclassical Green's function can be written as follows: The second line of Eq. ( Quasiclassical equations are not valid in the vicinity of interfaces, where the normal state Hamiltonian of the system changes over the atomic length scales. Therefore they should be supplied by the boundary conditions. Corrections to the boundary conditions appear even for the simplest "absolutely transparent interfaces" case when the boundary conditions take the form: The signs ± correspond to the NSO/S and S/NSO interfaces, respectively. It is seen that neglecting the right hand side of the above equation, which is of the first order in ∆ so /ε F , we obtain the well-known quasiclassical boundary condition at a fully transparent interface: ǧl = ǧr = ǧ, that is just the continuity of the Green's function. In the framework of this modified quasiclassical theory, the boundary condition is reduced to the standard continuity condition ǧl = ǧr only for the case of equal SO coupling in both materials. For the considered S/NSO/S junction the y-component of the triplet anomalous Green's function in the NSO interlayer, which determines the electron polarization S y , takes the form: It is seen that the triplet correlations are of the first order with respect to the parameter ∆ so /ε F = αp F /ε F . Result (32) coincides with the result of the exact calculation in terms of Gor'kov Green's functions beyond the quasiclassical approximation 178 up to the first order with respect to the parameter ∆ so /ε F . Please note that the statement of Ref. (178) that the triplet pairing vanishes to the first order in ∆ so /ε F is not correct. The correct expansion contains terms of the first order by this parameter. Making use of the above equations it is possible to evaluate the average spin polarization: The supercurrent-induced spin polarization is directly related to the triplet pairing. It can be written as 126 g s (f s ) and g t (f t ) are the singlet and triplet components of the normal (anomalous) Green's function, which can be found from the matrix Green's function structure: where the structure in the particle-hole space is shown explicitly and the matrix structure in the spin space is encoded in the Pauli matrices σ. The anomalous Green's function f can be expressed as ). The only component of the triplet anomalous Green's function f , which is not an odd function of p y and, therefore, survives after integration over p y , is f y , expressed by Eq. ( For the considered case αp F /2πT = ∆ so /2πT It is the same value as for homogeneous superconductors Another technique accounting for the magnetoelectric effects is a gauge-covariant approach to establish the transport equations In the framework of this approach the well-known Edelstein's results for supercurrent induced spin polarization in homogeneous superconductors, which were obtained in the diffusive The supercurrent-induced spin polarization in the S/NSO/S Josephson junctions has also been calculated in the diffusive limit 125 . The first-order corrections in ∆ so /ε F were added to the Usadel equation for the Green's functions. The triplet anomalous Green's function has been obtained in the form The supercurrent-induced electron spin polarization is where σ -is the conductivity of the NSO interlayer, N F is the density of states at the Fermi level and τ is the elastic-scattering time. The ratio Sev f /(j s ) ∼ αp f /ε F in Eq. ( As it is discussed in the previous section, the value of the supercurrent-induced electron spin polarization in Josephson junctions via SO-materials is rather small and ∝ ∆ so /ε F . The physical reason for this is the presence of two helical Fermi surfaces in the material with intrinsic SOC, which contribute to the direct magnetoelectric effect in opposite directions. In contrast, the 2D Fermi surface of the conductive surface states of the 3D topological insulators (TIs) consists of the only helical Fermi surface, see Fig. 5(b). It leads to the absence of the partial compensation of the current-induced electron spin polarization produced by the helical Fermi surfaces with the opposite helicities. As a result, the current-induced spin polarization does not contain the reducing factor ∆ so /ε F and takes the form: Eq. ( A. Direct coupling between magnetization and superconducting condensate: basic physics and equations The discussed above direct and inverse magnetoelectric effects are of great interest for Josephson junctions with ferromagnetic interlayers because they result in the coupling between the ferromagnet magnetization and the Josephson current. This leads to several interesting ways of electrical control of magnetization and electrical detection in S/F/S junctions. The present section aims to a discussion of those effects. First of all we formulate the basic equations and describe qualitatively the physics underlying the direct coupling between the supercurrent and the magnetization. In the considered S/F/S junction the coupled dynamics of magnetization M and Josephson phase difference χ is determined by the following closed set of equations Eq.( where Ψ = (Ψ ↑ , Ψ ↓ ) T , S is the localized spin operator in the ferromagnet, J ex is the interface exchange constant and the integration is performed over the 2D interface. In both cases the torque can be represented in the form: where s is the averaged polarization of conductivity electrons. J is the exchange constant of the s-d model or J = J ex /d F for the hybrid F/HM interlayers with d F standing for the ferromagnet thickness. Below, the particular examples of the electrically induced magnetization dynamics in JJ via ferromagnets and the backward influence of the dynamics on the JJ are discussed. In the context of inhomogeneous ferromagnetic interlayers, the supercurrent-induced spin torques have been calculated theoretically in Josephson junctions through single spins 186-188 two Let us consider an S/F/S JJ via a strong ferromagnet with the exchange energy h of the order of the Fermi energy. This model is relevant for most classical ferromagnets, including Fe, Ni, Co and permalloy. It is wellknown that in this case, the opposite spin pairs decay very rapidly into the depth of the ferromagnet (on the length scale of a few nanometers), and the Josephson current is presumably carried by equal spin pairs The hamiltonian of the ferromagnetic interlayer is where Πr = ∇i(e/c)A(r) and A is the vector potential of the electromagnetic field. The last term in Eq.( The quasiclassical theory is formulated in terms of the spinless quasiclassical Keldysh-Green's function ĝσ (t 1 , t 2 ) (σ = ±1), which is defined separately at each of the Zeeman split Fermi-surfaces for spin-up and spin-down electrons and in general depends on the spatial coordinates r and the two time variables t 1,2 . This theory only accounts for the equal-spin Cooper pairs residing at the same Fermi surface. In contrast, the opposite spin correlations residing at different Fermi surfaces are neglected due to their strong suppression resulting from the large Zeeman splitting of the Fermi surfaces. The Usadel equation takes the form: where D σ are the spin-dependent diffusion coefficients, in the isotropic case given by D σ = τ σ v 2 σ /3. The spin-dependent Fermi velocities v ± = 2(μ ± h)/m F are determined on each of the spin-split Fermi surfaces with m F being the electron mass. The time dependence appears due to the dynamical character of the problem under consideration and •-product is defined as ). The commutator of the Green's function with an arbitrary operator Ĉ is defined as [ Ĉ, ǧ] t = Ĉ(t 1 , r 1 )ǧǧ Ĉ(t 2 , r 2 ). The anticommutator { Ĉ, ǧ} t is defined analogously with the plus sign. σi and τi are Pauli matrices in spin and Nambu spaces, respectively. and The spin-dependent gauge field is given by the superposition of two terms Z = Z m + Z so , where is in general the time-and space-dependent unitary 2 × 2 matrix that rotates the spin quantization axis z to the local frame determined by the exchange field, so that h z. The term Z so i = m F (mB i ) (where m = M /M ) appears due to the SOC. Eq. ( In the framework of this theory the torque Eq. ( where m = M /M , B j = (B xj , B yj , B zj ) is a vector, which is determined by j-th coordinate component of the tensor B and J z is the spin current in the local frame determined by the exchange field, which is represented by difference between the Josephson current carried by spinup and spin-down pairs. In Eqs. ( where only perpendicular to m component of the polarization is considered. The first term is the currentinduced spin polarization originated from the spin texture and is analogous to the first term in Eq. ( x > Jz,crit x , where Jz,crit The DW motion of an unpinned DW under the action of the spin-orbit torque is possible for arbitrary small values of the applied supercurrent. For example, if we consider a Neel DW in the (x, y)-plane, see Fig. where u = 2μ B J s /M is the characteristic velocity associated with the value of spin current J s = (1/2e)(J ↑ -J ↓ ) flowing through the ferromagnetic interlayer and β = 2m F B R d DW is the dimensionless SO coupling parameter. C. Resistive state of the Josephson junctions in the presence of magnetization dynamics The reciprocal effect to the torque is the appearance of a gauge spin-dependent vector potential Z in the local spin basis Suppose that we apply a constant electric current I = jS (here S is the junction area) to the Josephson junction and consider a steady motion of the DW across the junction with a constant velocity defined by Eq. ( where the first term is well-known and represents the conventional Josephson voltage appearing at j > j c . The second term V M is nonzero both at j > j c and at j < The resistance of the junction at j < j c caused by the DW motion is given by It is important that according to Eq. ( In real setups the time of the DW motion through the junction is limited by the finite junction length: t DW ≈ d/v st = (α/β)(d/u). Therefore, the voltage should be averaged over t < t DW . Although experiments on the DW motion in Josephson junctions have not yet been carried out, the estimates t DW ≥ 0.5(α/β) × 10 -6 s has been obtained 149 for j c ∼ 10 9 A/m 2 . For other setups, which report the Josephson current carried by equal-spin triplet correlations The torque can be obtained from a direct calculation of the average electron polarization s 191 . However, there is another widely used approach for calculating the torque. Its strategy is to determine the Josephson energy of the system E J and then find the additional contribution to the effective field δH ef f according to the relation , where V F is the ferromagnet volume The example is an S/F/S JJ via a metallic ferromagnet on top of a 3D TI 148 , where the supercurrent flows via the TI conductive surface states and the normal current flows via the ferromagnet and does not contribute to the torque. The magnetization dynamics has been analyzed in voltage-biased JJs via single spins where ω = ω J /ω F is the ratio of the Josephson frequency to the ferromagnetic resonance one. It is seen that in this regime, the magnetic moment precesses around the y-axis, which is the direction of the pseudo magnetic Rashba field induced by the current. If Γ/ω > π/2, the full magnetization reversal occurs in the system. For general coupling regimes, the magnetic dynamics was found to be complicated and strongly nonharmonic. It has been demonstrated that in S/F/S JJs with SOC in the interlayer, the stable position of the ferromagnet easy axis can be dynamically reoriented under the applied voltage. The system in which such a feature was first studied is called the Kapitza pendulum. Particularly, in a pendulum with a vibrating point of suspension, the external sinusoidal force can invert the stability position of the pendulum 220 . In Ref. 221 it was predicted that the S/F/S JJ with SOC exhibits the analogous behavior: the unstable fixed point, which does not coincide with the equilibrium ferromagnet easy-axis, can become dynamically stable under the applied voltage. It was found that if the equilibrium easy axis of the magnet is the z-axis (the sketch of the considered system is shown in Fig. where β = Γ 2 rα/2ω(1 + α 2 ). Eq. ( Another interesting effect related to the electrical control of the ferromagnet easy axis is the easy axis splitting in S/F/S JJs on top of the 3D TI 148 . The qualitative difference of this system from the case of the S/F/S JJ with the SOC in the interlayer is that in 3D TI-based JJs the critical current demonstrates strong dependence and in the middle of time interval is shown in the insets. We see that the average value of m z deviates from one. Figure Fig. The dynamically stable easy axes are in the (x, y)-plane, therefore if the magnetization direction is parametrized as m = (sin Θ cos Φ, cos Θ, sin Θ sin Φ), the stable points correspond to Φ = 0, π. Red circles shown them at the vector fields, which demonstrate the time evolution of the magnetization starting from an arbitrary initial magnetization position. Panel (a) corresponds to the small value of the parameter A when the easy-axis is not split yet. Panels (b)-(c) are in the parameter range where the splitting occurs, and for panel (d), the A value already exceeds the upper boundary of the range. In this case, the easy axis is reoriented to the x-direction. Another intriguing effect related to the electrical control of the magnetization in S/F/S JJs is the ferromagnet magnetization reversal Josephson current pulses. One of the key challenges towards developing ultra-low-power computers is the fabrication of a reliable and scalable cryogenic memory architecture. Superconductor-ferromagnet-superconductor (S-F-S) junctions are promising structures suggested for such memories The magnetization reversal by current pulses has been originally discussed in Ref. 183 for the S/F/S Josephson junction with the Rashba SOC in the interlayer. The magnetization dynamics in the system shown in Fig. The magnetization reversal by the electric current pulses has also been investigated for the 3D TI-based S/F/S JJs 151 . The advantage of this system is the very strong value of the SOC parameter r provided by the spin-momentum locking in the TI surface states, what allows to use low-current pulses for the reversal of the magnetization. The full spin-orbit torque containing the contributions both from the supercurrent and the normal current can be found in terms of the current-induced polarization of the surface states conductivity electrons Eq. ( Whether there will be a reversal of the magnetic moment under the action of a given current pulse -depends strongly on the amplitude and duration of the pulse. It is illustrated by numerical data represented in Fig. where K and K u are the hard axis and the easy axis anisotropy constants, respectively. Therefore, an easyplane anisotropy was considered in addition to the easy axis anisotropy, investigated earlier. This situation corresponds to the experimental data reported for YIG thin films 237 . The parameter k = K/K u can describe the ratio of the hard amd easi-axis anisotropy parameters. The nonzero value of this parameter results in the appearance of the uncertainty regions in the reversal diagrams, Fig. where ∆m x is the full change of m x caused by the pulse. If the magnetization reversal m = e x → -e x occurred, then ∆m x = -2, otherwise it is zero. Therefore, the integrated over time value of the voltage between the additional electrodes can be used as a criterion of the magnetization reversal. Another type of magnetoelectric effect, specific for superconducting systems, is the generation of triplet S = 1 Cooper pairs by the condensate motion. It is wellestablished that the nonzero momentum of moving superconducting condensate is a pair-breaking factor. The reason is that it makes the momenta of two paired electrons to be not exactly opposite, and such a finitemomentum pairing has less binding energy. This fundamental mechanism called the orbital depairing effect exists in any superconducting system and leads to the suppression of superconductivity by the magnetic field or by the supercurrent 238 . In Ref. 239 it has been demonstrated that in superconductor/ferromagnet hybrids with interfacial SOC controllable condensate motion can induce superconducting correlations. More specifically, it was predicted that the condensate motion provides effective manipulation of the odd-frequency spin-triplet pairing states 240 which have attracted continual interest for several decades It has been demonstrated 174,175 that, in principle, the SOC in combination with the exchange field can induce LRTs in diffusive systems. However, pure Rashba or Dresselhaus SO coupling does not induce the LRTs in a transversal geometry with an in-plane magnetization 174 . It is this situation that is the most common experimental setup and is depicted in Fig. The qualitative physics of the effect can be described as follows. The general structure of anomalous function describing the pairing in a spin-triplet channel can be parameterized as ( σ • d), where σ is the vector of Pauli matrices. The role of h z is to generate S z = 0 spin triplet correlations with d SRT ∝ h. The role of SOC Ĥsoc = α[n × p] is to convert them to S z = ±1 correlations due to the momentum-dependent spin rotation by the SOC. The resulting p-wave spin vector is d pw = F pw (ω)h × (n × p) with the amplitude F pw (ω) which is an even function of the Matsubara frequency ω. Such momentum-odd correlations are greatly suppressed in diffusive systems due the efficient impurity-induced momentum averaging. The externally induced superflow p s = 0 induces Doppler shift of the quasiparticle energy levels 277,278 v F • p s . It results in the suppression of pairing on one part of Fermi surface, namely for electrons with momentum p p s . In the simplest case of homogeneous system this leads to the shift of imaginary frequencies so that the amplitude of triplet correlations is given by This modification of the pairing amplitude results in the additional component of the spin vector δd By the order of magnitude |d pw | ∼ hv F α/∆ 2 v F α/E F . Then the typical amplitude of the s-wave correlations is |d sw | ∼ (p s ξ)hv F α/∆ 2 where ξ is the coherence length. It means that the magnitude of this magnetoelectric effect can be considerably larger than that of the effects discussed before because the magnitude of the electron spin polarization and current-induced triplet correlations due to the Rashba SOC is governed by the parameter v F α/E F , see Sec. II D. Technically the triplet correlations can be calculated on the basis of the quasiclassical Usadel equation 239 . If the Rashba SOC is only present at the S/F interfaces, the (SOC+supercurrent)-induced SRT-LRT conversion can be described by the effective boundary condition at the S/F interface, which in the framework of the linearized with respect to the anomalous Green's function approach takes the form 239 : where the surface SOC strength α = dxα(x). The solution of the linearized Usadel equations for the LRT anomalous Green's function 63) supplemented by the boundary condition (62) gives the LRT anomalous Green's function, which in the ξ F d F ξ N takes the form: where ξ F = D/h is the coherence length of the SRTs in the ferromagnet and γ is the S/F interface transparency The moving condensate can be also induced by the alternating electric field E(t), which is described by the time-dependent vector potential E = - Weak links between two superconducting electrodes known as the Josephson junctions (JJ) are the cornerstone elements of superconducting electronics. For decades there has been an intensive search of technologies and physical principles allowing for the construction of superconducting transistors based on the JJ circuits with controllable switching between superconducting and resistive states [1]. Such devices are expected to pave the way for energy-saving superconducting computers [2]. Recently the interest to JJ with electrically-tunable critical currents has been stimulated by the perspectives of applying such systems in leading-edge quantum information architectures [3, 4]. Main efforts in this field have been focused on the systems with Josephson currents controlled by electrostatic gates. This concept has been re-alized in mesoscopic systems with normal metal interlayers [5-10], semiconducting interlayers [1, 3, 4, 11, 12] and quantum dots [13, 14]. Electrostatic control with constant gate voltages is not enough for most of the applications implying transistors operating under the action of high-frequency drives. Therefore it is of crucial importance to go beyond the electrostatic gating and find the physical mechanisms which could provide control of the Josephson critical currents by the high-frequency electric field. Here we suggest a qualitatively different way to controlling the Josephson current using dynamical triplet superconducting states driven by the external timedependent electric field. This mechanism can help to achieve switching rates in the teraherz and even the visible light frequency domains. It is based on the peculiar quantum state of matter which arises under the nonequilibrium conditions due to the interplay of Rashbatype [15-17] interfacial spin-orbital coupling (SOC), ferromagnetism and oscillating motion of Cooper pairs driven by the alternating electric field. The proposed effect extends the possibilities of generating and controlling dynamical and non-equilibrium states of matter which have attracted significant attention recently. The prominent examples of such states include Floquet topological insulators [18] and odd-frequency superconductivity [19], time crystals [20-22], driven Dirac materials [23-25], light-induced and light-manipulated superconductivity [26-32], cavity-enhanced ferroelectric phase transition [33] and dynamical hidden orders [34]. In general, the spin-triplet pairing amplitude can be written in terms of the spin vector [35] 67) where S is the junction area, P = c|E Ω | 2 is the radiation power, P c = (c /e 2 ) Ω 2 /ξ 2 S is the radiation power needed to speed up the Cooper pairs to the depairing velocity. In Ref. 281 it has been estimated that I 0 /(P/P c ) 2 ∼ 10 -1 -10 -3 A for typical parameters of JJs with ferromagnetic interlayers and taking α ∼ 0.1-1 where ω p = 2πI c π /CΦ 0 is the plasma frequency corresponding to the π-JJ. Eq. ( One can also obtain the photo-magnetic response without any threshold for the incoming power, provided the second branch of the SQUID contains the Josephson anomalous phase junction. Such photo-magnetic element generates dc current I dc ≈ I c dc cos φ 0 and the corresponding magnetic field B dc being exposed to any arbitrary small radiation power. In this review, we have discussed the fundamental aspects and characteristic features of the magnetoelectric effects, which were reported in the literature on JJs. The main focus of the review is on the manifestations of the direct and inverse magnetoelectric effects in various types of Josephson systems. The coupling of the magnetization in JJs with ferromagnetic interlayers to the Josephson current via the magnetoelectric effects and perspectives of this coupling are also discussed. To summarize, the direct magnetoelectric effect, that is, the current-induced spin polarization of the conductivity electrons, can arise in JJs via SOC materials, via topological insulators and also via spin-textures ferromagnets, which mathematically in the local spin basis can also be considered as materials with SOC. The effect is a driving force of the spin torques acting on the ferromagnet inside the JJ and, therefore, is of key importance for the electrical control of the magnetization. The inverse magnetoelectric effect in JJs takes the form of the anomalous ground state phase shift and has been re-ported for JJs via spin-textured ferromagnets, multilayered ferromagnetic systems, homogeneous ferromagnets with SOC and combined interlayers consisting of topological insulators or materials with SOC and ferromagnets. The effect accounts for the back action of the magnetization dynamics on the Josephson subsystem, making the JJ be in the resistive state in the presence of the magnetization dynamics of any origin. Another manifestation of the magnetoelectric effects in JJs is the generation of long-range triplet pairs in S/F/S JJs by the moving condensate, which allows for controllable and low-dissipative manipulation by the critical current of the JJ. Although by now progress has been most pronounced on the theoretical understanding of the magnetoelectric effects in JJs, the experimental activity has in the past few years started to catch up. In particular, a number of experiments confirmed the anomalous ground state phase shift in JJs via SOC materials and TIs under the applied Zeeman field. There is also a growing activity in the field of spin pumping experiments in superconducting hybrids and, in particular, JJs 