Ferroelectric domain walls have emerged as one of the most fascinating objects in condensed matter physics due to the broad variability of functional behaviors they exhibit. However, the vast majority of domain walls studies have been focused on bias-induced dynamics and transport behaviors. Here, we introduce the scanning probe microscopy approach based on piezoresponse force microscopy (PFM) with a dynamically heated probe, combining local heating and local biasing of the material. This approach is used to explore the thermal polarization dynamics in soft Sn2P2S6 ferroelectrics, and allows for the exploration of phase transitions at individual domain walls. The strong and weak modulation regimes for the thermal PFM are introduced. The future potential applications of heated probe approach for functional SPM measurements including piezoelectric, elastic, microwave, and transport measurements are discussed. Ferroelectric domain walls separate regions of uniform polarization in ferroelectric materials and have recently been investigated for the broad range of functional behaviors they may exhibit. Similarly, advancements in (Scanning) Transmission Electron Microscopy have enabled direct observations of the atomic structures in the vicinity of domain walls and topological defects. In this, direct visualization of atomic column positions and shapes allows the reconstruction of symmetry breaking distortions on a unit cell level. From the theoretical perspective, the emergent properties of the domain walls can be generally traced to the symmetry breaking phenomena emerging when the primary order parameter becomes zero. In the systems close to the phase coexistence, the walls can precipitate transition to the spatiallymodulated phases induced by flexoelectric interactions. Here we introduce a new approach, UV laser assisted thermal band excitation PFM (tPFM), to probe thermal-and voltage dynamics in functional materials based on the synergy of local heating and local biasing. By aligning a UV laser normal to an atomic force microscope cantilever while employing band excitation piezoresponse spectroscopy (Figure As shown in Figure To gain further insight into spatial variability of the observed behaviors, we employ kmeans clustering and principal component analysis (PCA) on the tPFM spectra. Briefly, k-means is an unsupervised machine learning algorithm that automatically assigns each pixel to a group (cluster) such that the within-cluster sum of squares is minimized. Comparatively, PCA is a linear decomposition technique used to decompose the dataset into the characteristic temperature dependent behaviors associated with position-dependent loadings. The application of these techniques on hyperspectral data is discussed in detail elsewhere. Correspondingly, the decrease in resonance frequency (Figure We further explore the phase transition behavior via uniform heating studies without the presence of the large local thermal field created in the UV laser assisted tPFM. Figure To gain further insight into the observed phenomena, we performed Finite Element Modeling reflecting the experimental conditions. Here, we aim to understand the temperature dependent polarization and effective piezoresponses in both a uniform and local heating (i.e. tPFM) geometry while considering the effects of rigid pinning on domain wall motion. For completeness, we also model the temperature dependent polarization, vertical displacement, and effective piezoresponse at the domain wall versus a uniformly polarized surface within a local heating PFM geometry. Accordingly, we establish a decoupled model for thermal PFM. We assume that the temperature distribution inside the material is established due contact with the heated AFM probe and is calculated self-consistently. The equilibrium temperature distribution T(r ⃗) satisfies a Laplace equation inside the SPS region: Due to the very high heat conductivity of the metallic tip in comparison with a moderate conductivity of SPS and very low conductivity of the air, one can neglect the heat flux between the SPS and air and assume fixed temperature T d at the tip-surface contact area. Far from the heated tip the temperature tends to T 0 . Using a disk-plane model of the SPM tip, Here, SPS layer is located at 0 ≤ z ≤ h, ε b is a background permittivity, Assuming the dominant role of the thermo-polarization effect over the flexoelectric effect, the latter is omitted in this work. The electric potential is V at the tip-surface contact area and vanishes at bottom electrode, The potential φ obeys the Laplace equation outside the ferroelectric. As such, the equations of state for elastic stresses σ ij and strains u ij are: Analysis of the SPS polarization and effective piezoresponse for different tip voltages revealed that starting from |V| > 10 mV we are already in the "strong modulation" regime, i.e., such small voltages lead to domain wall motion and nanodomain nucleation under the tip (see with ambient temperature T 0 = 20 ̊C. Note, far from the DW boundary one can see "up" (red) and "down" (blue) domains (see Supplementary Information for further details). Here, the heated and biased tip is placed on the domain wall resulting in clear temperature-induced domain wall broadening (Figure To provide numerical insight into the materials responses, surface polarizations P 3 and effective piezoresponses d 33 eff under the tip apex were calculated versus the tip temperature T d for uniform (Figure In comparison, under local heating, the spontaneous polarization disappears under the tip for the tip temperatures T d > T cr , due to the local transition to a paraelectric phase (see Figure Importantly, the temperature T cr is approximately 110 o C, however some thermo-induced polarization remains. Here, the difference between "up" and "down" domains originates from the thermo-polarization effect, mathematically expressed by the term μ dT dz in LGD equations for polarization (see Appendix A for details). The effective piezoresponse under local heating with and without pinning are shown in Figure However, in the rigidly pinned case (dashed lines), the effective piezoresponses monotonically decrease with temperature resembling the polarization behavior shown in Figure . The small voltages and symmetrization minimize the effect of possible domain nucleation in applied E-field. In essence, the modeled enhanced response in both heating geometries in the unpinned case qualitatively match the observed response near the domain walls (Figure Accordingly, next we investigate the thermally induced responses near the domain wall. As such, the surface polarization, displacement profiles and effective piezoresponse across the straight 180-degree domain wall (DW) in thick SPS are shown in Figure To summarize, here we report the experimental realization of the temperature-assisted piezoresponse force microscopy. In this method, the local electromechanical response is measured as a function of tip temperature, providing insight into the local temperature-induced polarization dynamics and phase transitions associated with changes in the polar behavior. For SPS, we discover temperature-induced broadening and effective transition temperature lowering at the domain wall. Moreover, we observe distinctively different phase transition behavior between up and down polarized domains, suggesting domain dependent Curie temperatures. Intriguingly, both tPFM and uniform heating studies suggest the presence of weak (less then 10% of RT value) constant polarization above the (nominal) bulk phase transition associated with the preexisting domains where the polarization is zero at the preexistent domain walls. While we tentatively identify this behavior with surface chemical pinning, it is clearly a subject for further investigations. Overall, the tPFM can be broadly used for the analysis of thermal phase transitions in materials exhibiting local electromechanical responses. This includes classical ferroelectric materials, but also ionic materials such as those used in energy and information technologies, in which electromechanical response is associated with electrochemical phenomena in the tip-surface junction. Laser assisted tPFM measurements were deployed via an Oxford Instruments Asylum Research Cypher atomic force microscope equipped with a "BlueTherm", 40 mW laser diode. All PFM experiments used Budget Sensor Multi75E-G Cr/Pt coated AFM probes (~3 N/m). Band excitation PFM was collected using an AC voltage of 1V, while thermal spectroscopy was collected using laser voltages ranging from 0V-4.75V at 1Hz cycling frequency. All measurements were performed in ambient conditions in standard humid conditions (~20-50%). Finite Element Modeling was done in COMSOL@MultiPhysics software, using electrostatics, solid mechanics, and general math (PDE toolbox) modules. A portion of results were analyzed and visualized in Mathematica 12.2 (https://www.wolfram.com/mathematica)