FIB/SEM tomography represents an indispensable tool for the characterization of three-dimensional nanostructures in battery research and many other fields. However, contrast and 3D classification/reconstruction problems occur in many cases, which strongly limits the applicability of the technique especially on porous materials, like those used for electrode materials in batteries or fuel cells. Distinguishing the different components like active Li storage particles and carbon/binder materials is difficult and often prevents a reliable quantitative analysis of image data, or may even lead to wrong conclusions about structure-property relationships. In this contribution, we present a novel approach for data classification in three-dimensional image data obtained by FIB/SEM tomography and its applications to NMC battery electrode materials. We use two different image signals, namely the signal of the angled SE2 chamber detector and the Inlens detector signal, combine both signals and train a random forest, i.e. a particular machine learning algorithm. We demonstrate that this approach can overcome current limitations of existing techniques suitable for multi-phase measurements and that it allows for quantitative data reconstruction even where current state-of the art techniques fail, or demand for large training sets. This approach may yield as guideline for future research using FIB/SEM tomography. Unlike naked-eye observations might suggest most natural materials such as rocks, tissue or plants are porous, i.e. have a reduced apparent density and contain voids of various sizes. Pores might allow for mass transport, enlarge the surface area of the material significantly and lead to mechanical properties differing from those of bulk materials. Many functional materials have a complex three-dimensional pore structure that determines their properties and strongly influences their overall functionality. Erosion, degradation, growth or even flexural strength are only a few properties defined by the porosity of materials. This influence of the porous structure on functionality is also found and most often intended in many manufactured materials, for example electrodes, catalyzers, filters or concrete A powerful tool for three-dimensional investigations of nano-porous materials is the focused ion beam (FIB) in combination with a high-resolution scanning electron (SEM) or helium-ion microscope. Nearly any material can be investigated, even non-conducting (with helium ions) or fluids (with a cryogenic stage). During FIB/SEM tomography a sample is stepwise sliced by the ion beam while, after every cut, an SEM image is taken of the sliced section. By stacking such images a 3D image of the entire volume -called tomographic reconstruction -is created. However, for porous materials this technique has a major drawback: When taking an SEM image of a sliced sample where pores have been opened, the background of the pore space is illuminated. This background does not belong to the respective slice but to a slice that will appear in later cutting steps. Therefore, this background signal has to be separated from the foreground in the tomographic 3D reconstruction. In order to address this problem, the pore space can be filled with a material like epoxy resin or other The present paper proposes and evaluates a new approach that exploits information gained from multiple signals during ion milling to train a machine learning algorithm, which in turn allows for an improved FIB/SEM-dataset semantic segmentation and then classification of multiple phases -from now on called classification. This implies the advantage of dealing additionally with artefacts like curtaining effects or image gradients simultaneously and even enables multiphase reconstruction without the need of Raw-data preprocessing. Several methods for pore segmentation in images of a lithium ion battery cathode material are compared and an optimized approach is proposed. The investigated cathode consists of highly structured nickel manganese cobalt (NMC) active material with a carbon-based conducting matrix. Counting the voids as a phase implies three different phases. The hierarchically structured cathode material investigated in this study was manufactured with enhanced power and energy density in mind A 3x3 mm2 area of the NMC cathode was cut out and fixed on a standard (12.5 mm Ø) aluminum pin stub using conductive silver. After a resting time of 8 h, the sample was transferred into a ZEISS Crossbeam 340. This dual beam machine combines a gallium liquid metal ion source for sample manipulation (in our case milling), a field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM) with GEMINI® optics for high-resolution imaging and a multi-channel gas injection system (GIS) for material deposition. A 0.5-μm thick protective layer of platinum of 15x15 μm2 area was deposited onto the sample in the region of interest using the GIS. The platinum was heated up to 50 °C. In the first 10 minutes, the platinum precursor was reduced to metallic platinum only by the electron beam set to a current of 250 pA at 5 keV. Then, the procedure was continued using a gallium current of 300 pA at 30 keV for 30 minutes. For tomography, the gallium current was set to 700 pA at 30 keV. The plane spacing was 10 nm over an area of 13x13 μm2 resulting in 1300 slices and a total dwell time of 3 h. High-resolution imaging was done using the InLens and the SE2 detector located off to the side in the microscope chamber -from now on called InLens detector and SE2 detector -simultaneously. The electron current was set to 250 pA at 1 keV. Image acquisition took 21 s per frame resulting in a total measure time of 11 h. Drift correction was applied to the obtained raw data focusing on shine-through artefacts (porebackground). Considering the coordinates X as the width and Y as the height of each SEM image, then Z can be defined as the depth of the measurement. When examining the image stack in the Z-Y direction (the image stack re-slice) that drift correction results in horizontal structures in background areas. After the drift correction, tomographic image data was de-noised using a non-local means filter with a photometric distance equal to the standard deviation of homogeneous sample areas. The described computations for image processing have been performed using the open source software Fiji Six different classification approaches detecting the three classes: voids (back ground and pores), active material (NMC) and carbon-binder matrix were evaluated. As we want to reduce the amount of additional processing required for the final result we perform no further image processing. Although the selected threshold-based methods in particular would benefit from further image preprocessing, such as advanced background correction, these processing steps were omitted to keep the processing effort uniform. For the comparison of the different classifications, one slice (#530) of the tomography was completely labeled by hand for each pixel. This manual classification, serving as a ground truth, is used as test data. The machine learning based algorithms tested utilize image information from the vicinity of the voxel to be determined. To avoid an overlap of the test region with the training region, a distance in Zdirection of 300 nm (30 slices) was chosen. This means that no training was performed on slices 501-560. For training, the open source software Ilastik 20 was used (version 1.2.2 in the debug mode). The training data was generated within the Ilastik user interface by manual labelling. However, in contrast to the densely-labeled test slice #530 the training annotation was very sparse. In order to validate the goodness-of-fit for each classification approach, the intersection over union (IoU) for each of the classification approaches where p i represents the volume fraction of class i. We chose to use the weighted over the non-weighted error to take volume differences per class into account and avoid an overestimation of errors on small classes. We chose not to use simulations for the evaluation of classification because of the complexity of the multiphase FIB/SEM tomography measurements. We wanted artefacts like curtaining, gradients and re-depositioning to be included in our datasets and there exists no model tool allowing for a simultaneous simulation of all these artefacts. Fig. The most straight-forward approach of thresholding a three-phase dataset is a combination of two thresholds. We applied two thresholds based on the carbon peak of the SE2-dataset histogram shown in Fig. In Fig. Algorithms such as the one suggested by Salzer et al. The next logical step was to test, whether a machine learning algorithm can outperform any of the previously mentioned approaches. Due to the implementation of 3D filtering for feature generation in Ilastik In a next step, we carried out the same classification including both the SE2 and the InLens signal and the difference of both signals, which leads to a number of 183 features in total. In doing so, the weighted error was reduced to 10.3 %, which is more than two times better than the approach presented in Section 3.3. On the cropped volume, with a weighted error of 16.2 %, the algorithm that was trained for the whole dataset was slightly better than for the approach presented in Section 3.3. detector in the most cases, the subtraction of both is of high importance concerning the classification of carbon. The texture-based filters show an overall low impact on the classification. For the final classification approach, we designed features mainly depending on the evolution of pore space during milling. The idea behind that approach is to make use of the knowledge gained by the method described in Section 3.3 but to let the algorithm learn by itself. Thereby the random forest is trained to interpret the obtained data which turns out to be advantageous compared to the modelbased interpretation of the approach in Section 3.3. More precisely, the resulting classification did outperform all the other approaches considered in the present paper by far with a weighted error of 6.1 % on the total data set, which is haft of that of the pure single detector approach (3.4). This result represents another case of a classification algorithm where a hybrid approach combining machine learning with classical image analysis leads to improved results Fig. Next to the large size variation of the pore areas, the carbon material is also very sparse and varies in size. We found that this was the most challenging aspect of the classification and only the random forest trained on the tailored feature set was able to classify these structures. With a weighted error of 11.0 %, this approach also outperformed the other approaches in the cropped volume within a single NMC particle. Again, the accuracy is inferior to the overall accuracy because the algorithm was trained and specialized on classifying three phases with a large variety in pore sizes. A precise multiphase classification of porous materials allows for a large variety of analyses. Figure In this section, we present a further statistical analysis of the image data based on its semantic segmentation by random forests as described in Section 3.6. The focus is on volume fraction of the solid phase as well as on characteristics related to the shortest transportation paths and bottleneck effects in the pore space. The analysis in this section is based on the individual NMC particle, which has been resolved completely by tomographic imaging, i.e., the particle from which the cutout for the small FOV is taken, see Fig. To compute the volume fraction of the solid phase of the considered NMC particle -in the following volume fraction -we determine the inner pore voxels by means of the so-called rolling ball algorithm. This algorithm has also been used to determine the inner pores of battery electrodes Besides volume fraction, the descriptors "mean geodesic tortuosity" -measuring the length of transportation paths -and "constrictivity" -measuring bottleneck effects -are of crucial importance for the characterization of microstructures, in which transport processes take place In order to measure bottleneck effects, we compute the amount of pores that can be filled by an intrusion of spheres with a predefined radius r, where intrusion starts at the boundary of the particle, see Fig. We found that the machine learning approach outperforms all the traditional approaches for analyzing complex data. For simple classification tasks as the segmentation of a region inside an aggregated NMC particle, however, machine learning might not be the best choice as classical gradient-based approaches can achieve comparable results without the need for time consuming training. In particular, this holds true, as the results can be improved for those regions by merely focusing on binarization tasks and by applying further pre-processing. For more difficult classification tasks, machine learning approaches are more robust when dealing with artefacts and multiple phases and, in addition, they identify pores with high accuracy. By using machine learning for the classification of 3D FIB/SEM data, the main drawback of non-infiltrated measurements -the lack of finale classification accuracy -becomes manageable. In addition, machine learning approaches are also able to incorporate and learn information that is not directly encoded in the measured gray values but lies in further a priori information such as shapes or arrangements. Without infiltration, much less pre-and post-processing has to be done and the desired region of interest on the sample can be found much easier. As a result, the time per sample at the instrument is reduced, thus allowing for a higher yield of FIB/SEM. In addition, sample alteration e.g. deformations caused by the infiltration and the hardening process can be ruled out and materials that were not accessible due to chemical or contrast reasons are now detectable. The only materials that do not eligible for non-embedded measurements are samples that need the structural support of an embedding material during milling in order to avoid crumbling. For such samples, the approach discussed in the present paper is not applicable. Without infiltration, a sample can be inserted directly into the FIB/SEM after fixation. In some cases there is not even the necessity of pre-milling material to reach the desired location. After image acquisition, rather few filtering and image cleaning is required, and the same applies after the classification. In the case of random forest classifiers, training and classifying can be computationally demanding, but for similar datasets, the classifiers can be reused and no further training is required. Except for the data acquisition software, use of software can be limited to open access sources (ImageJ/Fiji 19 , Ilastik In the present paper, a random forest classifier was used for the classification of structures in FIB/SEM tomography images of porous multi-phase materials. We show that the technique is capable to take non-infiltrated pores of different sizes into account while dealing with several material phases and identifying re-depositioning artefacts occurring especially in larger pores. We compare the accuracy of different random forest approaches with current state-of-the art techniques. We found that machinelearning based approaches outperform traditional approaches. Furthermore, we show that with specialy filtered input for the random forest and the use of two different detector signals, i.e. the InLens detector and the chamber SE2 detector, the accuracy of the classification can be further improved. Finally, we perform a detailed morphological analysis of the classification involving extracting gradient density, gradient tortuosity, gradient constrictivity and porosity information.