Since the 1960's when Gordon Moore proposed that the transistor density in our electronic devices should double every two years while the cost is halved, the semiconductor industry has taken this statement to heart. Over the last few decades, no other industry has seen growth even comparably close to that experienced by the semiconductors industry. This has all been made possible by the unbroken string of ingenious breakthroughs by brilliant minds that have been working tirelessly to shrink down transistors. The latest of which is the use of high-k dielectrics and a return to metal gates combined with 3D-transistor architectures. This has been the enabling technology for the transition from the 90 nm node to the 45 nm node, allowing us to shrink our transistors further without losing additional gate control. The fundamental reason for using a high-k gate dielectric compared to SiO 2 is that shrinking our gate oxide further, which is already at a few angstroms, is no longer a feasible option to gain additional gate control. High-k dielectric overcome this by exploiting the fundamental physics of capacitors and the materials science of dielectrics to provide a viable option to increase gate control without the need for successively thinner gate oxides. Hafnium Oxide (Hf O 2 ) is the most studied and popular of such materials. Its high dielectric constant ∼ 16 -25 and interface stability with silicon at operating temperatures make it an ideal candidate for use in current CM OS technology. Intel has been using Hf O 2 for their logic technology foundries for its 32 nm node and Micron its partner in memory has been using Hf O 2 for its DRAM access transistors and capacitors for the 50 nm node, all since the early 2010's. Despite its deceivingly simple appearance, the processes involved in the fabrication of such high-k Hf O 2 /Si interfaces are full of process subtleties and fabrication nuances. One of the primary reasons for this is the formation of a SiO 2 interlayer after deposition at process temperatures (∼ 600 o C -1000 o C) which degrades our final transistors gate control and ultimately the device characteristics. In this term paper we hope to explore the physics and materials science of these high-k Hf O 2 /Si interfaces, discussing the challenges and ways to overcome them when it comes to its actual fabrication, and how this ultimately affects our device performance. This paper is broadly divided into three sections where we look at the thermodynamics, reaction kinetics and atomic diffusion kinetics, after which we look at the effects of these parameters on device performance and fabrication. Moore's law has been the guiding force for the semiconductors industry since the last few decades, enabling it to grow at unprecedented rates unmatched by any other industry. The oxide-silicon interface on a M OSF ET transistor is a region of critical importance to the electrical performance of the device. Group IV -B elements, namely Hf , Zr, T i and their oxides have gained a lot of attention in recent years for their use in CM OS technology as high-k dielectrics. The electrical properties of Hf O 2 have been well studied in literature. Figure Figure In order to understand the impetus for the formation of the SiO 2 interlayer, one must look at the thermodynamics at the interface. For any scalable process to be implemented at an industrial scale, the effects of process parameters must be extensively studied and optimized. To enable the growth of an electrically well behaved Hf O 2 film, we have established in the previous sections that the growth needs to be performed in an oxidizing environment. Figure Figure Figure Given the mechanism of the diffusion which forms the oxide interlayer, the primary approach to mitigate its formation is crystal clear. If the positive vacancies at the grain boundaries that enable diffusion are occupied by another less diffusive species during growth, oxygen can react with the Hf O 2 fully oxidizing it but will not be able migrate to the interface. The primary motivation for a deeper understanding of the mechanism of interlayer formation in the Hf O 2 -Si gate stack was to understand its impact on the performance of next generation CM OS devices. A keen understanding of this phenomenon was crucial in weighing trade-off between performance enhancement and process limitations, that is if it was desirable to eliminate the interlayer at the cost of a poorer interface. In this section we look at the impact that the presence of an interlayer has on the CM OS performance factors of the device and the advantages and disadvantages that it entails. The primary quantity controlling the overall behaviour of any M OSF ET is the capacitance at the gate C g , which ultimately is dependent on the effective thick- Figure The primary reason for avoiding a direct interface between the Hf O 2 and the silicon is not the EOT loss, but also the severe degradation in the mobility of carriers at the channel in such devices. Another very important parameter that is affected by the formation of an interlayer is the gate potential at which strong inversion is initiated. In the case of a Hf O 2 /SiO 2 /Si gate stack with an interlayer it is expected that the gate leakage current would be reduced due to an increase in the thickness of the oxide. Figure In this term paper we looked at and analysed an in depth mechanism of interlayer formation in the Hf O 2 /Si system at the interface and provide a thermodynamic as well as kinetic impetus for such behaviour. The structural and electrical properties of Hf O 2 were explored briefly after which thermodynamic argument was presented. 