Deciphering the three-dimensional atomic structure of solid-solid interfaces in core-shell nanomaterials is the key to understand their remarkable catalytical, optical and electronic properties. Here, we probe the three-dimensional atomic structures of palladium-platinum core-shell nanoparticles at the single-atom level using atomic resolution electron tomography. We successfully quantify the rich structural variety of core-shell nanoparticles including bond length, coordination number, local bond orientation order, grain boundary, and five-fold symmetry, all in 3D at atomic resolution. Instead of forming an atomically-sharp boundary, the core-shell interface is atomically diffuse with an average thickness of 4.2 Å, irrespective of the particle's size, morphology, or crystallographic texture. The high concentration of Pd in the interface is highly related to the electric double layers of the Pd seeds. These results advance our understanding of core-shell structures at the fundamental level, providing potential strategies into nanomaterial manipulation and chemical property regulation. Core-shell nanoparticles (CS-NPs) are attracting significant interest in chemistry and material science, and are widely used in many applications such as catalysis, optics, electronics, and biomedical applications due to their novel optical, magnetic and electronic characteristics The characterization of CS-NPs is critical to understand structure-functionality correlations, which in turn influence the design of materials with improved properties. In the past decades, through rapid development of electron microscopy, both structural and elemental information of CS-NPs can be routinely characterized at atomic resolution using either transmission electron microscopy (TEM) or scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) It has been reported that the geometric misfit introduces interfacial strain during heteroepitaxial growth of the shell in solution to form multigrain nanocrystals To address these critical issues of core-shell interfacial structure, here we synthesized polycrystalline pentagonal bipyramid and monocrystalline truncated octahedron palladium-platinum CS-NPs using two-step chemical reduction, and then probed the 3D atomic structures of CS-NPs at the single-atom level. The 3D atomic coordinates and chemical composition of Pd@Pt CS-NPs with different morphology and size were determined using atomic resolution electron tomography (AET), which has been a powerful tool for atomic-scale structural characterization in 3D and even 4D Pd@Pt CS-NPs with different morphologies were synthesized by a two-step chemical reduction method We focus on three representative particles with different shapes; namely, pentagonal bipyramid (PB), elongated pentagonal bipyramid (EPB) and truncated octahedron (TO) in this study. After pre-processing and image denoising, 3D reconstructions were computed from the tilt series using an iterative algorithm described elsewhere To better visualize the internal 3D core-shell interface, we divided the atomic coordinates of three particles into slices four atom-layer-thick (Figs. To probe the rich structural information both in the interfaces and the whole particles at atomic resolution, we analyzed the point defects, grain boundaries and edges/corners in all three particles. No vacancies were found in any of the three particles. Figs. In all particles we investigated, the mean bond length distributions at the interfaces are similar to those of the whole particles (Supplementary Fig. The five-fold symmetry in EPB and PB particles exists in both the core and shell. We further classified the local structural environments in both particles with polyhedral template matching (Methods). We found five fcc grains in each particle, each sharing an hcp-like twin boundary with its two neighboring grains, and one five-fold co-axis (Figs. Compared with the ideal pentagonal bipyramid, we found most of the experimental pentagonal bipyramids are compressed in the co-axis direction (α/γ ratios are 0.99 for PB and 0.98 for EPB, smaller than standard 1.05). The β/γ ratios are both 0.99 for PB and EPB, showing almost ideal capping pyramids for the whole five-fold axis (Fig. We also measured the angle (θ) between the α bond and the plane normal vector of five ring atoms, where the mean θ is 5.2°for PB and 3.9°for EPB, indicating that the pentagonal bipyramids in the five-fold co-axis are distorted (Fig. Although TEM/STEM has been employed to explore the growth mechanism of CS structures in 2D We have examined the influence of heating procedures during sample preparation. We baked the CS-NPs at 180 °C in vacuum for much longer times, up to 48 hrs. The 3D atomic models from two independent measurements of the same nanoparticle before and after baking were obtained using the same procedures. The same atomic slice in both models shows that the diffuse Pd atoms in the Pt shell remain the same position and chemical environment (Supplementary Fig. It is notable that we washed the Pd seeds and re-dispersed them in fresh oleylamine to get rid of any extra Pd(II) salts for the shell growth. The size distributions between Pd seeds and the final Pd cores in CS-NPs (Supplementary Fig. Where is the relative permittivity of oleylamine, 0 is the vacuum permittivity, is the Boltzmann constant, is the absolute temperature, is the Avogadro constant, is the ionic strength and e is the electron charge. The of oleylamine is ~3.1 according to literature In conclusion, we quantified rich structural variety of Pd@Pt core-shell nanoparticles including bond length, coordination number, local bond orientation order, grain boundary, and five-fold symmetry, all in 3D at atomic resolution. Our results confirmed the heteroepitaxial growth of the core-shell structure. We quantitatively showed the unique atomically diffuse interface in CS-NPs synthesized with wet chemistry with unprecedented 3D detail. Our results suggest that the diffuse interface is highly related to the electric double layers of the seeds, which could possibly be tuned by manipulating the Debye length. The diffuse layer could influence the electronic structures of the shell, and further affect the applications of core-shell structures in catalysis, optics and electronics simulated ADF-STEM images and denoised experimental images with various denoising level. For each denoised image, a 2D mask slightly larger than the boundary of the nanoparticles was generated from each experimental image. The background level within the mask was estimated using Laplacian interpolation. Then the images in each tilt series were aligned by the center of mass and common line method. After image pre-processing, each experimental tilt series was reconstructed by the Real Space Iterative Reconstruction (RESIRE) algorithm 3D atomic coordinates determination and chemical species classification. 3D atomic coordinates of three nanoparticles were determined separately using the following procedure. All local maxima in the 3D reconstruction were identified and the peak positions were located using polynomial fitting described elsewhere These positions were further manually checked to correct for unidentified or misidentified atoms due to fitting failure or a large chunk of connected intensity blobs from multiple atoms 57 . Using a K-mean clustering method 58 based on the integrated intensity of a 2. 57. Brunger, A. T. et al. Crystallography & NMR system: a new software suite for macromolecular structure determination. Acta Crystallogr. D 54, 905-921 (1998). 58. Lloyd, S. P. Least-squares quantization in PCM. IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory 28, 129-137 (1982).