Terahertz (THz) sciences and technologies have contributed to a rapid development of a wide range of applications and expanded the frontiers in fundamental science. Spintronic terahertz emitters offer conceptual advantages since the spin orientation in the magnetic layer can be easily controlled either by the externally applied magnetic field or by the internal magnetic field distribution determined by the specific shape of the magnetic elements. Here, we report a switchable terahertz source based on micropatterned magnetic heterostructures driven by femtosecond laser pulses. We show that the precise tunability of the polarization state is facilitated by the underlying magnetization texture of the magnetic layer that is dictated by the shape of the microstructure. These results also reveal the underlying physical mechanisms of a nonuniform magnetization state on the generation of ultrafast spin currents in the magnetic heterostructures. Our findings indicate that the emission of the linearly polarized THz waves can be switched on and off by saturating the sample using a biasing magnetic field, opening fascinating perspectives for integrated on-chip THz devices with wide-ranging potential applications. Terahertz (THz) devices, which operate in the frequency range from 0.1 THz to 30 THz in the electromagnetic spectrum, have significantly impacted various fields such as spectroscopy, sensing, and imaging However, the additional spin-degree of freedom of electrons enables functionalities that could further advance THz technologies, e.g., biomedicine, materials science, physics, and chemistry. These spintronic THz emitters are based on magnetic heterostructures that comprise ferromagnetic metal/heavy metal layers where σ is the spin-polarization vector, γ is the spin Hall angle of the heavy metal layer, and J c , J s are the charge and spin currents, respectively. See supplemental material (SM) for a schematic illustration of the inverse spin Hall effect. The timevarying charge current burst then emits THz electromagnetic waves, described by Maxwell's equations. An additional advantage of spintronic THz sources is that micro-and nanofabrication of magnetic thin films are readily available, which opens up the possibility to tailor THz properties by design. Previously, microstructured stripes made of magnetic heterostructures were discussed as a means to modify the THz emission characteristics Here, we report a broadband magnetic-field controllable THz source based on the magnetization texture facilitated by micropatterned magnetic heterostructures with broken mirror symmetry. For this purpose, we use lithographically-defined arrays of a W/Fe/Pt trilayer grown on sapphire. We show that the precise tunability of the polarization state is facilitated by the underlying magnetization texture of the Fe layer that is determined by the exact shape of the elements and the direction of the applied field with respect to the microstructure. This interpretation is further supported by micromagnetic simulations. Our results further reveal how a nonuniform magnetization state affects the generation process of ultrafast spin currents in the microstructure and hence the properties of the emitted THz waves. Our findings indicate that a magnetic switch of linearly polarized THz source can be realized in microstructured geometries opening fascinating perspectives for integrated on-chip THz devices. In the following, we describe the experimental methods including time-domain THz spectroscopy, sample fabrication, and micromagnetic modeling. The experimental THz emission measurements are conducted using a standard time-domain THz spectroscopy (TDTS) system using electro-optical sampling with a 300 μmthick (110) ZnTe crystal, see Fig. To increase the intensity of the emitted THz radiation we sandwich the ferromagnetic layer (Fe) between two heavy metals with opposite spin Hall angles (W and Pt), see Fig. We perform micromagnetic simulations using the graphic processing unit (GPU) accelerated software mumax3 In the following, we discuss the main observation of our work -the manipulation of the ultrafast spin current generation driven by femtosecond laser pulses facilitated by the underlying magnetization texture in the micropatterned magnetic heterostructure. As will be shown below, this control is robust and is enabled solely by the effective magnetic field distribution of the microstructure. Once the magnetic texture is initialized by an external biasing field, no additional external magnetic field is required; this is particularly useful for applications since the THz device itself does not require to be powered. Our results show that it is possible to switch on or off linearly polarized THz waves by initializing the sample in either of two orthogonal directions, in the following called "parallel" and "perpendicular" to the cut. The peak amplitude of the THz signal of the chopped disks samples is about 1/20 of that of Fe/Pt bilayer film of the same thickness. This ratio is of the same order as the ratio of the twodimensional hybrid metal halides with respect to the control sample (E NiFe/Halides /E NiFe/Pt ≈1/15) direction, E x and in y-direction, E y . Figure To further support our interpretation and to provide guidance on the exact underlying magnetization texture of the disks, we use micromagnetic modeling based on mumax3 (SM) To further confirm our interpretation, we measure the dependence of the THz emission on the in-plane sample rotation angle θ [see Fig. Finally, we note that an additional tuning variable could be a spatial variation of the thickness of the layers or their conductivities that would enable the control of the exact phase difference as well as the relative strength of the two orthogonal components. This approach may lead to a reliable generation of elliptically polarized THz waves with tunable ellipticity and polarization direction from spintronic emitters We demonstrated an effective way to control and switch the linearly polarized THz radiation from femtosecond laser pulse driven spintronic microstructure emitters. We showed that the magnetic texture in the ferromagnetic layer controlled with the shape of the microstructure dictates the emitted THz waves. Our findings indicate that the emission of a polarized THz radiation can be controlled without an external magnetic field applied during the THz generation process with carefully designed microstructures. This goes beyond a recent proposal to harness permanently applied inhomogeneous magnetic fields See the supplementary material for details on the inverse spin Hall effect, results of micromagnetic simulations, helicity-dependent THz emission, angular dependence of the control sample, microscope and atomic force microscopy im-ages of the samples under investigation, and angular dependence of the total THz electric field.