Reduced dielectric screening in two-dimensional materials enables bound excitons, which modifies their optical absorption and optoelectronic response even at room temperature. Here, we demonstrate the existence of excitons in the bandgap of the monolayer family of the newly discovered synthetic MoSi2Z4 (Z = N, P, and As) series of materials. All three monolayers support several bright and strongly bound excitons with binding energies varying from 1 eV to 1.35 eV for the lowest energy exciton resonances. On increasing the pump fluence, the exciton binding energies get renormalized, leading to a redshift-blueshift crossover. Our study shows that the MoSi2Z4 series of monolayers offer an exciting test-bed for exploring the physics of strongly bound excitons and their non-equilibrium dynamics. The interplay of light-matter interactions and Coulomb interactions in two-dimensional (2D) materials gives rise to very exciting physics Recently, a new family of materials (MoSi 2 N 4 class of materials) has been added to the family of 2D monolayers. These are synthetic materials, with no known naturally occurring three-dimensional counterparts In this paper, we investigate the equilibrium and nonequilibrium optical properties of monolayer MoSi 2 Z 4 series of compounds (with Z = N, As and P), focusing on the excitonic effects. To obtain accurate electronic properties, we use the density functional theory (DFT) calculations and include the quasiparticle (QP) self-energy corrections using quantum many-body perturbation theory (MBPT) following the GW method To study the excitonic resonances and their impact on the optical absorption spectrum, we include electronhole correlations on top of the GW ground state, using the Bethe-Salpeter equation (BSE) This paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II we discuss the crystal structure and details of the computational methodology. The electronic properties, the optical absorption spectrum, and the exciton binding en- ergies and wave function for prominent bright excitons are presented in Sec. III. In Sec. IV, we explore the fluence dependent non-equilibrium optical properties such as photo-excited charge carrier dependent screening effects leading to shifting of the excitonic peaks and binding energies. We summarize our findings in Sec. V. The monolayer MoSi 2 Z 4 has a hexagonal lattice structure [see Fig. To confirm the dynamical stability of the monolayer MoSi 2 Z 4 structure, we have performed the phonon calculations with a 2×2×1 supercell. For this, we have used the first-principle calculations based on density functional theory (DFT) as implemented in the Vienna abinitio simulation package (VASP) As an additional check for the GGA bandstructure, we use the relaxed structure and validate our DFT calculations using the Quantum ESPRESSO package For incorporating the QP self-energy corrections in the electronic structure, we have used the GW method as implemented in the YAMBO package To probe the impact of pump fluence on the excitons binding energies, we study the non-equilibrium carrier dynamics of the system. We perform real-time simulation using the td-BSE equation Experimentally synthesized monolayer MoSi 2 N 4 crystal structure consists of seven atomic layers in the sequence of N-Si-N-Mo-N-Si-N as shown in Fig. We find that within the GGA approximation, including spin-orbit coupling (SOC), monolayer MoSi 2 N 4 is an indirect bandgap semiconductor with a bandgap of 1.78 eV. In contrast, the monolayers MoSi 2 As 4 and MoSi 2 P 4 are direct bandgap semiconductors with a bandgap of 0.51 eV and 0.60 eV at the K point of the 2D hexagonal BZ. To improve the estimation of the electronic bandgap, we include the QP self-energy corrections on top of the GGA DFT theory calculations, using the GW method. Our GW calculation indicate that the monolayer MoSi 2 N 4 has an indirect bandgap of 3.58 eV, while MoSi 2 As 4 and MoSi 2 P 4 have direct bandgap of 1.70, and 1.74 eV, respectively. Interestingly, our GW calculations for QP bandstructure indicate that the bandgap in these materials is even higher than that obtained from hybrid HSE06 functional-based calculations A subtle feature of the electronic band structure is that the combined effect of the absence of inversion symmetry and the strong SOC of the Mo-d orbitals breaks the valence band edge degeneracy at the K point. This is similar to the valence band splitting in TMD monolayers Having obtained the electronic spectrum, we now focus on the optical absorption spectrum. Owing to the reduced screening of the Coulomb interactions in 2D materials, these synthetic monolayers have enhanced electronhole interaction (EHI). This can give rise to several excitonic peaks below the electronic bandgap, similar to that found in MoS 2 monolayers. Thus, it is essential to consider the attraction between the quasi-electrons and quasi-holes by solving the BSE to obtain a reasonably good optical absorption spectra TABLE II. The exciton energy and the dipole oscillator strength of the most prominent exciton peak (having the oscillator strength of more than 0.3 out of 1) shown in Fig. To include the Coulomb interactions between the electrons and holes in our calculations, we use the quantum MBPT (an effective two-body approach). This goes beyond the one-particle picture of individual quasi-electron and quasi-hole excitations The optical absorption spectra is defined by the imaginary part of the dielectric function (E), which is specified by Here, E λ are the exciton energy eigenvalues calculated from the BSE for the exciton state λ. The dipole oscillator strength (OS) is defined as The dipole matrix element c|d|v captures the electronic transitions from the valence (v) to the conduction (c) band states We present the calculated optical absorption spectrum for monolayer MoSi 2 N 4 , MoSi 2 As 4 , and MoSi 2 P 4 , including the EHI (blue color) and excluding the EHI (orange color), in Fig. To identify all the excitonic states in the three MoSi 2 Z 4 monolayers, we analyze the positive eigenvalues solutions of the exciton eigenvalue equation. It is given by Here, E c and E v are the QP energies of the electron and hole, respectively. The K AA vc,v c (E λ ) represent the matrix elements of the EHI kernel. The energy location of all the different exciton states, and their oscillator strength, are presented in Fig. To visualize the spatial distribution of the excitons for MoSi 2 N 4 , we plot the exciton probability density for the A, B, and F exciton peaks in Fig. To study the non-equilibrium optical properties of monolayer MoSi 2 Z 4 series, we use the td-BSE framework as implemented in the YAMBO code The redshift to blueshift crossover in the exciton BE is similar to the atom-atom interaction with changing inter-atomic separation. To show this explicitly, we fit the exciton BE to the inter-atomic interaction potential energy specified by Here, r is the separation between the interacting atoms or excitons. In Eq. (4) r 0 , p, q and A are treated as fitting parameters. By assuming that all the photo-excited carriers form excitons, r can be related to the photo-excited carrier density (n) via the condition, πr 2 n = 1. Fitting yields, r 0 = 1.53 nm, p = 2.30 and q = 1.13. The minima of the exciton-exciton interaction potential occurs at, r eq = 2.9 nm. We show in Fig. We have demonstrated that the MoSi 2 Z 4 series of monolayers hosts very strongly bound excitons, with potential for optoelectronic applications in the infrared and in the visible regime. By explicitly including the QP selfenergy corrections in GW based bandstructure calculations, we find that monolayer MoSi 2 N 4 hosts an indirect bandgap of 3.58 eV with a comparable direct bandgap. In contrast, the monolayer MoSi 2 As 4 and MoSi 2 P 4 have a direct bandgap of 1.70 eV and 1.74 eV, respectively. Starting from the GW based QP bandstructure calculations and including the two-particle electron-hole correlations, we show the existence of several (around six) strongly bound bright excitons within the QP bandgap region in this series of materials. The binding energies of the prominent A and B exciton peaks in all three monolayers are greater than 1 eV, and it can be as large as 1.35 eV in MoSi 2 N 4 . Additionally, we solve the td-BSE equation to study the fluence-dependent renormalization of the excitonic BE. Interestingly, we find a redshift-blueshift crossover in the exciton BE with increasing pump fluence, indicating atom-like interactions between excitons with increasing exciton density. Our study establishes the monolayers of synthetic MoSi 2 Z 4 series to be an exciting platform for exploring the physics of strongly bound excitons and their non-equilibrium dynamics. . The electronic bandgap for the three MoSi2Z4 monolayers with spin-orbit coupling (SOC), calculated within the GGA approximation (E GGA g ), with hybrid (HSE) functional (E HSE g