In this paper, we propose a multi-layered hyperelastic plate theory of growth within the framework of nonlinear elasticity. First, the 3D governing system for a general multi-layered hyperelastic plate is established, which incorporates the growth effect, and the material and geometrical parameters of the different layers. Then, a series expansion-truncation approach is adopted to eliminate the thickness variables in the 3D governing system. An elaborate calculation scheme is applied to derive the iteration relations of the coefficient functions in the series expansions. Through some further manipulations, a 2D vector plate equation system with the associated boundary conditions is established, which only contains the unknowns in the bottom layer of the plate. To show the efficiency of the current plate theory, three typical examples regarding the growth-induced deformations and instabilities of multi-layered plate samples are studied. Some analytical and numerical solutions to the plate equation are obtained, which can provide accurate predictions on the growth behaviors of the plate samples. Furthermore, the problem of 'shape-programming' of multi-layered hyperelastic plates through differential growth is studied. The explicit formulas of shape-programming for some typical multi-layered plates are derived, which involve the fundamental quantities of the 3D target shapes. By using these formulas, the shape evolutions of the plates during the growing processes can be controlled accurately. The results obtained in the current work are helpful for the design of intelligent soft devices with multi-layered plate structures. Soft biological tissues with multi-layered plate or shell structures are commonly observed in nature. For example, the diverse structures of plant leaves Within the framework of nonlinear elasticity, soft materials can be viewed as certain kinds of hyperelastic materials. A number of theoretical models have been reported to study the growth-induced deformations of soft materials To model the mechanical behaviors of plate samples, one usually needs to adopt suitable plate theories. Some classical plate theories (e.g., the Kirchhoff-Love theory, the Föppl-von Kármán (FvK) theory and the Mindlin-Reissner theory) were established within the small strain range and by making a priori hypotheses on the in-plane or transverse displacement components, which are not applicable for the large deformations of soft material samples. In Dai and Song Regarding the mechanical behaviors of multi-layered hyperelastic plates induced by growth, swelling or prestrain, a number of modeling works have also been reported in the literature. For example, Tsai et al. Despite the existence of the above modeling works on the growth behaviors of multi-layered hyperelastic plates, the research state has not attained a satisfactory level. Most of the models focus on some special types of samples (e.g., the bilayer samples) or deformation styles (e.g., the plane-strain deformations). Currently, there still lacks a plate theory that can be applied for general multi-layered plate samples (with general material properties and geometrical shapes) and arbitrary growth-induced deformations. This is just the motivation for carrying out the current work. In the current work, we aim to propose a general multi-layered hyperelastic plate theory of growth within the framework of nonlinear elasticity. Compared with the previous modeling works, this new plate theory is applicable for the plate samples with general geometrical shapes, number of layers, material properties and external loading conditions, which can also incorporate arbitrary growth fields in the different layers. To establish the plate theory, we start from the 3D governing system and eliminate the thickness variables through a series expansion-truncation approach 2 The plate equation system for a multi-layered hyperelastic plate In this section, we first formulate the 3D governing system for a multi-layered hyperelastic plate, where the growth effect will be taken into account. After that, through a series expansion-truncation approach and by adopting an elaborate calculation scheme, the 2D vector plate equation system will be derived. We consider a general thin hyperelastic plate as shown in Fig. where Ω is the in-plane area of the plate. The position vector of a material point in κ k is denoted as where k is the unit normal vector of Ω (i.e., the unit vector directing along the Z k -axis). Under a rectangular cartesian coordinate system, we further denote The different layers in the plate can grow independently. Besides that, some external loads are applied on the surface of the plate. Due to the growth effect and the external loads, the configuration of the k-th layer in the plate will transform from κ k to the current configuration κk (1 ≤ k ≤ n). The position vector of a material point in κk is denoted as x k . The total deformation gradient tensor in the k-th layer is then expressed by where ∇ r is the in-plane 2D gradient operator. Following the conventional approach of growth mechanics where A k is the elastic strain tensor and G k is the growth tensor. In the current work, we assume that the growth tensor in each layer is uniform along the thickness direction, thus G k doesn't depend on the thickness variable Z k . By further assuming the elastic incompressibility of the material (which is satisfied for most soft biological and polymeric materials), we have the following constraint equation where Det(•) represents the determinant of a tensor. We suppose the hyperelastic material in the k-th layer of the plate has the strain-energy function During the growing process, each layer of the plate keeps in the quasi-static state, which yields the mechanical equilibrium equation where S k is the nominal stress tensor defined by In the expression of S k , p k (X) is the Lagrangian multiplier related to the constraint of elastic incompressibility, which is an unknown function. On the top and bottom faces of the plate, we propose the following traction boundary conditions where q -and q + are the applied tractions, Ω - 1 represents the bottom face of the 1st layer and Ω + n represents the top face of the n-th layer. The lateral surface of each layer is denoted as and the traction boundary ∂κ k , we propose the following boundary conditions where b k and q k are the prescribed position vectors and applied tractions, and N is the external normal vector of the lateral surface. On the interfaces between the different layers, we propose the following displacement and stress continuity conditions Eqs. ( In this subsection, a series expansion-truncation approach will be adopted to derive the 2D vector plate equation from the 3D governing system (3)-(9) (cf. Dai and Song In the following derivations, only the 5n vector unknowns x k and the 4n scalar unknowns p k (k = 1, 2, • • • , n) will be taken into account (i.e., there are totally 19n unknowns). According to the series expansions As mentioned before, the growth tensor G k does not depend on the coordinate Z, so we do not need to consider the expansion of G k . By submitting (10) 1 into (1) and comparing with (11) 1 , we obtain From Similar as the deformation gradient tensor, the nominal stress tensor S k can be expanded as On the other hand, by submitting (11) 2 into (5), another expression of S k can be derived, which is given by where Here, k ) (i = 0, 1, 2, 3) are the elastic moduli associated with the strain-energy function φk (A k ). By comparing the coefficients of Z i k in ( k , A - k , A k R (1) k ] + 3A (2) k , A k ] + 3R (2) k , A k ] -3p k R (1) Based on the above preparations, we begin to formulate a closed equation system for the 19n unknowns x k and p First, by substituting The coefficients of Z i k (i = 0, 1, 2, 3) in ( where 1 ≤ k ≤ n and ':' represents the double contraction of the tensors. Eq. ( Next, by submitting where 1 ≤ k ≤ n and S k . Eq. ( Further substituting Finally, from the displacement and stress continuity conditions (8)-( In summary, Eqs. ( k and p k (k = 1, 2, • • • , n), which formulate a closed equation system. To derive a 2D vector plate equation system from this closed system, we adopt an elaborate calculation scheme proposed in Du et al. • Step one. By solving the linear algebraic equations (1) 1 and the scalar unknown p (0) 1 . Once this system is solved, we can obtain the expressions of four unknowns in terms of x It should be noted that for general hyperelastic materials, Eq. ( 1 and p (0) 1 . Therefore, it may not be straightforward to derive the explicit expressions of these unknowns. While, if the layers in the plate are made of incompressible neo-Hookean materials, Eq. ( . By solving this system, one can derive the asymptotic iterative relations of the unknowns between the neighboring layers. The procedure of manipulation is 1 → 2 → • • • → n for the layers of the plate. In Eq. ( where k = 2, 3, • • • , n. After the manipulations in this step, we only have the unknowns x (0) 1 . • Step four. Finally, the 2D vector plate equation can be derived from the boundary conditions where q = q + + q -and S(x k (x (0) 1 ) . By submitting the iterative relations ( To complete the plate equation system, we still need suitable boundary conditions on the edge of the plate area ∂Ω. According to the boundary conditions We suppose the position vector field b k (s, Z k ) has been prescribed on the region ∂κ , from which we can adopt the following two kinds of edge boundary conditions where We suppose the applied traction q k (s, Z k ) has been specified on the region ∂κ ), which yields another two kinds of edge boundary conditions where Besides the traction boundary conditions In Eq. ( In summary, the 2D vector plate equation ( • By substituting the iterative relations ( 1 . In that case, the plate equation will have a very length expression, which is not convenient to be tackled. When solving some concrete problems, the plate equation may be further simplified. For some problems, the plate equation with the asymptotic order O(h) (i.e., only the first two terms of S are substituted in ( • The unknown vector x (0) 1 can be viewed as the parametric equation of the deformed surface S of the bottom face Ω - 1 of the plate. We denote {E, F, G} and {L, M, N } as the fundamental quantities of the first and second fundamental forms of S, respectively. In terms of the position vector where in the plate equation can be replaced by the fundamental quantities {E, F, G} and {L, M, N }, the lengthy expression of the plate equation can be simplified significantly, which will also facilitate the following work of shape-programming (cf. Li et al. • Recently, a more rigorous approach has been proposed to establish the edge boundary conditions in finitestrain plate (or rod, shell) theories The plate equation system of the multi-layered hyperelastic plate theory has been derived in the previous section. In this section, this plate theory will be applied to studied the growth-induced deformations and instabilities of some typical multi-layered plate samples. To obtain some concrete results, we assume that the layers in the plate samples are made of incompressible neo-Hookean materials, which have the elastic strain-energy functions The thickness parameters of the layers in the plate are where h is a small parameter representing the characteristic thickness of the layers. In the first example, we study the growth-induced plane-strain deformations of multi-layered hyperelastic plates. The reference configuration of a plate sample and the local coordinate system are shown in Fig. To simplify the plate equation system, we only consider the plate equation with the asymptotic order O(h) (i.e., the terms of O(h 2 ) are neglected). For the plane-strain problem being studied (y = Y ), it can be obtained that the deformed configuration S of the bottom face Ω - 1 has the fundamental quantities F = M = N = 0, G = 1 and To simplify the plate equation, we further denote λ k (X) = λ(X) + h∆λ k (X), which implies that the differences of the growth functions have O(h). After these manipulations, the plate equation ( (1) where Eq. ( where Eq. ( The fundamental quantities E and L can be viewed as two unknowns of the plate equation (2) n + 4Λ where Du et al. Based on the asymptotic expressions of E and L given in 1 can be calculated through a conventional approach, which represents the shape of the bottom surface S of the plate in the current configuration. By further using the iterative relations (70)-(72) given in A, the whole configuration of the plate sample can be recovered. To demonstrate the efficiency of the analytical results For the purpose of illustration, we consider three cases with the growth functions and the material and geometrical parameters given in Eqs. ( • Case 1: • Case 2: • Case 3: From the analytical results (34), we can determine the deformed shapes of the bottom surface S of the plates for the three cases, which are shown in Figs. ) is adopted. The elastic deformation tensor is defined as , where the total deformation gradient tensor F k is input from the finite element program and the growth functions in G k are input as the state variables. The parameters C k and D k are related to the Young' modulus E k and the Poisson' ratio ν through The Poisson' ratio ν is chosen as 0.495 to approximate the elastic incompressibility of soft materials. All the faces of the plate are set to be traction free and the rigid body motion of the plate is removed. For plane-strain problems, only one section of the plate sample perpendicular to the Y k -axis needs to be taken into account. This section is meshed by using the CPE8H elements (8-node biquadratic plane strain quadrilateral hybrid elements). For all the three cases introduced in ( Through some comparisons, we found that the analytical results match the finite element simulation results quite well. Thus, the efficiency of the analytical results (34) can be verified. It is found that accompanying the increase of the growth function λ 2 (X) in the 2nd layer, the plate exhibits larger bending deformations, which should be attributed to the increases of residual stresses in the plate. Based on the analytical solutions x (0) 1 and z (0) 1 of the plate equation, the whole configuration of the plate can be recovered by virtue of the iterative relations given in A. Furthermore, the residual stresses in the plate sample can be determined by using the expressions of the stress tensors given in In Section 2, the general multi-layered plate theory has been established without any assumptions on the magnitudes of displacement components. Under some specific loading conditions or boundary restrictions, the orders of displacement components may be identified in advance. In that case, the plate equation can be simplified through some further asymptotic analyses. In this subsection, under the assumption of plane-strain deformation, it will be shown that a FvK-type multi-layered plate model can be derived from the full-form plate equation ( We still consider a multi-layered plate as shown in Fig. 1 }. The position components and the growth functions are rewritten into where U and W are the in-plane and transverse displacements, and ) is referred as the growth rate. To derive the FvK-type plate equations, we adopt the scaling relations W ∼ h, U ∼ h 2 and ∆λ k ∼ h 2 λ,X - λ,X + Λ (1) n U ,X -g λ Λ (1) n Λ (13) n (1) n Λ (9) n + 4Λ (10) n + 12Λ (11) n + 24Λ (12) n where and q1 and q3 are the in-plane and transverse components of the traction q. From (38), it is known that the in-plane displacement is much smaller than the transverse displacement, thus the force component q1 should be small and can be neglected. On the other hand, we consider the resultant of {11}-component of the second Piola-Kirchhoff stress tensor T k = S k F -T k , which is denoted as t. By using (11) 1 , ( By virtue of (40), the two equations given in (39) can be rewritten into where Λn = Λ n + 4Λ n . Eq. ( For the bilayer plate sample considered in this example, the FvK-type plate equations ( In fact, ( (44) To study the growth-induced instabilities of this bilayer hyperelastic plate, we conduct some linear bifurcation analyses. For that purpose, we denote By submitting ( From ( By submitting ( where Corresponding to the boundary restrictions of plate sample shown in Fig. Next, we need to find the nontrivial solutions of (49) subject to the boundary conditions On the other hand, by submitting r = nπi/2 into (51), we can determine the bifurcation value of the growth parameter λ c (λ c = 1 + ∆λ 2 ) corresponding to the mode number n, which is given by To show the accuracy of the analytical result (53), we plot some evolution curves of the growth bifurcation parameter λ c in Fig. In the third example, we study the growth-induced axisymmetric deformations of bilayer circular hyperelastic plates. The reference configuration of a bilayer circular plate sample is shown in Fig. . The top and bottom faces of the plate are traction free. On the inner lateral surface ∂κ the boundary restrictions are shown in Fig. Through the similar derivation as that introduced in Section 2, the iterative expressions of r k -r k -z (k = 1, 2) and {r 2 } can be obtained, which are listed in B. By submitting these iterative relations into In Eq. ( 1,RR , z 1,RR , z Here, the lengthy expressions of W 1 -W 6 are omitted for brevity (the full expressions can be found in the supplementary document). By multiplying R onto (55) 2 , this equation can be integrated once with respect to R. Further from the condition that the vertical shear stresses on the lateral surfaces ∂κ To simplify the plate equations (55) 1 and (56), we rewrite the spatial position components and the growth functions as follow r (0) Due to the boundary restrictions shown in Fig. Corresponding to the boundary restrictions on the inner and outer lateral surfaces of the plate (cf. Fig. To solve the plate equation system ( For the purpose of illustration, we choose the following growth functions The values of inner and outer radii of the plate are set to be R 0 = 0.2 and R 1 = 1.2. Corresponding to some different material and geometrical parameters, the plate equation system (58)-( For the purpose of comparison, the finite element simulation results are also shown in Fig. In section 3, some direct problems of growth-induced deformations of multi-layered hyperelastic plates have been studied, where the growth functions in the plate samples are specified in advance. In this section, we begin to study the inverse problem. That is, to generate certain 3D target shapes, how to arrange the growth functions in the multilayered hyperelastic plates? This problem is known as 'shape-programming' To obtained some concrete results, we only consider the bilayer hyperelastic plates in this section and suppose that the plates are made of incompressible neo-Hookean materials. It should be pointed out that we do not aim to control the whole configuration of the plate samples. As the plate equation system ( In this subsection, we study the shape-programming of a bilayer hyperelastic plate under the assumption of planestrain deformations. The plate sample still has the reference configuration shown in Fig. For any given target surface S, the fundamental quantities E and L can be calculated from its parametric equation. Then, by solving Eqs. ( Eq. ( To demonstrate the efficiency of formulas (64), we introduce some illustrative examples. In these examples, the target shapes of S are selected to be an elliptic curve, a butterfly curve, an oval curve and a spiral curve. The parametric equations of these target shapes and the corresponding growth functions are listed in Eqs. ( In this subsection, we study the shape-programming of a bilayer circular hyperelastic plate under the assumption of axisymmetric deformations. The plate sample still has the reference configuration shown in Fig. The plate equations for axisymmetric deformations of bilayer circular hyperelastic plates have been derived in (55) 1 and (56). To facilitate the following derivations, the components of the position vector v = x (0) 1 in the plate equations will be replaced by the fundamental quantities of the deformed surface S. Under the cylindrical coordinate system, these fundamental quantities are given by (65) After the replacements, the plate equations (55) 1 and (56) can be rewritten into Besides the plate equations, from the moment boundary condition (29), we have another two equations Eq. ( The lengthy expressions of the terms W 7 -W 10 are omitted here for brevity, which can be found in the supplementary document. For any given target surface S, the fundamental quantities E, G, L and N can be calculated from the its parametric equation. Then, by setting the coefficients of h i in Eqs. ( ∆λ kΘ (k = 1, 2) can be determined. Through this approach, we have Eq. ( To demonstrate the efficiency of the formulas (69), we introduce some illustrative examples. In these examples, the dimensions of the circular plate are set to be R 0 = 0.2, R 1 = 1.2 and h 1 + h 2 = 0.06. The target shapes of S are selected to be an ellipsoid, an oval surface, an Ipomoea cairica and a pot surface. The parametric equations for these target surfaces are listed in Eqs. ( In Fig. In this paper, we proposed a general multi-layered hyperelastic plate theory within the framework of nonlinear elasticity, which can be applied to study the growth-induced deformations of soft material plates with multi-layered structures. The following tasks have been accomplished in the current work: • Starting from the 3D governing system and through a series expansion-truncation approach, the plate equation system for modeling the growth-induced deformations of multi-layered hyperelastic plates was established, which is applicable for the plate samples with general material properties, geometrical shapes and number of layers. There is also no restrictions on the growth functions and the deformation styles of plate samples. • The plate theory was applied to study the growth-induced deformations and instabilities of several typical multi-layered plate samples. Some analytical and numerical solutions of the plate equation system were derived, which show good consistencies with the finite element simulation results. It was also found that the current plate theory can be reduced to the multi-layered FvK-type plate theory under some assumptions of the displacement components. • Based on the current plate theory, the problems of shape-programming of some typical multi-layered hyperelastic plate samples were solved. The explicit analytical formulas of shape-programming were derived, which reveal the dependance of the growth functions on the geometrical quantities of 3D target surfaces and the properties of the plate samples. The accuracy of these formulas has been verified through finite element simulations. In our opinion, the plate theory established in the current work are helpful for the design of intelligent soft devices with multi-layered plate structures, which would have wide potential applications in the engineering fields. In the future works, the current plate theory will be applied to develop new types of plate elements, then some much more complicated problems can be solved through the numerical approach. Du et al. In step one, the 8n unknowns x (2) k and p (1) k : A k , A where k , A In step two, the explicit expressions of x 1 and p 1 in terms of x 1 for incompressible neo-Hookean materials are given by In step three, the asymptotic expressions of x k+1 and p (0) for incompressible neo-Hookean materials are given by where B Some iterative relations for deriving the plate equations of bilayer circular plates In Section 3.3, some iterative relations are obtained for deriving the plate equations of bilayer circular hyperelastic plates, which are listed in this appendix. The expressions of r 1 , z 1 , p 1 , r 2 , z 2 , r 2 , z 1 and p (0) 2 in terms of r (0) 1 and z 1 are given by r + O(h 2 ). (77) The expressions of r k -r k , z k -z k , p k -p k (k = 1, 2) are listed in Eqs. ( k,R -r k,R -z k r k,R -3r (1) k,R -r k z (1) (1) k Rλ kΘ z (1) k r (1) k z (1) k,R + z k,R -λ kR r k,R + z k,R + λ kΘ r k,R + Rr (1) k,R + Rz Rλ kR 2 λ kΘ r (1) k k,R -r k,R + 2r k,R -z k,R z k,R + 2C k λ kR Rλ kΘ,R (r k,R + z k,R + Rr k,R + Rz (2) k p (1) k,R z k,R -r k,R + λ kR 2 p (1) k,R + z k,R -2C k R(λ kΘ × λ kR,R -λ kR λ kΘ,R ) r (1) k,RR -r λ (R) 50R -9C λ (R) 250R 2C λ (R) 50R -9C λ (R) 50R 2C λ (R) 50C λ (R) 40 -9πC λ (R) 10C (90) • Case 4: a pot surface (C 1 /C 2 = 5, β 1 /β 2 = 1, h 1 = 0.03, h 2 = 0.03) (91)