We study the Loschmidt echo in the quenched two-dimensional p-wave topological superconductor. We find that if this superconductor is quenched out of the critical point separating its topological and non-topological phases into either of the two gapful phases, its Loschmidt echo features singularities occurring periodically in time where the second derivative of the Loschmidt echo over time diverges logarithmically. Conversely, we give arguments towards s-wave superconductors not having singularities in their Loschmidt echo regardless of the quench. We also demonstrate that the conventional mean field theory calculates classical echo instead of its quantum counterpart, and show how it should be modified to capture the full quantum Loschmidt echo. About a decade ago Loschmidt echo was proposed as yet another way of characterizing the dynamics of quenched quantum systems Of particular interest is the question of whether Z(t) may be non-analytic as a function of t, in a way reminiscent of the thermal partition function of quantum systems being non-analytic when they undergo phase transitions. This question was explored in the literature for a wide variety of quantum systems. Here we would like to demonstrate that a two-dimensional (2D) p-wave superconductor when quenched out of a critical point separating its two phases We also argue that an s-wave superconductor, in any number of dimensions, is unlikely to have any singularities in its Loschmidt echo. To arrive at these results, we show that the conventional mean field theory used to describe time evolution of out of equilibrium superconductors is not applicable for the purpose of calculating their Loschmidt echo. We give a prescription how this problem can be corrected and show that the time evolution in this problem is equivalent to the Hamiltonian evolution of complex classical spins satisfying certain boundary conditions. This construction generalizes classical Anderson pseudospins (which are real vectors) used in previous work to describe the time evolution of superconductors. In the previous work of some of us We begin our analysis with writing down the Hamiltonian for the 2D chiral p-wave superconductor where p and φ p are the polar coordinates describing the vector p, âp and â † p are fermionic creation and annihilation operators, ξ p = p 2 /(2m) -μ with μ being the chemical potential and m the mass of the fermions, g is the coupling constant and V is the volume of the system. It is customary to absorb the angles φ p , φ q into the fermionic creation and annihilation operators. Eq. ( It is also customary to use mean field theory to study this problem, which results in the simplified Here ∆ and ∆ are generally time-dependent gap functions. These can be related back to the fermions via the so-called gap equation. We will find that the gap equation that we need here is surprisingly subtle. Because of that, we will postpone its discussion until later and for now treat ∆ and ∆ as some given time-dependent functions. It is well known in the theory of superconductivity that the eigenstates of Eq. ( where |0 is a vacuum. Normalization of this wave function requires that In this work we consider the standard quench problem. We initiate the system in the ground state |Ψ i of the form (5) parametrized by u ip and v ip . The coupling constant g of the Hamiltonian is suddenly changed to a new value so that |Ψ i is no longer its eigenstate. The state now evolves forward with the new Hamiltonian. Knowing the time-dependent state |Ψ(τ ) , we can calculate the Loschmidt echo according to Eq. ( We note that evolving the state |Ψ forward in time is equivalent to having time dependent u p (τ ) and v p (τ ), satisfying the initial conditions u p (0) = u ip , v p (0) = v ip . By applying the Hamiltonian (4) to the state (5) we derive their equations of motion, To calculate the Loschmidt echo, we evolve |Ψ to the Loschmidt time t and project it back onto itself, with the result where A typical mechanism for Z to become singular is for S p to vanish at some critical value t = t c , at some value p c . Let us show that the S 0 ≡ lim p→0 S p can vanish in a particularly simple way. Indeed, the equations of motion of u 0 , v 0 (also understood as limits when p is taken to zero) can be solved directly, as they decouple from the functions ∆(τ ), ∆(τ ), with the result Substituting into Eq. ( S 0 vanishes as a function of t only if Therefore let us restrict our attention to this case. It is well-known that the p-wave superconductor we study here can be in the weakly coupled phase or strongly coupled phase depending on the sign of ξ 0 = -μ. The condition This allows us to calculate, from Eq. ( where Eq. ( Generally, taking into account Eq. ( where α is some (real) constant. This leads to (17) Let us examine the vicinity of the point in time where S 0 vanishes. Expanding in powers of t -t n and p we find (18) We now know, quite generally, the behavior of S p in the vicinity of the point p = 0 and time t n where a singularity of Z can occur. We can estimate the contribution of small p to the Loschmidt echo (8) by writing where p 0 is some momentum beyond which the expansion (18) no longer holds. The integral is easy to evaluate and produces as the singular contribution to the Loschmidt echo (with the second derivative of ln Z over time t having logarithmic singularity). Eq. ( (21) where ∆ i and ∆i are the equilibrium gap functions. Calculating its ground state is a standard exercise. Evaluating u ip and v ip leads to α = 1/ 4m ∆i ∆ i . We would like to point out that the ratio of the amplitudes v ip /u ip goes either to infinity or to zero in the two phases of the 2D chiral p-wave superconductors as p → 0, determining the topological properties The question still remains whether S p can also vanish at other values of momenta, perhaps leading to other singularities in Z which we also need to explore. We would like to argue that this does not happen. To do this, we need to understand further how ∆ and ∆ are related to the fermions. Usually in the problem of quantum quench where the goal is to calculate |Ψ(τ ) after the quench, the following equation is used for ∆, and its complex conjugate for ∆(τ ). Substituting this into Eq. ( While leaving the detailed construction for the Supplemental Material, we note that the Loschmidt echo is simply a matrix element of the evolution operator. These can be calculated using conventional Feynman functional integral, avoiding the intricacies involved in the Schwinger-Keldysh functional integral construction. The saddle point approximation with respect to ∆ and ∆ calculated in the framework of the conventional Feynman functional integral produces (see also Ref. and similarly for ∆(τ ). This equation replaces the equation (22) for the purpose of determining ∆ and ∆. To elucidate the meaning of Eq. ( ( Just like |Ψ(τ ) , it is described by the amplitudes ũp (τ ), ṽp (τ ). They satisfy the same equations of motion where S p can also be expressed in terms of these amplitudes by Note that S p do not depend on τ , thus they can be calculated at arbitrary τ . In particular, substituting τ = t we see that the definitions (26) and ( (27) These new gap equations replace the old equation ( Solving these new equations of motion is an interesting problem by itself, which will be left as a subject for future work. Here we would just like to see whether they are compatible with the singularities in Z that we found earlier. In the quench scenario considered earlier, we had S p vanish for small p according to Eq. ( This shows that as a function of t, ∆ will have a divergent second derivative. This by itself does not affect the earlier established fact of the divergent second derivative of Z. However, up until now we only analyzed vanishing of S 0 . What if S p vanishes for some nonzero p c ? If this were to happen, then the gap equation should be expected to read where the expression to be integrated is an approximation valid in the vicinity of p ∼ p c . Taking into account that β is generally complex and recalling the standard formula Im 1/(x ± iǫ) = ∓iπδ(x), we see that ∆ will then generally be a discontinuous function of t. If ∆ is discontinuous, so will be Z. On the other hand, Z is closely related to the partition functions of quantum systems. Partition functions of thermal systems cannot be discontinuous functions of temperature. Likewise we expect that the Loschmidt echo cannot be a discontinuous function of time t, thus we conclude that the scenario where S p vanishes for some nonzero p cannot be realized. Note that the s-wave superconductors are described by the Hamiltonians very similar to the ones studied here, but without the extra factors of momenta in the interactions. Let us test if they could have a vanishing S p at some critical p c . Putting this superconductor in d dimensional space for generality, the gap equation and the expression for the Loschmidt echo now read Again, unless p c = 0, the equations above lead to the discontinuity of ∆ as a function of t and therefore the discontinuity in Z, which we expect cannot happen. The only exception would be p c = 0. However, here p = 0 is not special in the same way as in p-wave superconductors as the spin at p = 0 is coupled to the rest of the spins and we were unable to identify any initial conditions for which S 0 can vanish. We are also not aware of any alternative calculation showing vanishing of S 0 in s-wave superconductors. On the contrary, we expect that the criticality in Loschmidt echo due to the p = 0 mode also manifests itself in the higher-order superconductors, such as 2D d x 2 -y 2 + id xy superconductor. Exploring this could be the subject of further research. Given the wave function |Ψ(t) calculated using the standard approach of Eqs. coincides with the classical echo defined as (31) Here x are the coordinates parametrizing the phase space of a classical system and ρ(x, t) is the classical distribution function, which is in general time-dependent. Indeed, equations of evolution of |Ψ(t) (7) together with ( An interesting remaining question is the role of the chemical potential μ we introduced into the post-quench Hamiltonian. Normally in dynamical problems with conserved total particle number μ is arbitrary as changing μ simply changes the phase of the time-dependent wave function. However, our initial wave function is not an eigenstate of the total particle number operator N = p â † p âp . Note that Ψ(τ )| N |Ψ(τ ) can be expressed entirely in terms of u ip , v ip characterizing the initial wave function which contains μ i but is independent of μ. A more relevant expectation value which arises in the process of evaluating the Loschmidt echo and depends on μ is Ψ i | e -i Ĥ(t-τ ) N e -i Ĥτ |Ψ i /Z. Therefore, μ must be chosen in such a way as to make this expectation equal to the desired fermion number, i.e., we need to introduce μ to ensure that we describe the time evolution with the correct number of fermions. More details of this formalism is given in the Supplemental material. Spinless or spin polarized fermions cannot interact in the s-wave channel. Their strongest interactions are in the p-wave channel. In 2D space, their Hamiltonian takes the following form Here â † p and âp are the creation and annihilation operators for the spinless fermions, g is the coupling constant and V is the volume of the system. In the applications to superconductivity, only the terms with k = 0 play a substantial role. From now on we will therefore remove summation over k and set k = 0 with the result The most interesting superconducting phase described by this Hamiltonian is the chiral phase where φ p is the polar angle of the vector p in the 2D space. It is also often referred to as p x + ip y phase of the superconductor. In this phase, it is advantageous to split the interaction according to The right-most term in (S5), when substituted into Eq. (S3), produces zero in the p x + ip y phase and therefore can be removed altogether, with the result p q e i(φp-φq) â † p â † -p â-q âq , (S6) Importantly, this nullification happens in any state, ground state or excited state, where Eq. (S4) holds. Here we restrict ourselves only to such states. In particular, we are going to consider time evolution of some initial state. All such initial states will be chosen to satisfy Eq. (S4). Then we can fully rely on Eq. (S6) as the Hamiltonian describing the time evolution. The final step consists of absorbing the phases φ p and φ q in the creation and annihilation operators with the result This is the Hamiltonian that we will use throughout this work. We are interested in calculating the Loschmidt echo, that is the quantity Here |Ψ i is some state which is not an eigenstate of Ĥ. We would like to use mean field theory to do this calculation, as common in the theory of superconductivity. One can argue that as long as the total number of fermions is large, mean field theory is a good approximation in the Hamiltonians (S3), (S6), (S8) (on the contrary, in the Hamiltonian (S1) mean field theory can sometimes fail, therefore in passing from Eq. (S1) to (S3) we implicitly assumed that mean theory works). Setting up mean field theory for purpose of calculating Loschmidt echo is subtle. Let us set up the appropriate formalism to do it. We express the echo in terms of the coherent state functional integral In order to represent the required matrix element of the evolution operator, the fields ψ p and ψp must satisfy the appropriate boundary conditions at τ = 0 and τ = t whose specific form will not be important here. As common in the theory of superconductivity we introduce the Hubbard-Stratonovich field ∆, which results in where We calculate the integral over ∆ and ∆ in the saddle point approximation. Varying W over ∆(τ ) at some time τ , we find Finally we reinterpret the resulting functional integral as Similarly, by varying W over ∆ we can find This is the version of the saddle point (or gap) equation appropriate for calculating the Loschmidt echo, which is used in the main text. Interestingly, Eq. (S15) is not the complex conjugate of Eq. (S14), unlike in the more common occurrences of the gap equation where usually ∆ and ∆ are complex conjugates of each other. The mean field Hamiltonian follows from Eq. (S12) to be The initial state |Ψ i in our formalism is a coherent state and so does not have a fixed number of particles. To fix the particle number we can introduce the time dependent chemical potential as a Lagrange multiplier. That generalizes the formalism to include where While the amplitudes on the right hand side of this equation are all dependent on τ , one can check with the equations of motion (7) that S p are independent of τ , while of course they depend on t. This replaces the earlier equation (S32) which is not adequate for the purpose of calculating the Loschmidt echo. Therefore, we arrive at what appears to be a rather difficult problem. We need to solve the equations of motion (S28) for u p , v p with the initial conditions (S35) as well as the same equations of motion for their counterparts ũp , ṽp but with the initial conditions (S36), all the while keeping ∆ to be given by the Eq. (S37). We The normalization condition (S31) still holds for the new variables. In other words, these are new spins -vectors of fixed length. Remarkably, the new spin satisfy the same equations of motion (S25) as the old ones and, moreover, the gap equations also retain their form (S26). So this approach has the advantage of keeping the familiar equations of motion. The difficulty is now that the initial conditions (S35) and (S36) must now be reworked in terms of these spins. One can check that this gives Therefore, the goal is now to solve the equations of motion (S25) with (S26), while imposing the boundary conditions (S40). One should also note that for these new spins s + p is not equal to the complex conjugate of s - p , and s z p is not necessarily real. Looking for complex solutions of the equations of motion with the boundary conditions (S40) generally remains an open problem. (S41) Here S p are defined in Eq. (S38). However, if we were not careful, we could have instead computed using the conventional approach of solving equations (S28) together with (S32). We could then calculate The right hand side of this equation appears to be superficially similar to the right hand side of the equation (S41) if τ = t is used in the definition of S p , Eq. (S38). However, importantly in evaluating the amplitudes u p , v p , Eq. (S32) is used instead of Eq. (S37). This in fact was done in the earlier publication of some of the authors, Ref. One could ask about the meaning of the resulting quantity. We would like to present arguments that it is equivalent to the classical echo introduced in Ref. 11. Consider the quantity It is a matter of simple algebra to show 