We report an experimental discovery of CrSnS3, a new Van der Waals ferromagnetic (FM) with Curie temperature TC ~119K. The Curie temperature is in qualitative agreement of Chittari et. al. DFT prediction (TC =112.3K) for an Ising model with the addition of Coulomb potential. The FM ordering temperature in CrSnS3 is the highest among Cr-based Van der Waals materials: CrI3, CrSiTe3 and CrGeTe3. The dc-susceptibility revealed a sharp increase at Tc (~119K) indicative of a first order transition; then raises to a wide maximum at AFM Neel temperature TN~90K.The ac-susceptibility reveals the presence of two sharp peaks; one close to Tc (119K) and the other at TN~90K. Ac-susceptibility measurements in an applied dc-magnetic field indicates that CrSnS3 undergoes two successive phase transitions: a sharp increase in the susceptibility indicates a first order PM to FM at 119K, followed by more gradual decrease at the onset of AFM transition at TN~90K. The magnetization isotherms below 30K indicates that the materials orders in an AFM state; while the magnetic isotherms at T >30K rises sharply to its saturated values confirming the ferromagnetic state. The discovery of the graphene renewed research interest in magnetic properties of various 2dimensional van der Waals materials and their properties. The coupling between the layers is week; while the in-plane coupling is mainly strong covalent bonding. In particular; ferromagnetic properties of these materials are being intensively investigated for their possible use in spintronics and magnetic semiconductors The general structure of the MAX3 compounds is stacked layers as ABC and held together mainly by van der Waals forces The MAX3 structures is expected to have quasi two-dimensional layered crystal structure rather than a pseudo one-dimensional crystal structure, with edge-sharing, double rutile chains in MBX3 compounds In this work, we report an experimental discovery of CrSnS3 Van der Waals ferromagnetic material with relatively high TC ~ 119K which is almost double the Curie temperature found other Cr-based FM van der Waals material such as CrI3 or CrSbSe3. This material has a 2D unit cell composed of two Cr 3+ ions and one [Sn2S6] 6- High purity elements (99.99%) of Cr, Sn and S are mixed in 1:1:3 molar ratio have been used to prepare CrSnS3 using solid state reaction. The elements were mixed, grinded pressed in pellets and sealed under partial Argon pressure in quartz tube. To avoid exploding the quartz tube, it is necessary to initially anneal the pellets at a temperature lower than the boiling point of sulfur (445 o C), then use slow heating rate (~10-20 o C /hour) to higher temperatures. We used 400 o C and 600 o C as intermediate temperatures. The pellets were annealed at 400 o C for 24 hours, then slowly heated to 600 o C and annealed for 48 hours then cooled to room temperature. The pellets were regrinded, pressed in pellets then reannealed at ~1200 o C for 24 hours then furnace cooled to room temperature. X-ray diffraction patterns were obtained using Broker D2 diffractometer with Cu-Kα radiation (λ=1.5405Å). Magnetic ac-susceptibility (χ ac ) was measured using a homemade ac-susceptometer incorporating a SR830 DSP Lock-In Amplifier and LakeShore temperature controller. The excitation field is H ac ~ 0.33 Oe and the oscillating frequency f = 887 Hz. In addition, the acsusceptometer hosts a set of modified design of Maxwell coils that provides highly uniform DC-field over the sample space. The magnetic isotherms were performed using a computer-controlled 9-Tesla PAR 4500/150A variable temperature vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM). The variations of the magnetization (Hdc=200Oe) with temperature is presented in Fig. As the temperature decreases below TN, the susceptibility decreases rapidly then raises to clear maximum near 90K (Fig. This peculiar behavior is also reflected in the derivative of the susceptibility (Fig. The magnetic state can be further investigated by looking at the effect of dc-magnetic field bias on the ac-susceptibility. The results are presented in Fig. 