Hydrocarbon mixtures are extremely abundant in the Universe, and diamond formation from them can play a crucial role in shaping the interior structure and evolution of planets. With first-principles accuracy, we first estimate the diamond nucleation rate in pure liquid carbon, and then reveal the nature of chemical bonding in hydrocarbons at extreme conditions. We finally establish the pressure-temperature phase boundary where diamond can form from hydrocarbon mixtures with different atomic fractions of carbon. Notably, we find a depletion zone at pressures above 200 GPa and temperatures below 3000 K-3500 K where diamond formation is thermodynamically favorable regardless of the carbon atomic fraction, due to a phase separation mechanism. The cooler condition of the interior of Neptune compared to Uranus means that the former is much more likely to contain the depletion zone. Our findings can help explain the dichotomy of the two ice giants manifested by the low luminosity of Uranus, and lead to a better understanding of (exo-)planetary formation and evolution. Carbon and hydrogen are the fourth and the most abundant elements in the Universe Diamond nucleation from C/H mixtures is particularly relevant; the "diamonds in the sky" hypothesis Many experimental studies have probed the diamond formation from C/H mixtures, but the experiments are extraordinarily challenging to perform and interpret because of the extreme thermodynamic conditions, kinetics, chemical inhomogeneities, possible surface effects from the sample containers, and the need to prove diamond formation inside a diamond anvil cell (DAC). Three DAC studies on methane disagree on the temperature range: Benedetti et al. reported diamond formation between 10 to 50 GPa and temperatures of about 2000 K to 3000 K Moreover, there is a mismatch between the experimental results and theoretical predictions particularly regarding the pressure range of diamond formation. Density functional theory (DFT) combined with crystal structure searches at the static lattice level predicted that diamond and hydrogen are stable at pressures above about 300 GPa In this work, we go beyond the standard first-principles methods, and study diamond nucleation in C/H mixtures with a fully thermodynamic treatment, by constructing and utilizing machine learning potentials (MLPs) trained on DFT data. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first MLP fitted for high-pressure mixtures. We first quantitatively estimate the nucleation rate of diamond from pure liquid carbon at planetary conditions, considering both the thermodynamic driving force and the kinetics. We then reveal the nature of the chemical bonds in C/H mixtures at high-pressure high-temperature conditions. Finally, we determine the thermodynamic driving force of diamond formation in C/H mixtures, taking into account non-ideal effects of mixing. We thereby establish the phase boundary where diamond can possibly form from C/H mixtures at different atomic fractions and P-T conditions. Although planets or stars typically contain a low percentage of carbon Fig. Although diamond solidification is thermodynamically favorable below the melting line, undercooled liquids can remain metastable for a long time as solidification is initiated by a kinetically activated nucleation process s n s 2 3 . ( The first (bulk) term stems from the chemical potential difference Δμ D . The second (surface) term describes the penalty associated with the interface: γ is the area specific interfacial free energy, v s is the molar volume of diamond, and (36π) is a geometrical constant. Nucleation is thus typically a rare event that does not occur during a conventional MD simulation at a reasonable undercooling. To accelerate the sampling so as to obtain a reversible formation of a solid nucleus in simulations, we performed metadynamics at pressures between 25 GPa and 600 GPa, and an undercooling ranging between 8% and 20%. A diamond nucleus formed during a metadynamics run is illustrated in Fig. Fig. s as the only fitting parameter. The surface energy is then extrapolated to other conditions using a linear fit in both P and T. The nucleation rate is obtained from the CNT free energy profile where the nucleation barrier G ★ = max(G (n s )) = G (n s ★ ) is the free energy of the critical nucleus with size n s ★ , v l is the molar volume of the undercooled liquid, f + is the addition rate of particles to the critical nucleus, and the Zeldovich factor As detailed in the Supplementary Information, we computed f + accurately and directly at T=5000 K and P=50 GPa from umbrella sampling trajectories, by applying a stochastic model Combining all these pieces, we obtain the nucleation rate J for diamond in pure liquid carbon in Fig. Going beyond the pure carbon case, we investigate the nature of the chemical bonds in C/H mixtures at conditions relevant for planetary interiors. The high-pressure behavior of hydrocarbons is also crucial in many shock-compression experiments for the development of fusion energy platforms and Inertial Confinement Fusion capsules conditions, but it is unclear how extreme conditions affect these bonds. DFT studies coupled with harmonic approximations have predicted a variety of hydrocarbon crystals to be stable at P ≤ 300 GPa We performed MD simulations using our fully dissociable MLP for C/H mixtures over a wide range of thermodynamic conditions. We focus on the CH 4 composition to directly compare to previous studies. Other compositions can be analyzed in the same way and yield qualitatively similar behaviors. At T < 2500 K, the MD is not ergodic within the simulation time of 100 ps, and therefore analysis is performed only at temperatures above this threshold. Fig. In our chemical bond analysis, a C-C bond is identified whenever the distance between a pair of carbon atoms is within 1.6 Å, and a C-H bond is defined using a cutoff of 1.14 Å. These cutoffs correspond to the first neighbor shells of the C-C and C-H radial distribution functions, respectively. The average number of C-C and C-H bonds at different conditions are shown in Fig. To determine the lifetimes of the C-C and the C-H bonds, we recorded the time it takes for a newly formed bond to dissociate during the MD simulations. Fig. We then determine the chemical potentials of carbon in C/H mixtures, Δμ C ( χ C ), as a function of the atomic fraction of carbon, χ C = N C /(N C + N H ). This, combined with the chemical potential difference Δμ D between diamond and pure carbon liquid, establishes the thermodynamic phase boundary for diamond formation from C/H mixtures with varying atomic ratios. Dilution will usually lower the chemical potential of carbon in a mixture, which can be understood from the ideal solution assumption: μ C id = k B T ln( χ C ). However, the ideal solution model neglects the atomic interactions and cannot capture possible liquid-liquid phase separations. To consider non-ideal mixing effects, we compute the chemical potentials of mixtures using the MLP. This is not an easy task, because traditional particle insertion methods where S 0 CC , S 0 C H , and S 0 H H are the values of the static structure factor between the said types of atoms at the limit of infinite wavelength dμ C /d ln χ C at P = 50 GPa, T = 4000 K and P = 400 GPa, T = 3000 K are shown in Fig. In both Fig. To rationalize the plateaus, we express the per-atom chemical potential of the C/H mixture as and compare it to the ideal solution curve μ mixtur e,id = k B T ( χ C log( χ C ) + (1 -χ C ) log(1 -χ C )). Fig. Furthermore, Fig. from the MD simulations in the Supplementary Information. This PS2 explains the plateau of μ C at low χ C in Fig. Previous experimental measurements are included in Fig. We first quantified the thermodynamics and kinetics of the diamond nucleation in pure liquid carbon, which sets an upper bound for the conditions of diamond formation in C/H mixtures. We then showed that C/H mixtures behave like liquids at T ≥ 2500 K, and precisely computed the thermodynamic boundary of diamond formation for different atomic ratios. Notably, we revealed the occurrence of phase separations of C/H mixtures and its role in diamond formation. At 200 < P < 600 GPa and T below 3000 K-3500 K, there is a depletion zone where phase separation can happen and diamond may form in the carbon-rich phase. Our phase boundaries in Fig. The "depletion zone" can help explain the difference in the luminosity between Uranus and Neptune. Being similar in size and composition, Neptune has a strong internal heat source but Uranus does not Our carbon-ratio-dependent diamond formation phase boundaries can help estimate the prevalence and the existence criteria of extraterrestrial diamonds. Neptune-like exoplanets are extremely common according to the database of planets discovered files, intermediate data, PYTHON notebook, are in the SI repository (url to be inserted) Single-point DFT calculations with VASP Machine learning potential We generated flexible and dissociable MLPs for the high-pressure C/H system, employing the Behler-Parrinello artificial neural network MLP MD simulation details All MD simulations were performed in LAMMPS Computing the chemical potentials of diamond and pure liquid carbon We computed Δμ D using interface pinning simulations Metadynamics simulations for nucleation Well-tempered metadynamics MLP MD simulation of CH We used two independent methods for computing the chemical potentials of carbon in C/H mixtures at various conditions. The first is the S0 method where AB can be CC, CH and HH, and r(t) = r(t) l NPT /l (t) and l (t) is the instantaneous dimension of the supercell. We then determined S 0 CC , S 0 C H and S 0 H H by extrapolating S AB (k) to the k → 0 case using the Ornstein-Zernike form as described in Ref. The second approach is based on the coexistence method, similar to the setup used for computing the chemical potentials of the pure carbon systems. In this case, interface pinning simulations We used the planewave code VASP The convergence of our DFT calculations used for the evaluation of the training set was extensively tested. In particular, we paid close attention to the planewave energy cutoff and the k-point grid resolution, which are the most important parameters to ensure the targeted accuracy of the training set. We chose a diverse set of configurations to test both the planewave energy cutoff and the k-point grid resolution, including an isolated carbon atom, a carbon dimer, amorphous carbon between 3 and 6.79 g/cm 3 and a high pressure phases of carbon (simple cubic). We also included liquid-like C/H structures with carbon concentrations of 0.008, 0.25, 0.67 and 0.89. The chosen configurations span the densities, pressure and stoichiometries of interest and have no electronic band gap hence they are particularly sensitive to the k-point grid resolution. We found that Γcentered k-point grids with a "KSPACING" parameter of 0.2 Å -1 are converged to better than 0.1% in pressure and 1 meV/atom in energy compared to a k-spacing of 0.1 Å -1 . A planewave energy cutoff of 1000 eV is sufficient to reach 1% in pressure and 4 meV/atom in energy compared to 1500 eV calculations. The forces in DFT are calculated based on the electronic free energy where E el and T el are the internal energy and the temperature of the electrons, respectively. The Kohn-Sham electronic entropy S el in the finite-temperature Fermi smearing approach is calculated according to where k B is the Boltzmann constant and f nk denotes the occupation number of each electronic band n at k-point k set according to the Fermi distribution: where μ is the electronic chemical potential and ε nk the energy of each state. T el is the electronic temperature. In Fig. We performed DFT molecular dynamics (DFT MD) simulations for the C/H system with various compositions to generate a variety of configurations to train the MLP and to create a data basis of thermodynamic, structural, and diffusive properties to benchmark our results obtained with the MLP. The DFT MD simulations were also performed with VASP [1-3] and used the same DFT parameters as described in section I except for the k-point sampling. The Brillouin zone was sampled at the Baldereschi Mean Value point, since MD runs typically require a less dense k-point grid a. DFT MD of pure C liquid This data set consists of simulations of 64 carbon atoms, starting from a liquid configuration, for temperatures between 6000 K and 10000 K and densities between 3 g/cm 3 and 8 g/cm 3 (every 0.1 g/cm 3 ) yielding pressures between 45 GPa and 1474 GPa. The simulations were run with a timestep of 0.5 fs. The MD trajectories were generated using simulations lengths of at least 10 ps. A second data set for pure carbon was generated for the diamond phase. This data set also consists of simulations of 64 carbon atoms, this time starting from a solid (diamond) configuration for temperatures between 2000 K and 10000 K and densities between 3.7 g/cm 3 and 6.5 g/cm 3 (every 0.2 g/cm 3 ). We also included a simulation at 3.52 g/cm 3 and 300 K as well as simulations at 6.889 g/cm 3 and temperatures between 6000 K and 10000 K. The pressure range spanned by these simulations is between 4 GPa and 1000 GPa. We used a timestep of 0.5 fs. The MD trajectories were generated using simulations lengths of at least 10 ps c. DFT MD of CH 4 This data set is expanded based on earlier DFT MD calculations that primarily targeted the equation of state of high-pressure methane for all the other mixtures, we simulated six different densities at 3000 K, 4000 K, 6000 K, and 8000 K. All simulations were run for at least 7.5 ps at 8000 K and 12.5 ps for all other temperatures with a timestep size of 0.25 fs. To generate flexible and dissociable MLPs for high-pressure C/H mixtures, we employed an artificial neural network architecture built according to the framework of Behler and Parrinello The same cutoff was also used for a previous MLP built for hydrogen, and a recent GAP model for carbon used 4.2Å [10] and 3.1Å We constructed two versions of the MLPs (V1 and V2). V1 was used for all the production simulations with carbon fractions χ C ≥ 0.2 (CH 4 or more carbon-rich components), and V2 was used for all the other production simulations with χ C < 0.2. The behaviors of the two MLPs for systems with χ C ≥ 0.2 are very similar, but V2 is more accurate for dilute carbon solutions. Both versions of the MLPs are provided in the Supplementary Information. The training set for the MLP V1 has 84,657 configurations with a total of 7,133,531 atoms. For the MLP V2, the training set was expanded by including another 7,528 configurations with a total of 1,773,051 atoms. a. FPS selection from DFT MD simulations The 6,490 most structurally diverse configurations were extracted from all the DFT MD trajectories of 54 CH 4 molecules using a farthest point sampling (FPS) algorithm. The ASAP code b. High-pressure hydrogen We added 48,679 snapshots of pure hydrogen configurations each with 8 to 128 atoms, which have previously served in training a recent MLP of pure hydrogen We used all the carbon structures from the GAP20 data set d. Random searches We included 17,500 structures with variable compositions generated using random crystal structure searches e. Active learning We performed active learning in order to refine the training set. The snapshots of atomic positions were generated from replica exchange molecular dynamics runs at different temperatures. Subsequently, the structures with large variance of the predicted energies from 4 different fits of the MLP were selected. To validate the MLPs, we generated a very diverse set of C/H structures with variable compositions (73-380 total number of atoms in each configuration, carbon atomic fraction from about 1% to 94%). This set has a total of 3,884 structures, and was generated by running MLP NPT simulations at T =2500 K, 3000 K, 4000 K, 6000 K, and pressures between 10 GPa to 600 GPa. We then computed the PBE energies for these configurations and compared with the MLP energies, We have performed extensive benchmarks of the MLP by comparing with DFT results based on the PBE exchange-correlation functional, including the comparison of equations of state (EOS), radial distribution functions, diffusion coefficients, and the enthalpies of solid structures. The details of the DFT MD simulations for pure carbon and methane are provided in Sec. II, and the DFT MD results for pure hydrogen were taken from Ref. We performed the benchmark based on the systems of liquid carbon, diamond, liquid hydrogen, CH A. NVT simulation of pure liquid carbon The MLP MD data set consists of simulations of 64 carbon atoms starting from a liquid configuration for temperatures between 6000 K and 10000 K and densities between 3.3 g/cm 3 and 7.3 g/cm 3 , yielding pressures between about 45 GPa and 1100 GPa. Fig. We performed NVT simulations for systems of 54 CH 4 molecules using the MLP. The initial configuration has 54 methane molecules with ordered orientations placed on a bcc lattice. The equations of state and the diffusion coefficients are plotted in Fig. We first performed random structure searches All MLP MD simulations were performed in LAMMPS A series of NPT simulations was performed at 2500 K to 10000 K and 10 GPa to 600 GPa for diamond and pure liquid carbon phases. The system size was 512 carbon atoms. The simulation time was 120 ps. Besides computing the EOS, we collected the diffusion coefficient of carbon in the bulk liquid (Fig. To compute Δμ D , interface pinning simulations A Nosé-Hoover barostat was only applied along the z direction, which is perpendicular to the interface in the coexistence simulations. The dimensions of the supercell along x and y directions were commensurate with the equilibrium lattice parameters of the diamond phase at the given conditions. An umbrella potential with stiffness α was added to the Hamiltonian of the system: where Φ = N i=1 φ i is an extensive collective variable (CV) of the whole system that is constructed by summing up the order parameters φ i of each carbon atom. More specifically, we used a locally-averaged where ⟨Φ⟩ is the average order parameter from the interface pinning simulations, and ⟨φ⟩ diamond and ⟨φ⟩ liquidC are the average values of the atomic order parameter of carbon in the pure phases at the same conditions. The computed relative chemical potentials from the interface pinning calculations are shown in Fig. To compute the nucleation free energy of diamond from undercooled liquid carbon, welltempered metadynamics The resulting free energy profiles (shown in Fig. s at a wide range of conditions. From the CNT nucleation free energy profiles, we obtained the nucleation rate using We computed f + accurately and directly at 50 GPa, 5000 K by applying a stochastic model. This model was originally proposed to mimic the kinetics of planar interfaces In the stochastic model, the time evolution of the collective variable Φ is expressed as Φ(t) = (φ s -φ l )n s (t) + φ l N + f (t). The first term stems from the temporal change of the size n s (t) of the solid cluster evolving under the biased Hamiltonian. The last term, f (t), takes into account fluctuations that do not change the composition of the solid-liquid system, but are due to changes of the extensive quantity Φ within the bulk phases. In general, the time evolution of these two terms in Eqn. In Fig. To rationalize the power spectrum S(ω) further and extract quantitative information on the growth process from it, we postulate that the time evolution of the collective variable Φ(t) can be modeled using a pair of coupled Langevin equations as described in Ref. m f f = -κ f f -κ( f + q -Φ) -γ f f + η f (t), The dashed green curve is the fitting curve using Eqn. We fitted this expression to the power spectrum obtained from the umbrella sampling simulation and the result is shown in Fig. We highlight here a few examples of carbon and hydrogen mixtures found in giant planets and carbon-rich stars. The measured elemental abundance in the atmosphere of Neptune and Uranus is taken from Table 