Novel extended networks of C 8 , Si 8 and silicon carbide Si 4 C 4 are proposed based on crystal chemistry rationale and optimized structures to ground state energies and derived physical properties within the density functional theory (DFT). The two carbon and silicon allotropes and the silicon carbide belong to primitive tetragonal space group P m2 N°115. C 8 allotrope structure made of corner sharing C4 and Si4 tetrahedra is illustrated by charge density projections exhibiting sp 3 -like carbon hybridization. From careful symmetry analysis, C 8 is found as another representation of cubic diamond. It is identified as ultra-hard with a similar magnitude of Vickers hardness. The interest in C 8 is to serve as template to study Si 8 and Si-C binary. Si 8 allotrope is found soft with H V =13 GPa alike cubic Si, and Si 4 C 4 is identified with H V =33 GPa close to experimental SiC. All three new phases are mechanically (elastic constants) and dynamically (phonons) stable, and their electronic band structures are characteristic of insulating C 8 (diamond) with large band gaps of about 5 eV, and semiconducting Si 8 and Si 4 C 4 with band gaps of about 1 eV. The chemistry of carbon and silicon, major elements in nature, is ruled by three several factors mainly involving: (ii) the larger size of Si covalent radius with respect to C: rSi= 1.14 Å versus rC= 0.76 Å resulting from one extra shell for Si: Si (1s 2 , 2s 2 ,2p 6 ,3s 2 ,3p 2 ) versus C (1s 2 ,2s 2 ,2p 2 ) leading to more compressible Si and Si based compounds as SiC examined herein. (iii) the tetrahedral coordination (sp3 -like), common to Si, C, In this context, diamond is the hardest material while isostructural silicon is soft and binary combinations between Si and C, SiC, shows intermediate hardness and considered as an abrasive material In last decades large research efforts were devoted to identifying novel allotropes of carbon close to diamond using modern materials research software as CALYPSO Such investigations, backed with liminary crystal chemistry rationale led to several works by us and others on novel carbon allotropes with different stoichiometries as hexacarbon C 6 Extended carbon networks For the search for the ground state structures, geometry optimizations calculations onto the ground state with minimal energies were performed using DFT-based plane-wave Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) Blöchl tetrahedron method Besides the elastic constants calculated to infer the mechanical stabilities and hardness, further calculations of phonon dispersion curves were also carried out to verify the dynamic stability of the new carbon allotropes. In the present work, the phonon modes were computed considering the harmonic approximation via finite displacements of the atoms around their equilibrium positions to obtain the forces from the summation over the different configurations. The phonon dispersion curves along the direction of the Brillouin zone are subsequently obtained using "Phonopy" interface code based on Python language Thermodynamic properties such as the heat capacity C v and the entropy S, were calculated as functions of temperature. Quite recently, we proposed a novel tetracarbon as the simplest 'seed' of corner sharing C4 tetrahedra for building large carbon edifices approaching diamond The "electronic  crystal structure" relationship is further illustrated with the charge density projections. Fig. Then tetrahedral C(sp 3 )-like carbon is the building unit. The investigation of mechanical characteristics was based on the calculations of the elastic properties determined by performing finite distortions of the lattice and deriving the elastic constants from the strain-stress relationship. Most compounds are polycrystalline, and generally considered as randomly oriented single crystalline grains. Consequently, on a large scale, such materials can be considered as statistically isotropic. They are then fully described by bulk (B) and shear (G) moduli obtained by averaging the single-crystal elastic constants. The method used here is Voigt's Vickers hardness (H V ) was predicted using four pertinent theoretical models of hardness Lyakhov-Oganov approach The results are summarized in Table Young's modulus (E), the Poisson's ratio () and fracture toughness (K Ic ). Interestingly the hardness of the tet.C 8 shows larger magnitude than diamond with Mazhnik-Oganov Beside structural stability criteria observed for the new carbon allotrope from the positive magnitudes of the elastic constants and their combinations, the phonon modes were subsequently computed. Phonons are quanta of vibrations; their energy is quantized through the Planck constant 'h' used in its reduced form ћ (ћ = h/2) giving with the wave number ω the energy: E = ћω. Besides the novel allotrope the phonon band structures were obtained for diamond for the sake of comparison. Fig. There are 3N-3 optical modes at higher energy than three acoustic modes starting from zero energy (ω = 0) at the  point, center of the Brillouin Zone, up to a few Terahertz. They correspond to the lattice rigid translation modes of the crystal (two transverse and one longitudinal). The remaining bands are 21 but the higher the symmetry, the degeneracy is observed with bands found at a given frequency, and a reduction in the number of dispersion curves is observed as obvious from the comparison of diamond few bands and the larger number of bands for the two octacarbon polymorphs. In the three panels the energy range is the same for all three phases, i.e. from 0 to 40 THz, stressing furthermore their similar behaviors, especially with the magnitude observed for diamond by Raman spectroscopy: ω ~ 40 THz Following the phonon band structures, the thermal properties such as the entropy and the heat capacity C v were calculated using the statistical thermodynamic expressions from the phonon frequencies on a high precision sampling mesh in the BZ (cf. the textbook by Dove on 'Lattice Dynamics' The discrete experimental points obtained from 300K up to 1000K by steps of 100K are plotted as blue diamond symbols on the calculated curve (green). They are found exactly on the calculated diamond curve (Fig. Fig. The energy level along the vertical line is with respect to the top of the valence band (VB), E V . As a specific character of diamond (Fig. In this work a novel ultra-hard carbon allotrope, tet.C 8 that has be regarded as another representation of diamond, was proposed with electronic, mechanical, dynamic, and thermal properties close to diamond. The hardness assessment provides Vickers hardness hypothesized larger than diamond along different models of approaching hardness. details the crystal data of diamond and the new octacarbon. For diamond, a good agreement is found between calculated and literature cubic lattice constant