The materials exhibiting exchange bias (EB) have been extensively investigated mainly due to their great technological applications in magnetic sensors, but its underlying mechanism remains elusive. Here we report the novel coexistence of in-plane and out-of-plane EB in the Cr-doped Mn3Sn, a non-colinear antiferromagnet with a geometrically frustrated Kagome plane of Mn. Field-cooling experiments with the applied field parallel and perpendicular to the frustrated Kagome plane exhibits loop shifts and enhanced coercivities. Interestingly, a maximum EB field of 1090 Oe is observed along out-of-plane direction in the Mn2.58Cr0.42Sn sample, higher than that of in-plane value. Our results indicate that the exchange bias along perpendicular kagome plane is primarily induced by Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interactions due to the breaking of interfacial symmetry, while the EB along kagome plane is due to the exchange effects at interface of AFM and FM component originating from the net moment. These findings provide a new insight on EB in the kagome AFM materials, which are important and highly potential to the application of antiferromagnetic spintronics. The exchange bias effect usually results from the interfacial exchange coupling between antiferromagnetic (AFM) and ferromagnetic (FM) part, resulting in unidirectional anisotropy Numerous experimental investigations on exchange biased FM/AFM bilayers and multilayers have been performed Mn3-xCrxSn single crystals were grown by the Sn-flux growth method Data reduction and empirical absorption correction were performed using the CrysAlisPro program. Magnetic property measurements were performed in a Quantum Design Magnetic Property Measurement System (MPMS). First-principles calculations based on the density functional theory (DFT) are performed by VASP5.4. Hexagonal Mn3Sn adopts a D019-type structure with space group P63/mmc at 300 K according to our single crystal XRD results (Fig. We first present in Fig. To identify the effects of the Cr-doping induced variations in spin structure, we did the magnetic property measurements on high quality Mn3-xCrxSn single crystals (x = 0~0.42). Similar to previous observations It can be noted that the produced value of HEB and coercive field (HC) is nearly the same for the FC 1 T and -1 T directions for both B//x and B//z. Therefore, we conclude that the observed EB behavior is intrinsic for both in-plane and out-of-plane of Mn2.72Cr0.42Sn. Here, HEB and HC are calculated using HEB = -(HL +HR) /2 and HC = -(HL +HR) /2, where HL and HR are the left and right coercivity Mn3Sn displays weak ferromagnetic behavior due to the magnetic frustration from the instability inverse triangular structure as we calculated. Through Cr-doping, the net moment originating from the inversed noncolinear spin structure varies to z axis (Table To further investigate the physical origin of doping induced HEB enhancement, we calculated the magnetocrystalline anisotropy energy (MAE) in Cr x Mn 3-x Sn as shown in Fig. With creasing Cr substitution content, MAE increases and changes to positive when substitution content x exceeding 0.125, which indicates the out-of-plane magnetic anisotropy. Our experiments results are consistent with the calculations [Fig. As we know, traditionally, the unidirectional anisotropy and exchange bias can be qualitatively understood by assuming exchange interaction at the AFM-FM interface Moreover, the EB anisotropy is clear. Therefore, the anisotropy evolution and relevant origin of EB exhibited need to be discussed separately. In-plane EB model. The EB of Mn3Sn thin film with field parallel to the kagome plane have been investigated based on the AFM-FM interface model With increasing Cr content, we have observed the enhanced MAE as shown in Fig. Comparing the two models, we indicate that the in-plane EB is based on an exchange coupling interaction across neighboring AFM/FM domains, while the out-of-plane EB achieves interlayer pinning effect via the DM-interaction. Notably, NN atoms in the same layer also generate nonnegligible DM-interaction, but do not contribute to the EB effect We will now turn our focus to the details of the temperature and cooling field dependence of EB effect at three axes for Mn2.72Cr0.42Sn with the maxim EB effect. As shown in Fig. Importantly, the in-plane (300 K) and out-of-plane blocking temperature (50 K) shows a significant difference, which further illustrates the different mechanism of the EB. The hysteresis loops in different direction after various field cooling are shown in Fig. In summary, we theoretically found that Cr-doping tune the inverse triangular antiferromagnetic structure of Mn3Sn tilting to out-of-plane, inducing large net moment with enhanced MAE and enhanced DMI along perpendicular to the kagome plane. Correspondingly, the coexistence of in-plane and out-of-plane EB were experimentally observed in the AFM systems. Strikingly, additional Cr doping causes more than a tenfold increment in exchange bias field when compared with that in pure Mn3Sn, which is the origin of the perpendicular EB observed here. The found of the large EB in the typical AFM system with frustrated kagome structure provides a new avenue for the correlation mechanism of the symmetry breaking and DMI. and (f-j) z direction, respectively. With Cr content increasing, the bias of M(H) loops increases gradually. Meanwhile, the curves display different shapes for in-plane and out-of-plane. With Cr substitution content increasing to x=0.125, 0.25, 0.375 and 0.5, the net magnetic moments increase to 0.016 uB, 0.024 uB, 0.029 uB and 0.032uB per Mn (Cr) atom, which is agree with our measurements of saturation magnetization in Cr doped Mn3Sn samples, resulting in the magnetic exchange effect increased. On the other hand, taking Cr0.125Mn2.875Sn as an example, the calculated magnetic moment of Cr atom is 3.04 uB, which is a little lower than Mn atoms, and the spin directions of Mn nearby the Cr atoms tilted both in in-plane and out-plane directions. To facilitate comparison, the calculations results are shown with the green pentagram in Fig. 