We predict that the square lattice layer formed by [Co2N2] 2-diamond-like units can host high temperature superconductivity. The layer appears in the stable ternary cobalt nitride, BaCo2N2. The electronic physics of the material stems from Co2N2 layers where the dimerized Co pairs form a square lattice. The low energy physics near Fermi energy can be described by an effective two orbital model. Without considering interlayer couplings, the two orbitals are effectively decoupled. This electronic structure satisfies the "gene" character proposed for unconventional high temperature superconductors. We predict that the leading superconducting pairing instability is driven from an extended s-wave (s ± ) to a d-wave by hole doping, for example in Ba1-xKxCo2N2. This study provides a new platform to establish the superconducting mechanism of unconventional high temperature superconductivity. A roadmap to search for or design unconventional high temperature superconductors (T c s) has been recently proposed by us Isolating those d-orbitals to satisfy the "gene" condition always costs significant energy. Therefore, creating such an environment requires a specific lattice structure in which the energy cost can be compensated. For example, in cuprates, the energy cost of isolating the d x 2 -y 2 e g orbital is compensated by lowering the 3t 2g in the perovskite-type of structure. In iron-based superconductors, the energy cost of isolating the t 2g orbitals in a tetrahedron environment is reduced by the hybridization of the e g and some part of t 2g orbitals between two edge shared tetrahedrons. This hybridization is critical in creating the "gene" condition for a partially filled d-shell. The hybridization creates an empty hybridized band at high energy while leaving two near half-filled bands attributed to pure t 2g orbitals near Fermi energy in the d 6 configuration of Fe 2+ . We have proposed that the "gene" condition can be created in a layer formed by corner-shared tetrahedrons In this paper, we predict that a new "gene" exists for the d 7 configuration of Co 2+ in layers formed by [Co 2 N 2 ] 2-diamond-like units as shown in Fig. Before presenting the detailed calculation, we use the symmetry analysis to argue why the electronic physics in the single Co 2 N 2 layer is described by a two orbital model and satisfies the "gene" condition. In a [Co 2 N 2 ] 2-unit in Fig. , where the signs represent the three mirror symmetries characters. In the first order approximation, we only need to consider the hoppings between the two nearest neighbor (NN) sites to determine the kinematics of these states. It is important to notice that the two dimers between two NN sites align perpendicularly. Therefore, only the electrons in those states with the same symmetry characters with respect to the XZ and YZ planes are allowed to hop between the two NN sites, namely, only the electrons in d A XY (-, -, +) and d A Y Z (-, -, -) can generate NN hoppings, as illustrated in Fig. To obtain the effective model in the monolayer Co where the operator d † kασ (d kασ ) creates (annihilates) an electron with momentum k of orbital α and spin σ and e α is the onsite energy for the α orbital. The hopping terms in Eq. ( We fit our model to the DFT band structure of the monolayer Co 2 N 2 and the fitting parameters are provided in Table Then, we can apply a strong correlation method to uncover the superconducting property of BCN material. The correlation part of the Hamiltonian H I follows the two-orbital Hubbard model where the intra and interorbital repulsion U and U ′ are related by Hund's rule coupling J H through U = U ′ + 2J H . The correlation parameters are set as U = 2eV and J H = 0.1U . The strong correlation effects are studied using the multiorbital Gutzwiller projection method , where P G is the finite-U Gutzwiller projection operator that reduces the statistical weight of the Fock states with multiple occupations. The projection can be conveniently implemented using the Gutzwiller approximation (GW) The strong correlation effects are described by the orbital dependent hopping renormalization g σ αβ and the renormalized crystal field λ σ α , which must be determined selfconsistently for a given electron density n. The superexchange interactions involving spin-orbital can also be derived and the Kugel-Khomskii type terms are written as where the J-term is the SU(2) invariant Heisenberg spin exchange coupling, while the terms proportional I μν and K μν describe the anisotropic orbital and spin-orbital entangled superexchange interactions respectively, since the orbital rotation symmetry is broken by the lattice in the hopping Hamiltonian H t . Decoupling the superexchange interactions by including all spin-singlet pairing order parameters, we can arrive at the effective Hamiltonian as Using the GW approximation, we found two different regimes separating by a Lifshitz transition when hole doping the BCN. This Lifshitz transition point n L is shifted from 0.86 at U = 0 and 1.12 at U = 2 eV owing to the correlation-induced crystal field renormalization. When electron density n is great than n L , there are one hole pocket centering around the Γ point and one electron pocket centering around the M point respectively, as shown in Fig. In the low doping region, the physical property of BCN is similar to the iron-based SC with two electron pockets. In iron-based SC, a nodaless s ± wave SC is obtained from both strong coupling and weak coupling studies In summary, we proposed a new family of high temperature superconductors consisting of [Co 2 N 2 ] 2-diamondlike units. These [Co 2 N 2 ] 2-units from a square lattice layer. The low energy physics near Fermi energy of the layer is described by an effective decoupled two orbital model. This electronic structure satisfies the "gene" character proposed for unconventional high temperature superconductors as both orbitals isolated near Fermi energy generate large dispersions through d -p couplings. The system can bridge the gap between the electronic physics of iron-based SC and cuprates. Without doping (n=2.0), the Fermi surface topology of the system is very similar to those of iron-pnictides with one electron pocket at the Brillouin zone center and one hole pocket at the Brillouin zone corner. In this case, an extended s-wave (s ± ) pairing similar to iron-based SC is found using a strong-coupling mean-field study. However, at large hole doping close to n=1.0, d-wave superconductivity similar to cuprates is achieved. The transitional region between these two SC states will be an extremely interesting region to study both theoretically and experimentally in the future. The layer is stabilized in BaCo 2 N 2 . BaCo 2 N 2 is the stablest Ba-Co-N ternary structure in its stoichiometric ratio according to the Materials Project database 