We show that lattice dislocations of topological iron-based superconductors such as FeTe1-xSex will intrinsically trap non-Abelian Majorana quasiparticles, in the absence of any external magnetic field. Our theory is motivated by the recent experimental observations of normal-state weak topology and surface magnetism that coexist with superconductivity in FeTe1-xSex, the combination of which naturally achieves an emergent second-order topological superconductivity in a two-dimensional subsystem spanned by screw or edge dislocations. This exemplifies a new embedded higher-order topological phase in class D, where Majorana zero modes appear around the "corners" of a lowdimensional embedded subsystem, instead of those of the full crystal. A nested domain wall theory is developed to understand the origin of these defect Majorana zero modes. When the surface magnetism is absent, we further find that s± pairing symmetry itself is capable of inducing a different type of class-DIII embedded higher-order topology with defect-bound Majorana Kramers pairs. We also provide detailed discussions on the real-world material candidates for our proposals, including FeTe1-xSex, LiFeAs, β-PdBi2, and heterostructures of bismuth, etc. Our work establishes lattice defects as a new venue to achieve high-temperature topological quantum information processing. Crystals of quantum materials are rarely perfect in the real world. While it appears natural to always suppress lattice disorders and pursue crystals of a higher purity, defectiveness in topological quantum materials often binds exotic massless quasiparticles that hold great promise for future electronics. A prototypical example is the famous Jackiw-Rebbi problem Our main finding in this work is that screw or edge dislocations can naturally bind 0D Majorana zero modes in tFeSCs and similar superconducting systems, in the absence of any external magnetic field. Noting that a pair of dislocations, as well as the 2D "cutting plane" attached to them, can be viewed as an effective 2D subsystem embedded in a 3D crystal, the four dislocation Majorana bound states (dMBSs) manifest as "corner" Majorana modes for this 2D subsystem, one at each corner. Therefore, our mechanism exemplifies an unprecedented Majorana mechanism that is based on the second-order topology of 2D subsystems, which is in sharp contrast with earlier proposals on vortex/vacancy Majorana modes enabled by the first-order topology for 1D subsystems (i.e., vortex/vacancy lines). We thus dub this new phase "embedded second-order topological phase" (ET 2 ). ET 2 in tFeSCs is completely driven by the normal-state topology We start by deriving the key result in our work, the recipe for dMBSs in tFeSCs, with the help of a nested domain wall construction approach. We then proceed to discuss boundary conditions of dislocation-induced cutting plane and find that a 0D dMBS can be "inflated" to a 1D "hinge" chiral Majorana fermion under certain circumstances. Nonetheless, each corner of the cutting plane will always host a single zero-energy mode. This directly leads to the concept of embedded higher-order topological phase ET 2 . Let us first provide some motivations for our recipe. To trap a 0D bound state in a 3D system, one can start from a 3D gapless quasiparticle (e.g. a massless Dirac fermion) and further constrain its degrees of freedom (d.o.f.) in all three spatial directions. This "dimensional reduction" procedure can be feasibly achieved by decorating the Dirac fermion with a hierarchical set of Z 2 mass domains, with each domain effectively reducing the dimension of gapless state by one. For example, the 2D gapless surface of a 3D TI can be viewed as a domain wall bound state for a 3D massive Dirac fermion, with the TI bulk and the outside vaccum carrying opposite Dirac masses, respectively. A second SC/magnetism domain for the 2D surface Dirac fermion further reduces the gapless d.o.f. to 1D, i.e., leading to a 1D chiral Majorana domain-wall mode Another key motivation is from the material side. Recent experimental breakthroughs have revealed hidden topological Dirac surface states for several high-Tc ironbased SCs We now derive the topological condition of defect MBSs for tFeSCs. Our starting point is a 3D TRI TI with bulk isotropic s-wave spin-singlet superconductivity. The normal-state topology is indicated by a strong Z 2 topological index ν 0 and a set of weak Z 2 indices ν = (ν 1 , ν 2 , ν 3 ) a SC/magnetism domain emerges around the edges between top/bottom and side surfaces. This condition thus generates a 1D chiral Majorana mode around both top and bottom surfaces, i.e., a chiral Majorana hinge mode. We emphasize that the chiral Majorana hinge mode here is a result of 2D surface topology alone, that the top and bottom surfaces both feature a BdG Chern number of |C| = 1, as will be discussed in Sec. III B. The 3D bulk topology will not be altered and thus remains trivial throughout the surface magnetism decoration. Our last ingredient, the lattice dislocations, is intuitively a "gluing fault" when combining two identical copies of our setup. For example, as schematically shown in Fig. ment vector b=(0,0,1), i.e., the Burgers vector. While a screw or an edge dislocation appears one-dimensional, it must be attached to a 2D cutting plane P c that only terminates at either another dislocation to form a dislocation dipole or the crystal boundary. Example of a cutting plane is highlighted by the orange line in Fig. To explore the fate of chiral Majorana hinge modes during the gluing process, it is helpful to fold the top surfaces of the two to-be-glued crystals as shown in Fig. Crucially, when we have t(y) = t 0 sgn(y). Namely, when Eq. ( Geometrically, a dislocation-induced cutting plane P c can terminate at either a crystal surface or another dislocation, leading to two seemingly different yet equivalent boundary conditions. For example, we can start from a dislocation dipole and move one dislocation towards the crystal side surface. This expands P c until the dislocation hits the side surface and further merges with it. This process is reversible and thus transforms the aforementioned boundary conditions from one to another. In Fig. Because of this finite-size hinge gap, when the defect MZM merges with the hinge Majorana modes as shown in Fig. The fact that dMBSs are "corner" Majorana modes of the cutting plane motivates us to define a higher-order topology • an embedded nth-order topology (dubbed ET n ) is defined by the presence of (d -n)-dimensional gapless boundary of a d-dimensional subsystem, which is further embedded in a D-dimensional bulk system with D > d > n > 0. ET n is thus a higher-order generalization of "embedded topology" proposed in Ref. "Inflation" of a Majorana mode from 0D to 1D. (a) shows a schematic of a dislocation dipole and their dMBSs. The surface Chern number enforces a pair of 1D chiral Majorana modes circulating around he top/bottom surface. The chiral Majorana modes yield a finite-size energy gap, as schematically shown in (b). When the cutting plane terminates at the sample boundary shown in (c), the defect MZMs γ2,4 move to the hinges and merge with the chiral hinge modes, decorating each 1D chiral mode with a zero-energy state. Notably, the total number of zero-energy Majorana modes remains to be four while evolving from (a) to (c). In this section, we provide a minimal lattice model for FeTe 1-x Se x to demonstrate the above ET 2 recipe. Bulk superconductivity and surface ferromagnetism (FM) are also included in our model setup. By analyzing the competition of SC and FM for the Dirac surface states, we map out a surface topological phase diagram to discuss when Eq. (1) will be fulfilled. This can be directly translated to a condition for ET 2 to emerge in FeTe 1-x Se x , which we verify through explicit screw dislocation simulations for our minimal model. Our minimal Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian for FeTe 1-x Se x is where the normal-state Hamiltonian To introduce superconductivity, we adopt a spin-singlet extended s-wave pairing for our model, where the pairing matrix ∆(k) = [∆ 0 + ∆ 1 (cos k x + cos k y )](iσ 0 ⊗ s y ). Here ∆ 0 (∆ 1 ) is the on-site (nearest-neighbor) intra-orbital pairing strength. Finally, following the experimental observations of FeTe 1-x Se x in Ref. Here δ z,i is the Kronecker delta function, M denotes the surface magnetization, and g 1 ± g 2 are the effective isotropic Landé g-factor for the two orbitals involved in our model. We take g 1 = 0.5 and g 2 = 0.2 in our numerical simulations throughout this work. More discussions on the experimental aspects of FeTe 1-x Se x and other candidate materials, can be found in Sec. V. The first step to realize dMBSs or class-D ET 2 is to identify the concrete condition to achieve Eq. (1) for our system by studying the competition between magnetism and superconductivity on the (001) surfaces. Note that the (001) Dirac surface state is localized around Γ, the center of the surface Brillouin zone (BZ). As a result, the surface state will develop an isotropic pairing gap from the self-proximity effect We further remark that the surface Dirac fermion has a continuous rotation symmetry around the z-axis in the low-energy limit. Therefore, the effect of a general FM configuration M = (M x , M y , M z ) is always equivalent to that of M = (0, M , M z ) up to a coordinate transformation, where M = M 2 x + M 2 y . Without loss of generality, we thus consider M = (0, M y , M z ), and the surface Hamiltonian reads, where s and τ represent spin and particle-hole degree of freedom, respectively. v F is the surface Fermi velocity. Up to the first-order perturbation approximation, Σ y ≈ g 1 M y and Σ z ≈ g 1 M z are the Zeeman en- ergies It is then easy to check that the ET 2 condition of Eq. (1) now becomes which coincides with the condition for the Dirac surface states to carry a BdG Chern number |C| = 1. This nontrivial C accounts for the chiral Majorana hinge modes in Fig. Therefore, when |Σ y | ≥ |∆ 0 |, E +-= 0 and E -+ = 0 lead to four k x solutions that form two sets of partial Fermi surfaces. Thanks to the rotation symmetry of Dirac surface Hamiltonian, we expect this PFS condition to be generalized to where Σ = g 1 M . Combining Eq. ( To confirm the ET 2 phase, we consider to place our minimal model for FeTe 1-x Se x on a 28 × 28 × 28 lattice. Periodic boundary conditions are considered for both x and y directions of the lattice cube to eliminate possible unwanted hinge modes in our simulations. Out-of-plane FM are considered for both the top and bottom layers of the lattice cube, following H FM . We further decorate our lattice system with a pair of screw dislocations with a Burgers vector b = (0, 0, 1). The dislocation dipole spans a 2D cutting plane P c that is parallel to the y-z plane. In principle, one can consider a pair of edge dislocations instead, as along as their Burgers vectors satisfy As the FM is gradually turned on, the (001) surface gaps close and reopen in our cubic geometry following Fig. For tFeSC candidates such as FeTe 1-x Se x and LiFeAs, the bulk s ± pairing as described by ∆(k) is supported by experimental observations Our new recipe for class DIII ET 2 is motivated by the deep connection between hinge Majorana modes and ET 2 , as revealed in the nested domain wall picture. Even in the absence of surface FM, a bulk s ± pairing itself is capable of inducing a pairing mass domain for Dirac fermions living on the top (bottom) and side surfaces. As a result, the inter-surface hinge will harbor a pair of 1D helical Majorana modes that respect time-reversal symmetry We now provide a lattice simulation to verify the existence of class DIII ET 2 with our minimal model of FeTe 1-x Se x in Eq. 4. We adopt the same model parameters of Fig. In this section, we will discuss material candidates that can harbor ET 2 physics in both class D and class DIII. We will focus on the tFeSCs, especially FeTe 1-x Se x and LiFeAs, and further discuss their experimental relevance. However, ET 2 is not a privilege of tFeSCs and can in principle exist in other superconducting systems as well. We will discuss β-PdBi 2 as such an example. As highlighted in Sec. II and Sec. III, FeTe 1-x Se x naturally combines all necessary ingredients of our class D ET 2 recipe and manifests itself as perhaps the most promising platform for dMBSs. Thanks to the recent extensive experimental studies on both the normalstate topology and high-temperature superconductivity of FeTe 1-x Se x Evidence of surface magnetism in FeTe 1-x Se x has been experimentally established by a variety of measurement approaches. For example, an angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) study in Ref. Earlier experimental studies Remarkably, for FeTe 1-x Se x films epitaxially grown with pulsed laser deposition (PLD), formation of screw dislocations can be feasibly controlled by simply tuning the deposition rate Mag. Type Orientation Surf. Gap Besides FeTe 1-x Se x , evidences of Dirac surface states and vortex Majorana modes have also been found in other tFeSCs such as LiFeAs The band structure of LiFeAs resembles that of FeTe 1-x Se x and features a weak-index vector ν = (0, 0, 1). While we are not aware of any surface magnetism for LiFeAs, evidence of s ± pairing has been reported in earlier ARPES measurements ET 2 can also be achieved in an extrinsic manner by assembling all the necessary elements together in a heterostructure. For example, candidates of weak topological insulators carrying Z 2 indices (ν 0 ; ν 1 , ν 2 , ν 3 ) = (0; 0, 0, 1) have been experimentally established in a plethora of Bi-related materials, including BiTe We further note that a similar structure has been successfully fabricated for Bi(111) grown on a Nb(110) substrate, of which a ferromagnetic Fe cluster is placed on top Signatures of ET 2 for above material candidates can be feasibly revealed by mapping out the local density of states (LDOS) around lattice dislocations in experiments with the state-of-the-art STM technique. In this section, we numerically simulate the LDOS signals of dislocation-trapped Majorana modes for our minimal Hamiltonian in Eq. 4 using the iterative Green function method where G surf (r, E) is the surface Green function. This simulated LDOS signal can be directly compared with ultra-low-temperature STM data in future experiments. When δr d is much greater than the Majorana localization length l M ∼ 3, the hybridization between neighboring defect Majorana modes is negligible, as shown in Fig. We now remark on several phenomenological distinctions between defect and vortex Majorana modes. First, a quantum vortex always traps finite-energy Caroli-de Gennes-Matricon (CdGM) states inside the SC gap, which can introduce Majorana-like signals near the zero energy and further complicates interpretations of experimental data. As for ET 2 , however, we do expect the dislocation core to carry fewer or even no subgap states besides the dMBS, as shown in our numerical simulations. This "cleanliness" of Majorana signal of ET 2 can significantly enhance the unambiguity of future experiments on relevant topics. In addition, while a vortex Majorana wavefunction is usually circular symmetric Because of the known inhomogeneity of FeTe 1-x Se x samples, it is likely that local magnetic and non-magnetic patches, instead of a uniform FM order, will appear on a real-world sample surface We have proposed a new magnetic-field-free mechanism to trap non-Abelian Majorana zero modes with lattice dislocations, and further establish topological ironbased superconductors such as FeTe 1-x Se x as an ideal venue to realize dMBSs. This exotic defect Majorana physics manifests as an exemplar of an embedded higherorder topology, paving the way for exploring emergent subsystem topological physics. Notably, our recipe for dMBS is beyond tFeSCs and it further provides theoretical guidance to experimentally design and achieve dMBSs in other weak-index-carrying material systems such as β-PdBi 2 . Given the remarkable capabilities of manipulating both the screw dislocations and surface magnetism in FeTe 1-x Se x that have been reported in the literature, we believe that our proposal of dislocation Majorana physics will soon be experimentally realizable. We further note that the ET 2 uncovered in this work is "extrinsic", in the sense that the dMBS cannot be characterized by a 2D bulk topological invariant of the subsystem. An interesting future direction is to explore the possibility of crystalline-symmetry-protected "intrinsic" ET 2 . While a screw dislocation necessarily breaks the majority types of lattice symmetries, edge dislocations or even partial dislocations are probably better geometric subsystems to consider for this purpose Finally, motivated by the recent theoretical proposal of boundary-obstructed topological phases 