We present results of numerically exact simulations of the Bose one-component plasma, i.e., a Bose gas with pairwise Coulomb interactions among particles and a uniform neutralizing background. We compute the superconducting transition temperature for a wide range of densities, in two and three dimensions, for both continuous and lattice versions of the model. The Coulomb potential causes the weakly interacting limit to be approached at high density, but gives rise to no qualitatively different behavior, vis-a-vis the superfluid transition, with respect to short-ranged interactions. Our results are of direct relevance to quantitative studies of bipolaron mechanisms of (high-temperature) superconductivity. Introduction. Reliably estimating the critical temperature (T c ) for the superfluid/superconducting transition in a correlated Fermi system-even with relatively large uncertainties-is a difficult task. Exponential sensitivity of T c to system parameters leads to the challenge of accurate and unbiased treatment of many-body correlation effects. An exception to this rule are dimerized states when pairing of fermions takes place in real, rather than momentum, space, and the system can be effectively regarded as an assembly of interacting Bose particles. Remarkably, the value of T c in the three-dimensional (3D) interacting Bose system is very close to the Bose-Einstein condensation point for the ideal gas, T (0) c ≈ 3.31 (n 2/3 /m), where n is the number density and m the particle mass (we use units in which ħ = k B = 1), when interactions are short-range. This holds all the way (within, say, a factor two) from the dilute gas limit to interparticle distances of the order of the potential range ; for the case of superfluid 4 He, for example, it is T c /T (0) c ≈ 0.7. The archetypal model displaying this physical behavior is a Bose fluid of particles interacting via short-ranged, hard-core potentials In two dimensions (2D) there is no Bose-Einstein condensation, but in the presence of interactions a Bose fluid undergoes a Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless (BKT) superfluid transition, which is theoretically well understood and, for a gas with short-ranged interactions, precisely characterized quantitatively d being the dimensionality. Eq. ( The long-range character of interactions leads to a number of fundamental questions and changes, including the reversal of the relation between the low-density and weak-interaction limits. In a Coulomb system, the dimensionless coupling parameter-the Wigner-Seitz radius r s -is defined as follows in 2D and 3D: a B being the Bohr radius. The perturbative regime (r s ≪ 1) now corresponds to the limit of high density, where the very notion of compact bipolarons may become ill-defined, while in the low-density limit (r s ≫ 1) strong correlations may result in large deviations of T c from the ideal gas value. On the one hand, this raises the question of applicability of Eq. (1) to realistic bipolaronic systems, calling for a reliable, quantitative verification based on unbiased, robust theoretical methods; on the other hand, the prospects of bipolaron superconductivity with large T c contribute to the fundamental interest in the superconductivity of a charged Bose gas and its broad relevance in astrophysics A system of charged particles in the presence of a neutralizing, uniform charge background is typically referred to as the one-component plasma (OCP). It has been extensively investigated in the classical case In this Letter, we determine the superconducting transition critical temperature (as a function of r s ) in the Bose OCP, in 2D and 3D, using state-of-the-art computer simulations. Besides the continuous-space system, we consider a lattice model in order to gauge the effects of long-range interactions against discreteness of space and/or extra short-ranged repulsion. Our results are numerically "exact", i.e., statistical and systematic errors can be rendered negligible in practice, using ordinary computing infrastructure. We use the lattice In order to account for the long-range character of the Coulomb interaction, we used the Ewald summation method in the pairwise form (see, for instance, Refs. Our key results are presented in Figs. The situation in 2D is similar. Here the critical temperature reaches its maximum value T (max) c ≈ 1.43 T (0) at r s ≈ 8 and then slowly decreases with increasing r s , in a qualitative analogy with the 3D case, but with somewhat more pronounced quantitative effect of about 30%. We traced the dependence of T c on r s up to r s = 48, beyond which the superconducting, Wigner crystal, hexatic, normal metal, and emulsion phases . Thus, the estimate (1) remains rather accurate in both 3D and 2D. The models. The continuous-space OCP model is standard (see, for instance, Ref. In the model (3), the essential-up to the choice of units-dependence of T c is three-parametric. A natural set of three dimensionless parameters consists of U/t, V /t, and the filling factor n = ⟨n i ⟩. In this work, we are not interested in the effects of commensurability (e.g., Mott physics), which model (3) definitely demonstrates at n = 1, 1/2, and other commensurate fillings (at strong enough interactions); hence, we work with n ≤ 0.4. In the n → 0 limit, Eq. ( One question, of both fundamental and applied (see the numeric protocol below) interest, is whether the longrange Coulomb interaction changes the universality class of the superfluid transition Numerical protocols.-We simulate our models with the lattice , where W i is the winding number of the particle paths along the i-direction. In the thermodynamic limit L → ∞ (L is the linear size of the hypercubic simulation cell), this quantity gives access to the superfluid stiffness, Λ s , via the Pollock-Ceperley formula As expected, the values of ⟨W 2 ⟩ at the crossing points in Fig. The 2D case is different because the BKT transition lacks scale invariance. However, its asymptotically exact critical theory Figures Conclusions.-Motivated by recent progress with quantifying scenarios of high-temperature bipolaron superconductivity, we studied the effect of Coulomb interactions on the critical temperature of the superconducting transition in the 2D and 3D Bose OCP, both on a lattice and in continuous space. We provide evidence that the superconducting transition is in the XY universality class and obtain values for the critical temperature T c in a broad range of densities. Screening of long-range interactions works in the direction of reducing their effect on T c . However, screening of q → 0 modes involves divergent time scales (this is the prime reason for having plasmons instead of sound waves) making our finding that T c shifts are remarkably modest all the way to the Wigner crystal phase, surprising. The estimate (1) remains quantitatively accurate and similar to that for systems with short-range interactions-up to the reversal of the small and large density limits controlling the strength of interaction-induced correlations. The role of interactions is twofold: (i) On one hand (this aspect is conceptually important and well pronounced in 2D), interactions suppress thermal fluctuations of the superfluid order parameter amplitude (but not the phase), thereby contributing to the increase of T c ; (ii) On the other hand, strong local correlations caused by interactions increase phase fluctuations and suppress T c . In a Coulomb system, the first effect is dominant at r s < 5 (high-density limit) while the second effect takes over at r s > 10 (low-density regime). The result of this competition is the T c /T (0) c vs. r s curve with a maximum at r s ∼ 8, see Figs. We expect that our precise data for the dependence of T c on r s will prove important in the context of experimental realization of a relatively dilute, and, thus, well-defined bipolaron superconductor. 