Unconventional Weyl semimetals have attracted intensive research interest in condensed matter physics and materials science, but they are very rare in two dimensions. In this work, based on symmetry analysis and the first-principles electronic structure calculations, we predict that the Si/Bi van der Waals heterostructure is a two-dimensional unconventional quadratic double Weyl semimetal with strong spin-orbit coupling (SOC). Although unprotected by the C 3v double group symmetry of the heterostructure, the two-dimensional quadratic double Weyl semimetal is stable for compressive strains up to 6.64%. The system transforms into a trivial semimetal with further increasing strain, where the phase boundary is a two-dimensional triple degenerate semimetal state. Furthermore, the Kane-Mele tight-binding model calculations show that the quadratic double Weyl phase is derived from the competition between the Rashba SOC and the proximity-effect-enhanced intrinsic SOC. On the other hand, by breaking mirror symmetry, the quadratic double Weyl semimetal transforms into a quantum spin Hall insulator as well as a quantum valley Hall insulator phase. Thus, the Si/Bi heterostructure is an excellent platform for studying the exotic physics of two-dimensional double Weyl semimetal and other novel topological phases. Weyl semimetals have been intensively studied owing to their many exotic properties, such as chiral anomaly, chiral zero sound, and topologically protected Fermi arc surface states Currently, the unconventional Weyl semimetals studied are basically three-dimensional. A natural question that arises is whether unconventional Weyl nodes exist in two dimensions. In three dimensions, a Weyl node is surrounded by a twodimensional closed Fermi surface, so that a chiral topological charge can be defined and calculated. In comparison, in two dimensions, a Weyl node is surrounded by a one-dimensional closed Fermi ring, leading to an ill-defined chiral topological charge. Nevertheless, it is interesting that two-dimensional Weyl nodes can carry ±π or ±2π Berry phases and correspondingly have linear or quadratic dispersions In this work, we predict that the Si/Bi van der Waals heterostructure is not only a two-dimensional unconventional quadratic double Weyl semimetal with strong SOC, but also an excellent platform to realize a variety of novel topological phases. A two-dimensional triple degenerate semimetal can be obtained by applying compressive strain, as the phase boundary between the quadratic double Weyl and trivial semimetals. Furthermore, a quantum spin Hall insulator as well as a quantum valley Hall insulator phase can be achieved by breaking the mirror symmetry. As described by the Kane-Mele tightbinding model calculations, both the quadratic double Weyl node and the topological phase transition originate from the competition between the strong Rashba SOC and the proximityeffect-enhanced intrinsic SOC. The Si/Bi van der Waals heterostructure is an ideal arena for exploring various topological phenomena and associated physics. In our calculations, the plane-wave basis based method and Quantum-ESPRESSO software package were used The Si/Bi heterostructure was constructed by combining a √ 3 × √ 3-R30 • supercell of a single bilayer bismuthene and a 2×2 supercell of planar silicene, both of which have been synthesized experimentally As is well known, monolayer Si is a Dirac semimetal, while single bilayer Bi is a quantum spin Hall insulator Once the SOC is introduced, the point group symmetry of electronic states of the Si/Bi heterostructure changes from C 3v point group to C 3v double group. The group theory analysis indicates that the two-dimensional irreducible representation of C 3v point group reduces to two one-dimensional irreducible representations and one two-dimensional irreducible representation of C 3v double point group. Correspondingly, the Weyl node at the K (K ) point splits into two non-degenerate and one double-degenerate bands (Fig. The close proximity between the silicene and the single bilayer bismuthene allows the electron wavefunctions from both layers to overlap and hybridize sufficiently, endowing the silicene with strong SOC. As shown in Figs. Just like the case of a three-dimensional conventional Weyl semimetal, there are also edge states connecting two Weyl points with opposite Berry curvatures in a two-dimensional conventional Weyl semimetal. In the Si/Bi heterostructure, in the case of ignoring the SOC, there is indeed an edge state linking the two conventional Weyl points at the K and K points (Fig. On the other hand, the C 3v double group symmetry protects the existence of a double-degenerate band, but unprotects a quadratic dispersion. Thus, a quadratic double Weyl point with Berry phase ±2π may transform into three Weyl points with Berry phases ±π and one Weyl point with Berry phase ∓π, even keeping the symmetry of C 3v To further examine the stability of the quadratic double Weyl nodes, we have calculated the electronic band structures of the Si/Bi heterostructure under different strains. The results indicate that when the compressive strain is less than 6.64%, the quadratic double Weyl points always exist. Therefore, the quadratic double Weyl points are stable under a wide range of strain. On the other hand, the quadratic double Weyl semimetal phase transforms into a triple degenerate semimetal with 6.64% compressive strain applied (Fig. The quadratic double Weyl nodes are unprotected by the C 3v double group symmetry, then, what is the underlying mechanism for the formation of quadratic double Weyl nodes in the Si/Bi heterostructure? To answer the question, we have constructed a low-energy effective model to describe the band structure of the Si/Bi heterostructure, that is, the Kane-Mele tight-binding model in which index b (c) represents the two (three) different types of hopping integrals between the nearest (second-nearest) neighbors. Note that there are three different types of bonds in the system. However, the lengths of b-2 and b-3 are almost the same, and hence, we set them the same for simplicity. The first term in Eq. 1 is the nearest-neighbor hopping term on the honeycomb lattice, in which t b is the hopping amplitude. Since the silicene is placed on the substrate of Bi which breaks the spaceinversion symmetry, an effective electric field is formed perpendicularly after relaxation, resulting in a Rashba SOC coupling term iλ R b i j b c † i (s × di j ) z c j , where λ R b is the amplitude. The third term describes the intrinsic SOC with amplitude λ I c . Here we define α as the ratio of the intensity of averaged Rashba SOC to that of averaged intrinsic SOC, namely α=λ R /λ I (There is only little difference in values between the different types of Rashba SOC or intrinsic SOC, so we simplify the description by averaging the different types of these two SOCs). When ignoring the Rashba SOC (α=0.0), there are two double-degenerate bands at the K (K ) point near the Fermi level. A gap opens due to the existence of the intrinsic SOC (Fig. To the end, we would like to remind that such a perfect quadratic double Weyl semimetal is also an ideal platform for hosting topological superconductivity via superconducting proximity effect, for example, setting the Si/Bi heterostructure on a Pb(111) substrate. There has been report that the fabrication of a Pb(111) film on multi-layer Bi enables observation of the proximity-induced superconductivity in Bi(111) as evident from a 1 meV energy gap at 5 K In summary, based on the symmetry analysis and the first-principles electronic structure calculations, we propose a promising realistic material system, the Si/Bi heterostructure, to realize the novel two-dimensional quadratic double Weyl state, which arises from the competition between the Rashba SOC and the proximity-effect-enhanced intrinsic SOC. With the application of strain or breaking the mirror symmetry, more exotic topological phases, such as two-dimensional triple degenerate state, quantum spin Hall state, and quantum valley Hall state, can be obtained. Our work therefore provides a good playground to study a variety of novel topological properties, and is of great instructive value for the future work on designing or customizing the electronic and topological properties of materials. Preprint submitted to XXXX July 8, 2022