Dynamic nuclear polarization (DNP) is a method of enhancing NMR signals via the transfer of polarization from electron spins to nuclear spins using on-resonance microwave (MW) irradiation. In most cases, monochromatic continuous-wave (MCW) MW irradiation is used. Recently, several groups have shown that the use of frequency modulation of the MW irradiation can result in an additional increase in DNP enhancement above that obtained with MCW. The effect of frequency modulation on the solid effect (SE) and the cross effect (CE) has previously been studied using the stable organic radical 4-hydroxy TEMPO (TEMPOL) at temperatures under 20 K. Here, in addition to the SE and CE, we discuss the effect of frequency modulation on the Overhauser effect (OE) and the truncated CE (tCE) in the room-temperature 13 C-DNP of diamond powders. We recently showed that diamond powders can exhibit multiple DNP mechanisms simultaneously due to the heterogeneity of P1 (substitutional nitrogen) environments within diamond crystallites. We explore the enhancement obtained 1 Dynamic nuclear polarization (DNP) enhances NMR signals by transferring spin polarization from electrons to nuclei by on-resonance microwave (MW) irradiation of the electron spins. We performed frequency modulated DNP experiments on a diamond powder sample at 3.34 T. Details about the sample and experimental methods can be found in the Methods Section at the end of the paper. This powder sample exhibits four DNP mechanisms, the SE, CE, OE and tCE, which we identified in a previous publication by fitting a non-modulated DNP spectrum. Next, we kept the modulation frequency constant (at 200 Hz) and observed how the modulation amplitude affected the DNP spectrum. In Figure However, we have identified specific frequencies that mark the maximum DNP enhancement from each mechanism, and contain the least 'contamination' from other mechanisms. These frequencies were chosen based on the fit of the non-modulated DNP spectrum. We begin by exploring the effect of changing the modulation amplitude and frequency on the DNP enhancement at the SE and the CE frequencies. Figures The key features that we observe are: (i) The SE is very sensitive to the combination of low modulation frequencies f m and large modulation amplitudes ∆ω; (ii) Frequency modu-lation results only in a very small improvement of the SE enhancement (from ∼ 26 to ∼ 27), and in most cases results in a decrease in the enhancement; and (iii) The CE shows a range of optimal conditions where there is an increase of about ∼ 20% to the enhancement (from ∼ 40 to ∼ 51). The effect of frequency modulation on the SE-and CE-DNP enhancement in small spin systems was originally described by Hovav et al. In our simulations, we simplify the diamond sample, and consider a single electron or a pair of electrons hyperfine coupled to a 13 C nucleus. The addition of a 14 N nucleus will just result in three EPR manifolds, each of which will behave independently, as we previously described. where S and I C are the electron and carbon spin operators, respectively. ∆ω e = ω e -ω MW is the electron off-resonance (compared to the rotating frequency ω MW ), ω C is the 13 C Larmor frequency. A C x and A C y are the pseudo-secular terms of the dipolar hyperfine interaction. Note that no e-C secular hyperfine, A n z =0 MHz, was added to the simulation. Here, For an e 2 -e 1 -C system the Hamiltonian is where D ee is the electron-electron dipolar interaction. In the original work by Hovav et al., For the CE, we must have two electrons at the CE condition (two electrons separated by the nuclear Larmor frequency ω C ). The polarization that is transferred to the nucleus is equal to the polarization difference between the two electrons. When irradiating on the SQ transition of the low frequency electron, positive enhancement is achieved, and on the SQ transition of the high frequency electron negative enhancement is achieved (Figure At low modulation amplitudes of ∆ω < ω C there is an increase in the CE enhancement due to the ability to irradiate on both sides of the EPR line that is split by the electron-electron dipolar coupling (Figure No cross relaxation was added to the system. The small spin simulation results do not align closely with the experimental data. In order to describe a real sample, we must next consider how modulation affects the SE and the CE in large spin systems, when there are many electrons that are possible DNP sources. As noted earlier it is essential to consider the effects of eSD on the DNP process. In Figure For the SE (red circles), at low modulation amplitudes (below the optimum ∆ω), when irradiating at a given MW frequency ω MW , we are irradiating on the DQ and ZQ transitions of electrons that have a SQ transition at ω MW ±ω C . However, we are also partially saturating the SQ transition of the electrons at ω MW . Partial saturation of these electrons results in a low DNP enhancement. As we increase the modulation amplitude ∆ω, the saturation of these SQ transitions becomes less effective, and we observe an increase in DNP enhancement. When we reach ∆ω ≈ ω C , where we begin saturating both the DQ/ZQ transition and the SQ transition, and this causes a sharp decrease in the DNP enhancement. This results in an optimum ∆ω ≈ ω C (or slightly larger). The CE (blue circles) behaves in a similar manner to the SE. Also here, the optimum modulation amplitude is ∆ω ≈ ω C . When eSD is non-negligible, the electron depolarization spreads throughout the EPR line even when ∆ω < ω C , and saturates additional electron transitions that we are not directly irradiating. At very large values of eSD, modulation does not improve the DNP contribution of a single electron to the SE or CE, and just results in a decrease in the enhancement. Going back to Figure Because we are observing the SE from the central EPR line, which is quite narrow (width at base of ≈ 20 MHz), increasing the modulation amplitude to values that are larger than the width of the central EPR line does not improve the DNP, but rather decreases it, especially at small f m values. Moreover, the fact that we do not see a large increase in the SE enhancement in Figure Otherwise, we would expect to find optimal modulation parameters that would result in an increase in the SE enhancement. This was observed in the TEMPOL sample recently. Therefore, we can conclude that the addition of more electron spin-packets into the DNP process is strong enough to overcome the fact that each spin packet is contributing less to the overall enhancement. This was also observed in the TEMPOL sample recently. Overall, the results from the SE and the CE suggest that by carefully selecting modulation parameters it is possible to change the relative ratios of the various DNP mechanisms, in systems where many mechanisms are active. Next, we proceeded to explore the effect of frequency modulation at the OE and the tCE frequencies. Once again we plot the change in the enhancement compared to the nonmodulated case as a function of the modulation amplitude and frequency. Both mechanisms (but in particular the OE) are very sensitive to the combination of low modulation frequencies f m and large modulation amplitudes ∆ω when enhancement is seen to drop sharply. Frequency modulation results in a slight increase for the OE (from -25.0 to -27.2) and a larger increase for the tCE (32.7 to 36.3) for large modulation frequencies and amplitudes. In order to better explain these observations, we expand the work of Hovav et al. The results are described in Figure The simulated DNP spectrum with and without frequency modulation are shown in Figure Next, we consider the effect of the frequency of the modulation on the DNP enhancement of the OE. As can be seen from Figure The simulated DNP spectrum with and without frequency modulation are shown in Figure In addition, working at much larger modulation rates should be advantageous for the tCE. We will not discuss the case where 1/(f m ) <T 2e . continued slight decrease due to a reduction in the irradiation efficiency (see Figure .05 MHz, T 1e1 =1.3 ms, T 1e2 =0.013 ms, T 1C =10 s, T 2e1 =T 2e2 =10 μs and T 2C =100 μs. t MW =100 s, f m =50 kHz and T=273 K. No cross relaxation was added to the system. In Figure For the OE (black circles) the enhancement is not sensitive to the modulation amplitude. This is because the effective irradiation strength on the SQ electron transition is large even under large modulation amplitudes, ∆ω. Moreover, because we are irradiating on the SQ electron transition, the irradiation of the DQ/ZQ transitions does not affect the DNP enhancement, exactly as described above for small spin systems. For the tCE (magenta circles), the enhancement is mediated via the polarization difference between the fast-relaxing pool of electrons (which is always fully polarized) and the slowly-relaxing pool of electrons. At low modulation amplitudes, the polarization difference is quite large because we are able to saturate the slow relaxing electrons. As the modulation amplitude increases, we see a decrease in the enhancement because the efficiency of the saturation of the slow electrons decreases as we spend less time irradiating at each frequency. However, at even larger modulation amplitudes we again see an increase in the enhancement. This comes from a second increase in the saturation of the slow electrons, as the modulation amplitudes become large enough to cover the whole width of the EPR line. When this happens, even irradiation that is not directly on the electron bin we are observing still results in saturation of that bin. When the eSD is non-negligible, the electron depolarization spreads throughout the EPR line, and saturates additional electron transitions that we are not directly irradiating even when ∆ω < ω C . The OE remains insensitive (all OE curves in Figure At very large values of eSD we still observe a slight increase in the tCE enhancement, until the slow relaxing EPR line is fully saturated (see Figure For both the OE and the tCE, we get a slight increase in the enhancement (of the order of 10 %) at large modulation amplitudes and large modulation frequencies. For the OE, the enhancement is a result of the narrow central EPR line, and therefore we would expect that increasing the modulation amplitude beyond the width of the central EPR line does not improve the DNP, but rather does not change it, or even decreases it, especially at small f m values. Note, also, that the DNP mechanisms overlap at large modulation amplitudes many of, making it difficult to draw hard conclusions about their behaviour under frequency modulation (see Figure For the tCE, the simulations of a single bin suggest that we should see an increase in the tCE enhancement. The simulations show that the increase in the tCE enhancement becomes smaller as the eSD becomes larger. This suggests that the slow electron pool in our system has a relatively large eSD connecting the electrons that make up the two outer EPR lines. This matches with our conclusions from the SE and CE enhancement described above. Thus, it seems like we are in the regime of large eSD, combined with a decrease in the effective irradiation power due to the modulation that decreases the tCE. We must also remember that the tCE overlaps with the CE and SE at large modulation amplitudes, making it difficult to separate the mechanisms. Microwave frequency-modulation has recently been shown to improve the nuclear spin enhancements obtained during DNP. While the effects of frequency-modulation on the SE and CE mechanisms have been studied previously, we have extended this analysis to the Overhauser effect (OE) and the truncated CE (tCE). We compare theoretical simulations of both small and large spin systems with experimental results from the the room-temperature 13 C-DNP of diamond powders. We recently showed that DNP via P1 defects in diamond can exhibit all of these mechanisms simultaneously due to the heterogeneity of P1 (substitutional nitrogen) environments within diamond crystallites Diamond powder used in these experiments were donated by Element6. The type Ib diamond is made by HPHT synthesis (High Pressure, High Temperature). The powder was 15-25 μm in size, and with a P1 concentration of 110-130 ppm. The experiments were performed on a homebuilt DNP spectrometer, at a field of 3.4 T, corresponding to an electron Larmor frequency of 94 GHz, a 1 H Larmor frequency of 142 MHz and a 13 C Larmor frequency of 36 MHz. All experiments were performed at room temperature. The homebuilt DNP spectrometer and the MW bridge were described in detail recently. The following settings were used for all the experiments, unless otherwise noted: The DNP enhanced NMR signal was recorded using 20 or 24 scans, with a 90-acquire pulse sequence, using a π/2 pulse of 10 μs in length. Eight step phase cycling was used in all cases (no difference was found between 20 scans and 24 scans despite the phase cycle being incomplete). The thermal NMR signal was recorded using 100 scans. All experiments began with a train of 100 30 ms saturation pulses separated by 20 μs. We did not record the DNP enhancement at steady state. The length of the MW irradiation or the thermal recovery time after saturation was set to 120 s, as a compromise between the length of the experiment and the signal intensity. Modulation grids were recorded by systematically changing the modulation amplitude and modulation frequency, while keeping all other experimental parameters unchanged. The 13 C relaxation time T 1n and the enhancement buildup time T bu measurements were described in a previous publication. Data processing was performed in MATLAB using custom scripts. 3 points of left-shift were used, in all cases. The data was then baseline corrected, phase corrected and 200 Hz exponential line broadening was applied. We report the integrated intensity of the 13 C resonance. For DNP enhancement calculations we divide the integrated intensity of the MW-on signal with the MW-off signal. No enhancement is equal to 1. Quantum mechanical simulations of a e-C and e 2 -e 1 -C spin systems which include relaxation effects and frequency modulation were performed according to the methods described by Hovav et al. In order to simulate the tCE, we repeated the CE simulations, but with unequal T 1e values for the two electrons. The simulations include: The electron and nuclear Larmor frequencies, ∆ω e and ω C , respectively. Secular and pseudo secular hyperfine interactions of A z , and A x =A y , respectively. The electron and nuclear spin-lattice and spin-spin relaxation times, T 1e , T 1C , T 2e and, T 2C , respectively. Electron-nuclear cross-relaxation on the DQ and ZE transition, T 1ZQ and T 1DQ , respectively. MW irradiation at a frequency of ω MW , for a time t MW , with a step size of ∆t and of a strength ω 1 . Sawtooth modulation (ramp up) is employed, with a modulation amplitude of ±∆ω surrounding the central irradiation frequency ω MW , a modulation frequency of f m . No electron spectral diffusion is included in these simulations. In order to simulate a large spin system, we rely on a previously published model by Hovav et al. The polarization of a single hyperfine-coupled nucleus is also included, to mimic the average of all nuclei in the sample. The EPR line is split into bins of index j, with a frequency ω j , an amplitude f j , and of width ω bin . The effect of frequency modulation with an amplitude ∆ω surrounding a central frequency ω excite is also taken into consideration. The model assumes modulation with a frequency that is larger then 1/T 1e , but does not consider an explicit f m value. The polarization of each bin, P e (ω j ; ω excite ; ∆ω) is then described by coupled rate equations. We assume that the frequency modulation affects N bins, according to N = (∆ω)/ω bin , and we scale the rates for the single quantum (SQ) and double/zero quantum (DQ/ZQ) irradiation according to the inverse of the amount of time the MW irradiation spends in each bin, ω bin /∆ω. For every bin, we include SQ irradiation, DQ/ZQ irradiation, 1/T 1e relaxation, 1/T 1n . We also include electron spectral diffusion (eSD) which spreads polarization between every pair of bins j and j'. The spectral diffusion constant is described by λ eSD , with units of μs -3 , and is a phenomenological parameter. All the rates are included in a single rate matrix R. where the electron polarization across the EPR line, --------→ P e (∆ω; t MW ), is represented by a vector of length N, which matches the number of bins in the EPR line, N. The electron polarization and the shape of the EPR line are then used to simulate the DNP spectra for the various DNP mechanisms. The nuclear polarization is not used further, but is necessary to reproduce the effect of the hyperfine interaction on the electron polarization during the MW irradiation. The details of the SE and CE under frequency modulation were published previously. Where ω MW is the central MW irradiation frequency, ∆ω mod is position of the irradiation around the central irradiation frequency, and goes from -∆ω/2 to ∆ω/2 in steps that match the bin size, ω n is the nuclear Larmor frequency, P e (ω x , ω y ) is the electron polarization at a position ω x , when irradiating at a frequency ω y . Where P 0 e is the electron polarization at thermal equilibrium (i.e., fully polarized). Here, we assume that the polarization that is transferred to the nucleus matches the amount of polarization that the electron loses during the DNP, in order to simulate negative enhancement. ω MW g(ω MW )g(ω MW -ω n ) (P e (ω MW -ω n , ω MW ) -P 0 e ) (1 -P e (ω MW -ω n , ω MW )P 0 e ) Here, we assume that there are two electron pools, one at ω MW -ω n that is partially saturated, and another at ω MW that is fully polarized. In order to achieve that, we always keep the polarization of the second electron equal to the thermal electron polarization P 0 e . As a result we assume that there are two identical EPR lines, one for a slow relaxing electron pool, and one for a fast relaxing electron pool that cannot be saturated. The EPR line was simulated via EasySpin, as described in our previous publication. The DNP spectra with modulation were fitted using a crude method of convoluting the EPR line with delta functions to form the basic shapes for the SE, OE (same shape used for tCE) and CE DNP mechanisms, and changing their amplitude to achieve the best agreement with the experimental spectrum. This method was previously described in Banerjee et al., 