Tens of Zr inter-atomic potentials (force fields) have been developed to enable atomic-scale simulations of Zr alloys. These can provide critical insight in the in-reactor behaviour of nuclear fuel cladding and structural components exposed, but the results are strongly sensitive to the choice of potential. We provide a comprehensive comparison of 13 popular Zr potentials, and assess their ability to reproduce key physical, mechanical, structural and thermodynamic properties of Zr. We assess the lattice parameters, thermal expansion, melting point, volume-energy response, allotropic phase stability, elastic properties, and point defect energies, and compare them to experimental and abinitio values. No potential was found to outperform all others on all aspects, but for every metric considered here, at least one potential was found to provide reliable results. Older embedded-atom method (EAM) potentials tend to excel in 2-3 metrics each, but at the cost of poorer transferability. The two highest-performing potentials overall, with complementary strengths and weaknesses, were the 2021 angular-dependent potential of Smirnova and Starikov (Comp. Mater. Sci. 197, 110581) and the 2019 embedded-atom method potential of Wimmer et al (J. Nucl. Mater. 532, 152055). All potentials trained through machine learning algorithms proved to have lower overall accuracy, and less transferability, than simpler and computationally faster potentials available. Point defect structures and energies is where the greatest divergence and least accuracy is observed. We created maps that will help modellers select the most suitable potential for a specific application, and which may help identify areas of improvement in future potentials. Zirconium (Zr) alloys have widespread use in water-cooled nuclear reactor cores due to their low thermal neutron capture cross-section, corrosion resistance and reasonable mechanical properties Since 1988, 57 interatomic potentials for Zr have been developed . Of these, Potentials developed before 1990 were superseded by the ones produce by Ackland, Wooding and Bacon The number of relevant interatomic potentials developed per year has been increasing, particularly since 2012 (Figure This work studies the transferability of 13 Zr-Zr potentials Table All simulations were performed using LAMMPS Rushton For each potential we performed a consistent set of simulations to benchmark: For the phase stability, we considered four allotropes of Zr: Hexagonal close packed (α), body centred cubic (β), face centred cubic (γ) and the hexagonal ω structure. For each phase, we calculate the ground state lattice parameters, the thermal expansion coefficient, and the change in energy with a change in volume of the unit cell, either by applying a hydrostatic strain (γ-Zr and β-Zr) or a hydrostatic pressure (α-Zr and ω-Zr), in increments of 0.02 % strain or 100 MPa, respectively. This approach was chosen so that the hexagonal crystal structure could relax to the lowest energy c/a ratio for each volume tested. Equivalent simulations were carried out with density functional theory (DFT) for comparison; these are described below. For the COMB14 potential, it was found that these distortions of the unit cell yield unstable simulations, and that the results were sensitive to supercell size used despite the periodic boundary conditions (details in supplementary materials). Thus, we report the results from a 3x3x3 supercell here, which appear to be the most consistent and reliable, and those from the unit cell and several other supercell sizes are reported in the supplementary materials. The elastic constants were calculated by applying strains of ±1 × 10 !" in each of the six directions on a supercell of 864 atoms. The bulk (B) and shear (G) moduli of α-Zr were calculated using the Hill average (B # and G # ) where the Voigt moduli B % and G % are: with M = c && + 3(c && -c &' ) + 2c (( -4c &( ; and the Reuss moduli B $ and G $ are: where Changes in lattice parameter with temperature were simulated with an isothermal-isobaric ensemble (NPT) with 5-chain Nose-Hoover thermostat and barostat with damping times of 400 fs and 4 ps, respectively. The temperature was ramped from 20 K to 1750 K in increments of 10 K, except for the ML potentials which had a 20 K increment due to computational cost. At each temperature, the simulation was equilibrated for 4 ps followed by a 20 ps temperature hold during which data was collected. The coefficients of thermal expansions and the heat capacity were calculated using a central difference derivative with temperature of the lattice parameter and enthalpy, respectively. A 14-point average on either side of each point was taken to smooth data prior to differentiating: For the GAP18 and ML19 potentials we used a 7-point average due to the reduced number of temperature steps (thus the average covered the same temperature range). The melting point, T , , was calculated using the moving interface method (or coexisting phase method) Self-interstitial atoms (SIA) were simulated in supercells containing 360 lattice sites, at a constant volume that was scaled isotropically by ("-, to allow direct comparison with the equivalent DFT simulations of Vérité et al. One metric used in this work to compare the relative performance of potentials is the order of stability of Zr phases OAE 122345367 8 C or SIA defect structures O(E ./0 ). This is defined as the difference in rank of the phases or SIA structures, with respect to the that predicted by DFT, divided by two to avoid double counting Where two SIAs have the same energy, they are given the same rank and the next highest is skipped. Where a phase or SIA structure cannot be modelled by a potential it is assigned the maximum rank. Figure Yoo Where experimental or DFT data was not available (e.g. energy-volume curves, defect relaxation volumes), additional DFT simulations were carried out using the VASP code Defect energies were in close agreement with those published previously 3 Results The relative computational cost for each potential is shown in Figure Figure Figure were explicitly fit to dimer potential energy, it is still illuminating to see the remarkable variation in inter-atomic interactions under this simple scenario. The GAP18 potentials exhibit very small interatomic energy at all distances, and with unphysically positive values for the α-Zr variant (i.e., repulsion at distances greater than 3.5 Å, but attraction at shorter distances). Additionally, as these potentials were not fitted to data at close inter-atomic separation, the energy of the dimer collapses to zero below 1.5 Å. This leads to highly unphysical results when two atoms are in close proximity to oneanother, as is expected during radiation damage collision cascade event, thermal shocks, and high strain-rate deformations. COMB14 and MEAM06 exhibit a sharp collapse of the dimer energy at distances greater than 3.8 Å and 5 Å, respectively, indicative of the short-range nature of the pairwise component of these potentials. ADP potentials display a complex energy landscape, with several inflections and a region of repulsion around 4.28 -6 Å. It is worth noting that the behaviour of a Zr-Zr dimer bares no direct consequences on the potential's performance on modelling solid phase Zr. Unlike all other potentials considered here, the GAP formalism contains a chemical potentiallike energy term that is intrinsic to the constituent atoms (i.e., an isolated GAP Zr atom has non-zero energy), which is -8.410 eV for the β-Zr variant and -8.439 eV for the α-Zr variant. To allow direct comparison with other potentials, the chemical potential was subtracted in the results presented in Figure The energy profile of a single atom being displaced within the lattice is shown in Figure suggesting no displacement anisotropy. Anisotropy of atomic displacements is expected in the HCP-Zr crystal, thus this is a potential area of further improvement for all potentials, which may have profound consequences on simulations of collision cascades and annihilation and clustering of radiation-induced defects. The other two directions considered here are towards the displacement to the 2 nd and 3 rd nearest neighbour, which require the moving atom to squeeze between (frozen) nearest neighbour atoms. This forma a characteristic hump at approximately half distance. In the two primary directions, atomic displacements appear as smoothly decaying function for all potentials, without the oscillation observed at 0.4 fractional bond length in DFT. It is not clear whether this short-range feature in the DFT data is an artifact of the pseudopotential used in the calculations or it is a real feature. Further calculations using full-potentials and/or local basis sets would shed light on this, but that is beyond the scope of this work, since this feature is not of great interest even under high-energy collision cascade events: it is only observed at short range and when the neighbouring atoms are frozen in place, which is a highly artificial condition. Thus, when considering the relative performance of the potentials, we only compare the relative difference against DFT ion the fractional bond length range of 0.4-1, i.e. past the short-range DFT feature. A simple EAM potential form is sufficient to capture the displacement energies accurately. The GAP18 potentials exhibit unphysically flat displacement profiles. The ML19 potential has discontinuities at 0.5 and 0.82 fractional bond length, which are also unphysical. Of the remaining potentials, the EAM-BMD potentials have by far the steepest displacement energy profiles of all potentials (overestimation of displacement energies), while the ADP potentials underestimate the displacement profile for fractional bond length < 0.6 (which is admittedly a fairly short-range interaction). It is interesting to note that the atomic displacement profiles are weak points for two of most versatile potentials in this study: the BMD19#2 and ADP21. Next, we consider the thermodynamic stability of Zr allotropes (α-Zr, β-Zr, γ-Zr and ω-Zr). Here, it is important to highlight a long-standing discrepancy between ab-initio simulations and experiments regarding the ground state structure. The hexagonal ω-Zr phase is experimentally observed only under hydrostatic loads of > 2.2 GPa Figure Importantly, GAP18#HCP and ADP17 predict the γ-Zr to have lower energy than α-Zr, which is not Figure An alternative format of the same data is provided in Figure Volume per atom (Å 3 ) β γ α ω predicting closely. Conversely, the widely used EAM-MA07#2 exhibits remarkable discrepancy with DFT for the α-Zr structure under both compression and tension (remedied in EAM-MA07#3). GAP18#BCC most accurately predicts the energy-volume relationship of β-Zr, unsurprising given it is the only potential specifically designed for β-Zr. ML19 most accurately predicts the energy-volume relationship of ω-Zr (also unsurprising, as that was the goal of the potential) and EAM-BMD19#2 most accurately predicts the energy-volume relationship of γ-Zr. Where high stress or strain simulations are being conducted for non-α-Zr structures careful choice of potential is recommended given the high variability in performance. The c/a ratio was allowed to change for ω-Zr and α-Zr during energy minimisation. DFT calculations inform that the α-Zr c/a ratio is expected to increase monotonically with increasing compression while the ω-Zr c/a ratio is expected to remain constant with increasing pressure Conversely, several potentials displayed non-monotonic, and in some cases discontinuous, behaviour for α-Zr and none maintained a constant ratio for ω-Zr. Further details are provided in the supplementary material Figure Under compressive and tensile strain, some of the potentials displayed unexpected or unphysical behaviour. Specifically, for EAM-AWB95 the ω-Zr phase transform to β-Zr at volume of The ability of each potential to describe the elastic properties of α-Zr was investigated by calculating the single crystal elastic constants, c *? , and the Hill when the potential was developed. ** Indicate potentials where the fitted quantities are not stated. Figure The temperature dependence of the lattice parameters, volume, and c/a ratio of α-Zr was analysed by performing MD simulations with increasing temperature from 10 K until melting or spontaneous phase transformation. Figure Most potentials accurately predict the a and c lattice parameters to within 0.7 % of the experimental value, and slightly overestimate c (up to 1.5 %) over the temperatures for which α-Zr is stable. As a result, the volume and the c/a ratio are also generally overestimated, with the exception of MEAM06 and ADP21. The ADP21 potential stand out for overestimating the thermal expansion of α-Zr, but correctly capture the room temperature a (underestimating/overestimating at lower/higher temperatures). Conversely, GAP18#BCC, MEAM06 and EAM-LWP13 correctly exhibit constant α 1 . Notably, both of EAM-MA07, EAM-AWB95 and ADP21 exhibit an unphysical negative thermal expansion coefficient below 300 K in either a or c direction. This is also observed for volumetric expansion in the case of EAM-MA07#3 below 200 K. In addition to the thermal expansion, we considered the enthalpy and heat capacity, and compared it to experimental value. All potentials perform poorly in this regard, with near-linear enthalpy change with temperature, and a slow increase in heat capacity with temperature, both of which deviate significantly from experimental trends. This is likely due to the intrinsic lack of an electronic system at this level of theory, irrespective of the potential form. For further details, refer to Figure As a metric of potential quality, we consider the root mean square difference in SIA energy between the potentials and DFT calculations. It is important to note that DFT energies of point defects often form part of the training set for the potentials, thus this metric isn't strictly a measure of transferability. Nevertheless, and despite this, we observe a surprisingly large disagreement between DFT. Overwhelmingly the formation energy of SIAs was higher than that predicted by DFT except for GAP18 potentials which predicted lower formation energies for nearly configurations. The average deviation from DFT reference value is 40 %. However, this metric can only be calculated for the SIA configurations that are predicted to be stable for both DFT and the potentials, and therefore it does not reflect how many of the structures are included in the comparison. For example, GAP18#BCC can only replicate two of the DFT SIA configurations, but for these two it predicts energies close to DFT and therefore this potential has the lowest RMSE value. This potential is closely followed by ADP 21. EAM-MA07#3, which was specifically designed to simulate point defects, predicts few stable SIAs, but with remarkably close agreement to DFT, if one considers that at the time the potential was developed most of the Zr SIA configurations had not been discovered An important quantity for calculations of radiation damage and radiation effects is the predicted amount of stored energy per Frenkel pair (a vacancy and SIA). Here we consider the energy required to form a dilute (non-interacting) Frenkel pair, composing the lowest energy SIA configuration. Under this definition, most potentials predict the Frenkel pair formation energy to within ±15 % of DFT, with notable exceptions of EAM-AWB95, MEAM06 (both > 6 eV) and GAP18#HCP (< 4 eV). Finally, we consider the relaxation volume of point defects. This is a valuable metric because it is less often used during the training of potentials, and because it informs the elastic behaviour of point defects, as they annihilate or grow into larger defect such as dislocation loops. Table C) is calculated using eq. ( Surprisingly, the GAP18#HCP potential appears to perform worse than the GAP18#BCC overall, despite many of the indicators being specific to the α-Zr structure. This suggest that the GAP potential form may have significant space for improved if it were fitted to a greater range of relevant quantities. While the COMB14 potential appears to have significant areas of weaknesses, one must also consider that this potential is specifically designed to model charge transfer between metallic and ionic valences of Zr in the presence of O and/or H. Conversely, the test performed in this study are biased towards potentials explicitly designed for metallic state of Zr. ADP21 is by far the best performing potential for phase stability and has significant improvements in the thermal and elastic parameters over ADP17 but at the cost of point defect performance. ML19 stands out in predicting point defect structures and relative energies (order of stability of SIA configurations), with the closest agreement to DFT -as would be expected when including point defect energies in the training set. ADP21 and EAM-BMD19#2 stand out as a particularly well-rounded potentials, with mostly complementary strengths. Areas where there is considerable space for improvement are thermal expansion (for both), displacement energies (for both), point defect stability (for both), phase stability and melting point (for BMD19#2), elastic constants and point defect volumes (for ADP21). ML19 and EAM-MA07#3 also show strong performance in most categories, however, have mediocre performance in one or two areas each. However, ML19 has shown to have unpredictable and unphysical behaviour when atomic configurations deviated from the training set, as is expected of machine learning potentials used beyond their design scope. It is important to bear in mind that point defects, elastic constants and phase stability are often part of the fitting strategy when generating the potentials, and as such the apparent good agreement with DFT or experimental values observed here should not be interpreted as a good measure of transferability. On the contrary, it is surprising how potentials perform in predicting even basic quantities, such as thermal expansion and point defect geometries, when these were part of the training set of the potentials. This study highlights that for every application considered here, there is at least one potential currently available that performs with reasonably close agreement to either experimental data (where available) or DFT data. However, no potential proved to be universally transferable, even within the relatively small set of performance metrics considered here. Thus, the choice of potential must be taken with great care, and with specific consideration to the set of properties required for the study, as there is substantial level of disagreement between different potentials. Even greater care must be taken when a study requires a potential with good description of a combination of properties, for example a study on radiation damage at temperature would require a good description of point defects, thermal expansion, and relative phase stability, and no one potential significantly outperformed all others when considering all three aspects. The also highlights the with largest areas for improvement (e.g. point defects), which we hope will guide the development of future potentials for Zr and Zr alloys. In this work we have compared the performance of 13 zirconium potentials and evaluated their capacity to accurately simulate a series of parameters relevant nuclear applications. No individual potential showed outstanding performance on all accounts, but for every property at least one potential performed with adequate accuracy. However, the discrepancy for relatively fundamental quantities, is remarkable, thus great care must be taken to choose the appropriate potential for the specific set of properties that are relevant to each study. All potentials showed less than 1 % error on the room temperature lattice parameters. The agreement remains admirable when considering thermal expansion in the range 140-1125 K, however, this is better for a lattice parameter (<0.5 % RSME) than the c lattice parameter (>1 % RSME). Interestingly, the older EAM potentials performed best on the elastic constants. minimum energy of ω-Zr compared to DFT (by a small margin in the case of BMD19#2), while GAP18#BCC strongly underestimates it. ADP potentials, GAP18#HCP and ML19 show good agreement with ω-Zr DFT data, likely because ω-Zr was part of the fitting dataset. ( 122345367 ). For radiation damage, we consider five metrics: The absolute percentage from DFT in Frenkel pair formation energy (ΔE := 8 ), the RMSE of the SIA formation energy (only considering those SIA configurations that can be reproduced in DFT)(E ./0 8 ), the order of the formation energy of the SIA configurations (O(E ./0 )) defined in eq. (