Zinc-Iridium Oxide (Zn-Ir-O) thin films have been demonstrated as a p -type conducting material. However, the stability of p -type conductivity with respect to chemical composition or temperature is still unclear. This study focuses on the local atomic structure and the electrical properties of Zn-Ir-O films in the large Ir concentration range. The films are deposited by reactive DC magnetron co-sputtering at two different substrate temperatures -without intentional heating and 300 °C. EXAFS reveals that strongly disordered ZnO 4 tetrahedra are the main Zn complexes in Zn-Ir-O films up to 67.4 at.% Ir. As the Ir concentration increases, an effective increase of Ir oxidation state is observed. Reverse Monte Carlo analysis of EXAFS at Zn K-edge shows that the average Zn-O interatomic distance and disorder factor increase with the Ir concentration. We observed that the nano-crystalline w -ZnO structure is preserved in a wider Ir concentration range if the substrate is heated during deposition. At low Ir concentration, the transition from n -to p -type conductivity is observed regardless of the substrates temperature. Electrical resistivity decreases exponentially with the Ir concentration in the Zn-Ir-O films, and it is slightly lower in the case of the heated films. properties of this material, as this system has been considered as a possible candidate for p-type transparent conductors. I have two suggestions to make: -In the description of the RMC procedure, I would like a bit of discussion about why a 4x4x4 ZnO cell was selected, and no other size. Response: To select the size of the supercell for RMC simulations, we relied on our previous experience with RMC simulations for bulk ZnO and other oxides, see Ref [25-26]. There it was found that at least ca. 100 absorbing atoms are needed in the structure model to ensure proper averaging of calculated EXAFS spectra. Moreover, periodic boundary conditions introduce artificial correlations in the atomic displacements, if the supercell is too small (i.e., is not larger than the largest interatomic distance that contributes to the calculated EXAFS spectrum). On the other hand, using too large supercell sizes does not improve the accuracy of the structure model (due to the fact that EXAFS is local method and normally does not contain information on atoms that are more than few angstroms away from the absorbing atom), but significantly increases the computational costs of RMC simulations, since both the convergence of RMC method is slowed down, and the CPU time required for each iteration is increased. 4x4x4 supercell provides a reasonable compromise that works well for most simple oxide materials. We have added this information to manuscript text. -In page 9, line 32 "The is reflected...", I did not understand the meaning of this sentence. The sentence corrected "This is also reflected ... ". Reviewer #3: I have accepted to review the submitted manuscript pssb.202100374. However looking precisely on the paper, it appears that the abstract does not really describe this paper. Response: The abstract has been improved by adding XAS RMC results as main results, and the novelty is better explained. In fact, the main part of the paper is devoted to the XAS measurements. The structural characteristics and resistivity properties only represent a small part of the manuscript. Concerning these rather limited results on the physical properties of the films, I dont think that this small part brings a lot of new results in the field of Zn-Ir-O films. We believe that the quantitative results on the local atomic structure around Zn ions provided by RMC-EXAFS analysis gives an important information about the structural units in amorphous Zn-Ir-O films. The RMC approach is more suitable for strongly disordered structures compared to conventional EXAFS fitting. Thermoelectric measurements show that p-type conductivity is maintained over a wide range of Ir concentrations, and deposition at elevated temperatures indicates the themal stability of the p-type conductivity. The authors are grateful to both reviewers and editor for useful comments that made it possible to improve the text of the article. We have made corrections in the text following the reviewers comments. All corrections throughout the manuscript are marked in yellow. Reviewer #1: The manuscript reports on the synthesis through reactive magnetron co-sputtering of amorphous p-type conducting Zn-xIr oxide (x>0. 13) thin films and their characterization. The topic of the manuscript is certainly of interest for the PSS b readership. In particular the authors report the effect of a wide range of Ir% doping into ZnO,in regard to structural and electrical properties. The manuscript contents are reasonable, but my main concern regards the similarity of results to authors previously published papers. The effect of lower doping was already addressed in ref. 7, paper titled "Changes in structure and conduction type upon addition of Ir to ZnO thin films" and published by the authors in Thin Solid Film lower in 2017. The effect of the higher doping was addressed in ref. 14 titled "Raman, electron microscopy and electrical transport studies of x-ray amorphous Zn-Ir-O thin films deposited by reactive DC magnetron sputtering", published in 2015. Other studies (Xanes and EXAFS) are reported in J. Mater. Chem. C 2021. So my concern is what is the novelty of this manuscript? It is not only a problem of the identical nature of deposited films, but also of type of characterization carried out that is the same than that previously reported. We are aware that some of the results and conclusions in this manuscript overlap with previously published data. However, the reason for the overlap is to provide a comprehensive study, and most results in this article are not published elsewhere: • the results for samples deposited at 300 ° C (XRD, Raman, electrical conductivity and thermoelectric measurements). The thermoelectric measurements of these samples suggest that the p-type conductivity in Zn-Ir-O films is thermally stable. This is explained in more detail in the revised manuscript. We believe that the results on the local atomic structure and the electrical measurements of Zn-Ir-O films (up to 70 at.% Ir) deposited at evelated temperatures provide a reasonable contribution to a better understanding of the physics behind the p-type conductivity. In addition, to the best of our knowledge, the Hall effect measurements of pure IrO2 thin films performed in our study, cannot be found elsewhere. The explanation of the novelty has been improved in the revised manuscript. The authors should also carefully check the language, which needs to be carefully revised. The language is carefully revised by the authors. Overall, in my opinion, the present manuscript cannot be published in the present form and it should be significantly modified/improved to make clear what are the differences with respect to the previously published papers. Reviewer #2: This is a nice study of Ir-doped ZnO thin films. The properties of the thin films are explored as a function of Ir content, with an emphasis on the conductivity properties of this material, as this system has been considered as a possible candidate for p-type transparent conductors. I have two suggestions to make: -In the description of the RMC procedure, I would like a bit of discussion about why a 4x4x4 ZnO cell was selected, and no other size. To select the size of the supercell for RMC simulations, we relied on our previous experience with RMC simulations for bulk ZnO and other oxides, see Ref [25-26]. There it was found that at least ca. 100 absorbing atoms are needed in the structure model to ensure proper averaging of calculated EXAFS spectra. Moreover, periodic boundary conditions introduce artificial correlations in the atomic displacements, if the supercell is too small (i.e., is not larger than the largest interatomic distance that contributes to the calculated EXAFS spectrum). On the other hand, using too large supercell sizes does not improve the accuracy of the structure model (due to the fact that EXAFS is local method and normally does not contain information on atoms that are more than few angstroms away from the absorbing atom), but significantly increases the computational costs of RMC simulations, since both the convergence of RMC method is slowed down, and the CPU time required for each iteration is increased. 4x4x4 supercell provides a reasonable compromise that works well for most simple oxide materials. We have added this information to manuscript text. -In page 9, line 32 "The is reflected...", I did not understand the meaning of this sentence. The sentence corrected "This is also reflected ... ". Reviewer #3: I have accepted to review the submitted manuscript pssb.202100374. However looking precisely on the paper, it appears that the abstract does not really describe this paper. The abstract has been improved by adding XAS RMC results as main results, and the novelty is better explained. In fact, the main part of the paper is devoted to the XAS measurements. The structural characteristics and resistivity properties only represent a small part of the manuscript. Concerning these rather limited results on the physical properties of the films, I dont think that this small part brings a lot of new results in the field of Zn-Ir-O films. We believe that the quantitative results on the local atomic structure around Zn ions provided by RMC-EXAFS analysis gives an important information about the structural units in amorphous Zn-Ir-O films. The RMC approach is more suitable for strongly disordered structures compared to conventional EXAFS fitting. Thermoelectric measurements show that p-type conductivity is maintained over a wide range of Ir concentrations, and deposition at elevated temperatures indicates the themal stability of the p-type conductivity. Revised Manuscript To develop transparent electronics, it is still essential to search for reliable transparent p-type semiconductors. Kawazoe et al. Zn-Ir-O has hardly ever been systematically investigated in a wide Ir concentration range. Therefore, in this study we employ XRD, XAS and Raman techniques to investigate the structure of Zn-Ir-O films (up to ≈ 70 at.% Ir) deposited by reactive DC magnetron co-sputtering. Reverse Monte Carlo (RMC) simulations of the Zn K-edge EXAFS spectra are performed to study the local structure of Zn ions. The electrical conductivity as well as the thermoelectric measurements are also presented to determine the electrical conductivity of the films and to observe the transition from n-type to p-type conductivity. To evaluate the structure of films deposited at higher temperatures and the thermal stability of p-type conductivity, the films are also deposited at 300 °C. Zn Ir target was used as a composition control parameter. Detailed experimental procedures of both methods can be found in Ref. All the studied samples together with the deposition parameters are summarized in Table The X-ray diffractograms of the Zn-Ir-O films are shown in Figure temperature. An X-ray amorphous structure of ZnO can be obtained if a deposition is performed at cryogenic temperatures. X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) is one of the most important techniques for investigations of the local atomic structure and oxidation state of the atom of interest in a broad range of materials, including the X-ray amorphous structures. In this work, we have analysed both the X-ray absorption near-edge structure (XANES) and extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) parts of XAS spectra, collected at Ir L3-edge and Zn K-edge. Here XANES spectra, extending up to ca. 40 eV above the absorption edge, are very sensitive to the charge density (i.e., the evolution of the oxidation state) and bonding motifs around the absorbing atom. EXAFS spectra, in turn, extending from ca. 40 eV up to 1 keV above the absorption edge, are important for the determination of neighbouring atoms distribution. To fit the contributions of distant coordination shell, we employ reverse Monte Carlo (RMC) method, as described in Ref. One needs to emphasize here that due to limited information available from EXAFS spectra of our disordered thin films, the obtained structure model is not unambiguous (especially for Irrich thin films, where only the first coordination shell contribute significantly to the experimental data). Nevertheless, the good agreement between simulated and experimental EXAFS spectra confirms that the ZnO4 tetrahedral units are the main Zn species in all the samples, and we expect also that our simulations provide reliable information on the shape of the radial distribution function (RDF) at least for the first coordination shell (Figure The obtained RDFs show increasingly asymmetric and broadened shape for Zn-O RDF upon an increase in the Ir concentration. This is also reflected in the increased average Zn-O interatomic distance and increased disorder factor, calculated from the atomic coordinates in the final RMC model (Table The Raman spectra of the Zn-Ir-O films are shown in Figure After the Ir incorporation into the film structure, a wide but intense band appears around 720 cm -1 , which was for the first time detected in Ref. For the heated films, the 720 cm -1 band is well detectable up to 36.9 Ir at.%. A wide vibration band around 545 cm -1 , which can be attributed to the vibration mode Eg of r-IrO2, is noticeable in the spectrum for the film with 61. polycrystalline bulk r-IrO2 taken from Ref. The conductivity of the films was measured at a constant temperature of 300 K. The resistivity of the films with low Ir concentration (< 12.4 at.% for the non-heated samples and < 8.0 at.% for the heated samples) is extremely large and exceeds the measurable range. The goal of the Zn-Ir-O deposition was to achieve transparent p-type conducting thin films. A relatively high oxygen partial pressure was used in the deposition process to prevent the formation of zinc interstitials, which are donor type defects in the ZnO structure and the possible source of spontaneous n-type conductivity. Apparently, the ZnO doping with Ir does not create appropriate defects in the film's structure to sufficiently elevate the conductivity. However, the resistivity in the measurable range decreases exponentially with the Ir concentration (Figure The resistivity of the heated films seems to be slightly lower compared to that of the non-heated films. The Hall effect measurements, except for the heated IrO2-x film, could not be performed, because it was not possible to accurately detect the Hall voltage. For the heated IrO2-x film, the Hall effect measurement shows that it is a p-type conductor with the hole concentration of 4.8 × 10 22 cm -3 and the mobility of 0.5 cm 2 V -1 s -1 . The relatively low hole mobility in the IrO2-x film suggests that it might be even lower for the Zn-Ir-O films and could explain why the Hall effect measurements were unsuccessful. The transition suggests that there are several competing conductivity mechanisms and sources of charge carriers in Zn-Ir-O. ZnO is known from its tendency to exhibit spontaneous n-type semi-conductivity. Moreover, when properly doped, it can be transformed into a material with metallic conductivity and high visible light transmission. If the Ir concentration is increased, the structure of the films becomes amorphous. At least for the heated films, the Raman spectroscopy results show an existing IrO2 phase in the Zn-Ir-O films already at ≈60 Ir at.%. Pure IrO2 films are p-type conductors, and this fact is supported by the Hall effect measurement of the heated IrO2-x film in this study. In this study the structure and the electrical properties of zinc-iridium oxide (Zn-Ir-O) thin films with various iridium concentrations were investigated. The films were deposited by reactive DC magnetron co-sputtering. The Zn-Ir-O structure changes from nano-crystalline to amorphous with the Ir concentration as confirmed by both XAS and XRD measurements; however, the nano-crystalline phase is preserved in a wider Ir concentration range if the substrates are heated during the deposition. XAS data also show that for amorphous films further increase in the Ir content leads to more disordered structures around Zn ions. Tetrahedral coordination of Zn ions was identified by XANES analysis and confirmed by RMC simulations of the Zn K-edge EXAFS spectra as the predominant complex. It was found that the heated film structure contains r-IrO2 nanocrytallites above ≈60 Ir at.%. After Ir incorporation into the film structure, the intense Raman band appears at 720 cm -1 , which then is blurred upon an increase in the Ir concentration. The transition from n-to p-type conductivity was observed, when the Ir concentration was increased up to ≈13 Ir at.% for both non-heated and heated films. Above 13 Ir at.% all the films are p-type conductors. The thermoelectric measurements together with the Hall effect measurements of pure IrO2-x show that the p-type conductivity in Zn-Ir-O films is stable at least up to 300 °C and in the wide range of Ir content (13-100 at.% Ir). In order to develop transparent electronics, it is still essential to search for reliable transparent p-type semiconductors. Kawazoe et al. Zn-Ir-O has hardly ever been studied in a wide Ir concentration range. In this paper, XRD, XAS and Raman techniques are used to investigate the structure of Zn-Ir-O films deposited by reactive DC magnetron co-sputtering. The electrical conductivity as well as the thermoelectric measurements are also presented to determine the electrical conductivity and transition from ntype to p-type of the films. Zn-Ir-O as well as pure ZnOx and IrO2-x thin films were deposited on soda-lime glass, Ti and polyimide type substrates by reactive DC magnetron co-sputtering in an Ar (20 sccm) + O2 (10 sccm) atmosphere (10 mTorr working pressure). Two types of sputtering methods were used to deposit the studied films in this paper. Part of the films (mainly at high Ir concentration) were deposited by sputtering a metallic Zn (99.95 wt%) target with Ir (99.6 wt%) pieces on the target erosion zone. An Ir concentration was varied by its amount on the Zn target erosion zone. The second part of the samples (mainly at low Ir concentration) were deposited by sputtering metallic Zn (99.95 wt%) and Ir (99.6 wt%) targets simultaneously. The power on the Ir target was used as a composition control parameter. A detailed experimental procedure of both methods can be found in Ref. All the studied samples in this paper together with the deposition parameters are summarized in Table The X-ray diffractograms of the Zn-Ir-O films are shown in Figure X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) is the one of the most important techniques for investigations of the local atomic structure, and oxidation state of the atom of interest in a broad range of materials, including the X-ray amorphous structures. In this work, we have analysed both the X-ray absorption near-edge structure (XANES) and extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) parts of XAS spectra, collected at Ir L3-edge and Zn K-edge. Here XANES spectra, extending up to ca. 40 eV above the absorption edge, are very sensitive to the charge density (i.e., the evolution of the oxidation sate) and bonding motifs around the absorbing atom. EXAFS spectra, in turn, extending from ca. 40 eV up to 1 keV above the absorption edge, are important for the determination of distribution of neighbouring atoms. To fit the contributions of distant coordination shell, we employ reverse Monte Carlo (RMC) method, as described in Ref. One needs to emphasize here that due to limited information available from EXAFS spectra of our disordered thin films, the obtained structure model is not unambiguous (especially for Irrich thin films, where only the first coordination shell contribute significantly to the experimental data). Nevertheless, the good agreement between simulated and experimental EXAFS spectra confirms that the ZnO4 tetrahedral units are the main Zn species in all the samples, and we expect also that our simulations provide reliable information on the shape of the radial distribution function (RDF) at least for the first coordination shell (Figure The obtained RDFs show increasingly asymmetric and broadened shape for Zn-O RDF upon increase in the Ir concentration. The is reflected also in the increased average Zn-O interatomic distance and increased disorder factor, calculated from the atomic coordinates in the final RMC model (Table The Raman spectra of the Zn-Ir-O films are shown in Figure After the Ir incorporation into the film structure, a wide but intense band appears around 720 cm -1 , which was for the first time detected in Ref. For the heated films, the 720 cm -1 band is well detectable up to 36.9 Ir at.%. A wide vibration band around 545 cm -1 , which can be attributed to the vibration mode Eg of r-IrO2, is noticeable in the spectrum for the film with 61. polycrystalline bulk r-IrO2 taken from Ref. The conductivity of the films was measured at a constant temperature of 300 K. The resistivity of the films with low Ir concentration (< 12.4 at.% for the not-heated samples and < 8.0 at.% for the heated samples) is extremely large and exceeds the measurable range. The goal of the Zn-Ir-O deposition was to achieve transparent p-type conducting thin films. A relatively high oxygen partial pressure was used in the deposition process to prevent the formation of zinc interstitials, which are donor type defects in the ZnO structure and the possible source of spontaneous n-type conductivity. Apparently, the ZnO doping with Ir does not create appropriate defects in the films structure to sufficiently elevate the conductivity. However, the resistivity in the measurable range decreases exponentially with the Ir concentration (Figure The resistivity of the heated films seems to be slightly lower compared to the not-heated films. The Hall effect measurements, except for the heated IrO2-x film, could not be performed, because it was not possible to accurately detect the Hall voltage. For the heated IrO2-x film, the Hall effect measurement shows that it is a p-type conductor with the hole concentration of 4.8 × 10 22 cm -3 and the mobility of 0.5 cm 2 V -1 s -1 . The relatively low hole mobility in the IrO2-x film suggests that it might be even lower for the Zn-Ir-O films and the reason why the Hall effect measurements were unsuccessful. The transition suggests that there are several competing conductivity mechanisms and sources of charge carriers in Zn-Ir-O. ZnO is known from its tendency to exhibit spontaneous n-type semi-conductivity. Moreover, when properly doped, it can be transformed into a material with metallic conductivity and high visible light transmission. In this research the structure and the electrical properties of zinc-iridium oxide (Zn-Ir-O) thin films with various iridium concentrations were studied. The films were deposited by reactive DC magnetron co-sputtering. The Zn-Ir-O structure changes from nano-crystalline to amorphous with the Ir concentration as confirmed by both XAS and XRD measurements; however, the nano-crystalline phase remains in the wider Ir concentration range if the substrates are heated during the deposition. XAS data also show that also for amorphous films further increase in the Ir content leads to more disordered structures. It was found out that the heated film structure contains r-IrO2 nanocrytallites above ≈60 Ir at.%. After Ir incorporation into the film structure, the intense Raman band appears at 720 cm -1 , which then blurs with the Ir concentration. The transition from n-to p-type conductivity was observed, when the Ir concentration was increased up to ≈13 Ir at.% for both not-heated and heated films. Above 13 Ir at.% all the films are p-type conductors. Cover Letter to Editor