The physical properties of two-dimensional (2D) materials may drastically vary with their thickness profiles. Current thickness profiling methods for 2D material (e.g., atomic force microscopy and ellipsometry) are limited in measurement throughput and accuracy. Here we present a novel highspeed and high-precision thickness profiling method, termed Transmission-Matrix Quantitative Phase Profilometry (TM-QPP). In TM-QPP, picometer-level optical pathlength sensitivity is enabled by extending the photon shot-noise limit of a high sensitivity common-path interferometric microscopy technique, while accurate thickness determination is realized by developing a transmission-matrix model that accounts for multiple refractions and reflections of light at sample interfaces. Using TM-QPP, the exact thickness profiles of monolayer and few-layered 2D materials (e.g., MoS2, MoSe2 and WSe2) are mapped over a wide field of view within seconds in a contactfree manner. Notably, TM-QPP is also capable of spatially resolving the number of layers of fewlayered 2D materials. Two-dimensional (2D) materials, such as graphene Quantitative phase microscopy (QPM), as a highly sensitive wide-field imaging method that maps the sample optical pathlength difference (OPD), has been increasingly applied to nanometrology in recent years Here, we propose Transmission-Matrix Quantitative Phase Profilometry (TM-QPP) for contact-free and wide-field thickness profiling of 2D materials with high sensitivity and high accuracy. In TM-QPP, a laser-illumination off-axis interferometry-based common-path QPM system allows us to achieve shot-noise limited phase imaging. A high sensitivity detection scheme, leveraging a high speed and high full-well-capacity camera and a frame summing method, is developed to further scale down the phase sensitivity to less than 6 picometers in time and 19 picometers in space. To precisely determine thickness from phase at each sample position, a transmission-matrix based thickness retrieval model is developed to account for multiple light refractions and reflections at sample interfaces. Using TM-QPP, not only the thickness profiles of various monolayer and fewlayered 2D materials (e.g., MoS2, MoSe2, WSe2, and graphene) can be precisely mapped, but also the number of layers can be determined. Our results are consistent with AFM and Raman spectroscopy, thus further demonstrating the great potential of TM-QPP for a wider use in the future for high-precision and high-speed thickness profiling of thin film structures. As illustrated in Fig. The sample thickness profile is usually retrieved from the measured phase map   , m x y   using a simple linear model: , where 0  is the central wavelength of the illumination source; and Re n   is the real part of refractive index difference between the sample and the medium (   Re n   is usually assumed to be small) where 0,1 n  and 2 H are known parameters. More details on the transmission-matrix model derivation and the related thickness retrieval algorithm are included in Supplementary Information, Section 2.2. Under shot-noise limit, the temporal phase sensitivity of our TM-QPP system follows the relation . OPDt is estimated from each time-series that contains 600 interferograms and averaged over a total of 15 different time-series, following a similar procedure in Ref. To further scale down the phase sensitivity, a frame summing method is developed as illustrated in S  (note that S should be at least 3 to calculate OPDt), we achieved OPDt of 5.9 pm, which is improved from the 32.7 pm when frame summing is not applied (i.e., 1 p  and 600 S  ). At the same time, OPDs is improved to 18.1 pm from 47.5 pm. As the thickness of single-layered 2D materials is larger than 0.1 nm, summing 50 frames to achieve OPDt of 9.4 pm and OPDs of 27.5 pm is sufficient for profiling 2D materials. Summing more frames will prolong both the measurement time and the data processing time. Therefore, we keep 50 p  for later experiments. Figure To verify the accuracy of the transmission-matrix model in thickness profiling of 2D materials, we first tested on a monolayer MoS2 sample fabricated by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) and transferred to a sapphire substrate. The bright-field optical image in Fig. To verify that the MoS2 flakes are single-layered structures, we first used a commercial AFM to scan the selected region as indicated in Fig. Figure For example, scanning a 10×10 μm 2 area with AFM (Bruker Dimension ICON) needs ~ 320 sec with scan rate at 0.8 Hz, 256 lines, while our TM-QPP system only needs ~ 2 sec for single frame analysis (note that the image acquisition time is only a few milliseconds) and ~ 5 sec when 50-frame summing is applied based on 150 measurements (note that the thickness retrieval process is performed using MATLAB on Core TM i7-6850K CPU). An accurate thickness profiling of the monolayer MoS2 can also be obtained without frame summing as shown in Fig. Two or more layers of 2D materials can form few-layered 2D materials in a certain stacking order The change of thickness can significantly affect the electronic structures of 2D materials, e.g., transition from an indirect bandgap in the bulk to a direct gap in the monolayer To explore the capability of TM-QPP for differentiating the number of layers of 2D materials, we used few-layered WSe2 and MoSe2 samples with different numbers of layers. Each sample is scattered on a 260-μm thick sapphire substrate. From bright-field optical images, the layered structures can be distinguished owing to the intensity contrast, as shown in the Fig. Using our system, we first obtained the high sensitivity phase maps of WSe2 and MoSe2 in Fig. , where 1c H being the peak location of the thickness histogram of that region (Fig. 1 / H h for each region. If N L is consistent with the assumed number of layers l, then the corresponding region is confirmed to be l-layered. The procedure will be repeated until the layer number of all regions are determined. (A detailed procedure in determining the layer number is described in Supplementary Section 5.2; the refractive index values of WSe2 with 1-4 layers and MoSe2 with 1-3 layers are provided in Supplementary Section 7 Table show the final determined layer numbers in region ii-iv of WSe2 (labeled as 1L, 2L, 4L) and MoSe2 (labeled as 2L, 3L, and 4L) and the corresponding thickness values (error bar is determined by the standard deviation of the corresponding region). For WSe2, region ii: 0.893±0.443 nm (1L), region iii: 1.517±0.229 nm (2L), region iv: 3.053±0.509 nm (4L); for MoSe2, region ii: 1.541±0.424 nm (2L), region iii: 2.111±0.408 nm (3L), region iv: 3.030±0.342 nm (4L). Reference thickness values l h  for the corresponding layer numbers (l) are also marked (dashed lines in Fig. We demonstrated TM-QPP as a new method for fast and accurate thickness profiling of 2D materials by combining a high sensitivity QPM method with a transmission-matrix model that accounts for the multiple reflection and refractions in the sample region. The presented approach can achieve thickness profile retrieval with a temporal sensitivity of <6 pm and spatial sensitivity of <19 pm with 200-frame summing. Compared with most currently used methods (e.g., AFM and Raman spectroscopy/microscopy that are based on point-scanning or line-scanning), our method is much more efficient with 100 times higher measurement throughput and can also determine the layer number of few-layered 2D materials. In the future, to further improve the performance of our method, e.g., profiling 2D materials with low refractive index contrast, the spatial phase sensitivity needs to be improved. The spatial sensitivity is limited by the speckle noise from the laser, which can be reduced by using a low coherence light source, such as light-emitting diode, super-luminescent diode or supercontinuum laser. Meanwhile, using substrates of lower roughness can also improve the phase image quality in experiments. Our method can also be extended to 2D materials or thin film structures on reflective substrates (e.g., silicon substrates) or both transmissive and reflective surfaces by adding a reflection mode. We envision this new wide-field optical imaging-based non-contact thickness profiling tool will find applications in high throughput and in-situ inspection of nanomaterials. The Raman and PL spectra measurements were performed on Horiba LabRAM HR Evolution Raman spectrometer with an excitation wavelength of 532 nm and power of 1 mW. The size of laser spot was ~1 μm. The AFM measurements were conducted on Bruker Dimension ICON (tapping mode), while the quantitative analysis of the image profiles was carried out using Gwyddion software The bright-field optical images were captured on Zeiss Axio Observer 7. Monolayer MoS2, monolayer graphene, multilayer WSe2 samples were purchased from Six-carbon technology, Shenzhen, China. Multilayer MoSe2 sample was purchased from Beike 2D materials Co. Ltd.