We study the magnetic susceptibility, magnetization, resistivity and thermal conductivity of intermetallic HoAgGe single crystals at low temperatures and in magnetic fields along the a and c axis, while the electric and heat currents are along the c axis. The magnetization curves show a series of metamagnetic transitions and small hysteresis at low field for B a, and a weak metamagnetic transition for B c, respectively. Both the magnetic susceptibility and ρ(T ) curve show anomalies at the antiferromagnetic transition (TN ∼ 11.3 K) and spin reorientation transition (∼ 7 K). In zero field and at very low temperatures, the electrons are found to be the main heat carriers. For B a, the ρ(B) curves display large and positive transverse magnetoresistance (MR) with extraordinary field dependence between B 2 and B-linear, accompanied with anomalies at the metamagnetic transitions and low-field hysteresis; meanwhile, the κ(B) mainly decrease with increasing field and display some anomalies at the metamagnetic transitions. For B c, there is weak and negative longitudinal MR while the κ(B) show rather strong field dependence, indicating the role of phonon heat transport. It is well known that the kagome spin ice has been realized in artificial spin ice based on two-dimensional arrays of single-domain ferromagnetic islands HoAgGe belongs to the RAgGe (R = Tb -Lu) series with the ZrNiAl-type structure, an ordered variant of the hexagonal Fe 2 P family (P -62m space group), which is non-centrosymmetric with the rare-earth ions forming a two-dimensional and distorted kagome lattice of cornersharing equilateral triangles (along the ab plane) Low-temperature heat transport has been found to be a useful tool to probe the field-induced magnetic transitions, due to either the changes of magnetic excitation transport or the spin-phonon coupling HoAgGe single crystals were grown by a flux method. The as-grown crystals are mostly rod-shaped with the longest dimension along the c axis. DC magnetic susceptibility (χ) was measured using a Quantum Design SQUID-VSM. Magnetization with magnetic field up to 14 T was measured using a physical properties measurement system (PPMS, Quantum Design). A rectangular parallelepiped crystal with dimensions of 2.66 × 0.36 × 0.28 mm 3 was cut precisely along the crystallographic a, b and c axes (b is define as the direction perpendicular to the a and c axes The temperature dependence of magnetic susceptibility χ measured in 0.1 T field along the a axis is shown in Fig. Figure Figure To probe the magnetoresistive characteristics of HoAgGe, resistivity as a function of magnetic field was measured with changing field from 0 to 14 T and back to 0 T along the a axis, as shown in Fig. Figure Figure Figure First of all, all the magnetization, magnetoresisitance and magnetothermal conductivity results of HoAgGe single crystal indicate a weak metamagnetic transition at ∼ 1 T for B c. This phenomenon has not be noticed in previous studies. It would be difficult to understand this transition if the Ho 3+ spin had an Ising axis in the ab plane In the case of B a and J c, HoAgGe displays a positive and large transverse MR up to ∼ 100 % at 14 T and the overall field dependence is between the B 2 and B-linear behavior, despite of the low-field peaks. It cannot be simply due to the ordinary Lorentz force-induced scattering, which usually induces rather weak MR For B c and J c, the longitudinal MR is much weaker and mainly negative. For example, the resistivity decreases by only 4-8 % in field range from 7 to 14 T and at T ≤ 1.95 K. There are several possible origins of this negative MR. First, it is well known that a negative MR in magnetic materials can be attributed to weakening of spin-dependent scattering with increasing field We can also obtain some conclusions on the thermal transport results: (i) at low temperature the phonons are scattered by magnetic excitations, which should be the magnons of the AF state; (ii) magnetic field drives the spin system to the polarized state after going through a series metamagnetic transitions, in which the magnetic scattering of phonons is likely experiencing some sudden changes; (iii) at high fields the phonon scattering by magnetic excitations is strongly suppressed while the resonant scattering by crystal-field levels may be active. It is known that in magnetic materials the thermal conductivity usually exhibits some anomalies at the magnetic transitions, due to either the changes of magnetic excitation transport or spin-phonon scattering In summary, the magnetization, resistivity and thermal conductivity of intermetallic HoAgGe single crystals were measured at low temperatures and in magnetic fields along the a and c axis. The magnetization curves display a series of field-induced phase transitions at low temperature for B a, in contrast to the case of B c, which reveals one weak metamagnetic transition. The low-temperature electric and thermal transport along the c axis under magnetic fields along the a or c axis demonstrates some unusual phenomena. In zero field and very low temperatures, the electrons are found to be the main heat carriers for the thermal conductivity. For B a, large and positive MR with extraordinary field dependence is observed and the ρ(B) curves exhibits anomalies at the metamagnetic transitions, accompanied with lowfield hysteresis; meanwhile the κ(B) mainly decrease with increasing field and display some anomalies at the metamagnetic transitions. All these results have good correspondence to the magnetization behaviors. For B c, weak and negative MR is observed and it is likely due to the weakening of spin-electron scattering upon spin polarization, while the κ(B) show rather strong field dependence indicating the role of phonon heat transport.