The electronic structure of condensed matter can be significantly affected by the electron-phonon interaction, which leads to important phenomena such as electrical resistance, superconductivity or the formation of polarons. This interaction is often neglected in band structure calculations, but can have a strong impact, e.g. on band gaps or optical spectra. Commonly used frameworks for electronphonon energy corrections are the Allen-Heine-Cardona theory and the Fröhlich model. The latter accounts for a single longitudinal optical mode, a single parabolic electron band, and washes out atomic details. While it shows qualitative agreement with experiment for many polar materials, its simplicity should bring hard limits to its applicability in real materials. Improvements can be made by introducing a generalized version of the model, which takes into account anisotropic and degenerate electronic bands, and multiple phonon branches. In this work, we search for trends and outliers on over a thousand materials in existing databases of phonon and electron band structures. We use our results to identify the limits of applicability of the standard Fröhlich model by comparing to the generalized version, and by testing its basic hypothesis of a large radius for the polaronic wavefunction and the corresponding atomic displacement cloud (large polaron). The validity of the perturbative approach to the Fröhlich model is also tested. Among our extended set of materials, most exhibit large polaron behavior as well as validity of the perturbative treatment. However, especially for the valence band, there is also a significant fraction of the materials for which the perturbative treatment cannot be applied and/or for which the size of the self-trapping region is close to the atomic repetition distance. We find a large variety of behaviors, and employ much more accurate, fully ab initio Allen-Heine-Cardona calculations to understand extreme cases, where the Fröhlich model should fail and unusually large zero-point renormalization energies occur. The correct assessment of the electronic band gap and properties of charge carriers is of primary importance in determining the utility and applicability of semiconductors and insulators. Theoretical treatments usually only include the "frozen-ion" electronic aspect of the problem. Over the past two decades it has become clear that this is a severe limitation given the accuracy of both measurements and more advanced theory. Several theoretical approaches are available to calcu-late the ZPR c+v , among which the Fröhlich model In the original Fröhlich model, the charge carrier dynamics is described by a one-band isotropic and parabolic dispersion, and couples to one dispersionless longitudinal optical phonon mode. The EPI is accounted for in a rather coarse fashion with a fixed analytic functional form, thanks to the hypothesis that the electronphonon interaction is dominated by the long-range behavior of the Coulomb interaction, in effect washing out all atomic details. Studies of this model have been numerous The quasi-particle formed by a charge carrier dressed with phonons is called a "polaron". Usually, the Fröh-arXiv:2207.00364v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 1 Jul 2022 lich model is only considered for so-called "large" polarons, for which the atomic details are ignored, while the denomination "small polarons" corresponds to the case where the localization of the electronic wavefunction is comparable to interatomic distances. Interestingly, large polarons can be self-trapped as well, but in this case the self-trapping region is much larger than the interatomic distance. More recently Miglio et al. While for the Fröhlich model and its generalization only the zone-center phonons are needed, the AHC formalism requires the full phonon spectrum over the whole Brillouin Zone (BZ), and involves the explicit calculation of EPI matrix elements, making it computationally much more costly. ZPR c+v determined via the generalized Fröhlich model have shown comparable results to the AHC formalism for a set of materials that include oxides and II-VI compounds. However for less ionic materials, its predictions are not on a par with AHC. The overall goal of this work is to exploit existing datasets from the literature to evaluate the breadth of applicability of the Fröhlich model(s). The development of high throughput workflows and database Application Programming Interfaces allows for fast queries of available information, allowing one to perform quick higher level calculations and even train machine learning algorithms. In this work, we rely on the database from Ref. 31, which provides the electronic band structure, geometry, dielectric tensors, and phonon properties (e.g. mode frequencies, eigendisplacements) for a set of 1521 semiconducting materials. These were selected according to the following criteria: from two to five chemical elements per unit cell; experimentally stable 3D structures; non-magnetic; insulating materials with a minimal DFT band gap. The missing data on band masses is computed via a high throughput computational flow employing both AbiPy and ABINIT as described in Sec. II D. In the end, 1260 materials had all needed quantities to parameterize a Fröhlich model Hamiltonian. The remaining 261 materials either have unstable phonon modes or their band extrema were not located along high-symmetry lines in the BZ. The latter issue makes automating the computation of band effective masses extremely difficult, as one has to find the global maximum (minimum) of the valence (conduction) band in the BZ. We do not believe that their inclusion in this work would significantly alter the results shown herein. We focus on indicators that could mark the potential of a material as a system with large or small polarons. These may be desirable (for optical properties) or undesirable (for transport) in different applications: more is not necessarily better. The essential quantity in the standard Fröhlich model α, and the parameters of its generalized form The paper is structured as follows: in Sec. IIA we recap the theoretical background for the original Fröhlich model in describing large polarons, while in Sec. IIB we summarize the recent developments of the generalized Fröhlich model. We present the high-throughput results for the 1260 studied materials in Sec. III. We follow with Sec. IV by performing an ab initio validation using the AHC approach for selected materials, and we discuss outliers found using the Fröhlich model, such as materials with large ZPR and small coupling α, as well as materials with large ZPR and large α. In these cases the Fröhlich model should be treated in the strongcoupling limit, and the long-wavelength limit may fail entirely (these are two distinct cases). We conclude in Sec. V. The Fröhlich model 15,32 assumes a system with a single parabolic electron band of effective isotropic mass m * and a single non-dispersive longitudinal optical phonon branch of frequency ω LO . The electron-phonon interaction comes from the macroscopically screened Coulomb interaction between electrons and the nuclei moving along the optical phonon mode. While the latter approximation is dominant and qualitatively correct for q ≈ 0, it is assumed to be valid in the whole Brillouin zone, which corresponds to a continuum treatment, in line with the hypotheses of an isotropic electronic band and non-dispersive phonons. This means that there are no Debye-Waller contributions to the electron-phonon interaction, and transverse optical or acoustic modes are ignored. This model also ignores band degeneracies and the possibility of different band masses and warping. For a material with non-degenerate isotropic band extrema and isotropic dielectric function, we can write the following Hamiltonian for the standard Fröhlich model for an electron (conduction band -in atomic units =1, a Bohr =1, m=1). 34 where the electron-phonon coupling constant is given by V BvK is the Born von Kármán supercell volume, the dimensionless coupling parameter α is where * is defined by As a side note, * , ∞ and 0 are independent of the nuclear masses: ∞ is purely electronic, while 0 is obtained in the adiabatic limit (low-frequency limit), so that the nuclei have time to adjust adiabatically to the applied electric field, regardless of their mass. * is always greater than ∞ . For polar compounds with strong ionic screening, the difference in 's will be large, and * → ∞ whereas for purely covalent compounds or mono-atomic compounds 0 ∞ , and so * → ∞, which runs counter to intuition for habitual dielectric responses, but simply pushes α to 0 in the Fröhlich model. In Eqs. ( where the energies, momenta, and length were rescaled by factors of ω LO , (ω LO m * ) 1/2 , and (ω LO m * ) -1/2 , respectively. With this choice, it becomes clear that the sole free parameter α characterizes the strength of the electron-phonon interaction with respect to the intrinsic electron and phonon terms. Such a Hamiltonian can be treated by perturbation theory, in the limit of small α, delivering the polaron binding energy (ZPR) (again in atomic units instead of ω LO units) as A more accurate approach based on the Feynman path integral 25 can be employed, covering the whole range of coupling strengths, as follows: E P = -ω LO (α + 0.98(α/10) 2 + 0.60(α/10) 3 + 0.14(α/10) 4 ), α ≤ 5 With the same perturbative treatment, it is possible to show that the ratio between the effective masses of the polaron, m * P , and the electron is approximately given by At the lowest order of perturbation theory, one obtains the well-known formula or more explicitly, where ω LO contains the only dependence on nuclear masses. At this order in the expansion Eq. ( with the immediate consequence that at α = 6 the polaron mass diverges and this low-order perturbation theory approach is no longer valid. This parameter thus also provides a breakdown point for the lowest-order perturbative treatment of the Fröhlich model. A large α is physically associated with the appearance of selflocalization of the electron due to the phonon response, a non-perturbative phenomenon that can be treated, alternatively, in the so-called "strong-coupling" limit of the Fröhlich model. Thus the α = 6 value suggests a change of regime for the Fröhlich polaron. Nevertheless the occurrence of the wide range of behaviors present in our set of 1260 materials demands a more careful treatment in describing the polaron effective mass: we make use of the results based on the Diagrammatic Monte Carlo method applied to the standard Fröhlich model The self-localisation of the electron yields the notion of a "polaron radius", a P . For instance, with a Gaussian ansatz for the electronic wavefunction, in the adiabatic limit one obtains: with Coherently, a P is defined only in terms of quantities that do not depend on the nuclear masses. When a P is on the order of the distance between equivalent atomic sites in the crystals, the Fröhlich model cannot be a good representation of the real material, as it is based on a continuum hypothesis for the vibrational degrees of freedom. The Fröhlich model can be generalized to include systems with degenerate and anisotropic band extrema, multiple phonon branches, and anisotropic dielectric functions with m * n ( k) the direction-dependent effective masses, k the electron wavevector, n the band index, ω j0 (q) the direction-dependent phonon frequency, q the phonon wavevector and j the phonon branch index. The electronphonon coupling constant is given by In these equations, the sum over n, n and m runs only over the bands that connect to the degenerate extremum, that are renumbered from 1 to n deg . The electron-phonon part also depends only on few quantities: the Born effective charges (entering the mode-polarity vectors p j which are the Born charge weighted phonon displacement vectors), the macroscopic dielectric tensor ∞ , and the phonon frequencies ω j0 , the primitive cell volume Ω 0 , the Born-von Karman normalization volume V BvK corresponding to the k and q samplings. The s nm tensors are symmetry-dependent unitary matrices, similar to spherical harmonics. Finally, k = k + q. In this generalized model, the ZPR for a band extremum can be obtained also at lowest order of perturbation theory, as When comparing with the expression for the renormalization energy from the standard Fröhlich model, Eq. ( where is an average over q directions. The α j (q) parameters are defined by and can also be re-written to look similar to Eq. ( where replaces Eq. ( highlights that the effective mass entering Eq. ( To summarize, in the lowest order of perturbation theory treatment, the multiband, multibranch, anisotropic generalization of the simple Eq. ( Note that σ does not appear in E P . A generalization of α to anisotropic, multibranch systems, α j (q), has been tentatively defined by C. Verdi, see Ref. 37, Eq.(4.12) page 62, however lacking both effective mass and phonon frequency dependencies on direction, and ignoring the possible electronic degeneracy. From Eq. ( The factorization of the (m * n (q)) qn term appears naturally and is exact in the cubic case. For a cubic system, even with several phonon branches, there is no dependence on the direction of q for the phonon frequencies and dielectric properties. The Hamiltonian becomes with a slightly simplified electron-phonon coupling constant given by The suppression of the "i" prefactor from Eq. 16 to Eq. ( Still working in the lowest order of perturbation theory, Eq. ( with each α j being ] The numerator is purely electronic, and independent of the j index, while the denominator is purely dielectric and dynamical. This simplification appears only for the cubic crystallographic system. A similar decoupling appears for the polaron energy: These equations shed light on the relationship between the standard and generalized Fröhlich model. They will provide guidance for the choice of the parameters for the standard Fröhlich model, which follows in the next section. An automatic python workflow was created to obtain the electronic effective masses and store them in a database. The input files for ABINIT In section III, we use the directional average of effective masses, to facilitate the characterization of the materials. For cubic systems, this expression accounts exactly for the anisotropy in the effective masses and for the possible degeneracies, as discussed in Sec. II C. For non-cubic systems, there is no such decoupling of the effective mass factor from the dielectric and dynamical ones, as Eq.( The standard Fröhlich model relies on the ω LO frequency, the m * effective mass and the ionic part of the dielectric tensor, * . They combine to deliver the α parameter, and to predict a polaron formation energy E P (or ZPR) obtained in the full range of values from diagrammatic Monte Carlo or Feynman path integral approaches In order to extract such simplified parameters in a high-throughput approach, and compare to the generalized Fröhlich model and the AHC first-principles treatment, we work with the following hypotheses. For the dielectric constants we use = Tr( αβ )/3. The single phonon frequency ω LO is assumed to be the highest phonon frequency at Γ. For all the simple materials mentioned above, this is indeed the case (the highest frequency mode is always an LO). When several LO phonon modes are present, one could expect that the highest one has the largest LO-TO splitting and, thus, interacts most strongly with the electrons. We will see, however, that there are cases for which the highest mode is weakly coupled to electrons, and other LO modes are dominant (see the metal-azides below as an example of such a situation). As stated in Section I, there are 1260 materials for which all necessary quantities are present to compute the ZPR sFr and α using Eqs. ( Values of α for conduction states are almost entirely concentrated in the α < 10 region, while valence values extend further into the 10 < α < 20 range. This difference comes from the different distributions of bare effective masses for conduction and valence band edges The broad trend ZPR that is proportional to α in a family is visible for both conduction and valence bands, coming from the simple proportionality through the ω LO frequency in the lowest order of perturbation theory. Not all chemical families show the same slope, even if the group of constituting element is taken into account, because the nuclear mass and bonding vary within a group, which can strongly influence ω LO and 0 . for all materials with ZPR below 3000 meV. Same conventions as in Fig. Halides (group 17) produce the highest values of α, far beyond the limit of validity of the perturbation treatment. Then the chalcogenides show the next set of large values of α, followed by the pnictogens and compounds with elements of group ≤ 14, with the lowest α. This trend is chemically intuitive as halides have a stronger polar behavior than elements of previous groups: polaron binding grows with electron affinity, but compounds from the "other" category, with no strongly electrophilic element, can be found in the full range up to quite high α ∼ 20. By looking at Eqs. ( A general trend can be derived from the datasets: the values of α and ZPR will increase if more polar elements are present in the compound, especially halides. These produce large band effective masses and electronic dielectric constants, and so smaller * . Despite lower values of ω LO , the α in halides is often beyond the limit of validity of perturbation theory for the standard Fröhlich model, indicating the probable breakdown of the first-principles AHC approach. In addition to the analysis of the validity of perturbation theory thanks to limits on α, the validity of the large polaron hypothesis can also be assessed. This hypothesis is crucial for the Fröhlich approach, be it in the standard form or in the generalized form. For this purpose, the polaron radius, Eq. ( breakdown of perturbation theory. Materials with small a P will not be well reproduced with the long-range, large polaron Fröhlich approximation. See Table The EPI enhancement of the bare electronic effective mass is shown in Fig. On this basis, the large polaron hypothesis with perturbative treatment might still be appropriate to treat the electron polaron for a majority of materials, but this might not be true to treat the valence band. The break-down of perturbation theory for α bigger than 6, implying also that first-principles AHC theory would be inappropriate, is less often encountered, even for valence bands. We now compare our results to the generalized Fröh-lich model discussed in Section II B. Here we define the direction-dependent dielectric tensor as ∞ (q) = αβ qα ∞ αβ qβ , we take into account all phonon modes with their respective direction dependence ω * j0 (q) and coupling, * j (q), and the direction-dependent effective mass inside Eq.( For the generalized Fröhlich model, no all-range calculations of the Feynman or DMC type have been performed until now. We have thus to rely on the perturbative result, Eq. ( with α j (q) given by Eq. ( For the conduction bands, the relative reductions of the largest ZPR G values are much smaller in comparison, with a 37% reduction for Li 2 CaHfF 8 and 39% for K 2 TiF 6 , i.e. those with the largest ZPRs. While some re-weighting happens thanks to the mode-polarity vectors, these materials have massive, almost point-defectlike, conduction bands. The main contribution to the reduction will then come from the fact that we account for the geometry of the Brillouin zone in the integration. Finally we look at how α G compares to α S in Fig. The generalized Fröhlich model is expected to improve over the standard model. In order to quantify the improvement brought by the generalized Fröhlich model, we compare model results with fully ab initio (AHC) calculations of the ZPR. As the latter are much more costly, we have selected a limited set of representative and/or simple test cases. Like the generalized Fröhlich model, the first-principles AHC approach works in the lowest order of perturbation. A. Results and comparison to Miglio et al. Previously, Miglio et al 9 computed ZPR from first principles for a set of 30 materials and compared them with the generalized Fröhlich model. Most of the stronger ionic compounds (oxides and chalcogenides) were well described by the model, within 25% error compared to the first principles AHC approach. For nitrides, the ZPR were less accurate but still within 50% error. Their ZPR was twice larger in first principles calculations than using the generalized Fröhlich model. We calculate the valence band ZPR for an intersecting subset of 20 materials (Tab. S.6) based on the generalized ZPR for cubic materials, Eq. (30). In addition, we have chosen specific systems with high ZPR, combined with either low, medium or high α. Despite our theories being based on a perturbative approach, the latter case is nevertheless instructive as it is expected that the similarity or difference within a common perturbative framework of similar order will translate to a similarity or difference within more elaborate frameworks able to tackle non-perturbative behaviors. The first case of lower α are four ionic molecular crystal azides: KN 3 and RbN 3 crystallize in a tetragonal system, LiN 3 and NaN 3 in a monoclinic system; the following case contains the trigonal system CsNO 2 (medium α); and, for the final extreme case we examine cubic Cs 2 NaScF 6 , tetragonal Li 2 CaHfF 8 and trigonal K 2 TiF 6 . In Fig. There are still important contributions missing from the generalized Fröhlich model, such as the non-polar and TO phonon modes, but the trend is surprisingly strong in both cases: the dominant qualitative physics is already present in the standard Fröhlich model, and, in most of the cases, the generalized version quantitatively corrects the ZPR. The systems Cs 2 NaScF 6 and Li 2 CaHfF 8 are the only cases in which the calculated values do not all follow this global trend. Their values in the standard and generalized models are very close due to a low ω LO . Even if the ZPR is spread over other phonon modes, their frequency would not be far from the low ω LO . In SI Table In the following Secs. IV B and IV C for KN 3 and Cs 2 NaScF 6 , we determine the features which produce differences between the standard and generalized Fröhlich approaches, and with the non-adiabatic AHC method. B. Azides: large ZPR, small α For the azide series, the highest ω LO are similar with a maximum difference of 14 meV. Therefore, the changes in the ZPR come from the dielectric constant and the effective mass. The trend from Rb, K, Na to Li is a decrease of ionic radius and an increase of electronegativity 41 , leading to a decrease of the unit cell volume and the dielectric constant, and an increase of the effective mass. In the standard Fröhlich model the value of α of KN 3 is smaller than, for example, the KF system. Even if both have a similar fraction √ m * / * (0.25 for KF and 0.28 for KN 3 ) KN 3 has a higher ω LO (271 meV), see SI Table Going beyond the generalized Fröhlich approach and deconstructing the non-adiabatic AHC ZPR into its phonon mode components (see top of SI Table Several factors contribute to the spread of the ZPR contribution throughout the different phonon states. One key attribute is the polarizability and eigenvectors of the modes. Phonon mode 15 in KN 3 has a stronger polarizability than the highest phonon mode, which is mostly driven by the lightest atoms. Mode 15 has a mix of contributions between the potassium and nitrogen atomic vibrations, with larger dipoles, and hence a larger mode polarizability. A second key factor is the inclusion of non-LO modes. In Fig. The non-LO phonon modes (either TO or non-polar) do not show peaks but a type of plateau starting at their Γ point phonon frequencies, linked to long-range quadrupole potential The real part of the self-energy for phonon mode 29 is the most important at the KS energy (0.0 in Fig. The angle-integrated ZPR as a function of wave-vector norm (Fig. As a summary for the set of "extreme" materials considered this section, we observe that the standard and generalized Fröhlich models are both close to the full first principles trend, but overestimate and underestimate, respectively, the non-adiabatic AHC ZPR. One characteristic of high ω LO materials, as in the azides, is the geometrical isolation of the lighter atoms. If lower frequency phonon modes have high polarization, the generalized Fröhlich ZPR is spread over these modes, reducing the ZPR compared with the standard Fröhlich model, which includes solely the highest ω LO phonon mode. This spread also leads to an increase of the averaged α value, as the electrons interact with lower frequency phonon modes. In cases with intrinsically low ω LO phonon modes, the ZPR can be similar for both models. In addition, ignoring non-LO modes can worsen the generalized Fröhlich model results, especially if the non-LO phonon mode is close to ω LO , exaggerating the importance of lower frequencies and widening the distance from the non-adiabatic AHC ZPR. for each phonon mode using the 64 × 64 × 64 q-grid sampling. We evaluate the polaron binding energy, or zero point renormalization, in both standard and generalized Fröhlich models for a database of 1260 materials. Lowest order perturbation theory is used for the generalized Fröhlich model, while both perturbative and all-range formulas are available for the standard model, once the single parameter α is defined. In our study we find a broad range of validity for both models (58% of valence bands and 91% of conduction band polarons), but the generalized model is in better quantitative agreement with our fully ab initio spot checks using the Allen-Heine-Cardona theory. The gen-eralized Fröhlich model ZPR shows a significant decrease of the ZPR but a slight increase of α with respect to the standard model. We find distinctive trends depending on the material's composition: more electronegative compounds containing halides or chalcogens generally present higher ZPR associated with higher α, while compounds containing group 13 elements show rather lower ZPR, though there are outliers in all categories. Given the broad range of behaviors in our set of materials, we complement our studies with fully ab initio DFT-based non-adiabatic AHC calculations of the ZPR. We focus on few outlier materials with different α (low, medium, and high) and high ZPR. Both Fröhlich models follow the trend of the non-adiabatic AHC qualitatively. The lower and medium α materials show a quantitative improvement going from standard to generalized Fröhlich , thanks in particular to the redistribution of the ZPR to lower frequency phonon modes. In some exceptional cases (e.g. Cs 2 NaScF 6 ) the standard Fröhlich can give better (i.e. closer to AHC) results than the generalized model, when important non-LO phonon modes are ignored. The standard Fröhlich model can fail in more than one way: due to essential non-LO phonons modes, anisotropy, or, crucially, the breakdown of perturbation theory. However, regardless of the Fröhlich method's limitations, we provide strong evidence for the ubiquity of polaron formation, the range of possible behaviors and parameter space, and the importance of polarons in providing reliable band gaps and effective masses. In a very small number of weak coupling cases the estimated polaron radius is small enough to call into question the applicability of Fröhlich type models.