As the need for miniaturized structural and functional materials has increased, the need for precise materials characterizaton has also expanded. Nanoindentation is a popular method that can be used to measure material mechanical behavior which enables high-throughput experiments and, in some cases, can also provide images of the indented area through scanning. Both indenting and scanning can cause tip wear that can influence the measurements. Therefore, precise characterization of tip radii is needed to improve data evaluation. A data fusion method is introduced which uses finite element simulations and experimental data to estimate the tip radius in situ in a meaningful way using an interpretable multi-fidelity deep learning approach. By interpreting the machine learning models, it is shown that the approaches are able to accurately capture physical indentation phenomena. Nanoindentation has become a standard way to characterize the mechanical properties of a wide range of materials. By being nearly non-destructive and fast to apply, it has advantages over other standard characterization methods, such as tensile testing. Sharp indentation tips are often produced as 3-sided pyramids of Berkovich or cube corner geometry, and both tip shapes are widely used in materials research. Load-displacement (P-h) indentation curves are used to calculate the elastic modulus and hardness of a material following a procedure described by Oliver and Pharr. The main focus of this study will be on the determination of the tip radii of both FE simulations and experiments. For this reason, 2D and 3D Abaqus FE simulations were created with tip radii ranging from 50 nm to 1 lm. Features from the FE and experimental indentation curve and its normalized counterpart were used to interpret the data similar to Ref. 10. Tip radii were directly evaluated using a novel self-imaging method described in Ref. 19. Direct tip radius estimations are expected to improve high-throughput indentation experiments, by improving data evaluation quality. All simulations were performed using the professional FE code Abaqus CAE 2019 with Python scripting to loop both materials parameters and tip geometry. Two models were produced: a 2D axisymmetric model of a cone-shaped indenter, and a 3D model of the Berkovich indenter, taking advantage of the 1/6 symmetry of the tip geometry (Fig. Both FE models were created using the static structural method with large displacements and the same material models: purely elastic material model for the indenter tip defined by its Young's modulus of 1140 GPa and Poisson's ratio of 0.07 (diamond), as used by Oliver and Pharr, where E is the elastic modulus, r y the yield stress, e the total effective strain, e p the plastic strain, and n the strain-hardening exponent. The material model was implemented into the FE simulation using a Fortran-based material model subroutine (UMAT) by Martı ́nez-Pan ̃eda et al. The maximum indentation depth was kept constant at 230 nm for both the 2D and 3D cases, and it was implemented in the FE model as a boundary condition prescribing the displacement in the direction perpendicular to the sample surface on the top of the indenter body. The whole simulation time span was divided into two sub-steps: the loading and unloading parts. In the first sub-step, the displacement of the indenter tip gradually increases from 0 nm to the maximum indentation depth. In the second sub-step, the indenter tip is moved from the maximum indentation depth back to its starting position. This way a quasi-static indent with both loading and unloading parts was modeled. To obtain results with sufficient precision, a considerably fine FE mesh had to be used. However, the combination of the fine FE mesh and the relatively large deformations of the FE elements under the indenter tip can lead to numerical instability of the model (e.g., by excessive element distortions). To avoid such problems, an arbitrary Lagrangian-Eulerian adaptive mesh smoothing procedure was implemented in the presented models, leading to the reshaping of the elements in order to avoid mesh distortions and to increase the modeling efficiency with no impact on the numerical results. The nanoindentation experiments were performed using a TS77 Select Nanoindenter (Bruker/ Hysitron) and a Berkovich diamond tip. The tip radius was characterized by confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) before any indents were performed, as well as intermittently over the lifetime of the tip (when it was removed from the transducer). Additionally, the tip was periodically scanned over silicon spikes (TGT1 grid from NT-MDT) to create self-images of the tip, all of which were made using a 1-Hz scan rate, a load of 2-3 lN, and scan sizes of 5 lm and 2 lm. Self-images of the tip were made before and after every tip area function and frame compliance calibration, as well as after finishing a set of indents on various samples. Indents were made into materials including: fused silica, silicon, refractory metals and alloys (films and bulk), aluminum (film and bulk), copper (film and bulk), sapphire, WC-based materials (film and bulk), shale (geologic mineral), metallic glasses (film and bulk), polymeric materials, Mo-based oxides and nitrides (films), and biological materials. Open loop, displacement control, and mapping to various displacements were performed with the tip, as well as scanning for imaging. Tip wear is presented over nearly a year, and 29,694 indents were made with the same tip. The complexity of a direct measurement of a nanoindentation tip radius is still a task that should not be underestimated. Saringer et al. When analyzing the obtained P-h curves, the curve has been divided into the elastic-plastic loading curve and the elastic unloading curve (Fig. where P is the load, h is the indentation depth, and C, C 0 , C 1 , and C 2 are the fitted values. The initial slope of the elastic unloading curve can be fitted using the approach of Oliver and Pharr 1 to deliver the reduced elastic modulus after the tip's area function is calibrated. The total work, W, made of the elastic and plastic components, W e and W p , respectively, can also be calculated using the respective areas under the P-h curves. Li et al. To accomplish data fusion, a residual-based multi-fidelity neural network (RMFNN) approach, as described by Lu et al., In the first step, the architecture was trained with the 2D simulation results as low-fidelity input data. The experimental data were split into a training and a validation set. The 3D simulation results combined with the experimental training data were used as the high- fidelity input. The experimental validation set was used for validation. In the second step, the model obtained from the first step was retrained using transfer learning, with the 3D simulation results as low-fidelity data and the training experiments as highfidelity data. The same experimental validation set as in the first step was used for validation in the second step. The approach utilizes the data and data combinations in an efficient way. Transfer learning is a state-of-the-art method to extend the predictive power of a model without having to start with a new, randomly initialized model. It is often used in modern deep learning libraries, mainly on vision and NLP tasks, such as in the fastai library, where y i is the i th predicted value, b y i is the ground truth, and m is the total number of samples. Four datasets were ultimately produced: The training of the model was performed using transfer learning. To illustrate the differences between a model using transfer learning and a randomly initialized RMFNN, five-fold cross-validation was performed. In the first step, the model accomplished 15.1 ± 4.6 MAPE, and in the second (transfer learning) step 12.4 ± 3.8 MAPE (five-fold cross-validation). The randomly initialized RMFNN resulted in a MAPE of 13.17 ± 3.1, showing only minor differences from the pre-trained models. This means that the model could potentially also be trained only with the 3D and experimental datasets, discarding the 2D set completely. For further investigations, the transfer learned model was used. The test set was ultimately predicted with 16.1 MAPE, which can be seen as an improvement to the stateof-the-art predictions in which a calibration procedure always has to take place or the tip has to be scanned, as described by Saringer et al. The experimentally determined evolution of the tip radius is shown in Fig. Predictions for tip wear of two different materials known to have isotropic behavior and similar elastic properties but different plastic behavior and hardness, are shown in Fig. As previously discussed, machine learning models can be benchmarked by the size of their prediction error (MAPE). To further analyze the seemingly black box model, SHAP Figure When analyzing the feature importance (order of the features in Figs. Figure A nanoindentation tip was monitored over a period of nearly 30,000 indents, experiencing actual laboratory conditions using a vast amount of different materials and indentation procedures. During this time, the tip radius was regularly measured to quantify tip wear with a self-imaging method. It was shown that machine learning can be utilized to interpret this tip wear. Combining the knowledge of FE simulations, tip characterization, and experimental methods inside a surrogate model allowed the prediction and interpretation of the experimental tip wear, defined by changes in the tip radius measured by P-h curves. Based on this research, future monitoring or calibration procedures for indentation experiments can be developed. The used approach allows not only characterization of the tip wear from indentation results with high precision but also enables further insight into the complex tasks inside a deep learning model. For the first time, complex multi-fidelity neural networks were analyzed and the decision-making process was examined from a game-theory perspective using SHAP. The study has also shown that interpretation of machine learning models can be a standard method in computational materials science in order to challenge the critique of non-interpretability of data-driven approaches. It will be crucial for scientists and engineers to continue to work as a control body, especially when it comes to safety-related applications. This approach is expected to allow the in situ study of tip wear, allowing the distinguishing between effects dependent on materials, scanning procedures, and indentation depths/loads, and will be shown in future work. Trost, Zak, Schaffer, Saringer, Exl, and Cordill