Resonant elastic soft x-ray magnetic scattering (XRMS) is a powerful tool to explore long-periodic spin textures in single crystals. However, due to the limited momentum transfer range imposed by long wavelengths of photons in the soft x-ray region, Bragg diffraction is restricted to crystals with the large lattice parameters. Alternatively, small angle x-ray scattering has been involved in the soft energy x-ray range which, however, brings in difficulties with the sample preparation that involves focused ion beam milling to thin down the crystal to below a few hundred nm thickness. We show how to circumvent these restrictions by using XRMS in specular reflection from a sub-nanometer smooth crystal surface. The method allows observing diffraction peaks from the helical and conical spin modulations at the surface of a Cu2OSeO3 single crystal and probing their corresponding chirality as contributions to the dichroic scattered intensity. The results suggest a promising way to carry out XRMS studies on plethora of noncentrosymmetric systems hitherto unexplored with soft x-rays due to the absence of the commensurate Bragg peaks in the available momentum transfer range. Recently, noncentrosymmetric magnetic systems attracted attention due to the stabilization of topologically non-trivial spin textures via the antisymmetric Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction (DMI) Resonant elastic soft x-ray magnetic scattering (XRMS) is an unique tool providing element-specific information about long-periodic magnetic structures in single-crystal chiral magnets Due to the high absorption at soft x-ray energies and limited momentum transfer range, two experimental XRMS geometries are typically utilized: 1) small-angle x-ray scattering from thinned crystals in transmission So far, detection of the magnetic satellites in a reflection geometry from skyrmionic single crystal hosts has not been demonstrated in the soft x-ray region, mainly due to instruments availability and due to poor surface quality of the single crystals. Here, we show experimentally that for a the sub-nm polished (001) Cu 2 OSeO 3 surface helical and conical magnetic modulations can be observed as satellite reflections around the specular peak (i.e. non-Bragg angle) and that chirality information of the underlying spin textures is encoded as dichroic intensity. This proof-of-principle experiment opens the possibility to explore a plethora of noncentrosymmetric systems hitherto unexplored with XRMS due to the absence of Bragg peaks in the available momentum transfer range at soft x-ray energies. A sketch of the experimental geometry is shown in Fig. For the current experiments, the chamber was mounted in the low resolution configuration and two-dimensional (2D) charge coupled device (CCD) detector (Greateyes GmbH, Berlin, Germany) was centered at the scattering angle 2θ of 36 • . The low resolution and high-Q range option was used. An in-vacuum photodiode and total electron yield (TEY) detectors were used for the sample and chamber alignment with respect to the incident beam direction. The sample was consequently rotated around the θ axis to access the reciprocal space of interest, around the specular reflection. The base pressure in the chamber was 5 × 10 -8 mbar. The energy of the circularly polarized soft x-ray beam was tuned to the Cu L 3 edge at E = 931.7 eV to maximize the magnetic scattering intensity. The incoming beam was collimated by a pair of vertical slits in front of the chamber to reduce the incident beam divergence and hence to improve the angular resolution of the experiment. XRMS patterns were collected at the specular reflection condition (θ = 18 • , 2θ = 36 • ) and symmetric off-specular ±Q x regions (θ = 16 • , 2θ = 36 • ) and (θ = 20 • , 2θ = 36 • ) to cover the set of magnetic satellites. The sample was mounted onto a dedicated sample holder and fixed by thermally and electrically conductive silver paint. The magnetic field was applied in the range of 0 -270 mT along the [110] crystal axis by using a rotatable electromagnet. The sample temperature was controlled by a close-cycle cryo-free cryostat (Stinger, ColdEdge Technologies). All measurements were carried out at the base temperature T = 8 K. The magnetic field dependencies of XRMS were measured for left and right circularly polarized soft x-rays. The acquisition time for each CCD image was 600 s. Detector images measured at B = 200 mT in the magnetic saturated sample state showing no incommensurate magnetic satellites were used to subtract the background. The aspect ratio of the images in the Q-space was corrected to account for the reflection geometry. High quality single crystalline Cu 2 OSeO 3 was grown by chemical vapor transport (CVT) The XRMS patterns measured in the helical ground state at B = 0 mT and T = 8 K are shown in Fig. Chirality of the magnetic structure is an important property of the helical and skyrmion phases. X-ray magnetic scattering with polarized x-rays is an unique tool that can reveal the occurrence of chiral magnetic structure. In Fig. Line profiles of the XRMS intensity of helical peaks at zero field along Q y measured with two circular C + and C -polarizations are shown in Fig. The intensity difference between +Q and -Q satellite magnetic peaks belonging to the same helical or conical domain is expected due chirality of the magnetic texture. For the present experimental geometry the dichroic contribution to the scattering intensity I CD = I C --I C + reads as where ξ is the conical angle and ψ is the azimuthal angle in the scattering plane (ψ = 0 corresponds to Q||Q x ), and Y is a constant determined by the XMCD contrast. In the case of a Bloch-type spin spiral which is characteristic to chiral magnets, the dichroic intensity follows the cosine law (Eq. 1). This equation implies that the reflection geometry (θ = 0) is necessary to detect a finite chiral XRMS contribution, while in a transmission experiment the difference between I C + and I C -is dominated by other scattering mechanisms such as charge-magnetic interference In conclusion, we have demonstrated a proof-of-principle resonant elastic soft x-ray scattering in specular reflection geometry on a polished single crystal of Cu 2 OSeO 3 . By measuring the satellite magnetic peaks at a base temperature of 8 K and as a function of an external field we have observed that the helical magnetic phase evolves from a multi-domain state to a single helical state, right before the eventual onset of the conical phase at B = 20 mT. This new transition from a multidomain to a fully saturated single helical domain phase is proposed to originate from the fieldinduced symmetry breaking which favours energetically the spiral domain with the propagation vector that is oriented closer to the magnetic field direction. Moreover, we show that chirality information, for both helical and conical phases, is encoded in the asymmetric satellite peak intensities when comparing the scattering cross-sections in a reflection geometry for circular positive with respect to circular negative x-ray beam polarizations. This is of key advantage since the intrinsic chirality of the system cannot be easily reversed through external stimuli. The method provides a new way to investigate long-periodic spin textures in the near-surface regions of hitherto unexplored non-centrosymmetric magnets with reso-nant soft x-ray scattering, including depth-sensitive dichroic techniques 