The role played by interfaces in metallic multilayers is not only to change the momenta of incident electrons; their symmetry lowering also results in an enhancement of the effects of spin-orbit coupling, in particular the flipping of the spins of conduction electrons. This leads to a significant reduction of a spin current through a metallic interface that is quantitatively characterized by a dimensionless parameter δ called the spin memory loss (SML) parameter, the interface counterpart of the spin-flip diffusion length for bulk metals. In this paper we use first-principles scattering calculations that include temperature-induced lattice and spin disorder to systematically study three parameters that govern spin transport through metallic interfaces of Cu with Pt, Pd, Py (permalloy) and Co: the interface resistance, spin polarization and the SML. The value of δ for a Cu|Pt interface is found to be comparable to what we recently reported for a Au|Pt interface [Gupta et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 124, 087702 (2020)]. For Cu|Py and Cu|Co interfaces, δ decreases monotonically with increasing temperature to become negligibly small at room temperature. The calculated results are in good agreement with currently available experimental values in the literature. Inserting a Cu layer between Pt and the Py or Co layers slightly increases the total spin current dissipation at these "compound" interfaces. Since the discovery of giant magnetoresistance (GMR) in magnetic multilayers In semiclassical transport theory Pt is an important NM metal in spintronics because of its large spin-to-charge conversion efficiency. It is widely used to generate spin currents via the SHE and to detect spin currents via its inverse, the ISHE. Pt (and Pd) have very high densities of states at the Fermi energy and are relatively easily magnetized In this paper, we present a systematic study of the transport parameters AR I , γ and δ for interfaces comprising Cu and Pd, Pt, Co and Py using first-principles relativistic scattering calculations The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we briefly summarize the theoretical methods and provide some technical details of the calculations. The main results are presented and discussed in Sec. III where we begin by estimating the SDL of Cu, which must be known before we calculate the SML for Cu|metal interfaces. This is followed by the results for Cu|Pt, Cu|Pd, Cu|Py and Cu|Co interfaces and their dependence on temperature and interface atomic mixing. A brief summary is given in Sec. IV. In Appendix A, the formalism required to determine the SML for NM|FM interfaces using a bilayer structure is derived and it is shown to yield the same results for Pt|Py interface parameters as were obtained for a Pt|Py|Pt trilayer in Most transport experiments in the field of spintronics are interpreted in terms of parameters that are defined in semiclassical transport theory In an axially symmetric layered structure, the current flow in the z direction, perpendicular to the interfaces, is described by the spin diffusion equation where l sf represents the SDL and μ s is the spin accumulation defined as the difference between the spin-up and spin-down chemical potentials, μ s = μ ↑ -μ ↓ . The spin-dependent chemical potential μ ↑(↓) drives the corresponding current density j ↑(↓) according to Ohm's law where ρ ↑(↓) is the spin-dependent bulk resistivity and it is assumed that the two spin channels are weakly coupled. The general solutions of ( and respectively, where the coefficients A and B are determined by appropriate boundary conditions. Here β = (ρ ↓ -ρ ↑ )/(ρ ↑ +ρ ↓ ) is the bulk spin asymmetry, j = j ↑ +j ↓ denotes the total current density and ρ is the total resistivity given by ρ -1 = ρ -1 ↑ + ρ -1 ↓ . We define the normalized spin-current density to be j s = (j ↑ -j ↓ )/(j ↑ + j ↓ ) which can be written Equation ( For a NM metal or alloy with an equal number of spinup and spin-down electrons, ρ ↑ = ρ ↓ = 2ρ, β = 0 and (5) simplifies to If a fully polarized spin current is injected from an artificial half-metallic left lead (z ≤ 0) into a diffusive NM|NM bilayer so j s (0) = 1, then the spin current will decay in both nonmagnetic metals and, provided the bilayer is sufficiently thick, will vanish at the right lead, j s (∞) = 0. On each side of the interface, ( In the absence of appropriate boundary conditions for a NM|NM interface, we follow where the cross sectional area A should not be confused with the disposable constant in By calculating the bulk parameters ρ NM and l NM and the interface resistance AR I independently, only the sin-gle unknown parameter δ needs to be determined from Unlike NM metals for which β = 0, the asymmetry between the spin-up and spin-down conducting channels in a FM metal leads to β saturating to a finite value well inside the ferromagnet, on a length scale of l sf . We therefore construct a symmetric NM|FM|NM trilayer with the origin z = 0 at the centre of the FM layer and inject an electric current from a NM lead imposing the boundary conditions j s (-∞) = j s (∞) = 0. The calculated spin current in the FM metal can be fitted using Taking the limit t → 0 yields the interface discontinuity j s (z I -η) -j s (z I + η) = 0 and the analysis which can be solved to yield the remaining unknown variables δ and γ The boundary conditions j s (-∞) = j s (∞) = 0 are appropriate for structures with NM materials like Pt, for which l sf is short, embedded between nonmagnetic leads Our starting point is an electronic structure for the layered metallic system of interest, calculated selfconsistently within the framework of density functional theory Temperature-induced lattice and spin disorder, alloy disorder and lattice mismatch can be efficiently modelled in "lateral supercells" that assume a measure of periodicity in the directions transverse to the transport direction Temperature-induced disorder is modelled in the adiabatic approximation using a "frozen thermal lattice disorder" scheme with atoms displaced at random from their equilibrium lattice positions with a Gaussian distribution of displacements. The root mean square displacement ∆ characterizing the distribution is chosen so that the resistivity of the NM metal at a finite temperature is reproduced as detailed in Before we calculate the SML for Cu|metal interfaces, the SDL of bulk Cu is estimated in Sec. III A. Cu|Pt and Cu|Pd interfaces are considered in Sec. III B, followed by Cu|Py and Cu|Co interfaces in Sec. III C. The effect of interface atomic mixing for materials with similar atomic volumes is examined in Sec. III D for Cu|Co and Cu|Py interfaces. A compound interface obtained by inserting atomic layers of Cu between FM and Pt is studied in Sec. III E. In the semiclassical theory commonly used to describe spin transport, five bulk parameters ρ NM , l NM , ρ FM , l FM , β and three interface parameters AR I , δ and γ are required to describe transport through the FM|NM interface of a bilayer, while the bulk and interface spin polarizations β and γ vanish for an interface between two NM metals. The numerical techniques required to determine the resistivity of a NM or FM metal, as well as the SDL of most transition metals and alloys using scattering theory are well documented l Cu (∆(T )) is plotted in Fig. We begin by examining the spin memory loss at the Cu|Pt interface that commonly appears in nonlocal spinvalve, spin-pumping and spin-Seebeck experiments. We then compare our results when Pt is replaced by the isoelectronic and isostructural but lighter element Pd. Before addressing the SML, the Cu|Pt interface resistance needs to be determined using the standard Landauer-Büttiker formalism where G Sh denotes the Sharvin conductance of the ballistic Cu leads, AR Cu|Lead is the resistance of the interface between the ballistic Cu lead and diffusive Cu, 2ρ Cu L Cu with L Cu = 10 nm is the resistance of a length 2L Cu = 20 nm of diffusive Cu [95], ρ Pt L Pt is the resistance of a length L Pt of diffusive Pt and AR Cu|Pt is the sought-after Cu|Pt interface resistance. By repeating the calculations without the central Pt layer, we obtain the contribution from the first three terms on the right hand side of We compare our calculated interface resistances and SML parameters with experimental and theoretical values available in the literature in Table We proceed to study the SML at the interfaces between Cu and the FM metals Py and Co. The exchange interaction in FM metals automatically generates a spin polarization of the conduction electrons so that we do not need to artificially inject a spin-polarized current from the half-metallic lead as in the previous section. Instead, we consider a Py thin film that is sandwiched between two diffusive Cu films, as sketched in Fig. The very long SDL of Cu introduces two technical difficulties in the above calculations: (i) the value of l Cu we use is extrapolated from high temperatures and (ii) the diffusive Cu layers attached to Py are not thick enough for the boundary condition j s (±∞) = 0 to be satisfied as required by the formulation of Sec. II C. We first examine the robustness of our computational framework with respect to the value of l Cu . In addition to using the value of l sf ∼ 502 nm estimated by extrapolation in Fig. In particular, we see that in the limit l Cu → ∞, γ = 1. Therefore, a reasonable value of l Cu is needed to estimate γ, the interface resistance asymmetry. The large value of l Cu ∼ 502 nm makes it impossible to construct a scattering region long enough for a Cu|FM|Cu trilayer to satisfy the boundary condition j(±∞) = 0 in currently practical calculations. We therefore examine the values of δ and γ we obtain when we apply a different boundary condition that can be strictly complied with in practice. By analogy with the injection of a fully polarized current into the Cu|Pt bilayer, we can inject a fully spin-polarized current with the same polarization sign as Py into a Cu|Py bilayer; this then satisfies the condition j s (-∞) = 1. When the thickness of Py is much larger than its SDL, the spin current approaches its bulk polarization β at z → +∞. Following the same procedure we used for the NM|NM interface in Sec. II B, we derive the semiclassical diffusion equations for spin transport in a diffusive NM|FM bilayer in Appendix A to eventually arrive at the two equations The spin current j s (z) calculated in the Cu|Py bilayer with the boundary condition j s (-∞) = 1 is plotted in Fig. The temperature dependence of AR I , δ and γ is shown in Fig. The Cu|Py interface parameters we calculate at various temperatures are listed in Table As the interfacial counterpart of bulk spin-flip diffusion length, the SML arises microscopically from the spin-flip scattering at the interface, which is usually induced by the enhanced spin-orbit interaction owing to the broken translational symmetry. With increasing temperature, spin fluctuation in the FM provides an additional source of spin-flip scattering. Nevertheless, the temperatureinduced spin fluctuation also lowers the spin polarization parameter β in bulk We repeat the above calculations at room temperature replacing Py by Co which has a higher Curie temperature and no intrinsic alloy disorder. The calculated interface parameters are included in Fig. Even in the best experimental samples, the interfaces will almost certainly not be as well ordered as those we have considered so far. In the process of growing thin layers, the kinetic energy of the deposited atoms will lead to interface mixing, rendering the interfaces less sharp The effect of interface mixing on the SML for Cu|Py and Cu|Co interfaces is complex. First, the stronger interface scattering by the interface alloy enhances the spin flipping, as we found for the nonmagnetic Au|Pt interface Cu is commonly used in experiments as a spacer material between a heavy metal like Pt with a large spin susceptibility and a FM metal, to prevent magnetism being induced in Pt by the proximity effect. Because of its weak spin-orbit interaction and correspondingly long SDL, a thin layer of Cu is usually assumed to have no effect on a spin current thus making the interpretation of experiments simpler. However, though bulk Cu may have little effect on a spin current, insertion of a Cu layer between a FM metal and Pt replaces the singel FM|Pt interface with two different interfaces, namely, FM|Cu and Cu|Pt interfaces whose effect on a spin current is, at best, poorly known. Here we consider Py and Co as typical FM metals and Pt as a typical heavy metal to investigate the influence of inserting Cu layers on the spin memory loss. As shown schematically in Fig. Using the above scheme, we calculate the interface parameters AR I , γ and δ for Py|Cu|Pt and Co|Cu|Pt interfaces at room temperature and summarize the results in Fig. We finally consider the SML with and without the Cu insert. Without it, δ Py|Pt = 0.76 ± 0.11 at room temperature. As shown in Table V and Fig. We have calculated the semiclassical spin transport parameters for Cu|Pt, Cu|Pd, Cu|Py and Cu|Co interfaces at finite temperature within the adiabatic approximation using first-principles scattering theory Where comparison can be made, the results we calculate are in reasonable agreement with published experimental values. The sophistication of our calculations is such that where discrepancies exist, the first issue that much be examined is the validity of the structural models we use. Our computer codes make it possible to examine many types of interface disorder but at present more information is required from experiment to motivate more extensive theoretical investigations than the present one. Where the experimental data were obtained from lowtemperature models, the onus is on our experimental colleagues to provide us with information about the disorder that leads to diffusive behaviour at low temperatures. μ s,NM (z I )e -t/lI -μ s,FM (z I + t) e zI/lI e -t/lI -e t/lI , (A10) B I = μ s,NM (z I )e t/lI -μ s,FM (z I + t) e -zI/lI e t/lI -e -t/lI . (A11) Substituting (A10) and (A11) into (A8) and (A9), we find two equations containing μ s and j s at the boundaries z = z I and z = z I + t. The spin accumulation μ s is eliminated using (A4) and (A5) and finally, we take the limit t → 0 to arrive at equations To examine the validity of extracting the SML δ and interface polarization γ for a NM|FM interface with a fully polarized current injected from the NM side, we take Pt|Py as an example and compare the numerical results we find with those obtained by passing an unpolarized current through a NM|FM|NM trilayer structure The plane-averaged spin current j s (z) we obtain for the Pt|Py bilayer is shown in Fig. Z I