Understanding the organizing principles of interacting electrons and the emergence of novel electronic phases is a central endeavor of condensed matter physics. Electronic nematicity, in which the rotational symmetry in the electron fluid is broken while the translational one remains unaffected, is a prominent example of such a phase. It has proven ubiquitous in correlated electron systems, and is of prime importance to understand the physics of the Fe-based superconductors. Here, we find that fluctuations of such broken symmetry are exceptionally strong in non-magnetic BaNi 2 (As 1-x P x ) 2 , the charge analog to the Fe-based systems, at temperatures well above that of any phase transition. This provides evidence for a new type of electronic nematicity, dynamical in nature, which exhibits an unprecedented coupling to the underlying crystal lattice. Quantum and thermal fluctuations between degenerate configurations cause a splitting of phonon lines, without lifting degeneracies or breaking the rotational symmetry. This nematic liquid is reminiscent of spin liquids in quantum magnetism, offering the perspective that the absence of ordinary order may lead to states with long-range quantum entanglement, fractionalized excitations, or unconventional superconductivity. The normal state of unconventional superconductors generally exhibits a variety of exotic electronic states emerging out of the interplay between intertwined orders. It is at least as intriguing as the superconducting state itself. The electronic nematic state is one such exotic state, which has proven particularly insightful in unveiling the properties of Fe-based superconductors. In these materials, nematicity is a canonical example of vestigial order which grows out of the magnetic fluctuations of two degenerate magnetic ground states The resulting relative splitting ∆ω/ω of the modes in the orthorhombic phase can be as large as 8% in the Fe-based superconductors' parent compounds such as BaFe 2 As 2 At room temperature, BaNi 2 As 2 has a tetragonal crystal structure (space group I4/mmm) similar to BaFe 2 As 2 , but unlike its Fe-counterpart, is superconducting, albeit below a modest critical temperature T c ∼ 0.6 K 14 . While earlier electronic structure studies concluded low electronic correlations in this system, pointing at conventional phonon-mediated BCS superconductivity Here we investigate the lattice and electron dynamics of BaNi 2 (As 1-x P x ) 2 , and report on an exceptionally large splitting of the doubly degenerate Raman active planar vibrations of the NiAs tetraedra. In sharp contrast to the behavior in the iron-based systems, where this splitting was taken as evidence for nematic symmetry breaking, in BaNi 2 (As 1-x P x ) 2 it occurs well above any reported structural phase transition temperatures. This calls for a distinction between the lifting of a degeneracy and a dynamical spectral splitting. We show that our observation can be accounted for by a particularly strong coupling of electronic B 1g nematic fluctuations, likely of orbital nature From a point group analysis follows that the tetragonal phase of BaNi 2 As 2 hosts four Raman-active optical phonons of A 1g , B 1g and E g symmetry at the Brillouin zone center. The corresponding eigen-displacements are shown on fig. These calculations also allowed us to estimate the strength of the electron-phonon coupling for the different modes and revealed that the phonon exhibiting the largest coupling is the A 1g mode, which consistently displays a weak Fano asymmetry. On the other hand, despite the rather modest calculated EPC, the E g,1 mode is very broad (full-width-at-half-maximum (FWHM) ∼ 22 cm -1 ) at room temperature, indicating additional decay channels. The singular behavior of the E g,1 phonon is confirmed upon cooling. The conventional behavior of the A 1g (Fig. The degeneracy of an E g phonon can only be lifted if the four-fold symmetry of the Ni planes is broken. This occurs across the tetragonal-to-orthorhombic structural transition in the Fe-based compounds Ba(Fe 1-x Co x ) 2 As 2 8-10 , EuFe 2 As 2 Before discussing the doping dependence of the effect in BaNi 2 As 2 , we briefly review the potential sources of symmetry breaking that could yield a splitting of the E g,1 phonon. As FeSe, BaNi 2 As 2 does not exhibit any magnetic order but a unidirectional, biaxial, incommensurate CDW (I-CDW) above T Tr i has recently been reported It is followed by an orthorhombic distortion of the lattice at T Or th = 142K which can be detected through high-resolution dilatometry Cooling further down, the CDW superstructure peak is suppressed and a commensurate CDW (C-CDW) signal appears at q C-C DW = (±1/3, 0, ±1/3) as the system enters the triclinic phase. We did not detect any additional phase transition in the temperature range at which the E g,1 mode splitting onsets, and can already conclude at this stage that this splitting is occurring in the tetragonal I4/mmm phase. Our first principle calculations confirmed that the amplitude of the orthorhombic structural distortion is in all cases much too small to account for the gigantic energy splitting of the E g,1 phonons reported here (Supplementary Information). Furthermore, in stark contrast to Fe-based materials We confirmed this by substituting arsenic by phosphorus. This has previously been reported to suppress the triclinic transition Upon further increase of the P-concentration (x=10%), for which the triclinic (and therefore the C-CDW) transition is completely suppressed, the maximal amplitude of the splitting is reduced and appears to saturate at lowest temperatures. In the investigated doping range, the temperature below which the E g,1 mode splits decreases linearly with doping at a modest rate of ∼ d T S pl i t /d x ∼ -2.5K/%, comparable to that of T Or th but much lower than T Tr i , and increases again beyond the suppression of the triclinic phase. The suppression of T Tr i further allowed us to resolve a splitting for the E g,2 mode as well, which amounts to ∼ 15 cm -1 at 50 K and could not be resolved at lower P-contents (not shown). The observation of the E g phonon splitting in BaNi 2 As 2 above any lowering of the symmetry of the compound, strongly suggests a coupling of the mode to fluctuations. Given the lack of magnetism in BaNi 2 As 2 , orbital degrees of freedom are the most likely candidates. This can directly be tested using electronic Raman scattering, which is a particularly sensitive probe of the charge fluctuations. In Fig. The main difference between the two channels is quantitative: the low energy B 1g intensity gain spans over a broader energy range ( ≥ 500 cm -1 ) than the B 2g , it is overall larger and accelerates significantly below T S pl i t ∼ 140 K. This observation is in line with recent elastoresistivity measurements Having established the presence of nematic fluctuations coupled to the lattice, we can understand the 'splitting' of the E g phonon spectrum, in the absence of a phase transition that would lift the degeneracy, as a dynamic phenomenon. To this end, we introduce a minimal model, in which a doubly degenerate lattice vibration couples to an Ising variable |s〉 ∈ {|⇑〉 = (1, 0), |⇓〉 = (0, 1)} that describes an electronic nematic degree of freedom, such as an orbital polarization. The two degenerate E g phonons are described by where p j ( j = x, y) are the phonon momentum operators, while u j represent the ionic displacements, and ω 0 is the phonon frequency. The phonons' coupling to the nematic degrees of freedom is dictated by symmetry as λ 2 is the strength of the symmetry-allowed coupling between Ising-nematic degree (transforming according to B 1g ) to the doubly degenerate E g phonons. The Pauli matrices τ α act in the space of the nematic pseudospin. σ ext is proportional to externally applied stress that explicitly breaks the four-fold symmetry. It acts like an conjugate field of the pseudospins. Finally Ω is the rate at which the nematic state undergoes quantum fluctuations. Without going into the details of a microscopic description, the rate can be thought of as a renormalized tunneling rate (ω+Ω 0 ) 2 dω rooted in a more complex dynamic nematic susceptibility of the form χ nem (Ω) = (Ω 2 0 -ω 2 + Γ (ω)) -1 , similar to other pseudospin problems Before discussing the results for the phonon spectrum in the tetragonal phase, relevant for BaNi 2 As 2 , we briefly discuss what happens in a C 4 -symmetry broken state where the nematic Ising order parameter 〈τ z 〉 is finite. There, the degeneracy of the E g modes is lifted with their energy becoming Ω 2 ± 〈τ z 〉λ 2 . In the limit where λ 2 〈τ z 〉 Ω 2 , the splitting is directly given by λ 2 Ω 2 〈τ z 〉 and therefore provides a direct measurement of the coupling strength between the lattice and the nematic degrees of freedom. This corresponds to the behavior observed in the Fe-based superconductors The main message of the analysis presented here is that, even without nematic symmetry breaking, the fluctuations between the |⇑〉 and |⇓〉 states can yield a dynamic splitting of each E g mode, which in turn can be seen as a direct signature of strong nemato-elastic coupling. A key prediction of the model is that in the dynamical regime, unlike in the ordered state, both u x and u y modes exhibit the same split spectrum. If we apply external stress σ ext the degeneracy of the two E g phonons is lifted. We then observe merely a gradual transfer of weight between the split peaks, see Fig. To experimentally investigate the symmetry-lifting for BaNi 2 As 2 , we performed measurements under strain, in a comparative study with FeSe. Quite generally, Fe-based superconductors are particularly soft and can be detwinned with very modest stress. This can be seen in a Raman experiment through the suppression in the intensity of one of the two degenerate B 2g or B 3g modes Discussion We summarize our findings on the phase diagram shown in Fig. The E g phonons follow the dynamics of the Ising variable, likely related to resonant transitions between distinct electronic orbital states, which causes a splitting in the phonon spectrum. For this splitting no symmetry breaking is necessary. Just like the splitting of the electronic spectrum in a Mott-Hubbard insulator into the two Hubbard bands can occur without symmetry breaking, here we capture the nematic system in terms of a purely dynamical description. The analogy to spin-liquid states in Mott insulators without magnetic order may carry over to nematic liquids and give rise to related phenomena, such as unconventional superconductivity or exotic quantum states with long-range entanglement. It strongly supports the view that the much-enhanced superconducting transition temperature of these materials upon doping is closely tied to the emergence of dynamic nematic fluctuations uncovered in our measurements. Single Crystal Growth. Single crystals of BaNi 2 (As 1-x P x ) 2 were grown using a self-flux method. NiAs binary was synthesized by mixing the pure elements Ni (powder, Alfa Aesar 99.999%) and As (lumps, Alfa Aesar 99.9999%) that were ground and sealed in a fused silica tube and annealed for 20 hours at 730 • C. All sample handlings were performed in an argon glove box (O 2 content < 0.7 ppm). For the growth of BaNi 2 (As 1-x P x ) 2 , a ratio of Ba:NiAs:Ni:P = 1 : 4(1 -x) : 4x : 4x was placed in an alumina tube, which was sealed in an evacuated quartz ampule (i.e. 10 -5 mbar). The mixtures were heated to 500 • C -700 • C for 10 h, followed by heating slowly to a temperature of 1100 • C -1150 • C, soaked for 5 h, and subsequently cooled to 995 • C -950 • C at the rate of 0.5 • C/h to 1 • C/h, depending on the phosphorus content used for the growth. At 950 • C -995 • C, the furnace was canted to remove the excess flux, followed by furnace cooling. Plate-like single crystals with typical sizes 3 × 2 × 0.5 mm 3 were easily removed from the remaining ingot. The crystals were brittle having shiny brass-yellow metallic lustre. Electron micro-probe analysis of the BaNi 2 (As 1-x P x ) 2 crystals was performed using a compact scanning electron microscope (SEM) (see Supplementary Information). The energy dispersive x-ray (EDX) analysis on the BaNi 2 (As 1-x P x ) 2 crystals revealed phosphorus content x = 0.035 ± 0.005, 0.076 ± 0.005, and 0.10 ± 0.005. Single crystal X-ray diffraction. The phosphorus concentrations of the investigated samples were further confirmed by structural refinement from x-ray diffraction using an image plate system as described in (1, 0, 3) Bragg peaks for the I-and C-CDW, respectively. were performed with a Jobin-Yvon LabRAM HR Evolution spectrometer in backscattering geometry, with a laser power of ≤0.8 mW that was focused on the sample with a 50× magnification long-working-distance (10.6 mm) objective. The laser spot size was ≈ 2 μm in diameter. Lowresolution mode (1.54 cm -1 ) of the spectrometer with 600 grooves/mm was used to maximize the signal output. For the phonon measurements, a He-Ne laser (λ = 632.8 nm) was used as the incident source, whereas the electronic background was best observed using the 532 nm line of a Nd:YAG solid state laser. Direct comparison of the structural phase transition temperature upon cooling as measured in specific heat and Raman indicated a laser-induced heating limited to less than 2K. The Raman spectra were Bose corrected and the phonons analyzed using a damped harmonic oscillator profile (with the exception of the A 1g mode that displayed a Fano Ref. [12] normalized intensity f 126 138 Raman shift (cm -1 ) 130 134 FeSe 