The anomalous Hall effect (AHE) has been extended into the nonlinear regime, where the Hall voltage shows higher-order response to the applied current. Nevertheless, the microscopic mechanism of the nonlinear AHE remains unclear. Here we report the orbital polarization and its induced third-order AHE in few-layer WTe 2 flakes. Through angle-dependent electric measurements, it is found that the third-order AHE is quite consistent with the electric field induced polarization of orbital magnetic moment caused by the Berry connection polarizability tensor, which is further directly detected by polar reflective magnetic circular dichroism spectroscopy. The microscopic mechanisms of third-order AHE are analyzed through the scaling law, that is, the opposite orbital magnetic moments (up or down) deflect to opposite directions driven by electric field induced Berry curvature, forming the intrinsic contribution; driven by the Magnus effect of the self-rotating Bloch electrons, the opposite orbital magnetic moments are scattered towards opposite transverse directions, resulting in the skew scattering. The in-depth investigation of anomalous Hall effect (AHE) in modern condensed matter physics leads to the discovery of Berry curvature, which describes the geometrical properties of Bloch electron wave functions Recently, the AHE has been extended to the higher-order versions. Both second-order and third-order AHEs have been identified theoretically and experimentally Here we report the orbital polarization and third-order AHE in time-reversal symmetric WTe 2 through both transport and optical measurements. The axial anisotropy of the third-order AHE in WTe 2 is found, which is quite consistent with the electric field induced orbital polarization due to the BCP. Through the polar reflective magnetic circular dichroism (RMCD) spectroscopy, it is found that the orbital polarization is parabolic dependent on the electric field. The temperaturedependent transport measurements reveal both intrinsic and skew scattering contributions to the third-order AHE in WTe 2 with high carrier mobility in the ultraclean limit. Different from conventional ferromagnetic metals with low mobility, the scaling law for the third-order AHE in WTe 2 indicates notable skew scattering, which is attributed to the orbit dependent scattering and the orbital polarization. The WTe 2 flakes with thickness around 5-10 nm were selected to demonstrate the third-order AHE (see Appendix A). In the bulk limit, T d -WTe 2 has the space group Pmn2 1 possessing a mirror symmetry with the mirror line along the b axis and a glide mirror symmetry with the mirror line along the a axis Figure ⊥ measured at 1.8 K demonstrates a clear θ dependence. The V 3ω ⊥ shows a cubic dependence on E 3ω , which clearly reveals the third-order nature of the nonlinear Hall response in WTe 2 . Considering the resistance anisotropy in WTe 2 , the E ω is obtained from E ω = I ω R L , where I ω is the applied alternating current, R is the longitudinal resistance along the current direction, and L is the channel length. 3 , where r is the resistance anisotropy, χ ij are elements of the third-order susceptibility tensor, and θ 0 is the angle misalignment between θ = 0 • and the crystalline b axis of WTe 2 . The fitting curve for this angle dependence is shown by the red line in Fig. , respectively, consistent with the Pmn2 1 space group symmetry of WTe 2 The anomalous crystal orientation dependence of the thirdorder AHE is well explained by the electric field induced orbital polarization due to the BCP. Upon applying an external electric field, the orbital magnetism is induced, following M ∝ D • E When applying alternating electric field E ω with frequency ω, the induced Berry curvature dipole also holds a frequency ω, satisfying D ω ∝ E ω . As shown in Fig. We further investigate the polarization of orbital magnetic moment through the scaling law of the third-order AHE. Figures rσ , where τ is the scattering time, r is the resistance anisotropy, and χ (3) is the third-order Hall conductivity. Thus, the linear relationship between 3 and σ 2 indicates χ (3) has two contributions, which scales as τ 1 and τ 3 , respectively. Note that the electric field induced orbital polarization scales linearly with τ . Therefore, the τ 1 and τ 3 contributions to χ (3) is quite consistent with the Berry curvature-related anomalous velocity and orbital skew scattering, respectively. This is somehow different with the conventional magnetic metals, where the anomalous Hall conductivity scales as τ 0 for the intrinsic Berry curvature and side jump contributions the observed τ 1 contribution to χ (3) may also be induced by the side jump in addition to the intrinsic mechanism. Nevertheless, the high mobility and resistivity in WTe 2 suggest the relative weak side jump, which generally dominates in the dirty metals It is worth noting that for ordinary linear AHE, the skew scattering is hardly observed in the good metal regime Here the observed skew scattering in high conductivity nonmagnetic WTe 2 can be well understood by considering the electric field induced polarization of orbital magnetic moment. Recent theoretical predication by Isobe et al. In summary, we have demonstrated the electric field induced orbital polarization and third-order AHE in few-layer WTe 2 . Notable third-order AHE with strong anisotropy is observed, consistent with the scenario of electric field induced polarization of orbital magnetic moment. Under the application of an external electric field, the BCP tensor would generate Berry curvature with dipolelike distribution, being responsible for the electric field induced orbital polarization. By exploiting RMCD spectroscopy, the electric field induced orbital polarization is directly measured. The scaling law of the third-order AHE further shows that the orbital polarization contributes to the third-order AHE through both intrinsic mechanism and orbital skew scattering. Our work paves the way towards the realization of orbital polarization through electrical means, promising for orbitronics. × 100%. Large, nonsaturated MR with characteristic two-carrier transport is observed, indicating a nearly compensated electron and hole density in WTe 2 and where n is the electron density, p is the hole density, μ n is the electron mobility, and μ p is the hole mobility, the carrier density and mobility are estimated. The mobility of all these devices is in the order of 10 3 cm 2 /V s. Table The Hamiltonian of the two-dimensional (2D) gapped Dirac model is The Berry connection polarizability is evaluated, and the field-induced Berry curvature is calculated as 1 5 k × E. We further the field-induced Berry curvature by (ε is the energy, k α is the wave vector along the α direction, ε F is the Fermi energy, and α = x, y) For the RMCD measurements, the He-Ne 633-nm laser was used as the excitation. A chopper and a photoelastic modulator were used to modulate the intensity and polarization of the excitation beam, respectively. The RMCD measurements were carried out in the Attocube closed-cycle cryostat with lowest temperature ∼ 1.6 K. The reflected beam was collected FIG. by the photomultiplier tube and was eventually analyzed by a two-channel lock-in amplifier through the signals of the reflected intensity (at f C ) and the RMCD intensities (at f The dependence of RMCD measurement results on the electric field direction was carried out in device S2. As shown in Fig. Besides the orbital polarization, the Joule heating effect may also lead to quadratic dependence of the RMCD signal on the electric field, which, however, can be safely ruled out in our measurements. Figure Since it is still debated whether the current induced spin accumulation from the spin Hall effect can be detected optically in metals The third-order nature of the AHE is revealed by both the nonzero third-harmonic Hall voltage and the cubic dependence of the third-harmonic Hall voltage on the applied alternating field. As shown in Fig. ⊥ shows a linear dependence on (E ω ) 3 . Moreover, a similar scaling relationship is observed in device S4, as shown in Fig. In addition to the third-order AHE induced by intrinsic effect, i.e., the Berry-connection polarizability tensor, there also may exist some extrinsic effects that can induce higherorder transport. Here by control experiments and symmetry analysis, the extrinsic effects are excluded carefully one by one: (1) Diode effect. The Schottky barrier is generally inevitable between the metal electrodes and two-dimensional materials, which would induce an accidental diode with a rectification effect, resulting in high-order transport effect. However, the two-terminal I-V characteristics of WTe 2 were measured, which show a linear behavior, as shown in Fig. (2) Thermal effect and thermoelectric effect. The Joule heating can cause the change of sample temperature. As the sample resistance has a notable temperature dependence, it results in a third-order response to the current (3) Transverse resistance R ⊥ . The influence of R ⊥ on the observed third-order AHE can be ruled out by the angle dependence of the third-order AHE. As shown in Figs. (4) Capacitance coupling effect. Higher-order transport can be also induced by capacitance coupled within the circuit. To exclude the spurious capacitive coupling effect, frequencydependent measurements were carried out, as shown in Fig. (5) Mixing from V 3ω . The observed third-order Hall signals may be mixed from nonzero third-order longitudinal voltage V 3ω . To exclude such a possibility, we simultaneously measured the third-harmonic longitudinal and Hall voltage, i.e., V 3ω and V 3ω ⊥ , in device S1 at 1.8 K, as shown in Fig. and 12(c). Within a large range of angle θ , V 3ω ⊥ dominates over V 3ω , by direct comparison between Figs. 12(b) and 12(c). Note the angle dependence of third-order AHE 3 is well fitted by the model based on the internal symmetry analysis of WTe 2 . However, the E 3ω (E ω ) 3 and 3 show totally different angle dependence. For example, the 3 is nearly zero when along both a and b axes. Nevertheless, E 3ω (E ω ) 3 shows a value close to the maximum when along the a axis and a value close to the minimum along the b axis, as denoted by the black dashed lines in Figs. 12(b) and 12(c). Therefore, through the angle-dependent measurements, the V 3ω can be safely excluded as the origin of the observed third-order AHE. R xx (0)