All-optical spin switching (AOS) represents a new frontier in magnetic storage technologyspin manipulation without a magnetic field, -but its underlying working principle is not well understood. Many AOS ferrimagnets such as GdFeCo are amorphous and renders the high-level first-principles study unfeasible. The crystalline half-metallic Heusler Mn 2 RuGa presents an opportunity. Here we carry out hitherto the comprehensive density functional investigation into the material properties of Mn 2 RuGa, and introduce two concepts -the spin anchor site and the optical active site -as two pillars for AOS in ferrimagnets. In Mn 2 RuGa, Mn(4a) serves as the spin anchor site, whose band structure is below the Fermi level and has a strong spin moment, while Mn(4c) is the optical active site whose band crosses the Fermi level. Our magneto-optical Kerr spectrum and band structure calculation jointly reveal that the delicate competition between the Ru-4d and Ga-4p states is responsible for the creation of these two sites. These two sites found here not only present a unified picture for both Mn 2 RuGa and GdFeCo, but also open the door for the future applications. Specifically, we propose a Mn 2 Ru x Ga-based magnetic tunnel junction where a single laser pulse can control magnetoresistance. Laser-induced ultrafast demagnetization 1 changes the landscape of spin manipulation, where the laser field plays a central role in magnetism. All-optical spin switching (AOS) 2 is a prime example, where a single laser pulse can turn spins from one direction to another, free of an external magnetic field. As more and more materials are discovered 3-5 , a critical question on the horizon is what properties are essential to AOS. Earlier studies have focused on magnetic orderings such as ferrimagnetic versus ferromagnetic Heusler compounds represent a new opportunity In this paper, we carry out the comprehensive first-principles density-functional study to pin down the material properties essential to all-optical-spin switching in ferrimagnet Mn 2 RuGa. We introduce two concepts -the spin anchor site (SAS) and the optical active site (OAS) as two essential pillars of AOS in ferrimagnets. SAS has a strong spin moment, and in Mn 2 RuGa it is the Mn(4a) site. Our band structure reveals that the Mn(4a)'s band is 0.5 eV below the Fermi level. By contrast, OAS has a smaller spin moment, easier to be switched optically The rest of the paper is arranged as follows. In Sec. II, we present our theoretical formalism. Section III is devoted to the results and discussion, which includes the crystal structure, electronic band structure, ultrafast demagnetization, and Kerr rotation angle. Finally, we conclude this paper in Sec. IV. Element Mn lies in the middle of 3d transition metals, with a half-filled 3d shell and zero orbital moment, just as Gd in the middle of 4f rare-earth metals. Mn is the only 3d transition metal element in inverse Heusler compounds, which is similar to a rare-earth element We employ the state-of-the art density functional theory and the full-potential linearlized augmented plane wave (FLAPW), as implemented in the Wien2k code where ψ nk (r) is the wavefunction of band n at the crystal momentum k and E nk is its band energy. The terms on the left are the kinetic energy operator, the attraction between the nuclei and electrons, the Hartree term, and the exchange-correlation A. Crystal structure Ordered Heusler alloys have three distinctive kinds of structures ), Y at 4c( 3 4 , 3 4 , 3 4 ), Mn at 4b( 1 2 , 1 2 , 1 2 ), and Z at 4a(0, 0, 0). So in their paper, their (4a), (4b), (4c), (4d) positions have different meanings from those in In Mn 2 RuGa, several versions have also been used. It adopts an XA structure. Kurt et al. Galanakis et al. We summarize those used Wyckoff positions in the same table, so the reader can see the difference. We adopt the common convention, as listed in the last line in Table We choose a big k mesh of 44 × 44 × 44, with 11166 irreducible k points in the Brillouin zone. The product of the Muffin-tin radius R MT and the planewave cutoff is 7, where R MT (Mn 1 , Mn 2 , Ru) = 2.42 bohr, and R MT (Ga) = 2.28 bohr. We find that Mn 1 has spin moment of M 4a = 3.17μ B . We call Mn 1 (4a) the spin anchor site, SAS, as it pins the magnetic configuration, so the magnetic structure can be stabilized and is immune to optical excitation. Mn 2 (4c) atoms form another spin sublattice with a smaller spin moment of -M 4c = -2.31μ B . The entire cell has the spin moment of 1.027 μ B , in agreement with prior studies Our first finding is that the above spin configuration hinges on the delicate balance between Ru and Ga. Figure Table Figure Mn 2 (4c) is quite different from Mn 1 (4a). Figure Before we move on to ultrafast demagnetization, we must emphasize that the band structure is not solely contributed by these two Mn atoms. Both Ru and Ga significantly affect the magnetic properties of Mn atoms. Thin lines in Figs. The split role from the same atom is remarkable. The circles in Fig. where t is the time. A is necessary, since without it the laser field amplitude cannot enter the equation. B determines the net amount of demagnetization. T sets the characteristic time for demagnetization or remagnetization. Since our spin moments are fixed by our calculation, we only have four fitting parameters for each region, where α 4a(4c) is the demagnetization rate for site 4a(4c). Table where c is a constant. This equation is consistent with the empirical formula proposed by Koopmans and coworkers If α 4a > α 4c , we only have a minimum which explains the spin change in region I. In region II, both α 4a and α 4c are reduced, but α 4a is reduced much more, so α 4a < α 4c , which corresponds to a peak in region II. Table Underlying ultrafast demagnetization and subsequent all-optical spin switching is the magneto-optical property of Mn 2 RuGa, which is characterized by the conductivity 54 in units of (Ωm) -1 , where m e is the electron mass, V is the unit cell volume, f nk is the Fermi distribution function, E mk is the band energy of state |mk , nk|p α |mk is the momentum matrix element between states |mk and |nk , and η is the damping parameter. The summation is over the crystal momentum k and all the band states |mk and |nk , and ω is the incident photon frequency. Here α and β refer to the directions, such as the x and y directions, not to be confused with the above demagnetization rate. The anomalous Hall conductivity is just the off-diagonal term. In the limit of η, ω → 0, the term behind the summation over k is the The general expression given in Eq. 5 is better suited for metals with partial occupation than the treatment with a separate sum over occupied and unoccupied states , without resorting to more complicated numerics where σ xx must be converted to 1/s. The SI version of 1 + 4πiσ xx /ω is 1 + iσ xx /(ωǫ 0 ). Experimentally, Fleischer et al. We can pinpoint the origin of the main peak by removing some atoms. We use η = 0.4 eV since it gives us more structures. First, we remove Mn 2 (4c), without changing the lattice structure and the rest of atoms, so we have Mn(4a)RuGa. The solid line in Fig. C.-H. Lambert, S. Mangin, B. S. D. Ch. S. Varaprasad, Y. K. Takahashi, M. Hehn, M. Cinchetti, G. Malinowski, K. Hono, Y. Fainman, M. Aeschlimann, and E. E. Fullerton, All-optical control