Reservoir computers (RCs) are among the fastest to train of all neural networks, especially when they are compared to other recurrent neural networks. RC has this advantage while still handling sequential data exceptionally well. However, RC adoption has lagged other neural network models because of the model's sensitivity to its hyper-parameters (HPs). A modern unified software package that automatically tunes these parameters is missing from the literature. Manually tuning these numbers is very difficult, and the cost of traditional grid search methods grows exponentially with the number of HPs considered, discouraging the use of the RC and limiting the complexity of the RC models which can be devised. We address these problems by introducing RcTorch, a PyTorch based RC neural network package with automated HP tuning. Herein, we demonstrate the utility of RcTorchby using it to predict the complex dynamics of a driven pendulum being acted upon by varying forces. This work includes coding examples. Example Python Jupyter notebooks can be found on our GitHub repository https://github.com/blindedjoy/RcTorch and documentation can be found at https://rctorch.readthedocs.io/. Reservoir computers (RCs), also known as echo state networks, are specialized, artificial neural networks. They are powerful and train very fast. However, today RC is not as commonly employed by the machine learning community at large as other classes of neural network models. Unlike most neural networks, the majority of RC weights are not optimized via the backpropagation algorithm. Instead, the weights are generated via a stochastic process that is very sensitive to a few numbers, typically less than 10, called hyper-parameters (HPs). In a simple feed forward neural network, rather than being optimized during training, HPs govern the learning process. The optimization of HPs is a significant challenge to the widespread adoption of the RC. Other classes of neural networks, which are extremely popular today, have faced similar significant challenges in the past. At times, pessimism about neural networks and, thus, AI more broadly, has led to aversion to these models by the scientific community at large, resulting in an AI winter: a "period following a massive wave of hype for AI characterized by a disillusionment that causes a freeze in funding and publications" 1 . ------------Preprint. Under Review Reservoir computers are a specialized subset of recurrent neural networks (RNNs), so it is important to understand RNNs and their shortcomings. RNNs are a class of artificial neural networks where the hidden states at time-step t depend on the previous hidden states. This establishes temporal dynamic behavior that yields a computation platform with an internal memory. The ability of RNNs to make predictions based on past events makes them powerful tools for handling temporal and sequential data. However, training an RNN is difficult and time-consuming due to its recurrent connections. Also, the problems of exploding and vanishing gradients are often observed. The simplicity of the RC architecture, and its substantially reduced learning cost compared to iterative learning algorithms, has attracted a large amount of attention in the machine learning and artificial intelligence (AI) communities. Even as early as 2012, RC had been employed in applications as diverse as robotic control, financial forecasting, and the detection of epileptic seizures While RC networks train extremely quickly, there is no free lunch in optimization problems. That is, "there is no optimization algorithm that can outperform all optimizers when solving all problems". In this study, we present a new RC library called RcTorchwhich creates RC networks and also has a powerful BO class capable of optimizing the RC HPs. RcTorch is capable of training many networks in parallel and then evaluating their performance, that is, generating a score for each model. These scores are then reported to the RcBayes class which performs BO. Thus, RcTorch generates many RC architectures and then selects the best one based on a robust and efficient process which can converge in as few as a hundred iterations. BO is an active field of research and is well documented in the literature. Automated BO has the potential to make the RC a popular model by eliminating the tedious task of searching for optimal HPs. In the next section, to emphasize the significance of enabling widespread adoption of effective models, we give historical examples of the challenges of other neural networks. We also examine the outcomes of overcoming those challenges. 2.1 The first AI winter: Feed Forward Neural Networks (FFNNs) and their initial challenges (1958 -1986) The earliest neural network, the single-layer perceptron, was introduced by Frank Rosenblatt in 1958 and was greeted with hyperbolic fanfare. a,1 The New Yorker reported that "[Rosenblatt's perceptron] is the first serious rival to a human brain ever devised". The New York Times claimed, in turn, that "The navy revealed the embryo of an electronic computer today that it expects will be able to walk, talk, see, write, reproduce itself, and be conscious of its own existence". The paper then reported that "[Rosenblatt] said Perceptrons might be fired to the planets as mechanical space explorers". 1 However, this overzealous excitement did not last. While at first it appeared that Rosenblatt had created the first universal learning machine, by 1969 Marvin Minsky of MIT famously proved that Rosenblatt's perceptron failed to approximate the simple logical function "exclusive or" (XOR). The perceptron more generally failed to solve functions that were not linearly separable. This was particularly devastating to the popular perception of AI because in the late 1950s and early 1960s, it was thought that solving AI essentially boils down to solving the rules of logic. Minsky specifically proved that a multi-layer model would be needed to solve this fundamental problem, but an algorithm capable of training such a network was not then known. The gap between dramatic proclamations of the promise of artificial intelligence and the limitations of the single-layer perceptron led to pessimism and aversion by the scientific community at large. Thus began the first AI winter. In 1986 Rumelhart et al. a The so-called perceptron, consisted of a single layer of simulated neurons. b In his seminal 1975 thesis, Werbos first described the process of training neural networks through the backpropagation of errors. Very deep networks are notoriously difficult to train due to the vanishing gradient problem c , which is the tendency of gradients to explode or shrink in deep neural networks. To perform gradient descent with backprop to find the optimal set of weights, we have to take derivatives. Backprop works by using the chain rule to calculate the gradient of the loss function with respect to the weights of the network. This is done from the final layer of the network back toward the input layer. For an RNN this means that the gradients must be calculated at every time step. Such a large application of the chain rule through a lot of layers amounts to a massive product -numbers slightly larger than one or less than one will tend to explode towards infinity or vanish towards zero, respectively. d When a number is too large or too small, the computer cannot represent it with sufficient precision, and information is lost. If we had infinite precision in our instruments, this would not occur, but alas. Thus, simple (or vanilla) RNNs struggle to train sequential data longer than 20 to 50 discrete time-steps. In the same 1994 paper, where Bengio et al. In 1997 the Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) (a class of RNN) was proposed to address the vanishing gradient problem. By the late 2000s, the second winter would begin to thaw and between 2010 and 2015 relentless interest and funding flooded back to neural networks. Hinton et al. employed GPU acceleration to empower deep neural networks (deep learning) and progressively beat records in computer vision and speech recognition. Soon his students were being hired at top tech companies. e For example, in 2011 one of Hinton's pupils, Navdeep Jaitly, went to Google where he interned with the speech recognition team. Shortly thereafter Google's previous solution to speech recognition was thrown out in favor of a new neural network approach. For RC, the problem of the HPs has been a barrier similar to the barrier of training a multi-layer perceptron in the 1960s and 1970s or RNNs in the early 1990s. While there are many useful RC software packages, such as pyESN and c also known as the gradient vanishing/exploding problem d Gradients vanish and explode when training RNNs because we must backprop back in time through their hidden states. This amounts to a very large application of the chain rule. Given an error function E, a prediction vector ŷ = (y1, ..., yn) an output network weight U , and hidden states h1, h2, h k , ...hn the derivative of the loss function with respect to the output weight is as follows: ∂U where ∂h t ∂h k = t j=k+1 ∂h j ∂h j-1 . e By 2010 two of his students were hired at Microsoft and jump started their artificial intelligence research division. This represented big tech's first serious attempt to integrate neural networks in its products. others and W out ∈ R N ×P . While the application in this study is time dependent, the input and output to the RC can more generally be any sequential data. RC is a subset of RNNs; thus, the following formulation describes any RNN of this form. We consider sequential data that comprise M different sequences with K sequential data-points, hence we read an input vector u k ∈ IR M where k is the sequential index. The input vector feeds an RNN that consists of N hidden recurrent states h k ∈ IR N that form a reservoir of hidden neurons. The evolution of the hidden states in this study is given by: where the dot indicates the inner product operator, α is a leaking rate that controls the evolution of the hidden states (smaller the α slower the evolution), f (•) is an arbitrary nonlinear activation function, the matrix W res ∈ IR N ×N is an adjacency matrix that contains the weights of the connections between the hidden neurons, and W in ∈ IR N ×M , b ∈ IR N ×1 denote, respectively, the weights and biases of the input layer. g The network is performing a regression task and predicts a vector of P sequences ŝk ∈ IR P that depends linearly on the recurrent states through the relationship described by Eq. ( Equations ( The transition from a standard RNN to an RC occurs when we fix the parameters of the input and hidden layers while we train only the weights and biases of the output layer. The loss function that needs to be minimized in the training phase is given by: where s k ∈ IR P is a vector that contains the ground truth data used to train the network. The second term in Eq. ( h More generally given an invertible output activation function fout the output layer can be expressed by Eq. ( i The regularization parameter can also be solved for via cross validation during training. This capability is under development for RcTorch. Having to optimize only the output linear layer, the network optimization simplifies to a ridge regularized linear regression problem. Considering that this problem has a closed form solution Let the input and output at time-step k be u k and s k . Fitting an RcTorchmodel consists of two steps: 1) constructing the hidden states and 2) training the output weights. Like a support vector machine, the RC uses its input weights to make a high dimensional projection of the input vector. The hidden state vectors h 1 , h 2 , ..., h k can be considered as a non-linear and non-orthogonal set of basis functions which the RC linearly combines to approximate the target (response) variable. The HPs, with the exception of the ridge regression coefficient, determine the architecture of the hidden states, which are not learned by the network. During BO, we progressively search for different HP sets S i ∈ IR |Si| . Crucially, the weights of the reservoir are randomly chosen from distributions that are determined by some of the HPs. An overview of the main HPs used in this study is given by table (3.2). N represents the total number of nodes in the reservoir. The spectral radius ρ is the maximum eigenvalue of the adjacency matrix (the adjacency matrix determines the structure of the reservoir). The hyper-parameter ζ is the connectivity of the adjacency matrix. The bias b 0 used in the calculation of the hidden states and the leakage rate α controls the memory of the network, i.e. how much the hidden state h k depends on the hidden state h k-1 . The ridge regression coefficient β determines the strength of regularization at inference when solving, in one shot, for W out . Search Space N number of reservoir neurons typically 100 to 500 ρ spectral radius max eigenvalue of 2) summarizes the HPs used in this study, RcTorch is adaptive framework and more HPs can be easily hard-coded in RcTorchcode. For example, an RcTorch user might want to add non-linear dense layers on top of the RC. If the user wants to add multiple non-linear dense layers to the RC then a one-shot solution for the best output weights is no longer possible and gradient decent must be performed. In this case, the learning rate λ would be an additional HP that could be optimized with BO. 4 Software application of RcTorch: the forced pendulum We demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed RcTorch AI tool through an application; we solve the forced pendulum problem. An undamped driven pendulum is represented by the system of non-linear ordinary differential equations represented by Eq. ( In Eq. ( For small initial position and velocity, the pendulum is a nonlinear periodic system, but for certain sets of ω and α the system begins to behave in a more complex way. The upper and lower middle panels of the second of Fig. In our software demonstration, in the case of a driven pendulum, we first perform pure prediction with the RC using RcTorch. Pure prediction is when the RC takes time as input and is trained on the ground truth (x, p). Then, we improve upon this result with a parameter-aware RC. That is, the driven force is assumed to be a known function. Next, we show that RcTorch can recover the underlying dynamics of the system even from noisy data. Finally, we demonstrate a transfer learning application of the RC: After learning one set of HPs optimized for a particular input force, our system can learn with a high degree of accuracy how the system will respond to other forces. This software application builds up to demonstrating that for non-resonant frequencies, RcTorch can predict the forced pendulum trajectories for forces outside the training regime. This means that the RC is capable of learning the general underlying dynamics of physical systems. Thus, the HPs of the RC can be viewed as encoding a rich latent embedding: a high-dimensional general representation of a system. Figure -1.0 -0.5 0.0 0. In this section we demonstrate how we can use RcTorch to solve the forced pendulum. Note that >>> represents a command being entered by the user. The RcTorch github repo can be visited at Githubrepo:https://github.com/blindedjoy/RcTorch. In addition RcTorch has clean and effective documentation that can be accessed at the link at https://rctorch.readthedocs. io. RcTorch can be easily installed via pip: >>> p i p i n s t a l l r c t o r c h A pure forecasting problem is a task where when making a prediction we do not have any knowledge of concurrent information (technically no time-series concurrent to the target). An example of pure prediction, as previously mentioned, is the prediction of a single stock price prediction as concurrent information is in the future and is inaccessible. To get started with the software we use the following HP set which acts as a recipe for the RC. This HP set was optimized via BO for f = α * sin(ωx) with α = 0.5 and ω = 0.2. In section 5.7 we show how to search for an optimal HP set. Given this HP set we seek to generate a phase plot like Fig. (1). In order to do so we demonstrate how to build, train, and test an RcTorch RcNetwork class model. Classes in python are declared with function notation, so in order to build a specific instance object of the RcNetwork class, we run the following line of code: Upon initialization, the RcNetwork class object builds the reservoir and other necessary matrices. The HPs are passed as an unzipped dictionary to the RcNetwork class. The argument random_state ensures that the random stochastic (statistical) processes generating the network architecture are the same from realization to realization. This allows us to search for stable and optimal architectures. If this was not done, we would generate a different network architecture every single time we ran the code even when the HPs stayed consistent. The feedback argument is crucial for longer predictions as it passes the output of the network at time-step t as an input to the network at time t + 1, which allows the network to make longer and better predictions in general; this is also known as teacher-forcing. Next, we fit our model on unseen data. When the fit method is called, RcTorch iterates over time while building the hidden states using Eq. ( >>> my_rc . f i t ( y = t a r g e t _ t r a i n ) In RcTorch y represents the target time-series which the network is supposed to predict and X represents the input time series. In this case we did not need to enter X because as we are doing a pure prediction task (the default value of X is N one, meaning that the only input is time). j Next we test our model on unseen data. Here y is described by the system of equations ẋ = p, ρ = -sin(x) + 0.5 sin(0.2x) with no noise added. This is achieved by concatenating the two vectors. RcTorch: Testing the model >>> s c o r e , p r e d i c t i o n = my_rc . t e s t ( y = t a r g e t _ t e s t ) The test method fist runs the predict method and subsequently calculates the mean square error (MSE) of the prediction versus the ground truth. The user can pass any other custom loss function by modifying the criterion argument of the test method. k . The test method returns a tuple of the overall loss (the score) and the prediction. Next, we can run the combined_plot method to see our model predictions. While Fig. To improve the model, the force applied to the pendulum can be fed to the RC as input. In this "parameter-aware" case, the force is assumed to be known. In control theory and robotics such known forces are called "observers". Choosing an appropriate activation function is an efficient way to improve the performance of a neural network (such as an RC). For example, we might make the assumption that the forced pendulum problem under consideration is a bounded problem. There are a host of other problems where bounding the output is reasonable, from planetary motion to the movement of a robotic arm. Other systems must obey the conservation of energy. RcTorch allows the user to control the activation functions used throughout the RC, not just in the output. In the following code snippet, multiple activation functions were used instead of one. RcTorch employs multiple activation functions to make hidden states more expressive. Namely, we get more complex dynamics of the states with more activation functions. o m This is the reason for the capital X. By convention, uppercase letters represent matrices, and lowercase letters represent vectors. n tanh is an invertible function. Therefore, we can use it as an output activation function, provided that the data that are fed to the RC lie in the domain [-1,1]. RcTorch automatically scales the data for the user so that this is true, provided the training set and the testing set lie in similar ranges. o We ran a rigorous study of whether multiple activation functions or the output activation function is more critical to finding a lower loss and found that overall having varying activation functions was more impactful. This work can be found in the Appendix. In fact we used a special version of ReLu which is only linear when for some input x, |x| ≤ θ * and otherwise is tanh. >>> my_rc = RcNetwork ( * * hps , r a n d o m _ s t a t e = 2 1 0 , f e e d b a c k = True , o u t p u t _ a c t i v a t i o n = ' t a n h ' , a c t i v a t i o n _ f u n c t i o n = { ' t a n h ' : 0 . 1 , ' r e l u ' : 0 . 9 , ' s i n ' : 0 . 0 5 } ) Above, RcTorch assigns each reservoir node with an activation function with a probability weight proportional to the value of the dictionary above (90% for ReLu, 10% for tanh, 5% for sin). RcTorch re-normalizes these probability weights internally so that they sum to one. -0.5 0.0 0.5 x, p x Figure The trajectory and phase-space plots for this experiment are shown in Fig. So far, we have demonstrated that RcTorch satisfies two of the three of Bengio's criteria for a successful time-dependent model. The RC works with data for a long duration (many discrete time steps) and trains quickly. However, we have not yet demonstrated its performance on noisy data. To test our model on noisy data, we selected a new force f = 0.5000 sin(0.3867t) and generated new data with an odeint integrator. Using a 40-60% train-test split, we fit an RC on 8000 time-steps and predict an additional 12000 time-steps with the same HPs as in the previous section. However, this time we added random uniform noise to the training data where y was perturbed by , which is drawn from a uniform distribution within the range -0.15 and 0.15. In Fig. Overall, low MSE values represented by large swaths of dark color indicate that the RC is robust to changes in force. This implies that the RC hidden states learn something fundamental about the dynamics of the forced pendulum so that we can conduct transfer learning for similar forces. However, there are small regions of the heat-maps with high MSE values. These light colored patches correspond to values of α and ω for which the RC did not perform as well. These regions, where the loss is larger, are found mostly on the edge of resonant behavior (blue patches), for example (α = 0.1, ω = 0.95), force = sin() and (α = 0.5, ω = 0.5), force = sin()cos(). In the next section, we address this issue by solving for new HPs. RcTorch takes some of the best BO methods that have come out of Facebook, Uber, and MIT, and synthesizes them to empower and automate RC. In particular, RcTorch relies on a custom implementation of the TuRBO algorithm in combination with the BoTorch package. Reservoir computing holds great promise for the future of AI research and applications. Here, we introduce RcTorch as the first unified PyTorch RC library with user-friendly hyper-parameter tuning. The library is written to be updated very easily. It is easy to install RcTorch using the command pip install rctorch and to apply it to a new data set. The associated documentation can be found on our github page: https://github.com/blindedjoy/RcTorch or at readthedocs https://rctorch.readthedocs.io/en/latest/Pages/tutorials/forced_pendulum.html. This paper aims to allow researchers all over the world to download RcTorchand use it to rapidly solve problems described by sequential data. j Technically by default if X is not provided to RcTorch, it will default to a vector of ones (X = [1, 1, 1, ...]), though using discrete time-steps X = [0.1, 0.2, 0.3, ...] is also effective.k Although the test method takes target_test as an argument to score the result, target_test is not passed to the predict method p Note that the activation function was assigned as a Python dictionary. q Note that the parameter-aware RC outperforms the pure-prediction RC as expected. r In particular we expressed the force as follows: f (α, ω, t) = α * f (ωt), f ∈ sin(), cos(), sin() cos(). s One problem with RNNs in general is the fact that the timestep interval dt must be fixed. Here, dt was changed from 1/(200π) to 1/(20π).