The transfer matrix formalism is widely used in modeling heat diffusion in layered structures. Due to an intrinsic numerical instability issue, which has not yet drawn enough attention to the heat transfer community, this formalism fails at high heating frequencies and/or in thick structures. Inspired by its success in modeling wave propagation, we develop a numerically-stable scattering matrix framework to model periodic heat diffusion in stratified solid media. As a concreate example, we apply this scattering matrix methodology to the 3 ω method. We first validate our framework using various well-known solutions. Next, we demonstrate the numerical stability of the framework using a configuration that resembles the three-dimensional stacked architecture for chip packing. Last, we propose synthetic "experiments" to exhibit, under certain circumstances, the merits of the scattering matrix formalism in extracting thermal properties. The transfer matrix method has been widely applied to model periodic heating problems in layered structures, since Carslaw and Jaeger developed the analogous heat transfer formalism However, this transfer matrix formalism has an intrinsic numerical instability problem, which has not yet drawn enough attention to the heat transfer community. This problem arises from the fact that one diagonal element of the matrix exponentially decays while the other diagonal element exponentially blows up as the film thickness and/or the heating frequency increases. This issue has long been ignored since it only manifests itself when the heating frequency and/or the total thickness of the multilayer stack increases to some critical value that was of no practical interest. For example, for a SiO2/Cu (50nm/50nm) alternating multilayer stack, the transfer matrix approach starts to break down only when the heating frequency increases to beyond GHz for microns thick stack (see, for example, Fig. On the other hand, the wave community had long been suffered from this numerical instability problem Here we present the scattering matrix formalism to model periodic heat diffusion in stratified solid media. In Section II, we highlight the numerical instability problem of the transfer matrix scheme, and introduce the scattering matrix formalism using the one-dimensional diffusion equation. We consider the most general scenario in which the heater line is buried inside the multilayer structure. In Section III, we generalize the scattering matrix framework to multidimensions, with the 3 ω method as a concrete example. As sanity checks, we verify the framework using widely known solutions. In Section IV, we demonstrate the numerical stability of the scattering matrix formalism using a configuration that mimics the three-dimensional integration technology for processor architecture design. In Section V, we demonstrate with synthetic "experiments" that, in certain scenarios, this scattering matrix formalism could be employed to extract thermal properties, which is challenging for other schemes. In this section, we review the widely used transfer matrix method to solve heat diffusion problems We start with the one-dimensional (1D) heat diffusion equation, where D(≡ k C ⁄ ) is the thermal diffusivity, k is thermal conductivity, and C is the volumetric specific heat. According to the Linear Response Theorem Substituting Eq. 2 into Eq. 1, one obtains The general solution of Eq. 3 in layer j of a multilayer structure (Fig. where the coefficients, a j and b j , depend on the reference point, here z j . The magnitude of the complex wave vector is the inverse of the thermal penetration depth where the transfer matrix, T j,j+1 = E j,j+1 × Φ j , bridges the temperature and heat flux between layers j and j +1 (Fig. is the effusivity matrix, and is the phase matrix. Here e j = √ k j C j is the effusivity, and d j is the thickness of layer j. The phase matrix (Eq. 8) contains both exponentially decaying and growing entries, which leads to numerical instability issues when the heating frequency and/or the total thickness of the stratified medium increases to some critical values (see, for example, open circles in Fig. Motivated by the treatment of the propagation of electromagnetic waves in thick and lossy systems which chooses a different reference point, z = z j + d j , for b j (see Fig. where S j,j+1 is the so-called scattering matrix Analogous to the scattering matrix formalism in electromagnetics By definition, S 1,1 is an identity matrix. Therefore, the key here is to obtain S i,j+1 from S i,j . First, for any layer i that is above layer j (Fig. in which, for brevity, we neglect the reference points for the coefficients, a i , b i a j , and b j . Second, combining the temperature (Eq. 9) and its corresponding flux in layer j, one obtains where and γ j = k j,z u j (14) Third, applying Eq. 12 to layer j+1, i.e., replacing the index j with j+1, and assuming continuity condition for both the temperature and flux at the interface between layers j and j+1, one obtains where I j,j+1 = M j -1 × M j+1 (16) is the interface matrix. To incorporate the thermal contact resistance, R c,j-j+1 " (with SI units of [m 2 KW -1 ]), between layers j and j + 1, one updates Eq. 16 to where At last, combining Eqs. 11 and 15, one develops the recursive relations to obtain S i,j+1 from S i,j , as derived in Appendix B and summarized in Table We consider a general case, in which the driving flux (q htr e iω H t ) is exerted at the interface between layers j and j + 1 by a heater with negligible thickness (Fig. We discuss two types of commonly used boundary conditions, an adiabatic boundary condition and an isothermal boundary condition. In the latter we assume the top and bottom boundaries are fixed at the same T ref. , which results in θ bdy = 0. For the top boundary, one has Likewise, for the bottom boundary one arrives at where c bdy = 1 or -1 for an adiabatic or isothermal boundary condition. If the top or bottom layer is semi-infinite, Eq. 20 or 21 reduces to which is equivalent to set c bdy = 0. We summarize different values of c bdy according to different boundary conditions, Using the recursive relations (Table First, using Eq. 11, one obtains and where S 1,j and S j+1,N can be obtained using the recursion relations in Table In section II, we develop the scatter matrix formalism for the one-dimensional (1D) diffusion equation. We now generalize the framework to two-dimensional (2D) in this section, using the 3 ω method as a concrete example. Although the original 3ω method was derived in a cylindrical coordinate Isolating the time dependence and performing the Fourier cosine transform (along the x-axis, see Fig. where n xz = k x k z ⁄ is the anisotropy ratio, and k x and k z are the in-plane and the cross-plane thermal conductivities. As compared to Eqs. 3 and 5, Eq. 30 is now an ordinary differential equation with an updated complex wave vector where is the thermal diffusivity of layer j along z-axis. For the general case where the heater is located at the interface between layers j and j+1 (Fig. where the normalized coefficients, a j+1 ′ = a j+1 /q ̃htr and b j+1 ′ = b j+1 /q ̃htr , are computed using Table Section II-B gives a recipe to implement the scattering matrix formalism, in which the heater is embedded inside the sample (Fig. First, treat the air/vacuum above the sample as a semi-infinite layer Next, replace, in Eq. 28 and Eq. 29, both the subscripts 1 and j with 0 in matrices S 1,j and S j+1,N , the complex wave vector u j (or, u ̃j in the 2D scenario here), and the layer thickness d j . Therefore one obtains α = 0 (Eq. 28), regardless of the boundary condition. On the other hand, β (Eq. 29) depends on the boundary condition and S 1,N that can be obtained from the recursion relations in Table where γ ̃1 = k 1 u ̃1 is defined in Eq. 14. We verify the framework using widely known solutions, as discussed in detail in the following and summarized in Table We consider two types of heaters. First, if the line heater is infinitely-narrow, one has where P 0 is the root-mean-square value of the Joule heating power (with SI units of [W]). Performing the Fourier cosine transform to Eq. 36, one obtains Second, if the line heater has a finite width, w, one has and its corresponding Fourier cosine transform In this scenario, one has S j+1,N = S 1,1 = I , and thus β = S 1,1 (2,1) = 0 for a semi-infinite substrate (Eq. 29). For an infinitely-narrow heater, substituting Eq. 37 and β = 0 into Eq. 35, one obtains where K 0 is the modified Bessel function of the second kind. For an isotropic substrate, k x = k z = k and thus n xz ≡ k x /k ,z = 1, Eq. 40 reduces to which recovers the well-known solution of the classical 3ω method and its corresponding isotropic form, which recovers Eq. 8 of Ref. [24]. If the thermal penetration depth, is much larger than the half width of the heater, i.e. L penetr. ≫ w/2, Eq. 43 could be further simplified to which recovers Eq. 15 of Ref. [26] or Eq. 1 of Ref. [27] . ̃2 e -u ̃1d 1 . Following the same procedure above, one recovers the solution using the transfer matrix formalism (Eq. 1 of Ref. [6]), where with 1 denoting the film, and 2 denoting the substrate (see the schematic in Table . Equation 46 can be regrouped to θ htr-on-top,avg. = θ sub. + θ film , (48) where θ sub. is computed using Eq. 42, and θ film = θ film,1D × s, (49) where the dimensionless scaling factor, s (see Appendix E), indicates how much deviation the 1D approximation, is away from the true θ film . As compared to previous works This configuration has to be solved using the general framework (Eqs. 32 and 33, instead of Eq. 35). Here we again consider a line heater with finite width, w. Using Tables I-II, we compute the S-matrices, and correspondingly α and β , and finally where B 21 ± and B 34 ± are evaluated using Eq. 47 with updated subscripts. Note here 1, 2, 3, and 4 denote the upper substrate, the upper film, the lower film, and the lower substrate, respectively (see the schematic in Table (54) If one further assumes isotropic properties, Eq. 54 reduces to which recovers Eq. B2 of Ref. [28]. To demonstrate the numerical stability of the scattering matrix scheme, here we consider a 20 μm -wide line heater sandwiched by two identical superlattice-onsubstrate structures (Fig. Figure In addition to the failure for thick structures, the transfer matrix scheme is also destined to break down at high heating frequencies. This is confirmed by Fig. We briefly comment on the periodic heating in the GHz regime and beyond. First, this high frequency heating is becoming realistic in integrated circuits in the context that the clock frequency of CPU has already been in the same order of magnitude. Second, the thermal wave in this regime is well localized inside the top layer for f H > f H,c . For example, the critical penetration depth, L penetr.,c = √D Si /2πf H,c ≈ 6.6nm (Eq. 44), which is much smaller than the thickness of the upper and lower SiO2 layers adjacent to the heater, d SiO 2 =50 nm. Correspondingly, an approximate solution is to treat the SiO2 layers as semi-infinite substrates and compute the temperature rise of the heater using Eq. 43. Third, although the ballistic phonon transport should be considered in this regime In addition to the application to the complicated multilayer structure in Fig. For all three scenarios (rows 1-3 of Fig. Note in this 1D approximation approach, R film and thus k film include the effect of the thermal contact resistance between the film and the substrate, R c,SiO 2 -Si " . In the second (2 nd column) or the third (3 rd column) approach, we treat k film as the only free parameter to fit Eq. 46 (or Eq. 35) to the synthetic "experiments" using the transfer matrix (or the scattering matrix) formalism, respectively. The first scenario (upper row of Fig. The second scenario (middle row of Fig. As can be seen from Fig. We qualitatively resolve this seemingly paradoxical problem using the following two-step argument. First, replace the SiO2 film in the first scenario (1 st row of Fig. Therefore, in this high-k -film-on-substrate scenario, the 1D approximation approach fails. We will return to this interpretation quantitatively in the context of Fig. We now apply the transfer matrix and the scattering matrix methods to fit for k Diamond,z . Since k Si and C Si had been accurately measured and well documented, the sensitivity analysis in Appendix G indicates that, among the remaining input parameters, k Diamond,z is most sensitive to R c,Diamond-Si " and k Diamond,x . We obtain R c,Diamond-Si " by applying the 1D approximation to a 0.1μm -thick diamond film on silicon substrate configuration, in which R film is dominated by R c,Diamond-Si " (see Appendix G for more details). We further assume k Diamond,x is obtained using the suspended microfabricated-device method with typical measurement uncertainty of 10% The last scenario (lower row of Fig. At last, we turn to quantifying our qualitative interpretation to the dilemma in Figs. The fact that Π 3 ≪ 1 , Π 5 < 1 , and L penetr.,sub. ≪ d sub. may suggest that 1D approximation is justified. However, Fig. To circumvent the intrinsic numerical instability problem of the transfer matrix formalism, we have generalized the scattering matrix methodology of wave propagation to model periodic heat diffusion in layered structures. We applied this scattering matrix framework to the 3 ω method, and validated it with various wellknown solutions. Then we demonstrated its numerical stability in modeling the periodic heating of a thick 3D stacked architecture for chip packing at high heating frequency. We also proposed synthetic "experiments" to show that this framework can be used to extract thermal properties in certain circumstances when the conventional techniques break down. We conclude by commenting on the potential application of this scattering matrix framework to two other popular experimental techniques, the time-domain thermoreflectance (TDTR) Recursive relations to obtain S i,j+1 from S i,j (see detailed derivation in Appendix B. By definition, S i,i is an identity matrix. The interface matrix, I j,j+1 , is defined in Eq. 16 (or Eq. 17 if considering contact resistance), and the complex wave vector, u j , is defined in Eq. 5. For the 3ω method, u j should be replaced with u ̃j (Eq. 31). S i,j+1 (1,1) S i,j (1,1)e -u j d j I j,j+1 ( TABLE II. Expressions of normalized coefficients of the temperature fields (Eq. 9), a j ′ = a j /q htr and b j ′ = b j /q htr , for the general scenario (Fig. where M j , u j , α and β are defined in Eqs. 13, 5, 28 and 29, respectively. If the driving flux is applied on top of the sample (see, for example, the first two schematics in TABLE Input * Assumed to obtain from separate measurement using the microfabricated suspended device method, with representative uncertainty # See Appendix G. 1D Planar Heating 3ω Method " = 0. " are given in Section III-C.