The field of quantum information processing offers secure communication protected by the laws of quantum mechanics and is on the verge of finding wider application for information transfer of sensitive data. To overcome the obstacle of inadequate cost-efficiency, extensive research is being done on the many components required for high data throughput using quantum key distribution (QKD). Aiming for an application-oriented solution, we report on the realization of a multichannel QKD system for plug-and-play high-bandwidth secure communication at telecom wavelength. For this purpose, a rack-sized multichannel superconducting nanowire single photon detector (SNSPD) system, as well as a highly parallelized time-correlated single photon counting (TCSPC) unit have been developed and linked to an FPGA-controlled QKD evaluation setup allowing for continuous operation and achieving high secret key rates using a coherent-one-way protocol. As secure communication becomes increasingly important for today's society, encryption technology becomes more and more omnipresent. Especially recent advances in the field of quantum computing put advanced classical encryption approaches such as the RSA public-key cryptosystem at risk Independently from the detector technology, capable readout electronics are required to be able to scale up in performance or bandwidth respectively, particularly if time-bin encoding is used on multiple channels. With modern time-correlated single photon counting (TCSPC) units based on time-to-digital converters (TDCs), dead times as short as 650 ps with picosecond timing resolution can be achieved for multiple inputs As outlined earlier, one field, which will profit from highly parallelized single photon detection, is the field of QKD. In combination with the one-time-pad (OTP), provable information-theoretic secure communication becomes possible Making use of the inherent scalability of advanced SNSPDs and modern TCSPC electronics towards high bandwidth QKD, we designed a highly parallel architecture for multiplexing with up to 64 channels. To handle the resulting data rates in real-time, we furthermore designed a new generation of time tagging electronics that can deliver their data streams not only to a host PC but also to an external FPGA through high-speed serial links capable of handling a total photon rate of up to 1.6 GHz. This SNSPD and TCSPC technology was then utilized to implement QKD, namely the coherent one-way (COW) QKD protocol. The COW protocol, which was introduced by Gisin et al. in 2004 where Q is the quantum bit error rate (QBER) in the time basis, and μ is the mean photon number of a pulse. The secret key rate S can then be calculated from r and the sifted key rate R to be S = rR. In the presented work, the above-described COW protocol was modified such that multiple QKD signals can be transmitted simultaneously employing WDM. The implemented design for a simplified WDM QKD system is shown in Figure To decrease the complexity and cost of the QKD system, a simplified receiver design was developed and implemented, where the different QKD channels share components, as will be elaborated in the following. First, the incoming signal is split by a 10-dB fiber-coupler to be evaluated in the time or phase basis, with the largest portion of the signal being routed to the time base measurement. A straightforward approach for multiplexing multiple QKD channels based on time-phase coding would be to use one DLI on the receiver side per quantum communication channel. Thus, multiplexing multiple quantum channels would result in a huge number of DLIs. One approach to reducing the number of DLIs would be to apply the so-called "colorless" interferometric technique Here, we demonstrate that a single DLI on the receiver side is sufficient for multiple quantum communication channels with a different technique. Instead of using phase modulators for phase stabilization, wavelength tuning of the deployed commercial off-the-shelf DFB Lasers was used. The tuning resolution, stability, and range of the DFB lasers allow for maintaining high interference contrasts that enable reliable QKD transmission. With this technique, the DLI can be implemented in the signal path before de-multiplexing, such that only one DLI is necessary for evaluating the phase basis. For the time basis, the signal is directly multiplexed and forwarded to the SNSPDs. The disadvantage of the need to employ two de-multiplexers is largely outweighed by the economization of DLIs. The detection of single photons is still one of the major challenges of today's quantum technologies and brought up different approaches like the PMT, SPAD, TES and the SNSPD. If highest performance is required, SNSPDs offer superior performance that is beneficial for demanding applications such as long-range QKD. On the downside, they are arguably costefficient and scalable and thus are rarely used in commercial implementations Addressing the previously mentioned technological challenges, we developed a compact detector system based on waveguide integrated superconducting nanowire single-photon detectors (WI-SNSPDs), allowing for scalability of up to 64 channels, which is depicted in Figure The system is designed to operate up to 64 detection channels in parallel, but during the integration into the QKD experiment setup, the configuration was reduced to 32 channels due to issues with the cooling system. The cause for the monitored instabilities could be identified as the changed laboratory operation environment that reduced the cooling power and resulted in an increased base temperature of 3.8 K with a constant drift towards higher temperatures. Due to the observed drift of the cooling system, the number of detection channels, unfortunately, had to be further reduced to 22 to maintain detection performance within the required specification. For the detector readout with high throughput time tagging, we developed a new scalable system with up to 64 independent but synchronized channels. The original concept of time tagging TCSPC builds on a modification of classic TCSPC electronics permitting just start-stop measurements and immediate histograms. For the first time-tagging instruments, the start-stop timing circuitry was used as previously, providing the required picosecond time resolution for TCSPC. In order to maintain the full information of the temporal patterns of photon arrivals, the events were no longer stored as histograms but as separate records. In addition, a coarser timing was performed on each photon event with respect to the start of the experiment In addition to the 64 regular timing channels, the system provides a common synchronization channel. This channel serves as a timing reference in classic histogramming measurements and the so-called T3 mode, which is explained further below. The sync channel provides the same resolution and dead time as the regular timing channels and may, if no common sync is required, be used as an additional detector channel. In order to support high sync rates, e.g., form a fast laser, the sync channel provides a programmable divider permitting sync rates as high as 1.2 GHz. Furthermore, in addition to the high-resolution timing inputs, the TCSPC electronics provide four inputs for TTL signals that are captured at a lower resolution and get inserted in the data stream exactly like regular timing events. These low-resolution signals can serve as markers for different schemes of secondary synchronization, e.g., representing spatial information of scanning devices or control events in a QKD system. As in our previous systems, a central crystal clock ensures that all timing inputs have a common time base. Optionally, the clock may also be fed in as an industry standard 10 MHz signal from an external source such as an atomic clock or a GPS receiver. The same standard clock signal is also available as an output so that other devices can be daisy-chained. Similarly, the new time tagger provides a White Rabbit interface, allowing long-distance remote synchronization over Gbit Ethernet fiber links that may also carry regular TCP/IP traffic. It was previously shown that the White Rabbit protocol could achieve a synchronization precision of a few tens of picoseconds The data acquisition schemes of the new time tagging system follow proven concepts For each channel, the timing records from the TDCs are stored in separate front end FiFo buffers, which are fast enough to accept records at the maximum speed of the TDCs of 1.53 GHz. Only if the space of up to 2048 records in the FiFo runs out events are dropped, which will be notified to the host computer by a corresponding flag. An additional, considerably larger FiFo buffer, in which the temporally sorted T2 records from all channels are queued, can store up to 268,435,456 event records and is continuously read via a USB 3.1 Gen 1 interface by the host PC. The FiFo input can cover bursts of a much higher rate and allows to maintain the data integrity if the average data rate to the host is not exceeded for a long time. In the case of such a FiFo overrun, the measurement is aborted. Nevertheless, sustained average rates of 88 Mcps (shared by all input channels) were achieved with a recent host system (Windows 10 Intel Core i7 7740X @4.3 GHz). The T3 mode is conceptually similar to the TCSPC histogramming mode. It is typically used when the sync channel is needed for an excitation source of a high repetition rate. Frequently used mode-locked laser systems with tens of MHz sync rate would overrun the FiFo buffer very quickly if processed in T2 mode. In T3 mode, only the timing records but not the actual sync events are forwarded. The timing records in T3 mode contain a coarse time tag derived from the counted sync pulses and a high-resolution time difference of the start-stop measurement between sync and photon event. The data records are held in a 32-bit format, also including information on the channel number. If the sync count exceeds what the limited number of bits can hold, an overflow record is inserted, allowing unlimited measurement times as in T2 mode. The covered time span of the high-resolution start-stop measurements depends on the chosen resolution R for the time bins of 5 ps to 41.9 μs. With a width of 15 bits for the start-stop record, the resulting time span covers a period of 32768 × R, which corresponds to 163.84 ns at the highest resolution and 1372 ms at the lowest resolution. Events of even higher time delay than this time span are not recognized by the system, just as for the classical histogramming mode that is similarly limited by the number of time bins. The T3 mode records are read by the host system from the same FiFo as for the T2 mode, achieving burst buffering and similar maximum average count rates for every individual channel. In contrast to T2 mode, the bus is not loaded with transfers of sync events. The USB interface provides good performance and flexibility for many use cases. However, when targeting very high count rates in setups using all 64 channels, as in the QKD application here, its bandwidth becomes limiting. Furthermore, the host computer must keep up with the generated data, which can be a challenge when running complex real-time data processing algorithms. In order to address this issue, an external FPGA Interface (EFI) was developed. It uses two or more high-speed serial links (6 Gbits/s each) to transfer data to an external FPGA, where fast parallel data processing and I/O can be performed with virtually unlimited flexibility. Custom logic can be written in VHDL, Verilog or any other language supported by Xilinx Vivado, it only needs to be connected to a set of high-level data stream interfaces. The EFI can deliver raw timing data or pre-processed T2 or T3 mode data. Through a loopback interface, custom data generated by the external FPGA can even be transmitted back to the time tagger unit and retrieved through the USB interface. Deep customization of the gateware IP is supported, as all required sources for the external FPGA are made openly available. The most convenient mode of operation of the EFI is to T2 or T3 mode over USB, only with higher bandwidth. It uses two physical serial links aggregated as one 12 Gbits/s logical link over which data is streamed in T2 or T3 format, with records of all (up to 64) channels temporally ordered. To achieve this temporal ordering, the data of all timing modules is passed through the main unit for sorting and aggregation. The fastest mode of operation of the EFI is the T2 direct mode (T2DM), where each of the four time tagger modules (16 channels each) delivers its data directly via two serial links (6 Gbits/s each) to the external FPGA. Using T2DM, it is possible to process more than 1.6 G events/s using all 64+1 channels. It also reduces the latency between measurement and availability in the external FPGA by 80 % compared to the regular T2/T3 streams. The downside is that in this case, the data is not temporally ordered and must be sorted in the external FPGA if their temporal relation across the individual timing modules matters. The T2DM streams are based on the semantics of the T2 mode. To evaluate the QKD transmission, a test pattern with a random but repeating pattern was modulated with the MZM. The transmitted QKD test pattern consists of 96 symbols, where the symbols "0" and "1" occur 43 times each and the Decoy symbols 10 times to roughly match the 10-dB fiber-coupler used as the receiver's basis choice. The symbols are randomly distributed within these 96 symbols. The evaluation was performed in real-time on the previously mentioned external FPGA (here, a Digilent Genesys 2 Kintex®-7 FPGA development board). The evaluation was implemented in FPGA logic (not in a softcore). The data was accumulated over a one-second interval. The accumulated data was then evaluated during the next time interval, in parallel to accumulating data for the next interval. Note that the evaluation took only around 20 msec of processing time, which allows for additional or more advanced processing if needed. The evaluation was performed by comparing either the known sending pattern (for the time basis) or the consequential interference pattern (for the phase basis) with the pattern received by Bob. For that purpose, the incoming signal was measured in T3 mode. The clock signal was transmitted by the sender and clicked with every repetition of the sending pattern. The detection signals were sorted by the time slot to build a histogram, which was then compared to the sending or interference pattern, respectively. By counting and processing those events that agreed or disagreed with the sending-or interference pattern, the sifted key rate, Quantum Bit Error Rate (QBER) and visibility were calculated. Since the relative shift between Alice's sent pattern and Bob's received pattern varies with the transmission distance, the evaluation was repeated for all possible shifts. Then, the smallest QBER and highest visibility correspond to the correct shift and thus yield the correct results. Based on measurement results, the secret key rate was then calculated offline. Note that in order to improve the QKD performance further, detections within the first and last 40 ps of every 400 ps long slot were discarded and ignored in the evaluation. This served as a filter to only process the most unambiguous photon clicks, thus decreasing QBER and increasing visibility at the cost of only a small decline in the sifted key rate. As a result, both the secret key rate and the range of the QKD transmission increased. The new time tagging system was tested in various scenarios to verify functionality and timing accuracy. Even though the digital TDC resolution is fixed at 5 ps, a timing uncertainty (jitter) due to noise is always present. This is the case even for digital signals because of the finite slope of the signal transitions. In order to test this quantity for the prototype design, the following test was performed. A test generator (CG635, Stanford Research Systems) delivered pulses of 10 MHz repetition rate with rise/fall times of 370 ps (10 to 90 %). The steep transitions ensure that the time measurement results are only insignificantly influenced by noise, as shown by earlier measurements on TDCs with substantially higher resolution and precision Each peak at 15, 25, 35, and 45 ns represents the histogram obtained for one channel. Using the software adjustable offset of each channel, the 10 ns spacings between the peaks were set arbitrarily for a clear view. Numerical analysis of the distributions shows that the r.m.s. timing jitter is typically 43 ps. It should be noted that this is the overall error, including the sync channel and the respective detector channel. The single channel measurement jitter would correspond to 43 ps / √2, which is about 30 ps. The next important key characteristic is the differential nonlinearity (DNL), which is a measure of the systematic error of the bin widths of the TDCs. For a quantification measurement of the DNL, the correlation of two different pulse one as sync reference with a frequency of 10 Mhz (Staford Research System, CG635), and one as independent signal source with a 1 MHz pulse train and period dithering of 8% (Dallas Semiconductor, DS1090), were used. The expected start-stop histogram should therefore show uniform counts for the different time bins, only deviated by the statistical or systematical (DNL) error. To keep the statistical error at a minimum, the experiment was run until a total number of about 10 6 counts was reached (compare Figure For an investigation of the system performance in a QKD application, the multichannel SNSPD unit and the multichannel time tagger unit were combined with the COW-QKD setup. In between Alice's and Bob's setup, an optical attenuator was used to experimentally simulate the transmission losses of common glass fibers to evaluate the long-range QKD capabilities. The basic level for the attenuation was set to a value according to the desired average number of photons per pulse of μ ≤ 0.1 for all channels to ensure a single-photon level intensity. For a back-to-back transmission, no further attenuation was added and sifted key rate, QBER, visibility and secret key rate were measured and tracked for a period of 35 minutes (Figure To evaluate the long-range capabilities of the QKD system, additional dampening was added to simulate the losses induced by optical fibers. The system achieves secret key rates starting from 13.2 Mbit\s for all channels without additional loss and can maintain operation for attenuation of up to 26.6 dB with a secret key rate of 3.8 Mbit\s (Figure The different QKD channels should, to some extent, show very similar long-range QKD capabilities since the dark count rate, the main limiting factor for this performance aspect, was measured between 100 to 150 Hz for all detection channels before any QKD measurement was carried out. Due to the increasing temperature, the DCR began to deteriorate for some channels, increasing the window of DCRs to 0.1-10 kHz. For the highest attenuation of 26.6 dB, only one QKD channel remained operational. The focus of this work was to implement scalable solutions for the different parts of a COW-QKD on a high number of channels. A QKD setup was built using a COW protocol utilizing WDM to demonstrate QKD on up to 40 wavelength channels in parallel. For the detection of photons, a mobile air-cooled cryogenic single photon detection system offering up to 64 channels was developed. In a first configuration, 37 single photon counting channels satisfy the requirements for ultrafast COW-QKD. Secondly, to sense and time tag the signals of up to 64 detectors, a new scalable TCSPC system with 64 independent but synchronized channels was developed and thoroughly characterized. The TCSPC unit can register up to 1.6 Giga event/s with a timing jitter of 30 ps. To evaluate the extremely high data rates at once, the system features a high-bandwidth serial link interface that was later used to process the time bins of a QKD transmission with an FPGA evaluation board. The final QKD experiment was performed by combining the novel multichannel approaches in a single rack structure. Due to unexpected thermal limits in the cooling system of the detector unit, a successful QKD transmission was carried out on 9 wavelength channels utilizing 18 single photon counting channels with a total maximum back-to-back secret key rate of 13.2 Mbit\s or 3.82 kbit\s for 26.6 dB attenuation. Disclosure. The authors declare no conflicts of interest.