Applying the Helmholtz Decomposition theorem to linearized General Relativity leads to a gauge-invariant formulation where the transverse-traceless part of the metric perturbation describes gravitational waves in matter. Gravitational waves incident on a superconductor can be described by a linear London-like constituent equation characterized by a "gravitational shear modulus" and a corresponding plasma frequency and penetration depth. Electric-like and magnetic-like gravitational tensor fields are defined in terms of the strain field of a gravitational wave. It is shown that in the DC limit, the magnetic-like tensor field is expelled from the superconductor in a gravitational Meissner-like effect. The Cooper pair density is described by the Ginzburg-Landau free energy density embedded in curved spacetime. The ionic lattice is modeled by quantum harmonic oscillators coupled to gravitational waves and characterized by quasi-energy eigenvalues for the phonon modes. The formulation predicts the possibility of a dynamical Casimir effect since the zero-point energy of the ionic lattice phonons is found to be modulated by the gravitational wave, in a quantum analog of a "Weber-bar effect." Applying periodic thermodynamics and the Debye model in the low-temperature limit leads to a free energy density for the ionic lattice. Lastly, we relate the gravitational strain of space to the strain of matter to show that the response to a gravitational wave is far less for the Cooper pair density than for the ionic lattice. This predicts a charge separation effect in the superconductor as a result of the gravitational wave. The fundamental motivation for this paper is to examine how gravity interacts with quantum matter, yielding experimentally testable predictions. In particular, we de-scribe a mechanism which quantifies how gravitational waves interact with superconductors, and may even be expelled by them in a gravitational Meissner-like effect. In addition, we investigate a "charge separation effect," also dubbed the "Heisenberg-Coulomb effect," which was first proposed in In contrast to this, each ion in its lattice site can respond locally to the gravitational wave, and thereby the ionic lattice can oscillate in its deformation accordingly. It is found that the zero-point energy of the phonon modes of the lattice dominates the response of the lattice to the wave. The difference in motion of the Cooper pairs (negatively charged), and the lattice ions (positively charged) results in the charge separation effect. According to It is well established in General Relativity, that gravitational waves can be described by the metric perturbation, h T T i j , in the transverse-traceless (TT) gauge. This gauge eliminates unphysical degrees of freedom from the metric leaving only the "plus" and "cross" polarization wave fields, h ⊕ and h ⊗ , respectively. Therefore we begin with a metric which is constructed in accordance with the Helmholtz Decomposition theorem as shown in Here we motivate a constituent equation for gravitational waves interacting with a superconductor by considering an analogy with the London constituent equation in electromagnetism. The London equation for superconductors is known to be J s = -Λ L A, where the supercurrent J s is induced by the vector potential A. Here the London constant is known to be Λ L = n s e 2 /m e , with n s being the number density of Cooper pairs, e the electron charge, and m e the electron mass. The negative sign in this relationship implies that electromagnetic fields are expel l ed from a superconductor. For the case of a gravitational wave incident on a superconductor, we also develop a linear relationship between h ττ i j , the transverse-traceless strain field for an incident gravitational wave, and T ττ i j , the transverse-traceless stress induced by the wave 2 . The constituent equation is where μ G is a positive, real constant with the dimensions of energy density. It can be thought of as a gravitational shear modulus which determines how much stress, T ττ i j , is produced within a superconductor by an incident gravitational wave field, h ττ i j . Similar to the case with the London equation in electromagnetism, the relationship (1) follows as a direct result of the fact that particles within a superconductor (namely, Cooper pairs and lattice ions) undergo dissipationless acceleration due to the gravitational wave field. This dissipationless nature follows from 1 Note that the fact that there exists a BCS energy gap that prevents dissipation by low-lying energy states nearby to the BCS ground state. Again, similar to the London equation, the negative sign relating T ττ i j and h ττ i j would imply gravitational waves are expelled from a superconductor in a gravitational Meissner-like effect. It will be shown in the following section that this Meissner-like expulsion leads to an associated plasma frequency and penetration depth for gravitational waves incident on a superconductor. It is shown in where κ = 8πG/c 4 . We can insert (1) into (2), and consider a monochromatic plane wave propagating in the z-direction given by h ττ i j (z, t ) = A ττ i j e i (kz-ωt ) where A ττ i j is a constant amplitude tensor. This leads to a dispersion relation given by It is pointed out in We can define a complex wave number as k = K + i α, where K and α are real quantities, and insert this into the plane wave solution. Separating the real and imaginary parts of the phase gives h ττ i j (z, t ) = A ττ i j e -αz e i (K z-ωt ) . Here we see that the wave falls off exponentially with distance, where α is the exponential decay factor. The square of the wave number is is only real, then we must have either K = 0 or α = 0. For K = 0, we use (3) to solve for α and define a frequencydependent penetration depth as δ G ≡ 1/α. This gives the following solution. where An exponential decay solution implies that gravitational waves are expel l ed from the superconductor in a gravitational Meissner-like effect, where δ G characterizes the depth that gravitational waves penetrate the superconductor. Note the critical role of μ G in determining the value of this depth. In later sections, we will formally develop the constituent equation ( Recall that using the electromagnetic London constituent equation, J = -Λ L A, and taking temporal and spatial derivatives, leads to equations involving the electric and magnetic fields within a superconductor given as For a sinusoidal current density, we have ∂ t J ∝ ωJ. Therefore, in the DC limit (ω → 0), the first equation above requires that E → 0. This implies that in the DC limit, the electric field vanishes completely throughout the entire superconductor and only a magnetic field remains. It can also be shown that the magnetic field satisfies a Yukawalike equation given as The solution to this equation is B (z) = B 0 e -z/λ L where z is the distance from the surface to the interior of the superconductor, and λ L is the London penetration depth. This result implies that the magnetic field is expelled from the interior of the superconductor which is referred to as the Meissner effect. Here we find an analogous Meissner-like effect for the DC limit of gravitational waves in a superconductor. First note that for the case of gravitational waves in the far field, 4 the geodesic equation of motion (to first order in 4 It is shown in the metric perturbation and second order in velocity) is Recall that in electromagnetism, the propagating degrees of freedom are E = -∂ t A and B = ∇ × A which are the temporal and spatial derivatives of the vector potential, respectively. By analogy, in Using these, we can write the geodesic equation in Hence we find that the electric-like and magnetic-like tensor fields defined in (10) determine the physical motion of test particles in the presence of gravitational waves. 5 Next we will use these definitions to identify a Meissner-like effect for gravitational waves in the DC limit. Taking temporal and spatial derivatives of the London-like gravitational constituent equation in These equations are directly analogous to the constituent equations in 5 Similarly, the geodesic deviation equation for two test particles separated initially by a distance L i in the presence of a gravitational wave (to linear order in the metric and first order in velocty) can be written in terms of E i j and B i j k as where we have chosen the local Lorentz frame of one of the test particles. This is essentially an Ampere-like law in the sense that a spatial derivative of a magnetic-like tensor field is proportional to a source term plus a time-derivative of the electric-like tensor field. For sinusoidal stress, the DC limit requires E i j → 0. Taking a spatial derivative of ( This is a Yukawa-like equation similar to which is consistent with the DC limit of the gravitational penetration depth found in In this section, we will formulate the response of the Cooper pair density to a gravitational wave using the Ginzburg-Landau (GL) free energy density embedded in curved space-time. First recall that the non-relativistic GL 6 Although there is a Meissner-like effect for the gravitational wave strain field in the DC limit, there is no corresponding Meissner-like effect for Earth's gravitational field. This is due to the fact that the gravitational field of the Earth can be shown to satisfy a Helmholtz-like equation rather than a Yukawa-like equation in a superconductor. Therefore, a superconductor does not permit the shielding of Earth's gravitational field. where m = 2m e , q = 2e, α and β are phenomenological parameters, and ψ is a complex order parameter. (We exclude the contribution of the magnetic field energy density.) To obtain a GL free energy density with coupling to gravitational fields, we begin with the relativistic invariant, g μν π μ π ν = -m 2 c 2 , where π μ = E /c, p i is the kinetic four-momentum. Expanding the metric as g μν = η μν + h μν , solving for the energy, remaining to first order in the metric perturbation, and remaining to second order in velocity, gives For gravitational waves in the far-field, we can reduce the metric perturbation to just the transverse-traceless part so that h μ0 = 0 and h i j = h ττ i j . Also, in the non-relativistic limit, it is standard to drop the rest energy, mc 2 , giving 7 We now find the Helmholtz free energy, F = -k B T ln (Z ) , where the partition function for a canonical ensemble is given by Z = n exp -βE n , with E n being the energy modes of the system and β = (k B T ) -1 . For a superconductor, all the Cooper pairs are considered as condensed into a Bose-Einstein condensate where the particles are in the zero-momentum ground state and therefore behave as effectively a single coherent particle. In that case, the Helmholtz free energy is equivalent to the energy in (19). To describe a superconductor, we can use a procedure similar to Ginzburg-Landau. We introduce a complex order parameter, ψ, as well as a quadratic potential, α ψ 2 , and a quartic self-coupling term, β ψ 4 . Also, to formulate the free energy density in curved space-time 8 , we use 7 Dropping mc 2 allows (20) to reduce to (17) in the absence of a gravitational wave as expected. In fact, mc 2 should not appear in the Helmholtz free energy (20) since the rest energy is not an accessible energy of the system (in this context). 8 For a relativistic covariant form of the Ginzburg-Landau equation in flat space-time, refer to Section 2.1 of the coordinate volume expressed in terms of the proper volume as dV = dV pr oper / -g ττ , where -g ττ is the Jacobian and g ττ is the determinant of the metric in terms of the transverse-traceless part of the metric perturbation. Using the notation F GL = F -F n , we can write the GL free energy density with respect to proper volume as where π i = -i ∂ iq A i for coupling to electromagnetism. If we define a quantum stress as then we notice that the coupling of the gravitational wave field to the quantum stress of the superconductor has the form h ττ i j T i j which is consistent with the coupling found in The GL complex order parameter can be written as ψ = n s exp i p 0 • r , where n s is the number density of Cooper pairs, and p 0 is the momentum eigenvector in the ground state. Since the Cooper pairs are in a zeromomentum eigenstate p 0 = 0 , then ψ * ψ = n s which is a constant. Therefore, when using π i = -i ∂ iq A i in (20), we find that all the derivatives vanish and we obtain Now to consider the work done on a system due to a gravitational strain, h i j , causing a stress, T i j , we use W = T i j d h i j , where W is the work density (or work per unit volume). This means that T i j = d W /d h i j . By the work-energy theorem, we recognize that work done by the system must reduce the internal energy density so that ∆U = -W . We also use the thermodynamic relation dU = T d S -P dV with the Helmholtz free energy being F = U -T S. When stresses and strains are present, then the Helmholtz free energy density satisfies the relation d F = -Sd T + T i j d h i j , where S is the entropy density. It then follows that the stress produced by a gravitational wave interacting with the Cooper pair density can be expressed in terms of the GL free energy density as For a gravitational wave propagating in the z-direction, h ττ i 3 = 0 (since h ττ i j is transverse). For a plus polarization wave, we have h ττ 11 = -h ττ 22 = h ⊕ which corresponds to a stress T ττ 11 = -T ττ 22 = T ⊕ . For a cross polarization wave, we also have h ττ 12 = h ττ 21 = h ⊗ which corresponds to a stress T ττ 12 = T ττ 21 = T ⊗ . Therefore, we can write (22) as To obtain expressions for T ⊕ and T ⊗ that are purely in terms of h ⊕ and h ⊗ , respectively, we can consider the cases of plus and cross polarization waves independently. Then writing (1) as T ⊕ = -μ G h ⊕ and T ⊗ = -μ G h ⊗ for the two polarizations, we find that the gravitational shear modulus for either polarization becomes where the subscript "CP" represents Cooper pairs. For the zero-momentum eigenstate, the minimal coupling rule reduces to mv i = -q A i . Therefore, the first term in (24) becomes 1 2 mn s (v i ) 2 which is the kinetic energy density of the Cooper pair supercurrent. We can also combine the last two terms of (24) by using the coherence length, ξ = / 2m e |α|, and the relation n s = -α/β which comes from minimizing (17). Then (24) becomes The second term characterizes the minimum response of the Cooper pair density to a gravitational wave in the absence of supercurrents. Since ξ is a phenomenological parameter describing the superconductor, it follows that this term also becomes a phenomenological parameteran intrinsic property of the material. To obtain a numerical result, we consider that each atom contributes two conduction electrons, and only 10 -3 of the conduction electrons are in a superconducting state For an upper limit on the first term, the maximum kinetic energy which will preserve the superconducting state is determined by the BCS energy gap, E g ap = 7 2 k B T c , where k B is the Boltzmann constant and T c is the critical temperature. For niobium, T c = 9.3K , so the energy density of the BCS energy gap is E g ap n s ≈ 4.9 × 10 4 J /m 3 . Since this term dominates the second term in (25), then we have μ G(C P ) ≈ 4.9 × 10 4 J /m 3 (26) To determine the material strain that would occur for the Cooper pair density, we can use the corresponding material constituent equation, T ττ i j = -su ττ i j , where s is the material shear modulus and u ττ i j is the dimensionless strain tensor of the material. By equating this material constituent equation with the gravitational constituent equation, T ττ i j = -μ G h ττ i j , the material strain can be expressed in terms of the gravitational strain as For niobium, the material shear modulus is known to be s ≈ 3.8 × 10 10 J /m 3 . Therefore, (26) predicts that the material strain is related to the gravitational strain for the Cooper density by a factor of μ G(C P ) s ≈ 10 -6 . If the amplitude of the gravitational wave is on the order of h ττ i j ∼ 10 -20 , then the material strain produced would be on the order of u ττ i j ∼ 10 -26 . This demonstrates that the material strain is tiny for the Cooper pair density in response to the gravitational wave. We now describe the lattice ions using the Debye model in the low-temperature limit with coupling to gravitational waves in curved space-time. Using the approach of where we have included a harmonic potential term to model the lattice ions as quantum harmonic oscillators. For the case of a plus polarization gravitational wave, we set h ⊗ = 0. Then we act the Hamiltonian on a state, Ψ (x, t ), and use the quantum operator for the Hamiltonian, Ĥ = i ∂ t , and canonical momentum, pi = -i ∂ i . We also consider a separable solution which can be written as Ψ (x, t ) = ψ (x) φ (t ). This leads to We equate the left side to E (t ) which is the energy as a function of time. Then we have we define ε (t ) ≡ t 0 E t d t , then the solution to the differential equation has the form φ (t ) = e -i ε(t )t / . Hence we find that the gravitational wave will introduce a phase shift to the quantum wave function which is determined by ε (t ). Returning to (29), we can equate the right side to E (t ) and multiply through by ψ (x). Notice that this is not a time-independent Schrödinger equation. The states are time-independent, but the coefficients, h ⊕ (z, t ) and h ⊗ (z, t ), make the Hamiltonian timedependent. We can separate the time-dependent terms of the Hamiltonian by writing the expression above as The first line can now be considered as an unperturbed Hamiltonian, Ĥ0 , while the second line is a time-dependent perturbation, Ĥ1 (t ). For a gravitational wave with periodic time-dependence, the full Hamiltonian has a periodic behavior and thus applying Floquet's theorem leads to quasienergy eigenvalues. We now use ( xi ) 2 = x2 + ŷ2 + ẑ2 and K x , K y and K z to characterize the harmonic potential in the x, y, and zdirections, respectively. Then we use n x , n y , and n z to denote the occupation numbers of the modes with frequencies ω x , ω y , and ω z in the three directions, respectively. Applying separation of variables and summing over N oscillators, with n α being the number of phonons with frequency ω α , we obtain the following quasi-energy eigen-values in terms of phonon modes. where . Note that the coupling to a gravitational wave breaks the usual spatial isotropy of the modes in each spatial direction. This includes the zero-point energy of each oscillator, which implies that the gravitational wave also breaks the spatial isotropy of the vacuum. Since the gravitational wave is propagating in the z-direction, it modulates the frequencies in the x and y directions due to the squeezing/stretching of space itself. The factors, A + ⊕ and A - ⊕ , can be considered as "gravitational modulation factors" which determine the modulation of the frequencies (and corresponding energies) for the quantum harmonic oscillators. The gravitational wave effectively shortens/lengthens the boundary conditions of the lattice and therefore dynamically modulates the vacuum energy. (This is analogous to the mechanical oscillation of conducting plates which leads to the standard electromagnetic dynamical Casimir effect.) Since the zero-point energy is that of lattice phonons, then this is a "dynamical gravito-phonon Casimir effect." The physical meaning of this dynamical Casimir effect is that an increase in the occupation number of the phonon modes of the lattice is predicted to occur in the presence of the gravitational wave. We interpret this effect as a quantum-mechanical analog of a "Weber-bar effect". That is to say, the amplitude of the sound waves in the lattice grows in the classical limit due to the coupling of energy from the gravitational wave into energy in the modes of the lattice. Thus gravitational wave energy in the vacuum which is incident upon the superconductor could be converted into sound wave energy in the lattice, just like in the Weber bar. We now evaluate the free energy using the energy eigenvalues in (33). The partition function for this canonical ensemble is 10 10 Here we are essentially applying the concept of "periodic thermodynamics" as described by Kohn in where Z 0 = e -βE 0 and E 0 = 1 2 N ω A + ⊕ + A - ⊕ + 1 is the zero-point energy. Next, we find the Helmholtz free energy, F = -k B T ln (Z ), and apply the Debye model in the low temperature limit. This leads to the following free energy density embedded in curved space-time. where L x , L y , L z are the dimensions of the superconductor, and g ττ ⊕ is the determinant of the metric in terms of the transverse-traceless metric perturbation for a plus polarization gravitational wave. Similar to (22), we write the stress produced by a gravitational wave interacting with lattice ions in terms of the Debye free energy density as Likewise, (1) becomes T ⊕ = -μ G(LI ) A ⊕ where the subscript "LI" represents the lattice ions. Expanding (35) to second order in the metric perturbation, applying (36), and assuming L x ≈ L y >> L z for a thin superconducting film, leads to the following gravitational shear modulus for the lattice ions. The first term can be referred to as the "zero-point energy density" term since it originates from the contribution of the zero-point energy to the free energy of the system. For an upper bound on this value, we can use the Debye frequency, ω D , which is the cut-off frequency in the Debye model. For a niobium superconductor, ω D ≈ 3.1×10 13 s -1 . The number density of atoms was also found earlier to be n ≈ 5.7 × 10 28 m -3 . These lead to a value of 2.8 × 10 8 J /m 3 for the "zero-point energy density" term in (37). The second term in (37) can be referred to as the "sum of modes" term since it originates from the contribution of the sum of all the other modes of the system. To obtain a value for this term, we can use a thickness for the superconducting film on the order of micrometers L z ≈ 10 -6 m and a surface with edges on the order of centimeters L x ≈ 10 -2 m . The velocity is v = s/ρ, where ρ = 8.6 × 10 3 kg /m 3 is the mass density of the ionic lattice and s ≈ 3.8 × 10 10 J /m 3 is the material shear modulus for niobium. Then v ≈ 2.1 × 10 3 m/s. We can also use T ≈ 10 -2 K for the temperature of the superconductor. This leads to a value of 9.0 × 10 -12 J /m 3 for the "sum of modes" term. Therefore, we find that the zero-point energy density term clearly dominates over the "sum of modes" term and the gravitational shear modulus for the ionic lattice of niobium can be considered to have a value given by μ G(LI ) ≈ 2.8 × 10 8 J /m 3 (38) Comparing this to (26) for the Cooper pair density, we find that the lattice ions are on the order of 10 4 times more responsive to a gravitational wave than the Cooper pairs. The relative strain between the ionic lattice and the Cooper pair density is the difference between u ττ i j (C P ) for the Cooper pairs and u ττ i j (LI ) for the ionic lattice. Therefore, we can write the relative strain induced by the gravitational wave as U ττ i j ≡ u ττ i j (LI )u ττ i j (C P ) . Using (27) gives Inserting the results from ( This result demonstrates that there is a relative strain between the ionic lattice and the Cooper pair density that is approximately one percent of the gravitational wave strain. Since lattice ions are positively charged and Cooper pairs are negatively charged, then we find that a charge separation effect will occur in the superconductor in response to a gravitational wave. Note that the difference between μ G(C P ) and μ G(LI ) in ( Lastly, we note that the charge separation effect is expected to occur only within the London penetration of the superconductor, where non-zero electromagnetic fields can exist. In fact, due to the gravitational Meissner-like effect, the gravitational wave would exponentially decay within the penetration depth of the superconductor so that the charge separation effect could not be induced in the interior regions of the superconductor. Note that this formulation is applicable for all frequency ranges. The only limitation is that it applies only in the weakfield limit of linearized GR with the requirement that h μν → 0 as r → ∞. Copyright line will be provided by the publisher The method is described by Zel'dovich