Since the discovery of electron-wave duality, electron scattering instrumentation has developed into a powerful array of techniques for revealing the atomic structure of matter. Beyond detecting local lattice variations in equilibrium structures with the highest possible spatial resolution, recent research efforts have been directed towards the long sought-after dream of visualizing the dynamic evolution of matter in real-time. The atomic behavior at ultrafast timescales carries critical information on phase transition and chemical reaction dynamics, the coupling of electronic and nuclear degrees of freedom in materials and molecules, the correlation between structure, function and previously hidden metastable or nonequilibrium states of matter. Ultrafast electron pulses play an essential role in this scientific endeavor, and their generation has been facilitated by rapid technical advances in both ultrafast laser and particle accelerator technologies. This review presents a summary of the remarkable developments in this field over the last few decades. The physics and technology of ultrafast electron beams is presented with an emphasis on the figures of merit most relevant for ultrafast electron diffraction (UED) experiments. We discuss recent developments in the generation, manipulation and characterization of ultrashort electron beams aimed at improving the combined spatio-temporal resolution of these measurements. The fundamentals of electron scattering from atomic matter and the theoretical frameworks for retrieving dynamic structural information from solid-state and gas-phase samples is described. Essential experimental techniques and several landmark works that have applied these approaches are also highlighted to demonstrate the widening applicability of these methods. Ultrafast electron probes with ever improving capabilities, combined with other complementary photonbased or spectroscopic approaches, hold tremendous potential for revolutionizing our ability to observe and understand energy and matter at atomic scales. C. Different modalities of ultrafast electron scattering instrumentation: The discovery of the wave nature of the electron at beginning of the 20th century Over the years, continuous improvements in charged particle optics Time-resolved electron scattering emerged first as a new scientific technique for structural dynamics in the early 1980s Ultrafast electron scattering is a rapidly growing cross-disciplinary field, drawing from decades of instrument developments in the physical and energy science areas, such as electron microscopy, particle accelerator and laser technology, condensed matter physics and ultrafast chemistry. Atomic-level information can be retrieved via different operating modes such as microscopy, diffraction and spectroscopy, isolating specific electron-matter interaction channels. Elastic and inelastic scattering processes encode sample information respectively on the angle and energy of the scattered electrons, while the specific electron optics setup determines the mapping of the electron parameters into the detector plane, commonly energy, angle (momentum transfer) or real space. Furthermore, the geometry of the interaction and the detector collecting angle can be optimized for the study of surface structures in bulk materials (reflection mode) or for the characterization of bulk structure in thin films, liquids and gases (transmission mode). This review will mainly focus on the technological and scientific advancements in transmission ultrafast electron diffraction (UED), which has seen a very rapid increase in interest over the last decade. Sustained by scientific discoveries of increasing impact, UED is now considered an established technique in the ultrafast sciences. However, it is worth noting that the vast majority of techniques discussed here can be directly applied to the other operating modes mentioned above. Throughout the manuscript, the topics are presented without any assumption on the probe electron beam energy, whose dependence is explicitly derived and discussed where needed. Such approach extends the relevance of the treatment proposed to UED beamlines with probe energies in the keV-to-MeV range. Low energy, eV-scale electron diffraction (LEED) are not included, since they are not commonly used in transmission mode, and therefore face a different set of challenges. A conceptual schematic of the transmission UED technique in pump-probe geometry is summarized in Fig. A short summary of the structure of this review article follows. After reviewing fundamental concepts in diffraction in Sec. I.A, we will define a common metric for discussion and comparison of electron sources that will be used throughout the article (Sec. I.B), and briefly compare the different operating modes (Sec. I.C) in terms of electron beam requirements. The scientific niche of UED setups will be discussed as introductory motivation to the following Sec. II, which describes in details the state-of-the-art techniques for electron generation (Sec. II.B), beam dynamics (Sec. II.C), acceleration technologies (Sec.. II.D), and spatio-temporal control of femtosecond electron beams including detection (Sec. II.E and II.F). Sections III and IV discuss respectively the case of solid state and gas-phase targets. After an overview of the main processes of interest we clarify sample requirements and describe the interaction geometry. We then review the main techniques and challenges in data analysis, providing insightful information on the requirement for source stability and reliability. We then conclude with future prospects for UED techniques in Sec. V. The usefulness of electron diffraction stems from the large amount of information about the sample atomic-scale structure that can be extracted from a typical diffraction pattern. In order to understand the basic principles of electron scattering, both particle and wave aspects of the nature of electrons need to be considered When such an electron wave is incident on a target, the scattered wave can be described by the complex amplitude f (θ, φ), which indicates the probability of finding a scattered electron at angle θ and φ with respect to the incident direction. Tying together particle and wave approaches to electron scattering, this scattering amplitude depends on the detail of the interaction between the electron and the target and is related to the the differential scattering cross section as dσ dΩ = |f (θ, φ)| 2 . In the first Born approximation (kinematic scattering), we can write the amplitude of the scattered wavefunction in the direction k , where kk = s(θ, φ) as the Fourier transform of the target scattering potential, V (r): where the momentum transfer magnitude |s| = 4π λ sin θ 2 . In the case where the target is an atom, the largest contribution to the elastic scattering amplitude will be the Rutherford scattering from the atomic nucleus with a smaller contribution from the surrounding electrons. Following Salvat et al. where a 0 is the atomic Bohr radius, and is a function which depends on the approximation details of the screened atomic potential. The sum over the index i can include as many terms as desired for improved accuracy. As an example for silver we have A i = [0.25, 0.62, 0.13] and α i = [15.59, 2.74, 1.14] Å-1 . It is instructive to plot (Fig. The total integrated cross section can be used to calculate the elastic mean free path, i.e. the statistical average distance of propagation inside the sample over which the electrons will undergo one scattering event as 1 nσ where σ is the integrated cross section and n the density of scatterers in the material under study. Directly resulting from the scaling in Eq. 2, illustrated in the plots of Fig. In cases where the mean free path is shorter than the thickness of the specimen, then it is likely that electrons would undergo more than one scattering event. In order to quantitatively extract information from the diffraction pattern, one must go beyond the simple kinematical approximation (one scattering event per electron) and utilize the more complex dynamical diffraction theory If the sample is made up by a large number of scattering targets (atoms), the total scattering amplitude will be the sum of the individual waves. The so called scattering form factor F can then be written using the independent atom model as the sum of the atomic scattering factors f j from all the atoms in the with atomic coordinates r j = (x j , y j , z j ) multiplied by a phase factor which takes into account the difference in phase between the scattered waves in terms of the momentum transfer vector s In gas phase electron diffraction, high energy electrons (keV to MeV) elastically scattered from an ensemble of molecules produce an interference pattern on a detector, from which structural information on the molecule can be retrieved. The total scattering intensity can be obtained by the incoherent sum of the scattering from each molecule since the transverse coherence of the electron beam is typically smaller than the distance between molecules. For randomly oriented molecules, averaging over all possible orientation results in a scattered intensity only dependent on the polar angle (circular symmetry diffraction pattern) and that can be written as a function of the momentum transfer magnitude s as I Total (s) = I A (s) + I MOL (s). We can separate the contributions to the total scattering in two terms: the first is atomic scattering term I A (s) = N m=1 f * m (s)f m (s) and contains no structural information and only depends on the atoms present in the molecule.; the second term, known as molecular scattering, can be written as sin(sr mn ) sr mn (4) where N is the number of atoms in the molecule, and r mn is the distance vector from atom m to atom n (assuming static molecular structure), and contains the interference between all atom pairs in the form of a sinusoidal modulation in the intensity of the diffraction pattern. For ease of analysis and to compensate for the fast decrease in scattering intensity with s, the modified scattering intensity is used: The most straightforward method to extract structural information from diffraction data is to Fourier (sine) transform the scattering intensity into a Pair Distribution Function (P DF ) where r is the real space distance between atom pairs. The spatial resolution of the measurement is strictly defined by the width of the peaks in the P DF , and thus depends only on the value of s Max . Note that this value determines whether two nearby distances can be resolved in the P DF , but it does not determine the precision with which any individual distance can be determined. Finding a distance is equivalent to finding the center of the peak, which typically can be done to a value much smaller than the width of the peak, and depends strongly on the SNR of the measurement. Figure Consider the case of a beam of electrons with wavevector k incident on a perfect, infinite single crystal consisting of periodically arranged unit cells, which defines the smallest repeating atomic arrangement within the material. The crystal can be described as a sum over all the α atom positions within a unit cell, r α , and an infinite sum over all the unit cell coordinates R n . With these definitions the scattering potential of the entire crystal can be written as where V α is the potential of atom α in unit-cell n. The periodicity of V (r) ensures that the form of V α (r -R n -r α ) is identical for a given pair of n and α values. Generalizing Eq. 1, we can write the scattering amplitude at wavevector k in terms of the momentum transfer which can be understood as the as the product of the structure form factor F which contains the details of the unit cell atomic composition, and the lattice or shape factor G If the crystal is not infinite, the delta function must be replaced by the finite sum over the unit cells. For example, considering a crystal with N planes spaced by distance d, we have where s * = |s -G| is the deviation from the perfect Laue condition (excitation error). The amplitude of the lattice factor G is particularly important. If electrons are scattered by N unit cells, at the Bragg peaks (i.e. s * = 0 in Eq. 9), the lattice factor G is responsible for a N times increase in the scattered wave amplitude with respect to single atom case. The corresponding scattered intensity increases by a factor of N 2 . This Bragg enhancement factor can be very significant (i.e. in excess of 10 5 even for small microcrystalline samples). In this simplified picture, the angular width of the Bragg peaks just depends on the number of atomic planes in the sample (i.e. the shape factor of the target). In practice, as we will see below in the coherence length section, there are many other effects that must be taken into account in the width of the Bragg peaks including the angular distribution and energy spread in the probing electron wavepackets. For the nanometer thick single crystal specimens used in UED, the measured width of a Bragg peak in the direction of the film thickness is typically determined by the finite size effects described above, while the measured width of a Bragg peak in the plane of the thin specimen is typically determined by instrumental broadening associated with the illuminating electron beam parameters. In Eq. ( The intensity of electron scattering as a function of s, the quantity measured by an electron imaging detector, is The phase of the scattering amplitude is lost by intensity detection, resulting in the well known phase problem of crystallography. The result in Eq.( The Ewald sphere construction is often used to graphically represent the Laue condition, describing which reciprocal lattice points (or diffraction peaks) will be seen in a diffraction pattern in a specific scattering geometry (i.e. crystal orientation with respect to the incident electron wavevector). We will use this construction here to illustrate how the electron deBroglie wavelength, λ (or beam energy), influences diffraction. However, the impact of other beam parameters, like the spread in electron beam energy and divergence angle, can also be understood using this construction. The Ewald sphere is drawn on top of the crystal's reciprocal lattice with a radius of 1/λ and an orientation determined by the incident beam angle with respect to the crystallographic axes. This is shown in a simple geometry for a hypothetical simple cubic crystal at two beam energies in Fig. In order to form a diffraction pattern, a large number (a beam) of probe electrons is used to illuminate the target. In Bragg scattering, if one wants to distinguish the scattered particles from the undiffracted ones, it is essential that the scattering angle 2θ B be much larger than the uncorrelated spread of the divergence angles in the beam at the sample. In the root-mean-square sense this can be expressed as σ θ (i.e. σ θ 2θ B ). Note that any angular divergence correlated with position (for example due to a converging or diverging beam) can be removed by the transport optics and does not play a role in the diffraction contrast. For polycrystalline or gas/liquid phase samples, where the diffraction pattern is a series of concentric rings due to the random orientation of the grains, it is customary to introduce as figure of merit for resolution R = R/∆R where R is the radius of the diffraction ring on the detector screen and ∆R is the smallest distance between two neighboring rings which can just be discriminated at the detector. Note that the position on the detector screen is simply proportional to the scattering angle so that R can also be interpreted as the inverse of the relative reciprocal space resolution, i.e R = R/∆R = s/∆s. A typical TEM operating in diffraction mode achieves R > 10 2 or more for static images. For UED, a resolving power of R > 10 guarantees a good quality diffraction pattern and provides enough resolution to adequately resolve typical ultrafast structural rearrangements. The experimental value of R is affected by multiple factors, such as the electron beam angular and energy spread, and the spatial resolution of the detector, as it will be discussed in detail in the following sections. In most diffraction setups the uncorrelated beam divergence is the dominant limiting factor in the resolving power of the diffraction camera The importance of the beam divergence at the sample in UED is encoded in the concept of coherence length L c which is an equivalent figure of merit for diffraction contrast. In standard optics the coherence length indicates the extent of the coherent portion of the illumination (i.e. the spatial extent over which the phase of the illuminating beam wavefunction is correlated). For example, for an incoherent source, with no optics between the source and the sample, the Van Cittert-Zernike theorem defines the coherence length as the wavelength divided by the angle subtended by the source To illustrate the impact of beam coherence on the quality of the diffraction pattern, we show in Fig. To compare different electron beamlines, it is also useful to normalize the coherence length to the electron beam size at the sample σ x and define a relative coherence length Indeed beam divergence can be controlled by the electron optics before the sample, and the coherence length can be adjusted, while the relative coherence length is an intrinsic beam property and effectively can be thought as the fraction of the beam which participates in coherent scattering. A final point related to the study of sensitive materials is related to the damage effects associated with the bombardment of the sample by high energy electrons. The main mechanism involved is ionization damage (radiolysis), in which valence or inner-shell electrons within the specimen are excited by inelastic scattering events either directly breaking a chemical bond, or indirectly by secondary electron emission It is useful at this point in order to better appreciate the opportunities enabled by the development of ultrafast electron scattering to draw a comparison with x-ray scattering techniques. In particular, there is often a debate in the comparison of the effectiveness of probing with electrons or x-rays, even though the information extracted from these different technologies is mostly complementary. Aside from significant difference in the size and cost of electron and x-ray machines Owing to their higher cross section, electrons have significantly shorter penetration depth than hard x-rays, with important consequences on the sample thickness of choice and on the detector technology. The value of the probe beam penetration depth is an important factor in designing pump-probe experiments. An ideal excitation (absorbed fluence/layer) would have a uniform profile throughout the sample thickness. On the other hand, perfect uniformity is only reached with negligible absorption, i.e. negligible excitation. Therefore a sample thickness roughly equal to one absorption length at the excitation wavelength can be considered a good tradeoff between uniformity and pumping efficiency. Typical electron elastic mean free path values limit sample thickness for UED in the tens-to-hundreds of nanometers (depending on electron energy and atomic composition).Such values are a good match for optical radiation in a metal, while insulators and semiconductors can have absorption depths up to cm-scale. For x-rays (non-resonant, hard and soft) the penetration depth mostly depends on the form factor, i.e. how heavy the elements are, but it is typically on the scale of cm or longer. For soft x-rays, there is an additional situation when one goes into resonant absorption. There, the elemental absorption becomes extremely strong and the penetration depth short and in some cases comparable with visible light Furthermore, the difference in wavelength of the probing particles leads to key differences in the experimental data. An X-ray photon energy of 1-10 keV corresponds to a wavelength in the range of 1-10 Å, while electrons with energies typically used in UED exhibit wavelengths in the picometer-range, with a dramatic difference in the curvature of the Ewald sphere between the two cases. As a consequence, X-rays provide excellent momentum resolution in reciprocal space within a narrow range, i.e.typically only few spots per diffraction pattern. Conversely, each electron diffraction pattern typically includes a large number of spots/rings/diffraction features from which more information can be retrieved Another important difference relates to the amount of energy deposited in the sample for a single inelastic scattering event. X-rays are fully absorbed, depositing their entire energy into the sample, while electrons typically only release a small fraction of their energy in a collision. In fact it has been pointed out by Henderson Finally, with the advent of X-ray lasers In this section we introduce a metric for measuring the ability of a specific setup to deliver high density electron beams, and for comparing different instruments. The definitions introduced below will be used throughout the article to elaborate on the capability of an electron beam to perform specific experiments or provide the required spatial and temporal resolution. Adding temporal resolution to electron scattering experiments requires the formation of an electron bunch, i.e. a three-dimensional charge distribution well defined and limited in space and time. Such electron beam can be defined by the sum of isolated electrons correlated in time by periodic emission (stroboscopic approach) If the beam spatial and angular distributions are not uniform, a more general definition of beam diameter and angular spread is needed. Using the statistical framework, we introduce the generalized standard deviations of the beam along a specific direction, also known as root mean square moments of the distribution about its mean, rms hereafter For the case of pulsed electron sources, a distinction between average and peak current needs to be made, the latter describing a local property of the individual bunch of electrons in a longer bunch train, and defined as the instantaneous rate of change of the beam charge. The resulting peak and average brightness values will bear different information, the former describing the ability of a particular setup of performing single-shot measurements, and the latter providing information on experiment recording times. Unless specified otherwise, the quantities defined in the following of this section will relate to isolated bunched beams. The key distinction between pulsed and continuous wave beams is the role played by the longitudinal parameters in the experiments. Similarly to transverse focusing in which beam size and divergence can be trade-off for eachother, longitudinal compression allows to manipulate pulse length and energy spread to achieve optimal resolution. A modified metric for pulsed source quality which includes both the transverse and longitudinal degrees of freedom, is obtained by introducing the concepts of six-dimensional phase space and six-dimensional brightness. From a classical mechanics standpoint a set of N particles represents a system with a total of 6N degrees of freedom, including each particle coordinates in space r i and their relative conjugate momenta p i . In most cases of interest the temporal evolution of such system can be described by an Hamiltonian which, in turn describes the evolution of a unique trajectory in the 6N-dimensional space defined by the full system degrees of freedom. The number of dimensions can be reduced back down to six if particle-particle interactions can be neglected or described by a mean field approximation, resulting in a description of the electron beam as a clustered set of points in the hyper-volume V 6 , called 6D phase space for each instant in time. A key concept in this description of electron beams is represented by the phase space charge density ρ 6 (r, p, t), also called microscopic six-dimensional brightness Although the shape of the distribution changes with time, the Liouville theorem states the invariance of its total volume during motion under the the assumption of Hamiltonian evolution. The six-dimensional beam brightness is therefore a constant of motion. In the special but not uncommon case of decoupled motion between the different planes, the 6D volume can be written as V 6 = A x A y A z , where A i is the phase space area in the (i, p i ) plane (i = x, y, z). If we use second order moments of the distribution to describe the area enclosed by the beam, then A i takes on the meaning of normalized rms emittance n,i . It is often convenient to express the beam properties in terms of the angle of the particle trajectory with respect to the propagation direction z, x = px pz . Considering a beam waist at a position z 0 as shown in Fig. x σ 2 x -(σ xx ) 2 . Introducing the uncorrelated transverse rms spread in divergence σ x u simplifies the general equation back to the product of two terms, n,x = γβσ x σ x u . Figure In case of uncoupled dynamics, the rms six-dimensional brightness can be written as: where we assume no time-energy correlation in the bunch and mc 2 , and I rms = N e/σ t = ηI peak , with I peak being the maximum current within the pulse, N the number of electrons in the bunch, and η a numerical value depending on the shape of the temporal distribution (η = √ 2π for a gaussian temporal profile). Depending on the specific application, it is common to introduce different brightness definitions which better capture the key beam properties. In typical ultrafast electron diffraction experiments electron beam's transverse emittance rather than the energy spread dominates the minimum beam size at the sample and the resolution in reciprocal space. In this case we can then consider the five-dimensional brightness to be more representative of the effectiveness of the electron beam to carry out an experiment, B 5D = Irms n,x n,y . This parameter is directly proportional to the β micro defined above and used in microscopy. The proportionality factor depends on the details of the charge distribution (for example uniform, gaussian, parabolic). There is also an additional factor (γβ) 2 which is used to make B 5D invariant under particle acceleration. On the other hand, this value can be increased by longitudinal beam compression, which increases the beam peak current at expenses of energy spread. Lowering further the number of dimensions, one can define a brightness in the transverse planes, called fourdimensional brightness and defined as: This metric results particularly useful when balancing trade offs between temporal and spatial resolution in timeresolved electron scattering. Larger values of B 4D result in better diffraction pattern contrast and higher spatial resolution. One simple way to increase B 4D is by starting with a longer pulse length, which would increase the charge at expenses of temporal resolution. Assuming no coupling between longitudinal and transverse planes, the four-dimensional brightness is set at emission and remains constant during transport and acceleration. The fermionic nature of the electrons limits the number of electrons that can occupy the same phase space area through the Pauli exclusion principle. This sets a value for the maximum phase space electron density which can be derived starting from the uncertainty principle, stating that σ x σp x mc ≥ λc 4π , providing the volume of a coherent state in phase space The ratio between the beam six-dimensional brightness and the quantum limited brightness defines the beam degeneracy parameter δ = B 6D B q , a measure of the source quality with respect to the ultimate physical limit. In the case of a unpolarized source, δ max = 1. Typical values of δ for state-of-the-art electron sources range from 10 -2 of single-atom emitters to 10 -6 of large-area photo-emitters. When normalized by the quantum-limited transverse brightness B q 4D = 2e( 2π λc ) 2 , the four-dimensional brightness provides a direct measure of the source lateral coherence. Using the definition of beam normalized emittance, the relative coherence length (Eq. 11) can be rewritten as l c = λ c /(2π n ), and the normalized transverse brightness for a round beam (same emittance in x and y planes) then is: where N c = N/l 2 c is the number of electrons per coherent area in the beam. As an electron beam interacts with matter, a wealth of information related to the lattice and electronic structures, as well as their dynamics, gets encoded in the beam phase space, corresponding to changes of the momentum, energy, and intensity of the beam. Over the past century, various specialized methods and instruments utilizing electron probes have been developed, focusing on one or few types of changes in phase space, giving rise to various modalities of electron scattering instrumentation such as diffraction, imaging and spectroscopy The quality of the image depends on many parameters, including those related to illumination (electron dose, relevant to the so called Rose criterion Accessible time scales in ultrafast electron imaging range from ns for single shot full field images Adding an energy filter at the end of the electron column enables observation of time-dependent changes in the electron energy loss spectrum (EELS) Combining spectroscopy with diffraction one would provide access to momentum-resolved EELS carrying a great deal of information on the electronic structure of the sample. An important additional benefit of using ultrafast sources for EELS is that the time structure of the beam allows the possibility for more accurate energy measurements In comparison with these other modalities, diffraction requires no further electron optical elements between the sample and the detector. The signal is generated by the interference of elastically scattered electrons, i.e. those electrons with modified transverse momentum by negligible energy changes . This signal encodes the structural information averaged over the entire probed area. Benefiting from its simplicity, diffraction usually also allows for most quantitative correlation between the measured pattern and the structure of matter. For these reasons, UED has been the first modality of time-resolved electron scattering to receive attention, but advances in ultrafast electron beams from photoemission sources establish exciting new capabilities for imaging and spectroscopy as well. In this review we will focus on the recent developments in UED, with the understanding that the other modalities will likely take advantage of much of the technical progresses described below. In addition, mixed-modalities instruments, for example setups where ultrafast electron microscopy and UED can take place in the same modified TEM column In addition to the static ordering of charge, spin, orbital and lattice degrees of freedom in materials, an understanding of the elementary excitations that are present -both collective and single particle-and how these excitations couple/interact with one another is required for a fundamental understanding of the diverse phenomena and properties found in condensed matter. The interactions between collective excitations of the lattice system (phonons) and charge carriers, specifically, are of particular relevance and easily studied by UED. These interactions are known to lead to superconductivity, charge-density waves, multi-ferroicity, and soft-mode phase transitions. Carrier-phonon interactions are also central to our understanding of electrical transport, heat transport, and energy conversion processes in photovoltaics and thermoelectrics. Phonons can themselves be intimately mixed in to the very nature of more complex elementary excitations, as they are in polarons or polaritons. Further, the coupling of spin and lattice systems can also be studied from the lattice perspective with UED. By tuning the excitation wavelength in the mid to far IR and THz (see for example Knowledge of how molecules responds to the incidence of light is essential to our understanding of nature and its fundamental processes, e.g. photosynthesis The observation of coupled electronic and nuclear rearrangements, arising from conical intersections, are key to understanding the conversion of light into mechanical and chemical energy. Many important photochemical processes, such as photosynthesis, retinal isomerization in vision, ultraviolet-induced DNA damage The non-radiative relaxation of a system relies on the redistribution of internal energy into nuclear degrees of freedom as the molecule returns to the ground state. By spatially resolving the nuclear wavepacket motion from its inception in the excited state to its vibrational dephasing in the ground state, UED experiments can glean information into the mechanisms mediating the dissipation of internal energy. A recent UED experiment probing the photoinduced ringopening dynamics of 1,3-cyclohexadiene, CHD, a model for the photosynthesis of previtamin D3, using UED, revealed a coherent oscillatory rotation of the terminal ethylene groups in the ground state photoproduct 1,3,5-hexatriene on the ground state In gas-phase UED, the random orientation of molecules in the target volume results in the loss of structural information, which prevents the retrieval of three-dimensional structural information directly from the diffraction pattern alone. Controlling the angular distribution of the target molecules, more specifically alignment along a single axis, increases the information content of the diffraction patterns Advances in the UED sources have, and will undoubtedly continue to be reflected in great strides in our understanding of photochemistry and photobiology. The technique has demonstrated its enormous impact in providing complementary information to laser-based spectroscopic methods that probe the electronic structure, and in combination with other methods can help to build a complete picture of the electronic and nuclear dynamics. Technological and methodology developments in gas-phase UED will soon allow for the study of large and more complex model systems and the study of classes of reaction across multiple systems. These will enable the rationalization of general rules for reactivity with the goal that molecules can be designed from first principles to fulfill a particular function. A. Overview of a general UED setup and operating modes The consolidation of ultrafast electrons as probes of matter providing high spatial and temporal resolution is the result of concerted advancements in multiple scientific and technological areas. To start, the widespread adoption of photoemission for particle accelerator sources has revolutionized the field of high brightness electron beams which had already seen a leap forward with the invention of field-emission electron guns in the late 60s After extraction, preserving high beam quality to the sample becomes of upmost importance. The interactions of the electron beam with the environment and within itself via Coulomb forces can indeed broaden the pulse temporal distribution effectively resulting in degradation of the instrument temporal resolution. Progress in understanding the latter (Coulomb-broadening or space charge effects) in these instruments In this fertile research environment different technological approaches sprung, with the shared ultimate goal of achieving ever improving spatio-temporal resolution. In many cases, custom instruments have taken the form of compact accelerator beamlines with flexible designs, equipped with a mix of electromagnetic, electrostatic and magnetostatic optical elements and insertable diagnostics stations Figure In its most general configuration, a UED setup includes a timing and synchronization system, as schematically shown in Fig. The overall temporal resolution is probably the single most important parameter in a UED setup, and it is described as a combination of multiple uncorrelated terms, including the excitation pulse length τ pump , the electron beam pulse duration τ probe , the velocity mismatch τ V M (if applicable, see Sec.IV), and the fluctuations τ ∆pp in temporal delay (∆t) between the laser pump and the electron probe (see Fig. Accelerating and bunching field amplitude and relative phase fluctuations cause shot-to-shot fluctuations of τ ∆pp (see Sec. II.C.4 and II.C.6), and require precision phase synchronization between the different sources is required (Sec. II.E.4). In the assumption that the same laser system is used to both generate photo-electrons and to excite the sample, we then have τ ∆pp = τ ∆ eT OF , where τ ∆ eT OF is the electroh time-of-flight (TOF) from cathode to sample. If instead more than one laser system is used in the experiment, a similar synchronization system is required between the different optical oscillators, and the jitters in arrival time of the laser to the cathode and to the sample plane would need to be taken into account separately. Figure In the following we will provide an in-depth review of the state-of-the-art of each of the subsystems introduced above. The number of electrons interacting with the specimen required to obtain structural information varies by orders of magnitude, depending on the modality and on the specimen details. As an example, electron microscopy provides real-space local information, and therefore it requires high dose at the sample (10-100 electrons/(spatial resolution) 2 ). The requirement for number of electrons N I e illuminating the sample is usually in the range of 10 8 to 10 9 . In electron diffraction on the other hand, the signal at the detector carries reciprocal space information integrated over the entire illuminated sample area. For solid-state specimens the signal is concentrated in few areas of the detector, usually spots or rings, as a consequence of the highly ordered atomic structure of the sample. Typically less than N ED e ≈ 10 6 electrons are sufficient to obtain high quality (multiple Bragg spots) diffraction patterns from a thin (one elastic mean free path) solid-state sample When evaluating the feasibility of an experiment it is instructive translating electron diffraction requirements into constrains for the beam four-dimensional brightness. Electrons must be tightly confined spatially within the specimen boundaries, while maintaining a small angular spread for achieving good resolution in reciprocal space (and a large enough spatial coherence length). Using the definition of R from I.A.4, the minimum required value for the 4d brightness (Eq. 13) is equal to: where R min is the experimental target for resolving power at momentum transfer s, d s is the illuminated specimen lateral size (assuming circular symmetry for simplicity), and λ c is the Compton wavelength. Experiment acquisition modalities can be separated in two broad categories: single-shot and multi-shot (strobo-scopic) modes.The choice of the modality is often dictated by the details of the phenomenon under study. In a reversible process, the excited specimen can be cycled between identical initial and final states by a very large number of times, undergoing exactly the same dynamical process and allowing data integration over many shots. Other samples show enhanced sensitivity to the excitation and damage or a modified initial state develop after a finite number of pulses, limiting the total number of excitation events (partial reversibility). Finally, if the excitation pulse drives the system to an irreversible final equilibrium state different from the initial one, only the paired probe pulse will be able to capture the transition before the sample is permanently altered. In line with the different types of processes, UED operation modalities span from single-electron to high-charge per bunch, and from one/few shots per second to millions, with fundamental impact on the instrument technology used, starting from the choice of the laser system and repetition rate, the electron source size and geometry, the transverse and longitudinal compression schemes, and the overall footprint of the setup. A key difference between the single and multi-electron beam modalities is the role of the beam self-fields (see Sec. II.C.5) in the beam dynamics. The so-called space-charge fields effect the bunch duration, the beam energy spread, and the total beam emittance of a multi-electron bunched beam, while single-electron pulses are only constrained by transverse and longitudinal emittance at emission Note that the concepts of beam size and angular spread in single-electron mode take the meaning of moments of distribution of the statistical ensemble represented by many single-electron beams, generated and transported through the beamline at different times. Although for an isolate electron one could define and measure angle and position to a better degree, a visible diffraction pattern is only formed upon accumulation of many electrons, and the overall resolution will still depend on the moments of the ensemble distribution. This issue could potentially be minimized via the combined used of fast single-electron detectors and time-stamping, although high precision non-invasive timestamping methods for single-electron beams are still out of reach. Finally it is also worth pointing out that, as a direct consequence of the statistical nature of photo-emission, the beam current in this configuration is in practice limited to much less than 1 electron per shot. Indeed, in order to maintain the spatio-temporal characteristics of the beam shot by shot, the generation of beams with more than one electron should be avoided. The photo-emission probability is described by Poisson statistics and, in order to ensure that the overwhelming majority of pulses contain only one electron, the average value of the distribution needs to be below 0.5 Although a continuous electron stream can be temporally chopped or bunched by (a series of) RF cavities (see for example Sec. II.E), most UED electron sources use short pulse lasers for generation of electron bunches by photoemission. When a laser beam impinges on a photocathode surface, single or multiphoton absorption can cause electrons in the material to gain enough energy to overcome the potential barrier at the interface and escape into the vacuum. The spatio-temporal format of the exciting laser pulse is nearly preserved in the photoemission process offering the opportunity to shape the initial electron beam distribution by controlling the properties of the illuminating laser. Photocathodes are evaluated by a few key parameters: the quantum efficiency QE, the mean transverse energy of emitted electrons M T E The cathode quantum efficiency QE is defined as number of emitted electrons per number of photons incident on the material, i.e. QE = ω e Q E ph , where Q is the electron beam charge and E ph is the laser pulse energy. A theoretical expression for QE in metals can be found by following the three step model model In presence of an externally applied electric field E 0 on the cathode surface, the total potential barrier is modified by the Schottky potential Φ Schottky The mean transverse energy (MTE) of the emitted electrons determines the beam emittance and, therefore, plays a relevant role in determining the beam brightness. The beam normalized rms emittance at emission can be written Given the low laser energy needed to obtain typical electron charges for UED setups (Sec. II.B.1), it may seem natural to trade quantum efficiency for better beam quality. On the other hand, a large increase in laser beam energy compensating lower QE approaching the work-function threshold may have detrimental effects. First, when coupled with a small focus at the cathode, it can lead to values of optical fluence approaching the material damage threshold. Furthermore, high intensity beams can increase the temperature of the transient electronic distribution within a material by orders of magnitude. For sub-ps photoemission, electrons do not have time to thermalize with the lattice, since typical electron-phonon coupling constants are in the few-picosecond range. This can lead to photo-emission of hot electrons, contributing to the beam momentum spread and ultimately limit the achievable MTE Most photocathode materials have response times in the few femtoseconds to sub-picosecond range, dominated by the travel time of electrons from the bulk to the vacuum interface, which is determined either by penetration depth of the optical pulse and/or the photocathode film thickness. In certain materials (negative electron affinity semiconductor cathodes) the surface is chemically prepared to energetically boost the bottom of the conduction band above the vacuum level. Upon photon absorption electrons will reach the conduction band, and some of them will slowly relax to the bottom of the band via scattering with the lattice, while traveling toward the surface. Once there, they will escape into the vacuum thanks to the negative electron affinity, forming long temporal tails (up to 100 ps) with close-to-zero excess energy The size and shape of the photo-emitting area has an direct impact on scientific breadth of the instrument, influencing paramters as the transverse brightness and spatial resolution, and driving technological choices, such as the accelerating field, illumination geometry and repetition rate. Single-shot ultrafast experiments require large peak currents I peak , which are achieved using mm-scale source sizes. Such dimensions are only acceptable when the heterogeneity of the sample is not a concern. When probing reversible dynamics in stroboscopic mode, the real space resolution of UED can be greatly increased by decreasing the spot size and optimizing for the current density J peak rather than for I peak . At its limit, the stroboscopic modality could provide combined nanometer-femtosecond spatio-temporal resolution, ultimately enabling nano-UED For typical MTE values of 0.5 eV and a resolving power above 10 at around 1 Å-1 , we get σ min x,sample > 1.3σ x,cath . This simple result puts in evidence the need of nanoscale emitters to reach nanometer-scale spatial resolution. Alternatively, transverse collimation downstream of the cathode can be performed, a common practice in static electron microscopes, with the result of decreasing the initial emittance at expenses of beam current In photo-emission, two main factors limit the initial spot size: the numerical aperture (NA) of the optical delivery system, describing the laser beam convergence angle θ (N A = sin(θ) in vacuum), and the wavelength λ ph of the laser used for photoemission. Even in the ideal case of N A ≈ 1, the laser beam waist w 0 is limited to w 0 = λ ph π . In practical circumstances the geometry of the setup may even prevent using large values of N A, due to physical constrains on the minimum distance of the last focusing lens from the cathode plane. Solutions to this issue have been investigated, for example by developing photocathodes operating in transmission geometry, allowing the last optical element to be positioned right to the back of the photoemission material In the last decade, laser-assisted electron emission from tips has been extensively explored to overcome the light diffraction limit. Selecting electrons emitted by the apex of the tip upon laser illumination provides nanoscale sources of femtosecond pulses. Laser triggered emission can be achieved via control of the temperature and the voltage applied to the tip, modulating the Fermi distribution tail and the potential barrier, exponentially suppressing electron emission in absence of laser. Linear photoemission from tips using near UV laser pulses can also be achieved upon coating of the tungsten apex with ZrO layer The shape of the source has a strong impact on the amplitude and direction of externally applied field in the vicinity of the cathode plane At a first glance, the demands for high peak current and large current density may seem to be simultaneously achievable. As will discuss in the following, the two requirements instead drive the size of photoemission area in opposite directions. The number of electrons emitted from a flat cathode in a given time and from a given area is limited by cumulative image-charge fields at the cathode interface. As electrons get emitted from the material into the vacuum, charge at the surface promptly re-distribute to screen the bulk material from the external field. The total electric field E tot in the vacuum region between the emitted electrons and the cathode surface is therefore the sum of the externally applied electric field and the opposing image-charge field. In the limit of very short pulses the electron beam aspect ratio A shows a "pancake-like" format, with 1, E 0 is the external accelerating electric field, and R and ∆t are the laser beam radius and pulse duration, respectively (considering for simplicity a uniformly charged cylinder). In this case the electron density in vacuum can be approximated as an infinitely wide sheet of charge, and the emission will stop when E tot = 0, leading to a maximum charge of Q = 0 E 0 πR 2 , where 0 is the vacuum permittivity Decreasing the source size to sub-micrometer changes the beam aspect ratio, eventually leading to cigar-like formats (A < 1). In this case the finite transverse extension of the beam plays a dominant role in the extraction process, changing the functional form of the scaling laws for current density and brightness In the case of cigar aspect ratios, decreasing the source size will cause a smaller change in the maximum charge extracted than in the corresponding emittance (squared), with the important and often overlooked consequence of introducing a dependence between maximum 4D brightness and the source size. Therefore a possible scheme to achieve larger brightness values would include starting from a cigar-shaped electron beam, and then perform temporal compression downstream the electron gun. Indeed, as it will be discussed more in detail in Sec. II.C.6, the electron beam can be temporally compressed with minimal implications on the transverse emittance (see for example Relevant research directions aim at increasing the brightness of electron sources by decreasing the cathode MTE or decreasing the photoemission source size and at the same time increasing the acceleration field. As shown in Fig. Alternatively, semiconductor cathodes can provide low MTEs and very large QE, on the order of few to few tens of percent, mostly thanks to the suppression of electron-electron scattering leading to a much more efficient transport of excited electrons from the bulk to the vacuum interface. In such materials electrons occupy states up to the top of the valence band, while the conduction band is empty. The energy barrier to overcome in this case is the sum of the material band gap and the electron affinity, often enabling linear photoemission with visible or infrared photons (see for example A possibility to reduce the emission area to be much smaller than that achievable by direct lens focusing is offered by laser field impinging on nano-structured metallic surfaces that can excite traveling waves confined at the metaldielectric interface, called surface plasmon polaritons (SPP). Mediated by SPP, whose wavelength can be much shorter than that of the excitation pulse, the optical field energy can be transported and concentrated in areas of sub-wavelength size, leading to large local field enhancement. This concept has been lately used to enhance absorption on metal tips A critical element in any UED setup is the ultrafast laser system which is used to provide pulses to the cathode and excite the sample. It should not come as a surprise that the chirped pulse amplification was a critical technological step in enabling the development of UED technique. Additional laser applications in UED setups include ponderomotive scattering for time-stamping the time-of-arrival of electrons with the photon beam Typical architectures for UED laser systems include a modelocked oscillator cavity followed by a chain of amplifiers to bring up the energy to the required levels. In cases in which RF is used to manipulate, control or diagnose the electron beam, it is important to choose the oscillator cavity length that can be easily synchronized with the RF frequency used in the experiment. Typically, a intra-cavity piezo-mirror is used to close a feedback loop to maintain phase-locking to an external signal. More on this is discussed in Sec. II.E.4. State-of-the-art systems are also able not only to lock the envelope of the laser pulse to an external signal, but also to lock the phase. CEP-phase locked phases so far have not been employed in UED setups, but this might change as attosecond electron pulses are starting to be used to probe attosecond dynamics While most of the UED instruments up to now have operated using the Ti:Sa technology due to the large gainbandwidth and clear advantage in the generation of ultrashort pulses of this crystal, the limitations associated with the poor efficiency and associated low average power as well as the progress in other competing laser technologies such as Yb:based lasers are increasing the diversity of the laser systems out in the field. As discussed in Sec. II.A.2, one of the main characteristics of any setup is the targeted operation mode (ranging from single shot to stroboscopic). For the latter, being able to increase the repetition rate beyond 50 KHz greatly affects the laser technology choice. An important issue that requires a compromise in fact is the longer pulse length typical of the higher repetition rate and higher average power laser systems. Ti:Sa systems routinely generate < 40 fs pulses, while the pulse length in Yb-based systems is 5-6 times longer. An open question is how to get ultrashort pulses at high repetition rates. Different technologies are being pursued ranging from OPCPA Precise control of the laser distribution illuminating the cathode has been shown to improve the beam brightness especially in space charge dominated beamlines The wavelength selectivity of the gain mediums does not cover all the possible wavelengths. For example in photocathode drivers it is useful to be able to tune the photon energy to the cathode work-function, and similarly when pumping a material one wants to excite certain optical modes and steer away from high reflectivity regions. Non linear frequency generation, both directly in crystals as well in optical parametric amplifier setups are usually added to the main laser system. While the price to pay in pulse energy is significant, the continuous wavelength tunability they offer allow exploration of new physics. For longer wavelengths, either difference frequency generation options in the OPA In the final step of the photoemission process, electrons escape the cathode surface and enter vacuum with a residual kinetic energy typically in the range of a few to 100s meV. Transport and control at these low energies is quite challenging, and electrons are therefore accelerated to higher kinetic energies, ranging from 100 eV As explained in Sec. II.B.4 larger accelerating fields at the cathode surface allow to extract larger current densities, and thus enable higher beam brightness for a given cathode MTE. In this section we will review the electron beam dynamics downstream the cathode plane, including acceleration and compression, which allow tailoring of the beam phase space to the specific application, but may also lead to potential degradation of initial beam brightness due to nonlinear forces, time-varying fields and/or self-forces within the electron bunch. The most mature and widely used acceleration technologies use DC and RF fields where z and r are the axial and transverse coordinates, z = 0 corresponds to the cathode position, E 0 is the peak electric field, e z is the normalized profile of the field distribution, and ω and φ are the RF angular frequency and phase, respectively. Maxwell equations relate the longitudinal field component E z with the transverse component E r = -r 2 ∂Ez ∂z , which is important in the transverse evolution of the beam in the gun. In presence of time-varying fields, the ensuing magnetic field has also to be taken into account in the transverse dynamics, but bears no effect on the kinetic energy. In a static accelerating gap with a flat cathode (Fig. The anode aperture is a perturbation from the ideal parallel plate geometry, which bends field lines outwards at the gap exit. The net effect on electron dynamics is transverse defocusing, typically requiring an optical element to re-capture the diverging beam after the gun. The strength of the electrostatic lens scales with the accelerating gradient, but at first order does not degrade the beam quality. As we will see later, in a time-dependent accelerating field the defocusing kick (visible by the magnitude of E r in Fig. Particle dynamics is more complicated in time-varying fields. In this section we describe the electron behavior in RF fields as an example. Most of the treatment can be extended to different frequency ranges. The longitudinal and transverse motion of electrons in an RF gun can be treated analytically where φ(z, t) = ωt -kz + φ 0 is the so-called synchronous phase. The use of the phase coordinate is particularly convenient for RF linacs, as particles reaching relativistic energies move along constant φ trajectories. The dimensionless parameter α = eE0 2mec 2 k is a normalized measure of the strength of the accelerating field. In order to capture electrons from rest α must be larger than 0.5 Particles are released from the photocathode with low speed, and quickly fall behind the synchronous phase until they reach relativistic energies. Due to the rapid acceleration of RF guns (α ≈1), most of the phase slippage occurs in close vicinity to the cathode, where electrons are much slower than wave phase velocity. The final synchronous phase depends on the launch phase φ 0 for a given gun geometry and operation field strength. This dynamics is an intrinsic feature of particle acceleration with time-varying fields. If α is too small, the electrons do not gain enough energy during the accelerating phase and keep slipping back in phase until they start experiencing a decelerating field, like a surfer with not enough initial speed to catch the incoming wave. The implications of such dynamics on the bunch length and time of flight of electrons will be discussed more in depth in Sec. II.C.6. The kinetic energy at the gun exit is a function of φ 0 . An example of γ-φ 0 correlation is shown in Fig. In the VHF range (30-300 MHz) The profile of the photocathode surface has an impact on the output electron beam parameters and dynamics in the gap. In general, the area can either have a flat or curved profile. In the case of the flat profile, the field lines will be normal to the surface and all the acceleration will be in the longitudinal direction with no effects on the transverse plane. In the case of a curved surface, three different cases can be distinguished, comparing the radius of curvature R with the laser spot size r used for photo-emission. If the surface radius of curvature is large, the main effect is a distortion of the field in the cathode vicinity, adding transverse components and leading to transverse focusing (concave) or defocusing (convex) effects. The cathode is an equipotential surface, with Φ(r) = 0. Expanding the electric potential in r and z to the second order, under the assumption of R r one finds aberration components due to curvature to be proportional to 1/R As the cathode radius of curvature gets smaller and becomes comparable to the laser spot size, both transverse and longitudinal effects need to be considered. The electric field enhancement along a curved surface discussed earlier, can be used to increase the accelerating field in the cathode area while keeping a large transverse emission size, obtaining at the same time extraction of multi-electron beams and ultrashort pulses from setups with otherwise modest accelerating gradients, typically DC guns For tip-like cathodes, the radius of curvature is orders of magnitude smaller than the illuminating laser, and in most of cases even smaller than the laser wavelength. The main advantage of a tip is that the source size is now determined by the physical extension of the tip and not by the laser spot size. Accelerating field at the tip apex can be enhanced by factors exceeding 100, with a longitudinal extensions comparable to the tip radius. While this may locally increase the maximum brightness achievable, it also increases field non linearities and, in order to obtain a high brightness beam, heavy collimation is needed downstream the accelerating gap, selecting only electrons emitted from the tip apex (see Sec. II.E.6). In this section we will review the role of key instrument parameters on the beam longitudinal dynamics in absence of space charge. The evolution of the beam center of mass is unaffected by self-fields, and we are therefore able to provide approximate analytical equations that can be used to accurately predict the final energy and arrival time of the electron(s) at the sample. At the same time, for an accurate prediction of the final pulse length at the specimen both longitudinal emittance and the eventual contribution of space-charge forces to the dynamics need to be accounted for. This requires solving self-consistently the Maxwell equations coupled to the equations of motion for the beam, and it is generally achieved through the use of sophisticated simulation codes (see for example Fig. In the simplest setup, which includes a static accelerating field within a gap and a downstream drift to the sample, accelerating field fluctuations and beam energy spread at emission (the electron excess energy) contribute to shot-toshot energy and time-of-flight variations. Variation in electron energy translates in time of flight fluctuations through vacuum dispersion. To quantify the impact of such effect on the instrument performance we first consider only the accelerating gap starting from the photocathode surface, and then we include the transport from the output of the gun to the sample. We define τ vd,gap as the temporal distance at the output of the accelerating gap between two electrons photoemitted from the cathode at the same time with respect with the laser arrival time. Depending on the operation mode, τ vd,gap represents the shot-to-shot TOF fluctuations (single-electron mode) or the final temporal spread of the beam (assuming negligible space charge effects). The value of τ vd,gap at the output of the static gap is mainly affected by the energy bandwidth of the photo-electrons at emission ∆E, which depends on the detail of the photocathode material and driving laser. Fluctuations in the amplitude of the accelerating fields are generally below 1e -4 for state-of-the-art high-voltage power supplies, and can be ignored inside the short accelerating gap, while they will need to be included when calculating the TOF to the sample. For an accelerating electric field amplitude E 0 we find τ vd,gap = ( √ 2m∆E) 1/2 /eE 0 Vacuum dispersion in the gap defines the minimum pulse length achievable in a UED setup in absence of temporal compression, with the sample ideally placed right at the output of the accelerating region. In a drift transport channel, the TOF and temporal broadening are fully determined by the particles kinetic energy and energy spread. We can express this dependence as: where L d is the drift distance, and R drif t 56 = L d β 2 γ 2 is the longitudinal dispersion function in a drift section Space charge forces, i.e. interaction between electrons, play a significant role in the dynamics of high brightness, ultrashort electron beams. In particular, space charge forces act as defocusing forces in transverse and longitudinal planes, limiting the beam charge density in real space, correlating pulse length and beam charge, and potentially degrading beam brightness and the spatio-temporal resolution in UED experiments. It is instructive to first look at the scaling of the Coulomb interaction between two electrons to understand how the space charge forces scale with their kinetic energy. Consider the case of two particles moving with parallel and constant velocity v = βc, and with longitudinal and transverse separation s and x, respectively. The total space charge force (electric and magnetic fields) experienced by the trailing particles is (23) If the electrons are purely transversely separated, then s = 0 and F l vanishes, while F t ∝ 1 γx 2 . Another way to understand this scaling is by performing the Lorentz transformation between the lab frame K and the particles rest frame K moving at v with respect to K in the longitudinal direction. As the two particles move, the electric field experienced by one of the particle, as seen in the laboratory frame is E t = γE t = 1 4π 0 eγ x 2 . The increase of E t with γ is a result of the growing anisotropy of electric field lines with increasing particle speed, which concentrate to within a transverse cone of opening angle on the order of 1/γ. Calculating the Lorentz force on the electron we then find that F t = eE t /γ 2 , where the factor γ -2 accounts for the opposite signs of electric and magnetic force components, retrieving the initial scaling F t ∝ 1 γ . A similar reasoning can be carried out for the longitudinal component of the force. From Eq.24 we find that, for x = 0 or s x/γ, F l ∝ 1 γ 2 s 2 . Note that s is proportional to β for a fixed temporal separation, and hence The acceleration of the electron is a l = F l γ 3 m , where the γ 3 dependence accounts for the increasing difficulty in changing the speed of the electrons when approaching the speed of light, and m is the electron's rest mass. The space chargedriven particle separation l at a downstream position L is given by l = 1 2 a l t 2 , where t = L βc is the average time of flight. Putting all together, l ∝ L 2 γ 5 β 4 , highlighting the benefit of increasing the beam kinetic energy to counteract space charge effects. For many-electron beams, the space charge force acted upon each electron is generally calculated by integrating over a smooth charge density distribution, rather than summing up the pair-wise Coulomb forces between the target electron and each and every other electron. The smooth field approach is valid when the field from each particle is screened by surrounding electrons within a distance equal to the Debye length , where n is the electron number density and T b is the effective temperature in the beam rest frame A first example of envelope equations is found in one of the first quantitative studies of non-relativistic space-charge driven bunch lengthening using simple analytical models If initially l is much smaller than r, the first term on the right-hand-side of Eq. 25 dominates the beam expansion. As the bunch becomes longer, d 2 l/dt 2 → 0, which implies that the lengthening rate dl/dt reaches a constant value after the potential energy of the electron bunch is converted to kinetic energy. This quantity represents the velocity spread of the bunch, since electrons at the head and tail of the bunch are driven by the space charge forces towards opposite directions. Although it is based on a simple model, Eq. 25 gives results in good agreement with particle-tracking simulation tools, which are capable of more accurately dealing with realistic beam profiles. The Eq. 26 and 27 are the non-relativistic simplified case of coupled envelope equations where the evolution is followed along the longitudinal coordinate s, and k 0z,r represent the transverse and longitudinal focusing (various techniques to implement longitudinal focusing are discussed in the next sections) and the last terms can be interpreted as pressure forces preventing the beam sizes to become infinitely small for finite beam emittances. These equations are coupled by the perveance terms K, K l which represent the smooth space charge fields contributions to the envelope evolution, and naturally depend on the beam aspect ratio. In the limit of very low charge beams, these terms can be neglected. The transverse perveance is K ≈ I I A βγ , where I is the beam current and I A = 17.04 kA is the Alfven current. The energy dependence of K shows the 1 γ scaling discussed above. For an infinitely long beam of current, only the second equation is relevant. For bunched beams, K l = Qrcg β 2 γ 5 , where Q is the bunch charge and r c is the classical electron radius. When the bunch is long g → 1 and this is essentially the relativistic generalization of Eq. 25 in the limit l → ∞. For shorter bunches, g is a more complicate function of the aspect ratio of the beam in its own rest-frame. Regardless of the specific functional form of g, the strong γ dependence of K l illustrates the scaling of the space charge-induced bunch lengthening with energy. Larger γ values allow for higher charge density and bunch charge for single-shot experiments, and help maintaining ultrashort bunch lengths over a longer distances L, to accommodate for sophisticated sample delivery systems and other complex setups including front sample illumination, gas phase and liquid phase samples, etc. To quantitatively evaluate space charge effects on the beam evolution, particle tracking codes are heavily employed. Figure One appealing approach, inspired by the similarity with the gravitational potential fields of galaxies Alternatively, uniform ellipsoid beams can be formed by illuminating the photocathode with a very small transverse size and longitudinally parabolic laser pulse, and then the electron beam will expand transversely under its selffield One can take advantage of the time-dependent nature of oscillatory RF accelerating fields to manipulate the longitudinal phase space (LPS) of ultrafast electron beams. Typically the RF fields (depending on the injection phase) induce an energy modulation or chirp in the beam that through the effect of dispersion results in a temporal compression (or stretching) after some propagation distance. This dynamics occurs first in RF guns in the vicinity of the cathode, where electron energy is low. In this region the acceleration depends linearly on the experienced field amplitude, determining the rate of change of the electron velocity, its final energy and the TOF of electrons through the gap. As the electrons become relativistic and their velocities approach the speed of light, the dispersion in straight region of beamlines becomes negligible. In order to quantify this effect we can consider two electrons injected into one cavity at different times ∆t inj , and define a compression factor C of the cavity as the ratio between ∆t inj and the difference in time of arrival at the cavity output ∆T OA Figure When a bunching cavity is present (see e.g. the scheme in Figure In order to understand the dynamics in bunching cavities, we consider a beam of particles traveling in vacuum with a certain average energy γmc 2 and spread in time dt. To achieve temporal compression one first need to obtain the right correlation coefficient in the γ-t LPS. When used at the so-called zero-crossing phase, the bunching cavity provides zero net acceleration, but imparts an energy chirp h = dγ dt on the beam, with a negative slope in the γ-t distribution of magnitude h = eω 0 V 0 /mc 2 , where ω 0 and V 0 are the angular frequency and total integrated voltage of the structure, respectively. As the beam travels through the downstream transport line, the chirp leads to temporal compression via the longitudinal dispersion R drif t 56 /βc. In the LPS, this process can be seen as a shear motion of the γ-t distribution, i.e. electron trajectories in the plane move horizontally (maintaining a constant γ) until the projection of the distribution t is minimized and the beam reaches the shortest bunch length as depicted in Fig. It is worth pointing out a distinction between the minimization of ∆eT OF , and electron beam compression. While Eq.28 provides a direct link between C and ∆eT OF , the former parameter can only be quantitatively associated with actual electron beam temporal compression in the case of negligible longitudinal space charge effects, as in singleelectron mode operations. When dealing with a beam of multiple electrons, space charge fields will increase during compression and may eventually become important. To obtain the shortest pulse length at the sample, the bunching cavity field will then need to be set to higher values, in order to pre-compensate for the downstream space-charge de-bunching. This will lead to negative values of C, possibly even smaller than -1, with a consequent amplification of the input temporal jitter. For such reason temporal compression needs to be designed carefully. Despite providing shorter electron pulses at the target, it may be detrimental to the overall temporal resolution. The use of RF fields for energy modulation and temporal compression described above has long been used in vacuum electronic devices as well as in electron photoinjectors driven by DC or RF guns. In UED, such technique was first introduced for 100 keV electron beams THz radiation can be very efficient in compressing electron beams, due to the 2-3 orders of magnitude larger ω 0 compared to RF fields. Recent experiments have shown laser-generated THz radiation combined with interaction structures for coupling and enhancement can effectively compress keV-scale beams to bunch lengths below 100 fs Figure Many factors contribute to the the minimum bunch length achievable. Due to the non-linear relationship between γ and β, the LPS will develop nonlinear correlations even for an ideal linear chirp Another limitation is represented by space charge effects. The charge density increases during transport and compression, and the space charge field may develop nonlinear components associated with the particular charge density profile, including curvatures in the beam core and tails at the beam edges (see e.g. the tails of the distribution in Fig. The total longitudinal dispersion R 56 along a beamline can be tuned using specifically designed electron optics to provide compression without the need of an active cavity relying on the energy chirp induced by the space charge forces. For example, while in a drift high energy particles arrive earlier (positive dispersion), in a dipole magnet higher energy particles will arrive later than low-energy particles at the magnet output (negative dispersion). Therefore it is possible to design beamlines where a combination of magnets and drift sections lead to the isochronous condition (R 56 = 0) i.e. the particle TOF is independent from its energy, or to bunch compression with a non-zero R 56 and properly tuned beam chirp Symmetric and asymmetric double bend achromatic (DBA) transport lines with tunable R 56 have recently been demonstrated in MeV UED setups to improve the temporal resolution Taking advantage of the significantly shorter wavelength of optical lasers compared to RF or THz radiation, laser fields can create extremely fine structures in the phase space of electron beams, generating trains of attosecond-long pulses One of the most exciting research frontiers on electron beam manipulation is to further pushing the limit in time towards generation of isolated attosecond electron pulses The energy spread of an electron beam contributes to the blurring of the diffraction pattern as it effectively induces a spread in the electron wavelength and therefore of the diffraction features. Mathematically one has ∆E/E = ∆λ/λ. Common energy spread values, on the order of 10 -3 or smaller, have negligible contribution when compared with emittance-induced blurring (one order of magnitude lower or more). Nevertheless, there are cases where such effect becomes important, for example in laser-plasma based electron sources Contributions to the beam energy spread include the excess energy in the photoemission process, the variation of the accelerating field instantaneous amplitude over the beam duration, and the work done by space charge forces. Values of the energy spread at emission depend on the particular setup and illumination characteristics, and range from a few meV to a few eV (see Sec. II.B).Time dependent fields used for compression cause correlated increase of beam energy spread, as already explained above. Furthermore,transverse variations of the accelerating electric field within the beam result in additional energy spread. The characteristic spatial scale over which the longitudinal field changes is related to its wavelength Linearization cavities can be used in the process of minimizing linear and non linear correlations in the longitudinal phase space The energy spread can also be filtered out by collimation in a dispersive section Shot-to-shot energy fluctuations also appear as source of energy spread in experiments requiring accumulation. In DC-based electron guns the stability of the high voltage power supply is typically at the 1 ppm level. High power RF amplification needed for relativistic beam acceleration has energy stability on the order of 100 ppm at the state-of-the-art. The first UED apparatus was realized in 1982 using a modified streak camera with DC accelerating fields The complexity and cost of this technology (in particular for power supplies and the insulating stages) increase very fast with the applied gap voltage (see Fig. -4 Figure experimental data reported in Fig. DC-gun designs can also include the possibility for cathode back-illumination. Such geometry is optimal for ultracompact systems, where the space-charge driven electron beam bunch lengthening is kept under control by the minimization of the distance between the gun and the sample Transmission electron microscopes use DC acceleration. The microscope column can be modified to accommodate the input of a laser pulse for both photoemission and sample excitation, therefore adding ultrafast temporal resolution to the device Radiofrequency electron guns One potential drawback of the high fields in the cavity, is the generation of unwanted electrons field-emitted from the walls of the cavity every RF cycle and accelerated into the beamline (dark current). In UED applications the dark-current degrades the SNR at the detector, requiring filtering schemes along the line, as for example transverse collimation or time-gated acquisition. In order to minimize this issue, short RF pulses are sought, but the minimum duration is set by the cavity filling timeτ RF , ranging from a few to few hundreds μs. Some RF designs utilize overcoupling to shorten τ RF , at the expenses of reduced power delivery to the cavity due to the consequent impedance mismatch. Typical cavities require multi-MW peak RF power to establish 50-100 MV/m acceleration fields. Such high peak power bears important consequences on the maximum attainable repetition rate of both the guns and the RF power sources (typically high-power klystrons amplifiers). Indeed the maximum duty cycle of such a high power source is of the order of 1E -3, while the gun operations are limited to around 1000 Hz, due to the RF-induced heat load on the structure surfaces. A final consideration on the RF design is related to the presence of high-order cavity modes which can affect the beam dynamics. Quadrupole components in the RF fields arise due to the asymmetries in the cavity geometry (vacuum pumping holes, couplers, laser ports), and can severely affect the beam dynamics. Designs with symmetric coupling or racetrack cavity geometry are employed to minimize these effects The main R&D efforts to further improve pulsed RF guns performance include increasing the acceleration fields, the duty cycle and rep-rate, and the integration of advanced photocathodes in the RF cavity. Cryogenic pulsed RF guns are a promising research direction to push the limits of beam brightness Pushing the repetition rate of RF guns is a challenging endeavour. RF currents on the cavity walls cause ohmic losses, and eventually the power density dissipated on the cavity walls can not be efficiently removed anymore. For a given energy gain, the power density is a steep function of the RF frequency, proportional to f 5/2 RF Continuous-wave room-temperature normal-conducting RF guns have been developed in the context of high reprate X-FELs, and usually operate at lower frequencies in order to sustain the continuous field. As an example, the APEX gun An alternative solution which would greatly reduce the thermal management issue relates to the use of superconducting RF (SRF) technology When using CW-RF guns, each RF bucket can be filled with one electron pulse, so the maximum attainable repetition rate is equal to the RF frequency. In UED experiments, considerations on the available laser energy and sample relaxation times can limit the repetition rate further. Due to the CW operation, system noise can be characterized and potentially suppressed over a much wider bandwidth, thanks to fast electronic feedback. Therefore the amplitude and phase in a CW gun can in principle be controlled to high precision, obtaining higher energy stability than in the case of pulsed systems. High rep-rate detectors and beam instrumentation are an active area of development with many commonalities between UED and FEL requirements and similar rewards. In the following we provide an overview of the main research directions aimed at the development of new electron sources at the time of this review. a. THz gun and acceleration Extending electron beam acceleration devices to THz-scale frequencies could potentially allow to reach GV/m gradients, leading to a leap in beam brightness. Recent progress in this direction led to increased energy gain from a few keV to hundreds of keVs b. Laser-acceleration based electron sources Laser-driven acceleration is based on ultrashort and ultraintense lasers to achieve acceleration gradients up to three orders of magnitude higher than that of conventional RF accelerators. The main challenge is to identify suitable coupling mechanisms between the transverse electromagnetic waves and the longitudinal electron motion. In laser-plasma accelerators (LPA), this coupling is performed via excitation of a longitudinal plasma wave in a gas using intense laser pulses, producing gradients up to 10 GV/m. LPA-based electron sources share with THz-based acceleration the advantage of obtaining electron bunches intrinsically synchronized with the drive laser. In addition, the temporal duration of the accelerated bunches is inversely proportional to the plasma frequency, which can be controlled by the plasma charge density, naturally producing few fs electron bunches. The use of sub-MeV electron beams generated by laser driven acceleration for diffraction measurements has been demonstrated d. RF-streaked ultrashort bunch train Generation of picosecond to sub-ps electron beams usually relies on photoemission sources using ultrafast lasers. A new concept for producing a train of ultrashort bunches without laser has been proposed and experimentally demonstrated Measuring and controlling femstosecond electron beams is a challenging endeavour shared among many techniques for ultrafast science, such as free-electron lasers and ultrafast electron diffraction and microscopy setups. In UED, given the small number of electrons per pulse, accurate measurements of arrival time and pulse duration suffer from low signal-to-noise ratio and long acquisition times. Strong lateral focusing of electron pulses into nanoscale dimensions is complicated by the action of space charge forces, inducing large energy spread and non-linearities in the beam phase space, by the large beam emittance produced by flat cathodes and by lens aberrations. To further complicate the matter, beam properties are most useful if measured in real-time, i.e. contextually with the experiment. In what follow we provide an overview of the state-of-the-art techniques for measuring and control of electron beams in a UED beamline. Information on the electron beam temporal distribution can be encoded into one of the transverse directions through streaking technique, which uses time varying fields to introduce transverse-to-longitudinal correlations. A time-dependent kick in transverse momentum is applied (streaking), and then mapped into a transverse profile via a drift section or electron optical transport line. The necessary fields for beam streaking include quasi-DC, RF, THz, as well as optical fields. DC-like streaking fields are generated by ramping a DC field perpendicular to the beam trajectory, between two electrode plates, and have been used for long time in streak cameras to characterize the bunch length of low energy photoelectron beams. Optically triggered streak cameras can provide enough electric field amplitude for obtaining sub-picosecond resolution in non-relativistic setups. Photoswitch-based devices encode information related to the electron beam TOA at the sample within the diffraction pattern image (centroid motion of the peak along the streaking direction), obtaining 150 fs resolution after temporal binning Electron energy modulation via direct interaction with optical near-field from laser pulses can be used for retrieving pulse length and relative electron beam-laser time jitter. If the electrons are suddenly launched into a high field region, with boundary conditions allowing electric field in the longitudinal direction, electrons will be accelerated or decelerated depending on the phase, and energy sidebands will appear in the spectrum, showing higher-order periodic modulations separated by the laser photon energy reaching tens of eV. Analysis of the side bands reveals information on the electron beam duration and time jitter Direct electron-laser interaction in vacuum, i.e. ponderomotive scattering of electrons by laser fields, have also been used to characterize the bunch length of electron beams. The present laser technology provides access to high-peak laser intensities from commercial table top systems, in the region of 10 17 W/cm 2 , which can be used to drive non-linear processes and enable energy exchange with free electrons in vacuum. The ponderomotive force acting on an electron beam upon interaction with a laser field depends on the spatial gradient of the field envelope and adds an outward drift component to the motion, superimposed to the quiver oscillations driven by field oscillations in time The technique has been demonstrated in accumulation mode with non-relativistic UED setups Online, single-sot measurements of the relative time delay between pump and probe pulses provide a clear route towards higher temporal resolution. Such development needs to be carried out in conjunction with novel signal detection methods enabling high frame rate acquisition of single-shot UED patterns, which would then enable tagging of each frame with a specific measured pump-probe delay. The first demonstration of electron beam time stamping was performed in 2005 Temporal streaking of electron beams can provide sub-femtosecond resolution in time of arrival. The technique is mostly used for measurement of longitudinal beam distribution (Sec. II.E.1), but it can also be applied to the measurement of beam shot-to-shot temporal jitter. The information obtained in RF streaking corresponds to the jitter between the electron beam arrival time and the phase of the RF wave, not of the optical excitation pulse. If THz or optical frequencies are used, the streaking field can be derived directly from the pump laser, maintaining phase-coherence and providing direct pump-probe time-stamping information. Although beam streaking is a destructive measurement, it could be in principle applied to the undiffracted beam downstream the detector, if let through. Linear correlation between electron beam energy and time of flight has been experimentally demonstrated over a broad range of energies for a system without a bunching cavity All methods described in Sec. II.E.2 for time-stamping can also be used to find temporal overlap between the optical pump and the electron probe at the exact sample location, also called time-zero. On the other hand, performing time stamping measurements requires additional tools not necessarily included in every UED setup. Given the primary importance of establishing time-zero in ultrafast experiments, alternative methods have been developed, mostly based on destructive interaction between electron beam and laser mediated processes. The main challenge is to develop a simple and robust procedure to retrieve time-zero with sub-picosecond precision, which could be implemented rapidly during an experiment, ans possibly repeated multiple times during a data-acquisition run. For low density targets, like gaseous materials, hours of integration may be needed to obtain diffraction images with good SNR, making such experiments particularly sensitive to slow drifts of time-zero, due to variations of the system, such as environmental conditions or calibration constants. For example, the thermal coefficient of delay (TCD) of a typical optical fiber or coaxial cable is in the range of 10 ps/km/ • C or larger. As a consequence the time delay of signals traveling through a fiber/cable to reach the receiver depends on the ambient temperature. A change in temperature will then result in a phase shift at the receiver. As experiments with long accumulation times can run overnight, large temperature variations are expected if not compensated by adequate temperature control, and time-zero measurements will likely need to be repeated periodically throughout the experimental scan, justifying the need of a technique readily available contextually to the experiment. Electron beam shadowgraphy of transient electric fields in a laser-induced plasma has been extensively used as time-zero tool in UED experiments More recently another technique for electron-laser cross-correlation has been proposed and implemented, drawing from the examples of successful timing tools at FEL facilities (see for example When using time varying fields for acceleration and/or compression, phase locking between the different oscillators (RF and laser) in required. The most use figure of merit to characterize the system phase stability is the cumulative rms time jitter Once characterized, different signals can be phase locked to a reference with the use of a phase-locked-loop (PLL). A typical locking scheme includes a custom very-low-noise microwave oscillator as a common reference for all the subsystems. In order to perform laser phase locking, the oscillator cavity length can be adjusted controlling the position of the cavity end-mirror with voltage-regulated piezoelectric actuator, with typical bandwidth in the (tens of) KHz range limited by mechanical resonances the system. A schematic of a typical synchronization setup is shown in Fig. The figure also presents a general diagram for RF cavity field control. Feedback loops in this case act on the field amplitude and phase, therefore the RF electronics in the loop will have to decouple AM from PM (I/Q demodulator). A vectorial PID loop will provide the output signal to the RF amplifier to stabilize the cavity. In implementing a PLL loop, both analog or digital electronic solutions can be used. In particular, Field-Programmable-Gated-Array (FPGA) technology is becoming very common in the field of particle accelerator controls. FPGAs-based boards are today equipped with ADCs, DACs, clocks and clocks distribution channels, and can perform all the functions highlighted in the green dashed boxes of Fig. Figure Temporal streaking can be used in UED experiments to obtain continuous temporal information over the duration of the incoming electron beam. In this setup the deflecting element is placed after the UED sample, obtaining a streaked image of the diffraction pattern. The technique was already proposed during early UED experiments The advantages of this technique are demonstrated by the experiment results from Due to the induced coupling between longitudinal and transverse planes, the main limitation to the temporal resolution of the method is the transverse emittance. Indeed the total beam size at the detector plane σ x is the convolution between the geometric beam size without streaking σ x0 , and the streaking contribution, σ 2 x = σ 2 x0 + (K T CAV σ t ) 2 where K T CAV is the deflecting cavity calibration factor, measured in m/s. At the same time the method requires a larger number of electrons in the beam. For a given temporal resolution, the electron number requirements in a matching time slice should follow the requirements for single-shot UED defined earlier, i.e. roughly 1e6 electrons per units of temporal resolution, setting a beam current requirement. For example, to obtain 100 fs resolution, an electron beam with a current of 1.6 A should be used. Also, spatial information along the streaking plane is lost, and overlapping between different streaked Bragg peaks should be avoided The use of an optical system is critical to maximize the resolution in an optical setup. The scattering of the electrons in the sample changes their angle, and optics is used to convert this angular deviation into a transverse offset which can be detected using a beam profile monitor screen. An ideal optical system for this task is one for which the transverse position on the detector screen does not depend on the position of the electron at the sample so that a simple map exists between diffraction angles into position offsets. In beam optics formalism, this corresponds to setting the first element of the 6x6 transport matrix R 1,1 to be equal to zero. This could be accomplished by a series of round lenses as typically done when operating a transmission electron microscope in diffraction mode. Alternatively one could simply use a very long drift and settle for an equivalent condition where the transverse offset on the detector screen is dominated by the angular deviation at the sample plane (i.e. R 1,1 σ x R 1,2 θ b ). For a drift of length L, R 1,1 = 1 and R 1,2 = L so that this condition will be satisfied for a sufficiently long distance between the sample of the detector. R 1,2 is the so-called length of the diffraction camera and enters in the calibration of screen offset to angle which is essential to get quantitative information from the diffraction pattern. If a combination of lenses is used, the diffraction patterns need to be calibrated and a known Bragg peak or a calibration target can be used for this scope. Before we go in detail on the subject of transverse beam control, it is important to clarify the definition we adopt to characterize the spread of a distribution which, following accelerator and beam physics, is the root-mean-square (rms). Such a definition can be used independently from the actual details of the distribution and transported along the beam line using linear equations. The relation of the rms size with other definitions, such as FWHM or FW50 (or full width containing 50 % of the beam) more common in other literatures, will depend on the particular shape of the distribution. There are a variety of motivations to control the size and shape of the transverse distribution of the electrons illuminating the sample in UED experiments. For example, by increasing the transverse spot size at the sample (which can be done provided sufficiently large sample and pump area), one can reduce the uncorrelated beam divergence and therefore increase the coherence length L c . Conversely, a very small spot size is needed to understand the role of local heterogeneities in structural dynamics and whenever large samples can not be used. In fact, in typical custom kev and MeV UED setups, the transverse probe size has been around 100 μm rms, and smaller local details are averaged out in the Bragg peaks. An exciting research and development opportunity is to combine the strengths of UED and TEM, i.e. femtosecond pulse duration/temporal resolution with μm and smaller probe size, to enable studies of ultrafast structural dynamics with very high spatial resolution. Using the formulas in Sec. I.A.4, we can estimate the beam quality requirements to achieve simultaneously desired probe size and momentum transfer resolution in micro and nano UED. If we target an rms probe size at the sample σ x = 1 μm rms and an uncorrelated beam divergence σ x = 100 μrad rms yielding reciprocal space resolution ∆s = 2πσ x /λ = 0.26 Å-1 for γ = 10 electrons, the corresponding normalized emittance requirement is n = γσ x σ x < 1 nm-rad, at the lowest end of what achievable with state-of-the-art electron sources. In these demanding cases, simply measuring how small the spot size is at the sample becomes a technological feat. Typically, a spot size measurement is obtained from the quantitative analysis of beam images from fluorescent screens or other 2D detectors (see below for general discussion). These work well for low charge beams with spot sizes down to 10 μm. At higher beam charges, effects like saturation or space-charge blooming a. Electron optics In the following we will discuss electron focusing, starting from the lens geometry, configuration and limits and then addressing the most common magnet technologies employed. It is worth noting that that space charge effects enter in this discussion only at second order, mostly being responsible for emittance growth. Somewhat counter-intuitively, in tight focusing conditions the beam waist is ballistic and fully dominated by the emittance term and not by space charge forces (see envelope equation in Sec. II.C.5) Both electrostatic and magnetic lenses can be used for focusing Solenoids are the most common electron optical element in UED beamlines. The focal length of a solenoid of effective thickness L is f = (4Bρ) 2 B 2 L where Bρ = m 0 cβγ/e 0 is the relativistic beam magnetic rigidity. Spherical and chromatic aberrations The quadrupole lens is another focusing element which focuses in one direction and defocuses in the other one. The focal length of a single quadrupole of effective thickness L q can be written as f = Bρ gLq and has a much more favorable scaling with energy than the solenoid. g is the quadrupole gradient and strongly depends on the gap size. For small gaps (mm-scale) quadrupole gradients approaching g 1000 Tesla/mm are achievable Conventional electromagnets use current carrying coils and an iron yoke to bend the field lines and complete the magnetic circuit. The magnetic field depends linearly on the current density until saturation in the high permeability yoke takes place. For current densities below 1.5 A/mm 2 the magnet can be simply air-cooled Permanent magnet technology (either pure or hybrid) is a competitive candidate as it eliminates the need for the power supply and has no cooling requirement Collimation of the outer part of the beam, the so called buffer-charge, will eliminate most of space charge-induced emittance growth We can get a better understanding at how the collimator works to improve the quality of the patterns, by looking at the simulations in Fig. Electron detectors are a key element in a UED setup, as much as they are in electron microscopy. While most of the UED research efforts has been focused on beam generation and manipulation techniques, improvements of detection schemes, both in space and in sensitivity would have a tremendous impact on the technique, decreasing the integration times by decreasing the number of electrons needed for the experiments, and contributing to the elimination of the background and to an optimal SNR. To our advantage, electron detection has been studied for decades and produced a large amount of literature, mostly driven by electron microscopy. In the following we summarize the status of the field in UED. In conventional non-relativistic UED micro-channel plates (MCP) are used for direct amplification of diffracted keV electrons. The intensified electron flux is then converted by a scintillator to visible photons which are subsequently fiber-optically coupled to a high efficiency charge-coupled device (CCD) camera. It is relatively straightforward to achieve single-electron detection capability due to the large gain of the MCP and the high light collection efficiency of the fiber-optics coupling. MCPs have also been tested for MeV electrons, obtaining high quality single-shot diffraction patterns An effective alternative for the detection of MeV electrons is the use of optimized passive scintillator screens which are low cost and provide high electron-to-photon conversion efficiency and improved spatial resolution. A phosphor screen yields as many as a few thousand photons for each MeV electron due to the large penetration depth of MeV electrons. As an example, two recent papers reported calibration measurements showing greater than 10 3 photons per MeV electron from a Lanex Fine (a commercial version of phosphor P43) screen It becomes then important to maximize the collection efficiency of the optical system which images the detection screen onto the charge-coupled device. The collected solid angle of a lens with numerical aperture N = f /D where D is the diameter of the lens and f its focal length is proportional to 1/N 2 (M + 1) 2 where M is the magnification factor. At the same time in order to maximize the reciprocal space resolution, one would want to increase the magnification so that more pixels can be used to cover the same momentum transfer interval. For a given detector, the best situation is obtained when the size of the diffraction pattern at the screen is matched to the dimensions of the CCD array so that M is close to 1 -and the collection angle maximized. For example, a scattering angle of 3 mrad from a 4 MeV beam energy corresponds to a momentum transfer s up to 4 Å-1 . If the CCD chip used has a vertical dimensions of 7 mm, then the diffraction pattern reaches its optimum width size 2.4 m downstream the sample. With a properly designed lens coupling system whose collection efficiency is higher than 1% and a state-of-the-art CCD camera capable of single-photon detection, single-electron imaging is possible. This was demonstrated in the work from the UCLA group where diffraction spots from planes up to (800) were detected from a single crystal 20 nm gold sample in a single shot Scintillator-based detection schemes offer high sensitivity, but also several shortcomings. First, the they suffers from image burn in. For example in P43, intense fluorescence can persist at a low level for minutes afterwards even though the fluorescence 1/e lifetime is 0.7 ms. This is disadvantageous when analyzing subtle differences in diffraction patterns. Faster scintillators are available, but generally exhibit low quantum efficiency. Second, and more important, a typical spatial resolution of a phosphor screens is on the order of 50-100 μm, limiting the reciprocal space (q-space) resolution of the system. For the detector employed in the experiment from The dynamic range of the imaging system is another important requirement, given the large intensity variation between different features in the diffraction pattern ( for example bragg peaks versus diffused scattering signal). An effective solution is to use a radially symmetric, variable neutral-density apodizing optical filter on the output side the phosphor screen, extending the system dynamic range by over 7 orders of magnitude. Similar large dynamicrange detection scheme has also been pursued and implemented for beam halos characterization in high electron accelerators Recently, active pixel sensor technology (APS) initially proposed for detectors in particle physics Here the electron beam impinges directly on the sensor (from top to bottom in Fig. Direct electron detection provides unprecedented performance in terms of efficiency and resolution, which make it a very attractive technology for experiments with low illumination, such as electron microscopy and speficic UED modes, including gas-phase or nano-diffraction experiments. Thanks to the large number of e-h pairs for each electrons and the very low leakage current, the detector quantum efficiency (DQE) of such systems approaches 1 A further advantage of high speed and single-electron sensitivity, is the possibility to perform cluster imaging The focus of this section is to provide quantitative tools and showcase the impact/potential of UED techniques in solid-state and material physics applications. For the sake of clarity, we will differentiate between ultrafast electron diffraction (UED) and ultrafast electron diffuse scattering (UEDS) signals, the former being associated with Braggpeak electron scattering, and the latter, much weaker, resulting from electron scattering with the system phonon modes. The signals in these time-resolved crystallographic techniques have directly benefited from developments in enhanced beam brightness and shorter pulse duration that the last decade has brought. There is now a long list of extremely exciting examples of UED studies in solid state materials that probe a wide range of phenomena in most classes of materials, phases and microstructures (single crystal, polycrystal, monolayers and amorphpous/liquids). As we will show, increasingly complex and subtle phenomena have been visualized in recent years, and many important questions at the very center of condensed matter physics can now be addressed directly by UED. Section III.B provides a summary of the theory of electron scattering in materials to provide a quantitative basis on which to understand both UED and UEDS signals. In Sec. III.C we describe the main experimental requirements and constraints, including the determinants of signal-to-noise and issues of specimen preparation. Finally, in Sec. III.D we present selected experimental results that exemplify some of the unique capabilities of the UED technique. B. Summary of theory results for time-resolved electron scattering from crystalline solids 1. Scattering from crystals including phonon excitations Under equilibrium conditions, atoms in crystalline materials fluctuate about their lattice positions in a manner that depends on the temperature and phonon band structure of the material. Following laser excitation, these atomic positions can change as a function of time in a number of distinct ways that have characteristic effects on the electron scattering intensity, I(s). Thus, measurement of time-dependent electron scattering provides rich and detailed information on lattice transformations and phonon excitations as we summarize below. Following the most common perturbative treatment as given in Zeroth-order scattering: I 0 (s) The zeroth order term in the series expansion for I(s) yields Bragg scattering modified by the lattice/phonon excitations: where, as described in Sec.I.A.3, α is the index of each basis atom in the unit cell. The anisotropic Debye-Waller factor (DWF), exp(-M α (s)), depend on the M α (s) for each basis atom, which are given exactly by: The phonon Eigenvectors êj,α,k describe the direction (or polarization) of the atomic displacements associated with the phonon mode of frequency, ω j,k . The index j specifies the phonon branch which labels the symmetry properties of the phonon mode (e.g. longitudinal or transverse and optical or acoustic modes). The mode amplitude a j,k is related to the quantum number n j,k , the number of phonons with that index in the phonon field; |a j,k | 2 = mαω j,k n j,k + 1 2 . The DWF depends on the amplitude of atomic motion associated with all phonon modes and suppresses the structure factor (and therefore scattering intensity). This can be understood as a weakening of microscopic structural correlations due to vibrational atomic motion away from their average lattice coordinates in the material. The effect of the atomic displacements associated with phonon excitations on the intensity of Bragg scattering is to exponentially suppress diffraction peak intensities. M α (s) is a complicated expression in this general form, but its magnitude clearly scales as s 2 . Thus, phonon excitation suppresses the intensity of peaks in a very characteristic way as a function of scattering vector. In fact, Equation (30) can be shown to reduce to M α (s) = 2π 2 u 2 α s 2 in limit of isotropic atomic displacements. In this limit it is clear that the suppression of Bragg peak intensities depend on both the mean-square atomic displacements and the magnitude of the scattering vector squared. First-order scattering: I 1 (s) The first-order term in the expansion described above is called the thermal diffuse scattering intensity and is given by the following expression: where F 1j (s) is called the one-phonon structure factor and is given by: This term in the expansion has a very different character than I 0 . I 1 is non-zero at all scattering vectors, not just at scattering vectors that satisfy the Laue condition. Equation (31) shows that I 1 scattering at s is exclusively due to phonon excitations with wavevector k = s -G, where G is the reciprocal lattice vector associated with the closest Bragg peak. Thus I 1 provides momentum-resolved information on phonon excitations in the crystal. Thermal diffuse scattering I 1 (s) gives detailed, wavevector-resolved information about the lattice structural fluctuations in terms of the phonon mode amplitudes n j,s-G ωj (s-G) . This term is weighted by F 1j (s). The form of F 1j (s) is very similar to Eqn. (10) except for an additional factor of s • êj,α,k . This factor gives distinct structure to F 1j (s) (and therefore also I 1 (s)) through the set of phonon Eigenvectors, {ê j,α,k }, leading to regions of reciprocal space where F 1j (s) vanishes if s ⊥ êj,α,k . The s dependence is contained through its relation to k and G which is s = G + k. The single-phonon structure factor is a s-dependent weight for each phonon contribution to the total diffuse intensity I 1 (s). Generally, the polarization vectors ê are best computed using density-functional methods for real material systems. Some examples of calculations of F 1j (s) and thermal diffuse scattering are shown in Fig. The perturbative single phonon scattering theory presented above is an attractive starting point for understanding electron scattering from materials, but is an approximation. The limits of this approximation and the more general multi-phonon theory has recently been fully described by Zacharias and coworkers 2. Time-dependent factors in Bragg scattering: I0(s, t) The results presented above provide a quantitative basis on which to understand ultrafast electron scattering signals from single crystal materials. Specifically, how UED provides a window on nonequilibrium structural dynamics within a well defined phase and can also provide details on the dynamics associated with the transformation between phases. Here we identify how various materials physics processes lead to qualitatively distinct changes in electron scattering intensity. Order and periodicity: Phase transitions that yield a change in lattice, charge or orbital order will tend to modify the set of reciprocal lattice vectors; G • R n = 2π ×Integer. Transformations that change the space group/symmetry result in a different set of reciprocal lattice vectors and the appearance/disappearance of Bragg peaks from a diffraction pattern. Transformations that only modify the lattice constants (e.g. thermal expansion or strain), but not the space group/symmetry, re-scale the existing set of reciprocal lattice vectors and result in shifts of Bragg peak positions, not new peaks. Strain can also be probed in electron diffraction patterns through peak broadening and asymmetry. Directed and coherent motion: Optical excitation can result in the coherent, directed motion of atoms across many or all unit cells in a material without necessarily changing the space group/symmetry of the crystal. This motion may be associated with a coherently excited vibration (oscillation) or the structural pathway along which the material evolves between two phases. Motion of this type changes the atomic coordinates, r α , which modulate the interference condition in the structure factors, |F 0 (s)| 2 . Changes in structure factor due to atomic motion like these are directly observed as changes in the intensity of Bragg peaks across the entire detector in a manner that is characteristic of the motion. The impacts are not confined to a single Bragg peak; relevant information is distributed throughout the pattern. Thus, a full characterization of the motion will -in general-require the time-dependence of a sufficiently complete set of diffraction peaks, not just a single one. For example, a coherent optical phonon will modulate the exp(-is • r α ) phase term of the structure factor F 0 (s). This effect will yield a characteristic intensity modulation at the frequency of the phonon, but only in diffraction peaks associated with reciprocal lattice vectors with a non-zero projection onto the atomic motion u α ; i.e. those G for which G • u α is nonzero. Bonding, valency, orbital order and atomic form factors: In the solid-state, atomic scattering factors are not necessarily isotropic due to chemical bonding and orbital ordering that is present. Atomic form factors for electron scattering, f α (s), are sensitive to details of the valence charge distributions, in particular at small scattering vectors where these changes tend to be largest Equation ( 3. Time dependent factors in the diffuse intensity: I1(s, t) Phonon mode amplitudes in I 1 (s): Unlike the DWF, diffuse intensity provides a momentum-resolved picture of phonon mode amplitudes n j,k ω j,k (t -t 0 ) if the single-phonon structure factors F 1j (s) are known to a reasonable degree. The diffiuse intensity at scattering vector s reports exclusively on phonons with wavevector k = Gs. Changes in diffuse intensity report on the changes in phonon mode amplitude that can result from either changes in occupancy ∆n j,k (t -t 0 ) (usually phonon emission) and/or changes in mode frequency ω j,k (t -t 0 ) everywhere in the Brillouin zone. For the typical case where mode frequencies are relatively unchanged by photo-excitation the transient diffuse intensity at the detector ∆I(s, t -t 0 ) is given by In the time-domain, the measured rate of phonon emission ∆n j,k (t -t 0 ) initiated by photo-excited electrons contains information about the electron-phonon coupling vertex at that wavevector. Diffuse intensity measurements, when appropriately related to the phonon system, has the potential to yield dynamics of phonon modes and band structures analogous to way the angle-resolved photo-electron spectroscopy yields dynamics of electronic states and bands. In UED and UEDS experiments there are three primary practical considerations related to electron beam parameters. First, the electron beam spot-size at the sample determines the spatial resolution of the probe and may limit the maximum momentum resolution (see Fig. In this section we will introduce the important considerations regarding UED experiments on solid-state specimens. These are sample preparations methods (Sec. III.C.1), laser excitation conditions (Sec. III.C.2), signal detection and noise considerations (Sec. III.C.3), sample reversibility considerations in multi-shot experiments on the same sample (Sec. III.C.4) and details pertaining to the handling and processing of UED measurement data (Sec. III.C.5). UED experiments build on many decades of developments in conventional electron microscopy and have similar sample requirements. The kinematical approximation for Bragg peak intensities presented above is in quantitative agreement with those measured in electron diffraction patterns of single crystalline specimens only for nm-scale thicknesses. Thicker specimens require dynamical (multiple scattering) diffraction calculations if a truly quantitative determination of the changes to structure factors is desired. Thus, to obtain easily interpreted results there is a strong incentive to perform UED experiments on very thin specimens. Such specimens typically make use of standard substrates that have been developed and employed to support samples in transmission electron microscopes. Some typical examples are shown in Fig. One of the primary advantages of ultrafast electron scattering (compared to x-ray scattering) in transmission experiments on solid-state materials is the excellent match between typical optical absorption depths and the sample thicknesses for which kinematical (or quasi-kinematical) scattering applies. At near-IR and visible wavelengths skin depths are on the order of 10 nm in metallic films, with absorption lengths increasing to 100s of nm for above bandgap excitation in semiconductors and insulators. Thus, it tends to be rather straightforward to design transmission geometry experiments in which the electron beam probes a nearly homogeneously excited volume of material. Large signals from homogeneously excited volumes significantly simplifies data analysis and interpretation. 3. Determinants of signal detection; shot-noise limits Beam brightness has been a primary motivator behind the development of new pulsed electron beam sources for UED. This is because of signal-to-noise (SNR) in a UED experiment is fundamentally limited by beam brightness. We briefly discuss SNR considerations at a general level as they apply to the measurement of pump-induced changes in ultrafast electron scattering intensity from solid state samples. These considerations will serve to provide further motivation for continued improvements in electron beam brightness. In time-resolved scattering and diffraction, the differential intensity ∆I/I is almost always considered and the SNR of a measurement places a limit on the magnitude of the optically induced change in scattered intensity, ∆I, that can be reliable determined Shot noise: This is determined directly from the counting statistics σ shot (Q, f rep , T ) = N e . The relationship between detector counts and "single electron detection instances" varies depending on the detector type, but Poisson statistics on a per pixel or per region-of-interest basis usually still apply. Source noise: This term depends on the noise properties of the electron source used for the experiments, characterized by a noise spectral density α source and is given by σ source (Q, f rep , T ) = α source N e / √ T . Detector noise: This term includes, gain noise σ gain , pixel integration/binning noise σ int and readout noise σ readout . All of the relevant noise terms add in quadrature. The total signal to noise is expressed as In typical solid-state samples with thickness in the range of 10-100 nm, the Bragg scattering probability is p s=G = I s=G /I tot ∼ 10 -3 (for a single Bragg peak). Figure Transmission ultrafast electron diffraction experiments are performed on thin-film specimens that are susceptible to heat accumulation effects. In pump-probe spectroscopy, thin film specimens are often deposited onto thick optically transparent substrates to efficiently remove heat from the laser excited film. In UED experiments the same approach cannot be employed, since the total film thickness must typically be kept below ∼100 nm; heat must be removed via transport in the plane of the film rather than normal to the film. Convective cooling via air is also not effective in a vacuum environment. In a pump-probe experiment, energy is deposited at a rate equal to F × f rep , where F is the absorbed pump-fluence (mJ/cm 2 ) and f rep is the pulse repetition rate. For a given F , the rate of thermal transport of pump-laser deposited energy out of the excited region will, in practice, set some limit on the laserexcitation repetition rate that can be used in an experiment. As a result, SNR in solid-state UED cannot be increased arbitrarily through the use of higher repetition rate sources. Given the maximum repetition rate determined by heat dissipation consideration, SNR improves directly with Q and T as described in the previous section. This provides a strong argument for continued improvements in electron beam brightness and stability as primary enablers of future advances in UED. There are, however, a number of effective and proven strategies to enhancing the rate of in-plane thermal transport. For truly "free-standing" thin samples in the quasi-2D limit, a useful model to understand the tradeoffs is provided by the equation In Eqn. 36, t r is the relaxation or recovery time, w is the width of the pump-beam (excited region), κ is the thermal conductivity, T 0 is the initial excited effective temperature and T f is the final temperature. The cooling time t r scales with square of the width of the excitation region, w 2 . Thus, nanoprobe setups promise a step forward in this regard because the laser-deposited energy can diffuse out of the probes region on potentially a nano-second time-scale, allowing for repetition rates into the several MHz and potentially into the GHz range. In addition, more complex specimen geometries can be used to dramatically increase thermal transport out of the laser excited region and reduce cooling times between laser shots. It is only necessary that the probed region be electron beam transparent. The region surrounding this 'window' can be as thick as desired and thermally engineered. TEM sample supports based on Si:SiN nano-membranes provide an excellent solution in this respect. Window sizes and membrane thicknesses can be chosen to optimize SNR and thermal transport conditions leading to cooling rates somewhere between a truly 2D film and the conditions typically employed in spectroscopy. To ensure that appropriate steady-state conditions are present in solid-state samples during pump-probe UED experiments one can follow the evolution of the UED patterns at negative pump-probe time delays (i.e. probe arriving before the pump) over the course of an experiment. Changes in these patterns as a function of lab time can clearly indicate that the sample is deteriorating due to repeated laser shots. In addition, negative time delay patterns can indicate if an inappropriate or unexpected steady state condition is achieved at the pulse repetition rates being used in the experiments. If so, modifications to the accumulation conditions can be made accordingly. Efficient handling of large experimental datasets is essential for UED experiments. The raw data typically comprises a sequence of pump-probe delay time stamped diffraction images that can easily exceed hundreds of Gigabytes. Basic data reduction steps include the removal of artifacts specific to the camera and experiment geometry that are not associated with the desired signals (e.g. detected laser light or dead pixels) and the determination of suitably averaged, differential (pump-on minus pump-off) images at each pump-probe time delay. Typically, this can be accomplished by subtracting appropriate reference images on a per scan or per time-point basis and stacking repeated measurements. Shot to shot or scan to scan normalization of the signals can be used to diagnose and correct for some systematic changes during the experiment (e.g. source noise, beam intensity and position drifts). In some cases it can be desirable to remove background signals that result from the sample substrate or heating effects that are not removed by straight forward image subtraction. Methods to accomplish this vary and have been developed by researchers on a case by case basis, although various approaches to background subtraction have been previously published (René de Cotret and Siwick (2017); It is unlikely that the processing of UED and UEDS data and subsequent extraction of dynamical structural information will ever obtain the level of automation that is common in conventional/static xray or electron crystallography. However, the further development of software tools that facilitate both the processing and exploration of time-resolved data, and the reliable, standardized, and quantitative extraction of meaningful structural information from it is urgently needed by the community. Some recent progress on developing an open-source software ecosystem for UED and UEDS has been made (René de but not yet available. In this section is to present a selection of experimental results showcasing the unique capabilities of ultrafast electron diffraction tools. Owing to their short wavelength and large elastic cross-section, and thanks to technological development in acceleration, compression and control of dense high-brightness beams, electron probes can today efficiently capture the temporal evolution of irreversible processes, sample micrometer-sized areas, and deliver high reciprocal space resolution and signal-to-noise ratio for detection of weak signals such as thermal diffuse scattering, while at the same time maintaining a temporal resolution of 100 fs or below 1. Following ultrafast evolution of irreversible processes with high brightness beams Some of the earliest work that applied UED to solid-state systems were performed to interrogate the irreversible processes involved in laser-induced melting and ablation of solids . ing intensity that are expected of the liquid/amorphous/disordered phase where only short range pair-correlations are present (similar to those of gas-phase samples described in Sec. IV). This is illustrated for laser-excited gold in Fig. 31 Reduced dimensionality can induce the emergence of quantum behaviour in materials through electron confinement. Quantum materials provide a rich playground for light-induced control of material properties, but direct access to the lattice dynamics is complicated by the faint signal associated with the small numbers of atomic layers As one example, UED setups can be used to reveal symmetry breaking transitions, a concept that is central to condensed matter physics. Whether such symmetry breaking can be controlled by optical excitation is a question of fundamental importance for the "properties on demand" type approaches described in Sec. I.D.1. As an example, LaTe 3 is a layered compound in which a small lattice anisotropy in the a -c plane results in a uni-directional charge density wave (CDW) along the c axis (Fig. original uniaxial CDW are nearly identical, which points towards a strong competition between the two orders. The new density wave represents a transient non-equilibrium phase of matter with no equilibrium counterpart. UED enables studies aimed at revealing how light can be used to control the structure of quantum materials by probing lattice and charge order directly. Ultrafast electron probes provide a unique tool for measuring the coupling between electron and phonons, and the evolution of phonon population in non-equilibrium scenarios. Such signal appears through patterns in the diffuse scattering background (UEDS). Accurate measurement of UEDS intensity across the momentum space requires high resolution in reiprocal space, to separate the Bragg and phonon diffuse scattering, and at the same time large momentum space field of view. Furthermore, SNR requirements are orders of magnitude more higher than for the case of Bragg peak detection, since the phonon diffuse intensity is (in general) several order of magnitude weaker and, therefore, competing with the measurement background floor. Figure By complementing the UEDS with first principle density-functional theory calculations of the phonon polarization vectors, e j,α,k it is possible to transform the measured data into a map of the phonon populations for each mode as shown in Fig. UEDS provides rich time, momentum and branch resolved information on the state of the phonon system and has yielded insights into inelastic electron and phonon scattering A. Introduction Molecules can be thought of as atomic-scale machines that convert light into chemical energy and heat through the motion of atoms and the destruction and creation of chemical bonds. This intricate dance takes place on the picometer scale, with the speed of the moving atoms determined by internal forces. The fast motion, combined with the small distances over which they take place, results in structural changes taking place over tens to hundreds of femtoseconds. The accurate observation of these structural dynamics is essential for elucidating the reaction mechanisms, which has motivated the development of instruments capable of probing reactions with sub-Angstrom spatial resolution and femtosecond temporal resolution. First observations of these dynamics were enabled by the development of femtosecond lasers, which could be used to precisely trigger reactions and probe changes in their energy landscape, giving rise to the field of Femtochemistry In a GUED pump-probe experiment, molecules in the sample volume are excited by a short laser pulse (the pump) and then probed by a short electron pulse which arrives at a predetermined time delay with respect to the pump. The resulting scattering pattern of electrons is recorded in a two-dimensional imaging detector, typically after accumulation of multiple electron pulses. Multiple snapshots of the changing molecular structure can be recorded by adjusting the relative time delay between the laser and electron pulses. Time resolved gas electron diffraction experiments where a sample was excited by a laser and probed by an electron pulse can be traced back to early experiments with microsecond resolution GUED pump-probe experiments are directly sensitive to the relative positions of the nuclei in a molecule, which allows for probing both reaction kinetics and dynamics given sufficient temporal resolution. Reaction kinetics are concerned with the rate with which a product is formed, and the time scales can vary from femtosecond up to milliseconds and beyond. Reaction dynamics are concerned with the actual path that the nuclei take during the reaction, i.e. the motion of each atom during a structural rearrangement. In most cases, this motion takes place on timescales ranging from tens to hundreds of femtoseconds. If the reaction dynamics are coherent, i.e. all excited molecules undergo the transformation simultaneously, then the full motion of the nuclei can, in principle, be mapped using GUED. If the reaction is thermally driven, each molecule will still go through the reaction in a short time, but different molecules will undergo the transformation at different times, thus the GUED measurement can only capture the reaction kinetics, along with the structure of intermediate and final products. Recent improvement in the temporal resolution of GUED, which is currently in the order of 100 fs, have been transformative to the field, as they enable GUED to capture reaction dynamics. In addition to the temporal resolution, the pump laser and the sample delivery are crucial aspects of a successful experiment. Ideally the pump pulse will be designed to produce a specific excitation condition. This requires control over the duration, wavelength and fluence of the laser pulse. The temporal resolution of a GUED experiment has many contributions, as expressed in Eq. 16. With the advent of commercial laser systems capable of delivering sub-30 fs pulses , the laser pulse duration τ pump is seldom the limiting term in the overall temporal resolution of a GUED experiment (see Sec. II.B.6). The electron bunch length τ probe is dependent on the pulse length of the drive laser, the initial energy spread in the electron bunch and the space-charge induced pulse broadening during propagation. Control and manipulation of τ probe to obtain short electron pulses has been reviewed in Sec. II.C. In GUED experiments using non-relativistic electrons, the temporal resolution is typically dominated by the velocity mismatch between the pump laser and the probe electron, τ V M In GUED experiments with relativistic electrons the τ V M term is typically less than 10 fs, and the overall resolution is rather affected by τ ∆pp term, a consequence of fluctuations in timing and energy of the electron bunches, typically attributed to instabilities in the launching field and/or the timing of the drive laser system (see Sec. II.C.4).These effects are more pronounced in setups with RF cavity electron sources-based setup or those fitted with RF bunch compressors, as the use of time-dependent fields requires extremely precise synchronization between the drive laser and the cavity fields (see Sec. II.E.4). In principle, shot-by-shot data acquisition and time-stamping could enable the temporal sorting of the signal in post-processing, thus mitigating contributions from the τ ∆pp term (see Sec. II.E.2). The pump laser pulse parameters are selected to excite the molecule to a specific state or states. In many molecules energies above 4 eV are needed to reach the first excited state. The most commonly used laser source for UED experiments is a Ti:Saphire laser, which has a central wavelength of around 800 nm, which corresponds to 1.55 eV in photon energy. Higher photon energies can be reached using nonlinear optical processes to generate the second, third and fourth harmonics at 3.1 eV, 4.65 eV and 6.3 eV, repectively. An optical parametric amplifier (OPA) can be used to produce tunable wavelengths in the visible and UV down to 200 nm, which gives more flexibility to select the excitation wavelength but generally produces less pulse energy than the harmonic conversion. The laser pulse duration must be short enough as not to impact the temporal resolution of the experiment. On the other hand, if the laser pulse is very short, this would result in a broad spectrum and simultaneous excitation of multiple energy levels which in some cases might not be desirable. The fluence of the laser pulse is often a critical parameter in the experiment due to two competing requirements: excite a sufficiently high fraction of the sample volume and avoid multiphoton excitation. The signal to noise ratio (SNR) of a GUED experiment is directly proportional to the fraction of excited molecules, since the measured signal increases proportionally to the number of excited molecules while the noise remains unchanged. For comparison, the SNR increase associated with using higher bunch charges is, at best, proportionally to the square root of the electron beam current, since a higher number of electrons increases both the signal and the noise. For a 1-photon transition, the excitation fraction is proportional to the product of the absorption cross section of the molecule and the laser fluence. Most experiments require excitation of at least a few percent to achieve an adequate signal level. As the laser intensity increases, multiphoton channels need to also be considered. Having both single and multiphoton excitation in a single experiment is often undesirable as it makes the data interpretation much more complex. In some cases, although, it is possible to separate the dynamics arising from single and multiphoton channels Finally, the pump laser must overlap the electron at the interaction region and allow for a uniform excitation of the sample volume. This can be achieved by either making the spot size of a laser beam with a gaussian profile slightly larger than the electron beam, or by shaping the laser beam into a flat top spatial profile. The required laser fluence is determined by the spot size of the electron beam and the absorption cross section of the target molecule at excitation wavelength. With typical electron beam sizes ranging between 100 μm and 300 μm, most experiments are performed with laser pulse energies between 10 μJ and 100 μJ in the UV, which requires a few-mJ laser pulse at 800 nm to drive the OPA. distance between interaction region and incoupling and focusing optics. Experiments at lower signal levels due to lower excitation fraction or lower sample density will result in a data set with a more limited range of momentum transfer, essentially reducing the spatial resolution. Different nozzle designs have been developed and successfully employed in the study of samples with a wide range of scattering cross-sections, vapor pressures and thermal decomposition properties. When studying samples with low vapor pressure, sample density is often limited by the temperature of the sample. In these cases, precise control of the temperature across the sample delivery system is important, along with the ability to flow carrier gases through the sample. Sample delivery strategies commonly used in gas-phase UED experiments can be categorized under two main classes: pulsed and continuous nozzles. In this section we compare the main features of these nozzle types and discuss the considerations of nozzle selection. All dimensions, temperatures and pressures described hereafter refer to, or have been obtained at, the gas-phase MeV UED instrument at SLAC Continuous nozzles have been used both as effusive and supersonic nozzles in GUED experiments. Effusive nozzles consist of a circular orifice a few tens of micrometers in diameter at the end of a gas transport line. Typically built out of stainless steel, without moving parts or sealing surfaces, these nozzles are extremely reliable and can be easily heated to facilitate the delivery of low-vapor pressure samples. When delivering samples with vapor pressure of less than 5 Torr at room temperature, it is recommended to keep the sample reservoir in vacuum and as close as possible to the heated nozzle. This minimizes the potential for cold spots along the transport line and reduces the risk of clogging the nozzle orifice with condensates. To achieve the highest possible sample density from the expanding gas plume, nozzles are typically placed one electron beam diameter away from the center of the interaction volume. This close proximity between the nozzle and intersection region can, in some cases, result in the ablation of the nozzle by the pump laser, leading to orifice damage and/or clogging. An alternative approach to compensate the rapid decrease in gas density away from orifice is to elongate the interaction region, for example, by using flow-cells or nozzles with elongated orifices. Flow cells, consist of a transport tube with two circular orifices aligned with each other and oriented perpendicularly to the tube and parallel to the propagation axis of the electron. These cells enable higher sample densities and longer interaction region at the cost of a more angularly constrained interaction region and increased background pressure upstream of the chamber. For a flow cell with a 4 mm path length and 500 μm orifices, sample densities between of 3 × 10 16 and 1.6 × 10 17 molecules cm -3 can be achieved for sample pressures of between 1 and 5 Torr. Most samples which are liquids at room temperature can achieve these vapor pressures with gentle heating (< 60 degree Celsius). Nozzles with elongated orifices, also known as slit nozzles, often require high sample pressures to achieve identical density over the interaction volume, due to the rapid expansion of the gas plume. A 60 by 1000 μm slit nozzle requires a sample pressure of around 20 Torr to achieve a density of 10 16 molecules cm -3 . Supersonic nozzles are useful for producing a beam of rotationally cold molecules, and also result in a more collimated gas beam. These nozzles have a deLaval profile, with a small internal orifice followed by a conical opening. The sample is mixed with a noble gas at high pressure, to collisionally cool the target molecules as they go through the nozzle. In GUED experiments this gas is typically Helium as it offers the smallest scattering cross section and minimizes background scattering, even though heavier noble gases cool more efficiently. Using an internal hole of 30 μm and a backing pressure of 1 to 3 atmospheres, rotational temperatures in the range of 20 to 50 K can be achieved a short distance from the nozzle exit. Continuous effusive and supersonic nozzles typically require large amounts of sample, typically 1 mL per hour, and thus are better suited to higher repetition rate UED instruments. Electromagnetic pulsed nozzles have been routinely used in GUED experiments at repetition rates up to 360 Hz. Although piezo actuated pulsed nozzles are theoretically capable of repetition rates above 1 kHz, their use in GUED experiments has not yet been demonstrated. GUED experiments often require nozzles to operate over a large temperature range to accommodate different samples, which has been a challenge for the piezo valves. In brief terms, electromagnetic pulsed nozzles use a solenoid and a set of springs to move a plunger inside the nozzle body in an oscillatory fashion. At the end of the plunger, a gasket material seals against the nozzle orifice. When the plunger moves away from the orifice, gases in the nozzle body move through the orifice into the chamber. The reciprocating motion of the plunger results in a pulsed flow of gas into the chamber. Orifice diameters in electromagnetic pulsed nozzles range between 50 and 200 μm. In order for the electron beam to transverse the highest possible sample density, the trigger delay and opening time of the pulsed nozzle must be adjusted to match the arrival of the electron beam at the interaction region. This is typically done by maximizing the scattering intensity of a known sample. Opening times are in the order of 175 μs. By only delivering sample when the electron beam is present, pulsed nozzles reduce the background pressure in the chamber and the sample consumption. This not only positively impacts the signal to noise ratio of the scattering signal, but also decreases the downtime associated with the emptying or replacing of the sample trap and the reloading of sample. For example, in a GUED experiment running a 360 Hz, the use of a pulsed nozzle equates to 16-fold decrease in sample usage compared to a continuous nozzle. Typical sample usage rates for a continuous nozzle are in the order of 2 mL per hour. To aid in the delivery of sample with low vapor pressure, pulsed nozzles can be backed with a few bars of helium. In these cases, the nozzle is heated to prevent sample condensation. However, heating is limited by the thermal decomposition properties of the sealing materials and solenoid wire coating. Known failure modes of pulsed nozzles include wearing of the sealing surfaces and/or plugger, solenoid damage from poor heat dissipation and orifice clogging with sample condensates and/or materials from nozzle wear. Positioning the nozzle horizontally can reduce the likelihood of clogging. In experiments where the rotational temperature of the sample molecules is not critical, the pulse nozzle is positioned as close as possible to the interaction volume without clipping the electron or optical pump beams. The distance between the pulse nozzle tip and the center of the interaction volume often lies in the 150 and 250 μm range. For a pulsed valve with a 100 μm orifice, sample pressures exceeding 40 Torr are required to achieve the minimum sample density of 10 16 molecules over the interaction volume sampled by a 200 μm FWHM electron beam. The design of a target chamber for GUED must address five major considerations: maintain adequate vacuum isolation between the target chamber and the electron source, establish the interaction region geometry, allow diagnostic tools to be moved into the interaction region, trap exhausted sample away from the interaction region and allow quick access to the nozzle and sample trap. These design considerations are addressed in the paragraph below. Figure Interaction region geometry The interaction region marks the overlap of the pump and probe beams with the target sample. The nozzle system is typically placed within a few hundred micrometers of the interaction region using a 3-dimensional translation stage. In setups using a collinear pump probe geometry, an incoupling 90-degree holey-mirror is placed inside a differentially pumped chamber positioned immediately upstream of the sample chamber. This chamber is kept at two ordersof-magnitude lower pressure than the chamber and thus preventing the mirror surfaces from being contaminated by sample molecules. A copper shower-stopper placed behind the holey-mirror protects its substrate from stray high energy electrons. In colinear incidence setups, both electron probe and laser pump beams are delivered to the interaction region using a long capillary a few millimeters in diameter, as shown in Fig. In setups using keV electrons, the laser and electron propagation directions are typically set at an angle between 60 and 90 degrees. This configuration is simpler in that the focusing optics can be kept outside the chamber, with the laser coupled in and out through viewports. In addition, the laser pulse front can be tilted to compensate for the velocity mismatch The ability to verify the dimensions of the probe and pump beams, as well as, their spatial overlap is key to the success of GUED experiments. This can be achieved by imaging the beams onto a YAG screen and/or performing knife edge measurements using blades placed at the interaction region plane. These devices can be introduced to the interaction region by either independent translation stages or by being mounted to the nozzle system. By adding a crystalline sample to the diagnostic devices, one can also assess the temporal overlap of the pump and, based on the Debye-Waller response of crystalline sample following photoexcitation, produce a rough-estimate of the time-zero position of the instrument. Alternatively, the plasma lensing effect Sample trapping Immediately adjacent to the interaction region, a cryogenically cooled high surface area trap is used to condense the exhausted sample. The use of a sample trap not only significantly improves the background pressure of the chamber and by extension the SNR of the diffraction data, but also increases the longevity of the pumping system. However, these improvements come at the cost of increased downtime from repeatedly venting the sample chamber in order to empty or replace the trap. When using a helium compressor based cryo-pump to cool the trap, steps must be taken to damp the propagation of vibration unto the chamber. The use of bellows to mount the cryo-pump and the use of flexible thermal straps to connect the cold-trap to the cryo-pump interface is recommended. Accessibility Unhindered and ease of accessibility to the interaction region is key to an efficient GUED experiment. Therefore, the use of large access flanges or preferably doors, is recommended. During the experiment, samples have to be replenished and the cold trap cleaned. Additionally, windows and optics might need to be cleaned and the nozzle serviced. The analysis of GUED data follows the principles established by the diffraction difference method developed by Ihee et al. The signal processing of a typical GUED experiment begins with the removal of detector and X-ray induced artifacts. Following the normalization of each diffraction pattern to the total scattering intensity, diffraction patterns recorded at the same delay stage position are averaged together and subtracted from a reference diffraction pattern recorded without the presence of a pump laser. The reference dataset is typically obtained by acquiring data a few picoseconds before the arrival of the pump pulse at the interaction region, i.e. before time-zero. In isotropic datasets, difference diffraction patterns can be averaged azimuthally into a series of scattering curves, one per time delay. In datasets where photoexcitation results in an anisotropic distribution of excited species, difference diffraction patterns are further decomposed into an angle dependent scattering. These scattering curves are converted to modified scattering intensity curves, ∆sM(s), using Eq. 5. The resulting time-dependent ∆sM(s) can then be transformed into a time-dependent ∆PDF, which provides a more intuitive representation of the structural dynamics at play. In anisotropic GUED datasets, a 2-D inverse Fourier transform followed by Abel inversion of diffraction-difference images results can be used to produce angularly resolved ∆PDF. This method was successfully employed in the study of the photodissociation dynamics of CF 3 I and CH 2 I 2 Several methods have been developed to extract structural information from experimental ∆sM(s) and ∆PDFs. For example, the structure of photo-products and reaction intermediates can be determined by using a least-squared fitting algorithm to find the set structural parameters which minimize the statistical χ 2 between a calculated and experimental ∆sM(s) Although UED has reached a high level of maturity as an experimental technique with several beamlines operating in a 'user facility' mode, continuous advancements in detection, acceleration and measurement techniques have the potential to enable further leaps in instrument performance. The development of new instrumentation in this area is far from complete. Different communities, from electron microscopy to particle accelerators, materials, condensed matter and atomic-molecular-optical sciences, have coalesced around this technique, using their skills and talent to advance its scientific breadth and impact into new areas, such as bio and catalysis related fields, for which novel methods of liquid sample delivery (nanofluidic cells or liquid micro-jets) have already been developed The cross-fertilization between ultrafast electron-based and x-ray-based science is expected to continue, introducing novel approaches to better harness the distinct characteristics of each approach. Different UED technologies will continue to advance in parallel, developing complementary advantages such as compactness, compatibility with sample environment, high temporal resolution and high average flux, disproving the concept of 'one setup fits all', where a single superior technology clearly emerges. In the following we briefly discuss more in detail some of the possible future directions for UED instrumentation. a. Probe size The probe size is a key aspect of UED, one in which electrons have an important edge with respect to the x-rays as in principle an e-beam can be focused to a much smaller spot than what available at x-ray facilities. In practice, though, the limited average brightness of the electron sources has direct repercussions on the minimum probe spot-size that can be achieved at the specimen while maintaining sufficient resolution in reciprocal space. One solution is to modify electron microscope columns for photoemission to provide nanometer-scale beam sizes, but such setups suffer from limited temporal resolution and low electron flux. Custom setups based on particle accelerator technology can provide higher flux electron beams, but with typical probe sizes in the 50-100 μm range, orders of magnitude larger than those achievable in conventional electron microscopes. Many relevant applications such as, for example, material engineering for energy harvesting and improved solarto-electrical energy conversion efficiency, require a deep understanding of the energy flow in heterogeneous specimens (bulk, two-dimensional, nano-materials, organic and hybrid organic-inorganic compounds, etc...) as function of their local topographical and morphological properties, and demand probe sizes commensurate with grain sizes. Similarly, in Quantum Materials, spatially heterogeneous states and nanodomain formation appear to be common-place. More generally, nanometer-scale probes will enable access to key scientific problems related to local variations in dynamics response of materials due to variations of phonon spectra and density of states in vicinity of defects, impurities or boundaries, to discriminate the micro-texture in complex heterogeneous materials in space and time, and the observation of the energy transfer in the specimen in real-time. Ongoing efforts to develop lower MTE photocathodes, higher accelerating fields, increased repetition rates and compact lenses with strong focusing gradients promise to reduce the spatial resolution gap existing between static and dynamics ED setups in the next decade, providing robust and stable (relativistic) femtosecond electrons packets of nanometer-size, with high average currents. b. Temporal resolution The temporal resolution is currently limited by the electron pulse duration and the timing stability between the pump laser and the probe electron pulses. Higher accelerating fields, higher energies and RF frequencies and finer phase space manipulation techniques are likely to lead to shorter bunch lengths. In terms of arrival time stability, improvements are expected either through advancements in high speed electronics and controls, and due to the development of high precision time stamping tools combined with a new generation of fast detectors. Compression of MeV electron pulses has recently been demonstrated to less than 30 fs, with significant improvements also on the timing stability c. Signal to noise ratio To elucidate the general rules that govern ultrafast dynamics, it is essential to carry out systematic studies where excitation conditions (laser wavelength, fluence,etc.) are varied, along with studies of comparison samples (either in solid state or gas form). Currently this is not possible due to the low probe beam average current, which results in low SNR and long acquisition times. The low SNR makes the data interpretation difficult, reduces the amount of information that can be extracted and so far has prevented the study of samples with low vapor pressure. A significant improvement could be made by introducing detectors with single electron sensitivity and fast readout such that an image could be read out after each electron pulse, as opposed to the current setup where many shots are accumulated at the detector. Increasing the electron beam current can be done either raising the charge per pulse or the repetition rate. While the first approach can be challenging, as it degrades the pulse duration and emittance, increasing the repetition rate can be done without degradation of the beam properties, but it is only effective if the sample is left enough time to relax in between shots. A hybrid DC-RF 90 keV UED setup has been demonstrated to operate at a 5 kHz repetition rate with a beam current that is one to two orders of magnitude higher (but temporal resolution much lower) than the current state of the art MeV-setup An area for future growth is in the algorithms used to extract structural information from the UED patterns. As detailed in the previous sections, several methods have been developed and employed to analyze and interpret UED data in solid and gas phases, each optimized for a particular experiment and designed to extract a specific subset of the information content. The field could benefit significantly from the application of more advanced data science methods to maximize the amount of retrieved information, correct for multiple scattering and standardize analyses. This will be particularly important as new detectors are introduced with the possibility of recording diffraction patterns at much higher repetition rate, generating large datasets that will require at least some part of the analysis to be automated. It is also possible that in some cases the timing instabilities could be corrected as part of the data analysis itself d. Beyond diffraction An area of great opportunity exists in carrying out multimodal measurements on a single photoinduced process to build a more complete picture of the dynamics. Each measurement can be thought of as a projection of some observables of the system, and thus usually requires modeling and theoretical input to be interpreted(?). Combining different measurements would provide more information and further constrain theoretical modeling for data analysis and interpretation, and thus provide a more rigorous comparison between experiment and theory. As an example, UED and time-resolved photoelectron spectroscopy have been recently combined to capture the nuclear motion together with the changes in the electronic state Due to the similarity of the technology used, it is easy to envision RF-based UED beamlines close to XFEL experimental stations, with the electron pulses being naturally synchronized with the X-ray pulses. A variety of configurations can be imagined, where electrons and X-rays are used in the same chamber to study the same system, either to provide complementary information (elastic and inelastic scattering) or to access exotic excitation modalities(X-ray pump electron probe or electron probe X-ray pump) Finally, while in this review article we focus on transmission electron diffraction, other electron-based scattering techniques will most likely benefit from the advances in electron sources and laser technology which have been discussed here, especially for what relates the transport and control of ultrashort electron pulses in the optical column The discussion of ultrafast electron imaging deserves a longer discussion that goes beyond the scope of this review. We only note here that the ability to obtain diffraction and microscopy information inside a single instrument could be a game-changer as recently showcased by Similarly, being able to resolve in momentum space the electron energy loss spectrum would provide a wealth of information on the excited states of a specimen. Improved understanding of the longitudinal phase space manipulation techniques, such as minimization of the beam energy spread and the use of RF cavities as temporal lenses together with novel high resolution spectrometer diagnostics (time-of-flight or magnetic-based) are poised to make a significant impact here In literature focusing on solid-state samples, the momentum transfer is commonly denoted by q. The notation s is maintained here for consistency with other sections of this review. C. Sample delivery requirementsCareful design of a sample delivery system is necessary to ensure that an adequate number of intact molecules is delivered to the interaction volume. The upper bound to the sample density is set such that multiple scattering is avoided, while the lower limit is set such that there is a sufficient current of scattered electrons to overcome the noise. In most UED experiments the fraction of scattered electrons is limited by the achievable sample density, and is only a few percent, far from the regime where multiple scattering becomes an issue. In UED experiments, this minimum viable number of scattering events must reflect the fact that only photoexcited molecules undergoing structural changes contribute to the difference-diffraction signal. In UED, the percentage of molecules excited is kept deliberately low, around 10 %, in order to minimize the likelihood of multi-photo absorption and the inadvertent capture of multiphoton dynamics, which are often challenging to assign and interpret. Time-resolved gas-phase UED experiments typically require 10 7 scattering events from photoexcited molecules per data point (time delay) in order to achieve a publishable signal level over a 10 Å-1 momentum transfer range. A smaller number of scattering events, ∼ 6 × 10 6 , is, however, required to resolve the static structure of non-photoexcited ground state species. To achieve a minimum viable 10 8 scattering events per data point, from a volume where 10 % of the molecules is photoexcited requires, precise control over the sample pressure at the interaction region, as well as the dimensions and geometry of the interaction volume. For example, for MeV UED experiments on small organic molecules, such as cyclohexadiene, with scattering cross-sections on the order of 10 -18 cm 2 , achieving the minimum viable 10 8 scattering events for a single data point requires a sample density of 3 × 10 16 molecules cm -3 . This can be achieved using a 120 Hz electron source delivering 2 fC per pulse with an acquisition time of approximately 1 hour per data point, which equals ∼ 5 × 10 9 incident electrons in total