Thermophotovoltaics are promising solid-state energy converters for a variety of applications such as grid-scale energy storage, concentrating solar-thermal power, and waste heat recovery. Here, we report the design, fabrication, and testing of large area (0.8 cm 2 ), scalable, single junction 0.74-eV GaInAs thermophotovoltaic devices reaching an efficiency of 38.8±2.0% and an electrical power density of 3.78 W/cm 2 at an emitter temperature of 1850°C. Reaching such a high emitter temperature and power density without sacrificing efficiency is a direct result of combining good spectral management with a highly optimized cell architecture, excellent material quality, and very low series resistance. Importantly, fabrication of 12 high-performing devices on a two-inch wafer is shown to be repeatable, and the cell design can be readily transferred to commercial epitaxy on even larger wafers. Further improvements in efficiency can be obtained by using a multijunction architecture, and early results for a two-junction 0.84-eV GaInPAs / 0.74-eV GaInAs device illustrate this promise. Thermophotovoltaic (TPV) devices are solid-state converters of heat to electricity that operate similarly to solar photovoltaics. Instead of capturing photons from the sun, however, TPV cells absorb and convert infrared photons radiated from a hot thermal emitter. Dashed lines are lines of constant TPV efficiency. Improvements to TPV performance require minimizing all loss mechanisms illustrated in (A) to achieve both high spectral management efficiency and high charge collection efficiency. Past leading efficiency measurements compiled by Burger et al. Researchers have developed single-junction TPV devices from a variety of crystalline semiconductor materials, and the best measured TPV efficiencies are shown in Fig. Spectral Management Efficiency • (VF • FF) (1) Fig. A key aspect of moving TPV technology from the laboratory to practical applications is ensuring scalability and reproducibility of the cells. The best recent Ga0.47In0.53As cells, Our TPV cells are grown by metalorganic vapor phase epitaxy (Methods), which produces very high-quality III-V semiconductor material and is regularly used in the commercial sector to produce photovoltaic cells for spacecraft applications. Beginning with a 2-in InP substrate, all epitaxial layers are grown with the same lattice constant to minimize defects, and significant care is taken with the cell architecture (Fig. As discussed in the introduction, a variety of TPV cell electrical and optical characteristics have a strong effect on the TPV efficiency. One of the most fundamental measures of material quality and spectral management is the IQE, calculated from the measured external quantum efficiency and the measured reflectance as shown in Fig. undergoing efficiency testing and noted on Fig. Our cell has an excellent open-circuit voltage under one sun of 0.443 V (with short-circuit current of 33.9 mA/cm 2 ), corresponding to a bandgap-voltage offset (E /q -V , where E is the bandgap energy, q is the electron charge, and V is the open-circuit voltage) of 0.297 V which is close to the radiative limit of 0.285 V for this bandgap. Although Figs. 3B, 3C, and later figures show data for one of our best-performing cells, these characteristics are repeatable across many devices on a single wafer and across multiple growths on different wafers. Fig. Our TPV cells are designed to be used with emitters that have high broadband emittance similar to a blackbody, which means that the cells must reflect as much sub-bandgap light back to the emitter as possible. We use our thin-film cell as a selective filter that is transparent to sub-bandgap light and place a back reflector behind the cell to reflect this light, which is the same strategy as that employed in recent studies of 0.74-eV GaInAs devices A similar comparison can be made to the recent results of a 0.74-eV GaInAs device by Fan et al., which achieved an impressive 98.9% weighted sub-bandgap reflectance at an emitter temperature of 1182°C due to their air-bridge architecture. The TPV efficiency in this study is determined calorimetrically through simultaneous measurement of the electrical power produced by the cell, P, and the heat dissipated from the cell, Q, in a custom test facility while under illumination from a heated graphite emitter through a watercooled copper aperture (Methods). Efficiency results are given in Fig. One promising pathway to reach even higher efficiency is with the use of a tandem TPV cell with two or more junctions. This provides two key benefits: first, a tandem consisting of materials with different bandgap energies allows incident light to be separated by energy and absorbed with lower thermalization losses; and second, series-connected sub-cells in a tandem device operate at half the current density and more than twice the voltage of a single-junction device with the same lowest bandgap energy, which reduces the need for very low series resistance and allows for efficient operation at higher emitter temperatures. Reducing cell current is a potent advantage, since halving the current density reduces the fractional power loss due to resistance by a factor of four. To demonstrate this potential, we provide here results for preliminary two-junction tandem 0.84-eV GaInPAs / 0.74-eV GaInAs cells, whose structure is shown in Fig. The electrical characteristics of this tandem cell are shown in Fig. Efficiency results for this tandem device are obtained from the same test facility as that used for the single-junction device and are shown in Fig. Higher voltages and lower current densities allow series resistance to play a less significant role compared to a single-junction cell, which is why the efficiency is still rising at the maximum measured temperature of 1900 °C. We demonstrate large-area and scalable single-junction and tandem TPV cells that achieve high efficiencies and power densities with emitter temperatures approaching 2000°C. The 0.74-eV GaInAs device reaches an efficiency of 38.8±2.0% and power density of 3.78 W/cm 2 with an emitter temperature of 1850°C, and the 0.84-eV GaInPAs / 0.74-eV GaInAs device reaches an efficiency of 36.8±2.0% and power density of 5.65 W/cm 2 at an emitter temperature of 1900°C. These high efficiencies, especially for the single-junction cell, are enabled by optimizing both the spectral management and charge collection characteristics of the device. Spectral management efficiency benefits from operating with a high emitter temperature, which in turn is made possible by having low series resistance to improve charge collection efficiency. The preliminary tandem device shows promise for reaching even higher efficiencies due to its ability to operate with lower current densities and more efficiently utilize the radiation spectrum of very high temperature thermal emitters. Both types of devices are designed to be scalable and transferrable to commercial epitaxy systems. For this reason, all layers of both devices are grown lattice-matched to InP substrates, which provides excellent material quality and does not require complex metamorphic buffers to change the lattice constant of the material. The single-junction cell is shown to have repeatable, excellent electrical characteristics across devices on a single wafer and across many growths on different wafers, which further demonstrates the scalability of this cell structure. These designs therefore have the potential to serve as a basis for TPV devices in a variety of high-temperature applications. To reach high efficiencies, TPV systems must minimize thermal, electrical, and optical losses. Thermal losses occur primarily at the system level and include conversion or transfer losses from the heat source to the thermal emitter (described by the source transfer efficiency TE) as well as convection and cavity losses of heat from the emitter (described by the cavity efficiency CE). Electrical and optical losses are specific to the TPV emitter-cell pair and affect the TPV efficiency given in Eq. 1 and repeated here for convenience: The product of spectral efficiency SE and internal quantum efficiency IQE is 6 where E is the bandgap energy, ε (E) = is the effective emittance of the cavity formed by the emitter with emittance ε and cell with emittance ε , b(E, T ) = is the spectral photon flux from a blackbody, E is the photon energy, and T is the emitter temperature. The voltage factor VF is where V is the open-circuit voltage and q is the charge of an electron. The fill factor FF is where J and V are the current density and voltage at the maximum power point and J is the short-circuit current density. The radiative limits of all these quantities are provided by Burger et al. Cells were grown by atmospheric pressure metalorganic vapor phase epitaxy in a custom-built cold-wall reactor. Source gases included trimethylgallium, trimethylindium and trimethylaluminum for the group-III elements, arsine and phosphine for the group-V elements, and dilute hydrogen selenide, disilane, diethylzinc and carbon tetrachloride for the dopants. All source gases were mixed into a purified hydrogen carrier gas flowing at 6 lpm. The substrate was a sulfur-doped (001) InP wafer, miscut 2° toward the (111) direction. The epiready substrate was loaded onto a graphite susceptor in the middle of the reactor and heated under a phosphine overpressure to 620°C over the course of five minutes, followed by a 1 minute deoxidation at 620°C and then growth of a ~0.1 μm InP seed layer, and then a layer each of GaInAs and InP etch-stops for post-growth processing. For the single-junction cells, the remainder of the layers in Fig. For the two-junction samples shown in Fig. Fabrication of individual cells was completed with standard photolithographic, wet etching, and electroplating processes. The Au rear reflector was first deposited by electroplating on the epitaxial surface. The samples were then bonded, Au-side down, to an intrinsic Si wafer with thermallyconductive epoxy in order to provide mechanical stability. Quantum efficiency was measured on a custom-built instrument consisting of a tungsten-halogen lamp and a 270M monochromator. The incident light was chopped at 313 Hz. QE was measured every 5 nm from 350-1850 nm. The incident flux at each wavelength was measured with a calibrated GaInAs cell and a beam splitter. The output current at each wavelength was measured with a low-noise current preamplifier and a lock-in amplifier. Specular reflectance was measured simultaneously, using a calibrated stacked Si/Ge photodiode and a separate pre-amplifier and lockin amplifier. For the two-junction cells in Figure Directional-hemispherical reflectance of the cells was measured with a Bruker Invenio-X spectrometer equipped with a PIKE Technologies IntegratIR diffuse gold integrating sphere with a 12° angle of incidence using the substitution method. We measure TPV efficiency using a calorimetric approach. As seen in the schematic in Figure where k is the thermal conductivity, A is the area of the cross section of the cutbar, l is the spacing between thermistors, and ΔT is the difference between the thermistor readings. The heat conducted through the electrical probes can be quantified similarly, as we place thermocouples on the probes. We illuminate the TPV cell with a thermal emitter through a diamond window resting on a copper aperture. The water-cooled aperture protects the electronics from the intense thermal radiation and the diamond window prevents sublimed carbon from the emitter from depositing on the cell. The thermal emitter is surrounded by carbon-based insulation to prevent excessive heating of the apparatus. A small hole in the insulation allows an optical pyrometer to monitor the temperature of the thermal emitter. We pass current through graphite strips that radiatively heat the emitter. The entire assembly is inside a bell jar that is back-filled with argon to prevent oxidation. We monitor maximum power point (MPP) of the cell as well as the heat passing through the cutbar and electrical probes throughout the experiment. After increasing or decreasing the temperature, we wait until the MPP has stabilized and then collect an current-voltage sweep. The efficiency is simply the ratio of the electrical power at MPP to the sum of electrical power and heat. We also quantify the view factor between the cell and emitter to corroborate the measured efficiency with our model. Using a home-built Monte Carlo ray tracing script, we track the number of photons that reach the cell from the emitter and use that to approximate the view factor. We also place a nearly 100% absorptive metal velvet strip on the cutbar and determine the power passing through the cutbar as we change the emitter temperature. Both methods agree that the view factor is approximately 31%. The series resistance of 6.5 mΩ cm 2 for the single junction device was determined by fitting a generalized optoelectronic model The spectral absorptance and reflectance of the cells was calculated with the standard transfer matrix method. To model the performance of our TPV cells, we re-write Eqn. 2 as where Q is the incident radiation power density on the TPV cell and Q is the reflected radiation. To model V , J , and FF, we used the same well-established optoelectronic model where Q (λ, T) is the spectral blackbody emissive power. To account for variations in cell temperature (Fig. The performance characteristics shown in Fig. 