The analysis of standardized low cycle fatigue (LCF) experiments shows that the failure times widely scatter. Furthermore, mechanical components often fail before the deterministic failure time is reached. A possibility to overcome these problems is to consider probabilistic failure times. Our approach for probabilistic life prediction is based on the microstructure of the metal. Since we focus on nickel-base alloys we consider a coarse grained microstructure, with random oriented FCC grains. This leads to random distributed Schmid factors and different anisotropic stress in each grain. To gain crack initiation times, we use Coffin-Manson-Basquin and Ramberg-Osgood equation on stresses corrected with probabilistic Schmid factors. Using these single grain crack initiation times, we have developed an epidemiological crack growth model over multiple grains. In this mesoscopic crack percolation model, cracked grains induce a stress increase in neighboring grains. This stress increase is realized using a machine learning model trained on data generated from finite element simulations. The resulting crack clusters are evaluated with a failure criterion based on a multimodal stress intensity factor. From the generated failure times, we calculate surface dependent hazard rates using a Monte Carlo framework. We compare the obtained failure time distributions to data from LCF experiments and find good coincidence of predicted and measured scatter bands. Fatigue is the process under which metals degrade under cyclic load and thereby fail after a given number of load cycles with load amplitudes well below the ultimate tensile stress (UTS) The microstructure of a conventionally cast metal consists of microscopic grains, in which atoms are organized in crystallographic lattices. In the lattice structure, one dimensional lattice defects can travel under the influence of cyclic loads. For such traveling dislocations, the activation energy required is lowest along certain slip systems, i.e. planes of densest packing and directions on the planes in the crystal's lattice structure That the LCF lifetime is subject to a high level of statistical scatter has been observed for a long time. In In Crack percolation modeling In this work, we thus undertake an effort to model such interaction effects in a physics based probabilistic model of LCF. To this aim, we perform finite element (FEM) simulations The probabilistic grain-micostructure model we employ consists of random Voronoi tesselations Finally, we calibrate this epidemiological model with data from isothermal LCF experiments, which shows a reasonable prediction of the scatter band after an adequate fitting of the model's parameters. Our paper is organized as follows: In Section 2 we recapitulate the model of random Schmid factors. The following Section 3 presents the anisotropic FEM-simulations of two adjacent grains, one of which is cracked. This section also discusses the training of the deep neural network to predict Schmid factors based on the orientation of both grains. Section 4 then describes our epidemiological percolation model, which is fitted and compared to experimental data in Section 5. We end with some concluding remarks in Section 6. Due to the crystalline structure of metals, the elastic properties of individual grains are directional. The orientation of the grains influences both the anisotopic stress and the orientation of the slip systems. In a non-textured polycrystal, the orientation of the grains is randomly distributed. The orientation of a grain can be described by three Euler angles in the Bungee convention (φ 1 , θ, φ 2 ). Each angle represents a rotation around the default crystal coordinate axes. Therefore the rotation can be represented as a 3 × 3-matrix where s and c stand for sine and cosine. It is assumed that the initiation time of a crack in a grain depends on the maximum shear stress in the slip systems of that grain. Nickel based alloys form a face centered cubic (FCC) lattice structure, therefore each grain has 4 slip planes with 3 different slip directions. To calculate the ratio of the externally applied strain and the shear stress in the slip systems of a grain, the anisotropic stress must first be calculated. Therefore the anisotopic stiffness tensor C ∈ R 3×3×3×3 must be rotated four times with the rotational matrix To compute the anisotropic stress for a given strain tensor in each grain Hooke's law is used. With the anisotropic stress the resulting shear stress in the slip systems is calculated with the help of the stress tensor where s ij is the direction and n i the normal of the slipsystem, gained with the orientation of the grain. For a rotation of the grain or elementary cell, the slip systems also rotates. For this purpose, the plane and directional vectors are rotated with the rotation matrix U mentioned in equation So to have a ratio between maximum shear stress and the applied principal stress, the alternative Schmid factor is used, which is introduced in A cracked grain changes the stress field in its surrounding and therefore the shear stress acting on slip systems in neighboring grains changes as well. The change in shear stress leads to changes in the remaining life time after the crack is initiated. Our approach to determine this difference is to use FEM simulations. The geometry in the FEM simulation consists of two adjacent grains with a grain boundary parallel to the uni-axial loading direction. The left and the right grain have an orientation of the lattice structure each given by three Euler angels (φ i 1 , θ i , φ i 2 ), i ∈ {r, l}. According to this, the stiffness tensor for the grains is given by C(U i ), where C(U i ) corresponds to the rotation matrix U (φ i 1 , θ i , φ i 2 ). The goal is to determine the new shear stress in each individual slip systems τ wc ij resulting from the crack as a function of the orientations of the two grains and the shear stress τ nc ij that was found in the slip system of the right grain before the crack For this purpose, two simulations were evaluated for each pair of orientations. One with a half of a penny shaped crack in the left grain and one without a crack. The direction of the crack in the left grain depends on the slip system with the maximum shear stress. For the geometry of the ellipsoidal crack, it is assumed that the whole grain is cracked. Accordingly, the crack length corresponds to the average diameter of a grain. The resulting shear stresses in the right grain are calculated by averaging over the volume of a half sphere centered on the grain boundary at the tip of the crack intersected with the volume of the right grain. Figure The integral in equation ( The toolchain for the simulations is as follows, the generation of the geometry and the preprocessing is done with R. The grid is created using Gmsh. The FEM simulations are solved with CalculiX. As post-processor we use R code again. The simulation is controlled and parallelized with R. The mesh consists of about 210000 nodes and 130000 tetrahedral elements of order 2. One simulation takes about 15 minutes, with our current hardware setup we are able to run 40 simulations in parallel. The results of the FEM simulations for different orientations of the neighboring grains are shown in Figure This leads to sudden change of the stress field in the intact grain, therefore the resulting shear stress in the slip sys-tems shows the same response (3b). This behavior has an impact on the ratio of the maximal shear stress with and without crack as shown in Figure To model the shear stress after a crack occurred as a function of the Euler angles we build a dataset from 25000 simulations with randomly orientated grains distributed according to the isotropic Haar measure. With this database, a machine learning model is trained. The input for the model are the six Euler angles that encode the respective orientation of the two grains and the shear stress in a particular slip system of the right grain if the left grain is not cracked. The gradient boosting machine then predicts the shear stress with a cracked left grain. So for each of the 12 slip systems one separate model is trained. For the machine learning model we use the implementation within the gbm package in R. For the loss function we take squared error. The detailed settings are as follows: for the maximal number of trees we chose 2000, the training fraction is 0.5 and the interaction depth is set to 6. With these setup, the R squared value for the 12 slip systems is between 0.970 and 0.987. The predictions over actual values for one particular slip system are shown in figure To model the polycrystalline rectangular surface of a cast metal with height h and length l, we use a Voronoi tessellation with n seeds. The seeds are independently sample from the uniform distribution in the plane. A grain with seed g then consists of every point for which the Euclidean distance to the seed g is smaller then distance to any other seed. Two grains are adjacent if the share a common boundary. We assume that the grains have no preferential orientation. Accordingly the orientation is again sampled according to Haar's measure For a given strain amplitude ε a , the same procedure as in section 2 can now be used to determine shear stresses and Schmid factors. to gain the stress amplitude from a mixture of plastic and elastic deformation the inverse of the Ramberg-Osgood equation (RO) with material dependent parameters E, K, n RO is used. With the so gained stress amplitude σ a = RO -1 (ε a ) the shear stress in each slip system of each grain is calculated and transformed back into an strain amplitude. Now the inverse of the Coffin-Manson Basquin equation (CMB) is used do gain the initial crack times for each grain: In equation ( The failure criterion for the whole surface that based on a stress intensity factor K. Therefore after each cracked grain we evaluate the resulting crack clusters. All cracked grains that are adjacent belong to the same crack cluster. Each crack cluster is evaluated by taking all possible pairs of two grains in the cluster. The resulting direction of the total crack from these two grains is the vector t between the two seeds of the corresponding Voronoi cells, the normal is just the normal in the surface. Our multi modal stress intensity factor is as follows: If K eq exceeds a critical value K crit , there is a material failure. To validate our percolation model, we use data from LCF experiments with RENE 80. The test specimens have a gauge length of 18mm and a radius of 7mm. The average diameter of the grains is 1.6mm, therefore the surface contains of 198 grains. The strain amplitude is between 0.55% and 0.65% for the specimens. The experiments were carried out at 850°C. As an failure criterion for the experiments we choose a drop in load of 5%. With these parameters, we perform 2500 simulations of the percolation model wit a prefitted CMB parameters per strain level. For comparison, we also run the simulation without the infection model. With the simulation data generated in this way, our model is now fitted to the experimental results. The parameters we fit are on the one hand a shift s CM B of the CMB which changes the position of the probability of failure (PoF) on the other hand we adjust the failure criterion K crit , which mainly affects the scatter of the resulting PoF. The influence of different values of K crit on the PoF is shown in figure It turns out that both models, with and without infection, predict a statistical scatter bands in the physically correct order of magnitude. While the infection free model's prediction tends to be over-dispersed, this is removed by the model that includes infection. However, the data at strain amplitude 0.6% seems to be right shifted in average, while the dispersion with is realistically modeled by the infection model. This, potentially, is due to a batch effect in the production of specimens or an experimental shift due to lab conditions as a second source of scatter. A final settlement of this issue would require further investigation and potentially more data as well. Also, including batch effects as random effects in the model could be a means for more accurate modeling. We presented a probabilistic model of low cycle fatigue (LCF) that models the scatter of fatigue experiments on the basis of an initial crack initiation phase and a subsequent crack percolation phase, where the neighboring grains of a cracked grain fail faster due to elevated stress levels. The statistical scatter in LCF cycles to crack initiation is explained from the effects of random grain structure, modeled by a Voronoi tessellation, and random orientation of the grains crystallographic axes. Here the latter effect accounts both for scatter due to anisotropic elasticity properties and also for the orientation of slip systems that enable plastic deformation. We integrated a finite element simulation for the elevation of loads in grains with anisotropic elastic properties via a gradient boosting machine trained on the results of the finite element simulations. In this way, we are able to integrate elevated stress due to a crack in a neighboring grain in a probabilistic simulation of crack propagation. In this way, we pass from a simple model with independent cracks to an epidemiological percolation model of crack growth. Finally, we compared our modeling approach with data from the Ni-based superalloy Rene80 and fitted the parameters of our model. We were able to show that the range of statistical scatter that is modeled is in the correct order of magnitude compared with the actually observed scatter and that the model can be reasonably fitted to the data for LCF experiments at high load amplitudes. In future research, we will further develop our model and account for effects due to deviations from uniform grain orientation at the surface of cast specimens due to dendrite growth of superalloy grains, in contrast to uniformly distributed orientations in bulk material. We also intend to further develop our model by including batch random effects and extend the range of validity from rather high load amplitudes to the high cycle fatigue regime.