We characterize heat dissipation of supported MoS2 monolayers grown by chemical vapour deposition (CVD) by means of ambient-condition scanning thermal microscopy (SThM). We find that the thermal boundary conductance of the MoS2 monolayers in contact with 300 nm of SiO2 is around 4.6 ± 2 MW.m -2 .K -1 . This value is in the low range of the values determined for exfoliated flakes with other techniques such as Raman thermometry, which span an order of magnitude (0.44 -50 MW.m -2 .K -1 ) and underlines the dispersion of the measurements. The sensitivity to the in-plane thermal conductivity of supported MoS2 is very low, highlighting that the thermal boundary conductance is the key driver of heat dissipation for the MoS2 monolayer when it is not suspended. In addition, this work also demonstrates that SThM calibration using different thicknesses of SiO2, generally employed in bulk materials, can be extended to 2D materials. Over the last two decades, there has been a growing interest in 2D materials due to their low dimensionality, making them attractive for various fields such as electronics, condensed matter, photonics, catalysis, among others. After the popularization of graphene, different layered materials have been discovered, including borophene 1 , hexagonal boron nitride hBN 2 , and transition metal dichalcogenides 3 (TMDCs). Molybdenum disulfide (MoS2), a member of the family of TMDCs, is a semiconductor whose synthesis has been quite well developed and established by different approaches 4-9 . In the case of a single layer (thickness around 6 Å) MoS2 exhibits a direct bandgap 10 (≈1.82 eV), reasonable electrical conductivity, large spin-orbit coupling, strong exciton binding, which makes it suitable for several optoelectronic applications Investigating the properties of 2D materials and implementing various characterization techniques are challenging in many cases, particularly for thermal studies, due to the complexity associated with their extremely-low thickness. With the advent of atomically thin materials, different thermal characterization techniques have been extrapolated from bulk to nanostructured materials. Techniques such as the 3ω method Thermal characterization aims mainly at obtaining parameters such as thermal conductivity and thermal boundary conductances (TBCs). Due to the quick preparation and crystal quality, most of the reports regarding the thermal properties of MoS2 are normally performed using exfoliated samples (either supported by an arbitrary substrate or suspended in a micrometer-sized hole), however MoS2 crystals can also be grown by chemical vapor deposition (CVD), which appears more appropriate for device integration and scaling The MoS2 crystals are grown by atmospheric CVD, further details can be found in previous reports where α = (1/R). dR/dT ̅ is the temperature coefficient of the Pt90/Rh10 electrical resistance known to be 1.66×10 -3 K -1 , R 0 = R(T 0 ) and θ = T ̅ -T 0 is the temperature rise above ambient temperature T 0 (see Suppl. Sec. 2 for more details on SThM). The ratio between the heat input to the sensor P = RI 2 and the sensor average temperature rise θ provides a qualitative estimation of the sample ability to dissipate heat, it is known as the probe thermal conductance G probe (see Suppl. Secs. 2-4) and its value is close to 95 μW.K -1 in ambient condition. In our setup, the current supplied to the probe is constant, and the voltage variation ΔV is monitored at the same time than the topography during the scan The unknowns are the MoS2 thermal conductivity, supposed isotropic in the 0.7 nm thickness, and the TBC between MoS2 and silica. These two quantities are adjusted in the 2D cylindrical FE simulation to dissipate a power equivalent to that of a bulk with the effective thermal conductivity mentioned above (i.e. the bulk and MoS2/SiO2/Si sample thermal conductances are equal). It is found that the value of the thermal conductivity of MoS2 impacts very weakly the temperature distribution, which is driven only by the TBC. The temperature profile in the center of the structure is provided in Fig. In summary, this works has showed that, with a proper calibration technique, SThM allows for quantitative determination of key parameters associated with heat dissipation in supported 2D materials. Thermal conductivity may not be the relevant parameter, while Van Der Waals bonding leads to weak thermal coupling with substrates. In the near future, it will be useful to analyze TMDCs with a better spatial resolution, either by studying the jump at contact in probe approach curves or by implementing vacuum conditions. Analyzing heat dissipation in TMDCs as a function of temperature may also enable to discriminate between the effect of thermal conductivity and thermal boundary conductance See the Supplementary Information for details on material, the temperature-probe thermal conductance connection, for details on the varying-thickness oxide calibration samples and on the simulations.