During their travel through the gastrointestinal tract, ingestible antennas encounter detuning in their impedance response due to varying electromagnetic properties of the surrounding tissues. This paper investigates the possibility of using this impedance detuning to detect in which segment of the gastrointestinal tract -stomach, small intestine, or large intestine -the capsule is located. Meandered dipole antennas operating in the 433 MHz Industrial, Scientific, and Medical Band are designed for this purpose. The antennas conform to the inner surface of 3D-printed polylactic-acid capsules with a shell thickness of 0.6 or 0.4 mm. The impedance response is first optimized numerically in a homogeneous cylindrical phantom with time-averaged electromagnetic properties. The magnitude and the phase of the reflection coefficient are then obtained in different tissues and compared with simulations and measurements. The experimental demonstration is carried out first using tissue-mimicking liquids and then in a recently deceased ex vivo porcine model. The minimum change in the phase between different gastrointestinal tissues was determined to be around 10 • in the porcine model, indicating that the changes in the impedance response, particularly the changes in the phase, provide sufficient information to follow the position of the capsule in the gastrointestinal tract. In recent years, ingestible devices have been widely used in diverse medical applications, such as monitoring of physiological data and wireless endoscopy Ingestible devices consist of several components integrated into the same capsule In this context, this paper investigates the possibility of using the impedance detuning caused by the varying EM properties of the GI tract to distinguish the GI tissues (i.e. stomach, small intestine, and large intestine) for localization purposes. For this investigation, impedance responses (both magnitude and phase of the reflection coefficient) of capsuleintegrated meandered dipole antennas in different GI tissues are compared with simulations in numerical phantoms representing different GI tissues and with measurements in tissuemimicking liquids as well as in an ex vivo porcine model. To the authors' best knowledge, it is the first time in the literature where impedance responses of ingestible antennas are investigated for the purpose of GI segment tracking. A capsule-integrated antenna is designed for the ingestible applications. We choose a meandered dipole antenna for this study since its radiation mechanisms and the near-field behavior have been widely studied and better understood than more complex structures After optimizing the antennas, the possibility of using the impedance detuning is examined by simulating the antennas in numerical phantoms representing 3 tissues in the GI tract: stomach, small intestine, and large intestine. The EM properties of these tissues at 434 MHz are tabulated in Table I In the conductivity range of 0.8-2 S/m, which covers all GI tissues at 434 MHz, the conductivity is inversely proportional to the phase angle. For the 0.4 mm shell, the phase follows the law φ = -131.7σ + 309 (R 2 = 0.932), and for the 0.6 mm, φ = -75.1σ + 217 (R 2 = 0.948). The measurements were carried out using two different measurement setups. In the first setup, tissue-mimicking liquids were used. In the second setup, ex vivo measurements were performed using a porcine model. The antennas and 3D-printed capsules were fabricated for the measurements, as shown in Fig. For the first measurement setup, tissue-mimicking liquids were fabricated with deionized water, sugar, and salt using the method proposed in Experimental validation of the proposed EM-sensing with ingestible capsules requires measurements using recently deceased tissues as the EM properties might quickly evolve postmortem After premedication with ketamine (15 mg/kg IM), a 50kg live body-weight Yucatan miniature pig was euthanized by intravenous injection of 5 ml of T61 -a nonbarbiturate, nonnarcotic combination consisting of 3 compounds: embutramide (anesthetic), mebenzonium iodide (paralytic), and tetracaine hydrochloride (potent local anesthetic). Once euthanized, the animal was placed in dorsal recumbency. An incision (about 30 cm) was made in the lower abdominal wall ventral median following the linea alba starting 100 mm behind the breastbone, opening the abdominal cavity. The stomach (M1), the apical part of the duodenum (M2), the terminal part of the ileum (at the beginning: M3 and at the end: M4), and the terminal part of the colon (M5) were located and exteriorized. At each location, 1 cm incisions were made and the prototypes were inserted in 10 cm depth as shown in Fig. This paper studied the feasibility of using the impedance detuning of ingestible antennas to track the segment-level location of the GI tract. For this, we compared the impedance responses of ingestible antennas in different GI tissues numerically and experimentally in tissue-mimicking liquids and porcine model. The results show that the location of the capsule can be followed by tracking the changes in the impedance response, in phase in particular. This study validates the proposed methodology and leads to the development and pre-clinical validation in vivo of a fully-wireless model. In practice, the phase shift measurement at a single frequency is straightforward and can be implemented using off-the-shelf miniature and low-power RF components AND MEASURED (PHANTOMS) REFLECTION COEFFICIENTS (ST: STOMACH, SI: SMALL INTESTINE, LI: LARGE INTESTINE)