We study the quasiparticle interference (QPI) pattern emanating from a pair of adjacent impurities on the surface of a gapped superconductor (SC). We find that hyperbolic fringes (HF) in the QPI signal can appear due to the loop contribution of the two-impurity scattering, where the location of the two impurities are the hyperbolic focus points. For a single pocket Fermiology, an HF pattern signals chiral SC order for non-magnetic impurities and requires magnetic impurities for non-chiral SC. For a multi-pocket scenario, a sign-changing order parameter such as s±-wave likewise yields an HF signature. We discuss twin impurity QPI as a new tool to complement the analysis of superconducting order from local spectroscopy. Introduction.-Quasiparticle interference (QPI) around impurities, which can be probed through a scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) measurement, has acquired a pivotal role in exploring the properties of unconventional electronic states of matter including high-T c superconductors (SCs) The QPI pattern's phase sensitivity renders it preeminently suited to resolve intricate properties of an unconventional SC state of matter. At present, the evidence on the nature of unconventional pairing symmetry of several material classes is still incomplete. This includes candidates for chiral SC order such as strontium ruthenate In this Letter, we propose a hyperbolic fringe (HF) signal fingerprint found in the QPI pattern of two adjacent impurities deposited on a gapped SC, which we coin twin QPI. We find that through the HF signal, the twin QPI pattern allows to retrieve information beyond the single impurity case, and thus to draw conclusions on the either chiral or multi-pocket sign changing nature of the SC order parameter. Minimal model.-In order to complement the numerical analysis with an analytically tractable limit to showcase the mathematical structure of the HF pattern, we initially constrain ourselves to the simplest Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) Hamiltonian for a single elec-tronic band with nearest neighbor hybridization on a square lattice ε k = -2t(cos k x + cos k y ) -μ: where we set the hopping parameter t = 1 and the lattice spacing a = 1. Initially, we assume the chemical potential to be located at fillings where the Fermi surface is approximately circular (Fig. where r n denotes the location of impurities, U 0 is the impurity coupling strength, and the +/-sign corresponds to non-magnetic/magnetic impurities. The QPI pattern observed by an STM measurement is related to the LDOS distribution N (r, ω), where we recast ω as the frequency bias of the STM tip. It reads where G denotes the Nambu Green's function, with the four-component spinor operator given by in momentum space. τ = (τ x , τ y , τ z ) denotes the Pauli matrix vector in particlehole space, and η denotes an infinitesimal positive number regulator. In the absence of impurities, the Green's function is given by where and S is the area of the sample. In the presence of impurities, the full Green's function is expanded with respect to U 0 to obtain the infinite series where U (r) = U n δ r,rn with U = U 0 τ z for nonmagnetic and U = U 0 σ z ( σ = (σ x , σ y , σ z ) is the Pauli matrix vector in spin space) for magnetic impurities. Note that for scattering around a pair of magnetic impurities, unless otherwise stated, we assume that their magnetic moments are aligned. Hyperbolic fringes in twin QPI.-Assume two impurities to be located at r 1 and r 2 . While there are infinitely many terms, we can separate them into two classes. The first contains all processes from r to r 1 (r 2 ), and after possible multi-bouncing, back to r from r 1 (r 2 ). We call this class single contribution. The other part contains processes from r to r 1 (r 2 ), and after possible multi-bouncing, back to r from r 2 (r 1 ), which we call loop contribution. In each class, the terms are summed up as a geometric series. The multibouncing processes at one impurity only renormalize U according to U ′ = [ 1 -U G 0 (0)] -1 U . Summing up all the multi-bouncing processes between two impurities yields a second step renormalization of U ′ according to where the lines ( and where r ≡ |r| and ω ′ ≡ √ ω 2 -∆ 2 . To second order in U 0 , we find from Eqs. ( where r 1 = |rr 1 |, r 2 = |rr 2 |, and d denotes the distance between the two impurities. The non-magnetic (NM) expression explains the elliptical oscillations in Fig. where θ is the polar angle of r. This gives a loop contribution to the LDOS according to where θ 1 and θ 2 denote the polar angle of rr 1 and rr 2 , respectively, and +/-corresponds to NM/M impurities. According to trigonometric transformations, we immediately recognize that Eq. ( Note that for our analytical expressions Eq. ( s ± -wave in multi-pocket systems.-Multi-pocket Fermiologies can qualitatively differ from single-pocket systems. In particular, with respect to gapped SCs, multi-pocket systems can exhibit s ± -wave unconventional pairing where the gap function takes opposite signs on different Fermi pockets Here, "c" and "d" label the two electron bands describing an electron-like FS centered at the M point in the folded Brillouin zone (or (π, 0)/(0, π) for the unfolded zone where we choose μ c = -3.2 and μ d = 3.6 (Fig. where t = 1, ∆ s = 0.32, and ∆ s± = 0.4. The extended s-wave pairing gives the same gap magnitude but takes opposite signs on the two FS of the two electron bands. The formalism laid out for the single pocket case readily generalizes to the two-band model by recognizing G 0 (r) = G c 0 (r) + G d 0 (r), where G c 0 (r) and G d 0 (r) are defined via Eq. ( Experimental detectability.-The loop contribution is generally smaller than the single contribution according to N loop /N single ∼ (k F d) -1/2 U 0 /t for non-magnetic impurities. Thus, it is crucial to isolate the loop contribution in STM measurements from the single contribution background, a procedure for which we provide two proposals. The first option involves measuring the LDOS around a single impurity before measuring close to twin impurities. By subtracting the single-impurity contribution from the full contribution, the loop contribution can be isolated. Our second proposal is specifically designed for magnetic impurities, where two measurements are made with the twin impurities with anti-aligned and aligned magnetic moments. While this change does not affect the individual contributions (second order), the loop signal changes sign between the configurations. Taking the difference between the two signals thus significantly suppresses the single contribution and singles out the loop contribution. In the SM, we provide detailed simulations demonstrating the effectiveness of these proposals. In the measurements, such twin impurities might be fabricated through STM atomic manipulation Conclusion and outlook.-The hyperbolic fringe (HF) pattern from twin impurity QPI provides a complementary approach of detecting phase information associated with SC order. While conventional pairing necessitates magnetic twin impurities to generate an HF signal, chiral SC and s ± -wave multi-pocket SC already exhibit HF signal for non-magnetic impurities. Upon closer inspection of the principal underlying mathematical structure, it is apparent that the HF signal is not special to SC, but can potentially appear in entirely different contexts such as topological insulators (TIs). For instance, the Qi-Wu-Zhang model on a two-dimensional lattice ( Acknowledgments.-R.T. thanks his mentor and friend Shoucheng Zhang for a discussion which has provided the inspiration for this project. The Supplementary material contains the following content arranged by sections: • Derivation of Eq. ( • Discussion of twin impurity QPI for d + id-wave SC, in parallel with that of p + ip-wave SC in the main text. • Discussion about the robustness of HF away from band bottom. • Analysis of the patterns of HF in p + ip-wave and d + id-wave SC. • Discussion of the mathematical origin of HF in iron-based SC. • Analytical investigation of higher order loop contribution. • Exhibition of patterns of HF around magnetic impurities. • Experimental proposal to detect HF in iron-based SC. • A detailed analysis of the Fourier spectra of the twin impurity QPI signals. In this section, we evaluate the Green's function assuming circular Fermi surface by performing Fourier transformation. The normal Green's function in real space reads Here ) where μ ′ = μ + 4t is the chemical potential measured from the band bottom, and φ is the polar angle of k measured relative to r. We have used the continuous version of ε k near the band bottom, and set the range of k integration to be R 2 . We perform the integration assuming ω > ∆, and μ ′ ≫ √ ω 2 -∆ 2 , which is the case in our numerical study. Note that the integrand decays quickly so that we can set -μ ′ to -∞ in the lower limit. We evaluate , We have introduced the convergence factor due to the Debye cutoff, and we have taken ω D to infinity (because ∆ ≪ ω D ) at last ) . ( For s-wave pairing, we simply have . While for p + ip-wave pairing, we have where ∆ is the gap magnitude (assuming uniform) on the Fermi surface. The first equality can be read off from symmetry argument, and θ denotes the polar angle of r. Similarly, for chiral d-wave pairing II. TWIN IMPURITY QPI FOR d + id-WAVE SC In this section, we discuss twin impurity QPI for d + id-wave SC, in parallel with our discussion of p + ip-wave SC in the main text. The gap function we adopt is ∆ k = 2∆(cos k x -cos k y +i sin k x sin k y ). In Fig. where -and + corresponds to NM and M case, respectively. In Fig. When the chemical potential is tuned away from band bottom, our analytical formulas no longer hold. However, from numerical calculation we show that the HF is actually robust in chiral d-wave SC (the similar plot for chiral p-wave SC has been shown in Fig. We then demonstrate that the chemical potential value +μ and -μ give equivalent results. When μ is positive, the Fermi surface centers around the M ((π, π) ≡ Q) point. Hence compared to Green's function with negative μ, there is an additional factor of e iQr in the Green's function with positive μ. However, in the loop contribution, this additional factor cancels out in the product of the three Green's function (Eq. ( Both p + ip-wave and d + id-wave SC can host HF around twin non-magnetic impurities. While the HF look similar, they exhibit distinct patterns due to different phase winding of the order parameter (∆e iθ for p + ip-wave and ∆e 2iθ for d + id-wave), which we investigate in detail in this section. In Fig. In Fig. At last, we briefly mention that, to distinguish between a p x -wave and a d x 2 -y 2 -wave gapless SC, QPI around single impurity is enough to tell the difference, through different symmetries in the LDOS patterns ( As mentioned in the main text, for the two-band model, the Green's function G 0 (r) = G c 0 (r) + G d 0 (r), where G c 0 (r) and G d 0 (r) are defined via Eq.( where term that gives rise to HF. To see this, note that, apart from an unimportant phase factor (due to the fact that the "c" Fermi pocket centers at M-point), the essential difference between G c 0 (r) and G d 0 (r) is that, F c 0 (r) = -F d 0 (r). Then, it is not hard to see that up to a phase factor, where U M = U 0 σ z denotes magnetic impurity potential. We immediately recognize that the right-hand side simply amounts to scattering around magnetic impurities in an s-wave SC, hence giving rise to HF. If the pairing symmetry in the iron-based SC model is conventional s-wave, on the other hand, there is no property as in Eq. ( In the main text, we investigated the loop contribution to the second order of impurity potential and showed that while N loop,s (r) features elliptical oscillations around NM impurities (Eq.( We study N loop,s (r) around NM impurities firstly. There are two kinds of multi-scattering processes. One is scattering at the same impurity site multiple times. The other is scattering between two impurities multiple times. No matter which kind, we note that one can write the contribution as , where Ḡ0 (r 2r 1 ) represents the renormalized Green's function incorporating multi-scattering processes, i.e. Ḡ0 (r 2r 1 ) = G 0 (0)U NM ...U NM G 0 (r 2r 1 )U NM ...U NM G 0 (0). To see what form Ḡ0 takes, we firstly study where According to this elegant result, Ḡ0 can be expressed as G s 0 ( d) with d a constant, regardless of the complexity of the multi-scattering process. This immediately implies that Eq. ( the main text) still holds for higher order scattering terms for NM impurities, albeit the parameter d is modulated. Therefore, we successfully explained the absence of HF in higher order contributions around NM impurities for s-wave states. We then move on to the discussion of chiral SC states. After a similar calculation, we can obtain This time it cannot be rewritten into a normalized Green's function as the case of s-wave. Nevertheless, one can easily show that, such a complex Ḡ0 (r 2r 1 ) also gives rise to HF as in Eq. ( At last, we emphasize that the figures shown in the main text are calculated numerically where all the higher order contributions are summed up. To make our arguments even more compelling, we provide a numerical comparison of the second order loop contribution and the full loop contribution, around non-magnetic impurities in a chiral p-wave state, in Fig. To facilitate a comprehensive analysis of our work, we have depicted the patterns HF in the vicinity of magnetic (M) impurities for various SC states, in Fig. Furthermore, the HF patterns around M impurities are distinctive in their characteristics. Despite the presence of HF in both s ± -wave and normal s-wave pairing in iron-based superconductors, the HF signals exhibit significant diversity (as evident from the comparison between Fig. In this section, we estimate the magnitude of the loop contribution using realistic parameters of iron-based SC. In the main text, we mentioned that the loop contribution is smaller than the single contribution by N loop /N single ∼ (k F d) -1/2 U 0 /t for non-magnetic impurities. For a typical iron-based SC, a ≈ 4 Å, k F ≈ 0.2π/a ( we proposed two different experimental proposals. Firstly, We propose a two-step measurement method to obtain the loop contribution from non-magnetic or magnetic impurities, which involves first measuring the interference pattern from a single impurity and performing another measurement for twin impurities (the second impurity can be introduced by STM atomic manipulation). The interference pattern from the second impurity alone can be obtained through translation of the data from the first impurity. By subtracting the single impurity signals from the interference pattern around twin impurities, we can isolate the loop contribution. Note that though single contribution cannot be completely cancelled due to multiscattering processes (higher-order terms), loop contribution (second-order term) dominates in this method. This procedure is numerically demonstrated in Fig. Secondly, for magnetic impurities, an alternative technique entails performing two measurements for twin impurities with anti-aligned and aligned magnetic moments, as demonstrated in Fig. In this section, we provide a detailed study of the Fourier transformations (FT) of the twin impurity QPI patterns. We begin with s-wave, for which we show the FT of the plots in Fig. We move on to show the FT for the loop contribution in p + ip and d + id-wave SC (Fig. The Fourier spectrum of the multi-band case is even more interesting. To facilitate understanding of the multiband case, we firstly review the Fourier spectra of QPI around a single impurity. In Fig. We then discuss the loop contribution with multiple scattering processes, shown in Fig. For NM impurities, the Fourier spectrum for s and s ± -wave SC differs in two aspects. Firstly, the shape of the stripe in the central circle in (b) is different from (a) due to the emergence of hyperbolic fringes, the same reason as in Fig. In summary, we emphasize that in the Fourier spectra of loop contribution in multi-band SC, both the location of the circles and the internal pattern inside each circle can provide crucial information about the properties of Fermi surfaces and sign change in the superconducting gaps.