Mechanical frequency combs are poised to bring the applications and utility of optical frequency combs into the mechanical domain. So far, their main challenge has been strict requirements on drive frequencies and power, which complicate operation. We demonstrate a straightforward mechanism to create a frequency comb consisting of mechanical overtones (integer multiples) of a single eigenfrequency, by monolithically integrating a suspended dielectric membrane with a counter-propagating optical trap. The periodic optical field modulates the dielectrophoretic force on the membrane at the overtones of a membrane's motion. These overtones share a fixed frequency and phase relation, and constitute a mechanical frequency comb. The periodic optical field also creates an optothermal parametric drive that requires no additional power or external frequency reference. This combination of effects results in an easy-to-use mechanical frequency comb platform that requires no precise alignment, no additional feedback or control electronics, and only uses a single, mW continuous wave laser beam. This highlights the overtone frequency comb as the straightforward future for applications in sensing, metrology and quantum acoustics. Over the last quarter century, optical frequency combs have become key tools for metrology, timing and spectroscopy In a different regime of breakthrough physics, optical trapping has allowed us to manipulate and control small particles ranging from single atoms In this work, we uniquely interface optical traps with frequency combs via a mechanism that enables mechanical frequency combs without requiring feedback control, external drives and frequency references, or precision optics. We observe that due to a weak counterpropagating optical trap In this section, we first describe the physical system and the mechanism that creates the overtone frequency combs, and then introduce a more quantitative model for their dynamics. The system consists of a suspended t = 80 nm thick Si 3 N 4 trampoline membrane The dielectric Si 3 N 4 experiences a dielectrophoretic force proportional to the gradient of the optical intensity, similar to a particle in a counterpropagating-wave optical trap This can be seen as follows: The restoring force of the mechanical potential switches sign twice per oscillation (arrow pairs in Fig. For small motion of a membrane at frequency ω 0 (cyan), the restoring force component from the optical field switches sign twice per oscillation (arrow pairs), same as the elastic potential. However, for larger membrane motion (grey, orange), more optical extrema are crossed so the optical field component switches sign multiple times per oscillation, efficiently generating frequency components at nω 0 (n = 2, 3, 4, ...) which form an overtone frequency comb. which are the overtones of the original eigenmode. We will show in Sec. II C that these overtones have a fixed phase relation and thus form a mechanical frequency comb. Because the overtones originate from the combination of the optical and mechanical potential, they completely avoid the difficulties of engineering the mechanical dispersion while still resulting in perfectly evenly spaced tones. In contrast to other combs, the tones do not exist around some carrier frequency. We model the overtone frequency comb using a resonator described by displacement x(t) (x = 0 mechanical equilibrium), with resonance frequency ω 0 and decay rate γ, where we have divided by the simulated effective mass m eff 12 × 10 -12 kg. We write the dielectrophoretic force as a proportionality constant F o (units of force) times the gradient of the periodic part of the optical intensity, ∇E 2 ∝ sin 4π λ (xx off ) . This way we can move finite-size effects of the membrane into F o , which we numerically evaluate in SI Sec. C. We obtain the equation of motion which requires only a suitable initial condition |x| t=0 λ/4 to demonstrate the creation of overtones. This condition is much larger than typical interferometric position measurements, which is why we use a laser Doppler vibrometer that is capable of resolving such large displacements (see Methods). Eq (1) also shows that the overtones are independent of the choice of drive (e.g. piezoelectric, electrostatic, thermal). By utilizing the spatially-periodic optical field through optothermal effects We measure the overtone frequency comb for the fundamental mode ω 0 = 2π × 118.049 kHz of our membrane in Fig. The overtones can be distinguished from the other mechanical eigenmodes of the membrane. The mechanical eigenmodes can be detected and identified (Fig. We examine Eq. ( The comb dynamics can be visualized by starting a measurement with the laser spot positioned away from the membrane, as shown in Fig. In Fig. We plot the power of the overtones as the comb grows in Fig. In Figs. 3d,e, we observe the membrane motion from thermal state at t < 5 s to the steady state of the comb at t > 33 s. Initially, we detect only the fundamental mode ω 0 , until the resonator starts crossing multiple optical extrema. Higher overtones appear as the maximum displacement grows. In contrast to Fig. We isolate and plot the spectrum around several of the overtones in Fig. To finally show that the overtones form a comb, i.e. that a fixed phase and frequency relation exists, we show the timedomain signal in Fig. We have discovered a mechanism which uniquely interfaces two breakthrough concepts: optical trapping and frequency combs. This allows for mechanical frequency combs whose simplicity stands out from those based on previous mechanisms. This is realized by integrating a suspended dielectric membrane in a weak optical trap. The dielectrophoretic force from the optical field modulates the mechanical potential of the membrane. This modulation creates integer multiple copies (overtones) of the membrane's motion, which forms a frequency comb. We show combs of up to 35 overtones in a 4.2 MHz bandwidth with control over the frequency spacing, excellent uniformity, stability and no added mechanical noise. The integration of the membrane in the optical trap allows us to combine the overtone comb with optothermal parametric driving, which brings the membrane to self-oscillate. We thus realize a frequency comb that requires no external drive or control frequencies and which uses a minimal setup (laser, microscope objective and vacuum chamber). This makes it more versatile and easier to use than other ways of generating these combs. In summary, this mechanism unlocks potential of mechanical frequency combs for sensing, timing and metrology applications at the microscale, and provides native integration with phononic circuits. The setup used in this work is shown in Fig. The LDV outputs a voltage signal proportional to velocity or displacement, depending on the LDV decoder used. If using the LDV postprocessing, it can easily be Fouriertransformed and exported. If using the oscilloscope and history function, we sequentially read out the measurements afterwards and concatenate them in the correct order in postprocessing. We can then further extract information from this signal either by integrating (to obtain the displacement), or by using Scipy's short-time Fourier transform function to obtain the time-varying behavior of the comb spectrum. The membrane structures used in this work are fabricated out of 100 nm thick stoichiometric low-pressure chemical vapor deposition Si 3 N 4 on top of a 1 mm Si chip. This was done by writing the pattern using electron beam lithography and an inductively coupled plasma (ICP) etch to transfer that pattern to the Si 3 N 4 . The membranes are then released using a second ICP etch, at -120 °C for 30 s, resulting in about 10 μm of undercut and a final Si 3 N 4 thickness of 80 nm. A SEM image of a released trampoline is shown in Fig. The membranes are pattered with a periodic array of holes (Fig. The data (raw data, analysis and calculation scripts, and finite element simulations) that support the findings of this study are available at https://doi.org/10.4121/19821016.v1. This document contains the supplementary information. The motion of a mechanical resonator can typically be described by considering a linear superposition of the normal modes of the structure. In some structures, the normal modes are related by integer multiples of some frequency, and they are said to be harmonic. This is the case for a model string (Fig. In this work, we introduce an optics-based non-linearity to the equation of motion, which affects the description of the resonator motion in terms of the normal modes given by its structure. Briefly summarized, we consider only the lowest frequency normal mode given by the mechanical structure, as a simple harmonic oscillator, The solutions for this equation are well-known, x ∝ e iω 0 t , which oscillates at the frequency ω 0 of the normal mode. By introducing the gradient force term, ∝ sin(x) (non-linear), we get terms in our solution that oscillate at integer multiples of ω 0 , without being related to the (other) normal modes of the mechanical resonator. To distinguish them from the other normal modes, we will refer to the components at nω 0 (n integer) as overtones. Others have detected these components of the mechanical motion before, and refer to them in a similar manner To expand the description of these overtones, we consider the equation of motion as Eq. 1 in the main text, where we have added a resonant drive term F d and absorbed the effective mass m eff into F o and F d for convenience. The shorthand Λ = 4π/λ is similarly used. We get The periodic part of the optical potential is of the form E ∝ sin 2π λ (xx off ) . The gradient of the optical intensity, ∇E 2 ∝ sin (Λ(xx off )) after some algebra and absorbing the relevant constants into F o . The constant offset between the potentials, x off , can be taken out of the sine by with s x = cos(Λx off ) and c x = sin(Λx off ). For a small displacement x, we can use the Taylor series and truncate the higher order terms, so s x sin(x) + c x cos(x) c x + s x x -c x 2 x 2 . The equation of motion then becomes This equation admits solutions of the form A n e inω 0 t , (S5) which are the integer multiples of our original frequency ω 0 ; the overtones. The term n = 0 corresponds to a static position offset from the zero of the mechanical potential. Substituting the solution Eq. (S5) into Eq. ( where the summation contains only the terms where j + k = n. This sequence of overtone amplitudes is monotonically decreasing (see Fig. If instead the displacement is not small, we can still use the same method. We need to keep all the terms of the Taylor expansion, We can use the same ansatz of Eq. (S5), and extract the amplitudes by collecting all terms of the same frequency. For n = 0, the solution converges to as the contribution from the higher order terms of the expansion scale with 1/Λ n . Similarly, the denominator for n > 0 can be truncated to obtain with s j = (-1) ( j-1)/2 Λ j j! for odd j (s j = 0 for even j) and for even j (c j = 0 for odd j). The summation only contains the terms of j amplitudes (A k , A , ...) whose indices k, , ... add up to n. To clarify, for n = 3, we sum over as well as many terms with more A 0 's. For every n, we get an infinite number of contributions to each term. The denominator contains at most two terms that depend on n, but the rest is constant and the whole denominator converges for each n; thus we can truncate the denominator, as we have done in Eq. (S9). In contrast, to evaluate the numerator we can take sequentially higher terms in the Taylor expansion (i.e. increase j), find all combinations of j integers that sum to n, and add them to the term of frequency nω 0 . It is difficult to analytically express all the combinations of j integers that sum up to n, so we numerically evaluate the overtone amplitudes in Fig. So far, we have derived analytically that the addition of an optical sin(x) non-linearity to a mechanical harmonic oscillator creates components of mechanical motion at integer multiples of the original frequency ω 0 . If the displacement is large enough, these overtones have significant amplitude and form a frequency comb. We have made some simplifying assump-FIG. tions (e.g. x off = 0), which do not necessarily hold in practice. The remedy that, we perform numerical simulations. These allow us to better understand the roles of resonator displacement x, the the optical (dielectrophoretic) force F o , and the position offset x off of the optical potential with respect to the mechanical potential. First, we investigate the dependence of the frequency comb on displacement x. In Fig. Secondly, we study the dependence of the frequency comb on dielectrophoretic force F o . For identical initial position x 0 , we plot the frequency comb for various values of F o in Fig. Finally, we report on the dependence of the frequency comb on position offset x off . In the analytical case, we simplified using x off = 0 nm, retaining only the cosine terms so the even overtones are strong (dark blue). By shifting the optical potential with respect to the mechanical zero by λ/8 = 79 nm, we see mainly the odd-numbered overtones appear. For this value of x off , we can rewrite the cosine into a sine, such that the Taylor-series expansion only contains odd terms. At other values of x off , we have a weighted average of the two series expansions. In the middle, at x off = 35 nm, we see odd and even numbered modes with approximately equal power. To summarize: The addition of an optical sin(x) nonlinearity to a mechanical harmonic oscillator creates components of mechanical motion at integer multiples of the original frequency ω 0 , which we call the overtones of ω 0 . These overtones can have significant amplitude, if the mechanical displacement is large enough. The displacement x controls the number of overtones visible, while the dielectrophoretic force F o determines their power relative to the fundamental mode of the comb. Based on the offset between the optical and mechanical potential x off , we can control the relative power in the even-or odd-numbered overtones. We have thus derived an analytical model for the overtone frequency comb, and expanded our qualitative understanding with numerical simulations. We have introduced an optical nonlinearity to explain the mechanical frequency combs, but we have not excluded conventional mechanical nonlinearities (e.g. a Duffing term, ∝ x 3 ). These nonlinearities can also lead to mechanical frequency combs, even in the absence of other modes to couple to We start from an initial condition of x 0 = 500 nm for all traces. For a sufficiently strong nonlinearity, we see a frequency comb. However, due to the nonlinearity, the frequency is shifted away from ω 0 . This is expected behavior for nonlinear resonators, oscillating at ω 0 for small amplitude frequency shifting for larger amplitudes where the nonlinearity becomes dominant. The sign of c duff controls the direction of the frequency shift, and a hardening nonlinearity (increasing frequency) is expected for most mechanical resonators. In Fig. It was proposed by others that strong, higher order nonlinearities (e.g. ∝ x 3 , x 5 , x 7 , etc.) could be the origin of this comb There have been demonstrations of mechanical frequency combs generated via different mechanisms in literature. For applications, the comb properties are more important than the generation mechanism, and we have summarized a large part of the combs available from literature in Table The overtone comb of this work has a bandwidth on par with the largest available in literature (limited by the setup), but also has a relatively large resolution. The bandwidth is given by a combination of the maximum displacement and mechanical frequency, both can easily be engineered. We estimate the optothermal parametric drive is limited to 500 kHz in our membrane, which would constrain the mechanical frequencies that can be operated without an external drive. The frequency resolution could be enhanced by lowering the mechanical frequency (i.e. make the membrane tethers longer and thinner), and can likely be tuned thermally. A further benefit is that the overtone combs are spectrally flat (same amplitude in different overtones), in contrast to other mechanical combs. The main benefit of the overtone comb is that it does not require an external drive, which is unique for a mechanical comb. This greatly simplifies the necessary setup to operate the comb. In terms of uniformity of the frequency spacing, overtone combs come close to the level of electromechanical combs, where the uniformity is given by the electric drives directly. However, our measured uniformity is limited by the detection setup. Overtone combs are also among the most stable, especially comparing our 6-hour frequency stability (Sec. V H) to the 10 s Allan deviation of Ref. There are several mechanisms by which spurious higher harmonics can appear in measurements from a LDV Multi-path interferences may happen when the LDV laser beam is reflected by more than one surface Only the membrane contribution has a Doppler shift due to its motion, +v. Neglecting effects from beam divergence, multiply-reflected beams contribute SiN , and so on. These terms have Doppler shifts with the opposite sign to the directly reflected beam, as they interact with the membrane from the opposite direction. The first term has a Doppler shift equal in magnitude to the desired signal (-v), while subsequent terms have multiple times the Doppler shift (-2v, -3v, ...). These terms thus directly affect the magnitude of the velocity that the LDV senses. For harmonic membrane motion v(t) = v 0 cos(ω 0 t), the multiply-reflected beams lead to an error in v 0 , but their Doppler shift does not contribute directly to higher harmonics of the observed membrane motion. In a non-ideal laser Doppler vibrometer, multi-path interferences can be identified by presence of ripples and spikes in the velocity signal. We can compare the measured velocity signals with simulated signals using the model of (S11) Here, θ is the electric field ratio of the correct and the unwanted reflected signals (θ = ∞ for an ideal vibrometer), ∆φ is the phase offset between the two beams (constant). In the worst-case scenario (R SiN = 0.3, R Si = 0.35, no scattering losses), θ 1.33. The unwanted beam likely suffers from scattering losses more than the correct beam, since its path crosses the Si 3 N 4 domain twice and reflects of the etchroughened Si surface (see Fig. We simulate the velocity signal with multi-path interferences, and compare it with the observed velocity signal in Fig. unlikely that the multi-path interference effect is completely absent in our setup, it can be corrected by a combination of amplitude-and phase-locked loops We can further exclude multi-path interferences as the source of the comb by measuring outside the membrane, on the Si chip. At the position indicated on the microscope image of Fig. High-aperture effects can occur when the LDV is operated with a microscope objective, based on the Guoy phase delay of the optical beam The electronic parts of the LDV (sketched in Fig. In a conventional heterodyne interferometer, harmonics of a signal would naturally arise for sufficiently large displacement. The interferometer phase is linear only in a limited regime, typically x λ. However, a Doppler vibrometer measures the frequency shift of the reflected light rather than its phase. The frequency shift can be extracted with a frequency-to-voltage converter, in the LDV decoder. This allows an LDV to measure velocities associated with displacements much larger than the optical wavelength, without suf- fering from the harmonics expected in a displacement interferometer. There are two LDV decoders available in our setup, the VD-09 velocity decoder and the DD-300 displacement decoder. The VD-09 has a lower maximum operating frequency (1.5-2.5 MHz), while the DD-300 has a lower detection maximum. In Fig. In summary, we have described common mechanisms that yield higher harmonics in laser Doppler vibrometer measurements. All these mechanisms can be excluded as the cause of the frequency combs, by qualitative arguments and the measurements shown in Figs. S5, S6, and S17. In combination with the fact that there is a visible change in the membrane when the frequency comb occurs (Fig. Optical traps can be used to confine small particles, as the light exerts a force proportional to the gradient of the optical intensity We simulate the physical system consisting of a t 80 nm thin Si 3 N 4 slab suspended in air above a much thicker Si slab, shown in Fig. We consider only motion in the out-of-plane direction of the membrane, so we are interested in the gradient of the electric field norm in the y-direction (Fig. with α the polarizability. For a linear isotropic material, the constant α = P x /E x can be found from the simulation by dividing the polarization in any direction P x by the electric field in that direction E x . We need relate the equation for F de (units of force) to the coefficient F o (units of force) used in Eq. 1. The expression for F de depends on the position of the resonator with respect to the Si backplane, Fig. The different curves of Fig. illustrate that the total optical force exerted on the membrane does not decrease monotonically with membrane thickness. When we calculate the effective strength of the trap (peak-to-peak force difference divided by the thickness of the membrane, in Fig. In an optical cavity, the interaction between radiation pressure and a mechanically compliant element can lead to optomechanical frequency combs We follow the analysis of Miri et al. with coefficients (S14) The key quantity is the static optomechanical frequency shift G = 2g 2 0 ω 0 |a| 2 , with g 0 = 2π × 1 Hz the vacuum optomechanical coupling strength typical for these membranes is the average optical field amplitude in the cavity, determined by the cavity decay rate κ, laser power and frequency P , ω and detuning ∆. Finally, the mechanical frequency ω 0 = 2π × 120 kHz and linewidth γ = 2π × 0.1 Hz are rounded from the values measured and reported in the main text. To estimate κ, we calculate the finesse of the Fabry-Pérot cavity formed by a 10 μm distance between an R = 0.3 Si 3 N 4 and an R = 0.35 Si backplane. This is a low estimate for κ, as the Si surface is rough from fabrication (Fig. In conclusion, we have simulated the behavior of a Si 3 N 4 membrane subject to an incident laser. Due to the Si backplane, reflected light forms a standing wave which leads to a counterpropagating optical trap. We have calculated the force exerted on the membrane by the optical trap, its dielectrophoretic part is sufficient to generate the overtone frequency comb as described in the main text. We have also verified that the optical cavity formed between the Si 3 N 4 membrane and Si backplane is not good enough to lead to an optomechanical frequency comb based on the radiation pressure. Driving the trampoline resonators to sufficiently large amplitudes to see the frequency comb from the optical trapping potential requires a strong driving mechanism. We have ously used a piezo shaker to drive these membranes In the following subsections, we study the optothermal parametric driving. Since it is based on absorption, which is normally not too large for λ = 633 nm in Si 3 N 4 , we first show the absorption is enhanced by our photonic crystal structure. Then, we simulate the slow (> 0.1 s) thermal dynamics from steady state absorption and the fast ( 0.1 s) thermal dynamics due to modulated intensity from the standing wave optical field. Finally, we compare the simulated changes in temperature to the optothermal self-oscillation theory Si 3 N 4 is a often-used optical material because of its low absorption at telecom wavelengths, with typical absorption coefficients μ = 1-2 cm -1 at 1550 nm Photonic crystal patterns can be designed to yield a certain reflectivity at a target wavelength We simulate the behavior of the photonic crystal in COM-SOL by taking a unit cell with the photonic crystal parameters (a, r, and Si 3 N 4 thickness t = 100 nm), as shown in Fig. From this simulation, we find that a standing wave pattern forms in the plane of the Si 3 N 4 membrane, shown in Fig. To build our understanding of the effects of the absorbed light, we simulate the effect of a heat source on the photonic crystal membrane (Fig. The choice of material parameters of Si 3 N 4 is important for our simulation. The Young's Modulus E = 250 GPa, Poisson's ratio ν = 0.23 and density ρ = 3100 kg m -3 are relatively well-known, and the fabrication pre-stress is known to be 1.0 GPa. The thermal properties reported in literature vary (see After simulating the steady state in temperature, material deformation and stress described in the previous subsection, we will now include the time-modulated optical intensity. We assume that the resonator moves initially in its fundamental mode at 120 kHz, so the optical field intensity is modulated by the sin term of Eq. 1. We make sure to keep the timeaveraged power the same as in our steady-state simulation. We simulate a full period, and plot the incident heat flux (grey) FIG. The incident heat flux modulates the temperature of the membrane with an amplitude of about 0.3 K and a delay on the order of a microsecond. This delay is smallest in the domain where the heat flux is directly incident (blue), and increases as we move further away from the center (orange through red). The change in temperature also decreases as we move further away, which indicates that the effect is local to the laser beam spot. We can also extract the average von Mises stress, Fig. The resulting stress difference is relatively small compared to the total local steady-state stress (∼ 24 MPa). However, it can forms a parametric driving mechanism since stress is modulated at double the frequency of the original motion, guaranteed by the optical standing wave. This optothermal parametric driving is thus automatically frequency-matched to the dominant motion. The delay between heat flux and stress suggests that this mechanism of driving is limited in our case to 500 kHz, which corroborates with the fact that only observe combs based on the first few eigenmodes. We have shown so far that the motion of the membrane through the optical standing wave results in a modulated stress via the absorption. However, this alone is not sufficient to drive the resonator to larger amplitudes since dissipation is also present (though small). To estimate whether this effect is strong enough to bring our resonator into limit-cycle oscillations under a P 3 mW drive, we follow the model of where Here, A describes the heating due to the laser (units K W -1 ), B is a dimensionless constant, C represents the stiffness change due to temperature (units K -1 ), D is the optothermal forcing term (units K -1 ), Q is the mechanical Q-factor of our resonator, and ψ is the fraction of optical field that forms a standing wave. These equations give the laser power necessary to create a limit-cycle of amplitude R. The authors of and the values of T dc and T ac reported in the previous subsections, we get A = 222425 K W -1 (independent of thermal conductivity k), and The forcing parameters C (parametric) and D (direct) can be estimated from other simulations. By calculating the difference between eigenfrequencies of our structure at the minimum and maximum temperatures of Fig. Finally, the we take mechanical quality factor Q = 1 × 10 6 and ψ = 1. The latter we implicitly assumed already in Sec. V D 3, where the standing wave field cancels out fully (modulated power goes to zero). This is likely an overestimation due to losses and transmission through the Si backplane. The assumptions behind the derivation of We evaluate Eq. (S15) and plot the power necessary for a limit-cycle of radius R in Fig. The optothermal parametric drive forms an effective periodic modulation, which could also lead to a frequency comb, similar to the dielectrophoretic force. By including a periodic variation in the frequency ω 0 , we simulate this effect. The equation of motion is such that the parametric term oscillates at twice the frequency of motion. With F th = 1 • 10 -5 , we are close to the simulated frequency shift ∆ω. Numerically integrating Eq. (S18) yields an increase of velocity over time (even in the presence of damping γ/2π = 0.2 Hz). However, the higher harmonics generated by the inclusion of this parametric drive are negligible, 60 dB lower than the fundamental mode. Higher harmonics (above 2ω 0 ) do not appear visibly in the spectrum. While the optothermal parametric drive is sufficiently strong to drive the membranes to self-oscillation, it is not strong enough to result in a frequency comb without the dielectrophoretic force. To conclude this section, we have simulated the optical and thermal behavior of our resonators and analyzed the possibility of self-oscillation. We find that the motion of the membrane through the standing wave optical field modulates the absorbed light intensity, which in turn modulates the tensile stress in the material. This is sufficiently strong to drive our resonator to self-oscillation, if the absorption is slightly higher than what is expected based on purely the material parameters. In this section, we demonstrate that it is possible to generate the overtone frequency comb through inertial driving with a piezo shaker. We do this by using several membranes that do not show any sign of overtones when the laser is positioned anywhere on the membrane for at least five minutes. This way, we exclude thermal parametric driving. The piezo shaker is mounted on the back-side of the sample holder and driven via an Agilent 33220A arbitrary waveform generator and a a FLC A400 voltage amplifier with 20× gain. In Fig. If the comb can be generated with the piezo by applying a white noise drive, it would be possible to avoid an external frequency reference that must be matched to the device. In Fig. We have shown that we can generate the overtone frequency comb using different driving mechanisms. Using inertial driving via a piezoelectric shaker, we observe qualitatively the same comb behavior as when using the thermal parametric drive. However, the white noise drive results in a noisier displacement signal and comb teeth powers. To highlight this, we show the displacement power spectrum around the first three tones in Fig. The bandwidth (span) of a frequency comb is an important property for many applications. While the overtone comb already performs on-par with the largest bandwidth mechanical combs (Table We observe a copy of the fundamental mode overtone comb (ω 0 spacing) symmetrically around the higher-order mode of the system. In Fig. To corroborate this interaction between the frequency comb as a whole and a higher-order mode of the membrane, we closely study the frequency of two of the comb teeth over time. Originating from the same measurement as Fig. In this section, we demonstrate the overtone frequency comb on multiple devices to corroborate the measurements shown in the main text. Additionally, we also describe the visible changes in the membranes under an optical microscope when driven into the overtone comb regime, and we study the effect of the optics (power and focus) on the frequency comb. We observe the overtone frequency comb behavior on multiple devices, shown in Fig. Of the 45 surviving devices on the two chips, 27 demonstrated the frequency comb behavior based on optothermal parametric driving (Sec. V D), and the remainder could be driven into the overtone comb regime by sufficient piezoelectric shaking (Sec. V E). This confirms the generality of the overtone mechanism. We can corroborate the relation of the overtone comb and (powerful) heating through absorption by studying the membranes using the microscope of the laser Doppler vibrometer. The presence of the optothermal parametrically driven frequency comb behavior is correlated with visible changes in the membrane structure. We show this by taking a microscope image immediately after the laser spot is moved to the center of the membrane (Fig. We show three devices to illustrate different changes observable in this interference pattern in Fig. interference pattern disappears only partially. This is typically along one diagonal, which suggests that the stress along the other diagonal is not fully removed; we can switch between the diagonals by positioning our laser spot. The steady-state temperature is likely less than in the case where the pattern disappears completely, and also the frequency comb appears less pronounced. Finally, a few devices show a small discoloration around the laser spot, which suggests that the interference pattern is modified only slightly. These devices display only weak frequency combs. These behaviors corroborate that the thermal parametric driving through absorption of the light is the origin of the frequency combs that we observe. We study the effect of laser focus on the frequency comb behavior. By deliberately defocusing the laser beam, and using a membrane that has a weak frequency comb behavior, we expect the focus to change the number of overtones appearing in the spectrum. In Fig. We also study the effect of laser power on the frequency comb. We can add an absorptive neutral density filter to reduce the power of the optical beam. This decreased F o and should decrease the power of the overtones with respect to the fundamental mode, as simulated in Fig. From Fig. An important property of a frequency comb is the stability of the comb teeth over time, both in amplitude and in frequency. To gain insight in how our overtone frequency comb performs, we park our laser on a single device and measure the spectrum on various timescales. From each spectrum, extract the frequency and amplitude of some of the overtones, and plot them in Fig. In Fig. In Fig. We study fluctuations in the frequency comb as a response to (thermal) noise. By starting from Eq. 1 and including a Langevin force noise term ξ(t), we obtain ẍ + γ ẋ + ω 2 0 x = F o sin 4π λ (xx off ) + F d e iω d t + ξ(t), (S19) Where the noise has zero mean ξ(t) = 0 and is correlated ξ(t)ξ(t ) = 2γT δ(tt ) such that we have assumed Markovian noise at temperature T , valid since resonator Q = ω 0 γ 1 This way, we work with the frequency of the first harmonic, Ω 0 , taking into account the shift due to the non-linearity. In the case where x off = 0, all odd α n = 0, and all even β n = 0 in general, which implies that the frequency of the first harmonic is not shifted by the non-linearity. Intuitively, that makes sense since the electric field is symmetric around the resonator rest position for x off = 0. We obtain the amplitude of the first harmonic by switching off the noise ξ(t), and get Similarly, we can find the amplitude response to fluctuations ξ(t) by turning off the coherent drive, ẍ + γ ẋ + Ω 2 0 x = ξ(t). (S25) In Fourier space, we then get with autocorrelation X(ω)X(ω ) = 2γk B T δ(ω + ω ) (Ω 2 0 -ω 2 + iγω)(Ω 2 0 -ω 2 + iγω ) . (S27) Then we can find the mean square amplitude response to fluctuations as The nonlinear term n α n x n from Eq. (S20) can then be expanded and simplified by neglecting higher-order noise terms and keeping only the linear one. If δx B, (B + δx) n B n + nB n-1 δx. Now if we let the sum in the nonlinear term go to a reasonable finite number N max , we split the sum and shift the index of one of the two, 