Sophisticated spin instruments require high-precision spin control. In this study, we accurately study the intrinsic magnetic properties of the strongly disordered system NdFe0.5Cr0.5O3 through molecular field models combined with ASD theory. The three constituent sub-magnetic phases of the system are separated, and their magnetization contributions are calculated separately. Fitting the angle of the A/B magnetic moment at a given temperature, the reorientation temperature point and temperature dependence of different magnetic phases are obtained. This research will provide a very good theoretical support for studying complex disordered systems and applying high-precision spin control and lay a foundation for the design of new functional materials. Rare earth perovskites are a subgroup of the larger family of perovskites. The RFeO3(R: rare earth ion) type is a G-type antiferromagnetic semiconductor with a Curie temperature of about 650 K to 750 K. The obtained powder was pre-calcined at 600 °C for 12 hours and subsequently calcined at 1200 °C for 24 hours, upon cooling, the final nano powder samples were obtained. X-ray diffraction (XRD) experiments were carried out in Siemens D500 Cu Kα (λ = 1.5418 Å) diffractometer with the range of 20°to 80°(rate of 0.02°/s). The obtained data were processed with Fullprof software. The Fourier infrared spectrometer model L1600400 Spectrum Tow PerkinElmer were used. We performed an infrared test on the NdFe0.5Cr0.5O3 with a wavenumber in the range of 400 cm -1 to 4000 cm -1 . The transmission 57 Fe Mössbauer spectra of NdFe0.5Cr0.5O3 were collected at RT on SEE Co W304 Mössbauer spectrometer with a 57 Co/Rh source in transmission geometry equipped in a cryostat (Advanced Research Systems, Inc.,4 K). The data results were fitted with MössWinn 4.0 software. The thermomagnetic curves (M-T) of the samples NdFe0.5Cr0.5O3 were obtained under an external magnetic field of 100 Oe. Field-cooled (FC) and zero-field-cooled (ZFC) measurements were done at a magnetic field strength of 100 Oe and temperatures ranging from 5 to 400 K. The magnetization curves (M-H) are obtained at temperatures of 300 K and 5 K, respectively. introduced to characterize the orthogonal distortion in the following formula: For the lattice of the Pbnm space group, 1 = , 2 = , 3 = , = ( * * / 2) 1 3 . The FT-IR spectra of NdFe0.5Cr0.5O3 is shown in Figure . 2. The sample show two distinct characteristic absorption peaks, located between 400 cm -1 -500 cm -1 and 500 cm -1 -600 cm -1 , respectively. The absorption peaks in the lower wavenumber range are caused by the vibration of the O-Fe/Cr-O bond. The absorption peaks in the higher wavenumber range correspond to the vibration of the Fe/Cr-O bond. Fig. We tested the magnetization curve of NdFe0.5Cr0.5O3 system at 5K and 300K temperature. Both appear as straight lines of different slopes and do not reach saturation magnetization. It is shown that the system maintains antiferromagnetic properties at both 5 K and 300 K. ions are slightly less than 180°, and weak ferromagnetic behavior is recorded below this temperature. and Cr 3+ -O-Cr 3+ exchanges can be ignored. When x → 3 and y → 3, the arrangement tends to be disordered, corresponding to the case of uniform distribution. When x and y are equal and very small, the arrangement of atoms shows an orderly trend. In spite of this, its anti-site defect can still reach 0.5. When x → 6 and y → 6, the Fe-rich and Cr-rich phenomena can be evident. We can even say that the system contains two independent phases with Fe 3+ and Cr 3+ occupying one side. We mark the Fe ion lie in Where λij represents the molecular field constant between i and j sublattices, and it is proportional to the exchange constant Jij, h is the external field; Mi is the magnetization of i sublattice. The magnetization of i sublattice is: In summary, we use the four-sublattice molecular field model combined with our previously proposed ASD theory to analyze the intrinsic magnetic properties of the NdFe0.5Cr0.5O3 complex strongly disordered system. Based on the hyperfine analysis of the Mössbauer spectrum, we divide the system into three phases and fit the respective magnetization contributions, and the results are satisfactory. Not only in the process of fitting, the effective magnetic moment is defined as the projection of the Nd 3+ magnetic moment on the Fe 3+ /Cr 3+ magnetic moment plane, and the spin reorientation process of each magnetic phase is analyzed to obtain an accurate, effective magnetic moment concerning temperature-the process of change. The temperature of reorientation is strongly related to the proportion of B-site ions. This work is different from the qualitative analysis of thermally induced spin reorientation of simple single crystal structures by previous researchers and obtained a very real dependence relationship, which has a profound guiding role in the analysis of complex disordered systems. And provide theoretical support for ultrafast spin control. There are no conflicts to declare.