Nanomaterials with core-shell architectures are prominent examples of strain-engineered materials, where material properties can be designed by fine-tuning the misfit strain at the interface. Here, we elucidate the full 3D atomic structure of Pd@Pt core-shell nanoparticles at the single-atom level via atomic electron tomography. Full 3D displacement fields and strain profiles of core-shell nanoparticles were obtained, which revealed a direct correlation between the surface and interface strain. It also showed clear Poisson effects at the scale of the full nanoparticle as well as the local atomic bonds. The strain distributions show a strong shape-dependent anisotropy, whose nature was further corroborated by molecular statics simulations. From the observed surface strains, the surface oxygen reduction reaction activities were predicted. These findings give a deep understanding of structureproperty relationships in strain-engineerable core-shell systems, which could pave a new way toward direct control over the resulting catalytic properties. By utilizing epitaxy between two different materials, the misfit strain at the interface can be finely controlled, and depending on the strain-induced structural change, the properties of materials can be dramatically altered To fully utilize the interfacial strain effect, it is essential to have an atomic-scale understanding of the 3D interface structure. However, studies to date have been mostly limited to ensemble-averaged structure or lower dimensional (2D) imaging, which cannot provide the full 3D atomic structural detail of the core-shell interface Here, we reveal the largely unexplored nature of a 3D core-shell interface via atomic electron tomography (AET) Strong shape-dependent anisotropy was observed from the strain distributions, whose origin was further investigated via molecular statics (MS) simulations. The opposite behavior of displacements along perpendicular directions, generally known as the Poisson effect, was clearly seen at the global nanoparticle scale and also on the scale of individual atomic bonds. Finally, based on the observed surface strains, oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) activities at the surface were predicted at the atomic scale via the strain-adsorption energy relation. Experimental identification of core-shell 3D atomic structure Pd@Pt nanoparticles with a core-shell structure were synthesized by a previously reported method Figure While most Pd atoms are located in the core of the nanoparticle, some Pd atoms (lower intensity blobs in the tomogram; see Fig. Having full atomic structural information (3D atomic coordinates and chemical species) allows us to quantitatively analyze the structural properties of the nanoparticle. We first compared the 3D atomic structure with an ideal face-centered cubic (fcc) lattice (Methods). Most of the atoms can be assigned to fcc lattice sites, suggesting that the core-shell nanoparticle can structurally be regarded as a single fcc crystal, as can be seen in Supplementary Video 2, Fig. The averaged volumetric strains can be calculated from the local lattice constants, which can be compared with those from a previous X-ray absorption fine structure (XAFS) study of a similar Pd@Pt system Since each atom was assigned to a specific site in an fcc lattice, the 3D displacements between the atomic coordinates and corresponding fcc lattice sites can be directly obtained. The displacements were mapped onto a Cartesian grid by Gaussian kernel averaging, and 3D strain tensor maps were obtained by taking their derivative (Methods). Figure Note that this overall behavior of opposite displacement along the two perpendicular directions is consistent with the Poisson effect for metallic compounds The azimuthal direction strain (Fig. To analyze the local atomic-scale details of the core-shell structure, the atomic displacement vectors and strain maps for the atomic layer in the middle of the nanoparticle were investigated (Fig. From the calculated strain information, we can directly address the relationship between the misfit strain at the interface and that at the surface, as visualized in Fig. Again, a strong positive correlation between the interface and surface strains can be observed, and the Pearson correlation coefficient (R) of 0.74 and a slope of 0.87 were obtained via linear regression. To further verify the correlation, the out-of-plane strain was plotted following a path connecting highsymmetry facets (Supplementary Fig. The overall strain behavior of the nanoparticle along the radial direction was also investigated. Figure Note that the propagation of misfit strain towards the center of the core is also prominent, not only towards the surface of the shell. This suggests that the misfit strain effect for both core and shell should be considered together for fine tailoring of the core-shell structure, for which the determination of the full 3D strain profiles will be essential. Having a full 3D atomic structure allows a direct calculation of the surface ORR activity (Fig. Note that the strain maps show an obviously anisotropic distribution for both the interface and the surface. Surprisingly, there is no strong relation visible between the observed anisotropy and identified facet types ({100}, {110} or {111}). The strain curve connecting high-symmetry facets (Supplementary Fig. To verify the interface-surface correlation and investigate the origin of the strain anisotropy, MS simulations were performed using the same core-shell geometry and shape of the experimentally measured nanoparticles. Starting from an ideal fcc lattice model fitted to the experimental atomic structure of Particle 1, the atomic coordinate relaxation was simulated at 0 K using the embedded atom model (EAM) potential (Methods). Note that we used the chemical species of Ag and Al instead of Pd and Pt (Methods), to mimic the lattice constant ratio between hydrogenated Pd and Pt while capturing the elastic anisotropy of cubic crystals. Although several EAM potentials The strong anisotropy of the radial strain is also well reproduced, supporting our speculation that the core-shell geometry and shape are the main parameters governing the anisotropy. To further verify this, we conducted two additional simulations (Supplementary Figs. All the analyses (displacement, strain, and ORR calculation) were conducted in the same way for Particle 2 (Supplementary Figs. 8-14 and Supplementary Video 5-8). There are a few different features found compared to those of Particle 1. First, the displacements and strains are distributed differently (Supplementary Figs. However, as can be seen from the differences in the interface lattice constants and lattice relaxation rates, other effects (the overall shape, size, larger core lattice constant [this might be due to the different degree of hydrogenation of the Pd], etc.) can also affect the behavior of the surface lattice constant. Experimental ORR activity measurements were also performed on two groups of nanoparticles with similar sizes to Particle 1 and Particle 2 (Methods and Supplementary Figs. In spite of these differences, the overall core-shell effects we discussed above can be consistently observed in the two nanoparticles. The overall strain distribution shows tensile and compressive radial strains in the core and shell, respectively, while azimuthal strains exhibit alternating behavior (Supplementary Fig. The full 3D atomic structures of core-shell nanoparticles were determined via AET, and their 3D displacement and strain distributions were mapped, leading to the following conclusions. First, partial exposure of the core part on the surface resulted in a remarkable tensile strain effect in the local region for the larger nanoparticle. Second, the misfit of lattice and thus intrinsic strain can be observed both on the surface and along the interface, and the relationship between them suggests a linear tendency. Third, the surface displacement behavior clearly demonstrated the Poisson effect globally as well as locally. Fourth, the prominent anisotropy of strain displacement shall be attributed to the core-shell geometry and the shape of the nanoparticles, rather than surface facet effects, as confirmed by MS simulations. These observations suggest that the strain at the surface can be controlled through the misfit strain at the interface as well as core-shell design, which would allow the optimization of catalytic activity as desired. These novel characterization results are the first demonstration of probing the 3D structure of the core-shell nanoparticles at the individual atom level, directly providing the structureproperty relations regarding strain-engineerable core-shell systems. Looking forward, controlled AET experiments via fine-tuning of the particle shape, core size, shell thickness, and the degree of hydrogenation of the Pd can shed light on the size and thickness effect, which can bring valuable information in the field of nanocrystal fabrication and catalysis. Furthermore, if in-situ capability can be properly implemented in the AET by overcoming some technical obstacles (e.g., sample durability, time resolution, and TEM holder design), it will allow us to unveil the 3D atomic dynamics of nanomaterials during dynamical processes such as segregation/diffusion, sintering, and device operation. Pd@Pt nanoparticles were synthesized by using a previously reported method The initially prepared Pd@Pt nanoparticles were collected by centrifugation (4500 rpm, 30 min) and washed with a mixture of ethanol and acetone, and washed again twice with pure ethanol. The washed nanoparticles were collected again and dispersed in an aqueous solution containing 100 mM cetyltrimethylammonium chloride (CTAC) to prevent the aggregation of nanoparticles during the sampling procedure. In this step, the concentration of nanoparticles was diluted to a concentration 2 or 3 times lower than that of the original colloidal solution. The CTAC-treated nanoparticles were washed with water and re-dispersed in water. This solution was used to prepare the specimens for electron tomography. Specimens for electron tomography measurements were prepared by depositing a solution of the synthesized Pd@Pt nanoparticles dispersed in water onto a 5 nm thick silicon nitride membrane grid (Particle 1), and a 3-4 nm thick carbon membrane grid (Particle 2). After deposition, the grids were annealed in a vacuum at 150 °C (Particle 1), and 100 °C (Particle 2) for 24 hours. Two tomographic tiltseries were acquired from the Pd@Pt nanoparticles using an FEI Titan Themis3 double Cs corrected and monochromated transmission electron microscope (TEM) at the Korea Basic Science Institute in Seoul (Particle 1) and the double Cs corrected TEAM 0.5 microscope equipped with TEAM stage at the National Center for Electron Microscopy in the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (Particle 2), respectively. The images were acquired using annular dark-field (ADF) scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) mode. For Particle 1, we collected a tilt series at 33 different tilt angles in the angular range of -68.2° to +68.2° using 300 kV acceleration voltage (Supplementary Fig. To check if the nanoparticles have suffered from the beam-induced structural change during the tilt series acquisition, the zero-degree projections were measured three times during the acquisition (at the beginning, in the middle, and at the end of the experiment). The zero-degree images show that the nanoparticles were slightly rotated during the experiment. We obtained the rotation angles by comparing the experimental zero-degree images with the forward-projection images of 3D atomic structure (see below for the atomic structure determination process) along several different tilt angles near zero-degree and finding the best-matching projection angles. Each zero-degree projection is consistent with the bestmatching forward-projection image, evidencing that the atomic structure did not suffer from substantial structural change during the experiment (Supplementary Figs. 18-19). Image post-processing (drift correction, scan distortion correction, image de-noising through BM3D noise reduction The 3D atomic coordinates of all atoms in each nanoparticle were determined by the atom tracing procedure (a) The tomogram was sliced along the fcc [001] direction for each atomic layer, and the 2D local maxima in each slice were identified. Next, the same 3D Gaussian fitting procedure was repeated using the determined 2D local maxima positions from all the atomic layers with various cropped volume sizes (side lengths of 3-7 pixels). The fitted position from the volume size which showed the smallest residual of the fitting was added to the traced atom list if it does not violate the minimum distance constraint of (b) For each atomic layer slice, a 2D atom number density was calculated for each pixel by counting the number of atoms within the distance of 1.9 Å from each pixel. We identified the connected regions where the 2D atom number density becomes 0 and classified them into three different categories: region of artifacts due to imperfect tomogram reconstruction (for the regions whose areas are below 3.03 Å 2 ), region of one-atom candidates (for the regions whose areas are between 3.03 Å 2 and 5.63 Å 2 ), and region of two-atom candidates (for the regions whose areas are above 5.63 Å 2 ). The criteria for classifying these three cases were determined by estimating the range of area of connected zero density regions from an fcc atomic model with random spatial displacement which gives 22 pm root-mean-square deviation (RMSD) from the ideal fcc lattice sites. From the fcc model, we randomly removed one or two adjacent atoms and obtained the minimum area (i.e., the classification criteria) of the zero density region by calculating the atom number density as mentioned above. For each one-atom candidate region, an initial fitting point was obtained as the center of each region. For each two-atom candidate region, two initial fitting points were obtained from the Expectation-Maximization algorithm for the Gaussian mixture model After this process, 3D atomic models of 22,494 (Particle 1) and 7,143 (Particle 2) atoms were obtained. To finalize the 3D atomic structure, a manual correction was applied to add (or remove) physically (un)reasonable atom candidates. A minimum distance constraint of 1.7 Å was used during this process. Total 749 (Particle 1) and 489 (Particle 2) atoms were manually added, and 899 (Particle 1) and 771 (Particle 2) atoms were manually removed, resulting in the final 3D atomic models of 22,344 (Particle 1) and 6,861 (Particle 2) atoms. It takes about 1 day to run the automatized atomic coordinate identification procedures, and the manual correction usually takes about 1-2 days. After the manual correction of atomic positions, their chemical species (either Pt or Pd) were determined. To classify them, we used an unbiased atom classification method based on the k-means clustering algorithm Histograms of the integrated intensities for all atoms are shown in Supplementary Fig. The atomic coordinates determined from the 3D tomograms were assigned to ideal fcc lattice sites using the following procedure. Note that since our main interest lies in the relation between the interfacial strain and the Pt shell surface structure, the surface Pd atoms were not included in the lattice assignment analysis. First, an atom closest to the mean position of the given 3D atomic coordinates was assigned to the origin of an fcc lattice. Then, the nearest neighbor positions of the atom were calculated based on initial fcc lattice vectors of lattice constant 3.88 Å (the lattice constant of bulk Pd × 25% = 0.686 Å), the atom was added to the corresponding fcc lattice site. The nearest neighbor search was repeated for all the newly assigned fcc lattice sites. The process was repeated until no more atoms could be assigned to the lattice. Second, new fcc lattice vectors were fitted (fitting parameters: translation, 3D rotation, and lattice constant) to the atoms assigned to the lattice by minimizing the error between the measured atomic positions and the corresponding lattice positions of the fitted fcc lattice. These two steps were continuously repeated with the newly obtained fcc lattice vectors until there is no change in the fitted lattice vectors. After this process, 99.7% (Particle 1) and 97.1% (Particle 2) of the target atoms were successfully assigned to the fcc lattices, and RMSDs between the assigned atom positions and the fitted fcc lattices were 49.83 pm and 58.95 pm for Particle 1 and Particle 2, respectively. The fitted fcc lattice constants were 3.90 Å (Particle 1) and 3.98 Å (Particle 2). For local property analysis, a local lattice constant for each atom was calculated using the following procedure. First, for each atom in the 3D atomic model, we prepared a set of atoms that only contains atoms that correspond to the nearest neighbor sites of the given atom, based on the globally fitted lattice. Second, by setting the given atom position as the origin, the nearest neighbor fcc lattice sites of the given atom were calculated. In this calculation, the lattice constant of initial fcc lattice vectors were set as the lattice constant of the globally fitted fcc To estimate the precision of the measured atomic coordinates, we performed precision analyses Since each atom was assigned to a specific site in the fcc lattice, the atomic displacement vectors between the atomic coordinates and corresponding fcc lattice sites can be directly obtained in Cartesian coordinates. The displacements were mapped onto Cartesian grids by kernel averaging with optimized Gaussian kernels Then, the radial strain assigned to each atom was interpolated and/or extrapolated on a 2D planar grid at 1 Å pixel -1 spacing using the biharmonic spline method The Gaussian kernel standard deviation (σ) parameters were optimized with the following procedure. First, an atomic model which consists of the atomic coordinates of the fitted ideal fcc lattice was prepared. Then, a radial strain function was generated based on the Fourier series (maximum frequency 0.21 nm -1 ) with randomly chosen coefficients, and the atomic coordinates of the atomic model were adjusted to reflect the generated strain. The atomic coordinates were further randomly modified so that the atomic structures before and after applying the random modification have the same RMSD value as the one obtained from the precision estimation step. Using this atomic model, the strain calculation process was performed with several different Gaussian kernel standard deviations. The standard deviation value which showed the minimum error between the applied strain and calculated strain was chosen as the optimized kernel parameter. This process was repeated 1000 times with different randomly generated radial strains. The 1000 optimized kernel parameters were averaged to obtain the final Gaussian kernel standard deviation parameters, which are σ = 4.67 Å for Particle 1 and σ = 4.31 Å for Particle 2, respectively. To analyze the strain relationship between the interface and surface, we paired the surface atoms and interface atoms along the same radial directions. First, the surface atoms were determined by applying the alpha shape algorithm The union of interface Pt and interface Pd atoms were defined as the final interface atoms. Some atoms were categorized as both surface and interface atoms (the Pd atoms on the exposed surface of Particle 1), which were excluded from the atom pairing analysis. Next, the position vectors of all interface atoms were calculated, for which the origin was set as the averaged 3D coordinates of all the core Pd atoms. For each position vector, an extension line was drawn along the direction of the position vector. Then, the surface atom which has the smallest distance to the line was paired with the corresponding interface atom represented with the position vector. This process was applied to all the interface atoms, and the distance between the interface atom and the paired surface atom is defined as the shell thickness for each interface atom. For each atom, the distance from the interface along the radial direction was determined as follows. First, the position vectors of all the atoms were calculated, for which the origin was set as the averaged 3D coordinates of all the core Pd atoms. For each position vector, an extension line was drawn along the direction of the position vector. Next, the interface atom which has the smallest distance to the line was paired with the given atom represented by the position vector. Then, the distance between the given atom and the paired interface atom was defined as the distance from the interface. This process was applied to all the atoms in the 3D atomic models. To verify the strain correlation between the surface and interface, the out-of-plane strains were calculated following different paths connecting high-symmetry facets for the surface and interface separately. Here, we employed two different types of paths, one connecting through ({100}, {110}, {111}) facets and another passing through {100}, {110} facets (Supplementary Fig. For each facet atom, the out-of-plane strain was calculated by taking derivatives of the out-of-plane displacements which were obtained by kernel averaging with optimized Gaussian kernels (σ = 4.67 Å for Particle 1 and σ = 4.31 Å for Particle 2). The strain of each facet was defined as the average of the out-of-plane strains for all the atoms in the facet. Since the surface ORR activity strongly depends on the type of facets as well as the surface strain, we classified all surface atoms into facets of the three dominant facet families: {111}, {100} and {110}. Most of the surface atoms were successfully assigned to one of the three dominant facet families by applying the method described above with the threshold number of 12 (the number of atomic planes in the facet can be more than three layers in this case). For the surface atoms which are not assigned to any of those facets, we calculated the distance from the surface atom to the deepest atomic layer of each facet ({111}, {100} or {110}) by measuring the number of atomic layers between them. The surface atom is then assigned to the facet with the smallest distance. If two or more facets have the same smallest distance from the surface atom, we calculated the distance from the surface atom to all the atoms already assigned to one of the dominant facet families, and the surface atom was classified into the facet which contains the atom of the smallest distance. Therefore, all surface atoms are assigned to one of the three dominant facet families (unlike our previous approach The Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) 