The study of intra and interlayer excitons in 2D semiconducting vdW heterostructures is a very hot topic not only from fundamental but also applicative point of view. Due to their strong lightmatter interaction, Transition Metal Dichalcogenides (TMD) and group-III nitrides are particularly attractive in the field of opto-electronic applications such as photo-catalytic and photo-voltaic ultra thin and flexible devices. Using first-principles ground and excited-state simulations, we investigate here the electronic and excitonic properties of a representative nitride/TMD heterobilayer, the AlN/WS2. We demonstrate that the band alignment is of type I and low energy intralayer excitons are similar to those of a pristine WS2 monolayer. Further, we disentangle the role of strain and AlN dielectric screening on the electronic and optical gaps. These results, while on one side do not favor the possible use of AlNWS2 in photo-catalysis, as instead envisaged in the previous literature, can boost the recently started experimental studies of 2D hexagonal Aluminum nitride as a good low screening substrate for TMD-based electronic and opto-electronic devices. Importantly, our work shows how the inclusion of both spin-orbit and many-body interactions is compulsory for a correct prediction of the electronic and optical properties of TMD/nitride heterobilayers. Guided by graphene rise Two emerging classes of 2D materials, Transition Metal Dichalcogenides (TMDs) and group-III nitrides, are particularly attractive for their sizable band-gaps, strong light-matter interaction and their interesting excitonic properties which hold premise for their use in opto-electronic applications, such as ultra-thin and flexible photovoltaic (PV) or photo-catalytic cells and light-emitting diodes (LED). After the discovery of indirect to direct gap behavior reducing the thickness of MoS 2 to monolayer form In particular, it is of interest to identify if a type I or type II band alignment is present and how the electronic and optical properties of an isolated TMD change in presence of a nitride (beyond the normally used hBN) substrate. Indeed, while a type I band alignment can be a good prerequisite for strongly bound excitons associated to efficient light-emission, a type II favors the formation of long-lived interlayer excitons and enable their ultra-fast charge transfer Then, motivated also by a recent experimental work Our first-principles calculations are based on DFT and many body perturbation theory (MBPT). For DFT structural calculations we have used PBEsol exchange-correlation functional The relaxed lattice parameters are 3.11 Å and 3.16 Å for isolated AlN and WS 2 monolayers, respectively. The lattice mismatch is less than 2%, which is a good value for constructing AlN/WS 2 heterostructure based on a 1×1 cell-periodicity. As starting point we chose a lattice parameter intermediate between those of the layers, then we relax the combined structure obtaining a final lattice parameter of 3.142 Å. For this HT we consider six configurations, as illustrated in Fig. where E total and E AlN total represent the total energies of AlN/WS 2 heterostructure, of WS 2 , and of AlN monolayers, respectively. The negative value indicates that this heterostructure is energetically favorable and could be experimentally realized. For isolated WS 2 and AlN our electronic DFT results are consistent with existing literature Indeed, calculating the projected density of states (PDOS), it results that, near the the CBM and VBM states are localized on different monolayers of the vdW heterostructure (see Fig. As seen more clearly in Fig. The interaction between the two layers increases also the spin-orbit splitting of the conduction bands at K to 0.042 eV with respect to the isolated WS 2 . This is not unexpected because it has already been shown that charge transfer and strain can modify the spin-orbit splitting of two dimensional materials. We report in Table II the direct and indirect gap at the different levels of approximation of all the three systems AlN, WS 2 , and AlN/WS 2 . We discuss here the results for the relaxed AlN/WS 2 structure (3rd row in table II). While the constrained structure (last row in table II) will be discussed in section III C 1. The GW correction in AlN opens the gap up to 5.61 eV without changing its position in k space. In WS 2 , instead, the calculated GW corrections open the gap and make WS 2 an indirect gap material with the minimum gap located between K=( 1 /3, 1 /3, 0) and Q=( 10 /66, 10 /55, 0) The optical response of the HT is investigated at two different levels of theory: within the independent-QP approach at the G 0 W 0 level, and with the inclusion of local-fields and excitonic effects by solving the BSE. In Fig. In order to understand the optical properties of the heterostrucure, we start with the study of the two separated layers. The optical properties of free standing AlN, in the energy range we are interested in, are dictated by a single excitonic peak at 4.75 eV two times degenerate, see the bottom panel of Fig. The optical response of WS 2 (green dashed line in Fig. As shown in Fig. Finally, it is worth to notice that a simple 2D excitonic model based on the Rytova-Keldysh approach Within this model, the Hamiltonian which describe the interaction of an electron-hole pair in a homogeneous 2D sheet with parabolic bands is given by with μ exciton reduced mass and Ŵ (ρ) the statically screened electron-hole attraction potential: Here, H 0 is the Struve function, N 0 the Neumann Bessel function of the second kind, and ρ 0 is the screening radius: ρ 0 = 2πα 2D with α 2D the static electronic sheet polarizability. Although the error is quite large (see Tab. III) this method confirms to be a cheap, fast way to obtain qualitative results. The simplicity of this method relies on the fact that the effective masses and polarizabilities are the only needed ingredients, and both can be easily obtained within DFT. AlN/WS 2 Table In summary, we have presented a study on a novel AlN/WS 2 vdW heterostructure. Its negative formation energy as well as its small lattice mismatch between the constituent monolayers suggests that it should be possible to synthesize it. The analysis of the band alignment and decomposed partial charge density of the heterostructure shows that a calculation at the DFT level is not sufficient to identify the character of the heterostructure. The GW inverts the band order transforming the heterostructure from type II to type I. The subsequent Bethe-Salpeter calculation of optical excitations confirms this result. All the lowest optical excition, dark or bright, belong to the WS 2 monolayer part. These results suggest that a simple identification of heterostructures by means of local or semi-local functional in DFT may fail when compared with more advanced methods as GW plus Bethe-Salpeter or hybrid functionals. Finally, the optical spectrum of the heterostructure is very similar to the one of the isolated WS 2 , with small differences arising from the presence of the substrate, which acts through the strain and through the screening. We demonstrate that the AlN substrate modifies only slightly the electronic and optical properties of WS 2 and therefore could be employed as an excellent alternative insulating substrate, acting as gate dielectric material, to the most common used h-BN. The research leading to these results has received funding from the European Union Seventh Framework Program under grant agreement no. 7 85219 Graphene Core2. C.A. acknowledges A. Saul and K. Boukari for the management of the computer cluster Rosa. CPU time was also granted by CINECA (ISCRA-B and ISCRA-C) and CRESCO ENEA HPC centers. This publication is based upon work from COST Action TUMIEE CA17126, supported by COST (European Cooperation in Science and Technology). O.P. and M.P. acknowledge financial funding from the EU MSCA-RISE project DiSeTCom (HORIZON2020, GA 823728). M.P. acknowledges Tor Vergata University Project 2021 TESLA. O.P. acknowledges fundings from PRIN 2020 "PHOTO". The following abbreviations are used in this manuscript: . Energy difference ∆E (eV), layer distance d W -AlN , LW -S and L Al-N bond lengths of the different configurations of AlN/WS2 heterostructures calculated by DFT-PBEsol including vdW correction. Notice that for the LW -S distance we consider the S atom towards the AlN layer.