Casimir forces between charge-neutral bodies originate from quantum vacuum fluctuations of electromagnetic fields, which exhibit a critical dependence on material's electromagnetic properties. Over the years, in-situ modulation of material's optical properties has been enabled through various means and has been widely exploited in a plethora of applications such as electro-optical modulation, transient color generation, bio-or chemical sensing, etc. Yet Casimir force modulation has been hindered by difficulty in achieving high modulation signals due to the broadband nature of the Casimir interaction. Here we propose and investigate two configurations that allow for in-situ modulation of Casimir forces through electrical gating of a metal-insulator-semiconductor (MIS) junction comprised of transparent conductive oxide (TCO) materials. By switching the gate voltage on and off, a force modulation of > 400 pN is predicted due to substantive charge carrier accumulation in the TCO layer, which can be easily measured using state-of-the-art force measurement techniques in an atomic force microscope (AFM). We further examine the influence of the oxide layer thickness on the force modulation, suggesting the importance of the fine control of the oxide layer deposition. Our work provides a promising pathway for modulating the Casimir effect in-situ with experimentally measurable force contrast. Quantum vacuum fluctuations of electromagnetic fields are a fascinating quantum-mechanical effect, manifested by a multitude of celebrated physical phenomena such as Lamb shift, spontaneous emission, the anomalous magnetic moment of electron and surface wetting If the perfectly reflective boundary condition is lifted by taking into account the optical properties of the materials comprising the interacting bodies (and the intervening medium), the magnitude and/or the sign of the Casimir force can be dramatically altered The material dependence of the Casimir force has also provoked the pursuit of direct force modulation by modifying the optical properties of the materials. Appropriate doping in semiconductors can readily modify the charge carrier density, giving rise to notable alteration of their optical properties and the resulting forces From the perspective of charge carrier density modulation, electrical biasing/gating is a highspeed modulation technique which is generally easier to operate, less power-consuming and less prone to the above-mentioned artifacts compared to many other techniques. In particular, metalinsulator-semiconductor (MIS) junctions comprising TCOs such as ITO (i.e. indium tin oxide) have been widely employed in high-speed electro-optical modulators where the optical responses of the devices can be adapted on-demand by tuning the gate voltage, as ITO exhibits gate-controllable optical properties through charge carrier accumulation or depletion at ultrafast speed In this work, we propose two configurations to realize gate-switchable Casimir forces which can be directly deployed in well-established experimental setups. For both configurations the Casimir interaction would be measured between an optically thick Au film-coated sphere, which could be attached to an atomic force microscope (AFM) cantilever for force detection, and a gatecontrolled MIS junction consisting of Au-Al2O3-ITO planar films with an applied gate voltage. Two potential configurations are considered (Fig. Figure where ε ox = 9 denotes the relative static permittivity of Al2O3 where k is the lateral wavenumber, k ⊥ = √k the reflection coefficients at the interface between air and medium i (note: the Au sphere is medium 1 and the MIS stack is medium 2 for our configuration) for imaginary frequency ξ m and lateral wavenumber k under TE and TM polarizations. The reflection coefficients off the surface of the stack are computed using the transfer matrix method (TMM) When a gate voltage is applied across the junction, the force magnitude is modified due to the change of charge carrier density in the accumulation layer (Fig. Compared with configuration I, the modulation for configuration II (Fig. In summary, we theoretically investigated two configurations for potential implementation of gate-switchable Casimir forces, both of which are composed of a gate-controlled MIS junction of Au-Al2O3-ITO planar films, with different orientations towards a gold-coated sphere attached to an AFM cantilever. The charge carrier density in the ITO accumulation layer formed at the interface between ITO and the oxide layer can be tuned substantially from 10 19 cm -3 to (4-6)×10 20 cm -3 via gating. As a result, a force modulation magnitude reaches up to > 400 pN with a gate voltage of 6 V, far exceeding the measurement sensitivity with the state-of-the-art AFM force-measurement techniques. Furthermore, a reduction of the oxide layer thickness from 3 nm to 2 nm can increment the force modulation magnitude by up to 70%, which indicates the precise control of the oxide layer thickness via advanced deposition techniques such as ALD is paramount for force modulation. Our results show the great promise of utilizing TCO materials to realize switchable Casimir forces with a pronounced force contrast, which may create new opportunities for in-situ control and modulation of movable parts in nanomechanical devices and systems.