We present a necessary condition for odd-frequency (odd-f) superconductivity (SC) to occur in a large class of materials described by Eliashberg theory. We use this condition to prove a no-go theorem ruling out the occurrence of odd-f SC in standard one-band superconductors with pairing interactions mediated by phonon exchange. We also present a corresponding no-go theorem for superconductors with interactions mediated by spin-fluctuations. Our results explain why odd-f SC is rare in conventional materials, and they open up the possibility for a search for materials with interactions designed so as to allow for odd-f SC. Introduction. Superconductivity (SC) is a fascinating phenomenon where quantum coherence is developed on a macroscopic scale. The usual narrative is that the condensation of Cooper pairs leads to coherence that is responsible for the striking phenomena exhibited by superconductors, including resistance-less flow of an electron fluid, Meissner effect, superconducting vortices, and the Josephson effect. Ginzburg-Landau theory for SC uses the pair condensate wave function, Ψ(r, t) = c ↑ (r, t)c ↓ (r, t) , as an order parameter With all the success of the current paradigm, there is a major omission in the discussion of SC: it omits the challenge posed by the existence of a whole class called odd-frequency (odd-f) superconductors, see e.g. With the literature on emergent odd-f pairing states growing, it is still viewed as an exotic and remote possibility. Indeed, in a majority of superconducting states, the conventional even-frequency (even-f) BCS pairing channel is dominant. Moreover, after unsuccessful attempts to find odd-f SC by solving the Eliashberg equations numerically, it was argued already early on that pairing by phonons is unlikely to give odd-f SC It is important to note that our results hold true for the general Eliashberg equations, taking into account the (Matsubara) frequency dependence and momentum dependence of the interactions, without any further approximation. Commonly, these general Eliashberg equations are simplified by the local approximation, eliminating the momentum dependence and , assuming thermal equilibrium and translational invariance. We consider transformations S, P * , and T * that swap the spin index, the sign of the momentum, and the sign of the Matsubara frequency, respectively: Note that all these transformations square to the identity 1, i.e., the possible eigenvalues of S, P * and T * are +1 and -1. Obviously the combined transformation SP * T * interchanges the two fermion operators in No-go theorem in special case. We consider the simplified Eliashberg equations obtained by projection to the s-wave channel and ignoring the |k|-dependence of the interactions (local approximation); see The simplified Eliashberg equations for a one-band superconductor in the local approximation determine the superconducting order parameter (also known as gap), ∆(iω n ), and the normal-state renormalization, Z(iω n ), as follows (we use units such that k B = = 1) The standard potential describing interactions mediated by phonons is given by where μ * > 0 is the Coulomb pseudo-potential, θ(x) the Heaviside function, ω c > 0 an energy cutoff, and α 2 F (Ω) ≥ 0 the Eliashberg function By writing the gap as a sum of even-f and odd-f parts, ∆ + and ∆ -, respectively: the first equation in (3) decouples: . Moreover, the second equation in (3) can be written as , and by inserting this into the equation for ∆ -, we obtain which is an eigenvalue equation of a temperature dependent matrix determining T c . Multiplying both sides of this equation by the complex conjugate of ∆ -(iω n )/ω n , summing over n ≥ 0, and symmetrizing the resulting double sum on the right-hand side using V -(iω n , iω m ) = V -(iω m , iω n ) we obtain (further details can be found in Appendix A.1) Note that this is an exact consequence of the Eliashberg equations (3). Our odd-f-condition is as follows: To obtain odd-f SC, the interaction potential V must be such that the identity in Eq. which is manifestly non-positive (note that minus sign and recall that α 2 F (Ω) ≥ 0). Clearly, this non-positiveness leads to a contradiction in (8) unless ∆ -= 0. This rules out spin triplet s-wave odd-f SC for the simplified Eliashberg equations ( No-go Theorem I: In P * T * -invariant Eliashberg theory, odd-f SC is impossible in a standard one-band superconductor with non-dynamically screened Coulomb interactions and attractive interactions mediated by phonons. No-go theorem in general case. We proceed by explaining the precise meaning of No-go Theorem I for Eliashberg theory without local approximation. The general (linearized) Eliashberg equations which determine the superconducting order parameter, φ, and the normal-state self-energy, Σ, depending on (Matsubara) frequency, ω n , and momentum, k, are given by see Note that the model is defined by the band relation, ǫ(k), and the two-body potential, V = V (iω n , iω m ; k, k ′ ); see Appendix A.2 for examples. Moreover, the equations hold true for spin-singlet and spin-triplet SC, and for s-, p-, d-or f -wave SC and ǫ(k) = ǫ(-k). We also recall the definition of the superconducting gap Similarly as in the simplified case with the local approximation above, one can show that these Eliashberg equations lead to decoupled equations for the even-f and odd-f gap solutions ∆ + and ∆ -, respectively, with ∆ -satisfying the following exact identity V ; the interested reader can find a detailed derivation of this fact in Appendix A.1; see Proposition 1. Thus, we get, again, the odd-f condition as formulated above with Eq. ( Spin dependent interactions. Our results above generalize to models with spin dependent interaction potentials. In Appendix A.1, we discuss more general model potentials which not only include screened Coulomb interactions, V C , and phonon interactions, V ph , but also interactions mediated by spin fluctuations, V sf . In this case, we get another no-go theorem (No-go Theorem II in Appendix A.3) ruling out spin-triplet odd-f SC in a oneband superconductor with phonon-and spin-fluctuation mediated interactions. Recall that, for odd-f SC, spin-singlet corresponds to S = -1 and P * = -1, and spin-triplet corresponds to S = +1 and P * = +1. Thus, the no-go theorem allows for spin-singlet p-wave odd-f SC, in agreement with results in Interactions leading to odd-f SC. Our results above rule out odd-f SC in a large class of models describing real materials. However, they can also be used to design interactions leading to odd-f SC. To give examples, we mainly restrict ourselves to the Eliashberg equations (3) for simplicity (local approximation and spin-independent interactions). A large class of examples avoiding our no-go theorems are repulsive interactions, V (iω n , iω m ) ≥ 0, which are monotonically decreasing functions of |ω n -ω m |. We study three such examples. Our first example is for λ > 0 (Ω > 0 is an energy scale, here and in the following); this is like a phonon interaction, except that the coupling constant has the opposite sign. To obtain a more physical such example, we start with the momentum-dependent potential given in [16, Eq. ( for g eff > 0 and Γ > 0; see , where N (0) is the electronic density of states at the Fermi surface (this standard approximation reducing the general Eliashberg equation to (3) is discussed in Conclusions. We present a new constraint on pairing interactions to allow for odd-f solutions within the Eliashberg framework (odd-f condition). Odd-f SC requires strong coupling to stabilize the odd-f channel and favor it over even-f channel. However, both anomalous and normal selfenergies are renormalized by interactions. By combining the corresponding two Eliashberg equations, we find a strong constraint on pairing interactions: for spin independent interactions mediated by phonons, we find odd-f solutions are impossible within the Eliashberg formalism (No-go theorem I). We also consider spin dependent interactions mediated by spin-fluctuations, and we find that single band models cannot support s-wave odd-f solutions. Since our no-go theorems apply to a large class of models used to describe real materials, they explain why it has been so difficult to find odd-f SC. We note that multiband systems do not suffer from this constraint and hence represent a fertile ground to pursue odd-f solutions; for experimentally observable signatures of odd-frequency pairing in multiband superconductors, see e.g. Our no-go theorems are about models with standard interactions occurring in nature, but there is no general mathematical obstruction to odd-f SC if one drops this latter restriction. As we show in examples, using our results, one can construct models with pairing interactions that allow for odd-f SC. Thus, our results can be used as a design principle to construct models for odd-f SC which, as we hope, can guide the search for real odd-f materials. Our results are an example of how mathematics can contribute to the theory of superconductivity; see, e.g., In the general case, the Eliashberg equations given in the main text have to be generalized by replacing (our notation is explained in the main text), while we use generalizations of formulas for F and G in the main text to 0 ≤ T ≤ T c , (note that, for |φ(iω n , k)| 2 = 0, this simplifies to the formulas for F and G given in the main text); the definitions with are as in the main text; see We use the definition of the gap ∆ in In the following, we use the following definitions of the even-and odd parts of the interaction potential V , and similarly for Ṽ . Lemma 1: The general Eliashberg equations above imply and with for T = T c , these results holds true for any solution of the Eliashberg equations, and for 0 < T < T c they holds true for any solution such that either ∆ = ∆ + or ∆ = ∆ -. Note that, by the transformation properties of ∆ ± , Z and χ under T * : ω n → -ω n , one can restrict Remark 1: To explain the distinctions between T = T c and T < T c in Lemma 1, we note that the linearized Eliashberg equations determining T c are obtained from this by simplifying W (iω m , k ′ ) in and this satisfies W (iω m , k ′ ) = -W (-iω m , k ′ ) without further assumption; however, for T < T c , this only holds true and, for this reason, our results hold true only if ∆ = ∆ ± . Thus, in principle, our no-go theorems do not rule out the possibility of a mixed gap at temperatures below T c , i.e., they leave open the possibility that, at T < T c , ∆ = ∆ + + ∆ -with ∆ + and ∆ -both non-zero. Proof of Lemma 1. In the following, we use the notation φ ± (iω n , k) ≡ [φ(iω n , k) ± φ(-iω n , k)]/2 and similarly for Σ, F and G. The symmetry properties stated in The first equation in recalling the definition of F ± in the second identity and inserting F ± in In the same way, the second equation in ), and thus with ( and This proves the second and the third equations in We now are ready to state and prove the odd-f condition for the general Eliashberg equations. Proposition 1 (Odd-f Condition): The equations in where Thus, to to obtain odd-f SC, the interactions V and Ṽ must be such that Note that, for Ṽ = V and W in In our argument below, we use the following property of interaction potentials V : It is important to note that this always holds true (for the convenience of the reader, we recall the argument for spin independent interactions: in the functional integral formalism (see e.g. Ref. 27), the interaction part of the action defining the interacting fermion model is where n(iω n , k) are Fourier transformed fermion densities which commute and thus, clearly, one can assume (31) without loss of generality). We find it convenient to abbreviate the variables (ω n , k) and (ω m , k ′ ) by N and M , respectively, and T m≥0 dk ′ by M etc. This allows us to write the first and third equations in Inserting the second in the first equation we obtain where, in the second step, we computed an exact integral (the reason for including the DOS is explained in Method. For the potential V in (44), One can easily check that, if the function f (x) of x ≥ 0 is monotonically decreasing, then V -is non-negative; thus, in such a case, odd-f SC cannot be ruled out by To show that such a model indeed describes odd-f SC, we compute T c using we find it convenient to define the matrix M = (M n,m ) n,m≥0 so that it is independent of the coupling parameter λ. Inserting (46), we find i.e., M depends only on one parameter X. Thus, the T c -equation ( i.e., m≥0 Denoting the largest eigenvalue of the matrix A as g(X), we get the following odd-f T c -equation, We recall that, for even-f SC, T c is given by the McMillan formula To compute g(X), we approximate M by a N × N -matrix, M N = (M n,m ) N -1 n,m=0 , compute the corresponding finite matrix A N from M N using (49) with M replaced by M N , compute the larges eigenvalue, g(X), of A N numerically, and check convergence by plotting g(X) for different values of N . Thus, we made sure that all plots in Figs. 1 are numerically accurate. It is worth noting that the solution method described above can be used for any potential of the form (44); we did not make any assumption on the sign of f (x). Analytic result for inverted γ-model. The inverted γ-model corresponds to (44) with f (x) = 1/x γ . In this case, the potential in (44) is invariant under the scaling transformations (λ, Ω) → (s -γ λ, sΩ) for arbitrary s > 0. This and our T c -equation (51) imply g(X/s)/g(X) = s γ for all s > 0 and X = 2πT c /Ω > 0; the latter equation has a unique solution depending on one constant C ≥ 0: g(X) = CX -γ for all X > 0. Inserting this in (51) we obtain with K = C 1/γ /2π. Numeric results. We computed the function g(X) numerically for various examples. We found that the convergence of our numeric procedure improves with increasing values of X. In the limit X → 0, we encountered convergence problems, i.e., for X < 0.005 or so the required values of N to reach convergence were too large for our limited computation resources. A related numeric issue for our second and third examples, f (x) = log(1 + 1/x) and 1/x γ , is that f (x) diverges as x → 0; to solve this problem, we replaced 1/x by 1/ √ x 2 + ε 2 and varied ε to make sure that ε is small enough that results do not change within the desired accuracy if ε is decreased further. We found that changes in the parameter ε mainly affect the function g(X) in the regime X → 0 + . Due to these numeric limitations of our method, we were not able to compute g(X) reliably in the limit X → 0 + our numeric method. However, for the inverted γ-model, our analytic result shows that g(0) = +∞, which implies that odd-f SC is possible for arbitrarily small λ > 0 for this model. We also checked the T c -equation ( We also found that, for λ > 10 or so, the numerically computed T c -curves in Fig. Discussion. We find it interesting that the T c -curves for odd-f SC and repulsive interactions are qualitatively similar to T c -curves for conventional even-f SC: T c grows monotonically with the coupling constant λ. However, for conventional even-f SC, the T c -curve is determined by the universal function g(X) = -log(X), while for odd-f SC this function g(X) is model dependent. For the inverted Coulomb potential, our numerical results suggest that odd-f SC is only possible for λ > λ c with λ c ≈ 1 > 0 (see Fig. Our numeric results suggest that the exact T c -formula (52) for the inverted γ-model captures the leading large-λ behaviour of many models: if V (iω n , iω m ) ≈ λ(Ω/|ω n -ω m |) γ for |ω n -ω m | → ∞, then T c ≈ KΩλ 1/γ for λ → ∞. Appendix A. Proof of no-go theorem for general Eliashberg equations