Optical metasurfaces enable to engineer the electromagnetic space and control light propagation at an unprecedented level, offering a powerful tool to achieve modulation of light over multiple physical dimensions. Here, we demonstrate a Sb 2 S 3 phase-change metasurface platform that allows active manipulation of both amplitude and phase. In particular, we implement dynamic nanoprinting and holographic image display through tuning crystallization levels of this phasechange material. The Sb 2 S 3 nanobricks tailored to function the amplitude, geometric and propagation phase modulation constitute the dynamic meta-atoms in the multiplexed metasurfaces. Using the incident polarizations as decoding keys, the encoded information can be reproduced into a naonprinting grayscale image in the near field and two holographic images in the far field. These images can be switched on and off by taking advantages of the reversible tunability of Sb 2 S 3 nanostructure between amorphous and crystalline states. The proposed phase-change metasurfaces featuring manifold information and multifold encryption promise ultracompact data storage with high capacity and high security, which suggests an exciting direction for modern cryptography and security applications. The ability for arbitrary control of optical wavefront is a long sought-after goal in the areas of optical imaging, optical communication, and information processing. Metasurfaces, the optically thin artificially structured materials, provide a powerful platform to manipulate light field over multiple physical dimensions including amplitude, phase, polarization, and orbital angular momentum at subwavelength scale Chalcogenide phase-change materials (PCMs) have emerged as an excellent class of active materials to realize dynamic metasurfaces in recent years With these unparalleled properties, chalcogenide PCMs have shown their potential in metasurfaces for optical switching, beam steering, photonic spin-orbit interactions, and optical computing In this paper, we demonstrate a complete and tunable wavefront control in the visible using a multifunctional metasurface composed of chalcogenide PCM meta-atoms. As an example, we implement integration of nanoprinting and holographic image display for multifold information multiplexing, and realize the multi-level modulation of these images using the refractive index tunability of nanostructured Sb 2 S 3 . Compared with previous phase-change metasurfaces controlling only one property of light, the proposed Sb 2 S 3 metasurfaces are designed to actively control phase and amplitude simultaneously for multiple independent channels. In the design, the three kinds of images are independently stored in a metasurface composed of one type of Sb 2 S 3 nanobrick. Using the incident polarizations as decoding keys, the encoded information can be reproduced into a naonprinting grayscale image in the near field and two holographic images in the far field. In particular, by tuning the crystallization level of Sb 2 S 3 , these functions can be controllable in both near and far fields, affording more degrees of freedom for visible information storage and encryption with advantages of crosstalk-free and ultra-compactness. The concept of structured Sb 2 S 3 metasurfaces for dynamic image display and information encryption is illustrated in Fig. The proposed dynamic multifunctional metasurfaces encode three channels of completely independent information into a single piece of design, which is essentially different from the previously reported functional metadevices To achieve the dynamic multifunctionality above, we combine the amplitude modulation in the near field governed by Malus' law with the phase modulation in the far field based on the geometric phase and propagation phase into a single structured Sb 2 S 3 metasurface. Without the loss of generality, the transmissive anisotropic Sb 2 S 3 nanobricks are adopted to encode the three independent information channels. On one hand, the anisotropic nanobricks can serve as a nano half-waveplate that enable to vary the polarization direction of LP light, and hence the amplitude manipulation of the metasurface can be realized by adjusting the orientations of the nanobricks. On the other hand, such nanobricks can introduce distinct phase shifts for the two orthogonal polarizations along its fast and slow axis, and the modulation of geometric phase can also be realized by their orientations. Through the precise design using the connection, the wavefront modulation over the amplitude and phase space can be possible. In the following, the optical response of a single Sb 2 S 3 meta-atom are firstly considered to present the operational mechanism of the proposed metasurface. Each Sb 2 S 3 nanobrick can be regarded as a Jones matrix connecting the input field to the output field, as By rotating the meta-atoms by angle θ with respect to the x direction, the transmission Jones matrix can be decomposed into the multiplication of the rotation matrix R(θ) and a diagonal matrix in the Cartesian basis as where t l and t s are the complex transmission coefficients along the long and short axes of the nanobrick, respectively. Thus the Jones matrix can be expressed by A. Amplitude modulation in the near field When the nanobricks are inserted between a bulk-optic polarizer and an analyzer that control the light's polarization directions, the Jones vector of the transmission light can be obtained where α 1 , α 2 are the angles between the transmission axis directions of the bulk-optic polarizer and analyzer, respectively. Therefore, a general expression of the output transmission light is written as For a simple case of incident light polarized along the x axis and the analyzer for transmission light along the y axis, the angles can be set as α 1 = 0 and α 2 = π/2, respectively. And the output light intensity is calculated as The first term is usually considered as the cross-polarization conversion efficiency of Sb 2 S 3 nanobricks, i.e. T cross = |(t l -t s )/2| 2 , which only depends on the phase difference between the fast and slow axis directions of the nanostructure. As a result, the near-field amplitude can be continuously manipulated by only adjusting the rotation angle θ of Sb 2 S 3 nanobricks. It is also noted that the concept of orientation degeneracy, i.e., the one-to-many mapping relationship between the light amplitude and rotation angle can also be well explained here. As shown in Eq. ( When a LCP or a RCP light is employed to normally illuminate Sb 2 S 3 nanobricks, i.e. T where δ = 1 or -1 corresponds to the LCP or RCP light, the output transmission light can be calculated as For the output field, the first term is regarded as the co-polarized transmission component, and the second term carries the cross-polarized component with the opposite handedness as the incident light. The polarization conversion efficiencies for the two components can be defined by For the cross-polarized component, the phase of the transmission light φ includes the spin-dependent geometric phase and the spin-independent propagation phase Here φ represents the propagation phase of complex (t l -t s )/2, and Ψ = 2θ represents the part of geometric phase. Thus, the full phase modulation covering 0 to 2π can be achieved by the reasonable combination of both propagation and geometric phases, which originates from the design of meta-atoms with various dimensions and orientations. Under the CP light with different helicities, the combined phases φ can be independently modulated by the transmissive metasurface, which provides the two distinct channels for the far-field holograph projections. Employing patterned PCMs in metasurface design is an excellent strategy to obtain a dynamic wavefront control. Despite the great success of GST in reconfigurable meta-devices within the infrared regime, the unconventional Sb 2 S 3 material with a large bandgap of 1.70∼2.05 eV shows a relatively low absorption in the visible spectrum around 600 nm The refractive index of the Sb 2 S 3 remains high around ∼3.5 in the visible, and it is comparable to Si, TiO 2 in recent reports, making the material a good candidate for all-dielectric metasurfaces. In this sense, the wavefront modulation of the metasurfaces can be achieved by properly designing the single type of Sb 2 S 3 nanobrick to simultaneously satisfy the aforementioned phase and amplitude conditions. Using appropriate thermal, electric or optical stimulus, the reversible multilevel switching of Sb 2 S 3 nanostructures can be achieved between the amorphous and crystalline states. During the phase transition to crystalline, the refractive index increases with ∆n ∼ 0.5 and the large contrasts can simply vary the transmission response. Meanwhile, the light extinction coefficient k also becomes apparent to increase absorption loss. These would disorder or erase the designed functions of metasurface, leading to the dynamic switching of the multifunctionality. For a proof-of-concept demonstration, the phase-change metasurfaces sketched in Fig. The Si 3 N 4 encapsulation not only prevents the heating damage of Sb 2 S 3 materials during the reversible tuning of crystallization and amorphization, such as the sulfur loss through evaporation, but also effectively mimics a free-space environment for stable performance of nanostructures. Fig. The refractive index n is well above 3 in the entire visible regime, and the C-Sb 2 S 3 has the larger n and the extinction coefficient k. The metasurfaces are targeted to implement tunable multiple tasks that merge the three kinds of independent images including one nanoprinting and two holographic images into a single Sb 2 S 3 nanostructure. Fig. Based on the amplitude and phase modulation strategies, the unit cell of metasurface consisting of only one Sb 2 S 3 nanobrick is designed with optimized length (L), width (W ), and orientation angle (θ). Herein we choose the working wavelength of 633 nm and carry out numerical calculations with finite-difference-time-domain (FDTD) method via commercial package FDTD Solutions. The transmission amplitude in the near field is firstly considered. When the x-polarized light is normally incident from the substrate side of the metasurface, the simulated amplitude of the y-polarized transmission amplitude is shown in Fig. lookup approach from the eight meta-atom database, the nanobrick size at each pixel can be easily determined by the propagation phase. As a result, the Sb By arranging the designed Sb 2 S 3 nanobricks, the phase-change metasurfaces can be realized for dynamic nanoprinting and holographic image display. The metasurfaces consisting of 150 × 150 pixel numbers with overall size of 60 × 60 um is employed for the full-wave FDTD simulations. As shown in Fig. Meanwhile, the two different Fourier holographic images in the far field can be observed in the LCP (RCP) channel converted from the incident RCP (LCP), respectively. In this sense, the encoded images in the three channels are all polarization related and they can only be decoded under the specific polarization combinations. As the phase transition to full crystallinity, the effective dielectric constant of chalcogenide PCM depends on the crystalline fraction m according to the Lorenz-Lorentz relation In particular, there are multifold encryption mechanisms in the proposed single metasurface. Since the three independent images in the single metasurface can only be observed under the corresponding polarization states, the decoded polarization combinations can be considered as the security keys, making these images as encrypted information carries. The other mechanism lies in employing the reversible tunability of the phase change materials to reveal and hide information, for example, the image information coded by nanostructured Sb 2 S 3 can only be captured at amorphous states but not observed at crystalline states. Therefore, the proposed phase-change metasurface provides an advanced encryption strategy to significantly increase the information security. In conclusion, we present a methodology to realize the dynamic multifunctional metasurfaces by employing nanostructured chalcogenide PCM as building blocks. 