The origins of the spin-orbit torque (SOT) at ferromagnet/topological insulator (FM/TI) interfaces are incompletely understood. Theory has overwhelmingly focussed on the Edelstein effect due to the surface states in the presence of a scalar scattering potential. We investigate here the contribution to the SOT due to extrinsic spin-orbit scattering of the surface states, focusing on the case of an outof-plane magnetization. We show that spin-orbit scattering brings about a sizable renormalization of the field-like SOT, which exceeds 20% at larger strengths of the extrinsic spin-orbit parameter. The resulting SOT exhibits a maximum as a function of the Fermi energy, magnetization, and extrinsic spin-orbit strength. The field-like SOT decreases with increasing disorder strength while the damping-like SOT is independent of the impurity density. With experimental observation in mind we also determine the role of extrinsic spin-orbit scattering on the anomalous Hall effect. Our results suggest extrinsic spin-orbit scattering is a significant contributor to the surface SOT stemming from the Edelstein effect when the magnetization is out of the plane. The discovery of spin-orbit torques (SOT) .. where the tensor K leads to the spin-orbit torque via e.g. Rashba or Dresselhaus SO interactions Considerable controversy continues to surround the origins of the SOT in topological insulators. The relative contributions of surface and bulk states have been under scrutiny O c u Y I f s B 5 + w R n a I + S < / l a t e x i t > E < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " M 0 U v 4 v G C G c 8 5 R z 4 L J f e g x a v 0 c l g = " > A A A B 7 n i c b V B N S 8 N A E J 3 1 s 9 a v q k c v i 6 3 g q S R F 1 G P R i 8 c K 9 g P a U D b b T b t 0 s w m 7 G y G E / g g v H h T x 6 u / x 5 r 9 x 0 + a g r Q 8 G H u / N M D P P j w X X x n G + 0 x < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " h i r A k s Proposed schematic for an FM/TI device with a magnetization perpendicular to the surface of the TI, M = M ẑ. At the interface FM/TI surface x -y plane, there is an applied electric field, E. side jump scattering In this paper, we investigate the SOT in a hybrid system comprising spinmomentum locked massless Dirac fermions in topological insulators Since in a realistic sample individual contributions to the SOT are difficult to disentangle, we also consider the fingerprints of extrinsic SO scattering in the anomalous Hall effect (AHE) Topological insulators exhibit strong SO coupling both in the band structure and in the impurity potentials. We consider a 2D topological insulator in the presence of magnetization M where its direction is perpendicular to the plane: a TI is placed on a ferromagnet with magnetization perpendicular to the 2D plane as in Fig. where v F is the effective Fermi velocity and k is the momentum vector of electrons. The eigenvalues of , where ± labels conduction/valence band and the eigenstates are The total Hamiltonian describing the conduction electrons is where V (r) represents the electrostatic potential which has the form V (r) = eE • r, implying a uniform electric field E, which corresponds to the overwhelming majority of experimental setups. Also, U = U (r) represents the disorder scattering potential for the conduction electrons. In order to capture general behavior of SOT in the system, we consider short-range scattering together with extrinsic SO scattering. For short-range scalar scattering, we consider U 0 (r) = i u 0 δ(r -R i ), where R i indicate the random locations of the impurities and u 0 is a parameter that measures the strength of the disorder potential where p is the momentum operator and λ 0 is the effective extrinsic spin-orbit impurity scattering strength. The matrix elements of the impurity potentials in reciprocal space are U ss kk = s, k|U 0 (r)|s , k + s, k|U so (r)|s , k . The extrinsic SO scattering term can be assumed as a random effective magnetic field, which depends on an electron's incident and scattered wave vectors. λ 0 can have either sign. Moreover, it is assumed that λ 0 1, and this term is typically treated in perturbation theory. Finally, the disorder potential including scalar and SO impurities reads as where σ 0 is the 2×2 in spin space and q = kk. If |k| = |k | = k F and assuming that there are no spatial correlations in the disorder potential, the scattering matrix elements will be where λ = λ 0 k 2 F and γ = θ k -θ k . Averaging over impurity configurations, the firstorder term in the potential vanishes due to the randomness of the impurity locations as usual, while the second-order term where m(m ) and m (m ) are spin indices and n i indicating the impurity concentration. The density matrix ρ = f k + g 0 characterizes the system considered in Eq. ( where the covariant derivative is as follows: In order to solve Eq. ( where g 0 in terms of Green's functions can be expressed as Also, G R 0 ( ) is a free retarded Green function obtained as where we introduce the factor e -ηt to ensure convergence and the advanced Green function is defined as ( ). Now we want to include the effect of the driving electrostatic potential up to linear order where the g E , which reflects it is the electric field correction and off diagonal in the momentum and in the band index, defined as To perform a linear response, one can use Eq. ( Ek , the kinetic equation (i.e., Eq. ( Notice that the kinetic equation is considered to linear order of the electrical field and basically n E begins at order -1 in terms of small parameter h/ε F τ Using the expression of J 0 (f k ), the diagonal part of the Born approximation collision integral can also be written as According to Eq. ( We assume transport time is angular-independent or k direction independent. Substituting the above equation in Eq. ( As discussed in where D is the intrinsic driving term and D is the anomalous driving term, containing disorder renormalizations of the response which are in part equivalent to vertex corrections. Having solved the above equation, the intrinsic and extrinsic contributions are defined as [S The diagonal subleading distribution function n E can be calculated as J(n where the right hand side plays as the driving term. By solving this equation, we get two different contributions to the subleading diagonal density matrix as n and one can write J(n and n (sk) E are due to the side jump and skew scattering contributions, respectively. We can also decompose the off-diagonal density matrix into S mn E = S mn int + S mn ext . Having calculated the scattering terms and after straightforward but lengthy calculations, we find where here ). Furthermore, the extrinsic and intrinsic contributions of the off diagonal term is given by and where τ tr = τ /χ(λ) with 1/τ = n i πu 2 0 ρ( k )/h, and ρ( F ) = F /2πh 2 v 2 F is the density of states. Here, k = x cos θ + ŷ sin θ and θ = -x sin θ + ŷ cos θ. It is clear that the extrinsic SO scattering renormalizes physical quantities given by Eqs. The spin density and spin-orbit torques in topological insulators with out-of-plane magnetization are determined in this section. The spin density has five contributions: a leading contribution at the Fermi surface analogous to the Drude conductivity, an intrinsic contribution that takes into account the Fermi sea, an extrinsic contribution due to the Fermi surface that is formally zeroth order in the impurity potential strength, a side-jump contribution at the Fermi energy which includes the electric field correction to the collision integral, and a skew scattering contribution. We determine each of these in turn below. Let us calculate the leading order contribution to the spin density. It is With the leading order density matrix n , we find the spin density as Note that the contributions including v x due to 2π 0 dθ k sin θ k cos θ k = 0 is zero. In a similar manner we find Let us now consider the off-diagonal intrinsic density matrix contribution. First, the off-diagonal spin expectation value is Furthermore, we consider the off-diagonal extrinsic density matrix contribution as Moreover, the diagonal subleading density function of skew scattering will be as In oder to find the spin density related to the subleading of side jump, The z-component of spin expectation, on the other hand, are found as which are angle independent and therefore, the z-component spin density vanishes: Now we add all these contributions and get where It is worthwhile mentioning that the effect of the SO impurity scattering is explicitly appeared in the results through parameter λ. The spin orbit torque is defined as dm dt = (2M/h)m × s where m is a unit vector along the ẑ direction. With the spin density we already calculated we get where we have multiplied by a factor of h/2 the spin density since we traced only the Pauli matrix. The effective Dirac SOT is defined as dm dt = τ F L m×(ẑ×eE)+τ DL m z m×eE, where the first term which is proportional to m × (ẑ × eE) is odd upon magnetization reversal, proportional to the τ and acts like a field-like torque, while the second term, m × eE, is even in magnetization reversal acts like a damping torque. The Rashba-Edelstein effects due to spin-momentum locking on the surface of the topological insulator are responsible for the field-like contribution Spin-orbit torques from topological insulator surface states: Effect of extrinsic spin-orbit scattering on an out Expanding the SOTs for λ 1 and skipping terms including ξ n F for n > 2, we have We consider a topological insulator (i.e. Bi 2 Se 3 ) whose Fermi velocity of its massless Dirac fermions is v F 5 × 10 5 m s -1 . For all figures the impurity density and the amplitude of the scattering potential are given as n i = 1 × 10 10 cm -2 and U 0 = 5eVnm 2 or otherwise specified. Figure As seen in Fig. The simultaneous effect of the exchange field strength or Fermi energy and the extrinsic SO scattering strength on the damping-like and field-like SOTs are investigated in the density plots of Fig. The extrinsic velocity in the conduction band is obtained as where θ = (-sin θ, cos θ). Note that the extrinsic velocity is proportional to the impurity density and in contrast to the group velocity, which is a velocity between collisions, the extrinsic velocity includes the effect of disorder on carrier dynamics, and can be read as an effective velocity of the electron after numerous collisions. The contribution to the anomalous Hall conductivity related to the skew scattering and side jump corrections is where σ 0 yx = e 2 πh M F . While the Hall conductivity is independent on the impurity in a case of short-range impurity scattering, it depends a highly nonlinear on λ in the case of the extrinsic SO scattering. The Hall conductivity can be expand for λ 1 up to λ 2 and ξ F < 1 (i.e., F > M ), and we thus obtain It can be found from above equation, the Hall conductivity decreases (increases) for Note that our calculations were performed in the F τ /h 1 regime, i.e. as expected from the σ xx σ xy equations above. The result for the longitudinal conductivity agrees with the literature σ xx ∼ (e 2 /h)(v F τ tr /2) (see Eq. ( The anomalous Hall conductivity as a function of the extrinsic SO scattering strength λ 0 (which is defined in λ = λ 0 k 2 F ) for the different values of the Fermi energy is shown in Fig. We have investigated the SOT and electronic AHE due to massless Dirac fermions in a 2D topological insulator with spin-momentum locking in the presence of a magnetization perpendicular to the topological insulator plane. We found that both scalar and extrinsic SO scattering play important roles in determining the magnitude of the spin-orbit torque. The Fermi energy, external magnetization strength, and extrinsic impurity scattering all affect the field-like and damping-like SOTs. The SOTs reach a maximum value by modifying the M , ε F , and λ. Despite the fact that the strength of the damping-like SOT component is independent of the impurity density, the field-like SOT component decreases in a disordered system. The anomalous Hall conductivity, on the other hand, is independent of the impurity strength in the case of short-range impurity scattering, but highly nonlinear in the extrinsic SO scattering strength. The physics for an in-plane magnetization is highly non-trivial and wholly different from that discussed here. It will be addressed in a future publication. This project is supported by Future Fellowship FT190100062.