We derive the Frank elastic constants for nematic solutions of semiflexible polymers. We plot these results as a function of the coarse-grained Maier-Saupe quadrupole aligning strength and polymer stiffness ranging from rigid to highly flexible. The derivation uses the random phase approximation and combines the exact results for the statistics of a worm-like-chain with polymer field theory using a spherical harmonic basis. The results are evaluated using a numerical inverse Laplace transform. We present the results in terms of microscopic features such as hairpins and polymer ends so the trends can be understood independently from the derivation. Key findings are that for rigid polymers K bend > K splay > Ktwist while for flexible polymers K splay > K bend > Ktwist. For rigid polymers, the Frank elastic constants grow with the polymer length. For flexible polymers the elastic constants grow with the persistence length, which becomes the characteristic length scale, with the exception of K splay at high alignment strengths which grows with polymer lengths due to the elimination of hairpins. When oblong molecules are sufficiently concentrated they tend to align. This liquid crystalline alignment results from the molecules being much easier to pack together when the molecules are oriented in roughly the same direction as their neighbors. That is, the alignment is an entropic effect, though an enthalpic contribution is also possible. Polymers, which are characterised by a length that is much larger than their diameter, are oblong in the extreme. Solutions and melts of semiflexible and rigid polymers are particularly prone to alignment because their structural rigidity tends to align monomers along the polymer backbone, compounding the aligning tendency from packing. Even for highly packed solutions of rigid polymers, imperfections in the packing will cause the direction of alignment to wander so that distant positions in the solution will have different local directions of alignment. The orientation of alignment is critical to the behavior of polymer solutions ranging from conducting polymers FIG. We formally define bend as n × ∇ × n, twist as n • ∇ × n, and splay as ∇ • n where the unit vector n denotes the direction of alignment (we will formally define n in equation 88). If deviations in the direction of alignment occur slowly -i.e. over large spatial distances -then bend, twist, and splay will be small due the presence of the spatial derivative ∇. Because these deformations are small, we can write the energy of these deformation modes as a quadratic in bend, twist, and splay where K bend , K twist , and K splay are the Frank elastic constants for the (achiral) solution. In writing Eq. 1, we have included only long distance (small k) terms and hence ignore higher order derivative terms such as the saddle-splay interaction. The central theme of material science is to predict macroscopic material properties from microstructure, which in turn is generated by the molecular properties of the constituents. Here we consider the latter connection between the molecular properties (in this case, the polymer length, concentration, Kuhn length and monomer cross sectional area) and the microstructure (bend, twist, and splay). We are particularly interested in the large effects that the flexibility or rigidity of the polymer backbone can have on the Frank elastic constants. The first step to building a theoretic model of the elastic response of a solution is to model the thermodynamics of the solution. In other words, when should we expect the aligned phase to even exist? The phase behavior of solutions of semiflexible polymers have been investigated by a number of authors Another important step is deriving the elastic constants for solutions in the rigid rod limit Exact results for the propagator of the wormlike chain in an aligning field were found by Spakowitz and Wong We wish to study deformations in the alignment of liquid crystal polymer solutions and melts. To this end we propose the following mathematical model and approximations. The point(s) at which an approximation is used in the subsequent derivation will be noted for those wishing to relax these assumptions. 1. We will assume all polymers have the same length, L, i.e. no polydispersity. 2. We describe the j th polymer as a continuous path in space r j (s), given as a function of path length s ∈ [0, L]. We define the orientation direction of the polymer at point s as the unit vector u j (s) = ∂ rj (s) ∂s . 3. Each polymer will be assumed to obey the statistics of an inextensible Worm Like Chain (WLC). That is, the mechanical energy of n p polymers is given by III. SUMMARY OF DERIVATION The results of this paper are intended to be intelligible without consulting the derivation. However, the derivation contains a number of interesting tricks and insights that the reader may find useful for similar problems. In particular, we describe a real spherical harmonic tensor distribution, extended summation notation for describing orientation over space, mean field polymer field theory, fluctuations away from this mean field, and WLC propagators derived via stone fence diagrams. In this summary we provide a brief description of the approach we use to calculate the Frank elastic constants for a solution of semiflexible polymers. A similar procedure is followed for the rigid rod and fuzz-ball examples. We begin by describing the polymer solution with the partition function where the polymer bending energy E poly is given in equation 2, the E F H is the Flory-Huggins interaction and E M S is the Maier-Saupe energy representing the preference for nearby polymers to align. The latter two are given by the sum of pairwise interactions and where A is the cross sectional area of the polymers. A factor of 1/2 is included to account for double counting To make the system mathematically tractable we first solve the partition function for the mean field of φ which we write as φ M F . The self consistent equation 21 requires that φ M F is the density that would be expected in a field φ M F V which φ M F generates and applies to itself. The Frank elastic constants are defined in terms of fluctuations about this mean field solution, as will be discussed shortly. In order to calculate φ for a WLC in the presence of an aligning mean field we follow In section IX we investigate fluctuations about the mean field solution. The fluctuations are divided into Fourier modes via a Fourier transform from position r to wave vector k. To first approximation, the energy of each mode φ (k) is quadratic, where the "spring constants" for each of these modes are combined in the matrix Γ. In section XIII we define the nematic director and the Frank elastic constants and manipulate them to be written in terms of particular long-wavelength elements of Γ. This allows us to write expressions for the Frank elastic constants in terms of numerical inverse Laplace transforms in section XV. The numerical evaluation of the inverse transform is described in section XVI. The material properties at a point r in space are determined by the position and orientation of polymers in the vicinity of r. For a particular configuration { r j (s)} of the system, the local density and orientation distributions can be mathematically described by φl,m ( r) where Y ,m is the real spherical harmonic function described in appendix A. Note that we will use the roman r and u for position and orientation of points along a polymer and italicized r and u for generic position in space. These continuous polymers (assumption 2) could be replaced with discrete beads by replacing the integral in equation 7 with a sum. While φ is formally defined as sum of infinitely thin space curve delta distributions, it is easier to interpret after integrating over a coarse grained volume ∆V in the vicinity of the position r in the material. For example, the scalar component of the density φ0,0 is interpreted as the local volume fraction of polymer; integrating φ0,0 over the region of space ∆V gives the volume of polymer within that region. The values of φl,m ( r) for > 0 describe the degree and direction of alignment of the polymers. In equation 7 the units of volume from Ads cancel the volume units from the delta function so that φ is unitless, as would be expected from a volume fraction. We write the partition function describing the set of configurations that φ can take on as The 1/n p ! prefactor accounts for the indistinguishably of the polymers but is not consequential the following discussion. The functional integral D [ r j (s)] refers to an integral over all possible configurations of the system, that is, it integrates the position of each point of each polymer over all space The WLC polymer energy E poly defined in equation 2 effectively reduces the region of integration to continuous smooth polymers. The term 1 2 φ1 V 12 φ2 in equation 8 describes the interaction potential between polymers. The interaction is quadratic in φ in keeping with assumption 9. The subscripts in φ1 V 12 φ2 refer to an extended summation notation that sums over and m indices and integrates over space such that Combining the concise summation notation with the spherical harmonic indices for orientation allows us to manipulate the tensor field φ in much the same way as scalar fields in previous publications Under the above assumptions we write where χ is the widely used Flory-Huggins mixing parameter. The second term in the parentheses provides an energetic benefit to polymer segments that align u 1 ≈ u 2 or antialign u 1 ≈ -u 2 . The factor of 2/3 maintains the meaning of the Maier-Saupe parameter, a, from for all unit vectors u 1 and u 2 . In contrast to equation 7, the density distribution for solution of fuzzballs is given as where σ is the standard deviation of the field falloff and defines the size of the fuzzball. v p is the effective volume (or amplitude if you prefer) of the fuzzball. For rigid rods the density distribution is where r j is the location of one end of the rod and u j is the orientation of the rod. For the rigid rod, the integration in the above equation simplifies to The partition functions for these two solutions are similar and, in contrast to the WLC, simply require integrating over n p positions r j and n p orientations u j . We introduce a delta function at every point in space and orientation δ φ -φ . Extending the Fourier repre- to a delta function for a tensor distribution φ we have where the functional integral DW integrates W m ( r) for each r, , and m combination. Like φ, the Fourier variable W is also a tensor distribution. Inserting this delta function into the partition function (equation 8) in the fashion of f (x) = dyf (y)δ (x -y) we have Note that the E poly and φ only depend on r while φ 1 V 12 φ 2 and W 1 φ 1 only depend on φ so these terms can be separated This separation is quite useful, and is why we introduced the delta function 16 and the W field. The second integral in 18 contains no inter-chain interactions other than through the W field and all chains are identical (assumption 1) so it has been factored into a product of n p terms. The superscript (1) on r, E poly , and φ indicates a single chain. Defining the contents of the square bracket in equation 18 as z p we have While strictly speaking W is simply an integration variable, we can assign a physical meaning to it as a chemical potential. The term iW 1 in equation 20 is the effective potential experienced by a single polymer. Meanwhile, the term iW 1 in equation 19 represents the potential that the single polymers impose to deform the density field φ. In this way single polymers don't communicate directly with each other, but communicate though the local chemical potential W . We will later integrate out W between equations 64 and 66. In this section we will solve for the homogeneous mean field solution φ of partition function 8 so that we can expand about φ in section IX. The essence of the mean field solution is that rather than calculating all interactions inside and between polymers, we calculate the statistics of a single polymer with E F H and E M S replaced by the average field the polymer experiences. The self consistency requirement sets the mean field strength to that generated by n p such single polymers. The field experienced by a single polymer can be found by differentiating the potential 1 2 φ1 V 12 φ2 with respect to the field generated by a single polymer, φ(1) , to get φ 1 M F V 12 . The self consistent equation sets the expectation value of n p φ(1) to be the mean field strength φ M F . Equation 21 can alternatively be derived by introducing W as was done in equations 19 and 20 and then minimizing the integrand of equation 19 with respect to a constant φ and W which gives φ M F and iW M F . For values of the Maier-Saupe parameter a below its critical value a , the homogeneous mean field solution will simply be a constant density with no net alignment φ M F ,m = φ M F 0,0 δ ,0 . Above a the tendency for polymers to align will overpower entropy and break rotational symmetry creating a direction of preferred orientation. We will align this direction with the ẑ axis. Because the mean field solution is constant throughout all space (assumptions 7 and 8) the = 0 component of φ 0,0 is a constant scalar offset it can be canceled from equation 21 with no consequence. However, there will be a non-zero φ 2,0 which will need to be solved for. Under the potential 11, the aligning field energy for a single polymer is φ = -γ N 0 dsY 2,0 ( u (s)) where N = L/2 p is chain length nondimensionalized by the Kuhn length is the strength of the aligning field which follows from equations 11 and 7. The value of gamma can roughly be thought of as the aligning energy in kT 's per persistence length of polymer. The procedure for calculating the value of φ M F 2,0 as a function of γ will be derived below, resulting in formula 59 with the inverse Laplace transform being performed numerically as described in section XVI. In figure When working with relatively stiff polymers L < 2 p it is natural to nondimensionalize a by the polymer volume LA. When working with flexible polymers it is natural to nondimensionalize a by the volume of a Kuhn length 2 p A. Because a stronger a is needed in dilute solutions, it is also convenient to multiply a by the volume fraction of polymer φ 0,0 . FIG. As the fuzzball and rigid rod have no Kuhn length, we instead define their field strengths γ in terms of their respective volumes so that the energy associated with each object is E (1) = -γY 2,0 ( u i ). The partition function for the orientation of a single fuzzball or rigid rod is given by To calculate expectation values for this partition function it is useful to define the matrix The numerical values of M can be obtained by matrix exponentiation where 1, 2 which is given in appendix A. As an example of how M can be used to calculate an expectation, consider which, with the help of From the above we can verify the densities, φ RR 0,0 , and get the mean field alignment φ and then solve for the Maier-Saupe parameter plotted in figure In this section we derive a propagator -equations 51 and 52 -which we will use to calculate φ M F in the next section. To obtain a numerical value of φ M F we follow the approach of which gives the probability distribution for the orientation u at one end of a chain of length L, given that the other end is orientated in the u o direction. (Note that in where d u 1 is meant as integration over the unit sphere. Going forward we will nondimensionalize the polymer length by the Kuhn length 2 p to give N = L/2 p . The propagator G o allows us to calculate statistics about any point along a free chain. For example, suppose we have a WLC constrained to start from orientation u 0 and end at orientation u f and there is some function f that depends on the orientation u 1 at a point N 1 = L 1 /2 p along a polymer. We can calculate f 's expectation value via This expectation value is precisely the type of quantity that we need to calculate to obtain the propagator G for a WLC which is in an aligning field φ M F 1 V 12 from equation 21. In particular, if we use the expectation value in equation 36 to include the aligning field γ as a re-weighting of G o then the partition function for the end orientation is where the prefactor G o ( u f | u 0 ; N ) cancels the denominator of 36. Please note that G is an unnormalized distribution that is proportional to the probability distribution of u f for a given u 0 , P and G differ in that 1 4π d u 0 P ( u f | u 0 ; N ) gives the probability distribution of u f assuming u 0 is uniform over the unit sphere, while ) is proportional to the probability distribution of u f for a polymer of length N in an aligning field whose ends are free to rotate. Like G 0 , the propagator G has the property G ( u| u 0 . We can think of G ( u| u 0 ; L) as the partition function for u and u 0 . The quantity G ( u| u 0 ; L) is useful because it allows us to calculate chain statistics in the presence of the γ field. For example, the expectation of f ( u 1 ) for a chain in field of strength γ and freely rotating ends is given by where the denominator can be simplified to We now turn to calculating G ( u| u 0 ; L) . Whereas equation 36 depended only on the orientation at s 1 , the expectation value in equation 37 depends on the orientation at every point along the chain. In order to expand G in terms of G o , we Taylor expand the exponential and reorder the integrals where we have introduced the short hand u i ≡ u (s i ). The factor of 1 n! canceled the n! from ordering the integrals. To calculate the the n = 2 term, for example, we have To simplify equation 42, it is convenient to perform a Laplace transform from N → p . Defining the Laplace transform of equation 35 as Go (p The convolution rule for Laplace transforms says that In equation 42 we have something of the form L [f * g * h]. By plugging the convolution rule into itself recursively we arrive at the general relation Taking the Laplace transform of the n = 2 example in equation 42 and substituting into 43 we arrive at o and Go (p| ) ≡ 1 p+ ( +1) from equation 43. The integrals over the spherical harmonics in the middle can be written in terms of A m and β m from appendix A. In particular equation A11 gives us so that which distributes to 9 terms for each m and 1 (though some are disallowed by the requirements that 1 ≥ |m|). We would like to apply the reasoning of equations 44 and 45 to all term in the sum 40, the Laplace transform of G ( u f , u 0 , N ). However, multiplying 45 by itself for each of the terms in 40 will result in a very large number of terms. The enumeration of these terms is greatly aided by the use of stone fence diagrams There is one of these diagrams for each of the values of -indicated by the to the left of the diagram. In this case, the incoming 0 and outgoing f are always the same, as indicated by the same for the spherical harmonics of u f and u 0 in equation 43. However, diagrams for n > 0, which include factors of γ, may connect different values. The form of equation 44 suggests that we should connect these dots with products of spherical harmonics. There are three types of connections in equation 45 corresponding to keeping the value the same, increasing by 2, or decreasing by 2. These are represented by horizontal, upwardly slanted, and downwardly slanted connections respectively: and in this way the vertical axis corresponds to as is indicated by the expressions to the left of the diagrams. The three possible diagrams starting at and having a single γ are and 4 of the 9 possible diagrams proportional to γ 2 are These nine diagrams correspond to the nine terms in equation 46. For each eigenvalue set {m 0 , 0 } describing the orientation of u 0 , there are 3 n such diagrams from the γ n term of the expansion 40; though many of these will be zero due to the requirement that ≥ |m| which is enforced by A = A +1 = 0 and disallows diagrams that go below |m| anywhere along their path. Our task is to sum the allowed diagrams with any number, n, of sections. We define a new symbol to denote the sum of all such diagrams that don't contain any factors of A so that it starts and ends at . which can be evaluated via a geometric series The critical insight made in which can calculated recursively by truncating at a sufficiently high value. Likewise where we have explicitly cut off the recursion when dips below |m|. Also of interest is the diagram similar to W (+) but without the left dot and requiring at least one up-down step To get all the diagrams that begin and end at we need to include all possible sets of up steps and down steps. We group these diagrams into four groups: 1, up first down last; 2, up first up last; 3, down first up last; and 4, down first down last. where the final -1/ (P -γB m ) is to remove the double counting of . We may write the sum The term W (±)m gives all the diagrams starting and ending at m and . The sum of diagrams that connect different values can be calculated recursively with the application of the flanking harmonics we have our desired propagator In this section we will show how the propagator G can be used to calculate expectation values of various quantities (e.x. φ 2,0 M F or φ 2,1 φ 2,1 M F ) for WLC's in an aligning mean field. In the mean field solution, the n p polymers are distributed over a volume V . Taking the expectation value of equation 7 we have or The probability the chain will point in direction u at path length s along the chain is weighted by the propagator from the beginning of the chain to s, i.e. G ( u| u 0 ; s), and the propagator from s to the other end of the chain The Laplace transform from N to p of φ 2,0 M F can be preformed using the convolution rule (see discussion of equation 44) To calculate φ 2,0 M F we want to integrate over beginning, middle, and end orientations as in where the denominator provides the appropriate normalization. We can then substitute equation 52 into 56 to change basis from u to Y ,m . The sums over can be made implicit by writing the result in matrix form where the rows and columns run over values so that and the product of three real spherical harmonics is defined as The values of J m,m ,m ( ) are derived in appendix A. After the change of basis, equation 56 becomes were e 0 = [1, 0, 0, 0...] is the unit vector so that e 0 • G 0 • e 0 = G 0 1,1 . The pinning to = 0 at the chain ends results from inserting Y 0,0 = 1 √ 4π and applying d uY 0,0 Y ,m = δ 0, δ 0,m . Furthermore, the requirement that |m| ≤ required m 1 = m 2 = 0 in equation 59. The inverse Laplace transforms can be performed numerically as described in section XVI. The process of connecting sequential propagators together can be extended to the expectation value of several spherical harmonics IX. FLUCTUATIONS Having solved for the average field values φ M F (and by extension ) we now investigate local fluctuations about these values by substituting φ = φ M F + δφ and W = W M F + δW into 19. Resulting constant terms such as W M F φ M F can be absorbed into the proportionality constant which only offsets the reference energy. Furthermore, the mean field solution W M F found above was uniform in space so the term W M F 1 δφ 1 must be zero. Equation 19 can further be simplified by using i exp -βE poly -φ(1) Per assumption 12, the field φ only makes small deviations from its mean field value φ M F so δφ is small. Also, under RPA (assumption 13) W only makes small deviations from its mean value W M F constraining δW to be small. Taylor expanding z p about δW = 0 gives (up to an additive constant of no consequence). We expand the logarithm log (1 + x) = x -1 2 x 2 in equation 61 and substituting in z p we have where We then perform a Gaussian integral over δW to arrive at where S -1 12 is defined via S -1 12 S 23 = δ 1 , 3 δ m1,m3 δ ( r 1 -r 3 ). Appendix C discusses how to perform this inverse. The energy expression in 66, which is often written with Γ 12 ≡ V 12 + 1 np S -1 12 , describes the quadratic fluctuations of φ around the mean field solution. The bigger an element of Γ is, the smaller the corresponding fluctuation will be. Given the critical importance of 66 we will devote considerable effort to calculating S -1 . Because of translational invariance (assumption 7), the Fourier transform r → k of S 12 is much easier to invert than the real space S 12 . Following the conventions in appendix B, where Ṽ12 = 4πχδ 1,0 -8π 15 aδ 1,2 δ m1,m2 δ 1, 2 δ k 1 + k 2 . In other words, the Fourier modes of fluctuations in φ are decoupled from each other (at least to quadratic order in φ). Another advantage of the Fourier transform is that by assumptions 7, 8, and 12 and as discussed in section VI the mean field solution is uniform in space so the latter term in equation 65, φ 1 , contributes only at k = 0. While we will be interested in the limit as k → 0, the value at precisely k = 0 will not be used so we can drop this constant term. We will refer to the first term on the right of equation 65 as δS 12 ≡ φ(1) . Calculating δS for a fuzzball or rigid rod can be accomplished using M from equation 27 which amounts to the expectation of a product of two spherical harmonics in an applied field. Inserting equation 13 into δS 12 ≡ φ(1) for the fuzzball the spatial and rotational terms, ρ and v respectively, factor because the position and orientation of a fuzzball are unrelated. where the denominators come from the single fuzzball partition function z F B = V d u exp (γY 2,0 ( u i )) = V 4πM 0 0,0 . Taking the Fourier transform of a Gaussian yields a Gaussian, hence where the δ k 1 + k 2 arises from translational invariance. The position along a rigid rod is inherently coupled to the orientation of the rod so the factorization into ρ and v is not possible. In particular, writing out δ S = φ(1) explicitly from equation IV we have where the single rod partition function is z RR = V d u exp (γY 2,0 ( u i )) = V 4πM 0 0,0 . Applying the Fourier transform from r → k takes The exponential can be expanded to quadratic order and the s integrals evaluated directly Introducing κ defined in equation 79 and doing some simplification we arrive at • where the integer M runs over all values allowed by the selection rules of J. We now have an explicit formula for the low k expansion of δ SRR . We now turn to finding δS 12 for the WLC. Writing δS 12 explicitly Note the distinction between the argument r 1 and the unitalicized r(s 1 ) which stands for position of a point s 1 along the polymer. We take the Fourier transform The integrals over r are eliminated by delta functions to give exp i k 1 r (s 1 ) + i k 2 r (s 2 ) which can be factored into where we have introduced the notation r (s 2 ) = r 2 . By translational invariance (assumption 7) we can average out r 2 over the system volume V by applying V -1 d r 2 and recognizing the delta function (2π) where we nondimensionalized L = N 2 p so that L 0 ds 2 became 2 p N 0 ds 2 . It will be convenient to write k in spherical coordinates. Because k is a vector, it is an = 1 object. Specifically we will define κ ,m as which has the property which is useful because k 1 •( r 1 -r 2 ) in equation 77 can be written as By assumption 15 we are interested in the large distance (small k) behavior, so we Taylor expand the exponential in 77 which, along with the above modifications, becomes The expectation values in 81 can be evaluated as described in equation 60. The first term in the series becomes • • G 0 • e 0 δ m1,m2 the linear term is killed by selection rules for J and the quadratic term is given by • • • Having gone though the effort to calculate the low k behavior of δ S it is worth taking some time to consider the form of the result. In this paper we are primarily interested in the density = 0 and quadrupole = 2 interactions. It is convenient two write δ S in the basis ( i , m i ) = [(0, 0) , (2, 0) , (2, -1) , (2, 1) , (2, -2) , (2, 2)] . (84) In the long wavelength limit there are only correlations between fluctuations of the same m values, i.e. lim k→0 δ S ∝ δ m1,m2 . As it turns out, in this basis we have lim κ→0 δ Sm1,m2 where the expressions for t, h, x, y, and z depend on the whether we are talking about a WLC, rigid rod, or fuzzball. In section XIII we will discuss the meaning of the various fluctuations (see equation 101 and figure In the isotropic limit, γ → 0, all directions Y 2,m are identical. As alignment in the ẑ direction (i.e. Y 2,0 ) grows, it does so at the expense of the alignment in the other directions. When δ S is inverted and substituted into equation 66 we get the energy coefficients for the various modes where the inverse is discussed in C. Critically, we have verified numerically, that in the limit that κ → 0 that y precisely cancels with 2 3 a term from the original interaction potential. This cancellation occurs at all field strengths γ. This cancellation comes about because of the invariance of the energy to a rotation of the entire system. Hence, the system will exhibit long distance deformations in the direction of alignment. It is only the rate of change of these directions that contribute to the energy, hence the derivatives, ∇, in the Frank elastic expressions. In this section we will define the nematic director and Frank elastic constants and their relation to the orientation field φ. The Frank elastic energy density depends on the orientations u in the vicinity ∆V . The orientation distribution can be described by the 3x3 matrix the denominator of which normalizes out the local polymer density, φ 0,0 , leaving only the directional information. The ∆V is the coarse-graining volume such that details of the structure smaller than this volume will not be treated. Going forward we will drop the ∆V . The eigen-decomposition of the M matrix is where λ 1 ≥ λ 2 ≥ λ 3 This defines the unit length nematic director n which indicates the general direction of alignment within ∆V . As n is an eigenvector, its sign is arbitrarily chosen. The eigenvalues of M , which obey λ 1 + λ 2 + λ 3 = 1 and λ i ≥ 0, designate the degree of alignment where with c 1 ∈ [0, 1] describing the degree of alignment in the primary direction and c 2 describing the degree to which a secondary direction of alignment exists. The Frank elastic energy density is the sum of bend, twist, and splay energies and is defined in terms of the nematic director To see why there are exactly three deformation modes, consider figure and definition 7 we can write The magnitude of φ2,m integrated over a coarse-graining volume ∆V depends on the direction and degree of local alignment of u vectors and grows with amount of polymer within ∆V . Explicitly writing the relation between n and φ 2,m is complicated as it involves the cubic equation for the eigenvalues of M . This relation can be much simplified by first making some assumptions. By assumption 19, there is a primary direction of alignment requiring λ 1 > λ 2 implying c 1 > 0. Furthermore, assumption 12 requires the direction of alignment to be approximately in the ẑ direction. Excluding terms that are quadratic in the deviation from ẑ (i.e. of order n 2 x/y or higher) we write where θ specifies the orientation of any azimuthal asymmetry. Substituting into 89 e 2 ≈ cos (θ) x + sin (θ) ŷ -(n y sin (θ) + n x cos (θ)) ẑ ( and where the dashes indicate a symmetric matrix. By assumption 14 we will work with systems where c 2 ≈ 0 and therefore λ 2 ≈ λ 3 ≈ (1 -λ 1 ) /2. We write c 1 and c 2 in terms of their deviations so that c 1 → c 1 + δc 1 and c 2 → 0 + δc 2 . Keeping only first order terms we have Comparing to equation 93 we have φ2,m = φ 0,0 This gives us an interpretation of φ 2,m under the assumption that alignment only slightly differs from the ẑ direction as shown in figure from which we can write the bend, twist and splay In appendix B we show that FIG. allowing us to write the Fourier representation of bend, twist, and splay as Using Equation 1 can be written in matrix form as where The Frank elastic constants are related to the deformation energy of the system given in equation 86, in that they comprise the portion of the energy that comes from φ2,±1 deformations that are quadratic in κ. The comparison between equations 111-112 and δ S-1 in equation 86 will allow us to write the Frank elastic constants in terms of the microscopic details of the system (e.g. L, A, φ 0,0 , a, v p , etc.). Comparing equations 111-112 and 114 to equation 71 we find that the Frank elastic constants for a fuzzball are identical and equal Comparing equations 111-112 and 114 to equation 75 we get the Frank elastic constants for a rigid rod • • Comparing equations 111-112 and 114 to equation 81 we find the dimensionless elastic constants FIG. where • G m1 • J m1,m1,0 • G 0 • e 0 (126) • • • G 0 • e 0 (127) Laplace inversion is accomplished by the numerical integration The complex integration is done along the path in figure Python code to do the inverse Laplace transform and generate the plots in this paper can be found at https: //github.com/SpakowitzLab/wlcsim/tree/master/wlcsim/FrankElastic. The documentation can be found at https://wlcsim.readthedocs.io/en/latest/FrankExample.html. FIG. The units of the Frank elastic constants are energy times length because they denote energy per unit volume per rate of change of direction squared. To compare the magnitudes of the Frank elastic constants we first nondimensionalize them. Throughout this paper we have dropped the implied energy units of k b T 's, so energy is already dimensionless. For relatively stiff polymers, it makes sense to nondimensionalize K by multiplying it by A/L because L and A are the only relevant length scales for the rigid rod. When nondimensionalizing we also divide the Frank elastic constants by the volume fraction of polymer φ 0,0 because denser solutions experience proportionally more aligning field. Figure In Figure The fundamental difference that leads to K bend being greater than the other K's is that bend is a change in orientation associated with a displacement in the direction of alignment (see figure Note that at the lower left corner of figure Nondimensionalizing by the Kuhn length in figure The splay modulus K splay for long polymers is larger and more complex. At low coupling strength splay can be accommodated by hairpins as shown in figure Surprisingly, after initially increasing, the twist modulus K twist moderately decreases with increasing a as shown in figure The primary trend presented above is that for rigid polymers N 1 the K bend > K splay and for long flexible polymers K splay > K bend . Naturally, we'd like to know when the crossover between bend and splay occurs. In figure 11 we plot the ratios of the Frank elastic constants. The crossover where K bend = K splay depends modestly on a and occurs a lengths a little above one Kuhn length. The curves in this figure end when the polymers become flexible to the point where the aligned phase is no longer metastable and spontaneously transforms to the isotropic state. Note that we have nondimensionalized a in this plot by the total polymer length. If we instead had nondimensionalized a by the Kuhn length, the curves would still cross at N values just above one, but the shape of the curves would be different. We have presented a method for evaluating the size of orientation deformations for nematic solutions of semiflexible polymers. These deformations, described by the Frank elastic constants, are accurately found for a wide range of chain flexibilities and alignment interaction strengths (i.e. persistence length, p and Maier-Saupe parameter, a). Our method shows the convenience of combining a previously-derived, stone-fence-diagram-based, exact statistics for the worm-like chain in a quadrupole field Below a minimum alignment interaction strength the nematic state will spontaneously degenerate into the isotropic one. That is, the aligned state is not even metastable. This minimum interaction is associated with finite -if small -Frank elastic constants and a large but finite amount of deformation. The following features are for solutions in a stable (or at least metastable) nematic state. We will divide our results into those for relatively rigid polymers (L p ) and those for relatively flexible polymers. First, we will make three observations that hold over both ranges. 1) The twist modulus is always smaller than bend and splay moduli. For most polymer solutions K twist is order(s) of magnitude smaller than K bend and K splay . This means that the primary deformation mode of polymer solutions will be twist. 2) At the level of the present theory (no coupling between deformation modes) the Flory Huggins χ parameter does not affect the Frank elastic constants. This means that using a better solvent will not directly For nematic solutions of rigid polymers the Frank elastic constants increase as Lφ 0,0 where L is the polymer length. That is, increasing polymer length and concentration decreases the expected amount of bend, twist, and splay. Over the range of Maier-Saupe coupling strengths a where liquid crystal alignment can be found, we find K bend > K splay > K twist . When coupling strength a is just above the limit of metastability of the nematic phase, then K bend ≈ K splay as predicted by For nematic solutions of semiflexible and flexible polymers the qualitative elastic behavior differs significantly from that of rigid polymers. For flexible polymers K splay > K bend . The crossover where K bend = K splay occurs at N ≈ 1.25 with the crossover value increasing modestly with aligning strength a. Unlike solutions of rigid polymers where the elastic constants depended primarily on the polymer length, the elastic constants of semiflexible polymers depend more heavily on the persistence length. In particular, the twist and bend constants, K twist and K bend , grow as p φ 0,0 where p is the polymer persistence length. The splay constant K splay grows as p φ 0,0 at low coupling strengths but as Lφ 0,0 at high coupling strengths. The dependence of the elastic deformations of flexible polymer solutions have an interesting dependence on coupling strength a. The value of K splay increases quickly with a as hairpins are removed from chains as shown by Taken together, the elastic deformations depend on the the polymer length, rigidity, and local alignment strength in a varied but predicable fashion. Armed with the knowledge of these dependencies, the reader can both predict and rationally design the liquid crystalline behavior of polymer solutions. The orthogonality of real spherical harmonics is A useful property of products of real spherical harmonics is their relation the the Legendre polynomial Furthermore, products of harmonics can be factored into sums of single harmonics where Because it will be used frequently, we will rewrite where where because of the infinite extent of the system we can do a change of integration variables using the definition of translation invariance S ( x 3 -x 0 , x 2 ) = S ( x 3 , x 2 + x 0 ) and setting Recognizing the delta function (2π) Being diagonal with respect to k makes S easy to invert. We define the inverse by S • S-1 ≡ I which written out implies Note that if S contains and m indices, it still needs to be inverted with respect them in the normal way. Appendix C: Inverting S As the deformation energy 86 requires the inverse of S, we will take a moment to discuss how to take the inverse of a power series of matrices. The derivative of an inverse can be calculated by differentiating the identity ∂I = 0 = ∂ SS -1 = S∂ S -1 + (∂S) S -1 which gives ∂ S -1 = -S -1 (∂S) S -1 (C1) for polymer j at path length s u 1 -shorthand for u (s 1 ) u 1 -arbitrary unit vector V -volume of space (assumed to be large) V 12 -interaction potential defined in equation 11 v -rotational term in equation 68 v p -volume of one polymer, rod, or fuzzball W -field conjugate to φ, similar to chemical potential, see equation 16 (86) 