Two-photon photopolymerization (TPP) has recently become a popular method for the fabrication of three-dimensional (3D) micro-and nanostructures. The reproduction fidelity of the designed micro-and nanostructures is influenced by experimental writing conditions, including laser power, exposure time, etc. To determine the appropriate writing parameters, characterization of morphological features and surface roughness during the experiment is needed. Traditional characterization methods for TPP, e.g., scanning electron microscopy and atomic force microscopy, have limited speed and cannot study internal structures without invasive approaches. Optical diffraction tomography (ODT) is an emerging label-free 3D imaging technique based on reconstructing the object's 3D refractive index (RI) distribution with diffraction-limited resolution. Here, we propose a non-invasive solution to fully characterize the TPPfabricated structures using a high-speed ODT technique, which can eliminate the need for complex sample preparation, such as fluorescence labelling or metal-coating, and achieve a full 3D measurement time of 6 ms. By visualizing and studying different TPPfabricated structures, including embedded spirals and cubes, via the ODT system, the fabrication quality, including 3D morphological features, exposure levels, and surface roughness, can be examined quantitatively. The results suggest our method can effectively improve the fabrication quality and reproducibility of TPP, generating impacts on the nanofabrication community. As a direct laser writing technique, two-photon photopolymerization (TPP) has become one of the most widely used manufacturing techniques for the fabrication of three-dimensional (3D) micro-and nanostructures with sub-micron resolution To date, a few methods have been used to characterize TPP-printed structures by offering different resolving capabilities, including scanning electron microscopy (SEM) Optical diffraction tomography (ODT) has emerged as a powerful tool for label-free 3D characterization of biological specimens In this work, we present a new method to characterize TPP printed structures based on a highspeed ODT system (first reported in a conference paper Figure After the printing and imaging systems are optimized, we designed several 3D microstructures for subsequent experiments. To validate the 3D imaging capability of ODT, we firstly printed a standing along spiral which has a dimension of 49x17x17 μm 3 and a period of 11.7 μm, following the design in Fig. After the validation, we printed a spiral and enclosed it in a shell, following the design in Fig. Knowing the RI distributions of materials fabricated by TPP is essential for designing novel optical devices for specific applications, such as gradient-index elements for focusing, compound lenses for chromatic dispersion controlling, and micro waveguides for photonic integrated circuits To test the capability of our system in mapping the RI distributions, we printed three rectangular cuboids with each made from a unique commercial photoresin material (from Nanoscribe GmbH), following the design in Fig. Surface roughness is a critical parameter for evaluating the performance of the printed structures for many optical applications. For example, the surface roughness of micro-lenses needs to be several times smaller than the wavelength of the testing light We printed a cube that has a dimension of 25 x 25 x 7 μm 3 , following the design shown in Fig. AFM can well characterize the roughness of the sample top surfaces, but it cannot easily access the side walls. Here we demonstrate characterizing the side-wall roughness using ODT by designing a stacked tower structure as illustrated in Fig. In conclusion, we have presented a combined ODT-TPP system that can characterize both the external and internal structures of specifically designed 3D objects through mapping the 3D RI distributions with diffraction-limited resolution. In comparison, conventional characterization methods (e.g., SEM and AFM) have limited measuring capabilities, thus each method or even combinations of these methods cannot fully characterize the feature dimensions, internal structures, and surface roughness of the printed structures. Notably, the ODT measurement is performed in milliseconds, which is more than three orders of magnitude faster than conventional methods. Although the 3D image reconstruction and segmentation time are current around several minutes, it can be further expedited with parallel computing or machine learning algorithms. We envision our method can be potentially applied for large-scale characterization of micro-and nanostructures during the fabrication process and provide feedback for the optimization of the printing parameters in real-time.