Both the intrinsic anisotropic optical materials and fullereneassembled 2D materials have attracted a lot of interests in fundamental science and potential applications. The synthesis of a monolayer (ML) fullerene makes the combination of these two features plausible. In this work, using first-principles calculations, we systematically study the electronic structure, optical properties of quasi-hexagonal phase (qHP) ML and quasi-tetragonal phase (qTP) ML fullerenes. The calculations of qHP ML show that it is a semiconductor with small anisotropic optical absorption, which agrees with the recent experimental measurements. However, the results for qTP ML reveal that it is a semimetal with highly in-plane anisotropic absorption. The dichroic ratio, namely the absorption ratio of x-and y-polarized light / xx yy α α , is around 12 at photon energy of 0.29 eV. This anisotropy is much more pronounced when the photon energy is between 0.7 and 1.4 eV, where xx α becomes nearly zero while yy α is more than two orders of magnitude larger. This indicates qTP ML as a candidate for long-pursuit lossless metal and a potential material for atomically thin polarizer. We hope this will stimulate further experimental efforts in the study of qTP ML and other fullerene-assembled 2D materials. Stimulated by the successful synthesis of a monolayer (ML) fullerene network very recently, Using Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP), Crystal structure. The qHP and qTP bulk single crystals of polymeric C60 have been synthesized in experiment. Such sp 3 -like fourfold-coordinated C atoms also appear in the bridging bonds in qTP ML, as shown in Figures Due to the semimetal feature and quite small electron and hole pockets, we ignore the Drude type intraband contribution to the absorption in photon energy higher than 0.2 eV. We mainly discuss two distinct features of the anisotropic absorption spectra in Figure As shown in Figures for the bands of qTP ML. The IRREPs 46 at high-symmetry points (HSPs) and corresponding elementary band representations (EBRs) We use the IRREPs to analyse the absorption spectra of qTP ML. As illustrated in The anisotropic peaks at 0.29 eV can be understood from a simple real-space picture using EBRs. The N-th and the (N + 1)-th bands are the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO). From the EBR decomposition, they can be seen as the Bu and Ag orbitals at the same Wyckoff position (0.5, 0.5), respectively. From Table We further analyze the electron transitions of qTP ML allowed by dipole radiation selection rules In this paper, the electronic and optical properties of qHP ML and qTP ML are obtained with PBE exchange-correlation functional and HSE06 hybrid functional calculations. The calculated results show that qHP ML is a semiconductor and has marginal optical anisotropy with dichroic ratio around 2.34, being consistent with the experimental measurements. On the contrary, qTP ML is predicted to be a semimetal with strong anisotropic optical absorption. In the infrared and visible light region, the x-polarized light is nearly absorptionless while the absorption of y-polarized light is more than two orders of magnitude larger. The underlying physics for this anisotropy has been revealed in both real-space and momentum space pictures based on the elementary band representation analysis and selection rules constrained by symmetry in electronic dipole transition. Finally, the STM images are simulated to guide the experimental identification of both qHP and qTP MLs. We think the intrinsic high inplane anisotropy makes the qTP ML very promising for optoelectronic devices, such as the candidate for lossless metal and sub-nanometer polarizer. The authors declare no competing financial interest. 