Molecular beam epitaxy of K-doped Ba122 (Ba1-xKxFe2As2) superconductor was realized on a MgO substrate. Microstructural observation revealed that the undoped Ba122 served as a perfect buffer layer for epitaxial growth of the K-doped Ba122. The film exhibited a high critical temperature of 39.8 K and a high critical current density of 3.9 MA/cm 2 at 4 K. The successful growth of epitaxial thin film will enable artificial single grain boundary on oxide bicrystal substrates and reveal the grain boundary transport nature of K-doped Ba122. The iron-based superconductor, The transport measurements over a single grain boundary are a clear-cut method in understanding the nature of the grain boundary. So far, in the Co-and P-doped Ba122, the transport properties across the grain boundary have been evaluated using bicrystal thin films. Film growth was performed using custom-design molecular-beam epitaxy (MBE) equipped with various element rate monitoring systems. The details of the deposition method are described in our previous report. The crystal structure of the films was evaluated by x-ray diffraction (XRD) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). The cross-sectional TEM samples were prepared by focused ion beam (FIB) in a scanning electron microscope (SEM, Thermo Fisher Scientific Scios). The scanning-TEM (STEM, Thermo Fisher Scientific Titan G2 Cubed 60-300) was utilized for microstructural analysis equipped with bright-field (BF) and annular dark-field (ADF) detectors, and chemical compositional analysis by energy-dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDS). These analyses were operated at an acceleration voltage of 300 kV. The temperature dependence of in-plane resistivity was measured using a standard four-probe method. The resistivity of the film was calculated using the total thickness of the (Ba,K)122/Ba122 bilayer because the resistivity of the undoped Ba122 and Kdoped Ba122 is comparable. Magnetic measurements were performed using on a rectangular slab (dimension of 1.512 mm × 2.194 mm × 80 nm and 2.091 mm × 2.540 mm × 80 nm for the temperature dependence of magnetic susceptibility and magnetic field dependence of Jc, respectively) a superconducting quantum interference device. The Bean critical-state model was applied to estimate Jc values. Figure In the cross-sectional BF-STEM image of the K-doped Ba122 film on MgO substrate, figure Figure Figure Figure In this study, we demonstrated the first successful epitaxial growth of K-doped Ba122 thin film on oxide substrate by employing undoped Ba122 as a buffer layer. The epitaxial growth was confirmed from both XRD and TEM observation. A high Tc of 39.8 K exceeding the bulk value has been achieved, which is possibly due to epitaxial strain (and/or thermal expansion mismatch). A reasonably high self-field Jc of 3.9 MA/cm 2 with Jc > 1 MA/cm 2 under a magnetic field of 7 T confirmed superior magnetic field dependence of K-doped Ba122.