Motivated by cuprate and nickelate superconductors, we perform a comprehensive study of the superconducting instability in the single-band Hubbard model. We calculate the spectrum and superconducting transition temperature Tc as a function of filling and Coulomb interaction for a range of hopping parameters, using the dynamical vertex approximation. We find the sweet spot for high Tc to be at intermediate coupling, moderate Fermi surface warping, and low hole doping. Combining these results with first principles calculations, neither nickelates nor cuprates are close to this optimum within the single-band description. Instead, we identify some palladates, notably RbSr2PdO3 and A ′ 2 PdO2Cl2 (A ′ =Ba0.5La0.5), to be virtually optimal, while others, such as NdPdO2, are too weakly correlated. Introduction-Ever since the discovery of cuprate superconductivity As for the theoretical modeling, the one-band Hubbard model is arguably the simplest effective model for cuprates While the relevant low energy model for nickelates is still under debate, a boost for scenario The aim of the present paper is hence two-fold: First, we would like to identify the optimal conditions for superconductivity in the Hubbard model building upon recent progress made with diagrammatic extensions of DMFT Here, we study this possibility on a quantitative level. We show that a one-band description is justified for palladates, and make a prediction of the superconducting phase diagram which can be tested in experiment. Let us start by sketching the electronic structures of the above-mentioned materials schematically in Fig. If we replace Ni (3d) with Pd (4d), the Pd 4d-orbitals are shifted back down by ∼1 eV due to the higher ionization energy of Pd compared to Ni. This removes the pockets present in the nickelates and leads to a larger d-p hybridization and minor overlap with the oxygen bands. However, we do not yet have a charge transfer state as in the cuprates. Indeed, our DFT and DMFT computations (shown in Supplementary Materials (SM) where c † k,σ (c k,σ ) is the creation (annihilation) operator, the energy-momentum dispersion, U the onsite Coulomb repulsion, and t, t ′ , t ′′ are the nearest, second nearest, and third nearest hoppings, respectively. The model parameters are obtained from DFT, using wien2k We analyze these single-orbital models by means of the DΓA It has predicted the superconducting dome in nickelates As demonstrated here, DΓA properly captures correlation induced changes of the Fermi surface (e.g., Fermi arc in cuprates In Fig. Fig. Let us note that cluster DMFT Except for the perfectly nested case (t ′ = t ′′ = 0) where spin-fluctuations are overly strong and open a gap regardless of interaction strength, we can separate the U -range into two regions: For weak couplings (U ≲ 5), there is only a weak doping dependence. For strong coupling (U ≳ 7), on the other hand, a pronounced filling dependence develops, with antiferromagnetic fluctuation dominating around half-filling and suppressing λ. Optimal conditions for superconductivity in the one-band 2D square-lattice Hubbard model are realized in between these two regions. The importance of the finite Fermi surface warping was also suggested in early phenomenological material-dependence studies of cuprate superconductors Fig. (Color online) Phase diagrams for nickelates (NdNiO2) and palladates (RbSr2PdO3 and A ′ 2 PdO2Cl2). In the red region, we expect antiferromagnetism instead of superconductivity for A ′ 2 PdO2Cl2 if there is a weak inter-layer coupling because of the huge χsp (color code of χsp in DΓA as in Fig. In Fig. Following this insight, we can rationalize now the recent experimental achievements of realizing higher T c 's in NdNiO 2 : both external pressure A more promising solution to increase U/t and thus T c is to enlarge the lattice which is possible by inserting spacing layers between the PdO 2 planes. Doing so, our DFT and cRPA calculations indeed place RbSr 2 PdO 3 and A ′ 2 PdO 2 Cl 2 close to the optimum. We finally show in Fig. The theoretically proposed palladates have yet to be synthesized. Palladates with a perovskite-like structure This supplementary material contains additional results obtained by density functional theory (DFT), dynamical mean field theory (DMFT) and dynamical vertex approximation (DΓA) that further corroborate our conclusions of the main text and is organized in nine sections. In Section I, we perform discussions on the crystal structures, parameters and analyze similarities and differences between the nickelate NdNiO2 and the palladates NdPdO2, RbSr2PdO3 and A ′ 2 PdO2Cl2 (A ′ = La0.5Ba0.5). Section II provides detailed DFT (and beyond DFT) results of electronic structure computations for all compounds. In Section III we show the DMFT results, including spectral functions and effective mass, for RbSr2PdO3 and A ′ 2 PdO2Cl2. Section IV shows the self-energy effect on the spectrum and the superconductivity instability in more detail. In Section V, we show the numerical details on the DΓA study of superconductivity. Further, in Section VI we present our Wannier function projection and in Section VII the computational details of the virtual crystal approximation. Section VIII analyzes the phonon dispersion and structural distortions of LaPdO2. Finally in Section IX we compute the DFT total energy for different magnetic states of A ′ 2 PdO2Cl2. The crystal structures of nickelate NdNiO 2 PdO 2 Cl 2 , we need a A ′2.5+ cation which can be achieved by mixing 50%La and 50%Ba. To approach optimal filling/doping in the proposed palladates RbSr 2 PdO 3 and A ′ 2 PdO 2 Cl 2 , the ration between Rb 1+ /Sr 2+ for the former and La 3+ /Ba 2+ for the later case can be tuned. The relaxed parameters for all nickelates and palldates are shown in Table For NdPdO 2 , an in-plane lattice expansion from 3.864 Å to 4.085 Å results from substituting Ni by Pd. Such an expansion may contribute to smaller orbital overlap and stronger electronic correlations if the B-site atoms are unchanged, however the more delocalized 4dorbitals of Pd counteract this with their larger orbital spreads (see main text). When the in-plane lattices are fixed to the one of SrTiO 3 to simulate the strain effects from a STO substrate, the out-of-plane is relaxed to 3.255 Å, which boosts its two-dimensional characters. For the proposed palladates RbSr 2 PdO 3 and A ′ 2 PdO 2 Cl 2 , the in-plane lattice constants are even larger than those of NdPdO 2 . Another notable difference is the distance between Ni-Ni or Pd-Pd along the z-direction (out-of-plane); it increases to ∼7.5-8.0 Å, as shown in Table To investigate the difference between nickelates and palladates, we first compute their band centroids. The bands centroids in Table For NdNiO 2 , the d-bands (d x 2 -y 2 band) shift up by ∼1 eV (∼0.9 eV) compared with those in CaCuO 2 . Moreover, the O-p bands are shifted down by ∼0.9 eV. As a consequence, the charge transfer energies ∆(dp) and ∆(d x 2 -y 2p) in NdNiO 2 are ∼1.8 eV larger than in CaCuO 2 . For the palladate NdPdO 2 , the band centroid of dorbitals E(d) is comparable with those of CaCuO 2 while E(d x 2 -y 2 ) is ∼0.3 eV higher than in CaCuO 2 . Thus, the charge transfer energies ∆(dp) and ∆(d x 2 -y 2p) are 1.211 and 1.827 eV, i.e., in between the charge transfer energies of CaCuO 2 and NdNiO 2 . The computations strongly hint that NdPdO 2 hosts a similar 2D nature as in both CaCuO 2 and NdNiO 2 . In As we discussed in the main text, the fully relaxed in-plane lattice constants of NdPdO 2 are a=b=4.085 Å, 4.6% more than a SrTiO 3 substrate: 3.905 Å. A suitable substrate for an almost unstrained film is PrScO 3 whose lattice is 4.02 Å (as shown in Table The DFT bands are projected onto maximumly localized Wannier functions Finally, we investigate the effective mass (m * ) of both compounds. As antiferromagnetic correlations become large towards halffilling so does the effective mass, in particular for the larger interaction. This indicates the strong tendency toward an anti-ferromagnetic Mott insulator at strong coupling. The mass renormalization for both RdSr 2 PdO 3 and A ′ 2 PdO 2 Cl 2 at optimal filling for superconductivity, i.e. n ∼ 1 -0.8, is around m * /m ∼ 2, which is consistent with the values of NdNiO 2 as n approaches ∼ 0.82 per Nid x 2 -y 2 : m * /m = 2.81. This comparison indicates that these palladates are quite strongly correlated but less so than NdNiO2. This is advantageous for superconductivity, as discussed in the main text. As shown in the main text, the self-energy weakens the spectral intensity and flattens the Fermi surface shape. Here, we discuss these effects on the Fermi surface structure in more detail, by artificially separating the different effects. In . We fix the filling to the original value (i.e., recalculate the chemical potential) for all cases. We also show the corresponding superconductivity eigenvalues λ calculated with these spectra, while keeping the pairing vertex the same for solving the linearized gap equation. We can first see that the imaginary part of the selfenergy has the most relevant effect; it leads to the pseudogap physics, as expected: From DΓA to ImΣ = 0 in Fig. S.8, the shape of the Fermi surface remains the same, but its intensity becomes stronger, in particular in the antinodal region around (π, 0). The corresponding superconducting eigenvalues is a factor 6-7 higher. This clearly shows that the pseudogap is counterproductive for superconductivity. Comparing DΓA to ImΣ = 0 and the non-interacting Fermi surface (white dots in the top left subpanels) further shows that the flattening of the Fermi surface is still captured for ImΣ = 0. That is it is caused by the real part of the DΓA self-energy, hence there is also no flattening in the ReΣ = 0 Fermi surface. Next, if we compare the DMFT self-energy and the momentum averaged DΓA self-energy, they give similar results. That is, the Fermi surface structure is similar to the non-interaction line (white dots in top left subpanels). Some self-energy damping exists in both cases, but as a matter of course, there is no momentum differentiation and hence no pseudogap. In this case, the superconductivity eigenvalues are in between those for ImΣ = 0 and the DΓA self-energy. When ignoring the momentum dependence of the real part of the self-energy, ReΣ = 0 and ReΣ k-ave give similar results in Fig. S.8. The Fermi surface is the same as in the non-interacting case, but strong damping exists around the anti-nodal (π, 0) region (and symmetrically related momenta). This is a consequence of the momentum differentiation of the imaginary part of the DΓA self-energy. When we focus on the effect of the Fermi surface flattening on superconductivity, we can compare the superconducting eigenvalue λ for ReΣ = 0 and ReΣ k-ave with the original DΓA λ. We surprisingly find the flattening of the Fermi surface suppresses superconductivity at U = 7.5t, t ′ = -0.22t, t ′′ = 0.14t, n = 0.85 but enhances it at U = 6.5t, t ′ = -0.25t, t ′′ = 0.12t, n = 0.95. To study this dichotomy further, We analyze the parameter dependence in Fig. S.9. We can see that there is almost no effect of ReΣ in the weak coupling regime. In contrast, at strong coupling, the eigenvalues are almost everywhere suppressed if the flattening of the Fermi surface is properly included in Fig. In this section, we explain computational details for DΓA results. For further details and the general procedure how to calculate spin (and charge) fluctuations and from these superconductivity in (λ-corrected), we refer the reader to First, for solving the impurity problem and calculating local vertices, which act as a staring point, we use the continuous-time quantum Monte-Carlo (CT-QMC) on w2dynamics In the DΓA calculations, we separate the Matsubara frequency range into two parts following the previous works In Fig. From these points, we obtain the contour plots of Fig. As for the T c calculation, we calculate the superconducting λ down to T = t/100, and extrapolated the λ vs. T curve (using the form λ ≈ ab ln(T )) as in previous publications Essential for interfacing DFT and DMFT is the Wannier projections. It not only provides the electron hopping parameters for the construction of the minimal lowenergy model, but also allows to investigate the degree of localization of the orbitals. An indication for the quality of Wannier projection is its consistency with the target DFT bands. As in previous theoretical studies in the case of nickelates For obtaining orbital occupation and spectra, including the positions of pockets, we have done multi-band DMFT calculations, based on the multi-band projections. For the previous calculations of NdNiO 2 , a Nd(La)-d+Nid basis with 10-bands was adopted. A ′ 2 PdO2Cl2 The virtual crystal approximation (VCA) We perform VCA calculations for A ′ 2 PdO 2 Cl 2 using WIEN2K and Vasp as outlined in the last paragraph. To investigate the magnetic ground state of A ′ 2 PdO 2 Cl 2 (A=La 0.5 Ba 0.5 ), we perform DFT+U (U =3 eV, 3.3 eV and 4 eV) calculations with a √ 2× √ 2×1 supercell, as shown in Fig. . 2. (Color online) DΓA Spectrum (momentum dependence of the imaginary part of the Green function -IG/π at lowest Matsubara frequency) for different interactions (U/t = 4.3, 6.0, 7.0, 8.0) and fillings (n = 0.80, 0.85, 0.90, 0.95) at T = 0.01t, t ′ /t = -0.17, t ′′ /t = 0.13. Corresponding dwave superconductivity eigenvalues λ are also shown. -E(d) E(d x 2 -y 2 ) E(Op) ∆(dp) ∆(d x 2 -y 2p) 2 -y 2 orbital.