Poly(vinylidene fluoride), PVDF nanofibers were prepared using electrospinning method and the influence of electrospinning parameters such as PVDF concentration, DMF:Acetone ratio on the formation of different phases (α, β, and γ) and desired morphology were investigated. A detail analysis of X-ray diffraction (XRD) and Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR) spectrometer data by deconvoluting the peaks were carried out for assigning and accurately identifying the peaks associated to a particular PVDF phase. SEM micrographs further helped in understanding the mechanism of desired β-phase as well as in obtaining a condition for bead-free nanofibers. Interestingly, the mechanism of formation of phases are found mostly governed by the balance between surface tension and viscosity which is controlled by PVDF concentration and acetone content in the solution. A PVDF concentration of 20% (w/v) and DMF:Acetone ratio 1:1 was found suitable for maximum βphase in a completely bead-free nanofibers. The methodology and understanding of underlying mechanism of desired phase and morphology suggest a guideline for optimization of β-phase and bead-free fibers in PVDF-based nanocomposite as well. Polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) is the most considerable electroactive (EA) fluoropolymer that have been studied in last couple of decades by reason of their attractive piezoelectric and ferroelectric properties, which are utilized in a variety of applications including sensors, actuators, and nanogenerators Furthermore, PVDF is a semi crystalline polymer known to exist in EA polar β-phase in alltrans (TTTT) and less polar γ-phase in tri-trans gauche (TTTG + TTTG -), and non-polar αphase in alternate trans gauche (TG + TG -) conformations However, there exists some inconsistencies in these results, which are due to the obvious reason that it contains a significant number of interdependent electrospinning parameters and a complex interaction between these key parameters determines the phase and morphology of the resulting nanofibers In an earlier work, authors have summarized the influence of various electrospinning parameters such as solution (molecular weight, concentration, solvent type), process (applied voltage, flow rate, needle size, tip-to-collector distance), and ambient (relative humidity, temperature) parameters and established some of the major parameters for tailoring the nanofibers For this, we have varied the PVDF concentration and ratio of the binary solvent (DMF:Acetone) used for the preparation of PVDF nanofibers. Different phases obtained at varied electrospinning parameters were characterized using X-ray diffractometer (XRD) and Fourier-transform infrared spectroscope (FTIR), which helped to identify those individual phases present in the PVDF nanofibers and quantify them. Further, using a Scanning electron microscope (SEM), morphology of the resulting nanofibers was investigated and explanation for the mechanism of different phase formation due to varied electrospinning parameters and a correlation among them to find the most suitable condition was provided. The findings allowed us to find a suitable combination of PVDF concentration and DMF:Acetone ratio for obtaining a maximum β-phase in completely bead-free nanofibers, which could provide a guideline for nanofiber preparation in pristine as well as PVDF based nanocomposites. For the preparation of electrospun nanofibers, it is considered that, ambient parameters (temperature, and humidity) do not change significantly during deposition and keeping standard temperature 25 o C and relative humidity 40-45% The phase formation of the PVDF nanofiber mat was confirmed using an X-ray diffractometer (Bruker D8 Advance, Germany) pattern and Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) (PerkinElmer, USA) spectra data. Morphology was studied using a scanning electron microscope (SEM) (Tescan MIRA 3 MUG FEG, Czech Republic). The diameter of the fibers was measured using Image J (USA) software from the SEM micrographs. For accurately identify the peak position of different phases in PVDF nanofiber, first, the peaks that obtained from XRD data for the 2θ range 10-30 o were deconvoluted. The deconvoluted XRD peaks were then indexed Once a polymeric solution begins to form nanofibers, the goal is to achieve consistent and controllable fiber diameter, defect-free fiber surfaces, and collectable continuous single fiber. As a result, to achieve the desired morphology and phase of PVDF nanofibers, various electrospinning parameters are varied. Due to the large number of parameters, however, some of them must remain constant. Furthermore, it is believed that, during the slow acceleration of pre-solid state fibers near the needle tip are attributed to electrification and jet initiation that is controlled by both the process parameters (applied voltage, tip-to-collector distance and flow rate, needle diameter) and solution parameters (viscosity, surface tension, conductivity, concentration, molecular weight), whereas during fast acceleration solid state fibers near the collector is attributed to elongation and solidification is controlled by mainly solution parameters Thus, it can be concluded that when the DMF:Acetone ratio is low (1:1), the formation of an electroactive γ and β-phases to that of a predominant α-phase is more favorable for a fixed PVDF concentration, while for a fixed DMF:Acetone ratio, as the PVDF concentration increases, more electroactive γ and β-phases are developed. As a result, a quantification of each phase would be critical at this stage to investigate the influence of concentration and DMF:Acetone ratio on the phases as sometimes different phases (α, γ) exhibit similar peaks in PVDF nanofibers where, ∑ A cr and ∑ A amr are the sum of integral area of crystalline peaks and amorphous halo respectively FTIR spectra of all the samples with varying PVDF concentrations (15, 20, 25 %w/v) and DMF:Acetone ratios (1:1, 1.5:1, 2:1) were collected for the frequency range 450-1500 cm -1 . The peaks corresponding to vibrational bands associated to each PVDF crystalline phases (α, β, γ) are labeled as shown in Figure where, Aα and AEA refer to the absorbance of α and electroactive phases (at 763 and 841 cm -1 ), respectively. Kα and KEA represent the absorption coefficients with values of 6.1 × 10 4 and 7.7 × 10 4 cm 2 mol -1 respectively. Although eq. ( where, Aβ and Aγ are the area under the deconvoluted curve centered at 841 cm -1 (Shown in Figure Another alternative method Cho et al. have used to calculate the relative content of a particular phase by sum of the intensity ratio of the absorption peaks associated to the phase to those α, β, and γ-phases and is given as The calculated β and γ phase fractions using eq. ( The overall total EA-phase calculated from eq. ( A significant influence on the morphology (shape, diameter) of PVDF fiber due to variation in the concentration of PVDF and DMF:Acetone ratio can be found in the SEM micrographs of the samples. It is evident from the micrographs that low concentration of PVDF, i.e., 15% results in beaded fiber, however when the DMF:Acetone ratio is reduced from 2:1 to 1:1, the bead formation is also reduced. This is because when the concentration of PVDF is low the entanglement of the polymer macromolecular chain in the solution is not very strong Furthermore, when a sufficiently large field is applied, the electrospinning process changes to electrosprayying shows minimum numbers of beads. The DMF:Acetone ratio less than 1:1 was not used as it can dry up quickly results in clogging of the needle. Therefore, the most suitable combination was found for PVDF concentration 20% with DMF:Acetone ratio 1:1. It is believed that PVDF concentration 20% is just above the critical concentration and a DMF:Acetone ratio 1:1 is much favorable for complete solvent evaporation during electrospinning to obtain bead-free fibers The influence of electrospinning parameters such as PVDF concentration and DMF:Acetone 