Superconducting transition metal dichalcogenides emerged as a prime candidate for topological superconductivity. This work presents a detailed investigation of superconducting and transport properties on 2H-TaSeS single crystals using magnetization, transport, and specific heat measurements. These measurements suggest multigap anisotropic superconductivity with the upper critical field, breaking Pauli limiting field in both in-plane and out-of-plane directions. The angle dependence of the upper critical field suggests 2-dimensional superconducting nature in bulk 2H-TaSeS. Recently superconductivity in layered transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) The Ta-based TMD system, 2H-TaSe 2 and 2H-TaS 2 , is known to host charge density wave and superconductivity at low temperatures Recently 4H b -TaS 2 phase consists of alternating stacking of weakly coupled 1T-TaS 2 (Mott insulator and proposed gapless spin liquid 2H-TaSeS single crystals were synthesized by the chemical vapour transport method using iodine as the transport agent. The stoichiometric ratios of Ta, Se, and S were thoroughly ground and sealed in a quartz ampule with iodine as the transport agent. The ampule was then placed in a two-zone furnace at a temperature gradient of 850 • C -750 • C. After 15 days, shiny single crystals were grown in the cold zone of the tube. The Laue diffraction pattern was recorded using a Photonic-Science Laue camera. The orientation of the crystal plane was also confirmed by X-ray diffraction (XRD) at room temperature on a PANalytical diffractometer equipped with CuKα radiation (λ = 1.54056 Å). Magnetization measurements were done using a Quantum Design Magnetic Measurement System (MPMS3, Quantum Design). Transport properties were measured using the four-probe method and specific heat measurements were performed using the two-tau model in the Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS, Quantum Design). The temperature-dependent resistivity of 2H-TaSeS above 10 K, which shows metallic behaviour up to 300 K and below 3.9(1) K, undergoes a superconducting transition. The resistivity data above the transition tempera- ture was well fitted by using the Bloch-Grüneisen model where ρ BG (T ) is defined as where ρ 0 is residual resistivity, r is the materialdependent constant, and Θ D is the Debye constant. The fit using Eq.( where λ -= λ 11 -λ 22 , λ 0 = (λ 2 -+ 4λ 12 λ 21 ) 1/2 and w = λ 11 λ 22 -λ 12 λ 21 . λ 11 , λ 22 are the intraband coupling constants and λ 12 , λ 21 are the interband coupling constants. D 1 and D 2 are diffusivities of two bands, respectively. φ 0 is flux quantum and ψ(x) is the digamma function. Fig. In a type-II superconductor, the Cooper pair can break in the applied magnetic field via the orbital and Pauli paramagnetic limiting. In orbital pair breaking, the field-induced kinetic energy of a Cooper pair exceeds the superconducting condensation energy, whereas in Pauli paramagnetic limiting it is energetically favourable for the electron spins to align with the magnetic field, thus breaking the Cooper pairs. For the type-II superconductor, Pauli paramagnetic or Clogston-Chandrasekar limit is defined as H P c2 = 1.86T c . The Pauli violation ratio defined as H c2 (0)/H P c2 . For 2H-TaSeS, PVR in perpendicular and and parallel directions are 2.2 and 1.3 respectively. Violation of Pauli limit of the upper critical field has been observed in other layered superconductors like NbSe 2 The finite-momentum pairing can gives rise to the Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin-Ovchinnikov (FFLO) state. To certain the exact mechanism of Pauli limit violation, further low temperature angle depend measurements along with theoretical inputs are required. To further explore the anisotropy, in-plane and out-ofplane upper critical fields, the resistivity was measured at different angles. The angle variation of field dependence of the resistivity at 2.5 K Solid orange and green lines show the 3D GL and 2D Tinkham model fitting consequently. The 2D Tinkham model gives a better fitting result compared to others represented in the inset of Fig. The Ginzburg-Landau coherence length (ξ ⊥c (0) = 58.61(2) Å and ξ c (0) = 35.19(2) Å) estimate using 0) . Using the Ginzburg-Landau coherence lengths and the lower critical field values (H ⊥ c1 (0) = 4.3 where φ 0 (= 2.07×10 -15 Tm 2 ) is the magnetic flux quantum. The two characteristic length parameters are used to calculate the Ginzburg-Landau parameter κ ⊥c = 104 and κ c = 80> 1 √ 2 by Eq. ( c. Specific heat The zero-field low temperature specific heat data show a discontinuity at 3.79(7) K, the same as the reported superconducting transition temperature via resistivity and magnetization measurements. The zero-field data above the superconducting transition temperature is fitted with C/T = γ n +β 3 T 2 , where γ n is the electronic contribution, and β 3 is the phononic contribution. The parameters were 8.13 mJ/mol-K 2 and 1.33 mJ/mol-K 4 , respectively. Furthermore, the Debye temperature, θ D = 163.34 K, was calculated using Eq. where R is the universal gas constant (=8.314 J mol -1 K -1 ) and N is the number of atoms per formula unit. To reveal the superconducting gap parameter, the detailed electronic specific heat (C el (T )) in the superconducting state analysed. The C el (T ) (Eq. ( The temperature dependence of the electronic contribution of specific heat in the superconducting state can be described using the fully gaped model given below in Eq. where f (ξ) = [exp(E(ξ)/k B T )+1] -1 is the fermi function E(ξ) = ξ 2 + ∆(t) 2 , where ξ is energy of normal electron comparative to Fermi energy, y = ξ/∆(0) , t = T /T c and ∆(t) = tanh[1.82(1.018((1/t) -1)) 0.51 ] is the BCS approximation for the temperature dependence of the energy gap. The normalized electronic specific heat is related to entropy by Eq. The temperature dependence of C el (T ) was fitted using Eq. ( The inset Fig. In summary, we studied the magnetization, electrical, and magnetotransport properties of 2H-TaSeS. It confirms multigap superconductivity in 2H-TaSeS having a superconducting transition temperature of 3.9 K and Pauli limit breaking in both the in-plane and outof-plane directions. The angle dependence of the upper critical field well-fit 2D Tinkham model suggests 2D superconductivity in bulk 2H-TaSeS single crystals. All results indicate 2H-TaSeS a is a new candidate for unconventional superconductor and can host Ising or FFLO type superconductivity. Further, low temperature and thickness dependence measurements along with theoretical inputs are required to understand the exact superconducting pairing mechanism.