A detailed investigation of BaNi2(As,P)2 single crystals using high-resolution thermal-expansion, heatcapacity, Young's-modulus and resistivity measurements is presented. The experimental data are complemented by density-functional calculations. The phase diagram of BaNi2(As,P)2 is shown to be much richer than suggested by the original data of Kudo et al. [Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 097002 (2012)]. The transition to the commensurate charge-density-wave (C-CDW) is always preceded by a four-fold symmetry-breaking transition associated with the long-range ordering of a strongly fluctuating unidirectional incommensurate charge-density wave (I-CDW). Significant precursors above the I-CDW and C-CDW transitions are seen in the thermal expansion and resistivity and are particularly evident in the temperature dependence of the c/a ratio of the lattice parameters. Heat-capacity measurements of the crystals with a higher P content and a higher critical temperature of 3.2 K uncover a Debye-like behavior of a soft-phonon mode with a very low ΘDebye of roughly 15 K. Associated with this soft phonon are unusually large thermal-expansion anomalies, resulting in logarithmically diverging uniaxial phonon Grüneisen parameters. Young's-modulus data of these higher-Tc crystals exhibit a significant softening in both B1g and B2g channels, which is argued to be incompatible with nematic criticality and is rather associated with a broad phase transition to an hitherto unknown structure. Possible origins of the increase in the superconducting critical temperature with P-substitution are discussed. BaNi 2 As 2 crystallizes in the same ThCr 2 Si 2 structure as BaFe 2 As 2 In this paper we take another look at the BaNi 2 (As,P) 2 system using detailed high-resolution thermal-expansion, heatcapacity, Young's-modulus and resistivity measurements. First, the phase diagram of BaNi 2 (As,P) 2 is shown to be much richer than suggested by the original data of Kudo et al. Single crystals of BaNi 2 (As 1-x P x ) 2 were grown using a selfflux method, as described in more detail in References In this section we concentrate on making a detailed comparison between crystals with widely different P contents -i.e. one with a clear triclinic phase transition and a low T c = 0.7K (x = 0.048) and one without the triclinic transition and a higher T c = 3.2 K (x = 0.10) -using thermal-expansion, heat-capacity, Young's-modulus and resistivity measurements. With this comparison we hope to shed new light on the CDW transitions, the soft phonon effects, as well as possible electronic nematicity. Additionally, the complete phase diagram will be mapped out using thermal expansion measurements on crystals with additional P-contents. A. Thermal expansion: x = 0.048 In Figure B. Four-fold symmetry-breaking transition at T orth : x = 0.048 As demonstrated previously C. Thermal expansion x = 0.10: evidence for an additional phase transition Next we turn to the thermal expansion of the crystal with x = 0.1, which is not expected to exhibit a triclinic transi-tion The evolution of the c-axis thermal expansion for several additional P-substitutions is shown in Fig. The thermal-expansion data allows us to construct a detailed phase diagram showing the evolution of T fluct , T cross , T orth , T tric with P substitution, as well as the newly discovered transition at T x (see Fig. tionally suppressed by using a coarse energy sampling Additional information about this soft-phonon mode can be obtained by examining the thermal-expansion coefficients and their associated uniaxial Grüneisen-parameters. As shown in Fig. In order to search for nematic signatures in the higher-T c crystal with x = 0.1, Young's modulus, Y , measurements were made using a three-point-bending technique in our capacitance dilatometer I. Resistivity scaling for x = 0.048 and x = 0.10 Finally, we compare the resistivity of the high-and low-T c crystals in Fig. The present results provide compelling evidence that the phase diagram of BaNi 2 (As,P) 2 is far more interesting and intriguing than suggested by the original dat of Kudo et al The I-CDW transition is overshadowed by a large hightemperature fluctuating region, as evidenced by our thermalexpansion data and resulting temperature dependence of the c/a ratio. We note that the onset temperature of these fluctuations, T fluc , is roughly coincident with the observation of the E g,1 phonon broadening/splitting observed in Raman data Next we address the increase of the superconducting critical temperature with P-substitution. First, we point out that fully P-substituted BaNi 2 As 2 , i.e. BaNi 2 P 2 , is already superconducting with a T c of roughly 2.5 K -3 K In conclusion, we have demonstrated that the phase diagram of BaNi 2 (As,P) 2 is much richer than suggested by the original data of Kudo et al. 