Quantum sensing using optically addressable atomic-scale defects, such as the nitrogen-vacancy (NV) center in diamond, provides new opportunities for sensitive and highly localized characterization of chemical functionality. Notably, near-surface defects facilitate detection of the minute magnetic fields generated by nuclear or electron spins outside of the diamond crystal, such as those in chemisorbed and physisorbed molecules. However, the promise of NV centers is hindered by a severe degradation of critical sensor properties, namely charge stability and spin coherence, near surfaces (< ca. 10 nm deep). Moreover, applications in the chemical sciences require methods for covalent bonding of target molecules to diamond with robust control over density, orientation, and binding configuration. This forward-looking Review provides a survey of the rapidly converging fields of diamond surface science and NV-center physics, highlighting their combined potential for quantum sensing of molecules. We outline the diamond surface properties that are advantageous for NV-sensing applications, and discuss strategies to mitigate deleterious effects while simultaneously providing avenues for chemical attachment. Finally, we present an outlook on emerging applications in which the unprecedented sensitivity and spatial resolution of NV-based sensing could provide unique insight into chemically functionalized surfaces at the single-molecule level. surface optimization chemical functionalization ionization dephasing NV center Nuclear and electron spins within molecules provide invaluable handles with which to identify chemical structures and intermolecular interactions, allowing for visualization of physiological processes and biological matter for medical diagnostics. Moreover, observing the spin dynamics of transient reaction intermediates could provide new insights into spin-selective chemistries. Traditional methods for performing such characterizations include nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectroscopy. One such approach replaces traditional NMR and EPR detectors with single, individually addressable quantum spins, which are capable of detecting the minute magnetic fields generated by nuclei or unpaired electrons in nearby molecules. This Review begins with a tutorial-style introduction to the NV center electronic structure and sensing properties, focusing on detection of magnetic fields since it is the most prevalent sensing modality. We include a brief complementary summary of electric-field, strain, and temperature sensing, which may prove useful in future surface-chemistry characterization. We follow with a discussion of measurement sensitivity and other relevant figures of merit, elucidating which experimental parameters are most important for chemical characterization with shallow defects. Next, we explore the origins of instabilities that plague near-surface NV centers along with experimental progress toward mitigating these effects. Focus is given mainly to experiments on NV centers hosted in bulk diamond materials as opposed to scanning probe experiments and nanodiamonds, although, we note that many of the surface engineering techniques described here can be applied to those systems. Ultimately, applications in chemical sciences require precise and optimal placement of analytes on the diamond surface; we therefore highlight advances in chemical functionalization techniques that are compatible with near-surface NVs. This discussion is accompanied by a survey of measurement-based strategies for further improving detection sensitivities. Finally, we combine the aforementioned chemical toolbox and library of quantum control strategies to offer a perspective on untapped applications for NV-based quantum sensing of chemical systems. The NV center is the most widely used and best understood crystallographic defect in diamond. The NV center comprises a substitutional nitrogen atom and adjacent vacancy occurring along the 111 -family of crystallographic directions (Fig. Here, h (h) is the (reduced) Planck constant, S = [ Ŝx , Ŝy , Ŝz ] are the spin-1 operators, I is the nuclear spin operator and 1 is the identity operator. The simplified Hamiltonian in Eq. 1 is spanned by the three S = 1 spin states: |m s = 0 , |m s = +1 , and and is grouped into four terms. First, there is a zero-field splitting (ZFS) term caused by electron spin-spin interaction, which shifts the |m s = ±1 states in energy by D gs = 2.87 GHz relative to |m s = 0 . The second term describes the Zeeman interaction for the |m s = ±1 states, which is used to lift their degeneracy in quantum sensing experiments (Sec. 2.3); most commonly, the anisotropy of the interaction is neglected and the energy splitting is given by the product of the gyromagnetic ratio of the NV center γ NV and the strength of the magnetic field. Here, the gyromagnetic ratio is γ NV = 2π × γ e (1 + 357 ppm) = 2π × 28.0345 (28) GHz/T Finally, the fourth term describes the coupling to both electric fields E and strain σ , ( E = E + σ ), which impact the NV center through electric dipole interaction, piezoelectric coupling, and spin-spin interaction that distort the electron orbitals. x + E 2 y D gs , In addition, the NV center is optically addressable, with an excited state (|e , Fig. An ideal quantum sensor would offer mechanisms for coherent control of the sensor state, as well as methods for efficient state preparation and readout. Such a system can be realized within the NV ground state using the m s = 0 and one of the m s = ±1 states (hereafter generalized as |0 and |1 , Fig. The aforementioned preparation, control, and readout mechanisms for the NV offer a powerful toolbox for detection of environmental signals. In practice, sensing applications benefit from several additional experimental constraints: i) proximity to the sensing target for increased signal and spatial resolution, ii) long measurement times for maximizing signal integration and spectral resolution, and iii) efficient mechanisms for spin preparation and readout of the sensor. In the following, we describe relevant sensing properties that are directly influenced by these experimental constraints. First, we note that the signal strength and detection volume of an NV sensor scales sensitively with experimental geometry, namely with the NV-target distance d. Indeed, for high-spatialresolution detection of rapidly decaying signals, this distance must be minimized through both the NV-interface distance and the interface-target distance. Thus, there has been significant effort toward deterministic fabrication of near-surface NVs for sensing applications, which are outlined in Sec. 3.1. Furthermore, diamond surface functionalization methods yielding minimal standoff distance are discussed in detail in Sec. 4. The sensor spatial resolution is parameterized by the NV sensing volume, which depends on the specific protocol used and the NV orientation, Furthermore, the spectral resolution ∆ f is an additional consideration for signals that may exhibit closely spaced resonances, such as detection of small chemical shifts, hyperfine couplings, or even spurious harmonics. Next, the magnetic field sensitivity improves for increased spin initialization fidelity. Off-resonant, optical spin polarization efficiency for deep NV centers depends on the applied laser power and can approach ∼ 80%. Finally, the readout fidelity F quantifies the ability to measure the spin state of the NV at the end of a single experiment, with F = 1 corresponding to an ideal, single-shot readout. This value varies considerably for different experimental conditions, and is therefore explored extensively in this text. Since quantum sensing requires repeated measurements for statistical averaging, a larger readout fidelity can speed up experiments significantly. For offresonant readout, the fidelity is given by where α 0 and α 1 are the expected number of measured photons for |0 and |1 , respectively. Here, α 1 = (1 -C)α 0 , where C is the measurement contrast. Moreover, α 0 = ξ γ T R , where ξ is the photon collection efficiency, γ is the radiative decay rate, and T R is the readout time, yielding Typical off-resonance fidelities are quite poor (F ∼ 0.03) The vast majority of NV sensing focuses on magnetic interactions owing primarily to its strong coupling constant (γ NV ), which impacts detection of external fields as well as the strength of the (dipolar) hyperfine interaction. In the following section, we will explore the sensitivities obtained for some of the simplest detection protocols, including DC and AC schemes with the Ramsey and spin-echo experiments, as well as T 1 and T 2 relaxation experiments. While these represent only a small fraction of possible sensing schemes, they illustrate which experimental parameters should be considered and optimized when implementing an NV sensor. For these examples, we simplify Eq. 1 to include only contributions related to a small, time-dependent magnetic field B(t) and a relatively large magnetic-field bias B 0 along the z-axis of the NV center, yielding Note that Eq. 4 is only accurate in the limiting case where hγ NV B i (t) hD gs and B i (t) B 0 for i = {x, y, z}, such that that the NV center becomes insensitive to B x (t) and B y (t). The transition energies (e ± ) between the m s = 0 and m s = ±1 spin levels are then e ± = hD gs ± hγ NV (B 0 + B z (t)) . ( In this Review, we consider a simplified sensor utilizing a twolevel subspace spanned by the |m s = 0 and one of the |m s = ±1 states, resulting in the following effective Hamiltonian Here, a rotating frame was used to remove the contributions from D gs and B 0 . We note that an alternative effective Hamiltonian yielding twice the signal can be obtained by instead using the subspace spanned by the two |m s ± 1 states (details in Sec. 5.4). The basic sensing premise is as follows: first, the NV state |ψ is initialized to |0 via optical pumping; subsequently, a superposition state |ψ(t = 0) ∝ |0 + |1 is created through the application of a π/2 y rotation (e.g., with a microwave pulse), which can be visualized on the Bloch sphere where τ is the total evolution time. |ψ(τ) will remain in an equal superposition (with equal population in |0 and |1 ) for all values of φ ; however, NV fluorescence can only be used to measure the state populations and not coherences. Application of a second π/2 y rotation can convert φ into a population difference, which can be read out via spin-dependent fluorescence. By comparing the resulting fluorescence level against that of the |0 and |1 states, one can infer φ through the transition probabilities p 0 = sin 2 (φ /2) or p 1 = cos 2 (φ /2), respectively, for the sensing scheme shown in Fig. Typically, one characterizes the magnetic field by measuring the deviation of the transition probability δ p = p ip, where p is some fixed bias point. If the measurement protocol can be synchronized with the target signal, the highest sensitivity is obtained for "slope detection", While Ramsey experiments are ideal for sensing DC fields, they are ill-suited for detection of signals that vary quickly compared to τ since the acquired phase is averaged away over the course of the measurement. For detection of AC magnetic fields, the canonical spin-echo experiment We consider a magnetic field with frequency ω and phase θ described by B z (t) = B AC sin(ωt + θ ); if θ is known, slope detection can be employed, yielding ). This quantity is maximized for ω = 2π/τ and θ = 0, resulting in φ echo = 2B AC γ NV τ/π. The sensitivity can then be calculated as Here, we set τ = T 2 where T 2 is the spin-echo coherence time. This protocol has the added benefit of cancelling low-frequency noise occurring on timescales slower than τ; consequently T 2 often far exceeds the natural decoherence time T * 2 , resulting in an improvement in slope-detection sensitivity of η DC /η AC ≈ T 2 /T * 2 . Similarly, the sensitivity for variance detection of an AC field can be calculated from φ rms = √ 2B AC γ NV τ/π and SNR = δ p 2 /σ p resulting in Complementing these widely used DC and AC measurement techniques, relaxometry Here, S B,⊥ (ω) is the power spectral density of the transverse magnetic field, where S B,z is probed at ω = 0 since phase flips do not require energy. Electric-field sensing with NV centers is possible through a piezoelectric coupling that produces a Stark shift in the NV resonance levels. An electric-field sensor can be realized using a single energylevel transition (Sec. 2.3) with a sensitivity defined similarly to those of magnetic-field protocols except that the electric susceptibility parameters (d z and d ⊥ ) take the place of the gyromagnetic ratio (γ NV ). With established techniques for sensing DC and AC electric fields with deeply implanted NV centers, The first scheme for electric-field sensing requires a weak mag-netic bias field along the z-axis of the NV center (B 0 = B z ), similar to magnetic sensing. In the presence of an electric field, the transition energies are where e ± (B z ) is the contribution from the ZFS and bias field (Eq. 5) and . By applying sufficiently large B z , it is possible to isolate the E z component of the field. x + B 2 y ) 1/2 ) on the NV center. In this configuration, the transition energies are (15) where e ± (B ⊥ ) includes the contribution from the ZFS and a nonlinear shift from B ⊥ . The additional cosine term involving two in-plane angles (tan φ B = B y /B x and tan φ E = E y (t)/E x (t)) allows for control over the electric-field detection axis through variation of φ B . The NV center is susceptible to additional physical quantities through the dependencies of the Hamiltonian coupling terms; for example, the ZFS splitting is both a function of temperature and pressure (D gs (T, P)). As an illustrative example, we explore the experimental considerations for the detection of a single nuclear spin external to the diamond using variance detection. The magnitude of the magnetic variance generated by the Larmor precession of a single nuclear spin at distance d from the NV is 24 where μ 0 is the vacuum permeability and γ n is the gyromagnetic ratio of the nuclear spin. Following the calculations in Sec. 2.3, the minimum detectable variance after N repetitions of the spin- and the expected number of detectable nuclear spins is The contributions of parameters d, T 2 , F, and N allow us to identify potential avenues for minimizing N nuc , ideally approaching the single-spin regime of N nuc = 1. Eq. 18 scales with the sixth power of d, emphasizing the crucial importance of minimizing the NV-target distance. While the exact dependence of the magnetic-field strength on d varies for different target geometries (B 2 rms ∼ 1/d 6 for a single spin, B 2 rms ∼ 1/d 4 for a two-dimensional spin layer, and B 2 rms ∼ 1/d 3 for a volume of spins), Eq. 18 also illustrates the effect of extending T 2 , which has inspired large bodies of work aimed at fabricating coherent, nearsurface emitters (Sec. 3) in addition to development of sensing protocols for extending T 2 by mitigating surface noise (Sec. 5). Finally, improving the readout fidelity is another avenue for experimental optimization. For off-resonant excitation, the readout fidelity is limited by short readout times (T R ≈ 400 ns) due to the transient nature of the spin contrast (Fig. The best combination of NV preparation and readout fidelities have been achieved using resonant excitation of spin-dependent optical transitions within the ZPL. We conclude by noting that chemical sensing at diamond surfaces may be performed using either single NV centers or ensembles of shallow defects. Single emitters boast nanoscale spatial resolution but are limited in signal by their radiative emission rate γ and optical collection efficiency ξ . Magnetic sensing of external targets necessitates fabrication processes that yield a deterministic density of shallow NVs with high spin coherence. NEA surface termination unpaired electrons surface nuclear spins distributed, two-dimensional layer of impurities at a depth and density determined by the acceleration energy and fluence, respectively. In this section, we explore physical phenomena leading to reduced measurement sensitivity for near-surface NV centers, namely charge instability and magnetic and electronic noise. The NV center has three physically relevant charge configurations comprising the negative (NV -), neutral (NV 0 ), and positive (NV + ) states. So far, only the long-lived, S = 1 ground state (see Sec. 2) of the negatively charged state has proven useful for quantum sensing applications. Indeed, the S = 1/2 ground state of NV 0 is subject to line broadening caused by Jahn-Teller distortion that precludes EPR detection. While the NV 0 state has garnered interest for super-resolution microscopy, where E vac and E CBM are the energies of the vacuum level and conduction band minimum, respectively (Table As discussed in Sec. 2.3, the best detection sensitivities are obtained by maximizing T 2 , which is hampered by unwanted noise. For near-surface NV centers, this noise comes from magnetic and electronic sources (Fig. The influence of electric-field noise on the NV is thought to be comparatively minor, Common diamond CVD growth employs hydrogen gas, resulting in hydrogen termination of dangling bonds at interfaces. Halogen termination of diamond may occur naturally during CVD growth processes that employ halogenated carbon precursors, or by post-growth treatments including plasma exposure, Oxygen-terminated surfaces offer a highly promising route to stabilize shallow NV centers while allowing for subsequent chemical functionalization. Importantly, we note that coverage by different oxygen-containing functional groups, such as hydroxyl (C-OH), carboxylic acid (COOH), carbonyl (C=O) and ether (C-O-C) groups, impact both χ and as the presence of deleterious subbandgap surface states. Such states may perturb the excited-state energy levels of nearby NV centers, impacting their charge stability. Experimentally, surface oxidation treatments have consistently shown improvements in T 2 times for near-surface NVs, in addition to higher ζ both for bulk reported on the impact of thermal oxygen annealing on shallow NV-center spin coherence, along with complementary characterization of the surface morphology (Fig. In some cases, surface oxidation can have minimal impact on T 2 while having a significant influence on T 1 for shallow emitters. For example, Ohashi et al. observed no significant change in T 2 after oxidation (compared to H-terminated surfaces after triacid cleaning) but observed a larger spread in relaxation times (T 1 ≈ 0.54 -4.2 ms compared to T 1 ≈ 2.7 -3.8 ms). Nitrogen-terminated surfaces have recently received increased attention as an alternative to the more widely employed oxygen treatments. Crucially, the band bending (and resulting electron affinity) at the surface depends sensitively on the bonding nature of the nitrogen atoms. Theoretical results from Stacey et al. showed that (2 × 1)reconstructed (100) surfaces that are fully terminated with nitrogen exhibit a PEA of χ = 3.46 eV, while (2 × 2)-reconstructed surfaces with 50/50 N/H termination exhibit a PEA of only χ = 0.32 eV (Fig. In a recent study, Kawai et al. demonstrated the stabilization of the NV -charge state in shallow defects using nitrogen radical beam exposure (Fig. Interestingly, nitrogenation can also impact the fractional coverage of sp 2 and sp 3 carbon, a phenomenon that is heavily dependent on the process parameters and diamond surface morphology. For example, an rf plasma based on a mixture of NH 3 /N 2 diluted in H 2 was shown to induce surface graphitization on polycrystalline, boron-doped diamond. Despite being widely regarded as chemically inert, numerous techniques exist to functionalize diamond surfaces, which are the focus of recent reviews. One functionalization approach employs non-covalent attachment by physisorption, which is stabilized by, e.g., hydrogenbond interactions or electrostatic attraction. Alternatively, large molecules of interest (e.g., proteins) could be immobilized within solid polymer matrices that restrict translational and rotational degrees of freedom. Indeed, such a route may prove useful for NV-NMR-based approaches for elucidation of structural information. Moreover, solid supports could take advantage of dielectric shielding to mitigate the impact of electronic noise on NV-center sensors. For example, Shi et al. used a polylysine matrix to immobilize mitotic arrest deficient-2 (MAD2) proteins that were modified with nitroxide spin labels. Interestingly, Kayci et al. recently developed a sandwich bioassay that bypasses diamond functionalization in favor of modifying glass substrates with indexed droplets of hydrogel microstructures. These substrates are then brought into close proximity to a diamond containing near-surface NV centers for sensing (Fig. Overall, non-covalent functionalization is attractive due to the ease of achieving physisorption compared to chemisorption, particularly for diamond substrates where the density of functional groups may be limited. Nevertheless, under normal sensing conditions, desorption of physisorbed molecules occurs more readily than covalently tethered species. Furthermore, non-specific binding may pose a significant issue when relying on non-covalent attachment methods alone. 303 In contrast to non-covalent techniques, chemisorption offers greater stability and control over molecular attachment to surfaces that exhibit well-defined chemical terminations. In practice, the optimal chemical modification procedure and starting diamond surface termination are dependent on the available functional groups of the target molecule. Fig. Conveniently, residual carboxylic acid groups resulting from surface oxidation may be functionalized directly. For example, Sushkov et al. employed a 1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)carbodiimide (EDC)/Nhydroxysuccinimide (NHS) crosslinking chemistry to tether paramagnetic molecules composed of a gadolinium ion (Gd 3+ ) chelated by an amine-terminated ligand to carboxylic-acid moieties on diamond (Fig. Oligonucleotide probes may also be tethered using readily available modifications to the ends of the sugar phosphate backbone. For example, Shi et al. functionalized carboxylic acid groups on diamond nanopillars hosting single NV centers with NH 2 -modified probe sequences. They subsequently detected hy-bridization with nitroxide-labeled complementary strands using EPR measurements (Fig. Nitrogen-terminated diamond surfaces decorated with amine groups can be used to anchor molecules in a variety of ways. An alternative to directly binding molecules on the diamond surface employs an intermediate amorphous oxide capping layers that enables straightforward chemical functionalization. In summary, these recent examples show the benefit of amorphous oxide capping layers for NV-center sensing of functionalized diamond surfaces. Specifically, ALD affords precise control of adhesion layer thickness, enables the formation of dense monolayer coverage of molecular adsorbates, and facilitates recyclable surfaces through removal and regrowth. Nevertheless, there are challenges that accompany this functionalization strategy; the adhesion layer leads to increased distance between the NV and target spin, resulting in decreased signal (see Sec. 2.3). Moreover, the spin and charge properties of shallow NV centers were observed to degrade with application of ALD layers. Indeed, depending on the stoichiometry of aluminum and oxygen in Al x O y films, the layers can induce unfavorable electron affinity. In addition to the aforementioned materials optimization and surface chemistries, several strategies can be employed during measurement to mitigate the effects of noise on the NV center. Typically, such measurement sequences increase the sensor coherence time or realize a detection method that is immune to certain noise sources. While a complete overview of the methods for reducing the effects of noise via careful engineering of the measurement protocol (or measurement "hardenings") is beyond the scope of this work, we point the reader towards dedicated review articles. While dynamical decoupling (DD) sequences were not initially developed for sensing, they have proven exceptionally useful for detecting signals at the specific frequencies where they do not refocus the signal The simplest DD sequence is the Hahn-echo protocol This phenomenon can be exploited for sensing environmental noise via changes in coherence at specific frequencies, essentially using the NV as a magnetic spectrum analyzer. Already, such sequences have been used to detect signals originating from AC-modulated single spins, 328 currents, 329,330 magnetic gradients into a sequence that is now referred to as "CPMG" which provides first-order correction for amplitude, frequency, and timing errors. The phase θ of the last π/2 pulse can be tuned to select different sensing schemes Dynamical decoupling alone cannot mitigate noise from residual paramagnetic impurities (e.g., electron spins associated with dangling bonds at the surface or substitutional nitrogen centers) due to their fast Larmor precession at typical magnetic bias fields. However, if such spins have sufficiently long T 1 times, one can combat noise by employing continuous, coherent driving of the spin bath. Often the sensor coherence time is insufficient for achieving the desired spectral resolution using standard DD protocols; in such cases, weak-measurement techniques may serve as a viable alternative. Most measurement protocols leverage only two of the three spin states within the ground-state manifold (|m s = 0 and |m s = ±1 , see Sec. 2). In contrast, double-quantum protocols make use of the full spin-triplet subspace to obtain higher sensitivity. For example, in the Ramsey-like experiment shown in Fig. During the measurement evolution period, phases are imprinted on both basis states with opposite sign Finally, this state is mapped back to the starting basis through application of the same pulses in reverse order. The resulting measurement yields double the signal when compared to the singlequantum approaches described in Sec. 2. An additional benefit of double-quantum techniques are their immunity to common-mode shifts that affect both sub-levels in the same manner. For example, variations of the zero-field-splitting constant caused by temperature shifts, The previously surveyed methods for diamond-surface functionalization could be used in concert with the exceptional sensitivity and spatial resolution of the NV to enable molecular-level detection. Indeed, NV sensors could revolutionize many active areas of research since they operate at ambient conditions with minimal perturbation to the system of interest. The potential for NV sensors to elucidate the structure of small to hierarchically more complex biomolecules (e.g., proteins) has been widely posited. In contrast to conventional solid-state NMR, which has made tremendous progress in structural analysis by employing fast magic-angle spinning (MAS) 350 and high magnetic fields, 351 NV NMR has poor spectral resolution. This limited resolution pre-cludes the detection of small chemical shift differences since measurements are typically carried out at low applied magnetic field and MAS cannot (yet) be applied. Nevertheless, NV centers could still be used to measure structure-function relationships in biomolecules via position-dependent hyperfine interaction with nuclear spins rather than chemical-shift differences. Finally, optical pumping of the NV-center spin can provide a local, low-entropy source of nuclear-spin polarization that could provide complementary structural information to conventional NMR and EPR techniques. In such experiments, nuclear spins coupled to the NV center are polarized beyond the thermal limit by transferring polarization from the NV. The biocompatibility of diamond supports the use of NV centers for bio-sensing applications. Notably, the majority of NV biosensing research has thus far leveraged nanodiamonds rather than bulk substrates, which can directly utilize many of the diamond surface preparation and functionalization strategies described in this Review. Further supported by significant advancements in production and purification of nanodiamonds, this alternate platform has seen application in biomedical sensing and imaging, 363-367 drug delivery, 368 and reaction monitoring, ies of aggregation, protein corona formation, cellular uptake, and targeted delivery. In addition, alignment of the magnetic field required for NV-center experiments is simpler for bulk substrates than for randomly orientated nanocrystals. Radical pairs are reaction intermediates that either encounter each other in solution or are created simultaneously, usually by a chemical reaction such as homolytic bond cleavage or photoinduced electron transfer (e.g., in blue-light photoreceptive cryptochromes). Recently, Finkler et al. proposed to use the NV as a sensor for observing this radical-pair mechanism. Essentially, the charge-separated state of the pair generates a nonzero electric field at the NV position that vanishes upon recombination. Consequently, detection of this field would enable measurement of recombination rates at the single-molecule level. We note that both proposals rely on radical-pair generation in a covalently attached bio-molecule (via photo-induced electron transfer with a blue light source), which would benefit greatly from the advances in diamond functionalization discussed in this Review. Chiral-induced spin selectivity (CISS) refers to enantioselective and electron spin-dependent transmission of electrons through chiral molecules and crystalline materials. As previously mentioned, solid-state NMR is a powerful tool for studying the structure of heterogeneous catalysts 421 due to advancements in magnetic-field strength, 351 fast MAS, 350 and dynamic nuclear polarization (DNP). 422 However, it is often unclear whether the relevant, active species are observed since the working conditions of most catalysts include either high temperatures or pressures, which differ dramatically from standard measurement conditions. NMR and EPR spectroscopy of molecules are powerful tools for elucidating details of chemical structure, intermolecular interactions, and chemical reactions. The experimental approach wherein traditional inductive detectors are replaced with NV centers in diamond has facilitated highly sensitive and localized spectroscopy, allowing for detection of electron and nuclear spins in external targets at the single-or few-spin level. Encouragingly, vast improvements in measurement sensitivity have been obtained through advances in diamond surface engineering that reduce charge instability and decoherence for shallow emitters. In addition, novel methods for chemical functionalization of diamond allows for deterministic, covalent attachment of target molecular species. Despite this impressive progress, further experimental advances are required to achieve coherent detection of single nuclear spins on the diamond surface. Additional experimental challenges must also be overcome. For instance, the stability of molecular films or of hierarchically ordered structures in biomolecules may be compromised by extended exposure to laser-and microwave-induced heating. Nevertheless, use of low laser power as well as reduced experimental duty cycles may help to prevent ablation of specifically bound molecules during extended measurement times. Likewise, reduced microwave duty cycles, or elimination of microwave sources entirely (e.g., for relaxometry measurements) can mitigate heating issues. In addition, current detection sensitivities necessitate long integration times, placing limits on reaction monitoring or tracking of transient paramagnetic intermediates. Greater control over molecular density, orientation, and binding configurations at diamond surfaces will circumvent rapid diffusion of analytes into and out of NV sensing volumes, allowing for longer measurements. Moreover, motional dynamics and thermal fluctuations in large molecules induce signal broadening, complicating the extraction of structural and functional information and localized imaging of surface spins. Depending on the sensing application, immobilization approaches that restrict motional degrees of freedom can be employed to reduce spectral broadening. Finally, despite the exquisite sensitivity and spatial resolution, NV-center spectroscopy cannot achieve the spectral resolution of conventional spectroscopy methods. Indeed, typical magnetic-field biases applied in NV experiments are on the or-der of ca. 10 -3 -10 -1 T, compared to ca. 10 0 -10 1 T in conventional NMR. Therefore, a 5 ppm 1 H chemical shift, easily resolved in conventional NMR with an operating field strength of, e.g., 600 MHz, would result in an absolute shift of < 1 Hz at 20 mT. However, novel NV approaches including homonuclear decoupling sequences, In conclusion, advances in diamond surface engineering and chemical functionalization have facilitated landmark advances in nanoscale NMR and EPR using NV centers. Moving forward, the simultaneous immobilization of chemical analytes and preservation of NV sensing properties represents a critical step toward single-spin, coherent detection in chemically and biologically relevant systems. Efforts to overcome these challenges will benefit from the interdisciplinary nature of this research field, which lies at the intersection of surface chemistry, materials science, and quantum metrology. Motivated by the promise of new insights into molecular structure, spin transport, and reaction monitoring, the utility of NV-center sensing for the chemical sciences has only just begun to be realized.