ZrO 2 nanotubular arrays with intrinsic defects are a promising solid-state basis for the development of devices for detecting, storing, and converting energy. Layers of the self-ordered zirconia nanotubes of 5 μm length and 30 nm diameter, containing oxygen vacancies and their complexes, have been synthesized by anodic oxidation. The spectrally resolved TSL (thermally stimulated luminescence) above room temperature for the samples exposed by UV-irradiation with an energy of 4.1 eV have been studied. Two emission bands with maxima near 2.5 and 2.8 eV, associated with radiative relaxation of T and F + centers, respectively, have been found. An analysis of the measured glow curves within the framework of general order kinetics established the presence of four TSL peaks caused by charge carriers traps with activation energies of 0.7-0.8 eV. A band diagram is proposed to explain the role of optically active centers based on electron (vacancies in positions of three-and fourcoordinated oxygen) and hole (interstitial oxygen ions) traps in observed TSL processes during the irradiation and the followed heating of anion-deficient ZrO 2 nanotubes. To date, various high technology industries are extensively engaged in exploiting multifunctional structures based on oxide nanoporous and nanotubular high-specific-surface-area arrays It is known that anion-and cation-based point lattice imperfections -F-, F + -and Zr 3+ -centers aggregated by T-defects Nanotubular samples of zirconium dioxide were synthesized by anodizing Zr foil with an Hf < 1% impurity The morphological parameters of the synthesized arrays were studied using a scanning electron microscope (SEM) AURIGA, Carl Zeiss and transmission electron microscope (TEM) JEM-2100, JEOL. The image shown in Figure After synthesis, the ZrO2 layers were heated to 800 K in air to remove electrolyte residues. The final samples for taking TSL measurements involved a rectangular-shaped zirconium substrate of 12×7 mm in size, one-side-covered by a layer of ZrO2 nanotubes. The spectrally resolved TSL response was recorded on a Perkin Elmer LS 55 luminescent spectrometer equipped with a unique high-temperature attachment where I(T) is the TSL intensity; s'' is an effective frequency factor, s -1 ; n0 is the initial concentration of filled traps after irradiation, m -3 ; Ea is the trap activation energy, eV; k is the Boltzmann constant, eV/K; T is temperature, K; b is the order of kinetics; β is the heating rate, K/s; T0 = 300 K is the initial temperature, K. The energy and kinetic characteristics of trapping centers were determined by approximating the shape of the TSL curves by the superposition of several independent peaks of the general order of kinetics according to Eq. ( Figure Figure Thus, the close spectral composition of the luminescence for different types of excitations in ZrO2 structures with different morphology may indicate the predominance of the monoclinic phase in the samples. This fact agrees with X-ray diffraction studies of ZrO2 nanotubes that are characterized by the formation of a monoclinic phase as a result of annealing at 400 °C for 1 h in air The emission in the G1 band (2.4 eV) may evidence the recombination between holes of the valence band and electrons captured by Zr 3+ ions When possibly participating in the mechanisms of the recorded TSL, the T-centers are in good agreement with their position on the excited level that is 4.2 eV above the top of the valence band Figure The obtained values of the thermal activation process parameters (Table In our case, the values of the parameter s'' for the P1-P3 peaks are distinct by two orders of magnitude at close activation energies of 0.67-0.72 eV and at a change in the Tmax from 331 to 426 K for the corresponding peaks (see Table Under 4.1-eV irradiation of the ZrO2 nanotubes, an electron transition from the valence band (VB) into the excited level of the T-defect occurs (see Fig. Then, during heating of the UV-irradiated samples, free charge carriers arise in the conduction and valence bands (see Fig. Arrays, 5 μm thick, consisting of ZrO2 nanotubes with an outer diameter of about 30 nm, were synthesized by anodic oxidation. Upon irradiated with monochromatic UV radiation of 4.1 eV, the ZrO2 samples were studied by spectrally resolved TSL method in the range of 390-590 nm and at above-room temperatures. It is established that the TSL emission contains two spectral components with maxima at about 2.5 and 2.8 eV. By an analysis of independent data on the luminescence of ZrO2 samples, the former can be ascribed to the recombination of holes from the valence band with electrons captured by Zr 3+ ions of T-centers by the reaction Zr 3+ + h → T + h2.5eV. The latter can be attributed to the recombination processes involving F + -centers by the reaction F + + e → F* → F + h2.8eV. It is shown within the general-order kinetics, that the recorded TSL glow curves are a superposition of four temperature peaks. The energy and kinetic characteristics of the observed TSL processes are found. Also, it is shown that vacancy defects in three-and four-coordinated oxygen sites initiate a system of electron trapping levels in the ZrO2 bandgap. These traps are characterized by close values of the activation energies Ea  0.7 eV and are responsible for the emergence of three TSL peaks ranged in temperatures from 300 to 450 K. Simultaneously, a TSL peak appears in the region of > 450 K due to interstitial oxygen ions as Ea  0.8 eV hole traps. The results obtained and the analysis of the independent data allowed one to propose the mechanisms of thermally stimulated luminescence of the subband irradiated samples with the participation of T-centers based on the bound state between two neighboring oxygen vacancies, positioned in [111] direction, with the Zr 3+ -ion. The model at hand offers the interpretation of the spectral and kinetic features of the observed thermally activated processes in UV-irradiated ZrO2 nanotubes.