Developing new types of high-capacity and high-energy density rechargeable battery is important to future generations of consumer electronics, electric vehicles, and mass energy storage applications. Recently we reported ~ 3.5 V sodium/chlorine (Na/Cl2) and lithium/chlorine (Li/Cl2) batteries with up to 1200 mAh g -1 reversible capacity, using either a Na or Li metal as the negative electrode, an amorphous carbon nanosphere (aCNS) as the positive electrode, and aluminum chloride (AlCl3) dissolved in thionyl chloride (SOCl2) with fluoride-based additives as the electrolyte 1 . The high surface area and large pore volume of aCNS in the positive electrode facilitated NaCl or LiCl deposition and trapping of Cl2 for reversible NaCl/Cl2 or LiCl/Cl2 redox reactions and battery discharge/charge cycling. Here we report an initially low surface area/porosity graphite (DGr) material as the positive electrode in a Li/Cl2 battery, attaining high battery performance after activation in carbon dioxide (CO2) at 1000 °C (DGr_ac) with the first discharge capacity ~ 1910 mAh g -1 and a cycling capacity up to 1200 mAh g -1 . Ex situ Raman spectroscopy and X-ray diffraction (XRD) revealed the evolution of graphite over battery cycling, including intercalation/de-intercalation and exfoliation that generated sufficient pores for hosting LiCl/Cl2 redox. This work opens up widely available, low-cost graphitic materials for highcapacity alkali metal/Cl2 batteries. Lastly, we employed mass spectrometry to probe the Cl2 trapped in the graphitic positive electrode, shedding light into the Li/Cl2 battery operation. In recent decades there has been a steady increase in the demand of batteries for a wide range of applications from small personal electronics like mobile phones to medium ones like electric vehicles (EVs) and satellites, and to massive ones for grid scale energy storage. The developments of batteries with higher specific capacity, higher energy density, and longer cycle life have become increasingly important. Different types of batteries have thus been invented with various high-energy metals as anodes Investigating various forms of carbon materials represents one of the main directions of alkali metal/Cl2 batteries. Crystalline graphite materials are typically of low surface area and pore volume, and are seemingly unlikely candidates for high-capacity porous electrode materials needed for depositing large amount of metal chlorides and trapping and electro-reduction of chorine. Herein, we investigate a defective graphite material (Micro850, Asbury Carbons, abbreviated as DGr, see Methods) as the positive electrode in a Li/Cl2 battery. High performance battery was achieved using positive electrodes comprised of DGr activated in a carbon dioxide (CO2) environment at 1000 o C for 45 minutes (abbreviated as DGr_ac, see Methods). Despite the low surface area and pore volume of the as-made DGr_ac (SA < 20 m 2 g -1 , pore volume < 0.08 cm 3 g -1 ), the resulting Li/Cl2 battery delivered ~ 1910 mAh g -1 first discharge capacity (based on the carbon mass). The battery was rechargeable and cyclable at a high specific capacity of up to 1200 mAh g -1 with an average discharge voltage of ~ 3.5 V. We employed ex situ Raman spectroscopy, XRD and mass spectrometry to investigate the graphite evolution over repeated charge/discharge cycles. We found that the combination of CO2 activation of disordered graphite and in situ electrochemical intercalation/deintercalation and exfoliation opened up the graphite structure for effective Cl2 trapping, affording a high performance graphitic positive electrode for Li/Cl2 battery. The as received DGr material contained graphite flake with smooth edges and were several microns in size (see Fig. We constructed coin cell batteries by using a Li metal as the negative electrode, either DGr (Li/DGr battery) or DGr_ac (Li/DGr_ac battery) as the positive electrode in a neutral electrolyte (modified from our previous acidic electrolyte 1 ) comprised of 1.8 M LiCl + 1.8 M AlCl3 dissolved in SOCl2 with 2 wt% of lithium bis(fluorosulfonyl)imide (LiFSI) added as the electrolyte (Fig. Such LiCl formation was also present in a DGr electrode after the first discharge, confirmed by XRD spectrum showing strong LiCl peaks (Fig. The Li/DGr battery using graphite without CO2 activation was rechargeable at 375 mAh g - 1 cycling capacity with the main charging plateau at ~ 4.00 V and another small plateau near the end of charging at ~ 4.06 V (Fig. At a capacity of 375 mAh g -1 , the Li/DGr battery could cycle stably over > 150 cycles (Fig. The loading of DGr was ~ 4.3 mg cm -2 . d, Cycling performance comparison of Li/DGr batteries (375 mAh g -1 , 150 mA g -1 ) with and without 2 wt% LiFSI added into the electrolyte. The battery with LiFSI as the electrolyte additive showed an improved cycling performance. The loading of DGr in both batteries was ~ 4.3 mg cm -2 . The Li/DGr battery cycle life at higher capacities (e.g., 800 mAh g -1 ) was much reduced (to < 50, Fig. We consistently observed that the Li/Cl2 batteries could be reversibly cycled with ~ 100% CE up to an upper limit of capacity (~ 375 mAh g -1 for Li/DGr cells and ~ 1200 mAh g -1 for Li/DGr_ac cells), with the limit depending on the type of carbon material used for the positive electrode or treatment method for activating the carbon. The first discharge of our batteries showed > 1300 mAh g -1 capacity (Fig. Another trend was that the battery cycle life increased at lower cycling capacity. When cycling/charging to higher capacities, higher degree of less reversible reactions (e.g., electrolyte oxidation) likely occurred near the end of the charging (evident by the slight increase in charging voltage, Fig. We also investigated the rate capability of the Li/DGr_ac battery at 800 mAh g -1 with currents varied from 50 mA g -1 (0.0625 C) to 800 mA g -1 (1C) (Fig. In a capacity retention study, we held an 800 mAh g -1 charged Li/DGr_ac battery at opencircuit for 3 days and then discharged the battery, attaining ~ 100% CE without charge loss (Fig. The discharging step was controlled by setting a discharge cutoff voltage of 2 V. b, Cycling performance of a Li/DGr_ac battery at 800 mAh g -1 capacity with 100 mA g -1 current. The battery was cyclable for more than 85 cycles. The loading of DGr_ac was ~ 4.1 mg cm -2 . c, Typical chargedischarge curves of a Li/DGr_ac battery at 600 mAh g -1 and 800 mAh g -1 with 100 mA g -1 current. d-e, SEM images of DGr_ac electrode after the battery was discharged (d) and charged (e) to 800 mAh g -1 . After charging, LiCl on the DGr_ac was oxidized/removed to form Cl2 and the graphite flake underneath was exposed. After discharging, Cl2 was reduced back to LiCl and passivated the DGr_ac electrode. f, Cycling performance of a Li/DGr_ac battery at 1000 mAh g -1 with various currents (100 mA g -1 and 75 mA g -1 ). The battery was cyclable for more than 55 cycles. The The up to 1200 mAh g -1 cycling capacity of Li/DGr_ac battery suggested high surface area/pore volume in the positive DGr_ac electrode for LiCl deposition and Cl2 trapping, well exceeding those in the DGr electrode owing to CO2 activation. The high capacity approached those of Li/Cl2 and Na/Cl2 cells using high surface area (~ 3000 m 2 g -1 ) and large pore volume (~ 2.5 cm 3 g -1 ) amorphous carbon nanospheres as positive electrode 1 . To investigate the evolution of DGr_ac through battery cycling, we first performed Raman spectroscopy at different stages of battery cycling (Fig. 32, 34 . Upon battery discharge the peak at 1600 cm -1 mostly disappeared, indicating reversible intercalation/de-intercalation over charge/discharge cycling (Fig. To eliminate the doping effects of the electrolyte on the Raman spectra of graphite, we washed DGr_ac electrodes using deionized ultra-filtered (DIUF) water to remove SOCl2 and salts from the electrolyte. Raman measurements showed that all the charged and discharged DGr_ac electrodes at cycle 13 and cycle 40 displayed only 3 peaks (D band, G band, and D' band, similar to the starting DGr_ac, Fig. Upon expose to air and washing with DIUF water, XRD of the post-cycling DGr_ac electrodes showed only one main XRD peak with similar d-spacing to the as-activated DGr_ac (Fig. The Raman and XRD results revealed structural evolution of the graphite positive electrode over battery cycling in the electrolyte containing SOCl2, AlCl4 -, Li + and F-additives, as well as oxidative species such as SO2, SO2Cl2 and Cl2 resulted from battery cycling The starting graphite material DGr was several microns in size with pre-existing defects evident from Raman data of D/G = ~ 0.05 (Fig. In this work, we found that defective microns scale graphite flakes could be used as the positive electrode in Li/Cl2 batteries, especially after further 'activation' by annealing in a CO2 Electrolyte was made inside an argon-filled glovebox. Thionyl chloride (SOCl2) was purchased from Spectrum Chemical Mfg. Corp. (TH138-100ML) and used without any further purification. The appropriate amount of SOCl2 was added into a 20-mL scintillation vial (Fisher Scientific). 1.8 M of aluminum chloride (AlCl3, Fluka, 99%, anhydrous, granular) was weighed and added to the SOCl2. The mixture was then stirred until all the AlCl3 was dissolved. 1.8 M lithium chloride (LiCl, GanfengLithium) was then added into the solution stirred for ~ 15 minutes until LiCl could not be further dissolved. In this step, we typically added a little excess of LiCl into the solution to make sure that the electrolyte was completely neutralized. 2 weight percent (2 wt%) of lithium bis(fluorosulfonyl)imide (LiFSI, Tianfu Chemical) was then added into the solution and stirred for ~ 45 minutes or until LiFSI could no longer be dissolved. Normally after electrolyte making, a small amount of residual salts (LiCl, LiFSI) remained in the solution. We then removed the vial from the stir plate to let it sit until all the residual salts sank to the bottom of the vial. The upper transparent layer of liquid was then ready to be used as the electrolyte. All batteries were made inside an argon-filled glovebox. Lithium (Li) metal was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. A nail file was used to scratch the Li metal to remove any surface contamination. The scratched Li metal was then pasted onto a coin cell spacer (MTI Corporation) and ready for use as the negative electrode. Either the DGr or DGr_ac electrode was put in the center of a positive CR2032 coin cell case (SS316, MTI corporation). 2 layers of quartz fiber filters (QR-100, Sterlitech) were put on top of the positive electrode as the separators. 150 μL of electrolyte was added onto the separators. The Li negative electrode was then put on top of the separators, with the Li metal directly facing the positive electrode. A piece of coin cell spring (MTI Corporation) was put on top of the spacer. Lastly, the negative CR2032 electrode case (SS316, MTI corporation) was put on top of the spring and the entire battery was sealed using a digital pressure controlled electric crimper for CR2032 coin cells with the digital pressure reading set to 13.2 (MTI corporation, MSK-160E). After the coin cell was assembled, the battery was transferred out of the glovebox. A layer of GE advanced silicone sealant was applied on the coin cell to cover the O-ring that sealed the two cases together. The purpose of this silicone layer was to prevent water and air from leaking into the battery. After the silicone was cured, the battery was tested using a battery tester (Neware, CT-4008-5V50mA-164-U). The charging step in battery testing was controlled by setting the charging time depending on the cycling capacity (mAh g -1 ) and current condition (mA g -1 ) (charging time = cycling capacity/current). The discharging step was controlled by setting a discharge cutoff voltage of 2 V. After the DGr_ac electrode has cycled to the designated state in a battery, the battery was disassembled and the DGr_ac electrode was taken out from the battery. A small hole was punched on an aluminum laminated pouch (MTI, EQ-alf-100-210) and the hole was covered by a small quartz window. The edge of the quartz window was sealed using GE advanced silicone sealant and the pouch was allowed to sit in air until the silicone was cured. A piece of carbon tape (Ted Pella, 16073) was pasted onto the pouch directly under the quartz window. The pouch was then transferred inside an argon-filled glovebox, and the DGr_ac electrode was pasted on the carbon tape so that it was visible via the quartz window. All sides of the pouch were then heat sealed inside the glovebox using a tabletop impulse sealer (Uline). After sealing, the pouch was transferred out the glovebox for Raman measurement using the Horiba Jobin Yvon (Olympus BX41) instrument with Ar + laser of 532 nm. Before each measurement, a piece of p-type boron doped silicon wafer was used for calibration and the silicon peak was adjusted to 520.7 cm -1 . After the instrument was calibrated, the Raman laser was focused on the DGr_ac sample through the quartz window and the Raman spectra were recorded. Raman spectra on DIUF-water-washed samples were done similarly. The DGr_ac electrode was put inside a 20-mL scintillation vial and DIUF water was added to the vial to wash the sample. After washing, the electrode was air dried and its Raman spectra were recorded. No aluminum laminated pouch was needed for DIUF-water-washed samples as they were already exposed to air during washing. XRD measurement was conducted in the environmental measurements facility (Stanford Earth) using Rigaku MiniFlex 600 Benchtop X-ray Diffraction System. After the DGr_ac electrode has cycled to the designated state in a battery, the battery was disassembled and the DGr_ac electrode was taken out from the battery in an argon-filled glovebox. The DGr_ac was sealed inside a special XRD holder manufactured by Rigaku that consisted of a polycarbonate dome sitting on top of an O-ringed 1-inch holder with zero XRD background (Si (311)) in an argonfilled glovebox without exposure to air. The sample holder was then taken to the facility and placed inside the XRD instrument, and the measurements were taken at a scan rate of 2 o min -1 . DIUF-water-washed samples were prepared similarly as those used for Raman measurements (see Raman spectroscopy measurements section above). The DIUF-water-washed samples were directly placed into the XRD instrument and didn't need the special XRD holder. The scan rate of the XRD measurement was 2 o min -1 . SEM measurements were conducted using a field-emission scanning electron microscopy (Hitachi S-4800). To characterize as-received DGr and activated DGr_ac, the samples were directly pasted on the SEM sample stage using double-sided carbon adhesive. To characterize the electrode inside a battery, the battery was first dissembled inside an argon-filled glovebox and the electrode was taken out from the battery. The electrode was firmly pasted on the SEM sample stage using double-sided carbon adhesive inside the glovebox. The sample stage was then sealed inside a Ziploc bag inside the glovebox and was immediately transferred out of the glovebox and put into the SEM instrument. During this transfer process, it was important to minimize the sample's exposure to air. The samples were observed using a 15 kV acceleration voltage and 10 μA emission current. Mass spectrometry measurements were conducted using a residual gas analyzer (Fig. To measure the mass spectrometry data of a heated DGr_ac electrode, the DGr_ac electrode was first placed inside the sample chamber in an argon-filled glovebox (similar to above). Then with valve #1 closed (Fig. The AES and elemental mapping measurements were conducted in Stanford Nano Shared Facilities (SNSF) using a PHI 700 Scanning Auger Nanoprobe. After the battery has reached its designated state, it was disassembled inside an argon-filled glovebox. The graphite electrode was then removed from the battery and sealed inside an aluminum laminated pouch (MTI, EQ-alf-100-210). The sample was then transferred to the facility and introduced into the instrument for measurements. During this transfer process, it was important to minimize the sample's exposure to air. Surface area (m 2 g -1 ) Pore volume (cm 3 g -1 ) Micropore volume (cm The shape of the curve was similar to that at 375 mAh g -1 , with the main charging and discharging plateaus simply extended. b, Cycling performance of a Li/DGr battery at 800 mAh g -1 with 100 mA g -1 current. The battery displayed an inferior cycle life of less than 50 cycles. The loading of DGr was ~ 4.5 mg cm -2 . The charging step was controlled by setting the charging time to be 8 hours at 100 mA g -1 current (charging capacity = 800 mAh g - 1 ). The discharging step was controlled by setting a discharge cutoff voltage of 2 V. The battery was cyclable at 1200 mAh g -1 for more than 35 cycles. The loading of DGr_ac was ~ 3.0 mg cm -2 . The charging step was controlled by setting the charging time to be 12 hours at 100 mA g -1 current (charging capacity = 1200 mAh g -1 ). The discharging step was controlled by setting a discharge cutoff voltage of 2 V. . Cycling performance of a Li/DGr_ac battery at 800 mAh g -1 with various currents (50 mA g -1 , 75 mA g -1 , 100 mA g -1 , 150 mA g -1 , 200 mA g -1 , 400 mA g -1 , 600 mA g -1 , and 800 mA g -1 ). The battery was able to cycle under all these current conditions and with its coulombic efficiency slightly decreased as the current became higher. The charging step was controlled by setting the charging time depending on the current condition. The discharging step was controlled by setting a discharge cutoff voltage of 2 V. 