We describe a density-functional method which aims at computing the ground state electron density and the spectral function at the same time. One basic ingredient of our method is the construction of the spectral function from the first four spectral moment matrices. The second basic ingredient is the construction of the spectral moment matrices from density functionals. We call our method moment-functional based spectral density-functional theory (MFbSDFT), because it is based on density-functionals for the spectral moments and because it allows us to compute the spectral function. If it is implemented in second variation our method consumes only a fraction more computer time than a standard DFT calculation with the PBE functional. We show that MFbSDFT captures correlation effects such as the valence-band satellite in Ni and the formation of lower and upper Hubbard bands in SrVO3. For the purpose of constructing the spectral function from the first four N × N spectral moment matrices we describe an efficient algorithm based on the diagonalization of one hermitean 2N × 2N matrix. In density-functional theory (DFT) the ground state electron density is determined by minimizing the total energy functional However, the KS energy bands agree very often fairly well with photoemission data Well-known deficiencies of this approach are the underestimation of the band gap, which may require the application of band shifts when computing optical responses such as photocurrents Moreover, a well-known deficiency of the KS spectrum is the absence of the splitting of bands into lower and upper Hubbard bands due to strong electron correlations In other words, one remains within the DFT-framework in order to determine the ground state density, but similarly to GW one leaves this framework and directly solves an interacting many-electron Hamiltonian in order to obtain the spectrum of the correlated system instead of evaluating a density functional. However, one may also take a different viewpoint: The local spectral function of DMFT minimizes the effective action. In this sense DMFT is a spectral density-functional approach Nevertheless, the question still poses itself if it is possible to obtain both ground state density and correlated spectral function within a density-functional approach which avoids the direct use of many-body techniques such as GW and DMFT. A hermitean N × N matrix has N real-valued eigenvalues. This well-known fact from linear algebra is exploited in many electronic structure programs based on density-functional theory, where the KS equations are solved numerically by diagonalizing a hermitean matrix. The direct construction of 2N state vectors, 2N state energies, and 2N spectral weight factors from 4 hermitean N × N spectral moment matrices The I-th spectral moment matrix is defined by where S σ (E) is the spectral density matrix at energy E. In this paper we discuss only the magnetically collinear case without spin-orbit coupling. Therefore, there are only spectral density matrices S ↑ (E) with spin σ =↑ and spectral density matrices S ↓ (E) with spin σ =↓. So far, the direct construction of the spectral function of interacting fermionic many-particle systems from the first four spectral moments has not yet been investigated intensively. Well-explored are only the single-band case with the first four spectral moments Recently, we have demonstrated how to solve the Hubbard-Rashba model within the many-band generalization of the two-pole approximation of the spectral density and of the self-consistent moment method In this paper we combine basic ideas of DFT with the many-band generalization of the self-consistent moment method in order to develop an approach which aims at computing both the ground state density and the spectral function at the same time without forsaking the DFT framework. The first Hohenberg-Kohn theorem states that the ground state electron density determines the Hamiltonian up to a constant. Since the spectral moments can be computed from the Hamiltonian, the Hohenberg-Kohn theorem implies therefore that also the spectral moments may be expressed as density-functionals. To explore how this can be done in practice is the central goal of this paper. Combining this with our recipe The rest of this paper is structured as follows. In Sec. II we explain the theory of MFbSDFT. In Sec. III we describe an efficient algorithm for computing the spectral function from the first four spectral moments. In Sec. IV we explain how we construct the moment functionals. In Sec. V we explain how the MFbSDFT method may be implemented within the full-potential linearized augmented plane wave method (FLAPW) within a second variation approach. In Sec. VI we present applications of our method to fcc Ni and SrVO 3 . In Sec. VII we discuss some open questions of MFbSDFT and strategies of how to develop it further. This paper ends with a summary in Sec. VIII. The ground state charge density defines the Hamiltonian uniquely (up to a constant) When periodic boundary conditions are used, the spectral function and the spectral moments aquire an additional k-index for the k point k, which we often suppress in this manuscript for notational convenience. The spectral moments may be obtained by plugging Eq. (2) into Eq. ( (3) We may consider M (I) σ (r, r ′ ) as a non-local potential, from which we may obtain the spectral moment matrices by computing the matrix elements: According to our arguments above, the non-local potentials M (I) σ (r, r ′ ) are unique functionals of the electron density. In KS-DFT the total energy functional is split into the kinetic energy, the Hartree energy, and the exchangecorrelation energy We consider the Hamiltonian where and and V (r) is the lattice potential. Note that in the entire Sec. II B we use Hartree atomic units for notational convenience. Many-body approaches such as LDA+DMFT often take into account the Coulomb matrix element V nmn ′ m ′ only when all orbitals, i.e., n, m, n ′ and m ′ , describe the same crystal lattice site. In the simplest approximation V nmn ′ m ′ is described by a single parameter, the so-called Hubbard-U . Components of V nmn ′ m ′ that are neglected hereby are of course partly treated in LDA+DMFT, because the lattice potential V (r) is replaced by the KS potential in this case. Therefore, the Hubbard-U only describes the Coulomb interaction from strong localization of electrons. These effects are underestimated by KS-DFT and become important when U approaches or exceeds the bandwidth. In contrast, we do not restrict V nmn ′ m ′ at this point, i.e., both local and non-local contributions are described by it in MFbSDFT and V (r) is the pure lattice potential without exchange-correlation terms. The zeroth moment is given by where [. . . ] + denotes the anticommutator, and the first moment evaluates to Defining the Hartree potential by and the non-local exchange potential by we may write the first moment as where V H nm and V X σnm are the matrix elements of the Hartree potential and of the non-local exchange potential, respectively. Thus, one obtains a method of Hartree-Fock (HF) type if one considers only the first two moments. It differs from the exact Hartree-Fock method by the self-interaction error (SIE) where is the electron density at position r and ǫ X (n(r)) is the exchange energy density for electron density n(r). The local potential Eq. ( σ ] I , because there may be cases where Hartree-Fock provides an excellent description because correlation effects are small, and these special cases have to be accommodated by the general theory. We may therefore expect that the second moment should contain a term which is indeed what we find. We may use this observation to split the second moment into the anticipated part M HF σ M HF σ plus additional new terms, which we denote by In contrast to the single-band Hubbard model with onsite Coulomb interaction, where higher-order correlation functions appear in the third moment and in the higher moments, already the second moment M (2) σ of the manyband case with the full Coulomb interaction contains the higher-order correlation function c σ predicted by Eq. ( σ , V H T , and V X σ T can be identified without using perturbation theory, because they appear with the correlation function c † σ ′ m c σ ′ m ′ . The term T T appears even without any correlation function. Therefore, we define The idea behind Eq. ( Since these latter two terms occur sometimes in M HF σ M HF σ we introduce the notation of Eq. ( . Using this notation we may write M (2+) σ as a sum of 17 terms: which is spin-independent, which does not depend on the spin, which is spin-independent, In order to evaluate the contributions to M (2+) in a way similar to Eq. ( and to compute them for the uniform electron gas as a function of electron density. Similarly to Eq. ( from these contractions and compute the moments from these local potentials: Many popular exchange-correlation potentials are constructed with the help of Green's function Monte Carlo simulations of the energy of the uniform electron gas where which is indeed what we find: To identify T T T in M (3) σ one needs to check the terms without correlation functions. To find the terms that contain two factors of the matrix T , i.e., the terms , and V X T T , one needs to look out for the contributions to To track down the terms that contain a single factor of the matrix T , i.e., the terms and one has to evaluate this correlation function in perturbation theory. In order to identify all those terms in Eq. (40) that do not contain the matrix T , i.e., the terms and one has to evaluate this correlation function in perturbation theory. When one evaluates the correlator c † σn c † σ ′ m c σn ′ c σ ′ m ′ in perturbation theory in order to extract the terms discussed above, e.g. V H V H T , one may use Eq. ( and to use Eq. ( and thereby extract the terms discussed above, e.g. which is spin-independent, and where is the commutator between the matrix T and the density matrix. It is desirable to rewrite Eq. (42) in a form that permits a numerically efficient evaluation of this term, because the direct computation of Eq. (42) will often be numerically demanding due to the four indices of the Coulomb matrix element. We may exploit that the indices t ′ and n ′ couple to the Coulomb matrix element in a way that allows us to identify the density matrix. Therefore we may define from which we compute the Hartree-type integral Eq. ( where F nt are the matrix elements of the Hartree-type potential F (r). Similarly, in order to evaluate Eq. ( Eq. ( where L σnt are the matrix elements of the non-local Focktype potential L σ (r 1 , r 2 ). The next group of two terms in M (3+) σ does not contain the matrix T , but it contains the correlation function (50) which does not depend on the spin, and (51) In Appendix A we show that the sum of Eq. (50) and Eq. (51) turns into the very simple result U n -σ in the case of the single-band Hubbard model. However, for realistic many-band systems, the direct evaluation of these expressions may be numerically demanding due to the four indices of the Coulomb matrix element. Therefore, we may try to use concepts from DFT to simplify the calculations. In order to approximate these contributions by local functionals, we may use the recipe described above in Eq. ( , but the indices are not connected in a way that terms such as HHH or HXH arise, which we have already discussed above. An example from this group of terms is The first index The last two indices, u and u ′ are contracted with the cor- In this term, it is therefore not possible to express V t ′ m ′ uu ′ through the matrices H or X when perturbation theory is used. Other terms in this group differ from Eq. (52) for example due to different spin quantum numbers in the correlation function, e.g. c † -σn ′ c † σz c † σz ′ c σt c -σu c σu ′ , or they differ due to different indices of the Coulomb matrix elements, e.g. There is a second group of terms that contains three factors of the Coulomb matrix element as well. However, it contains the correlator c † σm c † σ ′ m ′ c σn c σ ′ n ′ instead. An example from this group of terms is Since V tt ′ zz ′ couples to the correlation function only through the index z, it cannot be expressed through the matrices H or X when perturbation theory is used. Similar to the previous group, the other members in this group differ from this example due to different spin quantum numbers in the correlation function, or due to different indices of the Coulomb matrix elements. Another group of terms contains the matrix T once, the Coulomb matrix elements twice, and the correlation function c † σm ′ c σn ′ . An example from this group of terms is Similar to the previous two groups, the other members in this group differ from the example of Eq. (54) due to different spin quantum numbers in the correlator, i.e., c † -σn ′ c -σz , and due to different indices in the Coulomb matrix elements. A similar group of terms contains the correlator An example is given by In Ref. In the following we describe the algorithm to construct the spectral function from the spectral moment matrices M (1) , M (2) , M (3) , where we assume that the zeroth spectral moment matrix is simply the unit matrix. Only the final result is described here, while the detailed proof is given in Appendix D. First, construct the hermitean N × N matrix Next, diagonalize M (2+) : where U is a unitary matrix and D is a diagonal matrix. Using D and U construct the matrix Employ the inverse of its hermitean adjoint together with the moment matrices to compute the matrix Use it to obtain the matrix Finally, take B 1 , D 1 and the first moment matrix to construct the 2N × 2N matrix and diagonalize it: The unitary matrix U contains the normalized eigenvectors of B (1) as its columns. Compute the spectral weight of state j from Note that a j may be smaller than one, because the summation over the index i goes only from 1 to N and not from 1 to 2N . Therefore, spectral weights smaller than 1 may occur when bands split into lower and upper Hubbard bands. Construct the N × 2N matrix V according to Note that i = 1, ..., N , i.e., only the first N entries of the j-th column of U are used, while every column of U has of course 2N entries in total. The spectral function is given by where E l is the l-th diagonal element of D, i.e., E l = D ll . Here, 1 ≤ i, j ≤ N , because in Eq. ( Note that in this paper we do not use the grand canonical Hamiltonian H = Hμ N , where μ is the chemical potential, but instead we use H, because most DFT codes do not work with H = Hμ N , as the chemical potential μ is typically redetermined only before the end of every iteration in the selfconsistency loop to achieve matching between electronic and nuclear charge, i.e., charge neutrality. When comparing our result Eq. (65) to the literature, one therefore needs to be aware of this difference by μ in the expressions for the spectral function. In Appendix B we have shown that and in Appendix C we have found where is the dimensionless density parameter. The corresponding matrix elements of the moments are obtained from these potentials according to and While it might be tempting to use these expansions, Eq. (66) and Eq. ( In order to construct an accurate analytic representation of the correlation energy of the uniform electron gas one considers the high-density expansion, the lowdensity expansion, and Green's-function Monte Carlo data In order to take into account Monte Carlo simulations in the construction of the moment functionals, we would need such calculations for correlation functions such as Eq. ( Additionally, we test the following strategy to find more elaborated moment functionals: Eq. (66) suggests that the leading order at low density is r -2 s . Since the leading order of the correlation energy is r -1 s in this limit, we try to replace r -2 s in Eq. ( and similarly This strategy should yield better results, because the r -2 s and r -3 s of the low-density expansion are hereby replaced by a more realistic functional form at high density. In Appendix B we have estimated Eq. ( s . We therefore expect d to be of the order of 10. At this order of magnitude of d (2+) σ we indeed find a strong satellite peak in Ni (see Sec. VI). In this section we describe the implementation of our MFbSDFT method within a second variation approach. By second variation we mean that first a standard KS Hamiltonian is diagonalized at a given k-point and only part of its eigenvectors are used to compute the matrix elements of the moment functionals. The computation of the state vector matrix V and of the energies E l = D ll may therefore be considered as a second variation step. The size of the KS Hamiltonian matrix depends on the number of basis functions N B . We do not compute all eigenvectors, but only as many eigenvectors as we need to describe the occupied bands and a fraction of the unoccupied bands. We call this number N < N B . At a given k point we additionally compute the N B × N B matrices M (2+) and M (3+) and project them onto the N eigenstates. By M (2+) and M (3+) we denote these projections: and where Ū is a N B × N matrix, which holds the N eigenvectors in its N columns. The implementation of the moments M (2+) and M (3+) is easy to do: In the subroutines computing the standard KS-Hamiltonian one needs to switch off the kinetic energy contribution such that only the computation of the matrix elements of the potential remains. If one additionally replaces the exchange-correlation potential by the moment functional potential for M (2+) or M (3+) , the subroutine computes the corresponding moment matrix. The first and zeroth moments in the basis of the N eigenstates are diagonal matrices: and Note that in contrast to a standard KS-DFT calculation, the KS-Hamiltonian used in the first variation step does not use the full exchange-correlation potential, but only the local or non-local first-order exchange, i.e., either Eq. ( and respectively. The size of the matrices M (0) , M (1) , M (2) , and M (3) is N × N and typically N ≪ N B . Therefore, the second variation approach is fast. Close to the end of the selfconsistency cycle the Fermi energy is determined such that the total electronic charge compensates the nuclear charge. Typically, the subroutine computing the Fermi energy makes use of the eigenvalues and of weights, which are determined by the multiplicities of the k points, when symmetries are used. In order to include the spectral weights Eq. ( which may be derived from Eq. ( We illustrate the selfconsistency loop by the flowchart in Fig. In this section we apply the MFbSDFT method to several well-studied materials that show genuine manybody effects such as satellite peaks. According to the literature, the details of the spectral function of these materials depend strongly on the theoretical model used to study them. According to our discussion in Sec. IV the parameterizations that we use for the moment functionals should be considered only as a first step towards the development of accurate moment functionals. Consequently, if the results shown below are more similar to one theoretical model than they are to another one this does not imply at all that MFbSDFT confirms one particular theoretical model, because accurate moment functionals remain to be developed. The main purpose of this section is therefore to show that MFbSDFT is able to reproduce spectral features qualitatively that have been identified as genuine correlation effects before. However, beyond validating the concept of MFbSDFT, the results shown also hint at a practical perspective for MFbSDFT already at this early stage of its development: Since the MFbSDFT reproduces spectral features of correlated materials, it may be used to compute response properties The DOS obtained in KS-DFT with the PBE functional is shown in Fig. Next, we discuss the MFbSDFT-spectrum obtained with With this choice of parameters the magnetic moment computed self-consistently in MFbSDFT is 0.58 μ . The resulting DOS is presented in Fig. Finally, we discuss the MFbSDFT-spectrum obtained with V (2+) σ (r) = 0.015ζ 3 . We use N = 36. With this choice of parameters the magnetic moment is 0.63 μ B . Fig. As discussed in Sec. IV the parameters employed in used to generate the DOS shown in Fig. s [Ry] 2 (used to generate the DOS shown in Fig. Hartree and Exchange potentials V H (r), V X (r) (Eq. ( Eq. (66), Eq. (67), Eq. (72), Eq. ( Eq. ( Compute spectral poles El = Dll (Eq. ( Compute output charge density nout(r) (Eq. ( - so that it effectively describes the regimes of intermediate and high densities as well. However, Fig. In Fig. In Fig. In Fig. We may reduce the intensity of this peak at 2.5 eV . In Fig. In the previous section we have shown that MFbS-DFT reproduces features such as satellite peaks and spectral weight shifts which are usually obtained by solving the correlated electron problem directly, e.g. by means of LDA+DMFT. While these first MFbSDFT results look therefore very promising there is a large number of open questions and obvious possibilities to improve this method further. First, accurate moment functionals are required. The construction of accurate moment functionals should be possible based on Monte Carlo data of correlation functions such as those given in Eq. ( Second, it is desirable to derive gradient approximations for the moment functionals. Using local functionals that depend only on the spin densities for MFbSDFT misses effects related to their spatial inhomogeneity. Like GGA is an improvement over LDA, we expect that MF-bSDFT will become more accurate by adding gradient corrections to the functionals. Third, in this work we do not explore the calculation of total energies and atomic forces for structural relaxation. However, since force calculations in correlated materials are possible within LDA+DMFT we expect that total energies and forces may also be obtained within our MF-bSDFT approach. Fourth, one may use more than the first 4 moments. While the first four moments are sufficient to reproduce the quasi-particle band structure qualitatively correctly in the strong-correlation regime Fifth, perhaps the method of spectral moments may contribute to the understanding of SIE, because it is remarkable that setting μ c (r) = 0 in Eq. (2.22) of Ref. Sixth, it is an important open question how to extend the MFbSDFT approach to finite temperatures. In Ref. While accurate moment functionals are currently not available yet, the MFbSDFT method may also be used in practice in a way similar to LDA+U : In LDA+U the U and J parameters are usually chosen for a given material in order to add correlation effects that are not described by LDA. Similarly, one may use parameterizations of the moment functionals similar to the ones that we discussed in Sec. IV and choose the coefficients in the functional in order to optimize spectral features. We describe the concept of moment functionals, which allow us to obtain the spectral moments from functionals of the charge density. These functionals play a similar role in MFbSDFT as the exchange correlation functional does in KS-DFT. We derive explicit expressions for the moment functionals and use perturbation theory to investigate their scaling with the charge density. We describe an efficient algorithm to obtain the spectral function from the first four spectral moments. We demonstrate that MFbSDFT allows us to reproduce spectral features such as satellite peaks in Ni and lower and upper Hubbard bands in SrVO 3 . At this stage of its development, MFb-SDFT may be used in a way similar to LDA+U : The parameters in the moment functionals are chosen such that spectral features found in experiments are reproduced. in terms of the dimensionless density parameter . According to the scaling analysis above, it is sufficient to evaluate the integral for a single density parameter, e.g. (B6) The integral can be performed numerically using the VEGAS [39, 40] package for the Monte-Carlo integration of high-dimensional integrals. We obtain Next, we consider C (2+,16) . This integral is given by C (2+,16) σ = d 3 qd 3 k 4 d 3 k 5 (2π) 9 nV -2 v(q) × v(k 4k 5 + q)n k5-q n k4+q n k5 While the contractions C (2+,2) , C (2+, 16) , and C (2+,17) above are straightforward to evaluate with VEGAS [39, 40], the contributions C (2+,1) , C (2+,6) , C (2+,8) , C (2+, 12) , C (2+, 14) , and C (2+,15) require more care, because their integrands contain factors (v(q)) 2 , which lead to a strong divergence of the integrands in the limit q → 0. In contrast, the integrals of the contractions C (2+,2) , C (2+, 16) , and C (2+,17) contain only a single factor v(q), which does not produce a divergence, because it is compensated by the q 2 of d 3 q = q 2 sin(θ)dθdφ. However, these contributions may be grouped into pairs of two, where the two partners in a pair differ in sign. When we replace the Coulomb potential by v η (q) = 8π V [Ry][a B ] 1 q 2 + η 2 , (B12) we observe that the limit η → 0 is finite for the pair, while both partners in a pair diverge in this limit. Consider for example the pair composed of C (2+,1) and C (2+,14) . Evaluating the integrals We explicitly left the spin-degeneracy factor 2 in this equation.