Converting charge current into spin current is one of the main mechanisms exploited in spintronics. One prominent example is the Edelstein effect, namely the generation of a magnetization in response to an external electric field, which can be realized in systems with lack of inversion symmetry. If a system has electrons with an orbital angular momentum character, an orbital magnetization can be generated by the applied electric field giving rise to the so-called orbital Edelstein effect. Oxide heterostructures are the ideal platform for these effects due to the strong spin-orbit coupling and the lack of inversion symmetries. Beyond a gate-tunable spin Edelstein effect, we predict an orbital Edelstein effect an order of magnitude larger then the spin one at the (111) LaAlO3/SrTiO3 interface. We model the material as a bilayer of t2g orbitals using a tight-binding approach, while transport properties are obtained in the Boltzmann approach. We give an effective model at low filling which explains the non-trivial behaviour of the Edelstein response, showing that the hybridization between the electronic bands crucially impacts the Edelstein susceptibility. Introduction. The spintronics is an emergent field that exploits the intrinsic spin of the electrons, in addition to its charge. The goal is to produce devices which combine information storage, sensing, and processing in a single platform. In view of their characteristics, these devices could in principle overcome the performances of standard electronic devices in terms of data processing speed and consumption where H TB contains the direct and indirect first neighbour hopping terms, whose amplitude t D and t I are fixed in Ref. where k is expressed in units of the in-plane lattice constant ã = 2/3a 0 = 2/3 • 0.3905 nm, E i is the renormalized dispersion expanded to second order at k: L i and S i are the i-th components of the orbital and spin angular momentum operator for L = 1 and S = 1/2, L 111 is the projection of the angular momentum along the (111) direction, n111 is a unitary vector along the (111) direction, the term k × L is the orbital Rashba whose strength is included in the coefficient F = 0.0035 eV (depending on v which is fixed to 0.2 eV), and ε 0 is an energy constant. The expressions and the numerical values of the coefficients in Eq. ( The electronic band structure in the low energy region is shown in Fig. where χ αβ is the Edelstein susceptibility and E β is the electric field in the β direction. χ αβ is the sum of two contributions: a spin contribution χ S αβ and an orbital one χ L αβ . We use the Boltzmann approach within the time relaxation approximation to compute the Edelstein susceptibility where S i n ( k) is the mean value over the eigenstates of the n-th band, μ b is the Bohr magneton, h is the reduced Plank's constant, S cell is the unit cell area, and δf is the modification of the thermal distribution f th in linear response regime, which is expressed as Here τ 0 is the relaxation time, q is the charge of the electrons. Therefore where O α = 2S α or L α . Due to the anti-symmetric property of the χ αβ A similar decomposition is adopted for L. By substituting Eq. ( The magnitude of this quantity is an indicator of how much the hybridization of the doublets is important for EE or OEE. The values of χ O,μν XY for different benchmark chemical potential are represented in Fig. The effective 2D single-particle Hamiltonian originating from the three t 2g orbitals of the Ti-atoms in the bilayer reads where H TB is the hopping Hamiltonian which in k-space can be written as: where d iασ, k is the annihilation operator of the electron with 2D dimensionless quasi-momentum k = ã K, where K is the quasi-momentum, occupying the orbital i = xy, yz, zx belonging to the layer α, β = Ti 1 , Ti 2 and of spin σ = ±1/2. The matrix t αβ i (t D , t I , k), in the basis {d yz , d zx , d xy } ⊗ {Ti 1 , Ti 2 } is the following where the interlayer contributions are: The direct t D and indirect t I couplings have been fixed to the values t D = 0.5 eV and t I = 0.04 eV H SO is the atomic SOC coupling, which has the following expression where ε ijk is the Levi-Civita tensor, and σ k are the Pauli matrices. We fix the SOC coupling λ = 0.01 eV, as a typical order of magnitude The trigonal crystal field Hamiltonian H TRI takes into account the strain at the interface along the (111) direction. The physical origin of this strain is the possible contraction or dilatation of the crystalline planes along the (111) direction. This coupling has the form We fix ∆ = -0.005 eV as reported in Finally the last term H v describes an electric field in the (111) direction, orthogonal to the interface, which breaks the reflection symmetry. The Hamiltonian H v can thus be written as the sum of an electrostatic potential H v0 and a term which induces the breaking of the inversion symmetry in the orbitals where ξ Ti1/Ti2 = ±1. For ease of writing h αβ ij, k (v) is written as the sum of two components: an interlayer contribution, connecting the two layers Ti 1 and Ti 2 , as and an interlayer contribution as h Ti1Ti1 V pdπ 0 -(sin(κ1) + sin(κ2) + 2 sin(κ3)) (sin(κ1) + 2 sin(κ2) + sin(κ3)) (sin(κ1) + sin(κ2) + 2 sin(κ3)) 0 -(2 sin(κ1) + sin(κ2) + sin(κ3)) (sin(κ1) + 2 sin(κ2) + sin(κ3)) (2 sin(κ1) + sin(κ2) + sin(κ3)) 0 , (A9) with eV by comparison with the Rashba splitting evaluated in Ref. The whole matrix H TB + H v0 , which is 12 × 12, admits as eigenstates with where the orbitals are labeled by the index i and the spin using the index σ. The corresponding eigenvalues are which expanded at the second order in k gives the expression E i of Eqs. In order to obtain the orbital Rashba Hamiltonian on the six lower bands for low fillings, we simultaneously linearize the Electric field Hamiltonian H BIS of Eq. (A7) as a function of k and evaluate its matrix elements among the six lower states in Eq. (A11), evaluated for k = 0. The result is the following linear Hamiltonian: κ = (κ 1 , κ 2 , κ 3 ) as defined above and α, β and φ are the Eqs. (A12) evaluated for k = 0. Identifying now the matrix elements of the orbital angular momentum L matrices, we can rewrite this term as: where n111 is a unitary vector along the (111) direction. Having introduced the notation of the angular momentum we can write also the TB over the states (A11) using the same notation: Also H TRI can be expressed in the form where the Greek indices label the orbital degrees of freedom, while the Latin ones label the diagonalized bands. The change of basis due to the diagonalization is ruled by the following transformation An impurity can occupy the position of an atom in the lattice. Since the elementary cell contains two atoms (Ti 1 or Ti 2 ) we will distinguish the degrees of freedom as α = o, t, where t labels the kind of atom in the unit cell, while o labels all the other degrees of freedom (spin and orbitals). With the previous definitions, we write the impurity Hamiltonian of N impurities which can randomly occupy an atom position as where we summed over all the impurities i in the first sum, defined v the volume of the crystal, I oo = d 3 r V oo ( r-r i ), V oo ( r -r i ) the impurity potential, r i the position of the impurity, and ε k q ab,ti = oo I oo U k a,oti U p † b,o ti . We do not sum over the label t i because every impurity occupies only one layer. We take the following form for the impurity energy tensor This expression is the simplest coupling for the scattering: the electron maintains its spin and orbital character, preserving the symmetries of the system. This choice allows us to have control on the results and see the differences with respect to the constant τ . With such a definition we can perform a diagrammatic calculation for evaluating the self-energy due to the impurities. We perform an average over all the positions r i and all the layer occupation t i , which are independent distributions. The imaginary part of the self-energy for the a-th band located at the t layer, up to the second order of perturbation theory over the strength of the impurity potential, is where n i is the impurity density. This coincides with the inverse of the scattering time, and is shown in Fig. 