The ab-initio theory of charge transport in semiconductors typically employs the lowest-order perturbation theory in which electrons interact with one phonon (1ph). This theory is accepted to be adequate to explain the low-field mobility of non-polar semiconductors but has not been tested extensively beyond the low-field regime. Here, we report first-principles calculations of the electric field-dependence of the electron mobility of Si as described by the warm electron coefficient, β. Although the 1ph theory overestimates the low-field mobility by only around 20%, it overestimates β by over a factor of two over a range of temperatures and crystallographic axes. We show that the discrepancy in β is reconciled by inclusion of on-shell iterated 2-phonon (2ph) scattering processes, indicating that scattering from higher-order electron-phonon interactions is non-negligible even in non-polar semiconductors. Further, a ∼ 20% underestimate of the low-field mobility with 2ph scattering suggests that non-trivial cancellations may occur in the perturbative expansion of the electron-phonon interaction. Introduction.-Recent advances in the first-principles treatment of charge transport in semiconductors have enabled the calculation of the low-field electrical mobility without any adjustable parameters Methodological developments continue to be reported, including an ab-initio treatment of two-phonon scattering The accuracy of first-principles theory has been tested primarily by computing the lowfield mobility and comparing to the available experimental data at various temperatures and doping concentrations. The warm electron regime, defined as the regime in which the next-to-leading order term of the expansion of current density with electric field is nonnegligible, is of interest because it contains information on the band structure anisotropy Subsequent investigation led to the prediction Although scattering by the interaction of an electron with one phonon (1ph) has typically been employed in theoretical and Monte Carlo studies at low field and in the warm electron regime to interpret transport studies, Here, we report first-principles calculations of the warm electron tensor in Si. At the 1ph level of theory, both the low-field mobility and β are overestimated, with a marked discrepancy of β at 300 K of over a factor of two. To address this discrepancy, we compute the scattering due to sequential 1ph processes, corresponding to one of the terms at second-order in the electron-phonon interaction. The scattering rates are found to be comparable to those of 1ph scattering over a range of energies, and their inclusion eliminates the discrepancy in β. The resulting ∼ 20% underestimate of mobility suggests that accounting for cancellations of the two second-order terms of the electron-phonon interaction may be necessary to achieve quantitative agreement for both the mobility and β. Theory and numerical methods.-We begin by describing the numerical approach to compute the transport properties of electrons in Si in the warm electron regime. The low-field mobility calculation is now routine and has been extensively described in Refs. The warm electron regime is defined by electric fields for which the cubic term of the expansion of current density with electric field becomes non-negligible Equivalently, the warm electron tensor can be specified by the values of β along different crystallographic axes. The warm electron tensor has not been calculated previously by ab-initio methods. It may be obtained from the first-principles approach described in Sec. 2 of Ref. With the distribution function obtained, transport quantities can be obtained by appropriate Brillouin zone integrations. For the present study of electrons in Si, the electronic structure and electron-phonon matrix elements are computed on a coarse 8 × 8 × 8 grid using DFT and DFPT with Quantum Espresso Mobility and warm electron tensor.-Figure The warm electron coefficient β can be obtained by fitting the quadratic dependence of the mobility on electric field. We define the fitting range as that corresponding to a 0.1 percent increase in electron temperature, although the value of β is not particularly sensitive to this choice. Because β depends on the direction of the applied field, we denote β without subscripts to indicate the electric field is applied along the [100] crystallographic axis. In Figure The prediction from the 1ph level of theory is clearly larger than the experimental values by around 150% across all temperatures. This discrepancy is markedly larger than that of the low-field mobility. Figures Role of higher-order phonon scattering.-Figures Therefore, we considered whether higher-order phonon scattering processes could account for the poor agreement. The 1ph level of theory accounts for the leading-order electronphonon scattering process for which electrons scatter with one phonon. We implemented a treatment of the next-to-leading order scattering processes where electrons scatter with two phonons using the ab-initio approach described in Ref. The computed one and two-phonon scattering rates are shown in Fig. We now examine the impact of the on-shell 2ph rates on the low-field mobility and β. In Figure as for the mobility. Therefore, the increased scattering rates contributed by on-shell 2ph processes can account for part of the relatively larger decrease in β. To examine how much of the decrease in β was due to the increased scattering rates, we scaled the 1ph scattering on-shell 2ph (green), 2e (brown), 2a (purple), and 1e1a (gray) scattering rates versus energy at 300 K. For energies less than 100 meV, the range relevant to transport properties at 300 K, the 1e1a rates are largest and have the dominant effect on transport properties. rates by a multiplicative factor so that the resulting low-field mobility was equal to the low-field mobility in the 1+2ph case. The DC mobility versus electric field and β were then calculated. The scaled 1ph results can be seen in Figure Discussion.-We now discuss the finding that multi-phonon processes are relevant to transport in non-polar semiconductors. Previous experiment and modeling works have suggested that 2ph processes could account for deviations in the predicted temperature dependence of the mobility from the 1ph deformation potential theory. In particular, two-phonon deformation potentials were extracted from second-order Raman scattering measurements and using these values in transport calculations improved the agreement of both the variation of the low-field mobility and β with temperature We additionally consider the role of other multi-phonon processes that have been neglected in the present study and their potential impact on the transport properties. First, the addition of the neglected off-shell 2ph processes will further increase the scattering rates and decrease both the mobility and β; however, Fig. To estimate the magnitude of this cancellation, we removed all two-phonon processes that involve acoustic phonons of energy less than 5 meV and recalculated the low-field mobility. The result is 1261 cm 2 V -1 s -1 , which is in near-quantitative agreement with experiment. This result indicates that taking into account the cancellation between the two 2ph vertices may be needed for predictive accuracy. Further tests of the role of multi-phonon processes may be obtained by calculating the free carrier absorption spectrum using the methods of Ref. Summary.-We have presented a first-principles calculation of the warm electron transport properties of Si. At the 1ph level of theory that is typically regarded as adequate for non-polar semiconductors, the low-field mobility is overestimated by around 20% while β is overestimated by over 100% across a wide range of temperatures and crystallographic axes. The discrepancy in β is reconciled by inclusion of 2ph scattering, which is found to exhibit a scattering rate that is comparable to that from 1ph processes. The underestimate of the mobility at this level of theory provides evidence for the occurrence of a non-trivial cancellation of second-order terms in the electron-phonon interaction. Plugging in the expansion in Eq. 2 again for the second derivative term, we obtain Discarding the terms of order E due to symmetry, Eq. 5 becomes To simplify this expression, we assume that f 0 ∝ e -E/kT , v x ∝ √ E for a parabolic band, and τ ∝ E s . The prefactors for these quantities are lumped into a constant, c 0 . Plugging these expressions into Eq. 6, we obtain Carrying out the second derivative with respect to energy E in Eq. 7, we obtain ∂f ∂E = ∂f 0 ∂E -c 0 e -E/kT kT × (eE) 2 × (s + 0.5)(s -0.5)E s-1.5 -2 kT (s + 0.5)E s-0.5 + 1 kT We therefore identify an expression for β up to a prefactor as Due to the terms with E 2s and E 2s+1 in the expansion for β, the contribution to the integral from low energies is increased compared to that for the low-field mobility. For instance, for s < 0 as occurs for most semiconductors, the leading term in the integrand for β will have a negative exponent, causing β to depend on the low-energy scattering rates to a larger extent compared to the low-field mobility. 