Optically-active spin defects hosted in hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) are promising candidates for the development of a two-dimensional (2D) quantum sensing unit. Here, we demonstrate quantitative magnetic imaging with hBN flakes doped with negatively-charged boron-vacancy (V - B ) centers through neutron irradiation. As a proof-of-concept, we image the magnetic field produced by CrTe2, a van der Waals ferromagnet with a Curie temperature slightly above 300 K. Compared to other quantum sensors embedded in 3D materials, the advantages of the hBN-based magnetic sensor described in this work are its ease of use, high flexibility and, more importantly, its ability to be placed in close proximity to a target sample. Such a sensing unit will likely find numerous applications in 2D materials research by offering a simple way to probe the physics of van der Waals heterostructures. Quantum sensing technologies based on solid-state spin defects have already shown a huge potential to cover the growing need for high-precision sensors In this work, we analyze the performances of hBN flakes doped with V - B centers by neutron irradiation for quantitative magnetic field imaging. As a proofof-concept, we image the magnetic field produced by CrTe 2 , a van der Waals ferromagnet with in-plane magnetic anisotropy, which exhibits a Curie temperature (T c ) slightly above 300 K X W e T b q P I 5 w j F O a Z x 0 t X K I N i 7 w 5 n v G C V + 1 K i 7 Q H b f a d q u U y z S F + L e 3 p C 5 5 1 k R 8 = < / l a t e x i t > ⌫ + < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " Y i i 6 s 6 U 8 z 0 n a V U 7 p s D X x F Y + 4 CrTe 2 from degradation of its magnetic properties. For each sample, the thickness of the different layers was inferred by atomic force microscopy (AFM). All experiments described below are carried out under ambient conditions with a scanning confocal microscope employing a green laser excitation, a high-numerical aperture microscope objective (NA= 0.7) and a photon counting detection module. At each point of the sample, optical illumination combined with microwave excitation enables the measurement of the ESR frequencies of the V - B center by recording its spin-dependent PL intensity We start by studying a heterostructure consisting of a 64-nm-thick CrTe 2 flake covered with a 85-nm-thick hBN sensing layer [see Fig. where R is the rate of detected photons, C the contrast of the magnetic resonance and ∆ν its linewidth [Fig. From the parameters {R, C, ∆ν} measured at different optical powers, we extract the power-dependent magnetic field sensitivity. As shown in Fig. Interestingly, the gain in sensitivity with optical power is accompanied by a slight reduction of the zero-field splitting parameter D = (ν + + ν -)/2, whose relative shift δD is plotted in the inset of Fig. To perform a quantitative analysis of the recorded magnetic map, we simulate the distribution of the magnetic field component B z produced by a CrTe 2 flake with constant thickness and uniform in-plane magnetization M. This vector is characterized by its azimuthal angle φ M in the (x, y) sample plane and norm M . The geometry of the flake used for the simulation is extracted from a topography image recorded by AFM [Fig. Having identified the orientation of the magnetization vector, we then estimate its norm M by analyzing the stray field amplitude recorded at the edges of the CrTe 2 flake. Besides being linked to the magnetization norm, the Zeeman shift of the ESR frequency measured at each pixel of the scan also results from both (i) a lateralaveraging due to the diffraction-limited spatial resolution of the magnetic microscope and (ii) an averaging over the vertical (z) distribution of optically-active V - B centers in the hBN sensing layer. Indeed, neutron irradiation creates V - B centers throughout the hBN volume, in contrast to ion implantation techniques which lead to the creation of defects at a depth linked to the ion implantation energy Next we study a heterostructure involving a thinner (15 nm) hBN sensing layer in order to rely on an ensemble of V - B centers localized closer to the magnetic sample, thus reducing vertical averaging effects [Fig. In summary, we have shown that V - B spin defects hosted in hBN layers can be used for quantitative magnetic imaging with a sensitivity around 100 μT/ √ Hz and a spatial resolution limited by diffraction at the micron scale. Although much better performances can be obtained with other quantum sensors such as the NV defect in diamond, the key advantages of the hBN-based magnetic sensor described in this work are its ease of use, high flexibility and, more importantly, its ability to be placed in close proximity to a target sample. Such a sensing unit will likely find numerous applications in 2D materials research by offering a simple way to probe in situ the physics of van der Waals heterostructrures, with optimal performance obtained for the study of nonmetallic 2D materials, for which PL quenching effects can be avoided. An improvement in magnetic sensitivity by at least one order of magnitude could be achieved by optimizing the microwave excitation used to perform ESR spectroscopy 