A low voltage, wide bandwidth compact electro-optic modulator is a key building block in the realization of tomorrow's communication and networking needs. Recent advances in the fabrication and application of thin-film lithium niobate, and its integration with photonic integrated circuits based in silicon make it an ideal platform for such a device. In this work, a high-extinction dual-output folded electro-optic Mach Zehnder modulator in the silicon nitride and thin-film lithium niobate material system is presented. This modulator has an interaction region length of 11 mm and a physical length of 7.8 mm. The device demonstrates a fiber-to-fiber loss of roughly 12 dB using on-chip fiber couplers and DC half wave voltage (Vπ) of less than 3.0 V, or a modulation efficiency (Vπ•L) of 3.3 V•cm. The device shows a 3 dB bandwidth of roughly 30 GHz. Notably, the device demonstrates a power extinction ratio over 45 dB at each output port without the use of cascaded directional couplers or additional control circuitry; roughly 31 times better than previously reported devices. Paired with a balanced photo-diode receiver, this modulator can be used in various photonic communication systems. Such a detecting scheme is compatible with complex modulation formats such as differential phase shift keying and differential quadrature phase shift keying, where a dualoutput, ultra-high extinction device is fundamentally paramount to low-noise operation of the system. The systems that support the world's communication networks are showing their age If an optical modulator is to be integrated with existing systems, it should maintain a small device footprint, feature a wide RF bandwidth and remain environmentally stable for reliable operation in any environment Si-based free carrier plasma dispersion-based modulation platform is then ruled out in favor of lithium niobatebased modulation, where the ideal platform for a lowvoltage, high-bandwidth and environmentally-stable modulator should show a strong electro-optic (Pockels) effect, and a linear response to an applied modulation voltage irrespective of the optical power and wavelength Commercial, or bulk LiNbO 3 modulators use titanium (Ti)-diffused waveguides to carry the optical mode, but suffer poor optical confinement (∆n < 0.02) which results in a large optical mode size Recently, advances in crystal ion sliced (CIS) films of LiNbO 3 on insulator (TFLNOI), which guide optical modes almost 20 times smaller than their bulk-LiNbO 3 counterparts have emerged as an answer to some of these issues One must also consider the packaging and size of the device. A conventional push-pull electro-optic modulator utilizes a straight waveguide before and after the interaction region, where light enters one side of the device and exits the opposite side, requiring fiber coupling to both sides of the device simultaneously In previous work, a waveguide crossing was used to ensure both sections of the modulator, before and after the fold, contribute to the total modulation of the device Through careful design of input and output splitters, and the use of symmetric MMI splitters, an extinction ratio over 45 dB is achieved at each output port. This design does not require cascaded directional couplers and additional control circuitry to control splitting imbalance, but the optical loss in both waveguides in the interaction region of the modulator must be closely matched through careful fabrication to achieve the high extinction ratio In this work, a high extinction ratio hybrid LiNbO 3 -SiN x electro-optic MZM with two equal and opposite outputs is designed, fabricated and characterized. Fiber couplers are used at the input and output to lower the total insertion loss to 12 dB. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time a high extinction ratio, folded, LiNbO 3 -SiN x dual-output MZM with a waveguide crossing has been demonstrated in this material platform. The device presented shows a measured DC-Vπ of 3.0 V with an 11 mm interaction region, and an extinction ratio of over 45 dB. The 3D aerial view of the folded electro-optic modulator, including thermal biasing heaters is shown in The material stack, from top to bottom, is comprised of a 450 nm buffer layer of PECVD SiO 2 (T BUF ), 100 nm of PECVD SiN x deposited on 300 nm X-cut thin-film LiNbO 3 , which is bonded to a 4.7 μm SiO 2 layer (T BBUF ), atop a 500 μm Si handle. To efficiently guide the first order transverse electric (TE) mode, the width (W SiN ) and thickness (T SiN ) of the striploaded SiN x waveguide is chosen to be 2 μm and 100 nm, respectively. The simulated fundamental TE mode in the interaction region of the device can be seen in Fig. A 2x2 MMI splitter that recombines the light to produce an intensity-modulated signal is deployed on the output of the device. The symmetric 2x2 multi-mode interference (MMI) splitter yields two outputs which are inversely proportional to each other. When the device is biased such that one output is at it's peak intensity, the other output is at it's lowest, or null intensity. The device can then be paired with a balanced PD receiver to eliminate any common-mode noise between both outputs An MMI splitter and combiner are used as 3 dB couplers to both split and recombine light before and after the interaction region of the device, respectively. Directional couplers and Y-splitters which require an extremely small gap between waveguides are sensitive to fabrication errors To achieve an inversely-proportional, balanced output from the MZM, a 2x2 MMI is used at the output of the device following the interaction region. The 2x2 MMI operates based on the self-imaging principle, where any input field is reconstructed periodically after a certain propagation distance Here, n r is the effective index of the multimode region, w e is the width of the multimode region (W MMI ), N is the number of self-images (inputs and outputs), and λ 0 is the input wavelength in vacuum. The n eff of the lowest order TE modes in the MMI region are found to be 2.128018, and 2.129952, respectively, using Lumerical's MODE solver. This results in a multimode region length of 618 μm. For optimization of the initial design parameters, Lumerical's MODE simulation software is used. With W MMI = 15 μm and S MMI = 8 μm, the final length of the structure is found to be L MMI = 640 μm, which is very close to the length given by the self-imaging method. For further reduction of the mode-index mismatch between the MMI region and the input waveguide, linear tapers of length (L TPR ) 52.5 μm and width (W TPR ) 7 μm are introduced at the input and output section, shown in Fig. The high frequency electrical response of the GSG electrodes is characterized through a 2-port measurement using a Keysight PNA-X network analyzer. The n Og of the fundamental TE mode is found to be roughly 2.14, while the group index of the RF mode in the air-clad and UV15-clad electrodes (n RF ) is roughly 1.85 and 2.10, respectively. The index mismatch between the optical and RF mode is then 0.04 with index matching fluid, with the RF mode propagating faster than the optical mode. Fabrication of the folded modulator begins on a 300 nm thick X-cut TFLNOI substrate procured from NanoLN TM . A 4.7 μm layer of thermal SiO 2 below the LiNbO 3 is bonded to a 500 μm thick Si handle. Electron-beam lithography (EBL) is used to pattern alignment structures in TiW (10%/90%) for future lithographic steps. A 100 nm thick layer of SiN x is deposited on top of the thin-film LiNbO 3 using PECVD. This layer will be used to define the SiN x strip-loaded waveguides. The refractive index for the SiN x is 1.943 at 1550 nm. EBL is again used to define the optical structures. The features are defined via dry etching of the SiN x layer in an inductively coupled plasma (ICP). A 2 μm SiO 2 buffer layer is then deposited using PECVD. A laser writer is used to pattern the regions where an increased thickness of the SiO 2 buffer layer will protect the optical mode from interacting with an overhead Au electrode. The rest of the SiO 2 buffer layer is reduced to 450 nm thickness via dry etching in an ICP. To reduce RF absorption losses, the device is annealed in an O 2 environment. A seed layer is deposited onto the sample using an Angstrom metal sputtering system and the electrodes are defined via EBL. An electroplating process is then used to realize the 1 μm thick Au electrodes. . This process is expanded upon in previous work A tunable telecom laser (Keysight 81608A) is used at a wavelength of 1550 nm and connected to an OZ Optics 1x4 lensed fiber array, with a mode field diameter (MFD) of roughly 2.5 μm through a polarization-maintaining (PM) fiber patch cable. The laser output from the lensed fiber array is free-space coupled to the on-chip fiber coupler. Due to the MFD mismatch between the lensed fiber and on-chip coupler, there is a 4.44 dB coupling loss per facet. Now, the tunable laser source is replaced with a reflectometer/lightwave analyzer (Luna OBR 6415), and the optical back-scatter and propagation loss from a reference structure is measured and shown in Fig. The 2x2 MMI must provide two arms with inversely proportional field intensities, varying with the phase difference between both input ports if it is to be used in a MZM configuration for a balanced link. Because one output of the ideal 2x2 MMI contains a π 2 phase shift with respect to the other when fed through one input arm, and considering the reciprocal nature of the device, illuminating both input arms with phase shift of π enables switching of light from one port to the other port. We can use the field transfer matrix of a 2x2 MMI, shown in Eq. ( The power transferred through each arm is modeled using MMI can maintain an equal splitting ratio across a range of optical wavelengths, where a peak splitting difference of 1.4% is found at the 1530 nm input wavelength. This still supports an ER of over 40 dB, shown later in this work. In Fig. The MZM functionality as an electro-optic (EO) transducer is measured at low frequencies and plotted in Fig. The same experiment is then performed using a thermooptic (TO) phase shifter near the fold of the device to ensure the device can be biased to null, quadrature and peak bias. The input power is swept from 100 mW to 350 mW and the output of both photodetectors is plotted alongside the applied TO phase shifter power in Fig. Through careful design of the 2x2 MMI splitter/combiner used at the output of the device, the optical extinction ratio can be improved compared to previous work which employs a 2x1 MMI combiner To solve this, we have placed a 2x2 MMI after the interaction region to serve as the splitter/combiner at the output of the MZM. Now, moving from a peak to null bias condition will shift the light from one output port to another rather than exciting unwanted substrate modes. The addition of linear tapers on the input and output of the MMI further prevents reflections cause by MFD mismatch between the multimode region and the waveguides leading to substrate modes. Moreover, because the optical mode is primarily confined in the LiNbO 3 slab, the multimode region of the 2x2 MMI must be relatively long compared to Silicon on Insulator (SOI) or silicon on LiNbO 3 strip-loaded waveguides, which maintain a higher index contrast than SiN x on LiNbO 3 . As such, the LiNbO 3 -SiN x material system affords greater fabrication tolerance, where, for example, a +/-25 nm variation in the length of the multimode region is only .004% of the total length. To demonstrate the ability of our 2x2 MMI to improve the extinction ratio of the MZM, we have measured the extinc-tion ratio of the device under forward and reverse operation. In forward operation, light enters the device through the input port as defined in To validate these results, the optical transmission in is then collected using an optical power meter, and plotted to find the static extinction ratio of the device as the bias condition is swept through null bias for each output port, shown in Fig. The same experiment is then performed with the device in reverse operation. Here, the laser source is connected to either output port 1 or 2 as defined in Fig. A 2x2 MMI transfer matrix is used to simulate the result after the fact to find the input power and splitting imbalance errors. The transfer matrix for this is shown below: Ae jφ A Be jφ B P imbal 1 . (3) Here, A and B are the input power of both input ports while A and B represent the output power of the MMI output ports. The term φ 0 is the constant phase offset that the MMI imparts on the optical mode. The π/2 term accounts for the ideal π/2 phase offset between the output ports when the MMI is fed by one input port. The term φ imbal accounts for any discrepancies between the ideal π/2 phase offset and the actual phase offset, which may be different due to fabrication tolerances or design issues. Similarly, the term P imbal accounts for unequal splitting within the MMI. With this, the output power of output ports A and B , is It is shown that this aligns well with the measured data and demonstrates that the 2x2 MMI will still produce a high ER when input power and splitting ratio are not perfectly balanced. If fabrication issues are expected, an additional thermal heater can be placed on the top or bottom of the MMI to tune the optical splitting ratio and account for fabrication errors In this work, a high extinction ratio hybrid LiNbO 3 -SiN x electro-optic MZM with two equal and opposite outputs is designed, fabricated and characterized. The device uses a 2x2 MMI at the output to provide two inversely proportional outputs with exceptional extinction ratio performance. Fiber couplers are used at the input and output to lower the total insertion loss to 12 dB. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time a high extinction ratio, folded, dual output LiNbO 3 -SiN x electro-optic dual-output MZM with a waveguide crossing has been demonstrated in this material platform. The device presented shows a measured DC-Vπ of 3.0 V with an 11 mm interaction region, and an extinction ratio of over 45 dB. This design does not require cascaded directional couplers to control splitting imbalance, and shows repeatability across multiple devices. This is nearly 31 times higher than high-extinction ratio single-output modulators in literature today. There is a clear path forward to optimizing either or both the low and high frequency operation depending on application-specific requirements. In future work, capacitively-loaded traveling-wave electrodes will be incorporated to increase the operational bandwidth. A dual-output MZM can be paired with a balanced PD receiver and used in many photonic communication systems where a high extinction, dual output device is paramount to the high-performance operation of the system as a whole. This enables heavy, lossy and space-consuming cables to be replaced with much lighter optical fibers. A balanced PD receiver pair is capable of detecting both the signal amplitude and phase information and is compatible with complex modulation formats used in DPSK and DQPSK systems. Moreover, the demonstration of the 2x2 MMI coupler to reach >45 dB ER lends itself to exotic applications such as IR and mid-IR Bracewell nulling interferometry for exoplanet detection VOLUME 4, 2016 VOLUME 4, 2016 VOLUME 4, 2016 VOLUME 4, 2016 VOLUME 4, 2016 