Optical control of electronic properties is essential for future electric devices 1,2 . Manipulating such properties has been limited to the microscale in spatial volume due to the wave nature of light; however, scaling down the volume is in extremely high demand. In this study, we demonstrate optical switching within a nanometric spatial volume in an organic electric material. Photochromic materials such as diarylethene derivatives exhibit semiconducting and insulating properties on ultraviolet (UV) and visible light, respectively, which are promising for optical switching and memory 3,4 . To control the wavelength between visible and UV light at the nanoscale, we employed plasmon nanofocusing, which allows the creation of a nanolight source at the apex of a metallic tapered structure over a broad frequency range by focusing of propagating plasmons 5,6 . We utilized an aluminum tapered structure and realized in-situ wavelength control between visible and UV light at the nanoscale. Using this method, nanoscale optical switching between the two states of diarylethene was demonstrated. The switching performance was confirmed for at least nine cycles without degradation. This demonstration would make a significant step forward toward next-generation nanoscale optoelectronic devices and stimulate diverse scientific fields owing to the unique concept of broadband plasmon nanofocusing. Organic materials have played a vital role in the past few decades, contributing to drastic developments in flexible electronic technologies and devices, such as electronic memories, displays, and solar cells. The unique and multifunctional nature of organic electronic materials promises future applications that cannot be developed using silicon-based technologies For such optoelectronic devices, scaling down the photochromic reaction volume has always been in exceptionally high demand for miniaturizing future optoelectronic devices, and is also an interesting subject for providing a new direction for fundamental chemistry and organic electronics. Meanwhile, it has been a long-standing challenge because of the diffraction limit of light, which does not allow light to be focused to less than approximately half the wavelength of light. Only under specific conditions, such as on an isolated single photochromic fluorescent molecule, the optical switching has been demonstrated In general, shrinking the illumination area of light is enabled by localizing light near a metallic nanostructure, which works as an optical antenna for light confinement through localized plasmon resonance It has been widely exploited as a popular tool for creating nanoscale reaction fields and inducing various photochemical reactions at the nanoscale with high efficiencies In this study, we achieved optical switching within a nanometric volume of photochromic materials. To this end, we completely abandoned the method to create nanoscale light field from the optical antenna technique based on localized plasmon resonance. In this study, we adopted plasmon nanofocusing as an alternative method for inducing a nanoscale light source. Plasmon nanofocusing is a phenomenon in which plasmons are excited near the broader end of a metallic tapered structure and propagate toward the apex with adiabatically compressing their energies, which eventually create a strong light field localized at the nanometrically sharp apex of the tapered structure We have proposed the generation of a white nanolight source through broadband plasmon nanofocusing and successfully exploited it for super-resolution hyperspectral optical imaging Because plasmons are excited by an excitation laser at the slit located far from the apex of the tapered structure, the nanolight source is spatially well separated from the excitation light, which is not the case for optical antennas because it requires directional illumination of the optical antennas. In particular, this is highly effective for optical switching because we can avoid unwanted photochromic reactions by the excitation light near the nanolight source. Considering the high freedom of the choice of wavelength and background-free features, we utilized plasmon nanofocusing as the best suitable way to achieve optical switching within a small volume. We selected diarylethene derivative among various types of photochromic materials, such as azobenzene and spiropyran, because it is one of the most popular and best-suited materials for device applications owing to its high thermal stability and excellent electrical properties Plasmon nanofocusing can be excited over a wide frequency range; however, the excitation of plasmon nanofocusing in the UV range is not straightforward. Broadband plasmon nanofocusing has been demonstrated with a silver or gold tapered structure in previous studies, in which it covers the entire visible range to the entire near-infrared range After confirming both the UV and visible plasmon nanofocusing on an aluminum tapered structure for nanoscale optical switching in the numerical simulation, we went ahead to fabricate a tapered structure similar to the simulation model on a glass substrate as a switching platform, followed by the fabrication procedure shown in Figure We implemented optical measurements with the fabricated structure to observe plasmon nanofocusing under both visible and UV light. Figure As we developed a switching system for diarylethene molecules, in which we can freely switch the wavelength of the nanolight source between the visible and UV range, we performed optical switching of diarylethene molecules in this setup. We dropped a 100 mM diarylethene solution on the tapered structure and allowed it to dry. First, we excited plasmon nanofocusing with a supercontinuum laser as visible light in this setup. All diarylethene molecules were converted to a closed-ring form by shining the entire substrate with a UV lamp prior to the open-ring reaction using visible plasmon nanofocusing. While broadband plasmon nanofocusing is utilized for optical switching, it is also useful for monitoring the optical properties of the diarylethene molecules at the apex. By detecting the broadband scattering spectrum from the apex, it is possible to evaluate changes in the absorption properties of the samples only near the apex 5 (See Methods and Fig. Nanoscale optical switching of organic photochromic materials was achieved by exploiting the unique advantages of plasmon nanofocusing. As organic photochromic materials such as diarylethene molecules are indispensable materials for future organic optoelectronic devices, this demonstration would be a significant step forward for employing photochromic materials in the nanoscale regime and for realizing nanoscale organic optoelectronic devices. It was not possible to evaluate the actual size of the nanoscale optical switching at this moment; however, it should be as small as the apex size (10-20 nm) due to limited throughput. In this sense, plasmon nanofocusing has a strong benefit in truly accessing the nanoscale. Although more developments will be necessary to exploit this technique for actual devices, we expect that further improvements will be made in the near future. The scaling down of a photochemical phenomenon that we achieved using broadband plasmon nanofocusing would have a huge impact not only for organic electronics but also for various scientific fields. Our concept of broadband plasmon nanofocusing provides an innovative tool for photochemistry, as it can be applied to several different photochemical reactions. Different photochemical reactions can be induced at exactly the same location within a nanometric volume by applying different wavelengths sequentially, which significantly improves the flexibility of nanoscale photochemistry. We can provide a small reaction field where the light wavelength can be freely controlled from the UV to the near-infrared range for chemical reactions. Furthermore, the background-free scheme effectively works as another strong advantage, as no by-products are produced by incident light. We have also made several developments in this research to realize nanoscale optical switching, and the first demonstration of UV plasmon nanofocusing is of great importance. This extremely expanded the capability of the plasmon nanofocusing technique. The wavelength range of plasmon nanofocusing has now been extended to such a high-energy wavelength region, which will call for several other potential applications not only in photochemistry but also in wide fields of optics and photonics. The broadband property of plasmon nanofocusing spanning over the UV to near-infrared regions would be highly beneficial for various optical analytical techniques such as absorption spectroscopy, Raman spectroscopy, and photoluminescence measurements. Moreover, further extending the wavelength range toward the mid-infrared region to create a mid-infrared broadband nanolight source, highly sensitive molecular sensing and analysis through infrared absorption spectroscopy would be possible. In this study, we have used broadband plasmon nanofocusing in a more active way to manipulate physical and chemical properties of samples. More precise and flexible manipulation of samples would be expected by involving nanoscale optical trapping via the broadband plasmon nanofocusing. Plasmon nanofocusing is becoming an innovative but practical tool for providing high freedom of wavelength to nanoscale experiments, which possesses great promise in diverse scientific fields. The nanoscale optical switching that we achieved in this study would be a milestone for future developments in fields ranging from organic electronics and photochemistry to nanophotonics and nanotechnology. We used the FDTD method (Poynting, Fujitsu Co. Ltd.) to simulate the electric field distributions around an aluminum tapered structure during the plasmon nanofocusing process. The apex size and angle of the tapered structure were 10 nm and 25 degrees, respectively. The thickness was set to 40 nm. The slit was designed as a plasmon coupler on the tapered structure. The slit width was 200 nm, and the distance between the apex and slit was 4 μm. The slit was illuminated with visible or UV light. The wavelength for visible light was 530 nm, and that for UV light was 375 nm, which are efficient wavelengths for open-and closed-ring reactions, respectively. The real and imaginary parts of permittivity of aluminum were set to -20.61 and 3.92, respectively, for the wavelength of 375 nm, and -40.07 and 11.92, respectively, for the wavelength of 530 nm. The tapered structure was placed on a glass substrate. The calculation model was discretized for simulation. The grid size was assigned non-uniformly. It was 1 nm near the apex, and in the range of 10-20 nm in the other areas for sufficient calculation accuracy and affordable simulation time. Further details are provided in the Supplementary Information (Fig. First, a thin aluminum layer was deposited by physical vapor deposition (VPC-1100, ULVAC, Inc.) on a coverslip that was cleaned with piranha solution in advance. The deposition rate and thickness were 1.5 nm/s and 40 nm, respectively. A smooth aluminum layer was obtained under these conditions (Fig. Next, we dropped 10 μL of PMMA solution (495PMMA A Resists, KAYAKU Advanced Materials, Inc.) on the substrate, and spin-casted it using a spin coater. The coating process started at a rotation rate of 500 rpm for 5 s, gradually increased from 500 to 1,000 rpm in the next 30 s, and continued further for the next 60 s at 1,000 rpm. The PMMA layer was formed on the tapered structure with a thickness of approximately 100 nm, which was confirmed by atomic force microscopy. A hole near the apex of the tapered structure was subsequently fabricated by FIB milling. A thin platinum layer was deposited with a thickness of 1.5 nm as a conductive layer on the PMMA layer using an ion-sputtering device (JEC-3000FC, JEOL Ltd.) prior to the fabrication of the hole. A platinum coating was necessary for FIB observation and fabrication. The hole size was 500 × 500 nm 2 , as shown in Fig. A supercontinuum laser (SuperK COMPACT, NKT Photonics) and a UV laser (LSR375NL-150, NaKu Technology Co., Ltd.) were used as the visible and UV light sources, respectively. The better coherence of the supercontinuum laser compared with other ordinary white light sources allows to tightly focus visible light to the slit. They were focused on the slit using an oil-immersion objective lens (NA: 1.45, UPLXAPO100XO, Olympus). The polarization of the incident light was oriented perpendicular to the slit, where the coupling efficiency between the incident light and plasmons was maximized. Optical images of the plasmon nanofocusing were obtained using a CMOS camera (VLG2020e-SP, Visualix). To evaluate changes in the absorption properties of diarylethene molecules at the apex of the tapered structure, the scattered signal from the apex through plasmon nanofocusing of visible light was detected by a CCD camera (PIXIS100BR_eXcelon, Teledyne Technologies Inc.) through a spectroscope (IsoPlane 160, Teledyne Technologies Inc.). A pinhole (diameter: 200 μm) was used as the confocal element to extract only the scattered signal from the apex. The details are described in the Supplementary Information (Fig. We used 1,2-bis [2-methylbenzo[b]thiophen-3-yl]-3,3,4,4,5,5-hexafluoro-1-cyclopentene (B5623, Tokyo Chemical Industry, Co. Ltd.) as one of the most typical diarylethene derivatives. The molecular structure is shown in Fig. We used the finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) method (Poynting, Fujitsu Co. Ltd.) to calculate the optical properties of the tapered aluminum structure on plasmon nanofocusing. We designed a tapered structure as shown in Fig. The grid size was non-uniformly assigned, where it was 1 nm near the apex, and 10-20 nm in the other areas for sufficient calculation accuracy and affordable simulation time. As a comparison to the aluminum tapered structure, we simulated distribution maps of the electric field intensity near the apexes of silver and gold tapered structures. Silver and gold are representative plasmonic materials. The structural designs were exactly the same as those in Fig. These values for gold are -0.76 and 6.47 for the wavelength of 375 nm, and -6.29 and 2.04 for the wavelength of 530 nm. In the case of silver, plasmon nanofocusing was observed at 530 nm (Fig. . This is even worse in the case of gold because plasmon nanofocusing was not observed at wavelengths of 530 and 375 nm (Figs. Herein, we describe the details of the fabrication procedure of the aluminum tapered structures used for nanoscale optical switching. A coverslip was cleaned in piranha solution for 30 min at 120 °C. A thin aluminum layer was thereafter deposited on the coverslip via vacuum vapor deposition (VPC-1100, ULVAC, Inc.). The evaporation rate was as fast as 1.5 nm/s such that a smooth aluminum layer was formed, as discussed in the next section. The thickness of the aluminum layer is 40 nm. We then fabricated tapered structures using focused ion beam (FIB) lithography (FB2200, Hitachi High-Tech, Corp.), as shown in Fig. The surface roughness of the aluminum tapered structure is crucial for facilitating efficient plasmon propagation toward the apex. Thus, we determined that the surface was sufficiently smooth. Figure The height fluctuated within a range of 2 nm. The root mean square (RMS) was only 0.86 nm, which was highly smooth for efficient plasmon propagation, as discussed in previous works 1.45, UPLXAPO100XO, Olympus) was used to tightly focus the laser on the slit to excite the plasmon nanofocusing. We observed optical images of plasmon nanofocusing, shown in Fig. We repeated this cycle for optical switching when we investigated the repeatability of the switching, as shown in Fig. To ensure that the change in the absorption spectra was attributed to the conformational change of diarylethene molecules located at the apex of the aluminum tapered structure, we investigated the absorption spectral changes with and without a hole at the apex. As seen in Fig. As reported in Fig. Figure 