Physical reservoir computing has recently been attracting attention for its ability to significantly reduce the computational resources required to process time-series data. However, the physical reservoirs that have been reported to date have had insufficient expression power, and most of them have a large volume, which makes their practical application difficult. Herein we describe the development of a Li + -electrolyte based ion-gating reservoir (IGR), with ion-electron coupled dynamics, for use in highperformance physical reservoir computing. A variety of synaptic responses were obtained in response to past experience, which responses were stored as transient charge density patterns in an electric double layer, at the Li + -electrolyte/diamond interface. Performance, which was tested using a nonlinear autoregressive moving-average (NARMA) task, was found to be excellent, with a NMSE of 0.023 for NARMA2, which is the highest for any physical reservoir reported to date. The maximum Lyapunov exponent of the IGR was 0.0083: the edge of chaos state enabling the best computational capacity. The IGR described herein opens the way for high-performance and integrated neural network devices. Artificial neural network (ANN)-based information processing is becoming more and more important as a way to deal with the vast amount of information currently in existence Herein we report the achievement of high performance physical RC using an ion-gating reservoir (IGR), in which ion-electron coupled dynamics at a lithium ion electrolyte/diamond interface generate an 'edge-of-chaos' state, which is empirically known to exhibit high computational performance In biological neuronal network systems, synaptic responses show characteristic variations in waveform, intensity, and frequency, with respect to environmental inputs in various forms due to the chaotic dynamics of the neural network, as illustrated in Fig. Reservoir computing is suitable for time series data analysis because it possesses features such as short-term memory, nonlinearity, and high dimensionality for input data. We took advantage of such suitability by using the IGR to solve a second-order nonlinear dynamical equation task where k and u(k)=[0,5] are a discrete time and a random input that were applied to IGRT as VG pulse streams, respectively. The reservoir states Xi(k) were obtained from the ID response, and the reservoir output y(k) is the linear combination of Xi(k) and read out weights wi trained by ridge regression as follows, where N and b are the reservoir size and bias respectively. Details of the procedure are given in the Methods section. To obtain high-dimensional reservoir states from 1-dimensional input, IGRT with an 8channel (drain)-1-gate-1-source structure and 8 different channel lengths (20 μm to 1000 μm) were fabricated as shown in Fig. We performed predictions on time series data generated by a NARMA2-system where u(k)=[0,0.5] is a random input. To evaluate the computational performance of IGR in the NARMA2 task, we used the normalized mean squared error (NMSE) for an index of RC performance, an explanation of which is given in the Methods section. Fig. Virtual Nodes 10ch The ion and electron dynamics in our IGR were simulated by using COMSOL multiphysics simulation software (COMSOL, Inc.) in order to clarify the underlying mechanism in the unique I-V characteristics of our device. As shown in Fig. Basically, such behavior can be understood in the framework of transmission line model, in which electrical resistance is dependent on the location due to the different length of the current path (2) 30ms (3) 50ms (4) 70ms To evaluate the high performance of the IGR in terms of nonlinear dynamics, we calculated the Lyapunov exponent, which quantifies the trajectory stability of the dynamical system by the Jacobi matrix method for direct analysis of time series data based on unknown dynamical systems Fig. In order to achieve high performance reservoir computing (RC), an ion-gating reservoir (IGR) was developed, based on ion-electron coupled dynamics in the vicinity of a lithium ion solid electrolyte/diamond interface. In the study, various synaptic responses, with asymmetric relaxation and spikes, are effective in achieving excellent expression power for mapping time series data to higher dimensional feature space. Good RC performance of the IGR was demonstrated in handwritten digit recognition, nonlinear transformations, and NARMA tasks. Multiphysics simulation revealed that during operation, transient charge density patterns form and change from moment to moment in an extremely thin EDL region. Asymmetric relaxation and spikes in the drain current response enables high expression power by realizing a mixed reservoir comprising different nonlinear dynamics. Lyapunov analysis was performed to inspect the dynamical features of the IGR, which analysis revealed that the maximum Lyapunov exponents of the carrier dynamics is 8.3 × 10 !" , supporting the understanding that the IGR operates in 'edge of chaos' states under certain conditions. Furthermore, the concept of an ion-gating reservoir can be extended to various information carriers (e.g., electrons, ions, light, and spin) as long as their dynamics or transport interact with each other. While the present EDL system, with its ion-gating transistor structure, is a typical case, various physical or chemical systems can be utilized for achieving IGR with diverse information carriers. Various materials and interfaces present exciting frontiers for exploring high performance, versatile, and integrated physical RC based on the coupled dynamics inherent in IGR. Hydrogen-terminated diamond was deposited on a single crystal diamond substrate (100) (EDP) by the MPCVD method. During deposition, 500 sccm and 0.5 sccm of H2 and CH4, respectively, were introduced and the hydrogen-terminated diamond was grown at 950 W RF power. The IGRT were fabricated with eight different channel lengths (20 μm, 50 μm, 70 μm, 100 μm, 200 μm, 500 μm, 700 μm, 1000 μm,), all with a channel width of 100 μm. Pd/Pt electrodes (10 nm and 35 nm, respectively) were deposited by electron beam evaporation with maskless lithography after oxygen termination of the diamond surfaces, other than channels, by oxygen plasma asher. A 3.5 μm LSZO thin film, used as an electrolyte, was deposited by PLD with an ArF excimer laser. 100 nm of LiCoO2 was deposited by PLD to form the gate electrode, and a 50 nm Pt thin film was deposited by electron beam deposition. IGRT measurements were carried out at room temperature in a vacuum chamber evacuated by a turbo molecular pump. Probers were used to connect the IGRT in the chamber, and electrical measurements were performed using the source measure unit (SMU) and pulse measure unit (PMU) of a semiconductor parameter analyzer (4200A-SCS, Keithley). A handwritten digit from the MNIST dataset The squared error is defined as . The weights W were updated to minimize The learning rate α was set to 0.1, and the training was performed 20 times. Solving second-order-nonlinear dynamic equation tasks A random input u(k) was converted to voltage pulse streams, with a pulse width of 10 ms and an interval of 10 ms, and applied to the gate terminal of the IGRT. The intensity of the pulses VG(k) was equal to u(k), over a range of from 0 to 0.5 V, and VG =0 V was applied during pulse intervals. The drain current responses of the IGRT with 8 channels were measured under constant VD=-0.5 V, and 10 virtual nodes were obtained from each of them. Thus, 80 reservoir states were obtained from 1D input u(k) by IGR. These reservoir states were normalized from 0 to 1 for calculation, as shown in equation In the time series data analysis tasks shown in Fig. , , ... , X(T)O and IN⊆ R (%;')×(%;') O are the target output vector, the reservoir state matrix and the identify matrix, respectively. Then, after learning the readout weights, the computational performance was evaluated by 'Prediction error' for solving the second-order-nonlinear dynamic equation task and 'NMSE' for the NARMA2 task, as shown in following equation A simulation of IGRT was performed with the semiconductor module of the CMSOL multiphysics software application, so as to analyze the dynamical behavior of ions and electrons in IGRT. The model of IGRT simulated by COMSOL consists of the following three parts: (1) Li + electrolyte with Li concentration 10 22 cm -3 and mobility 4 × 10 !'" cm 2 /Vs (100 nm thick). ( Here, we introduce how the Lyapunov exponents of IGR were calculated by the Jacobi matrix method Then, from equation ( . Considering the QR decomposition of the Jacobi matrix, the Jacobi matrix at time t can be expressed as shown in equation , where R : $$ is the i-th diagonal element of the upper triangular matrix R : . To investigate the origin of such high computational performance of the IGR, we evaluated the virtual node dependence of NMSE for the NARMA2 task shown in Supplementary Fig. 