Weyl semimetals, combining the advantages of a zero stray field and ultrafast spin dynamics as well as a large anomalous Hall effect and the chiral anomaly of Weyl fermions, have attracted extensive interests. However, the allelectrical control of such systems at room temperature, a crucial step toward practical applications, has not been reported. Here using a small writing current of around 5 × 10 6 A cm -2 , we realize the all-electrical current-induced deterministic switching of the non-collinear antiferromagnet Mn3Sn with a strong readout signal at room temperature in the Si/SiO2/Mn3Sn/AlOx structure, without external magnetic field and injected spin current. Our simulations reveal that the switching is originated from the current-induced intrinsic non-collinear spin-orbit torques in Mn3Sn itself. Our findings pave the way for the development of topological antiferromagnetic spintronics. Antiferromagnets have recently attracted tremendous interests as candidates for nextgeneration spintronics devices with the prospect of offering higher storage density and faster data processing than their ferromagnetic counterparts In particular, the non-collinear antiferromagnetic Weyl semimetal Mn3Sn has recently fascinated the condensed matter physics and information technology communities because of its nontrivial band topology Mn3Sn hosts an ABAB stacking sequence of the (0001) kagome lattice of Mn (Fig. Experiments were performed on sputter-deposited Mn3Sn (50 nm)/AlOx (2 nm) thin films, and the reference samples with heavy metals consisting of Ru (3 nm)/Mn3Sn (50 nm)/AlOx (2 nm) and Ru (3 nm)/Mn3Sn (50 nm)/Pt (8 nm)/AlOx (2 nm). All samples were deposited on thermally oxidized Si substrate. Unless otherwise stated, all the measurements were performed on the Mn3Sn (50 nm) /AlOx (2 nm) materials or devices without heavy metals. We first characterize the structure, transport properties, and magnetic properties of Mn3Sn. The X-ray diffraction peaks of (010) and (020) at 18 and 36 degrees confirm the hexagonal D019 Mn3Sn structure, and no additional peaks coming from plausible impurity phases were observed We measured the anomalous Hall resistivity ρ H as a function of the out-of-plane magnetic field μ 0 H Z to quantitatively estimate the population of switchable domains in the device (Fig. We then examine the possible current-induced topological non-collinear antiferromagnetic state switching. For the reference samples, the current-induced deterministic switching can only be observed under an auxiliary magnetic field for Ru/Mn3Sn/Pt devices (Supplementary Fig. in ρ H at a positive (negative) threshold writing current, implying a reversing of the z component of the octupole. The magnitude of the Hall resistivity jump ∆ρ H J is approximately 58% of ∆ρ H 0 in the field-swept measurements (Fig. Compared with the Mn3Sn/(heavy-) metal reference devices (Supplementary Fig. Notably, the critical writing current density J c required for switching the octupole, at zero magnetic field, is estimated to be 5 × 10 6 A cm -2 in our Mn3Sn device, which is less than half required for the reference Ru/Mn3Sn/Pt/AlOx sample. This is nearly one order of magnitude smaller than the recently reported values 4 × 10 7 A cm -2 for the collinear antiferromagnet/Pt devices To compare the efficiency of the readout signal driven by an electrical current with that of other heavy metal/magnet bilayer structures, we defined the readout efficiency as ξ = ∆ρ H J /J c . In the case of our Mn3Sn device, ξ is approximately 2.4 × 10 -13 Ω cm 3 /A (marked with a red star in Fig. In our Mn3Sn polycrystal, the measured non-zero anomalous Hall signal implies that the different configurations in our samples are not compensated. To understand this, we note that any crystal grain in the polycrystalline Mn3Sn can be decomposed into the z-x, x-y, and y-z configurations, according to the direction of kagome plane (Fig. More importantly, the z-x configuration of single crystal Mn3Sn requires an inversion asymmetry to be deterministically switched. Because the octupole is a pseudo vector, which is invariant under inversion, so it does not reverse as the current changes sign if there is inversion symmetry (see also the symmetry and microscopic analysis in Supplementary Sections S13 and S14). The occurrence of the inversion asymmetry in polycrystalline Mn3Sn was confirmed by our nonlinear Hall measurements. The inversion asymmetry can induce Rashba-like spin-orbit coupling, which can convert the injected electric current into spin currents or spin accumulations. The spin accumulations, when not aligned with the local Mn moments, can induce intrinsic non-collinear spin-orbit torques to rotate the Mn moments. The octupole is defined by the Mn moments in the Mn3Sn magnetic structure with inverse triangular spin structure (Supplementary Sections S15). Thus, in this sense, it is switchable by the current, and its z component leads to a measurable anomalous Hall signal. To verify our speculations regarding the microscopic mechanism behind the observed switching, we performed numerical simulations for the octupole polarization. Combinations of the magnetic-structure parameters K/(J m , D) (Eq. 1 in Methods) below (solid curves) and above (dashed curves) the critical combination are also considered. g, The same as the λ R = 0.2t case panel e, The presence of the x-axis magnetic field H x is also considered. More simulation results by changing λ R , K/(J m , D) , and initial states can be found in Supplementary Section S16. Figure Its insets also show the microscopic dynamics in terms of the calculated torques exerting on the Mn moments at different stages of a successful switching for I x well above the critical value. The noncollinear antiferromagnetic structure tends to maintain during the switching and the rotation of the Mn moments (collectively as octupole) is determined by the sum of the nutation tendencies of the sublattice moments driven by the torques. Figures Our findings promise potential applications of Mn3Sn in information technologies. Specifically, the all-electrical control of the binary and multilevel states with large Mn3Sn readout signals could act as the building block for magnetic random access memory and employed a writing current pulse (with current density J write ) with a duration of 50 ms and subsequently, we applied I read to read out the Hall voltage after waiting for 500 ms. The angle dependence of magnetoconductivity and planar Hall effect were obtained using the horizontal rotator option of a commercial magnetoelectrical measurement system. The electrical measurements were conducted using a cryogenic probe station (Lake Shore Cryotronics, Inc). For the ρ H -μ 0 H Z loop measurements shown in Fig. For the nonlinear Hall measurements, a sinusoidal current with a frequency of 133.33 Hz along the longitudinal direction was applied to the Hall devices using standard lock-in techniques (Stanford Research Systems Model SR830), the second harmonic voltages were detected in a direction perpendicular to the current. All nonlinear Hall measurements were carried out at room temperature without external magnetic field. The relationship between the nonlinear Hall voltage and current was obtained by gradually sweeping the amplitude of the sinusoidal current. To understand the microscopic mechanism of the all-electrical switching of the non-collinear antiferromagnet, we performed a numerical simulation of the octupole polarization direction O = (O x , O z ) , which can be determined from the direction of the magnetic moment m i2 (assumed to be the same for different unit cells i in the simulation) of the second Mn atom in the unit cell as where i indexes the unit cells. This expression is simplified from the full definition in Supplementary Section S15. The simulation procedures are as follows. Step 1 Assume an initial magnetic structure of the Mn magnetic moments m ia (Eq. 1 in Methods), a = {1, 2, 3} denotes the three Mn atoms in each unit cell. Step 2 Use the real-space form of an s-d model (Eq. 2 in Methods) to describe the itinerant electrons in the local Zeeman fields exerted by the Mn magnetic moments m ia , where s for the itinerant electrons and d for the Mn magnetic moments. Step 3 For an input electric current I x , use the linear-response theory for the current-spin correlation (Eqs. 3 and 4 in Methods) to calculate the local spin accumulations of the itinerant electrons induced by the current I x . Step 4 Use the local spin accumulations S a of the itinerant electrons to calculate the magnetic torques T ia exerted on the Mn magnetic moments m ia (Eq. 5 in Methods). Step 5 Use the magnetic torques T ia and the Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert equation (Eq. 6 in Methods) to calculate a new magnetic structure of m ia . Step 6 Return to Step 1 with the new magnetic structure. Repeat steps 1-6 until the magnetic structure converges to yield the octupole moment in the presence of the injected current I x . Any crystal grain configuration can be constructed using the three vector grain configurations of our polycrystalline Mn3Sn Hall-bar devices (Fig. Here we focus on the z-x configuration (left-hand side in Fig. Magnetic structure of Mn moments. To understand the microscopic mechanism of the current-induced switching of the non-collinear antiferromagnetic states, we study the dynamics of the sublattice moments m ia using the following Hamiltonian defined on a single layer of the Mn3Sn kagome lattice where i and j index the unit cells, a, b = {1, 2, 3} denote the sublattices, and c = (0, 1, 0) is the unit vector along the y axis (Fig. The Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction D, nearest neighbour exchange interaction J m , and inplane magnetic anisotropy K are assumed to be positive, and they stabilize the inverse triangular spin texture of Mn3Sn. m ia represents a unit magnetic moment on site ia . k a = (sin φ a , 0, cos φ a ) , with (φ 1 , φ 2 , φ 3 ) = (π,9π,5π) . The K term lifts the in-plane U (1) degeneracy and fixes the sixfold symmetry, introducing six stable positions for the octupole. For the magnetic structure, we used a single unit cell with periodic boundary conditions, the same as that in the previous work s-d model. where c ian is the annihilation operator of the electron highly localized on site ia (notice that sublattice index a = {1,2,3, 1 ′ , 2 ′ , 3 ′ } here corresponds to a monolayer AB stack Mn3Sn structure and we only need to calculate the local spin accumulations on sublattice 1,2,3 for the simulation) with spin n = {↑, ↓}, t is the kinetic energy, Λ is the energy difference between the {1,2,3} and {1 ′ , 2 ′ , 3 ′ } layers, J sd is the exchange interaction between the local moments and the spins of itinerant electrons, σ is the spin operator of the electrons, d ∧ ia,jb is the unit vector from site ia to jb, and λ R measures the Rashba-type spin-orbit coupling that breaks the mirror time reversal symmetry and inversion symmetry. By performing a Fourier transformation, the Hamiltonian in Eq. 2 can be converted from the real space to the k space. For each k point in the k space, the Hamiltonian is a k labeled 12×12 matrix (See Supplementary Section S17). Diagonalizing the matrix provides us with the energy spectrum and eigenstates of the s-d model. In Supplementary Section S14, we show that a reasonable energy difference ( Λ = 0.1t , comparable with the Rashba spin-orbit coupling) does not cause qualitative change to our switching mechanism. To simplify the illustration of the switching mechanism, we assume Λ = 0 in the simulations shown in our main text. Current-induced spin accumulations and torques. Using the linear-response theory, the Kubo formula for the local spin accumulations on sublattice a in response to the electric field (i.e., the injected write current) along the β = {x, y, z} direction can be written as where "d" stands for diagonal, and "od" stands for off-diagonal. The electric field can be derived from the injected current I as E = m * I ωdn 3D e 2 τ , where m * is the electron effective mass, Simulation parameters. In Fig. 