Optical quantum technologies promise to revolutionize today's information processing and sensors. Crucial to many quantum applications are efficient sources of pure single photons. For a quantum emitter to be used in such application, or for different quantum systems to be coupled to each other, the optical emission wavelength of the quantum emitter needs to be tailored. Here, we use density functional theory to calculate and manipulate the transition energy of fluorescent defects in the twodimensional material hexagonal boron nitride. Our calculations feature the HSE06 functional which allows us to accurately predict the electronic band structures of 267 different defects. Moreover, using strain-tuning we can tailor the optical transition energy of suitable quantum emitters to match precisely that of quantum technology applications. We therefore not only provide a guide to make emitters for a specific application, but also have a promising pathway of tailoring quantum emitters that can couple to other solid-state qubit systems such as color centers in diamond. Optical quantum technologies promise groundbreaking applications with quantum communication Many well-known single photon emitting systems have been investigated, including semiconductor quantum dots The recently discovered color centers hosted by twodimensional (2D) hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) Around the nature of the emitters, there has been a large debate among the community, due to the large dis-tribution of zero-phonon lines (ZPLs) In this work, we calculate a large number of defect complexes in order to uncover their radiative transitions using spin-polarized density functional theory (DFT) with the Heyd-Scuseria-Ernzerhof (HSE06) functional. In contrast to previous works, we do not aim to match computational results with experimental data, but rather to discover new defects which have radiative transitions at important wavelengths for quantum technologies. This should facilitate one to fabricate defects with the desired wavelength for specific applications. Frequency conversion schemes with non-ideal efficiency are thus not necessary. Our comprehensive study includes the electronic structure of 267 defect complexes with substitutional atoms from periodic main groups III through VI, transition metals, and multi-defect complexes. For a selected subset of defects, we have also investigated the effects of their charge states (neutral and ±1). Ultimately, we develop criteria to identify promising defects based on the transition type (radiative/non-radiative), localization (deep/shallow), and transition energy. Based on these criteria, we select emitters whose wavelengths are close to the important ones for quantum technologies and apply strain-tuning to tailor their emission wavelengths. As exemplary wavelengths, we chose here the resonance wavelengths of solid-state quantum emitters and qubits in diamond and silicon carbide, typical quantum memory wavelengths in rare-earth ion doped crystals and alkali vapors, as well as low-loss telecom wavelengths for longdistance quantum communication. We therefore provide a comprehensive list of promising quantum emitters in hBN and a mechanism to tailor them to enable potential applications in quantum technologies. All spin-polarized DFT calculations have been performed using QuantumATK (version S-2021.06) In order to being able to manipulate the transition energy, bi-axial strain was applied to the crystal structures by elongating and compressing them in both a and b directions isotropically (for definition of the axial directions see Figure In principle, the photoluminescence properties of any quantum emitter depend on the Huang-Rhys factor, Debye-Waller factor, its quantum efficiency (QE), and the excited-state lifetime. These excited-state proper- ties depend on the electronic transition, which can be classified in general into two types: radiative and nonradiative transitions. Both transition types are disparate in the sense of the electron-phonon coupling. While the radiative transition can happen without coupling to any phonon (i.e. into the zero-phonon line), the non-radiative transitions dissipate the excitation mostly through phonons. Ideally, any quantum emitter should feature a low Huang-Rhys factor, a high DW factor, high QE, and short excited-state lifetime. To select suitable defects for quantum technologies among the large number of investigated complexes, we define the following criteria for promising quantum emitters: 1. Electronic transition type: the defect should form a two-level system, where the transition between the highest occupied and the lowest unoccupied defect state is radiative. We determine this by considering the imaginary part of the dielectric function or the optical absorption spectrum. Non-radiative transitions do not exhibit any characteristic peaks. 2. Transition energy: the emitter should have an optical emission wavelength useful for quantum technology applications. We estimate this from the energy difference between the ground (highest occupied) and excited (lowest unoccupied) states, which correspond to the characteristic peak observed in the imaginary part of dielectric function. 3. Localization in the band structure: defect states can naturally occur in either shallow or deep regions in the band gap. For a high quantum efficiency at room temperature, the states should be well isolated from the band edges or other defect states (i.e. deep defects). Those deep-lying states should also exhibit a flat line in both the density of states and the electronic band structure, as this implies they have the same energy in every high symmetry point. In other words, such deep-level defects are well isolated from interaction with neighboring atoms. It is important to point out that this work considers only first-order transitions between the highest occupied state and the lowest unoccupied state. While there might be optically allowed transitions to higher unoccupied states possible, such excitation would have multiple decay channels which reduces the quantum efficiency of any given transition. Moreover, based on the first-order electronic transition, half of all defects are classified as being nonradiative. In another ongoing, work we employ the ∆SCF method to uncover the allowed optical transition pathways of those defects from the zero-phonon line. We first benchmark the electronic structure of a pristine hBN monolayer with other reports in literature. The lattice parameters, band gap, and the atomic orbital contribution in the electronic band structure are well consistent. To be more precise, our calculation with the HSE06 functional yields a direct electronic band gap of E g = 5.99 eV (see Supplementary Figure Then, the electronic band structures of different defect complexes were calculated and classified according to our criteria mentioned above. Figure We now turn to a more in-depth analysis of the defect complexes, starting with impurities from group III, namely Al, In, and Ga substituted into the structure at boron or nitrogen lattice sites. Figure The Al B and Ga B centers do not induce any states between valence and conduction band (VB and CB, respectively), because their equal number of valence electrons compared to boron. In other words, there is no additional free charge carrier left to occupy any additional states. For the In B center, however, a new deep (but unoccupied) state appeared. For Al-based defects, only the Al B V B , Al N , and Al N V B defects have radiative transitions around 2 eV, whereas for In-based defects, possible transitions were found for the In B V B , In B V N , and In N V B center. In case of Ga-based defects, we did not find any first-order transitions. Out of group IV we selected C, Si, Ge, and Sn for potential defect complexes (see Supplementary Figure . This is consistent with previous reports of C-based quantum emitters Out of group V we selected P, As, and Sb for potential defect complexes (see Supplementary Figure For group-VI dopants (see Supplementary Figure Transition metals being doped into the hBN lattice induce a a high density of localized states (see Supplemen- tary Figure We now expand our study to multi-defect complexes consisting of at least two impurities from different periodic groups (e.g. Al N Sb B , see Supplementary Figures Our results so far show a broad coverage of the optical transition lines of hBN defects in the visible spec-trum, with a few also in the near-infrared (for a complete list see Supplementary File S1). The question arises, if they can be used for quantum technology applications. To demonstrate this, we selected a number of important wavelengths for quantum technology applications. To represent solid-state quantum emitters and qubits we chose color centers in diamond (with the NV and group IV centers While we have identified hBN defects compatible with common quantum technology applications, their emission wavelength is only near the desired wavelength for the specific application. In case of narrow transitions (e.g. the Rb-D2), this can drastically reduce the coupling efficiency to the other quantum system. Therefore, a fine tuning mechanism of the transition is required. This would make it possible to select an hBN emitter close to the target wavelength and apply this tuning method. Strain often breaks the symmetry and modifies the local structure of the atomic orbitals, thereby shifting the energy of the system In Figure As one might expect, many defects exhibit a linear relationship between strain and transition energy. Some, however, also show a nonlinear behavior (see Figure It is worth noting that strain can also activate quantum emitters in hBN So far, we have only considered neutral charge states. We finally also expand our study to charged defects (single positive/negative). We divide the defects in Supplementary Table While charging is therefore not a suitable in-situ tuning mechanism, it is possible to generate totally new transition energies. It is worth noting that the wellstudied V - B was not calculated in this study, but only the neutral boron vacancy. As we have mentioned, charging/ionization leads to new level structures, which explains why our results for the neutral boron vacancy differ from the literature with the negatively charged boron vacancy. Among our charge state calculations, we have identified compatible emitters for quantum technologies: the Er B V - N has a first-order transition near that of the V - Si center in silicon carbide. The Er B V + B can couple to the Cs-D1 transition and the Er + B emits in the telecom C-band. This implies the latter can be used for longdistance quantum communication. We have performed spin-polarized DFT calculations using the HSE06 functional that allowed us to characterize the electronic band structures of 267 defects hosted by hBN, as well as their transition type and energy. We have identified a large distribution of color centers with their transition energy peaking in a range from 0.25 to 5.50 eV. We have established criteria to select useful defects that can act as single photon emitters out of our new database. Moreover, we were able to match compatible hBN emitters for specific quantum technology applications, including quantum communication, quantum memories, and the coupling to other solid-state qubit sys-tems. Furthermore, we have theoretically demonstrated how the emission wavelengths of these hBN defects can be tailored to exactly match the specific wavelength of the quantum technology application. Our work therefore provides a guide for tailoring quantum emitters with a freely choosable target wavelength, as well as an important step towards the efficient coupling of different quantum systems in a large-scale quantum network. * Transition between VB or degenerate (ground) state and an unoccupied non-degenerate (excited) state. ** Transition between double-occupied (degenerate) ground and unoccupied degenerate excited state.