We formulate a theory of bulk optical current for a periodically driven system, which accounts for the mixing of external drive and laser field frequencies and, therefore, the broadening of the harmonic spectrum compared to the undriven system. We express the current in terms of Floquet-Bloch bands and their non-adiabatic Berry connection and curvature. Using this expression, we relate spatiotemporal symmetries of the driven model to selection rules for current harmonics. We illustrate the application of this theory by studying high harmonic generation in the periodically driven Su-Schrieffer-Heeger model. At high frequencies and low field amplitudes, we find analytical expressions for current harmonics. We also calculate the current numerically beyond the high frequency limit and verify that when the drive breaks a temporal symmetry, harmonics forbidden in the undriven model become available. Moreover, we find significant enhancement in higher harmonics when the system is driven, even for low field amplitudes. Our work offers a unified Floquet approach to nonlinear optical properties of solids, which is useful for realistic calculations of high harmonic spectra of electronic systems subject to multiple periodic drives. High harmonic generation (HHG) plays an important role in extreme ultraviolet and attosecond physics Along with this renewed interests in HHG, periodically driven quantum systems have gained attention in recent years, in part due to the high degree of control they can offer in experiments . In contrast to their equilibrium counterparts, driven systems have rich nonequilibrium dynamics and can support nontrivial topology with no equilibrium analogue. Due to its inherently nonlinear character, it is important to study of the effect of external drive on HHG and its relationship with topology in periodically driven crystalline systems. To do so, we need a non-perturbative theoretical formulation of HHG in such systems. In this paper, we aim to advance our understanding of the interplay among external periodic drive, topology, and HHG by employing the power of Floquet theory As a concrete illustration, we study HHG spectra in the one-dimensional driven Su-Shrieffer-Higger (SSH) lattice model The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, along with a primer on Floquet theory, we present a general formulation of optical current in a periodically driven system and discuss its selection rules. In Sec. III, we consider the periodically driven SSH model and apply our formalism to obtain the optical current and its high harmonics. In Sec. IV, we present and discuss numerical calculations of HHG spectra in the driven SSH model. We conclude in Sec. V with a summary and outlook. Some details of our calculations are provided in the Appendix. Throughout the paper, we shall use the natural units = e/c = a = 1, where a is the relevant length scale, such as the lattice spacing. For a time-periodic Hamiltonian, Ĥ(t) = Ĥ(t + T ), with period T , the solution of Schrödinger equation takes the form |Ψ α (t) = e -iΞαt |Φ α (t) , where Ξ α ∈ (-π/T, π/T ] is the quasienergy, a conserved quantity and the Floquet state, |Φ α (t) , is also periodic in time with the same period T , and satisfies the Floquet-Schrödinger equation Also, the time-ordered evolution operator = e -i(t-t0) ĤF (t) P (t, t 0 ), is decomposed into a periodic micromotion operator and the evolution under the Floquet Hamiltonian For a Hamiltonian that depends on two commensurate frequencies (ω, Ω), we can define γ = ωt and Γ = Ωt so that Ĥ(γ, Γ) = Ĥ(γ + 2π, Γ) = Ĥ(γ, Γ + 2π). We can then write the multi-mode Floquet-Schrödinger equation where |Φ α (γ, Γ) is periodic in γ and Γ with period 2π. We may expand any such function, where is over a cycle of each integration variable. The single-time Schrödinger equation and its solutions are obtained simply by replacing γ = ωt and Γ = Ωt in the multi-mode Schrödinger equation and its solutions. We now derive an expression for optical current in a time periodic system using Floquet theory. The density matrix of the system at some initial time t 0 is ρ(t 0 ), which evolves in time through a unitary operator Û (t, t 0 ) as 1. Sketch for high harmonic generation in a Floquet system. The system is driven by a drive frequency Ω and irradiated by field frequency ω. Here the output frequency is mω + M Ω. For further simplification, we assume that all the operators can be written in the single-particle fermionic basis and take periodic boundary conditions. So, the Hamiltonian Ĥ(t) = krs ĉ † kr h rs (k, t)ĉ ks , where ĉ † kr and ĉkr are the creation and annihilation operators, respectively, at lattice momentum k and quantum number r, and h(k, t) is the time-periodic Bloch Hamiltonian. Similarly, the current operator Ĵ(t) = krs ĉ † kr j rs (k, t)ĉ ks , where j(k, t) = ∂h(k, t)/∂k. The current is where g rs (k, t 0 ) = Tr[ρ(t 0 )c † ks c kr ], 'Tr' is taken over the many-body Hilbert space, and 'tr' is over the single-particle Hilbert space for each momentum k. Here, j H (k, t, t 0 ) = u † (k, t, t 0 )j(k, t)u(k, t, t 0 ) is the (single-particle) current in the Heisenberg picture and u(k, t, t 0 ) = Texp[-i t t0 h(k, s)ds]. In the Floquet basis |φ α (k, t) of h(k, t), we find where j F βα (k, t) = φ β (k, t)| j(k, t) |φ α (k, t) is periodic in time, and α are the single-particle quasienergies. In the following, we specify the time dependence of the Hamiltonian through a periodically driven internal parameter δ(t) = M δ (M ) e -iM Ωt and an external electric field via the gauge potential A(t) = m A (m) e -imωt . Thus, the Hamiltonian h(k, t) depends on the two frequencies Ω of the drive and ω of the external field. Therefore, we may employ the Fourier expansion j The dependence on the initial time t 0 in Eqs. ( Then the current becomes periodic in time J(t) = J(t+ T ), and This form of the optical current clearly shows the frequency mixing in the generation of its harmonics. For example, if the drive frequency is an integer multiple of the field frequency, Ω = N ω, the current acquires harmonics m + N M of the field frequency. Conversely, when ω = nΩ for integer n, the current acquires fractional harmonics m + M/n of the field frequency. As we shall demonstrate in concrete examples, some of these harmonics may vanish or be enhanced depending on the order of the process and selection rules imposed by spatiotemporal symmetries. We also note that this diagonal optical current may appear to correspond to only the intra-band contributions. However, it is important to bear in mind that each quasienergy band is obtained by a reconstruction of the original energy bands of static system. Therefore, the optical current, Eq. ( We would like to recast the optical current in terms of geometrical quantities like Berry curvature and Berry connection. First, we note that in the Floquet basis, the current matrix elements, So the full expression of the current, Eq. ( where is the Berry connection of the Floquet band α. This expression makes it clear that all time dependence and, therefore, all higher harmonics of the optical current result from the time dependence of the Floquet Berry connection. As in the static case, this also shows that a completely filled Floquet band cannot contribute to DC current. On the other hand, the gauge invariant of the optical current is not manifested in Eq. ( where is the nonadiabatic (Aharonov-Anandan) connection of the states in Floquet band α. Therefore, we find where is the expectation value of the instantaneous Hamiltonian in the Floquet band α. As before, due to periodicity in crystal momentum k, this last term does not contribute in a completely filled band. However, in partially filled bands, it can contribute to DC as well as the higher harmonics of optical current. We note that these expressions can be readily extended to higher dimensions, where Here, we analyze the constraints on the current and its harmonics due to symmetries for the ideal Floquet occupation with each band either fully occupied or empty. In particular, we consider a unitary mirror (I F ) and an antiunitary time-reflection (Θ F ) symmetries, which include time glide operations, Under I F symmetry, the occupied Floquet bands α ∈ occ satisfy , where I(k, t) is a unitary matrix. This leads to a relation between the current at different times, Therefore, the current vanishes at an odd number of times in any interval of length t I in the cycle, at the boundary of which the current is nonzero. For t I = π/ω, we get the following condition for the harmonics of the current, which means in the presence of I F symmetry, only odd harmonics will survive. Under Θ F symmetry, the occupied Floquet bands satisfy where T(k, t) is an orthogonal matrix. This also leads to a relation between current at different times, As a result, the current must vanish at J(t R /2) = J(T /2 + t R /2) = 0. For t R = π/ω we have the following properties of the harmonics of the current, which means the odd harmonics of the current will be real and even harmonics of the current will be imaginary, and the DC component J (0) = 0. If t R = 0 instead, the current J(t) = -J(-t) is an odd function of time and we find which means J (0) = 0 and all the other harmonics will be imaginary. When both I F and Θ F symmetries are present, and taking t I = t R = π/ω, we have which means that only odd harmonics are nonzero and they are real. The expressions of the current in terms of the Floquet Berry connection and curvature, Eqs. ( In the low-frequency limit, the Floquet states |φ α (k, t) approach, up to a smooth gauge Then, the optical current of fully occupied bands approaches J(t) → α∈occ E ad α (k, t)dk, where E ad α (k, t) is the adiabatic Berry curvature. This is, of course, the Thouless pump, in which a charge equal to the Chern number Ch ad occ of the occupied adiabatic bands in (k, t) space, is pumped in each cycle. While Eqs. ( We would like to note a subtlety related to the choice of gauge in using Eqs. ( (31) There is a bulk-boundary correspondence between w(t * ) and the number of midgap bound states, ν 0 and ν π , respectively, at quasienergies 0 and π/T , It is possible to choose a smooth gauge at each t * , |φ α (k, t * ) → e iΛα(k,t * ) |φ α (k, t * ) , such that It is then tempting to related w(T /2)w(0) to T /2 0 j(t)dt. However, while both of these quantities are gauge-invariant, this would not be in general correct because it is not in general possible to find a gauge |φ α (k, t) → e iΛα(k,t) |φ α (k, t) that smoothly connects Λ α (k, 0) to Λ α (k, T /2) in the cycle. The degree to which this smooth gauge condition is broken is indeed what ν π quantifies. A. Model and symmetries In order to illustrate the physics of high harmonic generation in Floquet systems concretely, we consider the Su-Schrieffer-Heeger (SSH) model with time-periodic hopping amplitudes. In addition, an external time-periodic and spatially uniform gauge field, A(t), is introduced via Peierls substitution k → k -A(t). The full loch Hamiltonian is Here, w is the average hopping amplitude. In the following, we take the driven field A(t) = A 0 sin(ωt + θ) and the driven hopping modulation m(t) = m 0 + m 1 cos(Ωt). The static SSH model (m 1 = 0, A 0 = 0) has a trivial (m 0 > 0) and a topological phase (m 0 < 0) phase protected by the chiral symmetry, {h, C} = 0 with C = σ z . In addition, the static model has both unitary inversion (or mirror) symmetry (I = σ x , k → -k) and antiunitary time-reversal symmetry (Θ = K, k → -k , where K is the complex conjugation). In the driven model, these symmetries are in general lifted by the external field. However, for certain drive protocols, we may recover these symmetries upon a suitable mapping within the cycle. That is, the driven system may have related spatiotemporal symmetries, in which the temporal part of the Hamiltonian is also transformed. Indeed, the inversion symmetry can be restored for the driven system if there exists a time glide τ (t I ) : t → t+t I within the cycle, for which A(t + t I ) = -A(t) is odd and m(t + t I ) = m(t) is even. Similarly, the time-reversal symmetry is restored if there exists a reflection time t R , for which is even. The spatiotemporal symmetries of the driven system are, then, and When the drive frequency is an even multiple of the field frequency (Ω = 2nω, n ∈ Z), we may choose t I = π/ω for any θ to obtain symmetry under I F , yielding J(t+T /2) = -J(t). For θ = ± π 2 , we can take t R = π/ω to obtain symmetry under Θ F , whereby J(t + T /2) = -J(-t). Similarly, if θ = 0 or π, we can take t R = 0 to find J(t) = -J(-t). Therefore, selection rules for the ideal occupation of the Floquet bands apply to the harmonics of the current in these cases as discussed in Sec. II D. In this section we derive an analytical expression for the current in diagonal Floquet occupation using high frequency approximation. We will calculate the Floquet Hamiltonian and states as well as micromotion operators using high frequency expansion. We assume Ω = N ω for an integer N . In the high frequency limit, the Floquet Hamiltonian and micromotion operator are respectively, where h (n) (k) are the Fourier components of the Bloch Hamiltonian h(k, t), where, and J n are Bessel functions. Thus, we may write the Floquet Hamiltonian as h and the micromotion as where We can now use Eq. ( where |φ α (k, 0) are the eigenstates of the Floquet Hamiltonian h F (k). The current operator ∂h/∂k = j • σ, where Then, P † (k, t)[∂h(k, t)/∂k]P (k, t) = j F • σ with where are the components of j(k, t), respectively, parallel and perpendicular to V(k, t). The eigenstates of h F (k) with quasienergies ±|d F (k)| are oriented along ± dF (k, t) = ±d F (k, t)/|d F (k, t)| on the Bloch sphere. Thus, after some algebra, we find where we denote the occupation of ±|d F (k)| quasienergies by g ± (k). We can present explicit expressions for the harmonics for sufficiently small A 0 , such that d F and V can be approximated well by neglecting J n>0 (A 0 ). Then, V = m 1 v 0 sin(N ωt)/(N ω) with and and Then, d F , V and j are coplanar and j × V • dF = 0. So, where and Altogether, we find where we use the shorthands ṽ0 = m 1 v 0 /(N ω), Jn (A 0 ) = J n (A 0 )e -inθ , and Wj are listed in Table . I. In Fig. In this section, we present our numerical results for the current in the driven SSH model obtained by exact diagonalization of Floquet Hamiltonian and time evolution operators. We have used the Floquet Berry curvature method as given in Eq. 19 to numerically compute the current. We have ensured our results converge both in lattice momentum k and time t by taking a mesh in k with 200 points as well as a mesh in t with 256 points for Ω = N ω and 512 points for ω = nΩ. In order to investigate the effects of occupation of Floquet bands we compare our results for the ideal Floquet and thermal occupation projected to Floquet bands. First, we consider an ideal Floquet occupation where the Floquet state with lowest quasi-energy band is fully occupied and the higher quasi-energy band is fully empty. The quasienergies are plotted in Fig. We show the Floquet current within a period corresponding to the field frequency in Fig. We also investigate the dependence of HHG on the phase difference θπ/2 between the field and the drive. Optical current and its harmonics are calculated numerically and plotted in Fig. When the drive frequency is a fraction of the field frequency so that ω = nΩ for integer n, then the optical current for diagonal Floquet occupation produces fractional harmonics of the field frequency. To calculate the fractional harmonics numerically, we consider an ideal Floquet occupation with the lower Floquet band fully occupied. In Fig. We note that unlike the previous case, when the drive frequency is the principal Floquet frequency neither the inversion nor the time-reversal symmetry can be restored, since there is no time glide t → t + t 0 within the cycle for which we can ensure m(t + t 0 ) = m(t) and A(t + t 0 ) = -A(t), nor m(-t + t 0 ) = m(t) and A(-t + t 0 ) = -A(t). Therefore all the harmonics of the drive that were forbidden in undriven case are now generated. We now compare the optical current harmonics obtained for a thermal density matrix ρ 0 (k) = 1 Z e -h0(k)/T0 projected on the Floquet states, where T 0 is the temperature (we set k B = 1), Z = tr[e -h0(k)/T0 ], and the static Hamiltonian h 0 (k) := h(k, t 0 )| A0=0,m1=0 . That is, we retain only the diagonal elements where E 0 μ (k) and |φ 0 μ (k) are the energy eigenvalues and eigenstates of h 0 (k), respectively. We see the dependence of occupation on t 0 remains in Eq. ( We illus- trate the projected Floquet occupation of quasienergy bands in Fig. In Fig. We have developed a theoretical framework using Floquet theory to calculate the optical current in a periodically driven system. The Floquet optical current mixes the field and drive frequencies, ω and Ω, respectively, generating harmonics mω + M Ω. The frequency mixing broadens the spectrum of harmonic orders and enhances the values of harmonics even for a low field amplitude. This formulation naturally contains the Floquet theoretic approach to understanding high harmonic generation in initially undriven systems and the Floquet linear response theory The optical current can be recast in terms of the occupation of Floquet-Bloch bands and their non-adiabatic Berry connection and curvature. This formulation naturally brings out a relation between topology and optical current for sufficiently low drive and field frequencies and exposes and clarifies subtleties of gauge fixing that prevent a direct relation between current harmonics and Floquet topological invariants for higher frequencies. In the presence of spatio-temporal symmetries like inversion and time reversal with time glide, we obtained the properties of optical current and selection rules for the harmonics. As an application of our formulation, we studied the optical current and in the driven SSH model and found analytical expressions for its harmonics at sufficiently high frequency and weak field amplitude. Symmetry analysis and numerical calculations show that by altering the temporal part of the spatio-temporal symmetry, we can obtain harmonics that are forbidden in undriven cases. The broader implication of this phenomenon is that without changing the spatial structure or symmetry of a material, we can procure forbidden harmonics by driving the system. Importantly, frequency mixing between the drive and the field opens a way to enhance the HHG spectrum. This Floquet enhancement can be accessed naturally in pump-probe setups, where the pump and drive frequencies are commensurate. For non-optical drives, a more realistic setup is when the drive frequency is a small commensurate fraction of the field frequency, which always breaks the temporal symmetry and leads to a broadspectrum HHG. Additionally, our calculations pertaining to the driven SSH model may be tested in synthetic quantum simulators. . Choice of Wj in Eq. ( R )]dk = -J(-t + t R ), (A.8)