Efficient manipulation of magnetic materials is essential for spintronics. In conventional spin-current generator /magnet (SCG/M) bilayers, interfacial spin-orbit torques (SOTs) lose effectiveness in applications that require large magnetic layer thickness to maintain magnetic anisotropy and stability at lateral sizes of tens of nanometers (e.g. magnetic tunnel junctions and racetrack nanowires). Here, we develop an universally workable 3D spin-orbit material scheme in which the SOT efficiency can be remarkably boosted up towards infinite by stacking [SCG/M/oxide]n superlattices, with the oxide layers breaking the inversion symmetry. We demonstrate that this superlattice scheme not only promotes perpendicular magnetic anisotropy for effectively rather thick magnetic layer but also enables switching of such thick magnetic layers by interfacial SOTs with n 2 times lower power consumption than the corresponding conventional bilayer scheme with the same total thicknesses for the SCG and the M. In contrast, we find that spin torque diminishes in the second-type superlattices [SCG/M]n lacking inversion symmetry breaking. These results provide in-depth understanding of SOTs in magnetic multilayers and establish [SCG/M/oxide]n superlattices as advantageous bricks for development of low-power, high-stability, and highendurance spintronic memory and computing. Strong spin-orbit torques (SOTs) In such conventional bilayers ξ DL j is usually low particularly when θSH is small and when Tint is far less than unity due to spin memory loss The main idea of this work is to "accumulate" ξ DL j by stacking SCG/M/oxide superlattice. Here, the SCG generates spin current that diffuses into the adjacent M, and the oxide breaks the inversion symmetry for a total torque to occur. In the SCG/M/oxide superlattice (Fig. For this work, we sputter-deposited Pt 10 (here the numbers following the materials are layer thickness in nm and the subscripts represent the repeat number). Each sample was deposited on an oxidized Si substrate with a 1 nm Ta seed layer, and capped by a 2 nm MgO and a 1.5 nm Ta layer that was oxidized upon exposure to atmosphere. The Ta seed layer is very resistive and contributes negligible spin current to other layers. The layer thicknesses are estimated using the calibrated deposition rates and the deposition time. The thickness of 0.8 nm is chosen for the Co layers as a compromise between the interfacial PMA and the spin dephasing within the Co. For electrical measurements, the samples were patterned into 5×60 μm 2 Hall bars (Fig. As measured by a superconducting quantum interference device using un-patterned sample pieces that underwent the same lithography and ion milling processes as the Hall bars, the average saturation magnetization (Ms) of the thin Co layers is 790-1470 emu/cm 3 (see Fig. . The magnetization variation of the 0.8 nm Co layers is likely due to different degree of magnetic proximity effect To determine the SOTs, we perform harmonic Hall voltage response (HHVR) measurements where VAHE is the anomalous Hall voltage, VANE,x and VANE,z are the anomalous Nernst voltages due to the longitudinal and perpendicular thermal gradients. Note that V2ω contains contributions that are proportional to Hx from both the dampinglike torque and the perpendicular thermal gradient. Combining Eq. ( Here, VANE,z is equal to the value of V2ω when the magnetization is fully aligned along current direction by a Hx that is greater than Hk (Fig. 2 with E. This suggests that the anomalous Nernst effect should be taken into account in the analysis of resistive magnetic systems with a small SOT field and a large Hk. The so-called "planar Hall correction" where e is elementary charge, ħ is the reduced Plank's constant, jc = E/ρxx is the current density in the Pt layer, and t is the total thickness of the magnetic layer and increases with the repeat number of the superlattice (i.e., t is n times the M thickness of each repeat In addition, the variation of torque contribution of single repeat may be also related to the shortening of ldp of the Co for large repeat numbers. When ldp is greater than the layer thickness of the M, the spin current entering the M from the Pt cannot get fully relaxed before getting reflected at the oxide interface. The polarization of the reflected spin current is usually rotated relative to the incident spin current While the exact cause of the resistivity and magnetization reduction needs future efforts, ξ DL j of a SCG/M/oxide superlattice can be likely optimized to increase in proportion to the repeat number if the repeats can be kept identical by improved growth protocol. Alternatively, this might be also made possible if the Pt and the Co are replaced by a shortmean-free-path SCG (e.g. Au0.25Pt0.75 We have also performed HHVR measurements on the Pt/Co multilayers with no MgO insertion to break the inversion symmetry. As shown in Table Finally, we discuss the practical impact of the superlattice [SCG/M/oxide]n. We first demonstrate that the new spin-orbit material scheme we develop here, 3D superlattice [SCG/M/oxide]n, makes it possible to switch rather thick 3d ferromagnets with strong perpendicular magnetic anisotropy. As shown in Fig. More quantitatively, the current density for switching 8 nm Co in total of the superlattice is just comparable to or even smaller than that of Pt/Co and Pt alloy/Co bilayers with the Co thickness about 0.8 nm In summary, we have developed a three-dimensional spin-orbit material scheme made by stacking spin-current generator/magnet/oxide superlattice, in which the SOT efficiency can be remarkably boosted up, even to above the spin Hall ratio of the SCG. The superlattice scheme [SCG/M/oxide]n can have enhanced perpendicular magnetic anisotropy, enhanced tunability, and n 2 times lower power consumption to generate a given spin torque strength than the corresponding SCG/M bilayer with the same total thicknesses for the SCG and the M. However, in the counterpart of spincurrent generator/magnet superlattice with no symmetrybreaking oxide insertions the SOT diminishes. The spincurrent generator/magnet/oxide material scheme, which we develop in this work, should universally work for superlattices with the SCG being a spin Hall metal (not limited to Pt), an orbital Hall metal, a topological insulator, a complex oxide, and with the magnet being a ferromagnet, a ferrimagnet, or an antiferromagnet. This novel [SCG/M/oxide]n material scheme might also be benefitted from using self-torqued magnetic layers Table to the Pt 2/Co 0.8/MgO and the Pt 20/Co 0.8/MgO 2 (ξ DL j ≈ 0.14). The giant ξ DL j for the [Pt 2/Co 0.8/MgO 2]10 is also greater than the spin Hall ratio of 0.5 for Pt at resistivity of 30 μΩ cm [4]. This suggests that the SCG/M/oxide superlattice is a very effective spin-orbit material scheme to boost the total dampinglike SOT efficiency. Such enhancement cannot be attributed to the increase of the effective thickness of the Pt because we only measure a small ξ DL j of 0.14 for Pt 20/Co 0.8/