Half-antiperovskites (HAPs) are a class of materials consisting of stacked kagome lattices and thus host exotic magnetic and electronic states. We perform high-throughput calculations based on density functional theory (DFT) and atomistic spin dynamics (ASD) simulations to predict stable magnetic HAPs M 3 X 2 Z 2 (M = Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, and Ni; X is one of the elements from Li to Bi except noble gases and 4f rare-earth metals; Z = S, Se, and Te), with both thermodynamical and mechanical stabilities evaluated. Additionally, the magnetic ground states are obtained by utilizing DFT calculations combined with the ASD simulations. The existing spin frustration in an AFM kagome lattice manifests as competing behavior of the in-plane FM and AFM couplings. For a total number of 930 HAP compositions considered, we have found 23 compounds that are stabilized at non-collinear antiferromagnetic (AFM) state and 11 compounds that possess ferromagnetic (FM) order. Co 3 Sn 2 S 2 is a shandite-type structure with a general composition M 3 X 2 Z 2 . Its crystal structure can be derived from antiperovskites (AP) M 3 XZ with half of the M sites left unoccupied (half antiperovskites, HAP). In this work, we performed HTP screening for 930 HAP compounds with chemical composition M 3 X 2 Z 2 , where the M atoms (M = Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, and Ni) were selected as magnetic transition metal ions with the aim of finding new magnetic HAPs, X are elements from Li-Bi, except noble gases and 4f -elements, and Z atoms are chalcogens (Z = S, Se, and Te). A systematic stability analysis was conducted based on two stability criteria, thermodynamical and mechanical stabilities, determined by the formation energy combined with the convex hull distance and the elastic constants. After validating our calculations using six experimentally known HAPs, we predicted 45 stable novel HAPs. In addition, we evaluated the mechanical properties such as bulk modulus (B ), shear modulus (G), Young's modulus (E ), and Poisson's ratio (v ) for the stable compounds assuming a FM state. Moreover, the MGS analysis was carried out by comparing the total energies of the FM and non-collinear AFM states (see Figure HAPs are ternary chalcogenides with a prototypical shandite structure (M 3 X 2 Z 2 ), corresponding to the rhombohedral crystal structure within the hexagonal setting, and crystallize in the R 3m space group (space group number = 166) (Figure The high-throughput screening process is summarized in the workflow as shown in Figure , where E M3X2Z2 is the total energy of the HAP compound, and E M , E X , and E Z are the total energies of the constituent elements in their bulk phase. In the second step, the convex hull distance (E H ) is evaluated by considering all the competing phases that exist in the open quantum materials database (OQMD). The DFT calculations were conducted using the projector augmented wave (PAW) method as implemented in the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP). The critical magnetic temperature was evaluated with the mean-field approximation, Evaluating material thermodynamical stability, which is determined by the formation energy (E f ) and the convex hull distance (∆E H ), is critical in high-throughput materials design and is one of the key criteria for predicting new materials. A compound is thermodynamically stable as long as E f <0 and ∆E H = 0 conditions are fulfilled. In general, E f is an indispensable but insufficient condition, because a negative E f only ensures stability against decomposition into its constituent elements, whereas ∆E H = 0 guarantees stability against decomposition into any possible combination of the competing phases. A given phase with ∆E H = 0 is the most stable phase against decomposition and part of the convex Table As shown in Figure The compounds are likely to be formed if they are thermodynamically stable. However, it does not corroborate a further decrease in total energy against structural deformation or distortion upon the application of mechanical strain, which can be assessed by the mechanical stability analysis. A compound is mechanically stable as long as it has absolute minimum energy for the unstrained state. Therefore, mechanical stability is formulated in terms of strain energy (W), which can be calculated from the energy difference between the strained (E str ) and the unstrained (E unstr ) states based on the elastic constants. where denotes strain and C i,j are second-order elastic tensors. For crystals with rhombohedral Laue class 3m, there are six independent elastic constants: C 11 , C 12 , C 13 , C 14 , C 33 , and C 44 , where, C 66 = (C 11 -C 12 )/2 as in the hexagonal case. Therefore, the elastic tensor is expressed as follows: A compound is mechanically stable if it fulfills the Born-Huang stability criteria. The mechanical stability is analyzed for experimentally reported HAP and all predicted compounds with a convex hull distance <100 meV. All six experimentally synthesized compounds (marked with asterisk Table Next, we evaluated various mechanical properties including bulk modulus (B ), shear modulus (G), Young's modulus (E ), and Poisson's ratio (ν), which were obtained using the elastic tensors C i,j . The mechanical properties are briefly defined below. The bulk modulus (B ) quantifies the strength of a compound to resist volume compressibility under mechanical stress from all sides and the shear modulus (G) measures the strength of a compound to withstand transverse deformation. Pugh proposed As shown in Table Poisson's ratio describes the plasticity behavior of the material, which measures the deformation in the direction perpendicular to the applied internal forces. When a stretching force is applied in the longitudinal direction, a material initiates to elongate. Simultaneously, the crosssection contracts in the transverse direction. This results in a positive value for Poisson's ratio, which is the ratio of transverse contraction to longitudinal elongation. The linear Poisson's ratio can be calculated directly from the bulk and shear modulus values, using the formula ν = (3B -2G)/(2(3B +G)). For HAP compounds with ∆E H = 0, the positive Poisson's ratio varies between 0.11 in Co 3 Al 2 S 2 and 0.30 in Co 3 Al 2 S 2 (Table However, a negative Poisson's ratio is obtained when the cross-section of materials elongates in response to the longitudinal stretching force. Such materials are called auxetic materials. Auxetics materials have numerous applications, such as sensor technology, air filters, fasteners, soundproof materials and high-performance armor We list in Table Furthermore, the ASD method was utilized to cross check the obtained MGSs using the DFT approach. Discrepancies on the obtained MGSs by DFT and ASD approaches can be identified in Table Therefore, the complexities in predicting the true MGSs of HAPs are hinted in the above comparative discussions of Co 3 Pb 2 S 2 and Co 3 Bi 2 S 2 . The diversity of the magnetic exchange couplings motivates us to gain a more complete picture of their behaviors in a group of, e.g., Co-based or Mn-based HAPs. We summarize in Figure In summary, a systematic high-throughput screening was performed on 930 HAP compounds to search for novel stable magnetic systems. After validating the stability of 6 experimentally reported compounds based on the thermodynamical and mechanical stability criteria, we found 45 stable novel compounds. The number of stable compounds rises to 102 if the convex hull tolerance (∆E H ) is increased to 100 meV/atom. Further COHP analysis suggests that M-Z bonds contribute most to the thermodynamic stability. Subsequently, we invesgated various mechanical properties such as bulk modulus (B ), shear modulus (G), Young's modulus (E ), and Poisson's ratio (v ) for the thermodynamically stable compounds. We found six compounds with negative Poisson's ratio, which is an uncommon occurrence and can be useful for applications like sensors. Moreover, the systematic calculations of the magnetic exchange coupling parameters indicate that it is difficult to properly determine the MGS by employing solely the DFT method. Instead, by adopting the ASD simulations, the predicted MGSs by DFT can be further verified or revised. In the end, we show that 23 compounds would host a non-collinear AFM state and 14 of them show a T N higher than room temperature. A number of 11 HAPs were found to possess FM ground state and 5 of them exhibit a T C higher than room temperature. The investigations on the MGS and T C /T N provide a valuable guidance for designing novel magnetic materials for spintronics applications. hull