Haning Xiu contributed to build multistable Maxwell lattice models and 3D printing, numerical simulation, experimental implementation, and manuscript preparation. Harry Liu contributed to numerical simulation, multi-material Maxwell lattice design and experiments, and manuscript preparation. Andrea Poli contributed to multi-material Maxwell lattice design and experiments. Guangchao Wan Synthetic mechanical metamaterials have been demonstrated to exhibit exotic physical and mechanical properties such as negative Poisson's ratio In this section we discuss the effects of the springs, which are added to induce bistability, on the surface mechanical properties of the lattice and on the generated mechanical stiffnesses for the lattice. We show that, interestingly, the stiffness of the soft edge increases linearly with the stiffness of the spring, whereas the stiffness of the rigid edge is insensitive to the spring constant. Additionally, the springs generate mechanical stiffness when transforming the lattice from one state to another. A Maxwell lattice of n × m unit cells is created to quantify the surface stiffness of the lattice during the topological polarization transitions. To investigate how the bistable units affect the mechanics of the lattice, linearized surface stiffnesses are calculated and compared with the results of the same lattice without bistable units (Fig. where ii and kk label the unit cells and jj labels the 6 bonds (edges of triangles) in each unit cell, ll iiii0 and ll iiii are the rest and current lengths of each bond, respectively, ll kk represents the length of the spring in its current state. The stiffnesses of the bonds and the added springs are taken to be kk 1 and kk 2 respectively. In the limit of small strain on the bonds and springs the elastic energy of the lattice (energy of each bond and spring) can be linearized. More details about the elastic energy and its linearization in a unit cell can be found in the Supplementary Note. To perform the test, three out of four boundaries of the lattice are fixed, and the remaining boundary is free to be given a small displacement at the center (Fig. where bb rr is a side length of triangle A, ψψ aarr and ψψ bbbb are inner angles of the triangles, and φφ is the angle between the vector of aa 1 and the side of cc bb . More information on the mechanical stiffness is shown in the Supplementary Note. Here, the elastic and shear stiffnesses have linear relationships to the spring constant kk 2 and are also dependent on the initial twisting angle αα, shown in Fig. When kk 2 = 0, both kk eeee and kk ssh are zero and the lattice transformation between topological states is a purely soft one as discussed in Ref. The surface stiffness of the lattice depends on the rest length and spring constant of the added springs, as well as the configuration of the lattice. We first study the effect of the spring's rest length on the surface stiffness. By varying the rest length of the springs between 80%-99% of (aa bb + bb rr )/2, we tune the two equilibria between far from the topological transition to close to the transition (Fig. We then study the effect of changing spring constant kk 2 on the edge stiffness (Fig. The introduction of multistability to a Maxwell lattice offers new opportunities for studying intriguing structural features from topological interfaces to defects, as well as their reconfigurability. As an important first step in understanding heterogeneous states in multistable Maxwell lattices, here we study the static interface between topologically polarized and unpolarized phases in a multistable lattice. For a homogenous multistable Maxwell lattice, as a shear strain is applied from one boundary of the lattice, a portion of the lattice undergoes a topological transition from one topological state to another. However, due to the different primitive vectors between the two lattice domains in different topological states (Fig. The lattice-vector mismatch between the two domains causes interesting profiles where the interface curves and widens in all cases. This curvature shares similarities with curved thin elastic bodies in continuum elasticity due to frustration The study of the interface profile reveals a geometric frustration when this multistable lattice transforms from one topological state to another via an interface. When the whole lattice transforms uniformly, there is no geometric frustration, but as we described above, when this transition occurs across the lattice with an interface, the lattice vector mismatch causes frustration and internal stress, giving rise to interesting profiles. While such a transition is often dynamic (i.e., as the lattice is triggered by an impact from one end and the transformation propagates through the lattice), we have chosen to focus on the statics in this study; the dynamics of this interface profile will require further study to achieve a deeper understanding of how this geometric frustration interplays with waves of stress. A prototype of a 3D-printed lattice is used for experimental demonstration of the theoretical findings in the previous sections. The lattice consisting of 6-unit cells in both length and width are assembled with bistable units, where the added springs are incorporated between two triangles from adjacent unit cells (one unit cell with spring embedded is shown Fig. where the Guest mode has to be realized by a uniform dilation which is difficult to control, the multistable lattice efficiently improves the twisting manipulation and speeds up the transition process. Supplementary video 1 shows the entire transformation process of the lattice. The experimental setup for measuring the surface stiffness of the lattice is shown in Fig. To further demonstrate a significant contrast of the edge stiffnesses between two boundaries of the lattice, a multi-material additive manufacturing technique is utilized. In this design, VeroWhite, a stiff material, has been used to construct a solid triangle body for the unit cells to maintain the unit cell structure, and Agilus30, a softer material, has been used as the hinges connecting the triangles in the lattice. The hinges are stiff in response to a tensile force along the hinge axis because the Agilus 30 hinge is constrained via its attachment to the stiff Vero-White triangles. The hinges are compliant in bending because the soft Agilus 30 is free to bend. During the force vs. displacement measurements of the multi-material lattice, the boundary of interest is probed by a force sensor while the other 3 boundaries are fixed in place. The measurement shows a promising contrast between the edge stiffnesses of the rigid and floppy edges with an average initial stiffness ratio of ~16. The experimental set up and the measured force-displacement curves are shown in Fig. A further engineering design needs to be considered to succeed in the integration of bistability and topological kagome lattices through additive manufacturing methods. In summary, a multi-stable topological mechanical lattice is first-ever created by attaching a spring between two specific edges of the unit cell of a topological kagome lattice. We experimentally and computationally show that the new design of the multistable Maxwell lattice can achieve a controllable and swift transformation between different topological phases with dramatically different mechanical behaviors and enhanced load-bearing capacity (Fig. Multi-stable Maxwell lattices have broad potential applications according to different working circumstances. The edge of the polarized Maxwell lattices with a higher stiffness (hard edge) can be used for ballistic protection and vehicle components acting as load-bearing elements, while the soft edges of the lattices can be used as energy absorption layers and buffers. As the lattice reprograms to the non-polarized phase, both edges become soft, and this effect can be utilized to absorb and store external impact energy. The introduced bistability enables a feasible approach for improving the operation of programmable topological mechanical metamaterials. While in this specific example, bistablity in each unit cell is achieved through an addition of a spring, there are other methods by which bistability or multistability can be introduced including but not limited to strain engineering The primary methods used in this paper were theoretical analysis combined with experimental validation. Computer-aided programming and numerical computations were implemented via MATLAB. The prototype consisting of 6 × 6-unit cells was 3D printed using PLA materials by a commercial 3D printer (Ender 3 Pro) and assembled with springs (Uxewll 304 stainless steel) to generate a multistable lattice. A surface stiffness test was implemented using a digital force gauge by pushing and pulling tips at the soft and hard edges. The experiment on the multimaterial-3D-printed lattice was performed on a platform that employs a constant-speed actuator instrumented with a 1N force sensor (FORT 100). Three boundaries of the sample were fixed on the platform by clamps and tapes, and the force probe indented a selected tip at the open boundary by up to ~3 mm. The hingeless bistable unit was 3D printed with a Nylon material (Ultracur3D® ST 45) on a commercial 3D printer (Origin MDK4). The mechanical characterization of the bistable hinge was performed on a dynamic mechanical analyzer (TA RSA3) using a custom fixture to apply pressure to the outer edges of the unit while providing clearance for the spring element. spring is given by Eq. S.2 gives the energy of an entire unit cell. However, the total energy of a lattice is the combination of these entire unit cells having added spring and additional unit cells which only include red triangles from the top edge or blue triangles from the bottom. These incomplete unit cells only have partial terms of energy in Eq. S.2 which are related to those triangles. Reconfiguration results in Fig. First, two initial configurations of the lattice are given by two different sets of angles from homogeneous lattices, one located in the polarized domain, and the other in the non-polarized phase. Second, bonds at the interface of two groups of lattices are stretched and connected together to create an entire lattice consisting of these two domains (two examples in Fig. Third, the combined lattice is relaxed and the nonlinear minimization (nonlinear conjugate gradient method) is applied to solve this unconstrained problem. To quantify the surface stiffness of a Maxwell lattice during the polarization transition, it is assumed that the relative deformations of neighboring sites of the lattice is small enough (small ∆u values) when compared with the geometry of the lattice, and thus the simplified linearized energy of a unit cell, T en , can be used as an approximation instead of the nonlinear energy En. The linearized elastic energy of an entire unit cell represented in Fig. where K en and F en are a 10 by 10 semi positive-definite matrix corresponding to the quadratic term and an 10 by 1 vector relate to the force on the bistable spring away from the rest length l s , respectively, at a given α, which have the forms and ) is an energy constant resulting from the prestress in the spring, where l s is the rest length of the added spring. Coefficients of diagonal terms in the dynamic matrix K en are calculated: Coefficients of off-diagonal terms in Eq. (S.4) are expressed below: The lattice also consists of unit cells with only red or blue triangles at the top or bottom edges without bistable units. For a unit cell, (1, j), which only includes a blue triangle at the bottom of the lattice, the displacement vector u only consists of Node A , B , and C in Fig. (S.53) The corresponding linearized energy can be written by where K b is a 6 by 6 semi positive-definite matrix and is expressed , (S.57) For a unit cell, (n, j), that only has a red triangle at the top edge, the displacement vector u now has Nodes A, B, and C accordingly. The corresponding semi positive-definite matrix K r of this unit cell associated with these displacements is shown below. u = u i,j,x1 , u i,j,x2 , u i,j,x3 , u i,j,y1 , u i,j,y2 , u i,j,y3 T , (S.64) where K i,j is the coefficient from the dynamic matrix K en , and K i,jr are given by . (S.71) Compared K i,jr with K i,j at the same position in K en , K i,jr does not include the terms related to the energy from the bistable unit. The total linearized elastic energy, T = u T Ku + F T u + T 0 , in Eq. ( Without bistable units, a homogeneous Maxwell lattice can be transformed between different topological polarization domains via strain-free soft twisting. However, during the twisting process, the introduced bistability can generate new mechanical stiffness for the lattice, such as effective elastic and shear stiffness, when the spring is under compressed/elongated. It is assumed that all bonds of the lattice have infinite stiffness and only added springs generate the elastic energy of the system. Starting from a homogeneous lattice with an initial twisting angle α, the rest length of the added spring is (S.76) The pushing force of F x (F y ) parallel (perpendicular) to the primitive vector of a 1 that twists the lattice can be obtained by calculating the work that equals the total elastic energy of the added spring. where δl is the difference of the current length of spring and the rest length of the spring, which is Therefore, the effective elastic stiffness and shear stiffness are where φ is the angle between the vector of a 1 and the side of c b , which is given by . (S.80) The prototype is designed using SOLIDWORKS and 3D printed using PLA materials via an Ender 3 Pro printer. The material infill density of 10% is used for the 3D printed parts. The spring is selected from commercial Uxewll 304 stainless steel, which has a spring constant of k 2 = 150 N/m. Fig. The theoretical stiffness of the hard edge shows an insignificant decrease (no change for the pulling case) as the displacement increases; the experimental data show the increase of stiffness for the hard edge with increasing the displacement. At the low displacement range, the low stiffness is caused by the relative sliding of the fixed boundaries. But at the high displacement area, the friction, generated from the compression between hinges and triangles, dominates over the ratio of the force to displacement, leading to higher edge stiffness. The experimental stiffness of the soft edge (especially for the pushing case) is generally higher than the theoretical one since there are non-negligible surface frictions at the junctions of each unit cell. Box plots of force-displacement are shown in Fig. 3D printed using a Nylon material (printed piece in Fig. 