Thickness scaling of ferroelectricity in Al 1-x ScxN is a determining factor for its potential application in neuromorphic computing and memory devices. In this letter, we report on ultrathin (10 nm) Al 0.72 Sc 0.28 N films that are ferroelectrically switchable at room temperature. All-epitaxial Al 0.72 Sc 0.28 N/Pt heterostructures are grown by magnetron sputtering onto GaN/sapphire substrates followed by an in situ Pt capping approach to avoid oxidation of the Al 0.72 Sc 0.28 N film surface. Structural characterization by X-ray diffraction and transmission electron microscopy reveals the established epitaxy. The thus obtained high-quality interfaces in combination with the in situ capping is expected to facilitate ferroelectric switching of Al 1-x ScxN in the ultrathin regime. The analysis of the relative permittivity and coercive field dependence on the Al 0.72 Sc 0.28 N film thicknesses in the range of 100 nm down to 10 nm indicates only moderate scaling effects, suggesting that the critical thickness for ferroelectricity is not yet approached. Furthermore, the deposited layer stack demonstrates the possibility of including ultrathin ferroelectric Al 1-x ScxN into all-epitaxial GaN-based devices using sputter deposition techniques. Thus, our work highlights the integration and scaling potential of all-epitaxial ultrathin Al 1-x ScxN offering high storage density paired with low voltage operation desired for state of the art ferroelectric memory devices. T HE high coercive field (E c ) and the high, stable remanent polarization separates the ferroelectric properties recently discovered in materials with wurtzite-type structure from classical ferroelectrics All films were grown by sputter deposition in an Oerlikon (now Evatec) MSQ 200 multisource system on top of commercially available GaN/sapphire substrates. A 12 nm thick epitaxial Pt layer (bottom electrode) was DC-sputtered at 500 °C, 600 W, and 50 sccm Kr flow. XRD measurements were performed using monochromatic K α radiation in a Seifert XRD 3000 PTS system (θ-2θ scan) as well as in a Rigaku SmartLab diffractometer (Phi-scan). The Al 0.72 Sc 0.28 N thin films were grown by pulsed-DC co-sputtering at 450 °C, details about the process can be found elsewhere The voltage dependence of the relative permittivity (ε r ) is depicted in Fig. The θ-2θ scan depicted in Fig. Using equation 1, with θ 1 and θ -1 corresponding to the maximum of the peaks right and left from the center Pt 111 reflection, an average film thickness of 11 nm is determined. The in-plane ordering was resolved by recording a phi-scan of the non-specular 131 Pt reflection, depicted in Fig. The intensity profile across the HRTEM micrograph is shown in Fig. Distinguishable ferroelectric switching of 10 nm thick Al 0.72 Sc 0.28 N was demonstrated at room temperature. Largely constant coercive fields and constant ε r for films ranging from 100 nm down to 10 nm thickness were confirmed. Thus, no indications of instabilities of the ferroelectric phase or considerable contributions from dead layers are present. Therefore, it is expected that further potential remains to scale ferroelectric Al 1-x Sc x N to even lower thicknesses. These results highlight the general feasibility of using Al 1-x Sc x N as an active layer for integrated electronic devices with low operating voltage and high storage density.