Moiré heterostructures hold the promise to provide platforms to tailor strongly correlated and topological states of matter. Here, we theoretically propose the emergence of an effective, rectangular moiré lattice in twisted bilayers of SnS with nonsymmorphic symmetry. Based on first-principles calculations, we demonstrate that strong intrinsic spin-orbit interactions render this tunable platform a moiré semimetal that hosts 2D hourglass fermions protected by time-reversal symmetry T and the nonsymmorphic screw rotation symmetry C2y. We show that topological Fermi arcs connecting pairs of Weyl nodal points in the hourglass dispersion are preserved for weak electron-electron interactions, particularly in regions of superconducting order that emerge in the phase diagram of interaction strength and filling. Our work established moiré engineering as an inroad into the realm of correlated topological semimetals and may motivate further topology related researches in moiré heterostructures. Introduction -Moiré superlattices that emerge upon twisting few layers of van der Waals heterostructures have elevated twisted graphene and transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD) multilayers to the forefront of condensed matter physics. Twistronics exploits quantum interference effects to quench kinetic energy scales of electrons moving in the effective long-ranged moiré potential In this Letter, we theoretically propose the twisted bilayer tin(II)-sulfide (tSnS) to form a rectangular moiré lattice hosting 2D hourglass fermions Moiré engineering of topological 2D semimetals -The idea we put forward in this work aims to expand the realm of topological 2D semimetals Including spin-orbit interactions leads to significantly altered band degeneracies, as shown in Fig. Effective tight-binding Hamiltonian and hourglass fermiology -The emergence of charge localization points in tSnS hints towards an effective description of the low-energy valence band manifold within a tightbinding (TB) approach. Following the real-space distribution of the wave functions obtained from DFT, we adapt a rectangular lattice model with two sublattices A(B), as shown in Fig. The strong intrinsic spin-orbit coupling of tSnS is captured by Kane-Mele and Rashba SOC terms. The latter particularly break inversion and SU (2) symmetry completely such that the non-interacting Hamiltonian reads where c ( †) is creates (annihilates) an electron with spin s on moiré site r i that belongs to one of the sublattices o ∈ {A, B}. To achieve sufficient agreement with the ab intio DFT band structure and mimic the correct spin texture, we allow for nearest-neighbor SOC terms and up to 5 th nearest-neighbor kinetic hopping terms The origin and robustness of the nodal lines and Weyl points in the band structure can be understood from a symmetry perspective This particular choice of the interaction does not capture the entire long-ranged nature of the Coulomb interaction. Nevertheless, long-ranged contributions to the interaction may be screened in a controlled manner by substrate engineering To analyze electronic instabilities within the weakcoupling limit, we resort to the multi-orbital randomphase approximation (RPA) The largest eigenvalue λ SC corresponds to the highest critical temperature T c and the corresponding eigenfunction ∆(k) yields the symmetry of the dominating SC order parameter. We outline correlated phases emerging from electronic interactions in tSnS in a phase diagram of interaction strength U and filling ν as shown in Fig. When doping away from the vHs, DW order is steadily replaced by mixed-parity SC instabilities on the electronand hole doped side, see Fig. Discussion -In this work, we predict the robust realization of an effective rectangular moiré lattice model with strong Rashba spin-orbit coupling via moiré engineering of tSnS. Based on our large scale first-principles calculations, the limited crystalline symmetries of the twisted compound restrict the symmetry group of the effective model to the nonsymmorphic screw rotation symmetry C 2y and time-reversal symmetry T . This leads to symmetry protected pairs of Weyl nodal points along Γ -Y that are connected by Fermi arcs, which renders tSnS a 2D topological moiré semimetal. The hourglass fermions are robust against twist angle variations and in particular in the presence of weak interactions. While mixed charge-/density waves (DW) break T -symmetry and hence potentially destroy the Weyl nodal points, our analysis suggests that Fermi arc states are preserved in regions of the electronic phase diagram governed by SC instabilities. We hence argue that when starting from purely repulsive on-site interactions, any kind of unconventional SC order mediated by spin-/charge fluctuations inevitably will be of topological nature and will preserve the non-trivial topology of the hourglass fermions. Hence, our approach opens a rich playground towards the experimental realization of tunable Weyl-like physics, particularly as SnS is chemically stable and the valence band manifold should be accessible via gating. An interesting observation of our weak-coupling analysis concerns the observation of Majorana zero energy modes in subleading order. This hints towards a meta-stable state of the system that could potentially be stabilized by e.g. out-of-equilibrium dynamics The first-principles calculations are performed within the density functional theory (DFT) framework using the projected augmented-wave (PAW) method A 1×1×1 k-point grid is used for the ground state and relaxation calculations. The experimental lattice constants for bulk SnS (a=4.07 Å, b=4.31 Å) are used to build the supercell of twisted bilayer SnS. A negligible strain (≈ 0.05%) is applied on b to satisfy the commensurate periodic boundary condition. All the structures are optimized until the Hellman-Feynman forces on each atom are smaller than 0.01 eV/ Å and the energy convergence is reached when the energy difference is below 10 -6 eV between two consecutive self-consistent steps. A vacuum space of more than 15 Å along the z direction is built to decouple artificial interactions between periodic neighboring slabs. Van der Waals corrections are taken into account using the DFT-D2 method of Grimme Here, c is creates (annihilates) an electron with spin s on moiré site r i that belongs to one of the sublattices o ∈ {A, B}. As the rectangular lattice possesses translational invariance, a description of the non-interacting theory is done most conveniently in Bloch momentum space. As the 4-band Hilbert space arises from ĉ † = {c † A↑ , c † B↑ , c † A↓ , c † B↓ } this fixes our basis choice for the Bloch Hamiltonian. Defining the phase factors φ lm := e -ik•(la 1 +a 2 ) relative to the lattice vectors a 1(2) of the rectangular lattice, the nearest-neighbor SOC terms of the Bloch Hamiltonian read The appearance of the diagonal matrix σ ± (φ AB ) = diag(e iφ AB , e -iφ AB ) is reminiscent of the general Kane-Mele spin-orbit interaction, while the Rashba terms are proportional to σ x(y) . We further use the notation l = -l for negative numbers. The vector connecting the sublattices A(B) within the unit cell is given by d intra AB = (-1 2 , 1 2 ) and the three remaining vectors can be constructed by rotating by θ = π/2. The kinetic energy terms that couple same sublattices read The appearance of the diagonal matrix t ± AA = diag(t + AA , t - AA ) with nonequivalent hopping elements for sublattices A(B) is a direct consequence of the non-symmorphic symmetry C 2y . The longer-ranged kinetic hopping elements connecting different sublattices read Altogether, the Hamiltonian for the band sets I/II is given by The success of fitting the flat bands in twisted SnS within our low-energy tight-binding model is demonstrated in panel (a). By fitting the hopping parameters to the full ab-initio band structure for different angles, almost perfect agreement is achieved. In particular, the spin texture mandated by DFT calculations is captured accurately within our modeling approach, see Fig. In this section, we summarize the random-phase approximation (RPA) formalism applied in the main text that captures the collective spin-/charge excitations (DW) and superconducting instabilities in twisted SnS. In the absence of spin rotational SU (2) symmetry caused by the strong Rashba-type spin-orbit coupling (SOC) in the material, the electrons' spin remains no longer a well-defined quantum number when transforming the multi-orbital Bloch Hamiltonian to band space (α, b), where α = (o, s) denotes the orbital (sublattice)-and spin degrees of freedom. It is therefore that spin-and charge excitation generally mix in the absence of SU (2) symmetry for arbitrary momentum transfer q and a description beyond the decoupling in longitudinal and transverse fluctuations sufficient in the case of SU (2) symmetry is needed space that connects different interactions vertices appearing in the diagrammatic expansion Here, u αb are the orbital-to-band transformations that render the free Green's function It is the core of the random-phase approximation as single-channel approximation of the effective two-particle interaction vertex Γ (4) to expand the two-particle Green's function χ RPA (q) in a series of bubble-and ladder diagrams to infinite order in U such to account for all possible one-loop corrections as shown in Fig. To this end, it is beneficial to introduce the generalized (undressed) four-point correlation function χ P H/P P (q) in the particle-hole and particle-particle channel Here, we adopt standard notation and label in-going legs (α 1 , α 2 ) and out-going (α 3 , α 4 ) legs accordingly. The tensor M P H/P P (k, q) roots in the contributions of the unitary orbital-toband transformations Eq. ( In practice, this is achieved by discretizing the 2D Brillouin zone with an equidistant momentum mesh with N k × N k coarse momentum points and averaging over a fine momentum mesh with N k f × N k f point such that the electronic dispersion is effectively resolved for For the phase diagram presented in Fig. In terms of the generalized four-point susceptibility, the expansion of the two-particle Greens function χ RPA in bubble and ladder diagrams is straight forward by using Hugenholtz diagrams representing symmetrized interaction vertices, see Fig. we can resum this series to infinite order in U to obtain the full RPA corrected two-particle Here, we only focus on the static part of the effective interaction vertex, i.e. iq 0 = 0. Einstein notation applies as double indices are summed over implicitly. To solve this linear equation for χ P H , it is beneficial to re-order the legs of each rank-4 tensor according to the new positions To retain the standard notation, the legs need to be re-ordered accordingly. From the expression above it is clear that (i) spin-and charge correlations are generally mixed in the absence of SU (2) symmetry and (ii) that the RPA corrected susceptibility encounters divergences when the denominator becomes singular. This 'generalized' Stoner criterion for multi-orbital systems can be used to estimate the critical interaction strength U c that marks the onset of spin-/charge density wave (DW) order in the system. Divergences occur first at the interaction value for which the maximal eigenvalue λ max of the (non-hermitian) product This procedure is used to separate the phase diagram as function of filling ν and interaction strength U into paramagnetic and DW ordered regions. For interaction values U < U c , the effective coupling in the ph-channel did not diverge yet and fluctuations around DW ordered phases may provide the pairing glue for unconventional S6. Diagrams contributing to the pairing vertex within the fluctuation-exchange approximation. The vertex must is anti-symmetrized to fulfill fermionic anti-commutation relations, which can be achieved by swapping the out-going legs 3 → 4, starting from the simple RPA expansion. superconducting states in the system. To capture these contributions from fluctuationexchange From the first to the second line, we transposed each rank-4 tensor according to the order (1, 4, 2, 3) to rewrite the tensor product as batched matrix-matrix multiplication in q. To account for all contributions from bubble and ladder diagrams, we anti-symmetrize the pairing vertex by swapping the outgoing legs 3 ↔ 4 such that we finally arrive at ANALYZING SPIN-/CHARGE DENSITY WAVE AND SUPERCONDUCTING This section aims to establish the connection between (i) the dressed two-particle Greens function χ RPA (q) and the spin-/charge correlation functions in the presence of broken SU First, to analyze spin-and charge excitations, we resort to the spin-spin (charge-charge) correlation function in imaginary time where X i (q, τ ) = N (q, τ ) if i = 0 describes the density-density response of the system and X i (q, τ ) = S(q, τ ) if i ∈ {x, y, z} describes the spin-spin correlations associated to the spatial directions of the lattice structure. Furthermore, τ ∈ [0, β] denotes the imaginary time argument with inverse temperature β = 1/T and T τ is the time-ordering operator. In this context, the spin (charge) operators are defined as where σ i denotes the i-th Pauli matrix and σ 0 refers to the identity matrix. Comparing the expression of the spin-/charge correlation function Eq. ( where we traced over the orbital degrees of freedom. This is sufficient when analyzing in which channel the leading instability occurs. The leading channel is identified by the maximum value of any |χ RPA (q)| at given wave vector q. In general, divergencies in multiple channel can occur and the resulting DW instability will be a mixture of spin-/charge density waves in the case of broken SU (2) symmetry as mentioned in the beginning. Next, we turn to the discussion of the superconducting ordering tendencies. Given the effective interaction vertex in the particle-particle channel Γ PP Eq. ( S7. Linearized gap equation for the superconducting order parameter ∆ α 1 α 2 (k). The hatched area denotes the effective vertex in the particle-particle channel Γ PP σ as defined in Eq. ( multi-orbital systems, the linearized gap equation as diagrammatically shown in Fig. From the first to the second line, we identified the particle-particle loop Eq. ( On the other hand, the advantage of solving the linearized gap equation in orbital space lies in its gauge invariance, which is crucial for determining topological properties of symmetry broken phases as all information about topology is encoded in the phase of the Bloch states. The reason for it is that the solution of the linearized gap in orbital-space Eq. ( and is therefore not gauge invariant. In the presence of time-reversal symmetry T and restricting the analysis to intraband pairing only, i. The eigenfunctions ∆ α 1 ,α 2 (k) obtained by solving the linearized gap equation Eq.( where the phase factors φ( k) need to be introduced in order to ensure numerical equivalence and k = (-k x , k y ) is the C 2y transformed momentum. The reason for it is that by applying C 2y to entries of the Bloch Hamiltonian or SC order parameter combining different sublattices, e.g. ∆ ↑↓ AB (k), bonds that lie originally in the same unit cell (and therefore carry no phase φ( k) resembling their momentum dependence) are mapped to different unit cells under C 2y . Therefore, they pick up a phase dependence that needs to be compensated when numerically comparing to non-transformed order parameter. 