Machine learning interatomic potentials (MLIPs) are routinely used atomic simulations, but generating databases of atomic configurations used in fitting these models is a laborious process, requiring significant computational and human effort. A computationally efficient method is presented to generate databases of atomic configurations that contain optimal information on the small-displacement regime of the potential energy surface of bulk crystalline matter. Utilising non-diagonal supercell (NDSC) 1 , an automatic process is suggested for ab initio data generation. MLIPs were fitted for Al, W, Mg and Si, which very closely reproduce the ab initio phonon and elastic properties. The protocol can be easily adapted to other materials and can be inserted in the workflow of any flavour of MLIP generation. Modern approaches to material discovery and characterisation include the use of ab initio modelling. While well-established methods, such as Density Functional Theory (DFT), reliably predict the electronic, mechanic and thermodynamic properties of materials Creating such databases of atomic configurations are time consuming, both in terms of human and computational effort. Even though automated approaches, such as active learning The machine learned potential framework we use is GAP arXiv:2207.11828v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 24 Jul 2022 where R represents an atomic environment, s is a summation over a set of M representative environments, each associated with a weight α s . The kernel function, K(R, R ), may be regarded as a similarity measure between two atomic environments R and R . In this work, we describe atomic environments using the Smooth Overlap of Atomic Positions (SOAP) where a Gaussian with a width of σ atom is centered on each atom up to a specified cutoff radius, whereby beyond this cutoff, f cut smoothly goes to zero. This density is then expressed in terms of radial and spherical harmonics basis functions which are defined up to a specified complexity controlled by n max and l max and m = -l, -l + 1, ... l. Rotationally invariant features are constructed from the power spectrum elements as which are normalised Finally, we obtain an expression for our covariance evaluation between atomic neighbourhoods as where δ and ζ are hyperparameters that control the energy scaling of the descriptor and smoothness of the kernel, respectively. To obtain the weights α s , we minimise the loss function where the quantity y can be the one of total energy, force or stress value of an atomic configuration, and σ n is a hyperparameter, related to the weight or importance of each data point. y n represents the reference ab initio values, whereas ỹn is the GAP prediction of the total energy using equation 1 or the appropriate derivatives, with respect to atomic coordinates or lattice deformations. This definition allows us to fit using the total energy observations, as well as the forces on atoms and the virial stress for each configuration. The second term in the loss function acts as a regulariser. In algebraic form, the minimisation of this loss function with respect to α yields where Σ contains a diagonal matrix containing the values of σ n and y = [y 1 , . . . , y N ]. The kernel matrices K contain all pairwise evaluations of kernel functions between atomic environments, where M denotes the representative set, and N refers to the reference database of atomic configurations. For an interatomic potential model to represent the PES near a stationary point, which in our case is the perfect bulk crystal, it needs to reproduce the force constant matrix (FCM) of an extended system, formulated as the Hessian of the Born-Oppenheimer total energy E with respect to Cartesian atomic coordinates where i, j denote atomic indices, and α, β represent Cartesian directions. Under the harmonic approximation, the total energy is expressed as a Taylor expansion with terms higher than second order truncated. Most MLIP approaches rely on the assumption of locality of the atomic interactions, i.e. for any small number ε > 0 there exist an r cut such that all Φ iαjβ < ε for |r i -r j | > r cut , corresponding to a truncated FCM. It should be noted that MLIP frameworks can be extended to represent long-range, such as Coulombic, interactions, but our current discussion is limited to the short-range term representing local, i.e. covalent or metallic, bonding. It is customary to express the elements of the FCM such that they are indexed by labels of the basis atoms i and j within their primitive unit cells, and the displacement vector R p that translates the two primitive unit cells into each other: such that r j = R p + r j . Fitting MLIPs is ultimately data driven, therefore atomic configurations should ideally contain information on as many elements of the truncated FCM as possible. As fitting data is most commonly provided as atomic configurations with the corresponding ab initiototal energies, forces, and stresses, supercells capable of accommodating perturbations of distant atom pairs are highly desirable. A common approach is to use supercells generated such that their shape is as closely cubic as possible, as an attempt to include atom pairs isotropically. The lattice vectors a s , b s , and c s of a supercell s are related to the unit cell lattice vectors a u , b u , and c u as where elements of the supercell matrix S ij ∈ Z, and for a diagonal supercell (DSC) S ij = S i δ ij . For example, generating DSC of the cubic unit cell of fcc or bcc crystals, or in case of hexagonal crystals, using the orthorhombic unit cell is a convenient choice, as the unit cell lattice vectors are orthogonal. Atoms need to be displaced in the supercell before computing the ab initio total energy and its derivatives. George et al where r j,0 denotes the equilibrium position of atom j in the supercell. Since fitting of MLIPs assumes some degree of uncertainty on each observation as described in Section II A, such dominance may have detrimental effect on the quality of the fit as small contributions will be indistinguishable from noise. More terms in equation 5, corresponding to larger supercells, is expected to aggravate the situation, leading to poor fit of small elements of the FCM. Alternatively, the displacement of a single atom along a Cartesian direction results in the resolution of each individual element of the FCM, but such configurations contain highly correlated atomic environments and cannot be regarded as realistic examples of configurations sampled from finite temperature simulations. Samples from finite temperature simulations, such as molecular dynamics, are an optimal solution, but only if the sampling uses a sufficiently similar PES to that of the ab initio model, otherwise the configurations will be practically equivalent to those generated by randomisation. The computational cost of the ab initio reference calculations when using DSC scales as (S 1 S 2 S 3 ) 3 if using plane-wave DFT, therefore the size of the supercell, and the representable elements of the FCM is severely limited. Lloyd-Williams and Monserrat 1 demonstrated that perturbations that require a DSC constituting S 1 × S 2 × S 3 primitive cells, may be represented by a NDSC with no more than the least common multiple of S 1 , S 2 , and S 3 number of primitive cells. Lloyd-Williams and Monserrat suggested this method to sample the vibrational modes in the Brillouin zone (BZ) of a crystal uniformly on an N × N × N grid. When computing the FCM using finite differences, DSC of the size N × N × N are needed, whereas if using NDSCs, only supercells of size up to N are required. Even though more NDSCs have to be typically considered, each individual calculation incurs significantly less computational cost, while the process can benefit from trivial parallelisation. Overall, significant reductions in the the computational cost associated with ab initio phonon dispersion calculations can be realised, and also allows one to consider more dense sampling of the BZ. With the force constants determined under the harmonic approximation, one method for finding the frequency of the allowed vibrational modes q ∈ BZ is done via finding the eigenvalues of the dynamical matrix D(q) whose elements are obtained via Fourier-transforming the mass-weighted FCM as where m i and m j are the masses of atoms i and j. The square root of the eigenvalues at each q vector are the phonon frequencies. Negative eigenvalues result in imaginary frequencies, corresponding to dynamically unstable modes, along which displacements result in lowering the energy. As customary, we represent such imaginary frequencies as negative numbers on our phonon dispersion plots. The underlying ab initio calculations that were used to train the interatomic potentials as well as benchmark them was preformed using the plane-wave DFT code, CASTEP Our aim is to investigate a protocol that produces database configurations targeted to fit vibrational properties of crystalline materials in a computationally optimal way. We suggest basing the workflow on ND-SCs, which can represent long-range perturbation of crystalline order using the configurations that contain the fewest possible atoms. To construct a database that can explores displacements around the pristine crystal geometry corresponding to an N × N × N supercell of the primitive unit cell, we generated NDSCs using the FORTRAN 90 program by Lloyd-Williams and Monserrat 1 which contain supercells formed of up to N primitive unit cells. The NDSC configurations therefore contain information about the vibrational modes corresponding to a N × N × N phonon q-vector grid. In addition, we introduced deformation of the cells by homogeneous scaling of the cell vectors to capture isotropic compression and expansion. To capture the response of atoms displaced from ideal lattice sites within the different NDSC configurations, copies were made where atoms were randomly displaced via a normal distribution with standard deviation of 0.10 Å. Finally, to inform the fitting procedure on how the PES responds to anisotropic cell deformations, random shearing was applied on the NDSC configurations. The lattice vectors, contained in L were transformed by a symmetrical strain matrix, , as: where I is the identity matrix and each entry of the strain matrix is sample from a uniform distribution, ij ∼ U(-0.01, 0.01), such that is symmetric. To investigate the transferability of the proposed workflow for database generation using NDSC, four different crystal structures were considered: hexagonal closepacked (hcp) Mg, diamond (dia) Si, body-centred cubic (bcc) W and face-centred cubic (fcc) Al. The NDSCs were generated were commensurate with a 4 × 4 × 4 grid sampling of the vibrational BZ of the relaxed primitive cell of each system. All configuration manipulations were done through the Atomic Simulation Environment 31 . We used the GAP framework to generate MLIPs, but we stress that any other similar fitting approaches would benefit equally. For all models presented here we select 1400 sparse points through a CUR decomposition and set δ = 2 eV and ζ = 4. Further GAP hyperparameters and details on the training data set are specified in Table Based on the work of George et al introducing σ min to define a minimum value for the regularisation and ∆ to scale the value for each component of the corresponding quantity. The choice of regularisation parameters are summarised in Table The FCM elements of the developed MLIPs were calculated using the finite difference method 30 using the phonopy package Curtarolo Having fitted a series of GAP models for W, Al, Si and Mg using databases consisting of NDSC configurations, we evaluated the accuracy of each model by comparing its vibrational and elastic properties to DFT values. Our reference DFT calculations show good agreement with the literature We fitted a reduced model for Si that only contained the primitive unit cell configurations, in order to study the role of different elements of the database. Tabulated results in Table The GAP model reproduces the elastic and vibrational properties of bcc W to a great accuracy, although we note that the largest error compared to DFT in the phonon FIG. frequencies is at the H point, together with a discrepancy in the curvature along the P -H direction. Since the phonon mode at H corresponds to displacing oppositely the two atoms located on neighbouring corners of the cubic cell, the corresponding elements of the FCM can be regarded as well represented in our database. To illustrate the efficiency gains realised when using NDSC configurations in the training set, we compare the phonon dispersion curves corresponding to two GAP models, constructed to emphasise the advantage of using configurations consisting of fewer atoms. The two models were based on two separate databases, both of which required the same amount of computational time to calculate the ab initio reference energies, forces and virial stresses. To generate the first database, we used DSC of size commensurate with the desired q-point sam-pling, where only a single atom is displaced from its ideal lattice site, as suggested by George et al To establish how the performance and accuracy of our MLIP models benefit from increasing the amount of training data, we fitted a series of GAP models for Al, using different size random subsets of the NDSC data. We present our learning curves as a series of phonon dispersion diagrams in Figure We were also interested in studying how NDSC configurations may assist fitting the PES at stationary points other than minima. Aluminium at ambient conditions is dynamically unstable in the body-centred cubic form, although at extreme pressures the bcc phase becomes energetically favourable where the rows of L represent the cell vectors, and a and c change as with 0 ≤ η ≤ 1, such that the volume of the cell | det L| is conserved. With this definition, the cases η = 0 and η = 1 correspond to the bcc and fcc lattices, respectively. We fitted a GAP model based on perturbed NDSC configurations that were generated using primitive unit cells at η = 0, 1 /2 and 1. We benchmarked the phonon dispersion curves obtained with our model considering intermediate η values, as shown in Figure While accurate phonon spectra on acoustic modes near the Γ-point indicate that the elastic properties of the crystal are well represented We illustrate the effect of adaptive regularisation of individual virial stress components, introduced in Section III B, by comparing two Mg GAP models, one of which uses a static regularisation of 0.01 eV for each virial component, while the other employing the adaptive scheme. As shown in Figure FIG. In conclusion, we explored a computationally efficient approach using the NDSC method introduced by Lloyd-Williams and Monserrat to generate database configurations for fitting MLIP models based on ab initio data. We found that NDSC configurations provide sufficient data to fit MLIPs reproducing the FCM near stationary points of bulk crystalline materials, while costing significantly less computational effort than diagonal supercells. We have also suggested an adaptive scheme to regularise virial stress components of ab initio databases and demonstrated improvements of the elastic behaviour of MLIPs. The procedure described in this work can be fully automated and integrated into existing database generating workflows, allowing to save computational cost or include a greater variety of representative structures, re- alising savings on cost and carbon emissions associated with high-performance computations, or improved quality MLIPs. We also envisage further use of NDSC configurations in databases used to inform models for alloy materials, as an addition or alternative to semi quasirandom structures, where the substitution of elemental species may be regarded as alchemical perturbations. All ab initio training data and the scripts used to generate the configurations are made available in a dedicated repository 44 . We used the QUIP software package with the GAP plugin 45 , available under the General Public License and the Academic Source License, respectively. The Atomic Simulation Environment 46 was used to manipulate atomic configurations and we employed the phonopy package 47 to calculate the phonon dispersion curves of the GAP models. Our workflow greatly benefited from using GNU parallel We thank Noam Bernstein and Keith Refson for fruitful discussions. We acknowledge support from the NO-MAD Centre of Excellence, funded by the European Commission under grant agreement 951786. CA is supported by a studentship jointly by the UK Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council-supported Cen- 