Dehydrogenation of alkanes is of increasing importance in fulfilling global demand for olefins and offers a potential source of carbon-neutral hydrogen as a co-product. Currently commercial dehydrogenation processes occur at high-temperatures (500-900 °C) which is energy intensive and results in side reactions and rapid coking of the catalysts. In addition the hydrogen produced is often burned to maintain temperature and to inhibit the back reaction. Here we demonstrate pressure as a parameter to enable novel chemical catalytic processes and demonstrate ambient-temperature dehydrogenation of alkanes by palladium at 50-100 MPa pressures, with both hydrogen gas and olefins recovered on decompression. This reaction follows a fundamentally different path to current commercial high-temperature low-pressure dehydrogenation processes with the palladium catalyst reversibly forming a hydride intermediate. Hydrogen is of key importance in decarbonizing the global energy landscape as a fuel source for applications which are hard to electrify. It has also gained attention as a possible means to store excess grid energy from renewables Dehydrogenation of alkanes is a process by which hydrogen is removed from the alkane converting it to an olefin. Alkanes are lower value hydrocarbons typically burned as fuels, while olefins are much more chemically versatile and are the feedstocks for many processes, such as the manufacture of plastics, other chemicals and pharmaceuticals. As the carbon remains in the olefin product, the hydrogen is produced without release of CO 2 and constitutes an environmentally conscious energy source. Increased extraction of shale gas, compared to conventional oil, yields a greater portion of short chain alkanes which reduces the quantity of olefins available from processes such as cracking A large number of studies have investigated dehydrogenation using homogeneous catalysts The high-pressure dehydrogenation is insensitive to the composition of the initial alkane. We have observed it to occur in every alkane we have studied: n-tetracosane (C 20 H 42 ), n-octane (C 8 H 18 ), methylcyclohexane (C 7 H 14 ), and mineral oil (mixed alkanes). This covers alkanes with 7 to 24 carbons, as well as mixtures, and we expect it to be applicable to any alkane except methane which cannot form a double bond as it has only one carbon. To our knowledge, ambient-temperature, pressure-driven dehydrogenation has not been reported. As well as offering an alternative to traditional alkane dehydrogenation, this process could produce clean hydrogen from low value feedstocks such as heavy fuel oils and bitumen as well as high weight byproducts from plastic thermolysis We find the pressure required to be in the 50 to 100 MPa range. It is worth noting that this magnitude of pressure is comfortably within the reach of industry and is commonly used in the fuel rails of diesel engines A key part of the process is the palladium hydride intermediate which forms on compression. Palladium hydride has been widely studied At 20 °C, the β phase forms at around 3.5 kPa of hydrogen partial pressure, and x saturates at 1 around 2 GPa 15 . At low hydrogen partial pressure, it will dissociate into the α phase and hydrogen gas. This has led to it being proposed as a hydrogen storage system whereby hydrogen can be reversibly inserted into the palladium in a manner modulated by pressure The reaction was studied at the atomic scale using angle-resolved synchrotron powder x-ray diffraction in diamond anvil cells (DACs). In these experiments the sample is held between two opposing diamond anvils and contained within a metallic gasket. As the anvils are forced together the pressure on the sample increases. DAC samples are microscopic, in this study between 100 and 200 μm diameter and 20 to 40 μm thick. Samples consisted of powdered palladium embedded in the hydrocarbon being studied with a spherical ruby pressure marker All the hydrocarbons studied underwent dehydrogenation. This was indicated by initial splitting of the palladium peaks as the α hydride partially converted to the hydrogen-rich β hydride before being fully consumed. Integrated diffraction patterns are shown in Figure Further increases in pressure resulted in increased lattice volume, see Figure Hydrogen saturated palladium hydride, PdH x where x = 1, can be produced by compression of palladium in hydrogen gas to 2 GPa Time resolved powder x-ray diffraction data of hydride formation in palladium compressed in n-tetracosane on pressure increase to 170 MPa is shown in Figure On decompression to ambient pressure gas evolution is observed from the palladium in DACs which forms bubbles in the liquid hydrocarbons. A photomicrograph of a cell shortly after decompression is shown in Figure The reaction was studied at macroscopic volume in a high-pressure reactor with much finer control of pressure. The system is shown in Figure The hydrocarbons tested were mineral oil, n-octane (C 8 H 18 ) and ethanol (C 2 H 5 OH). Both mineral oil and n-octane produced hydrogen on decompression, while ethanol exhibited no reaction up to 350 MPa, the maximum pressure studied. A plot of the volume of hydrogen collected vs pressure for mineral oil and n-octane is shown in Figure Figure In this test study the yields were between these values. Any recovery greater than 0.224 ml implies formation of the β phase and the increased yields at higher pressure follow from higher hydrogen contents occurring, as is observed in the DAC experiment, see Figure The liquid product was analyzed using proton nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy. Samples were recovered from n-octane compressed to 250 MPa in contact with palladium. The n-octane precursor was chosen as, unlike mineral oil, it is a chemically pure species which simplifies interpretation of the NMR spectra. In the test reactor the liquid being compressed acts both as the reactant and pressure transmitting fluid so the product is inherently dilute. However, the recovered sample shows NMR peaks which correspond to the olefin product. Figure Table The hydrogen content of palladium compressed with alkanes in this study, see Figure In contrast to conventional heterogenous alkane dehydrogenation processes, which require high-temperatures and lowpressure, the process presented here occurs at ambient temperature and high-pressure. This points to differences in the thermodynamics of the reactions. All steps of the conventional reactions occur at the same conditions, and as it is overall endothermic and converts the gas phase reactant into two molar equivalents of gas phase products, the high-temperature and low-pressure reaction conditions are needed to drive the forward reaction. Our process takes advantage of the pressuretunable hydrogen affinity of palladium, as well as its catalytic properties, to force the forward reaction. The reaction: alkane + palladium olefin + palladium hydride becomes increasingly favorable as pressure is increased. On pressure release the palladium hydride decomposes into palladium and hydrogen. Further increase in the lattice parameter, and hence hydrogen content, of the palladium hydride on further pressure increase implies that both palladium metal and its hydrides catalyze this reaction. In some respects the pressure driven dehydrogenation by palladium bears more similarities to homogenous catalytic dehydrogenation reactions The kinetics of metal hydride formation and decomposition are complex and can depend on the purity, grain size, composition, and history of the material It is interesting to note that the equation of state of palladium is the subject of some controversy in the literature. Recently it has been measured twice, once to 62 GPa In conclusion, we present a novel dehydrogenation reaction of alkanes which converts palladium metal to palladium hydride at pressures around 100 MPa. The hydrogen may then be recovered from the palladium metal by decompression making this an alternate route to alkane dehydrogenation which has various advantages over conventional processes including removing the necessity of high-temperature and allowing full recovery of the hydrogen produced without the release of carbon dioxide to the atmosphere. The reaction proceeded in all alkanes studied, but not in ethanol, a primary alcohol. This reaction may also explain the controversy in the equation of state of palladium reported by prior studies. Angularly-resolved synchrotron powder x-ray diffraction was carried out in DACs. These were equipped with wide angle Bohler-Almax anvils with culets between 250 and 400 μm and rhenium gaskets preindented to 20 to 40 μm. Pressure was determined via the fluorescence wavelength of a small ruby sphere included in each loading Samples were prepared several days prior to the experiment. The methylcyclohexane and mineral oil were loaded to 100 MPa, while the solid n-tetracosane was loaded to 30 MPa. Powder x-ray diffraction was performed at HP-CAT beamline 16-ID-B at the Advanced Photon Source using monochromatic 30 keV radiation with data collected on a Dectris Pilatus 1M large area detector equiped with 172 μm pixels at a distance of 207.06 mm from the sample. Compression was performed stepwise using a gas membrane. On initially fitting the cells to the gas membrane apparatus there is a small (<30 MPa) increase in pressure, thus the initial measurements are made after a small pressure increase from the loaded pressures. Data was integrated using the Dioptas software package The dehydrogenation reaction occurs around 100 MPa. DACs are typically used at much higher pressures and control and measurement of pressure in the very low pressure regime here is challenging. Pressure changes of less than 100 MPa are difficult to achieve and pressure measurement based on ruby fluorescence is subject to 30 MPa uncertainty. Nonetheless they are an invaluable tool for observing the reactants in situ at high pressure and following the palladium content of the palladium hydride based on its lattice parameter determined by powder x-ray diffraction. They also allowed the reaction to be observed to much higher pressures of several GPa. The stoichiometry of the palladium hydride formed can be determined from the unit cell volume obtained from powder x-ray diffraction data. The presence of hydrogen increases the unit cell volume. The excess volume due to the hydrogen partially occupying the octahedral interstices of the lattice is simply the difference between the unit cell volume of the hydride and that of pure palladium metal. This volume is then compared to the volume increase from a hydrogen atom sitting in the palladium lattice to give an average occupancy. This method is commonly close to ambient pressure Where V hydride is the measured volume of the PdH x at pressure P, V Pd is the volume of pure palladium and V PdH is the volume of the saturated palladium hydride with x = 1. V Pd and V sat.hydride can be calculated using a Vinet equation of state and the parameters from ref. A high-pressure reactor allowed the reaction to be studied at macroscopic volume and with much finer control of pressure. It is shown in Figure The high-pressure reactor is of sufficient volume to allow hydrogen to be collected for further analysis. It does not, however, allow for in situ measurement as the vessel is constructed from stainless steel. Complete recovery of the hydrogen is also challenging as both the hydrogen gas produced and residual hydrocarbon must traverse tight passages in the high-pressure valves which prohibit complete recovery. Full removal of the hydrogen requires opening of the reactor so the palladium can be placed directly under vacuum. These limitations of the test reactor could be easily overcome in a larger-scale custom designed reactor. The gas collected was analyzed using an electrochemical hydrogen detector with NIST traceable calibration (Forensics Detectors model FD-90A-H2). This measures from 0 to 1000 ppm hydrogen concentration with 5% uncertainty. The detector was placed in an airtight container of known volume, then a known volume of the collected gas inserted. The resultant concentration of hydrogen gas in the container is then measured and confirms the gas collected to be hydrogen. Proton NMR was performed by an independent third party laboratory (NuMegaLab, San Diego, California) using 500 MHz spectrometers. Samples were dissolved in CDCl 3 for analysis and consisted of the liquid recovered after compression of n-octane to 250 MPa in contact with palladium in the high-pressure test reactor and the unreacted n-octane feedstock as a reference. Figure 