Abstract: Developing high quality GaN/dielectric interfaces is a fundamental step for manufacturing GaN vertical power transistors. In this paper, we quantitatively investigate the effect of planar etching treatment and trench formation on the performance of GaN-based MOS (metal oxide semiconductor) stacks. The results demonstrate that (i) blanket etching the GaN surface does not degrade the robustness of the deposited dielectric layer; (ii) the addition of the trench etch, while improving reproducibility, results in a decrease of breakdown performance compared to the planar structures. (iii) for the trench structures, the voltage for a 10 years lifetime is still above 20 V, indicating a good robustness. (iv) To review the trapping performance across the metal-dielectric-GaN stack, forward-reverse capacitance-voltage measurements with and without stress and photo-assistance are performed. Overall, as-grown planar capacitors devoid of prior etching steps show lowest trapping, while trench capacitors have higher interface trapping, and bulk trapping comparable to the blanket etched capacitors. (v) The nanostructure of the GaN/dielectric interface was characterized by high resolution scanning transmission electron microscopy (HR-STEM). An increased roughness of 2-3 monolayers at the GaN surface was observed after blanket etching, which was correlated to the higher density of interface traps. The results presented in this paper give fundamental insight on how the etch and trench processing affects the trapping and robustness of trench-gate GaN-MOSFETs, and provide guidance for the optimization of device performance. The formation of the gate module is of critical importance to the functioning of metal-oxide-semiconductor field effect transistors (MOSFETs), which are subject of intense research We investigated the reliability and trapping performance of MOS capacitor structures. To fabricate these capacitors a n + -GaN layer with 6 × 10 18 Si atoms/cm 3 is grown on top of an uid-GaN layer and some stress compensation layers on a Si substrate, by MOCVD. All the structures have a bilayer dielectric stack composed of an interfacial 2.5 nm layer of Al2O3, and a bulk SiO2 layer of 50 nm, deposited on the top n + GaN layer. The bilayer configuration is advantageous in trench MOSFETs as reported in previous works The three tested wafers differ in the semiconductor etching type. The "reference" wafer has planar capacitors on as-grown (i.e. devoid of any prior etching steps) gallium nitride, to reflect the properties of the dielectric stack and of the interface when the dielectric is deposited on as-grown n + -GaN. The "blanket" wafer has planar capacitors fabricated on a blanket etched n + -GaN surface, to study the impact of the bare etching process and to reproduce the conditions expected along the bottom of a trench. Finally, the "trench" wafer has trench capacitors with a selective deep trench etch to analyze the effects of the complete trench geometry, including the trench sidewalls and corners. The trapezoidal shape of the gate trench was found to be beneficial Initially, we compared the breakdown behavior of the three wafers: 9 capacitors from each wafer were subjected to I-V sweeps until hard breakdown, and the statistical distribution of the breakdown voltage (VBR) is compared in Fig. First, we notice that the "blanket" wafer shows only a small worsening compared to the reference wafer, indicating that a planar blanket etch does not significantly impact on device reliability. On the other hand, the "trench" wafer has a 20 % lower VBR, indicating that the 3D trench structure results in a reduced reliability. We notice that the intra-wafer dispersion in VBR is lower for the trench wafer. To obtain an estimation of expected lifetimes, constant voltage stress tests on 9 devices from each wafer were performed until breakdown. The average VBR for each voltage and wafer is summarized in Fig. ( To compare the trapping in the bulk and at the interface of the deposited dielectric, a set of C-V measurements were performed. First, C-V hysteresis was measured, from 0 V to increasing stop voltages, to calculate the effective traps density (Neff) profile for each wafer, shown in Fig. To quantitatively evaluate the amount of oxide and interface traps in the three wafers, photo-assisted CV analysis was carried out. This allows to (i) accurately extract the total amount of trapped charge by starting from a completely de-trapped device state, and (ii) to reliably separate the interface (Dit) and stored bulk oxide trap (Qox) contributions. The principle of the photo-assisted CV experiment 15 is illustrated in Fig. It is clear that both blanket etching and trench formation result in the worsening in bulk trapping (Qox), with comparable magnitude, compared to the reference wafer (Fig. To understand the impact of the blanket etch process on the electrical behavior of the interface, microstructural analysis of the dielectric was carried out for the reference and blanket planar capacitors. Cross sectional, electron transparent films located at the middle of the capacitors were prepared by large area Ar-ion milling to guarantee a Ga-free sample preparation providing best conditions for atomic resolved TEM imaging. EDXS (energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy) and HR-STEM (high resolutionscanning transmission electron microscopy) investigation were performed on a probe-corrected 200 kV Hitachi HF 5000 TEM equipped with a double EDX detector. In Fig. (f) (g) Then, the GaN/Al2O3 interfaces of both planar capacitors were characterized by means of HR-STEM (see Fig. In summary, we evaluated the impact of specific processing steps (blanket etch, selective etch, trench formation) on the stability and robustness of MOS capacitors: this aspect is fundamental for the development of vertical GaN MOSFETs. The results of our analysis indicated the following. (i) The blanket etching of the GaN surface results in increased trapping (by an average of 35 %) compared to oxide deposition on as-grown (un-etched) GaN films. However, the breakdown robustness is not compromised. (ii) Introducing a trapezoidal-shaped trench etch of controlled depth reduces the breakdown capability by an average of 10 V due to worsened field crowding effects, and results in increased trapping. While the bulk trapping effects remain comparable to that of planar capacitors on blanket etched GaN, the interface trapping at the oxide/semiconductor interface and/or border traps is strengthened further (+ 10 % compared to blanket etched case, and + 45 % compared to the as-grown case), possibly due to the combined effect of the blanket etch and of the sidewall formation. (iii) The microstructural quality of the insulator and interfaces was analyzed by means of HR-STEM and EDXS. No impact of the blanket etching on the chemical composition of the dielectric layers for the as-grown and the blanket etched planar capacitors were observed. The blanket etching induced a degradation of the GaN surface resulting in an increased roughness of 2-3 monolayers compared to an atomic flat as-grown GaN surface, that can explain the stronger charge trapping phenomena observed after etching. The results described within this paper can be used as guidelines for the optimization of MOS stacks to be used in vertical GaN transistors. SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL See supplementary material for details on the simulation framework and for representative photo-assisted C-V measurements.