The negative differential resistance (NDR) tunnel diodes are promising alternative devices for beyond-CMOS computing as they offer several potential applications when integrated with transistors. We propose a novel semiconductor-free NDR tunnel diode concept that exhibits ultra-high peak-to-valley current ratio (PVCR) value. Our proposed NDR diode consists of two cold metal electrodes separated by a thin insulating tunnel barrier. The NDR effect stems from the unique electronic band structure of the cold metal electrodes, i.e., the width of the isolated metallic bands around the Fermi level as well as the energy gaps separating higher-and lower-lying bands determine the current-voltage (I-V ) characteristics and the PVCR value of the tunnel diode. By proper choice of the cold metal electrode materials, either a conventional N-type or Λ-type NDR effect can be obtained. Two-dimensional (2D) nanomaterials offer a unique platform for the realization of proposed NDR tunnel diodes. To demonstrate the proof of concept we employ the nonequilibrium Green function method combined with density functional theory to calculate the I-V characteristic of the lateral (AlI2/MgI2/AlI2) and vertical (NbS2/h-BN/NbS2) heterojunction tunnel diodes based on 2D cold metals. For the lateral tunnel diode, we obtain a Λ-type NDR effect with an ultra-high PVCR value of 10 16 at room temperature, while the vertical tunnel diode exhibits a conventional N-type NDR effect with a smaller PVCR value of about 10 4 . The proposed concept provides a semiconductor-free solution for NDR devices to achieve desired I-V characteristics with ultra-high PVCR values for memory and logic applications. Current logic and memory devices are based on the complementary metal oxide semiconductor (CMOS) field-effect transistor technology and more than forty years chip makers have succeeded in scaling of CMOS transistors, which allowed Moore's law to remain on track The negative differential resistance (NDR) tunnel diodes offer variety of unique functionalities and potential applications when integrated with conventional CMOS * Electronic address: ersoy.sasioglu@physik.uni-halle.de transistors There are several devices (two-terminal tunnel diodes) and circuits described in the literature that produce an NDR effect. Of the two-terminal tunnel diodes, the Esaki diode and the resonant tunneling diode received the most attention Recently, we proposed a new semiconductor-free NDR tunnel diode concept with ultra-high PVCR. A patent application has been filed for the proposed device The structure of the proposed cold metal tunnel diode and its I-V characteristics are shown schematically in Figure For a qualitative discussion of the NDR diode characteristics we will use Bardeen's approach for tunneling , where ρ CM (E + eV ) denotes the density of states of the cold metal electrode and f (E) being the Fermi distribution function. T (V ) is the transmission probability being proportional to e -d √ φ-V , where d is the thickness of the tunnel barrier and φ being the barrier height. As shown in Figure The I-V characteristics of a cold metal tunnel diode having the same left and right electrodes is mainly determined by three parameters W m , E V g , and E C g . For N-type NDR effect one of the the following three conditions should be satisfied Up to now we focus only on the forward bias and discuss the NDR effect. In the same way, for a reverse bias one can observe the same NDR effect, i.e., the I-V characteristics of the cold metal tunnel diode turns out to be anti-symmetric if the left and right electrodes are made of the same materials. This is similar to the intra-band resonant tunneling diode but different than the Esaki diode and inter-band resonant tunneling diode shown in Figure Cold metallic behaviour is rather rare among the threedimensional (3D) bulk materials. Known examples are alkali-doped fullerides On the other hand, two-dimensional (2D) transitionmetal dichalcogenides (NbX 2 , TaX 2 , X=S, Se, Te) and transition-metal dihalides (ScI 2 , YI 2 , etc) as well as several other 2D materials like AlI 2 , GaI 2 , InI 2 , Ag 2 F 4 , DySBr, DySI, NdOBr, SmOBr, etc exhibit cold-metallic behaviour Ground state electronic structure calculations are carried out using DFT implemented in the QuantumATK S-2021.06 package The transport calculations were performed using DFT combined with the NEGF method. We use a 24 × 1 × 172 (8 × 1 × 172) k-point grid in selfconsistent DFT-NEGF calculations of lateral (vertical) tunnel diodes. The I-V characteristics were calculated within a Landauer approach Here V denotes the bias voltage, T (E, V ) is the transmission coefficient and f L (E, V ) and f R (E, V ) are the Fermi-Dirac distributions of the left and right electrodes, respectively. The transmission coefficient T (E, V ) for lateral (vertical) tunnel diode is calculated using a 300 × 1 (100 × 1) k-point grid. The cold metal tunnel diode concept introduced in the preceding section can be realized either by using 3D materials or 2D van der Waals materials. In the following, due to their structural simplicity and high-quality heterointerfaces because of the absence of dangling bonds in vertical devices, we will focus on the 2D materials by considering a lateral and a vertical tunnel diode as shown in Table Next, we discuss the transport properties of the cold metal heterojunction tunnel diodes. In the preceding section we qualitatively discussed the operation principle and I-V characteristics of a cold metal tunnel diode on the basis of a schematic energy-band diagram of the electrodes and a simple tunnel barrier model. However, in real materials quantum tunneling is a very sophisticated process as it depends on the symmetry of Bloch states in the electrodes, their matching at the interface, and their decay rate, which is determined by thickness and barrier height as well as the complex energy bands of the tunnel barrier. Thus, fully ab-initio atomic scale transport calculations are needed to reveal the I-V characteristics of the proposed cold metal tunnel diodes. Calculated I-V curves are presented in Figure As expected for both tunnel diodes the current decays exponentially with increasing the tunnel barrier thickness as seen in Figure The NDR effect can be explained on the basis of the device density of states (DDOS) (or local DOS). For simplicity we focus only on the lateral tunnel diode and consider the armchair orientation. The calculated DDOS using the PBE-1/2 method for two different bias voltages are presented in Figure The I-V characteristics and the ultra-high PVCR values of the tunnel diodes discussed above are based on the coherent tunneling transport i.e., no dissipation mechanism like inelastic electron-electron scattering or electron-phonon scattering is taken into account in calculations of the I-V curves. The latter is more efficient in 2D semiconductors than 3D ones Finally we would like to comment on the transport properties of the cold metal MX 2 (M=Nb, Ta; X= Se, Se) heterojunctions studied in Ref. In conclusion, we proposed a novel semiconductorfree NDR tunnel diode concept that exhibits ultra-high PVCR value. The proposed NDR diode consists of two cold metal electrodes separated by a thin insulating tunnel barrier. The operation principle and the NDR effect rely on the unique electronic band structure of the cold metal electrodes, i.e., the width of the isolated metallic bands around the Fermi level as well as the energy gaps separating higher and lower lying bands determine the I-V characteristics and the PVCR value of the tunnel diode. We showed that by proper choice of the cold metal electrode materials either conventional N-type or Λ-type NDR effect can be obtained. In both types of NDR effect the first PDR region and the NDR region are determined by the intra-band quantum tunneling, while inter-band quantum tunneling is responsible for the second PDR region in the I-V curves of the N-type NDR effect. 2D transition-metal dichalcogenides (NbX 2 , TaX 2 ; X=S, Se, Te), transition-metal dihalides (ScI 2 , YI 2 , etc), as well as several other 2D nanomaterials possess cold metallic electronic band structure and offer a unique platform for the realization of the proposed NDR tunnel diodes. We demonstrated the proof of concept by employing the DFT+NEGF method and calculated the I-V characteristic of the lateral AlI 2 /MgI 2 /AlI 2 and vertical NbS 2 /h-BN/NbS 2 heterojunction tunnel diodes. For the lateral tunnel diode we obtain a Λ-type NDR effect with an ultra-high PVCR value of 10 16 at room temperature, while the vertical tunnel diode exhibits conventional Ntype NDR effect with a smaller PVCR value of about 10 4 . The obtained ultra-high PVCR values in tunnel diodes should be regarded as the upper limit as we neglect the dissipative processes like electron-phonon scattering as well as interaction with environment i.e., the surrounding dielectric materials and defects in DFT+NEGF calculations. We anticipate that a plethora of 2D nanomaterials can serve as cold metal electrodes in proposed tunnel diodes to achieve the desired I-V characteristics and ultra-high PVCR values in a semiconductor-free solution for NDR devices for high-speed, low-power memory and logic applications. In Ref. 1 transport properties of the cold metal MX 2 (M=Nb, Ta; X= Se, Se) heterojunctions have been studied by employing the DFT+NEGF method. The authors claim to get a promising PVCR value of 51 and extremely high peak current density ( 5.1 × 10 4 μA/μm) for an edge contact NbSe 2 /NbS 2 heterojunction device. To verify the findings of this paper we construct the same edge contact NbSe 2 /NbS 2 heterojunction (armchair orientation, see Figure 