Data-driven design shows the promise of accelerating materials discovery but is challenging due to the prohibitive cost of searching the vast design space of chemistry, structure, and synthesis methods. Bayesian Optimization (BO) employs uncertainty-aware machine learning models to select promising designs to evaluate, hence reducing the cost. However, BO with mixed numerical and categorical variables, which is of particular interest in materials design, has not been well studied. In this work, we survey frequentist and Bayesian approaches to uncertainty quantification of machine learning with mixed variables. We then conduct a systematic comparative study of their performances in BO using a popular representative model from each group, the random forest-based Lolo model (frequentist) and the latent variable Gaussian process model (Bayesian). We examine the efficacy of the two models in the optimization of mathematical functions, as well as properties of structural and functional materials, where we observe performance differences as related to problem dimensionality and complexity. By investigating the machine learning models' predictive and uncertainty estimation capabilities, we provide interpretations of the observed performance differences. Our results provide practical guidance on choosing between frequentist and Bayesian uncertainty-aware machine learning models for mixed-variable BO in materials design. The goal of materials design is to identify materials with desired properties and performance that meet the demands of engineering applications, from among the vast composition-structure design space, which is challenging due to the highly nonlinear underlying physics and the combinatorial nature of the design space. The traditional trial-and-error approach usually involves many experiments or computations for the evaluation of materials properties, which can be expensive and timeconsuming and thus cannot keep pace with the growing demand. To accelerate materials development with low cost, data-driven adaptive design methods have recently been applied In contrast, Bayesian Optimization (BO) Acquisition functions guide the sampling process in BO. Commonly used acquisition functions, such as expected improvement (EI) However, the mixed-variable problems, i.e., when design variables include both numerical and categorical ones, pose additional challenges to uncertainty-aware ML, and are ubiquitous in materials design. The design variables in materials design tasks typically include processing, composition, and structure information. Some design variables such as process type (e.g., hydrothermal or sol-gel), element choice (e.g., Al or Fe), and lattice type (e.g., fcc or bcc) are categorical, while others such as annealing temperature, stoichiometry, and lattice parameters, are numerical. For BO methods to be generally applicable to these diverse design representations, uncertainty-aware ML models must be able to handle mixed-variable inputs. In this work, we first examine the methods for quantifying uncertainty in ML models and contrast their fundamental differences from a theoretical perspective. Based on this, we focus on two representative uncertainty-aware mixed-variable ML models that involve frequentist and Bayesian approaches to uncertainty quantification, respectively, and conduct a systematic comparative study of their performances in BO, with an emphasis on materials design applications. Based on the results, we characterize the relative suitability of frequentist and Bayesian approaches to uncertainty-aware ML as related to problem dimensionality and complexity. Our contribution is two-fold: • Outline of the suitability of Bayesian and frequentist uncertainty-aware ML models depending on the characteristics of problems; • Identification of key factors that result in the performance difference between Bayesian and frequentist approaches. We anticipate this study will assist researchers in physical sciences who use BO, providing practical guidance in choosing the most appropriate model that suits their purpose. Uncertainty is ubiquitous in predictive computational models. Even if the underlying physics is deterministic, uncertainty still exists due to the insufficiency of knowledge. Many efforts have been devoted to quantifying uncertainties of physics-based computational models Several UQ techniques have been adopted to attain uncertainty-aware ML. Here, we group them into two broad categories: frequentist and Bayesian. The frequentist approach obtains uncertainty estimation through various forms of resampling: in general, a series of models { fi (x x x)} n i=1 are fitted with different subsets of training data or hyperparameters, then the prediction variability at an unsampled location is estimated from the variance among these models' predictions: where Var(•) can represent any variance estimate using frequentist statistics, potentially involving noise or bias correction terms. Commonly used resampling techniques include Monte Carlo, Jackknife, Bootstrap, and their variations Instead of requiring a series of models, the Bayesian UQ approach treats the true model as a random field, and infers its posterior probability from the prior belief and observed data uses Euclidean distance metric and assigns Gaussian correlations a priori, with global variance σ 2 and correlation parameters ω i , to be learned via maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) in model training. The prediction derived from a GP model includes both the mean and the variance, thus providing a measure of metamodeling uncertainty. Besides GP, examples of ML methods with Bayesian-style uncertainty estimation include Bayesian linear regression and generalized linear models, Bayesian model averaging For mixed-variable problems, uncertainty quantification of ML models becomes more complicated. In early developed ML methods, categorical variables are mostly handled by ordinal or one-hot encoding where 1 j is an indicator function, i.e., when t i = j only the j-th element of c c c i equals 1, and others equal 0. This encoding, however, assumes symmetry between all categories (the similarity between any two categories is equal In recent years, some methods have been proposed for uncertainty-aware ML in the mixed variable scenario. Lolo 31 , for example, is an extension of the random forest (RF) model. As an ensemble of decision trees, RF has native support for mixed-variable problems. Uncertainty is quantified by calculating variance at any sample point from the predictions of the decision trees with bias correction. GP models in the original form are uncertainty aware; however, they have problems handling categorical variables. The covariance matrix is inferred from the similarity between inputs characterized by a distance metric. But the aforementioned representations cannot represent the distances between categories. The latent variable Gaussian process (LVGP) model where • 2 is the L 2 norm. Like other parameters, locations of latent vectors are obtained via MLE during model training. With the latent variable representation, the categories are not required to be ordered or symmetric, and their correlations are inherently estimated via distances in the mapped latent space. The latent variable configuration in the latent space also indicates the effects of different levels of a categorical variable on the response, thus making the model interpretable Some related studies have compared the performances of a variety of UQ techniques in materials design applications. For example, Tian et al. To examine and compare the performances of Bayesian Optimization using the two ML models (denoted LVGP-BO and Lolo-BO for conciseness), we tested them on both synthetic mathematical functions and materials property optimization problems. Our comparative study is conducted using a modular BO framework (illustrated in Figure We first present test results of minimizing mixed-variable mathematical functions selected from an online library In the first test case, we use the Branin function, which has two input variables and relatively smooth behavior. We modify its definition as follows: where x ∈ [-5, 10] is a numerical variable, and t is categorical, with categories corresponding to values {0, 5, 10, 15}. To provide an intuitive sense of its behavior, we visualize the function in Figure We then test LVGP-BO and Lolo-BO in optimizing low-dimensional complex functions (definitions are provided in Methods), in this case, rugged functions with several local and/or global minimums. The Six-Hump Camel function (Figure with x ∈ [-2, 2] and t ∈ {±1, ±0.7126, 0}, is optimized in 30 runs, each starting from initial samples of size 10. As Figure where d is the adjustable dimensionality. We set d = 3, with two numerical variables x 1,2 = v 1,2 ∈ [-5.12, 5.12], and one categorical variable t = v 3 ∈ {-5, -4, . . . , 5}. As Figure Moving beyond low dimensionality, we compare the two BO methods on a series of high-dimensional functions. We are optimizing the Perm function (whose behavior in 2D is shown in Figure the Rosenbrock function (whose behavior in 2D is shown in Figure and a simple quadratic function , where d denotes the dimensionality. Observations are that, in the 6D test case, LVGP-BO and Lolo-BO show close efficiencies (Figure The Perm function is complex because of its non-convexity, and more significantly, its erratic behavior at the domain boundary: the function value is growing nearly exponentially near the boundary. We test BO of the 10D Rosenbrock and quadratic functions to investigate the influence of high dimensionality, without the erratic complexity. The Rosenbrock function is also non-convex, but is well-behaved at the domain boundary. We define its input variables as following: numerical variables x 1,...,5 = v 1,...,5 ∈ [-5, 10], categorical variables We seek explanations for LVGP-BO and Lolo-BO's performance differences from two aspects: fitting accuracy and uncertainty estimation quality. For BO to successfully locate the global optimum, the ML model does not need to fit the response function accurately everywhere, but the accuracy near the optimum matters. This accuracy can be improved with new sample acquisition guided by uncertainty. In regions that are far from optimal, the quantity of data and the resulting prediction accuracy only need to be sufficient to confidently rule the region out as a promising design region, which is why uncertainty quantification is important. We select the Branin function as a representative, generate 10 initial samples following the same as described above, run 20 iterations of BO to acquire 20 more samples, and fit LVGP/Lolo models to the samples of sizes 10 and 30. In Figure We conducted a similar fitting test for the Rastrigin function in 2D and show the results in Figure We next extend this fitting and UQ comparison to high-dimensional cases. Training samples are generated from the 10-dimensional quadratic function and the Perm function (Equation as a metric of fitting quality. Note that RRMSE is related to another widely used metric, the coefficient of determination R 2 , through R 2 = 1 -RRMSE 2 . RRMSE > 1 can happen when the fitted model is worse than using the response mean as a constant predictor. For each function, we evaluate the model fitting quality by calculating RRMSE on 1,000 test samples generated independently from the training samples. As the figures show, in fitting the relatively simpler quadratic function, Lolo attains a higher quality compared to LVGP at small sample size (50); as the sample size increases to 80, the fitting quality of LVGP improves significantly, whereas the fitting quality of Lolo does not change much. However, even at a small sample size, LVGP's prediction error for samples with low function values (near optimum) is lower than Lolo's. With well-directed uncertainty quantification, LVGP-BO can add samples that improve the fitting, thus leading to efficient convergence. In fitting the 10D Perm function, both functions fail to attain a good RRMSE; the Lolo model fits slightly better than LVGP, and this comparison is not changed as the training sample size increases. In this case, the dimensionality is too large for the known samples to cover, hence, it is difficult for both ML models to capture the complexity of the Perm function. Neither model shows dominant fitting accuracy near optimum over another model. Lolo's slightly better global fitting accuracy enables it to display higher efficiency in BO of the Perm function. To assess the performances of two ML models in facilitating materials design, we apply Lolo-BO and LVGP-BO to optimize materials' properties using several existing experimental/computational materials datasets. We adopt a simple yet generally applicable design representation, using chemical composition as design variables to optimize the properties. We start with a small fraction of samples randomly selected from the dataset; the evaluation of a sample is imitated by querying its corresponding property from the dataset. Model fitting and acquisition function follow the same procedure described in previous stimuli, which leads to a redistribution of electrons in the band structure In a dataset collected by Wang et al. We show the different characteristics of the two responses of the dataset by a scatter plot in Figure Though the response functions linking materials compositions to properties are black-box functions, for which the exact behaviors are unknown, we investigate the fitting accuracy of two ML models to get a hint of their performance in BO. The regression plots in Figure In this study, we examine the fundamental differences between frequentist and Bayesian uncertainty quantification in ML models. Thereafter, we systematically compare the efficiency and accuracy of BO powered by two representative mixedvariable ML models in mathematical optimization as well as materials design tasks, and investigate the factors influencing BO performances. In summary, an ML model's fitting accuracy near the optimum and its uncertainty quantification quality are found important to BO. For low-dimensional problems, the ML models can fit the input-response function relatively easily; even if the function is highly complex, fitting quality can be improved by adding a small number of well-selected samples. In this case, the quality of UQ becomes the key factor of BO efficiency, where LVGP using Bayesian uncertainty quantification has advantages. Whereas for high-dimensional problems, if the function is complex, it becomes challenging for ML models to fit the function. The number of samples required for covering the input space and improving fitting quality also escalates due to the curse of dimensionality. In this case, better fitting leads to better BO performance, and ML models that are more capable of fitting complex functions (such as random forests) have advantages. The results and analyses draw a suitability boundary for LVGP-BO and Lolo-BO, and more generally, provide insights for understanding the difference between the two families of uncertainty-aware ML models they represent: • When the design optimization problem is low-dimensional, or high-dimensional but the response is anticipated to be relatively well-behaved, the LVGP model is recommended for BO. • While for high-dimensional problems with a highly ill-behaved response function, we recommend using an ML model that allows higher model complexity (e.g., random forest, neural network) with resampling UQ. The results constitute a supplement to the previous studies covering BO with all numerical variables and guide the model selection in materials design as well as other mixed-variable BO problems. The optimization process starts with initial samples, i.e., an initial set of input variables, and evaluates the responses. A machine learning model is then fitted with the known input-response data, which assigns for any input v v v a mean prediction ŷ(v v v) and associated uncertainty (predicted variance) ŝ2 (v v v). The model is used to make uncertainty-aware predictions for the unevaluated samples V (sample pool). A new sample is selected therefrom based on the expected improvement (EI) acquisition function where ∆(v v v) = y min -y(v v v), the difference between the minimal response value observed so far and the mean prediction of the fitted ML model; φ (•) and Φ(•) are the standard normal probability density function (pdf ) and cumulative distribution function (cdf ), respectively. The new sample and corresponding response value are added to the known dataset. This process is repeated iteratively, until the maximum number of iterations or some convergence criterion is reached. To compare the performances of Lolo and LVGP, we substitute them as the "ML Model" into the framework (Figure In these comparisons, we use the open-source implementation of Lolo We specify the following metrics to characterize the test problems and BO methods' performance. The dimensionality of inputs is an important criterion of problem difficulty. However, in categorical or mixed-variable cases, dimensionality is more than the number of variables. A more useful index considered in this work is the degrees of freedom, which we define as where #levels(t i ) yields the number of levels of t i . This quantity takes into account the number of levels for each categorical variable. In other words, high dimensionality may mean "many levels" in problems with categorical variables. In the following sections, we follow this definition to categorize problems with D f > 15 as high-dimensional, and others as low-dimensional. Uncertainty-Aware Mixed-Variable Machine Learning for Materials Design: Supplementary Information Represented as points in a low-dimensional latent space, the distances between levels reflect their similarities in terms of effect on the response. Bayesian Optimization (BO) results of mathematical test functions included in the main text, with different initial sample sizes: Branin function in Figure Figure 