We report first principles numerical discovery of hydrostatic pressure driven tetragonal to collapsed tetragonal transition in 1111-type material ThMnAsN accompanied by simultaneous magnetostructural, insulator to metal transition together with complete collapse of Mn moment. We present detailed evolution of various structural parameters, magnetism and electronic structures of ThM-nAsN with increasing hydrostatic pressure. All the structural parameters show anomalies at a critical pressure Pc ∼ 9 GPa; c-lattice parameter, out of plane As-As bond length, anion height (hAs) undergo drastic modification compared to the in-plane parameters which is manifested in an iso-structural phase transition from tetragonal to a collapsed tetragonal (cT) phase. In particular, above Pc the out of plane As-As bond length reduces by ∼ 9% whereas the hAs shortens by ∼ 14%; the tetrahedral angles α/β increases/reduces by ∼ 6.4%/∼ 3.6%; the Mn-As bond shortens by ∼ 8%. These modifications in "local structural correlations" due to pressure destroys usually localized nature of Mn moments and gets completely quenched. Apart from that the elastic constant, the electronic structures also bear the finger prints of insulator-metal and magneto-structural transition at higher pressures accompanying a total collapse of magnetic moment at the vicinity of 9 GPa. The critical value of the pressure Pc at which tetragonal to collapse tetragonal phase transition occurs, remains robust with respect to the on-site Hubbard correlation (U). The dynamical stability of the compound at higher pressures (above and below the magneto-structural transition) are affirmed through detailed computations of phonon dispersion curves endowed with positive phonon frequency through out the Brillouin zone. The effect of magnetic spin structure on the electronic band structures are obtained through band unfolding. The electronic structure of ThMnAsN at higher pressures "orbital selectively" influences bands, band gap and closely resembles with the electronic structure of Fe-based superconductors (quasi two dimensional Fermi surfaces) with the occurrences of orbital selective Lifshitz transition. In condensed matter materials research, hydrostatic pressure can be used as a non-thermal parameter that can systematically tune the ground state properties involving magnetism, superconductivity as well as structural transitions. High pressure reduces the interatomic distances which modifies the interaction between the quantum states through the overlap of individual atomic/electronic states causing drastic changes in the physical, magnetic, chemical as well as structural aspects. Thus, in contrast to the real space, the effect of hydrostatic pressure in reciprocal space would manifest through the expansion of the effective Brillouin zone. A balanced combined effect of the above two reorganizes occupation probabilities of electronic (as well as lattice) degrees of freedom; as a result the formed electronic/phonon bands under pressure would be differently dispersed. An artifact of the same is perhaps to create very high or very low density of states at the redefined Fermi level, influencing visible but unpredictable changes A plethora of ZrCuSiAs (1111) type compounds with diverse physical properties have been synthesized; largely because of the versatile nature of ZrCuSiAs type crystal structure in which all the four crystallographic sites can be occupied by a variety of elements to make it a stable compound A new 1111-type Fe based superconductors ThFeAsN has been discovered with a superconducting T c as high as 30 K without external pressure or chemical doping In this work, we show that as a result of hydrostatic pressure ThMnAsN undergoes a magneto structural phase transition from tetragonal to cT phase transition in which Mn moments are completely quenched; very similar to those in Fe-based superconductors The crystal structure of ThMnAsN is tetragonal with space group symmetry P 4/nmm (space group number FIG. Exchange correlation functional has been treated under the generalized-gradient approximation (GGA) within Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) functional In this section, we will demonstrate the effect of hydrostatic pressure in the structural parameters, magnetism and electronic structures of ThMnAsN. In the first step, we fully optimize (both lattice parameters as well as atomic positions) the geometry of the crystal structure. A number of magnetic configurations (spin arrangement of Mn) are considered. The C-AFM as shown in Fig. In the context of high temperature superconductivity in Fe-based superconductors, correlation of local structural parameters like h As , As-Fe-As angles etc. with T c (superconducting transition temperature) and its effect in electron correlation and magnetism is well established Next we present the variation of elastic constants of tetragonal ThMnAsN as a function of hydrostatic pressure as depicted in Fig. Further, we have also depicted the charge densities of ThMnAsN at various pressures along the 100 plane in Fig. To corroborate the charge density plots at 1, 8 and 9 GPa, the calculated integral crystal orbital Hamilton population (ICOHP) is indicated on Table Having presented in detail the effect of hydrostatic pressures on the structural parameters and associated modifications in elastic constants, it is imperative to present the effects of such changes of structural parameters on electronic band structure, density of states and Fermi surface at ambient as well as at higher pressure in this subsection. As mentioned earlier, in order to create C-AFM spin configuration a supercell √ 2 × √ 2 × 2 structure is used. With a larger real-space cell, the reciprocalspace Brillouin Zone (BZ) will become smaller. As a result, the band structure will fold into the small supercell BZ. Electronic eigen states calculated for the supercell can be unfolded into the reciprocal space of the primitive cell directly in VASP, these technicalities are described in Our calculated density of states at different hydrostatic pressures are presented in Fig. A detailed density functional theory based first principles studies are carried out on ThMnAsN. Our study predicts simultaneous C-AFM tetragonal to paramagnetic collapse tetragonal (PM -cT) transition when the Mn moments are completely quenched at the collapse tetragonal phase. All the structural parameters bear the finger prints of (PM -cT) phase transition at around 8 to 9 GPa pressure which is attributed to a iso-structural phase transition from a tetragonal to a collapse tetragonal phase. A comparison with the earlier discovered 122 family of Fe-based superconductors (like Ca(K/Na)Fe 2 As 2 We also evaluate the variation of various elastic constants of tetragonal ThMnAsN with pressure. We show that with the increasing pressure, metallic behaviour of the system enhances which is supported by our pressure dependent density of states, charge density plots and COHP calculations. Moreover, we have seen a significant increase of positive Cauchy pressure C 13 -C 44 around 9 GPa pressure, also indicating an abrupt uplift of the metallic character in ThMnAsN. Influence of hydrostatic pressure on electronic band structure, Fermi surface, density of states are also described in details. Dynamical stability of ThMnAsN was thoroughly verified at all presented calculations at various pressures by checking positive phonon frequency in the phonon dispersion curves. Phonon density of states exhibit that the phonon band gap (between optical and acoustic phonon branch) decreases with the increase of hydrostatic pressure. In general, electronic structure of ThMnAsN at high pressure resembles with the electronic structure of Febased superconductors with similar special features in common like orbital selectivity, Lifshitz transition etc. Therefore, a possible unconventional high temperature superconductivity may appear in ThMnAsN which might help to resolve the unsettled issues of Fe based superconductivity or in general high temperature superconductivity. An example of simultaneous structural, magnetic and metal-insulator transitions at the vicinity of 9 GPa pressure is found in ThMnAsN. We believe our work will stimulate further experimental and theoretical research in this direction. Optimised and experimental (measured at 4 K) structural parameters and local magnetic moment of Mn for ThMnAsN with the C-AFM spin arrangement.