Topologically protected magnetic textures, such as skyrmions, half-skyrmions (merons) and their antiparticles, constitute tiny whirls in the magnetic order. They are promising candidates for information carriers in next-generation memory devices, as they can be efficiently propelled at very high velocities using currentinduced spin torques The defining feature of a topological texture is a non-zero winding number, also called topological charge. In magnetic systems, this is a measure of the integer number of times the order parameter wraps around a unit sphere (Bloch sphere) when integrated over the texture volume. Magnetic textures with different winding numbers are topologically distinct and cannot be easily changed from one topological state to another. This provides strong protection against perturbation and prevents their collapse even at ultrasmall sizes where the b j are the collective coordinates of the topological spin structure, M ij is the mass tensor, and αΓ ij characterizes the viscous friction. The AF topological texture is propelled by this force at terminal velocity v = βJ, parallel to the current direction, as shown schematically in Fig. Our experiments are performed on tetragonal phase CuMnAs (space group P4/nmm), epitaxially grown on a lattice-matched GaP(001) substrate To resolve the magnetic structure we used X-ray magnetic linear dichroism (XMLD) combined with photoemission electron microscopy (PEEM). Figs. To investigate the current-induced generation and manipulation of topological spin structures, we fabricated a 4-arm cross device with 10 μm arm width from a 50 nm layer of CuMnAs (Fig. A 1 ms electrical pulse, with amplitude 21 V (corresponding to a current density of 1.2 × 10 7 A cm -2 ) was applied along the [010] CuMnAs axis of the device. Fig. Subsequent 1 ms electrical pulses, with 21 V amplitude, were applied in a sequence of alternating polarity along the [010] CuMnAs axis. Fig. As well as the electrical generation and control of meron-antimeron pairs along a 180°AFDW, we observed, in distinct regions of the device, the formation of isolated pairs on 180°AFDW loops. Fig. For nucleation of meron-antimeron pairs to occur, the pulse amplitude must exceed a nucleation energy threshold and the energy must be supplied within short enough time so as not to be dissipated due to damping in the system. The magnetic dynamics in the system can be described by the following Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert (LLG) equation: where m is the magnetic moment on sublattice k, F is the magnetic functional of the system, α is the Gilbert damping constant, and τ corresponds to all of the current-induced spin torques. The Gilbert damping defines the time scale on which to supply the critical energy needed to create the meron-antimeron pair from topological vacuum. In the exchange-dominated limit, this critical energy is given by a topological invariant 8πQ N At, where A is the AF exchange constant and t is the thickness of the sample In AFs both meron and antimeron move in the direction of the current, in this particular case confined along the length of a 180°AFDW, as it again minimizes the energy in the system. This is attributed to the fact that in AFs gyrotropic forces completely cancel out from the two AF sublattices The results presented demonstrate CuMnAs as a suitable electrically conducting AF host material for topological spin textures. Efficient generation and control of AF merons and antimerons using electrical pulses paves the way towards realizing practical AF-based solitonic devices. The role of magnetic anisotropy on stable meron size can be explored by tuning the CuMnAs epilayer thickness The 50 nm CuMnAs film used for this study was grown by molecular beam epitaxy on a GaP buffer layer on a GaP(001) substrate. The film was capped with a 3 nm Al film to prevent surface oxidation. The device structure shown in Fig. The photoemission electron microscopy measurements were performed on beamline I06 at Diamond Light Source. The X-ray beam was incident at a grazing angle of 16°, with the X-ray linear polarization in the plane of the film. The asymmetry, ∆ = (I E1 -I E2 )/(I E1 + I E2 ), between images obtained at the Mn L 3 absorption peak (E 1 ) and at 0.9 eV below the L 3 peak (E 2 ), provides a map of the local spin axis with 30 nm spatial resolution. The sample was mounted on a cartridge with four wire-bonded electrical contacts allowing electrical pulses to be applied in-situ within the PEEM vacuum chamber. After each pulse, XMLD-PEEM images of device regions were taken to map changes to the micromagnetic structures. The time between applying a pulse and acquiring an image exceeded 120 s, thus only non-transient changes to the magnetic state were observed. We use Monte Carlo methods on a 51 × 51 × 2 system of spins to simulate the magnetic textures observed in CuMnAs. The system has periodic boundary conditions in the first (x) and third (z) dimensions, and closed boundaries in the second (y). Each layer of the system (in z) corresponds to a magnetic sublattice, with AF coupling between the layers. The total energy of the system is defined as the sum of the exchange energy, the out-of-plane magnetic anisotropy, and the in-plane magnetic anisotropy. Spins have full rotational degrees of freedom with out-of-plane polar angle, θ, and in-plane azimuthal angle, φ. The system is initiated with in-plane textures and allowed to settle for N ×1e6 iterations.