We present a classical molecular-dynamics study of the collective dynamical properties of the coexisting liquid phase at equilibrium body-centered cubic (BCC) Fe crystal-melt interfaces. For the three interfacial orientations (100), (110), and (111), the collective dynamics are characterized through the calculation of the intermediate scattering functions, dynamical structure factors and density relaxation times in a sequential local region of interest. An anisotropic speed up of the collective dynamics in all three BCC crystal-melt interfacial orientations is observed. This trend differs significantly different from the previously observed slowing down of the local collective dynamics at the liquid-vapor interface [Acta Mater 2020;198:281]. Examining the interfacial density relaxation times, we revisit the validity of the recently developed time-dependent Ginzburg-Landau (TDGL) theory for the solidification crystal-melt interface kinetic coefficients, resulting in excellent agreement with both the magnitude and the kinetic anisotropy of the CMI kinetic coefficients measured from the non-equilibrium MD simulations. Quantitatively predicting the anisotropic crystal-melt interface (CMI) kinetics with given interface orientation n has been a long term goal in the field of controlling solidification or crystal growth, for example through the kinetic coefficient μ n, defined as the constant of proportionality between the steady-state solidification interface velocity V n and the degree of the interface undercooling ∆T . The most recent advancement in quantitative prediction of near-equilibrium CMI kinetics is the so-called time-dependent Ginzburg-Landau (TDGL) theory 1,2 of solidification kinetics. Compared with previous theories or models, the TDGL theory significantly improves the prediction of the kinetic coefficient, predicting a correct anisotropy sequence, while remaining free of undetermined fitting parameters. This theory has also demonstrated unique potential for revealing the nature of the kinetic anisotropy The clarification of the above mentioned discrepancies between μ MD n and μ GL n is needed to understand two fundamental issues. First, one needs a quantitative predictive theory that is sufficiently accurate in order to explain why universal kinetic anisotropy trend that holds in the a) yyang@phy.ecnu.edu.cn FCC CMIs over a range of different materials The authors have pointed out clues that may shed light on the origin of the discrepancies between μ MD n and μ GL n 2,3 . Specifically, the appropriateness of using the bulk value of a time-scale parameter (i.e., the density relaxation time associated with the collective dynamics of the liquid atoms), in the TDGL theory 1 prediction of the anisotropic μ GL n (i.e., see Eq.A2 and A3 in Appendix A), has been questioned. The authors raised a hypothesis that the dynamic time scale due to density fluctuation at the CMI holds the same value in the bulk melt phase is inappropriate, instead, such dynamic time scale should have anisotropic and material-dependent values at different oriented CMIs. Nevertheless, until the current study, the validity of this hypothesis has not been verified. Studies of interfacial local collective dynamics have been carried out in the liquid-vapor surface systems through experiments employed low angle beam X-ray scattering To the best of our knowledge, there is no inelastic neutron or X-ray scattering experimental study on the collective dynamics of the local liquids at CMIs. In contrast to the liquid-vapor system, the CMI is sandwiched between two condensed phases making experimental study difficult. In addition, the impact of the crystal structure on the adjacent liquid layers may affect both the layering order and the lateral (in-plane) ordering This study proposes an improved method for calculating the collective dynamics of the interfacial liquid through an analysis of the trajectories of equilibrium molecular-dynamics simulations. The improved calculation method as well as the method of del Rio and González are applied to equilibrium Fe BCC(100), (110), and (111) CMIs, yielding the spatial variations of the intermediate scattering functions (ISFs), the dynamical structure factors (DSFs) and the density relaxation times for a wavenumber corresponding to the BCC principal reciprocal lattice vector (RLV). Instead of the bulk liquid value, the density relaxation times for the interfacial liquids are used for the subsequent applications of the TDGL theory. We demonstrate that the current improved method provides more precise data than the previous method and eliminates the discrepancy between the μ MD n and μ GL n . This results in in reasonable predictions of both the magnitude and the anisotropy in μ for the three BCC Fe CMIs. The current computational effort on the CMIs enriches the well-known atomistic simulation-based characterization methodology (e.g., structure, thermodynamics, and dynamical properties The embedded-atom method potentials for BCC Fe 23 employed in the current MD simulations have been used in several previous studies of BCC Fe CMIs. For exam-ple, Sun et al. Here we choose this particular potential to revisit the validity of the TDGL theory for the μ GL n , the current results are compared to the μ MD n 25 and the previous TDGL predictions 1 using this potential. We perform the calculations of the local liquid dynamical properties based on the equilibrium MD simulations of three BCC Fe CMIs, namely, (100), (110), and (111). All the details, procedures, and boundary conditions for constructing the equilibrium CMIs, based on the platform of LAMMPS software In order to collect samples for the calculation of the time-spatial correlation functions and the equilibrium averages in the equilibrated CMIs and bulk melt systems, we subdivide the simulation into 10 ps blocks. Within each block, 5000 successive MD trajectories (each separated by 2 fs) are recorded for the calculation of the ISFs and DSFs. We use 500 blocks (across 50 ns equilibrium CMIs simulations). This procedure provides 1000 samples (as there are two independent interfaces in each simulation cell) for statistical averaging. In order to ensure independence, each block used in the statistical averaging is separated in time by at least 50 ps. In this study, we examine two types of interfacial profiles. The first type is the mean fine-grained particle num- x z y Fe(100) CMI FIG. ber density profile ρ(z), measured for each of the three interfacial orientations, and calculated using the protocol outlined in Ref. 27. The instantaneous fine-grained density profiles determined from the instantaneous MD trajectory (1ps each), are aligned in z axis to the timeaveraged CMI position, defined as z = 0, for calculating the time-averaged density profile. In which, the instantaneous CMI position is determined from the local structural order parameter ψ 28 distribution along z 29 , the values ψ = 1 and 0 correspond to the perfect crystalline phase and the melt phase, respectively. In this way, the calculated density profile is unbroadened by the capillary fluctuations. Following Rull and Toxvaerd 31 , the maximum of each of the peaks in the density profiles for z > 0 [ρ max (z)] are labeled in order to quantify the asymptotic decay length of stratification for each CMIs, through fitting the [ρ max (z) Here the subscript "M" denotes the bulk melt phase, ζ n is the decay distance from the CMI position with given interface orientation n. The second type is the coarse-scale profile of the characteristic time-scales (i.e., density wave relaxation times), τ n(z m ), depicting the CMI local collective dynamics. On the liquid side of each CMI orientation (z > 0), from z = 3 Å to z = 18 Å, we report τ n(z m ) results at 8 different positions along z with an interval of ∆z = 2 Å , for example, z In addition to the above two types, the coarse-grained diffusion coefficient profiles, D n(z) for the three Fe CMIs are also calculated, following the detailed method described in Refs.16 and 32. The anisotropy among three orientations will be discussed through the comparison between the interfacial D n(z) and the τ n(z m ) data. For the bulk melt system, the collective dynamics of the liquid can be resolved by determining the crosscorrelations of the particle coordinates, i.e., the ISF F M (| k|, t) and the DSF S M (| k|, ω) defined as The calculations in Eq. 1 and Eq. 2 count all N atoms in the entire simulation cell. The characteristic time-scale (or the density relaxation time) for the bulk melt phase, under a specific wavenumber, τ M (| k|), can be calculated from the inverse half-width of DSF. The method proposed in the current study, Eq.6. More atoms (N † (zm)) than than are present in the region of interest (N(zm)) are included at t = 0 to take into account the possible impact of the adjacent ordering environment on the local collective dynamic properties of interest. in which only the N(z m ) particles inside the region of interest were included in sampling trajectories. Because liquid particles can diffuse in and out of the region during the delay time window t, an atomic weight function W t i for particle i was introduced to take this into account, where λ is the thickness of the transition region in which W t i function decays smoothly to 0. With this weight function, the number of particles changes from N(z m ) (at t = 0, W 0 j =1) to W t i , after a delay time of t. Accordingly, the DSF for this slab region at z = z m is expressed as follows, This local method proposed by del Rio et al. has been proved to be feasible in well-reproducing inelastic X-ray scattering experimental results 11 of the local liquids (a 4 nm depth probe) at the liquid-vapor interface. In the current study, we will apply this method to the crystal-melt interfaces and compare it with our method (see below) to characterize the collective dynamical properties and predict CMI kinetic coefficients. For the crystal-melt interfaces, the interfacial liquids can show an evident lateral (in-plane) ordering in addition to the usual layer ordering normal to the interfacial plane The values of the relaxation times τ n,I and τ † n,I obtained using the two local methods for the collective dynamics are employed in implementing the TDGL theory (see Appendix B) to revisit the kinetic anisotropies and the previously reported discrepancy between the simulation and theory predictions of the CMI μ. Fig. The ISF and DSF data do not show strongly damped oscillations in addition to their nearly exponential decay, as we are treating a relatively large wavenumber, | K| = 2.985 Å-1 . Note that, we have confirmed that the local CMI liquid ISF at smaller wavenumbers is well described by a hydrodynamic model expression, in which the ISF is expressed as a sum of a thermal relaxationrelated exponential decay function and a sound wave attenuation-related damped oscillation term In contrast to the significant anisotropy seen in Fig. The method by del Rio et al. (Eq.3, Eq.5) has also been employed in determining the ISFs, DSFs, and the τ n(z m ) at the three CMIs. Within the statistical uncertainties, the results produced from the del Rio et al. method for (100) and (110) CMIs are nearly identical to the results produced from our local method. See the open symbols in Fig. The data listed in the 2nd column of Table With the interfacial density relaxation times (listed in Table In the current study, the local collective dynamics of the interfacial liquid regions at equilibrium BCC Fe (100), (110), and (111) CMIs are calculated based on atomistic simulations. Two methods of determining the local collective dynamics of the liquids in an interfacial region of interest with a finite thickness are employed, specifically, the method by del Rio and González proposed in 2020 In addition, the speed up in the local collective dynamics exhibit pronounced orientational anisotropy among the three BCC CMIs. We presume that the in-plane ordering may play a dominant role in facilitating the collective dynamics and their anisotropy in CMI regions, whereas the local mass transport (self-diffusion coefficients) seems irrelevant. By including the density relaxation times for the interfacial liquids (calculated by our method), we demonstrate that the TDGL theory can accurately predict both the magnitude and the kinetic anisotropy of the CMI kinetic coefficients measured from the non-equilibrium MD simulations, μ MD n , yielding a reduction of the discrepancy reported in its previous validation 1 . In contrast, by including the density relaxation times calculated by the method of del Rio et al., unsatisfactory TDGL prediction of the kinetic coefficient for the CMI with relatively narrow interlayer spacing is found, due to the insufficient counting of the nearby structural ordering impact in their method. Overall, there are currently no inhomogeneous fluid statistical mechanical theories for quantitatively predicting the specific variations (e.g., slowing down at the liquid-vapor interface, speeding up at CMIs, and so on) and their crystalline anisotropies. Half of the hypotheses proposed in our previous work This study gives us an important revelation: the interfacial liquid density relaxation time is a crucial parameter with the potential for modulation. In-depth investigations on this local dynamical property (such as its material-, composition-and structure-dependencies) could benefit the quantitative understanding of recently reported anomalously low solidification rates in glassforming and high entropy alloy systems TABLE III. Categories of the GL order parameters, as well as the corresponding spatial integrations of the square-gradient terms of the ui(z) profiles (SISG) in Eq. A3. Note that the z coordinates and the GL order parameters in the integrands are rescaled by the liquid correlation length ξM and the bulk crystal GL order parameter value uC, respectively. The data listed in this table are taken from Ref. in which τ M is the microscopic time scale (density wave relaxation time) corresponding to the inverse half-width of the dynamical structure factor S M (| K|, ω) and u i (z) represents the spatial distribution of the GL order parameters describing density wave amplitudes corresponding to the ith RLV K, along the CMI normal direction z. Wu et al. have calculated the spatial integration of the derivative of u i (z) for the three BCC Fe CMIs studied here. The details of these calculations are shown in u i (z) Table μ