The discovery of superconductivity in infinite-layer nickelates is presently an important topic in condensed-matter physics, and potential similarities to and differences from cuprates are under intense debate. We determine general features of the charge excitation spectrum in nickelates from two opposite viewpoints: (i) Nickelates are regarded as strongly correlated electron systems like cuprate superconductors and thus can be described by the t-J model, and (ii) electron correlation effects are not as strong as in cuprates, and thus, random-phase approximation (RPA) calculations may capture the essential physics. We find that in both cases, plasmon excitations are realized around the momentum transfer q = (0, 0, q z ), although they tend to be damped more strongly in the RPA. In particular, this damping is enhanced by the relatively large interlayer hopping expected in nickelates. Besides reproducing the optical plasmon at q = (0, 0, 0) observed in Nd 0.8 Sr 0.2 NiO 2 , we obtain low-energy plasmons with gaps of ∼ 360 and ∼ 560 meV at q = (0, 0, q z ) for finite q z in cases (i) and (ii), respectively. The present work offers a possible theoretical hint to answer whether nickelates are cupratelike or not and contributes to the general understanding of the charge dynamics in nickelates. The study of unconventional superconductivity in strongly correlated systems is one of the major topics in solid-state physics. Thirty-five years after their discovery Remarkably, a new discovery has occurred in the last few years. We have entered in what some people call the "nickel age of superconductivity" The occurrence of superconductivity in infinite-layer nickelates is now also confirmed for hole-doped PrNiO 2 In spite of possible analogies between nickelates and cuprates the discussion about the similarities and differences between them is substantial One important difference from cuprates is the fact that undoped nickelates with a halffilled 3d x 2 -y 2 band do not exhibit antiferromagnetic long-range order Cuprates and nickelates are layered systems. Thus, besides the usual optical plasmons, acoustic plasmons are expected, as theoretical models suggest. Acoustic plasmons were studied in weak-coupling theory a long time ago The plasmon gap and t z are particularly large in the electron-doped infinite-layer cuprate Sr 0.9 La 0.1 CuO 2 (SLCO) This benchmark for the optical plasmon branch represents an important advantage because it is an indicator of the suitable strength of the long-range Coulomb repulsion in the material class (see Appendix A), thus allowing us to perform reliable t-J-V model calculations for the low-energy plasmons in nickelates. In this paper, in the framework of a one-band model, we study the emergence of lowenergy plasmons in nickelates assuming two distinct cases: (i) Nickelates are strongly correlated systems and, (ii) nickelates are characterized by weak electron interactions. The consideration of these two opposite cases and the obtained presence and absence of plas-mons can help to identify whether nickelates fall into regime (i) or (ii) or a mixed regime. Moreover, the obtained plasmon dispersion relations and plasmon gap contribute to the understanding of the charge dynamics in nickelates, which is an integral part of these materials. In Sec. II we show the results of our t-J-V and random-phase approximation (RPA) calculations, and in Sec. III we present the discussion and conclusion. In Appendix A we summarize the main formulas for the layered t-J-V model which were extensively discussed in previous papers In the following we first assume that nickelates fall into the strongly correlated limit Since the optical plasma frequency depends on V c /α and α has no impact on the calculation of the low-energy plasmons To convert the energy to eV we use t/2 = 0.368 eV The calculation is performed for hole doping δ = 0.2, and the temperature is fixed to T = 0. In order to show the optical plasmon branch (q z = 0), in Fig. (q x , q y ) £ '' (q, ) q z = 0 (a) FIG. In Figs. 2(a)-2(c) we show results for χ ′′ c (q, ω) for the momenta (0.1, 0, 1)π, (0.2, 0, 1)π and (0.4, 0, 1)π, respectively, indicated by thin dotted lines in Fig. Next we discuss the case of weakly interacting electrons in the RPA method In Fig. RP A (q, ω) for the momenta (0.1, 0, 1)π, (0.2, 0, 1)π, and (0.4, 0, 1)π, respectively. The plasmons are not sharp and become broad with increasing q . In contrast to the results for the t-J-V model [see Figs. 2(a)-2(c)], the intensity of the maximum of χ ′′ RP A (q, ω) decreases with increasing q . In Figs. 5(d)-5(f) we show the particle-hole continuum χ ′′(0) (q, ω) for each q. For comparison we had added in each plot the corresponding particle-hole continuum for the same conditions but for t z /t = 0 (dashed (q x , q y ) (0, 0) RP A (q, ω) for momenta along the (0, 0)-(π, 0) direction at q z = 0 and q z = π, respectively, computed in RPA. The thin dotted lines in (b) mark the three momenta chosen in Fig. For larger t z , the continuum in RPA extends to larger energies, and the low-energy plasmons close to the zone center tend to be damped more severely by particle-hole excitations. This is an important difference with respect to the t-J-V results where plasmons are always well defined. Instead, for q z = 0 there is no particle-hole continuum near the zone center for any value of t z . Comparing Figs. (a) q = (0.1, 0, 1)π (b) (c) q = (0.2, 0, 1)π q = (0.4, 0, 1)π t z /t = 0 , respectively, calculated in the RPA. (d)-(f) χ ′′(0) (q, ω) for the same momenta as in (a)-(c). Dashed lines show the particle-hole continuum for each momentum for t z /t = 0. (g)-(i) show the denominator of the RPA charge susceptibility for each momentum. tends to degrade plasmons at low q , while the continuum from the two-dimensional band structure is the main effect to wash out the plasmon for large q . Note that the behavior of the particle-hole continuum in Figs. As an additional detail of the RPA calculations in Figs. 5(g)-5(i) we show Re[1 -V (q)χ (0) (q, ω)], i.e., the real part of the denominator of the RPA expression (see Appendix B). When this denominator crosses zero and χ ′′(0) (q, ω) is negligible at the crossing frequency, i.e., no damping, a plasmon resonance exists. Note that for the presented values for q the denominator does not cross zero where the maximum in χ ′′ RP A (q, ω) occurs (see vertical thin lines in Fig. We have demonstrated that if nickelates are cupratelike systems, RIXS experiments are expected to reveal well-defined low-energy plasmons, similar to those recently detected in cuprates and described in the context of the layered t-J-V model. Since the interlayer hopping t z is likely larger in the infinite-layer nickelates than in the infinite-layer cuprates In the case of the t-J-V model why are the low-energy plasmons well defined? The answer is that the continuum is strongly suppressed by correlations. This can be seen directly in the equations for the layered t-J-V model in the Appendix A. In Eq. (A2) the strong correlation effects renormalize the hopping parameters by a factor δ, which then reduce the phase space for the particle-hole continuum, allowing the formation of well-defined lowenergy plasmons. A reduction of the bandwidth and the Fermi velocity in comparison with local-density approximation was already discussed in a study of low-energy plasmons in LaCuO 2 If infinite-layer nickelates are weakly interacting one-band systems or if they are multiorbital with a significant contribution from weakly interacting electrons as expected from Ni orbitals different from the in-plane Ni d x 2 -y 2 , the large interlayer hopping t z is not renormalized by correlations, and a large particle-hole continuum for finite q z near the zone center is expected. Consequently, low-energy plasmons are likely masked. For example, if the Ni d z 2 and the rare-earth orbitals are relevant, they may lead to an enhanced interlayer hopping and make it difficult to yield well-defined plasmons. In the presence of weakly interacting electrons, as shown in Fig. It is under debate whether additional orbitals might also play a role at low energies. Hence, it is not our aim to discuss quantitatively the plasmons, their dispersion, and their possible presence at half filling in multiorbital models. Our RPA results obtained in the effective single-band model should be regarded at the qualitative level. If, in the future, more precise experimental data are reported on low-energy plasmons in nickelates, it will be worthwhile to perform calculations in a more realistic model including the multiorbital picture explicitly. Finally, it will be interesting to find or to develop a layered uncorrelated system with large interlayer hopping. According to our view, this system should not show well-defined low-energy plasmons, or if they exist, they should be of low intensity and broad and probably difficult to be discerned from the background. As far as we know, such systems and experiments have not been developed yet; they would provide useful insights about the effect of electron correlations on charge excitations. where n F is the Fermi function, N s is the total number of lattice sites on the square lattice, and N z is the number of layers along the z direction. In the context of the t-J model using a path-integral representation where δR describes fluctuations of the number of holes at a given site and thus is related to on-site charge fluctuations, δλ is the fluctuation of the Lagrange multiplier introduced to enforce the constraint that prohibits the double occupancy at any site, and r x and r y (A x and A y ) describe fluctuations of the real (imaginary) part of the bond field coming from the J-term. The inverse of the 6 × 6 bare bosonic propagator associated with δX a is 2 [V (q) -J(q)] δ/2 0 0 0 0 δ/2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 J ∆ 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 J ∆ 2 0 0 where q is a three dimensional wavevector and ω n is a bosonic Matsubara frequency. J(q) = J 2 (cos q x + cos q y ), and V (q) is the long-range Coulomb interaction for a layered system, V (q) = V c A(q x , q y ) -cos q z , (A9) where V c = e 2 d(2ǫ ⊥ a 2 ) -1 and A(q x , q y ) = α(2 -cos q x -cos q y ) + 1 . (A10) These expressions are easily obtained by solving Poisson's equation on the lattice 