All-optical switching (AOS) of magnetization by a single femtosecond laser pulse in Co/Gd based synthetic ferrimagnets is the fastest magnetization switching process. On the other hand, He ion irradiation has become a promising tool for interface engineering of spintronic material platforms, giving rise to significant modification of magnetic properties. In this paper, we explore the use of He ion irradiation to enhance single pulse AOS of Co/Gd bilayer-based synthetic ferrimagnets. The intermixing of the constituent magnetic layers by He ion irradiation was both numerically simulated and experimentally verified. We theoretically modelled the effects of intermixing on AOS using the layered microscopic 3-temperature model and found that AOS is enhanced significantly by breaking the pristine Co/Gd interface through intermixing. Following this notion, we studied the threshold fluence of AOS as a function of He ion irradiation fluence. We found that the AOS threshold fluence can be reduced by almost 30%. Our study reveals the control of AOS by He ion irradiation, which opens up an industrially compatible approach for local AOS engineering. It is well-known that single pulse all-optical switching (AOS) of the magnetization in 3d-4f ferrimagnets is the fastest and one of the least dissipative ways of magnetization switching Particularly, a unique merit of this Co/Gd material platform is that the presence of AOS is not composition dependent One of the methods to utilize this degree of freedom is to explore the intermixing at the Co and Gd interface To this end, it has been discovered that controlled promotion of intermixing in spintronic material systems can be realized by He ion irradiation So far, He ion irradiation has not yet been adopted in the field of single pulse AOS, despite being highly explored already in the field of spintronics and optically driven domain wall motion We then discuss our theoretical microscopic simulation for the intermixing effects in Co/Gd on AOS based on the numerically modeled intermixing profile, where we found AOS switching energy decreases with increased extend of intermixing. We further experimentally show that, as the irradiation fluence increases, the threshold fluence of AOS reduces by almost 30 %. Our study bridges the link between the single-shot AOS and He ion irradiation, which paves the way for local and wafer-scale control of AOS properties, potentially useful for AOS threshold energy engineering. To conduct the study as mentioned above, we deposited Ta(4)/Pt(4)/Co(1)/Gd(3)/TaN(4) (from bottom to top, thickness in parenthesis in nm) on top of a Si/SiO 2 (100) substrate using DC magnetron sputtering at a base pressure of 10 -9 mbar. The magneto-static properties of this material system have already been described in Ref. The irradiation is known to induce intermixing We further investigated the magneto-static properties of the samples as a function of He ion irradiation fluence using the magneto-optic Kerr effect (MOKE). We first measured the hysteresis loop obtained using a polar MOKE configuration, some examples of which are shown in Fig. Next, we both theoretically and experimentally investigated the effects of intermixing on AOS. We used a layered microscopic 3-temperature model (M3TM) In order to experimentally verify the reduction of the AOS threshold fluence by He irradiation, we characterized the threshold fluence of irradiated samples of Ta(4)/Pt(4)/Co(1)/Gd(3)/TaN(4). Here, we adopted the approach used in Ref. In summary, we have explored the use of He ion irradiation to enhance AOS through the intermixing between the Co and Gd. We first presented the physical evidence of this intermixing as well as its effect on static magnetic properties. We show the square hysteresis is maintained upon He ion irradiation, while the anisotropy reduces monotonically. We theoretically predicted the reduction of AOS threshold fluence upon intermixing. We further experimentally verified that He ion irradiation leads to a 30% reduction in threshold fluence paving the way for local and high-throughput control of AOS at wafer-scale. A. Maziewski, A. Wagner, and A. Wawro, "On defects' role in enhanced perpendicular magnetic anisotropy in Pt/Co/Pt, in-duced by ion irradiation," Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 31, 185801 (2019).