We present a framework dedicated to modelling the resistive switching operation of Valence Change Memory (VCM) cells. The method combines an atomistic description of the device structure, a Kinetic Monte Carlo (KMC) model for the creation and diffusion of oxygen vacancies in the central oxide under an external field, and an ab initio quantum transport method to calculate electrical current and conductance. As such, it reproduces a realistically stochastic device operation and its impact on the resulting conductance. We demonstrate this framework by simulating a switching cycle for a TiN/HfO 2 /TiN VCM cell, and see a clear current hysteresis between high/low resistance states, with a conductance ratio of one order of magnitude. Additionally, we observe that the changes in conductance originate from the creation and recombination of vacancies near the active electrode, effectively modulating a tunnelling gap for the current. This framework can be used to further investigate the mechanisms behind resistive switching at an atomistic scale and optimize VCM material stacks and geometries. Neuromorphic computing units require the development of solid-state synapses that are often realized in the form of devices with adjustable electrical conductance. Amongst such devices are valence change memory (VCM) cells. These are two-terminal metal-oxide-metal stacks across which applied voltages can drive the creation of oxygen vacancies and their redistribution into a conductive filament -an applied voltage of the opposite polarity can then partially dissolve the filament, thus breaking the conductive pathway across the oxide. The resulting conductance can then be measured with a low readout voltage without further disrupting the defect arrangement. VCMs are both relatively straightforward to fabricate and exhibit an especially large dynamic range. Simulation of these devices is complicated by the stochasticity of their operation and the atomistic granularity of the resulting conductance. The movement of oxygen vacancies has been modelled using Kinetic Monte Carlo (KMC) methods Here we present a framework dedicated to modelling VCM. Our method relies on a stochastic Kinetic Monte Carlo (KMC) model parameterized with density functional theory (DFT), followed by ab initio quantum transport simulations, all of which are preformed on the same atomic grid. It thus captures the growth and dissolution of oxygen vacancy filaments through the VCM cell and the electrical Select an event (i, j, x) Update the time i, j, n = 1 i, j Calculate all event probabilities ff i, j P x New snapshot current that flows through them. Figure Next, oxygen vacancy (V +2 O ) and ion (O -2 ) rearrangements under an applied voltage (V app ) are modelled with an in-house KMC code. KMC has been used previously to model physical processes governed by the harmonic transition state theory where E x A is the zero-field activation energy of event x, and ν is an attempt frequency The KMC algorithm makes a list whose elements k x correspond to the cumulative sum of event probabilities P n i,j , n = 1 • • • x and chooses the first element of the list that is greater than the sum of all event probabilities k N , multiplied by a random number r, r ∈ (0, 1). The corresponding event P x i,j is thus chosen to occur. The event selection-andexecution process repeats until the simulation timescale reaches the intended duration for which V app is applied. A device snapshot is finally generated, containing information on the atomic species and positions. Figure To calculate the conductance of each snapshot, we use the Quantum Transmitting Boundary Method (QTBM) as implemented in the OMEN code Here, Inj(E) describes carrier injection from the contacts, which are coupled to the device through Σ RB (E). H cp2k and S cp2k are the Hamiltonian and overlap matrices, respectively, as produced with cp2k for each of the KMC snapshots. Due to the localized nature of the underlying Gaussian-type orbitals, H cp2k and S cp2k have a blockstructure representing atomic layers as pictured in Fig. We apply this model to simulate the operation of a TiN/HfO 2 /TiN VCM cell. The HfO 2 oxide has a crosssection of 1.67 x 1.63 nm 2 , for a total of 2252 atoms. Starting from a structure with a formed filament (Fig. During the transition from the initial structure in Fig. ( with vacancies near the active electrode results in a local dissolution of the filament, creating a tunneling gap. A transition back to the LRS in Fig. We combined KMC and ab initio quantum transport on an atomic lattice to model resistive switching in a VCM cell. Our model is able to capture a non-volatile switching mechanism dominated by vacancy generation and recombination at the active electrode, resulting in a clear conductance hysteresis with an ON/OFF ratio of one order of magnitude. This framework can be used to provide insight towards the optimization of VCM material stacks and geometries. Preprint submitted to Solid State Electronics July 5, 2022