Metal thio(seleno)phosphates MPX3 have attracted considerable attentions with wide spanned band gaps and rich magnetic properties. In this series, two neighboring members MnPS3 and NiPS3 differ in magnetic atoms, magnetic easy axes, spin anisotropy, as well as nearest-neighbor magnetic interactions. The competition between these components may cause intriguing physical phenomena. In this article, the evolution of magnetism of Mn1-xNixPS3 series is reported. Despite the incompatible antiferromagnetic orders of two end members, the antiferromagnetism persists as the ground state in the whole substitution region. The magnetic ordering temperature TN show nonmonotonic V-shape behavior, and the reentrant spin glass phase at x=0.5 is observed. In addition, abnormal bifurcation of TN occurs at x=0.75, which may be due to the temperature-dependent spin reorientation or phase separation. The evolution of magnetism is further confirmed semi-quantitatively by our density functional theory calculations. Our study indicates that exotic magnetism can be intrigued when multi-degrees of freedom are involved in these low-dimensional systems, which call for more in-depth microscopic studies in future. Two-dimensional (2D) van der Waals (vdW) materials are those systems in which monolayer atoms or several atomic layers are stacked by vdW force. They have attracted considerable interests since the successful exfoliation of graphene In addition, 2D vdW magnets can be a good test field of some early-established theories. For example, Mermin and Wagner once predicted "absence of ferromagnetism or antiferromagnetism in one-dimensional (1D) or 2D isotropic Heisenberg models at any non-zero temperature" Cr2Ge2Te6 The family of MPS3 compounds (M=3d transition metal) offers a series of isostructural vdW layered compounds with plenty antiferromagnetism and spin anisotropy Although antiferromagnets display zero net magnetization, they can response to external perturbations and display ultrafast spin dynamics, for which the so-called antiferromagnetic spintronics have emerged in recent years. In addition, the wide spanned band gap of 1.2-3.5 eV of MPS3 also make them promising for applications in optoelectronics and catalysis The MPS3 series adopt a monoclinic structure with space group C2/m. Transition-metal ions M are caged in trigonally distorted sulfur octahedra, form honeycomb networks in the ab planes, and carry local magnetic moments With different transition metal ions, MPS3 possess diverse magnetic properties. The competitions between the direct M-M exchange and indirect superexchange mediated through S atoms within each layer, as well as the interlayer exchange, decide the magnetic ground states and ordering temperatures The magnetic structure of MnPS3 is shown in figure Whereas in NiPS3, Ni ions are antiferromagnetically coupled with one nearest neighbor, ferromagnetically coupled with other two nearest neighbors, forming the zigzag antiferromagnetic state, as show in figure Another fundamental parameter in collinear magnets is the magnetic anisotropy, coming from variety of sources (e.g. magnetocrystalline anisotropy, stress anisotropy, spin-orbit coupling, and shape anisotropy). In 2D magnets, such anisotropy is crucial in establishing long-range correlation since that it can gap the low-energy modes Given these distinct magnetic order, spin direction, and magnetic anisotropy, exotic quantum phases are expected to be revealed in their solutions. For example, spin glass behavior was found in Mn-substituted FePS3 In this work, we systematically studied the magnetic properties of 2D vdW layered Mn1-xNixPS3 series. Possible temperature-dependent spin reorientation (or phase separation) in Mn0.25Ni0.75PS3 and glassy behavior in Mn0.5Ni0.5PS3 are reported, revealing the complex competition between magnetic exchange interactions and anisotropy. Single crystals of Mn1 -xNixPS3 series were synthesized using the chemical vapor transport technique, as shown in figure To identify the crystal structures of samples, X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were measured by Rigaku Smartlab3 (40 kV, 30 mA) in Bragg-Brentano reflection geometry with Cu K radiation (=1.5406 Å). The electron microscopic images were captured by scanning electron microscope (SEM). The same SEM device allowed for energy dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDXs) measurements (Oxford INCA Energy) exam the chemical distribution. A thin film of gold was evaporated on the surface of samples to further improve the sample conductivity. Magnetization measurements were carried using Superconducting Quantum Interference Device (Quantum Design). Temperature dependence of susceptibilities were measured in an applied magnetic field of 0H=0.5 T, in both the zero field cooling (ZFC) and field cooling (FC) sequences. Field dependent magnetization were carried under different temperatures. Thermoremanent magnetization were measured after ZFC to 20 K and 2 K, then set the magnetic field to 5 T and lasted for 300 second, and then removed the magnetic field. First-principles calculations were performed based on density functional theory (DFT) as implemented in the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) And the van der Waals correction DFT-D3 method was adopted The magnetic ordering temperatures TN's, defined by the inflection points, are 78 K and 155 K for MnPS3 and NiPS3 respectively, which are consistent with the previous report With increasing concentration of Ni, it shows non-monotonic change. As summarized in figure Below TN, there is also an evolution on the ordered moments' directions. For MnPS3, susceptibility curve drops more quickly for H ⊥ ab below TN, indicating spins order predominately out-of-plane. For NiPS3, susceptibility curve drops more quickly for H || ab below TN, indicating spins order predominately in-plane. For the half doped sample, susceptibility curve still drop more quickly for H⊥ab below TN. It is quite possible that spin orders predominately out-of-plane, similar to MnPS3. For x=0.75, situation becomes complicated. A noteworthy feature in figure According to the temperature dependence of magnetic susceptibility, the ZFC and FC curves of entire series coincide completely except for the x=0.5 compound. As shown in figure where ~700 s at 2 K. Noting that similar exponential magnetic relaxation were also observed in Fe0.5Ni0.5PS3, which was attributed to the magnetic glass Our magnetization measurements on Mn0.5Ni0.5PS3 imply a spin glassy like behavior. To further understand above experimental results, a first principle DFT calculation was performed. First, we checked the bulks of two end members. Four most possible magnetic orders, including the ferromagnetic one and three antiferromagnetic ones are considered (see figure Then the Ni substitution is tested, with the concentrations of 25%, 50%, and 75%, also summarized in Table MnPS3. With 75% Ni substitution, it exhibits the zigzag type antiferromagnetism, in consistent with NiPS3. While for the half-substituted case, two configurations are adopted (see figure We successfully grown a series of (Mn1 -xNix)PS3 single crystals by chemical vapor transport method. The systematic study on physical properties was performed by a combination of XRD, EDXs, DC magnetic susceptibility, thermoremanent magnetization measurements. For this series, the magnetism is expected to evolve with the Ni concentration, since their spins (moment, easy axis, anisotropy, interactions) are different between two end members. Some nontrivial magnetic properties have been found, with a V-shape curve of TN. For the x=0.5 case, the irreversibility between ZFC and FC curves is observed below the magnetic ordering temperature for magnetic field applied perpendicular to ab plane, indicating a reentrant spin glass phase. For the x=0.75 case, abnormal bifurcation of TN is found. This magnetic evolution is further confirmed by DFT calculation. More characterizations such as neutron diffraction and magnetic force microscopy can be used to further reveal more microscopic details. 