Magnetic monopole unpairing as a function of external magnetic fields is presented as a fingerprint of this emergent quasiparticles freedom in a two-dimensional artificial spin ice system. Such freedom, required for example for further application in magnetricity, is only possible due to ground-state degeneracy, which causes a decreasing of the string energy in rectangular geometries, designed to allow highest equidistance among nanomagnets. We show by simulations that spin correlation in different rectangular artificial spin ices evolves from antiferromagnetic ordered magnetic structure to a ferromagnetic one, passing through an ice regime were pinch points related to Coulomb phase are observed. By measurements of magnetic force microscopy, we observe magnetic monopole creation, transport and annihilation in such systems with free monopoles created and transported throughout the sample without strings attached, as is commonly observed in conventional artificial spin ice systems. Artificial spin ices (ASI), originally composed by Permalloy nanomagnets arranged in a square lattice The reasonable simplicity in the fabrication and manipulation of such artificial systems has led to proposals for utilizing magnetic monopoles in information technology, once their flow according to applied magnetic field generates magnetricity Inspired by freely moving monopoles in natural crystals of spin ice, it was predicted that ASI may also lead to monopole freedom when a critical height offset between nanomagnets layer is accomplished In this letter, we report the first direct observation of monopole freedom under external magnetic field in a twodimensional nanoscaled ASI. Actually, by stretching one side of the square lattice, a rectangular geometric arrangement is obtained. There, the interplay between degeneracy of ground state and geometrical frustration was predicted to ensure vanishing of string tension Monte Carlo simulation of dipole-dipole interaction has been used to achieve thermal annealing in different rectangular lattices and also to calculate the magnetic structure factors (1000 lower energetic configurations have been tested; further details may be found in the Supplementary Material with low energy states for the distinct lattice configuration presented). Spin correlations have been obtained for square and rectangular arrangements, depicted in Figure In the R3 case, T 1 and T 2 topologies are energetically degenerate and monopoles are now connected in pairs by tensionless strings Experimentally, we have constructed rectangular arrays of R2, R3, and R4 with sample dimensions of 100μm×100μm. Each nanomagnet is fabricated as a trilayer 3nm tantalum / 20nm permalloy / 3nm tantalum defined on the top of commercial silicon substrate, with lateral dimensions 3μm × 400nm. Such a shape ensures each magnet to behave as a Ising-like spin, whose magnetization points along the larger axis. Tantalum layers are used for better adhesion and as a capping to prevent Permalloy oxidation. First, samples have been completely saturated by applied magnetic field in the positive direction of high axis (horizontal). Afterwards, images have been taken by magnetic force microscopy (MFM) at remanence, for each magnetic field step applied in order to saturate magnetization in the opposite negative direction. Other measurements have been performed for two different directions, low axis (vertical) and diagonal, in order to avoid possible direction influence on the results (see Supplementary Materials Figure The topography of the R2 sample, obtained by atomic force microscopy (AFM), is shown in Figure In Figure Actually, a remarkable distinction between R3 and any other rectangular arrangement is realized whenever we analyze the relative population of T 3O and T 3I vertices. Indeed, once a number of magnetic monopole pairs is created in the system, such vertices should show up equally populated. Any mismatch between T 3O and T 3I number of vertices should then be faced as the appearance of unpaired monopoles. In Figure In order to observe the monopole transport in such a very low energetic string framework, we have investigated the evolving of vertex topology in a sample region with 6 × 6 vertices, Figure In conclusion, we have for the first time presented spin correlation calculations from theoretical investigation of degeneracy in two-dimensional ASI, by dipole Monte Carlo simulation, and experimentally demonstrated such degeneracy in direct measurements of monopole creation, transport and annihilation, during evolution under external magnetic field sweep. Our results showing transport of free monopoles throughout the sample, points the rectangular ASI as the most simple and efficient system to be applied in future magnetricity devices. Grupo de Física, Universidade Federal do Recôncavo da Bahia, 45300-000 -Amargosa -Bahia -Brazil. (Dated:July 14, 2022) 