The nematicity in multilayer FeSe/SrTiO 3 films has been previously suggested to be enhanced with decreasing film thickness. Motivated by this, there have been many discussions about the competing relation between nematicity and superconductivity. However, the criterion for determining the nematicity strength in FeSe remains highly debated. The understanding of nematicity and its relation to superconductivity in FeSe films is therefore still controversial. Here, we fabricate multilayer FeSe/SrTiO 3 1 Electronic nematicity, which breaks rotational symmetry but preserves translational symmetry of lattice 1 , has been widely observed in cuprates The relationship between nematicity and superconductivity is under hot debate in FeSe crystals. Their competition is proposed in an electron irradiation experiment, where the disorder enhances T c while lowers T nem Whereas, their cooperative effect is suggested by the sizeable enhancement of T c with an enlarged orthorhombic distortion below T c upon increasing sulfur doping in FeSe Thus the origin of nematicity in FeSe remains highly interesting, but its effect on the electronic structure is controversial. In FeSe crystals, due to the complicated band structure and multiorbital character around Brillouin zone (BZ) corner, the energy scale of the zone-corner d xz /d yz splitting has been hotly debated. It was reported to be either ∼50 meV Multilayer FeSe films were fabricated on either Nb:SrTiO 3 (001) (for ARPES and STM) or SrTiO 3 (001) (for NMR) substrates. The surface and structural characterization of 15-ML film are presented in Fig. Given that the domain structure in FeSe film evolves with the thickness, we study the electronic structures of 15-ML and 115-ML films by ARPES measurements. It has been suggested that the vacuum-ultraviolet ARPES detects the signals of escaped photoelectrons mainly from the top two FeSe layers We further measure the band structure along Γ-M and Γ-X directions in k z = 0 [Figs. 3(e) and 3(h)], no splitting is observed on α band when crossing E F . The hole pocket is further revealed to be circular in shape by comparing the k F 's along Γ-M and Γ-X directions. In light of this, the ellipse-like FSs in Figs. As discussed above, the bulk region of thick FeSe films is composed of the nematicityrelated twinned domains. In Fig. As indicated by the red arrows, the splitting of α band is clearly observed, its splitting energy scale of ∼20 meV (Fig. Our observations clearly demonstrate the tensile-strain-induced no nematicity near the interface, solving the aforementioned controversy about the nematicity in multilayer FeSe/SrTiO 3 films 34,49-52 . The strain effect has been found to exhibit the exponential-like relaxation with increasing FeSe thickness Given that the volume of intermediate region is less than 10% of the bulk region, the NMR lines with tiny intensities from the intermediate region could be hidden by the intense f 1 -f 2 line. Last but not least, we discuss the implications of our results for the relationship between nematicity and superconductivity. Extensive studies have been performed to uncover their interplay in FeSe crystals, but the findings are multifarious as described above, leaving it still rather mysterious. The absence of a superconducting gap for undoped multilayer (2-20 MLs) FeSe/SrTiO 3 films has been reported in previous STM studies In summary, we have provided compelling evidence for the suppression of nematicity near the interface of multilayer FeSe/SrTiO 3 films. In the bulk region further away from the interface, where the SrTiO 3 -induced tensile strain is fully relaxed, the bulk-like nematicity is revealed. The present results facilitate further understanding the nematicity and its interplay with superconductivity in multilayer FeSe films. The experimental methods and details of the film growth, ARPES measurements, STM measurements, and NMR measurements can be found in the Supporting Information.