Physical reservoir computing, which is a promising method for the implementation of highly efficient artificial intelligence devices, requires a physical system with nonlinearity, fading memory, and the ability to map in high dimensions. Although it is expected that spin wave interference can perform as highly efficient reservoir computing in some micromagnetic simulations, there has been no experimental verification to date. Herein, we demonstrate reservoir computing that utilizes multidetected nonlinear spin wave interference in an yttrium iron garnet single crystal. The subject computing system achieved excellent performance when used for hand-written digit recognition, second-order nonlinear dynamical tasks, and nonlinear autoregressive moving average (NARMA). It is of particular note that normalized mean square errors (NMSEs) for NARMA2 and second-order nonlinear dynamical tasks were 1.81 ́ 10 -2 and 8.37 ́ 10 -5 , respectively, which are the lowest figures for any experimental physical reservoir so far reported. Said high performance was achieved with higher nonlinearity and the large memory capacity of interfered spin wave multi-detection. Reservoir computing is a promising method for implementing high-efficiency artificial intelligence that can perform at lower learning costs than is possible with conventional artificial neural networks, which is due to the system having fewer learning parameters and the ability to process time series data 1-3 . These advantages can be realized in a reservoir computing system by meeting three requirements; nonlinear transformation, short-term memory (fading memory), and the ability to map in higher dimensional space. Although recently, while various physical devices (e.g., electrical circuits, electrochemistry, magnetics, optics, and robotics) have been utilized to create physical reservoir systems 4-26 , some issues remain due to the high electrical power consumption, low accuracy rates, and large volumes associated with such systems. Among related research fields, the spin wave is attracting attention due to its charge-less transport method and low electric power consumption resonator Herein, we describe the first demonstration of a physical reservoir computing system utilizing interfered spin waves. In the subject system, an yttrium iron garnet (YIG) single crystal with multi-antennas, which are for the excitation and detection of multi-spin waves, is used as a homogeneous medium. A hand-written digit recognition task and nonlinear time series data prediction tasks were performed to evaluate the performance of the subject physical reservoir system. The maximum accuracy rate for the hand-written digit recognition task was 89.6 %, which is comparable to or higher than the score of the high performance physical reservoirs reported. Memory capacity and the solvability of nonlinear autoregressive moving average (NARMA) and second-order nonlinear dynamic tasks were dramatically improved by interfered spin wave multi-detection, which was used experimentally for the first time. Minimum errors of 8.37 ́ 10 -5 and 1.81 ́ 10 -2 were achieved, which are dramatically lower than the errors of any other experimental reservoir system reported to date. One of the most noteworthy points in this paper is that our reservoir computing system can predict NARMA10 more precisely than any experimental spintronics reservoir system due to its large shortterm memory capacity (CSTM ~ 26.98 per 100 nodes) and high nonlinearity, which were achieved utilizing interfered spin wave multi-detection. Figure where n and k are the number of nodes and the discrete time, respectively. The first demonstration performed with our reservoir computing system was of a handwritten digit recognition task, as shown in Fig. Time series data prediction tasks are widely performed so as to evaluate the nonlinear transform function of a reservoir system. The process flow for such task is shown in Fig. Here, T, d(k), and yp(k) are the lengths in the training phase (T = 3500) or test phase (T = 500), the target signal, and the predicted signal. NMSE at the training phase is 7.66 ́ 10 -5 . A new random input is prepared for the testing phase so as to verify that the trained reservoir computing system can predict output from Eq. ( ́ 10 -5 by utilizing interfered spin wave multi-detection, as is proved by the comparison shown in the two right-hand panels (Detectors A+B) and the remaining four panels (Detector A and Detector B) in the figure. This value is much lower than the values of other physical reservoir computing systems that have been reported, in which the NMSEs of a theoretical reservoir computing system with 24 spin torque oscillators 10 were ~ 1.31 ́ 10 -3 and an experimental reservoir computing system with 90 metaloxide memristors 5 were ~ 3.13 ́ 10 -3 , respectively. The nonlinear autoregressive moving average (NARMA) is a more difficult task than a second-order nonlinear dynamic task to perform, since in order to predict the output of an NARMA model, a reservoir system is required to not only perform nonlinear transform functions but also to exhibit fading memory. Here, we introduce NARMA2 and NARMA10, which need fading memory from the previous 2 and 10 steps, respectively, as defined below; d(k) = 0.4d(k -1) + 0.4d(k -1)d(k -2) + 0.6u % (k -1) + 0.1 (4) and d(k) = 0.3d(k -1) + 0.05d(k -1) ∑ d(k -m) Figs. 4(a) and (b) show comparisons with the theoretical outputs of Eq. ( where dave. is the time average of d(k). The measurement condition dependence of NMSEvar is similar to that for a second-order nonlinear dynamics task. The lowest NMSEvar for this task was 1.81 ́ 10 -2 , which is dramatically lower than that of an experimental physical reservoir computing system previously reported There is tendency, which differs from tendency for the NMSE for the NARMA10 prediction, which tendency is described as follows; while the NMSE is lower in stronger magnetic fields and longer intervals, the NSME at rest is higher. the figure. This result indicates that the large CSTM and high ability of mapping high dimension, achieved with 100 nodes extracted from the multi-detection, is critically important in solving NAMRA10 tasks. This result confirms that a reservoir computing system with interfered spin wave multi-detection exhibits the highest performance of all experimental reservoir computing system with spintronics phenomenon (NMSEvar of ~ 3.7 ́ 10 -1 ) A short-term memory task was performed to measure the ability of our reservoir computing system for predicting time series data output from a nonlinear dynamic model. The ability for prediction decreases as the step delay increases, as shown in Fig. To evaluate the nonlinearity of the system, Lyapunov exponents l were estimated. l is generally used to determine if the response of the system is orderly or disorderly (i.e., chaotic); when maximum l is negative (positive), the system is orderly (disorderly). Furthermore, the degree of nonlinearity of the system improves as l increases. As shown in Figs. We achieved the first demonstration of an experimental reservoir computing system with interfered spin wave multi-detection. Our reservoir computing system achieved a recognition rate of 89.6 % for hand-written digits. The NMSEs for a second-order nonlinear dynamic task and NARMA2 were 8.37 ́ 10 -5 and 1.81 ́ 10 -2 , respectively, which are dramatically lower than the NMSEs of any reservoir computing system reported to date. The subject reservoir system can also predict output from NARMA10 model, with an NMSE of 2.43 ́ 10 -1 , which is the lowest value in an experimental spintronic reservoir computing system. While the largest CSTM in this study was 26.98 per 100 nodes, which is larger than the CSTM for spin wave propagation reported to date (negative), proximity orbits are detached (asymptotic). In calculation, the Lyapunov exponent is calculated by taking a hypersphere (ε-sphere) in m-dimensional space of minute radius ε around a point, assuming that its change after one step can be approximated linearly, and then estimating the Jacobi matrix using that variation. The displacement vector μi ∈ R N+L with respect to v(ki) as seen from v(t) is expressed as; μ ! = v(k ! ) -v(t). (11) Since v(t) and v(ki) transit v(t + s) and v(ki + s) when time s elapses, the displacement vector zi at time t + s can be described as; z ! = v(k ! + s) -v(t + s). (12) Under the consumption that ε and s are small enough to be negligible, μ ! and z ! can be linearly approximated as follow; where J S (t) is the Jacobi matrix to be estimated. Thus, the Jacobi matrix can be estimated as follows; J U (t) = z ! μ ! . (μ ! μ ! . ) +$ . (14 J S (0) that is J S (t) at t = 0 is described by QR decomposition, as follows; where Q and R are the orthogonal matrix and the upper triangular matrix. At time t + 1, multiply J U (t) ∑ lnHR ) !! H . Here, R ) !! is the i-th diagonal element of the upper triangular matrix Rk.