Pyrochlore oxides A 2 B 2 O 7 have been a fruitful playground for condensed matter physics because of the unique geometry in the crystal structure. Especially focusing on the A-site tetrahedral sub-lattice in particular pyrochlore oxides A 2 B 2 O 7 (A = Sn, Pb; B = Nb, Ta), recent theoretical studies predict the emergence of "quasi-flat band" structure as a result of the strong hybridization between filled A-ns and O-2p orbitals. In this work, we have established the growth conditions of Sn 2 Nb 2 O 7 , Sn 2 Ta 2 O 7 , Pb 2 Nb 2 O 7 , and Pb 2 Ta 2 O 7 films by pulsed laser deposition on Y-stabilized ZrO 2 (111) substrates to elucidate their optical properties. Absorption-edge energies, both for direct and indirect band gaps, increase in the order of Sn 2 Nb 2 O 7 , Sn 2 Ta 2 O 7 , Pb 2 Nb 2 O 7 , and Pb 2 Ta 2 O 7 . This tendency can be well explained by considering the energy level of the constituent elements. Comparison of the difference between direct and indirect band gaps reveals that Pb 2 B 2 O 7 tends to have a less dispersive valence band than Sn 2 B 2 O 7 . Our findings are consistent with the theoretical predictions and are suggestive of the common existence of the hybridized states in this class of compounds. Pyrochlore oxides are one of the typical complex oxides generally formulated as A 2 B 2 O 7 and are known to exhibit a wide range of physical properties O(1) sites form BO(1) 6 octahedra and O(2) sites configurate A 2 O(2) tetrahedral network as shown in Fig. According to the theoretical band calculations, band structure near Fermi level largely depends on the combination of A-and B -site elements We first discuss the optimization of the thin film growth conditions. Following the growth conditions for Sn 2 Nb 2 O 7 reported previously We now argue the optical properties of the films to characterize the band structures in this class of compounds. Absorption coefficient (α) values were calculated as below: where d is the film thickness, T is the fraction of incident light transmitted through the film, and R is the fraction of incident light reflected by the film. The absorption spectra of the films are presented in Fig. These results of our films confirm that the hybridized band is the common feature in this class of compounds as predicted by the first-principles band calculations We then focus on the optical band gap (E g ) determined from the Tauc plots with considering direct and indirect allowed transitions. In Figs. are plotted as a function of hν, where direct and indirect band gaps (E dir g and E ind g ) can be deduced from the intercept of the dashed line with the horizontal axis. Figure Another intriguing observation is the difference between direct and indirect band gaps (∆E g ≡ E dir g -E ind g ) summarized in Fig. (a)