We explore the electron dynamics of a system composed of double quantum dot embedded between metallic and superconducting leads in a "T-shape" geometry. In nanoscopic systems, where electron transfer between electrodes can be realized via different paths, interference effects play an important role. For double quantum dot system in the chosen geometry, interference of electrons transferred between electrodes via the interfacial quantum dot and electrons scattered on the side dot gives rise to Fano-like interference. If such a system is additionally coupled to a superconducting electrode, together with the well-understood Fano resonance an additional resonance appears on the opposite side of the Fermi level. In the recent work [Sci. Rep. 10, 2881 (2020)], we showed that this resonance occurs solely as a result of the local pairing of non-scattered electrons with scattered ones. In this work, considering the quench dynamics, we explore how much time is required for formation of each of these resonances. In particular, (i) we analyze the charge oscillations between subsystems; (ii) we estimate the time required for each resonance to achieve stable equilibrium upon an abrupt change of interdot connection; (iii) we discuss a typical energy and time scales for experiments on similar architectures. Understanding of electron dynamics in nanoscopic systems is important issue for development of modern information processing devices. To determine the upper limit of how fast such devices can perform logical operations, the system reaction time to a sudden change of parameters should be taken into account. Process in which one parameter of quantum system is changed much faster than time required for its thermalization is called a quantum quench Equilibrium conditions analysis of charge transport through mesoscopic heterostructures turns out to be invaluable in the context of understanding of quantum interference effects and their coexistence with other many-body effects. In particular, the Fano resonance originating from interference of electrons transmitted simultaneously through broad and narrow energy levels has been extensively explored both on theoretical as well as experimental ground. Interplay of the Fano-like interference with the Coulomb blockade One particularly interesting experiment has been conducted by K. Kobayashi et al. Transient effects in quantum dot hybrids in various configurations have already been studied theoretically by a few authors One of convenient systems for theoretical analysis of such interferences in nanoscopic systems is composed of two quantum dots deposited in such a way that one quantum dot (QD 1 ) is strongly coupled to electrodes, while the other one (QD 2 ) is only side attached to the first quantum dot. This is so-called "T-shape" configuration. Realization of similar architecture have been done e.g. in In the present work, we inspect the dynamics of the interference effects when such system is additionally connected to superconducting electrode. Thus, the full system considered here is composed of a double quantum dot deposited between two metallic (L and R) and one superconducting (S) electrodes as schematically depicted in Figure In our recent work on a similar architecture system, we showed that, if the local pairing is present, along the well-understood Fano resonance another feature on the opposite side of the Fermi level is formed In the context of quench dynamics, an important question arises: Is there a difference in the timing of the formation of these two resonances? On one hand, if one foresees the appearance of the AF features in the spectrum of a given spin electrons, the electron of opposite spin should be scattered on the side level firstly, and only then information about this event should be passed to the first electron giving rise to the AF resonance. From this perspective, one could expect that the feature of direct scattering will be formed faster than its superconducting response. On the other hand, due to the local pairing, two electrons of opposite spin form one quantum object. If the superconducting-like correlations on the QD's are instantaneous, than any process that involve one electron should have its instantaneous effect on the other. Therefore, if information transfer between paired electrons is infinitely fast, there should not be any delay between formation of the OF and the AF resonances. In this regard, our analysis can be understood as answering the question whether the information transfer through local pairing have instantaneous character? In the present work, we explore the electron dynamics of a system composed of double quantum dot embedded between metallic and superconducting leads in a "T-shape" geometry. Considering the quench dynamics, we explore how much time is required for formation of both the ordinary Fano resonance (associated with direct scattering of electrons) and the anomalous Fano resonant features (associated with indirect scattering of electrons due to the superconducting pairing). In particular, we analyze the charge oscillations between subsystems in the absence of normal electrodes. The main part of the paper is devoted to estimation of the time required for both resonances to achieve stable equilibrium upon an abrupt change of interdot connection. Moreover, we discuss typical energy and time scales for experiments on similar architectures. A setup investigated in this work and schematically depicted in Figure where Ĥβ correspond to three external electrodes (two metallic β = L, R and one superconducting β = S). Two singlelevel quantum dots and the tunnel coupling between them are represented by ĤQDi , respectively (σ =↑, ↓). ĤTβ stands for hybridization of each electrode to interfacial quantum dot (QD 1 ). We treat metallic reservoirs as free electron gas, thus for β = L, R we have Ĥβ = ∑ k,β ,σ ξ kβ ĉ † kβ σ ĉkβσ , where electron energies ξ kβ are measured with respect to chemical potentials μ β . Assuming isotropic energy gap (∆ S ) of superconducting electrode, Ĥβ for β = S reads as ĤS = ∑ k,S,σ ξ kS ĉ † kSσ ĉkSσ -∑ k (∆ S ĉ † kS↑ ĉ † -kS↓ + h.c.). The hybridization part is described by ĤTβ = ∑ k,σ V kβ ĉkβσ d † 1σ + h.c. and represents the coupling of QD 1 to β electrode. Restricting our analysis to the energies deep inside the superconductor energy gap (i.e., ∆ S → ∞), we can neglect the existence of single-electron energy levels in the SC electrode. This, so-called superconducting atomic limit approximation, allows to reduce the influence of SC electrode on QD 1 by a static terms representing induced local pairing ( d1↑ d1↓ + h.c.) In this work, we focus solely on building up of interference effects in case when ordinary and anomalous Fano resonances are well separated (this is ε 2 ̸ = 0). Therefore, in our calculations, we will omit onsite Coulomb interactions. Consequently, constituents of the Hamiltonian representing the interfacial quantum dot, the SC electrode, and their mutual interactions can be rewritten in the following form: where ∆ d is dependent solely on the QD 1 -SC electrode coupling constant: In our work, we use the total coupling to conduction electrodes (Γ N ) as energy unit: ) is given by the inverse of this energy scale 1 t.u. = h/Γ N . More detailed discussion on the time and energy scales is given in Section Quantified values of time. Dynamics of coupled complex systems with discrete energy levels can be described in both time and energy scales. One of the scales is related to charge oscillations between subsystems. The period of these oscillations is usually associated with the energy of coupling between subsystems. In our case, apart from interdot coupling t 12σ , oscillations originating from the coupling of the system to superconducting electrode play an important role. All this oscillations do not thermalize unless the system is hybridized to continuum of states. Such continuum acts as damping force for classical oscillations Using the Laplace transformation, we conduct analytic calculations of the exactly solvable model with the time-independent parameters, where coupling to continuum is assumed to be negligible, i.e., Γ N → 0 + . The main goal of the work, i.e., analysis of the above described double quantum dot system for arbitrary Γ N ̸ = 0 and with the spin-independent interdot coupling (t 12↑ (t) = t 12↓ (t) ≡ t 12 (t)), will be achieved by numerical calculations using the 4th order Runge-Kutta (4RK) method applied to equations of motion obtained in the Heisenberg representation. In order to derive the time dependent occupation number n iσ (t) = ⟨ d † iσ (t) diσ (t)⟩, we start with equation of motion in Heisenberg representation for a given operator Ô: We calculate the set of such differential equations for creation d † 1σ , d † 2σ , ĉ † kσ and annihilation d1σ , d2σ , ĉkσ operators. Next, for each fermion operator we conduct a Laplace transform L [ Ô(t)](s) defined as where s is a complex variable. Such a procedure transforms a set of differential equations into a set of linear equations dependent on s which are solvable analytically. We get analytical expression for each operator Ô(s). For example, in the case of time-independent t 12σ 's, for the annihilation operators d1↑ and d1↓ , the s-dependent form looks as follows where Note that equations above are obtained for a general case of spin-dependent t 12σ (t 12↑ ̸ = t 12↓ ) and arbitrary Γ N , Γ S , ε 1 , and ε 2 . Now, we can get expressions for the occupation numbers in s-dependent form (i.e., expressions for n iσ (s) = ⟨ d † iσ (s) diσ (s)⟩) in the limit of Γ N → 0. The general equations are rather complex, therefore, we present here the results obtained in the conditions: ε 1 = ε 2 = 0 and n 2σ (0) = 0. After removing pairs of operators that give zero and applying the inverse Laplace transform for a given operator L -1 [ Ô(s)](t), for the spin-independent inter dot coupling, i.e., t 12↑ = t 12↓ = t 12 , we formulate the time dependence of expectation values n 1σ (t) and n 2σ (t): where n iσ (0) = ⟨ d † iσ (0) diσ (0)⟩ and Here, we will find the explicit equations for the time-dependence of occupation number n iσ (t) = ⟨ d † iσ (t) diσ (t)⟩ in the limit of Γ N → 0 and ε 1 = ε 2 = 0, time-independent t 12σ ≡ t 12 for σ =↑, ↓. We also assume that at the initial moment (t = 0), the side attached quantum dot is empty, i.e., n 2σ (0) = 0 (for both σ 's). Note that, in such a case, time dependence of n iσ is spin-independent (n i↑ (t) = n i↓ (t)). Taking into account this simplifications, we obtain from ( where h 1σ (0) = 1n 1σ (0) and σ denotes spin direction opposite to σ . Charge oscillations are defined by two frequencies We note that, for the vanishing interdot coupling (t 12 → 0), frequency ω -is equal to 0, while ω + → ∆ d . This brings the equation (10) to the form of n 1σ (t) = n 1σ (0) cos 2 (∆ d t) + h 1 σ (0) sin 2 (∆ d t), which reproduces the result obtained for a single QD placed between metallic and superconducting leads for vanishing Γ N (see Ref. The occupancies of both dots and the dot-lead charge flow (per spin) calculated from equations ( Although in our work we mainly focus on the limit of the weak (but not negligible) interdot coupling, it is very interesting to investigate charge oscillations for t 12 ≫ ∆ d (cf. the right panel of Figure Asymmetric line-shapes being a symptom of electron scattering on a side level can be practically investigated by inspection of time-dependent charge current induced by a bias voltage. Our aim is to calculate the charge current I L (t, eV ) flowing through one of the metallic electrodes upon bias voltage V applied to another one (e denotes the elementary charge), i.e., the source-drain voltage between the normal electrodes. We assume that chemical potential of the SC electrode and the metallic R electrode are equal and we measure the energy with respect to these potentials (μ SC = μ R = 0). The pronounced resonant features can be inspected in differential conductivity G(t, eV ) = d dV I(t, eV ). The charge flowing through L electrode is given by average change of the electron number in the L lead where N Lσ = Σ k ĉ † kLσ ĉkLσ . In order to find time-dependent statistical averages we derive the closed set of ordinary differential equations of motion in terms of the Heisenberg notation d dt Ô(t) = i h [ Ĥ, Ô] and apply the 4th order Runge-Kutta (RK4) method for numerical calculations of time evolution for each average. Details of this procedure were introduced in the previous work on dynamics of Majorana-QD hybrid We assume that initially (t ≤ 0) all parts of the system (both QD's and three electrodes) are separated. Such initial condition can be met by setting the averages comprising operators referring to different parts of the system like ⟨ d( †) jσ ′ (0)⟩ to be equal 0. The assumption that the quantum dots are separated from the SC electrode for t < 0 also imposes that there was no pairing potential in the region of the QDs. This requirement is met by ⟨ d † iσ (0) d † i σ (0)⟩ = ⟨ di σ (0) di σ (0)⟩ = 0. The average numbers of electrons in L and R leads are given by the Fermi distribution function ⟨ ĉ † kβ σ (0) ĉkβσ (0)⟩ = {1 + exp (ξ kβμ β )/(k B T ) } -1 . In order to do not confuse the effect of formation of quasiparticles with interference effects we developed two step procedure. First, we assume that at time t = 0 QD 1 is connected only to the external electrodes (i.e., L, R and S) keeping t 12 = 0. Static results for single QD in such heterostructure show that evolution should lead to the formation of two quasiparticle Andreev states located near ± ε 2 1 + ∆ 2 d (cf., e.g., Refs. In order to verify obtained results we can calculate also the static (time-independent) conductivity. Conductivity calculated using the RK4 method for (t → ∞) should reproduce these results. In three terminal heterostructure comprising two metallic and one superconducting electrode, charge transport is provided by three types of processes: (i) ballistic single electron transfer (ET) from L to R electrode, (ii) direct Andreev reflection (DAR), where single electron from L electrode is converted to a Cooper pair propagating in the SC electrode with simultaneous reflection of hole back to L electrode, and (iii) cross Andreev reflection (CAR), in which the hole is reflected to second metallic electrode (R). For the static case these three processes can be evaluated using the following Landauer-like formulas 52, 53 The comparison of the resonant features near ε 2 (red lines) and -ε 2 (orange lines) obtained for several different times (t = tt 0 ) with the static (t → ∞) conductance (the blue lines). The results are presented for t = 10, 40, 70, 130 [h/Γ N ], respectively (as labelled). V denotes the bias voltage. Other parameters used here are the same as in Figure where G r i j are matrix elements of the retarded Green functions of QD 1 in the Nambu representation (given, e.g., in Ref. are the Fermi distributions of electrons and holes, respectively. In our calculations we assume that voltage (V ) is applied to L electrode while the chemical potential of S and R electrodes are equal and energies are measured with respect to them (μ R = μ S = 0). Time-dependent current calculated using the RK4 method accounts for all these three processes together. In Figure In this regard, in Figure We noticed that evolution of the OF and the AF peaks in time resembles the exponential growth (cf. Figure Dependencies of the equilibrium times on the interdot coupling. Times τ F and τ AF (in the units of h/Γ N ) as a function of the interdot coupling t 0 12 obtained for the ordinary Fano resonance (blue line) and the anomalous Fano feature (red line), respectively. decay of a difference between the actual and the final value of maxima. This function is defined as where Ḡ(∞) is the peak amplitude in the static conditions (i.e., at t → +∞), Ḡ(t 0 ) is a value of the local maxima at the initial moment of the quench (at t 0 ), and the fitted parameter τ represents the interval, in which a mismatch between the initial conductivity and the equilibrium conductance diminishes e ≈ 2.71 times. The calculations have been performed for a few amplitudes of the interdot coupling strengths ranging from t 0 12 = 0.3Γ N to t 0 12 = 0.6Γ N . We find that the characteristic time parameter τ AF obtained for the anomalous Fano is larger than its counterpart τ F obtained for the ordinary Fano resonance. The difference τ AFτ F is larger for weak interdot coupling t 0 12 . Data of obtained τ for both resonances are collected in the second and third column of Table Time of achieving the equilibrium conditions t eq could be considered as time after which the difference between the initial and the final amplitudes of a given resonant feature decrease by 95%. In order to deliver information on a typical timescale of the resonances in tangible units (i.e., nanoseconds), in the table, we present also t eq assuming that the dot-lead coupling Γ N is equal to 50 μeV. The energy scale of this magnitude is typical for experiments considering nanoscale objects coupled with superconductors The Fano-type interference peaks are characterized by asymmetric line-shapes originating from the close coexistence of resonant enhancement and resonant suppression of transmission. The function resembling the Fano-like shapes reads as where α(ω) is the background transmission (which, in our case, is the undisturbed Andreev feature and can be obtained from equations ( disturbances. For the set of parameters used in Figure On four left panels of Figure where we assumed that α(ω) is almost not dependent on ω in the neighbourhood of ω 0 and α(ω) ≈ α max ≡ α(ω 0 ) near ω 0 (cf. also equation (10) from Ref. Although switching on and off the interdot coupling in considered time scales would be difficult to realize experimentally, effectively the quench protocol presented in this work could be realized electrostatically by gate voltage applied to the side dot (cf., e.g., Refs. In this work, we estimated the time required for formation of ordinary Fano resonance and its superconducting response on quantum dot (QD 1 ) region upon abrupt connection of additional quantum dot (QD 2 ). We found that upon abrupt interdot connection nonequilibrium SC response for scattering has its instantaneous effect pronounced by a high-magnitude asymmetric peak observables in differential conductivity. Careful inspection of their amplitudes relatively to static results reveals that stable solution for the anomalous feature develops longer than the feature representing direct scattering. The difference in time of this "saturation" decreases with increasing of the coupling between dots. A comparison of a time scale to typical values of the dot-lead coupling in experiments on quantum dot -superconductor hybrids shows that time of reaching equilibrium ranges from few to few hundreds of nanoseconds depending on strength of coupling to the Fermi sea and interdot connection. Comparing our results to those obtained when QD 2 was substituted by one end of topological chain hosting Majorana particles 