Polymers are ultra-versatile materials that adapt to a myriad of applications, as they can be designed appropriately for specific needs. The realization of new compounds, however, requires the appropriate experimental characterizations, also from the mechanical point of view, which is typically carried out by analyzing the vibrations of beams, but which still have some unclear aspects, with respect to the well-known dynamics of elastic beams. To address this shortcoming, the paper deals with the theoretical modelling of a viscoelastic beam dynamics, and pursues the elucidation of underlying how the flexural vibrations may be affected when an axial preload, compressive or tensile, is applied. The analytical model presented, is able to shed light on a peculiar behaviour, which is strongly related to the frequency dependent damping induced by viscoelasticity. By considering as an example a real polymer, i.e. a synthetic rubber, it is disclosed that an axial preload, in certain conditions, may enhance or suppress the oscillatory counterpart of a resonance peak of the beam, depending on both the frequency distribution of the complex modulus and the length of the beam. The analytical model is assessed by a Finite Element Model (FEM), and it turns out to be an essential tool for understanding the dynamics of viscoelastic beams, typically exploited to experimentally characterize polymeric materials, and which could vary enormously simply through the application of constraints and ensued preloads. The new forthcoming technology challenges seems to be oriented towards the use of ultra light, extremely resistant, active and super smart materials, substantially able to face with increasingly innovative shapes [1], demands for adaptative features based on operating conditions Whether polymers are employed individually or combined with other materials (e.g. in the case of composites), it is of fundamental importance to suitably characterize them from a mechanical point of view being ε(t) the time derivative of the strain, σ(t) is the stress, G (t -τ ) is the time-dependent relaxation function, usually characterized in the Laplace domain, through the viscoelastic modulus E (s) = sG (s). There is an awesome quantity of research devoted to the experimental characterization of the viscoelastic modulus E (s), from the widespread DMA (Dynamic mechanical analysis) technique to retrieve the complex modulus, increasing the frequency range of interest by varying the length of the beam. The technique is resulted reliable, accurate, and in good agreement with the DMA. The breakthrough of the proposed technique is related to the analytical model presented, which is able to accurately take into account, in the vibrational response of the beam, the correct frequency trend of the viscoelastic modulus, by varying the number of relaxation times to achieve a good theoretical-experimental fit. However, previous theoretical studies, focused on the dynamics of viscoelastic beam and plates In this section it is presented the analytical formulation to derive the equations which governs the flexural vibrations of an axially pre-loaded viscoelastic beam. For this scope, a homogenous beam with rectangular cross section is considered (Figure Since the study presented in this paper will be centered on the first resonances of the beam, which are not influenced by the shear deformations, the Bernoulli theory of transversal vibrations is exploited to describe the beam dynamics. This choice entails that the small displacements condition along the z-axis, i.e. |u (x, t)| L, needs to be satisfied. The beam is supposed to be simply supported on both extremities, with an axial pre-load It is possible to prove, through simple calculations that the effect of the static axial action P is introduced in the general equation of motion by means of the term P ∂ 2 u (x, t) /∂x 2 . In the case of a beam with viscoelastic properties, the equation of motion is therefore being μ = ρA, ρ the bulk density of the material, A = W H the cross section area, J xz = (1/12)W H 3 the moment of inertia, and f (x, t) is the generic forcing term. Any other damping terms may be added to the Eq.(2) together with the boundary conditions of the simply supported beam (Figure The solution of Eq.3 can be easily found in the Laplace domain, with initial conditions equal to zero, so that the eigenfunctions φ (x, s) can be calculated solving the equation with the boundary conditions . From the characteristic equation associated to Eq.5 one obtains the roots λ 2 a = P eq -P 2 eq + 4β 4 eq (s) 2 ( Finally, the solution of Eq.5 can be written as where By forcing to zero the determinant of the system matrix obtained from Eqs.( which gives us same solutions γ 1n L = nπ from which it is possible to calculate the complex conjugate eigenvalues s n corresponding to the n th mode, and the real poles s k related to the material viscoelasticity that can be employed to get the general solution of Eq.(2), through the decomposition By following the same calculations shown in Ref. it is straightforward to derive the projected equation of motion on the function φ m (x) of the basis dx the projected solution and the projected forcing term respectively. By considering the to the Dirac Delta of constant amplitude F 0 , in both the time and the spatial domains (i.e. which clearly depends on the axial pre-load P . In order to determine the most important parameters which affect the system dynamics, some non-dimensional quantities will be defined. For this purpose, the general natural frequency of the transverse motions of a narrow, homogenous beam with a bending stiffness E 0 J xz and density ρ, is considered It should be noticed that Eq.21 is always valid, regardless of the boundary conditions whereas the coefficient c n depends on the specific boundary conditions. In particular, the first natural frequency is beam length, with R g = J xz /A the radius of gyration. In the case of a rectangular beam cross section, one has α = H/ √ 12L and δ 1 = (c 2 1 /H) 12E 0 /ρ . It is so possible to define the non-dimensional eigenvalue s = s/δ 1 , and in particular one has, for the n th mode, Among the several constitutive models available in literature, generally exploited to describe the stress-strain relation in Eq.1, in this study the generalized Maxwell model is utilized, which considers a spring and k Maxwell elements connected in parallel. The viscoelastic modulus E (s) in the Laplace domain, in particular, is represented by the following discrete function where E 0 is the elastic modulus of the material at zero-frequency, τ k and E k are the relaxation time and the elastic modulus respectively of the generic spring-element in the generalized linear viscoelastic model and the fourth-order characteristic equation, for each n th mode, can be written s4 + where having defined the non-dimensional axial pre-load P = P/ (c 2 1 E 0 A), the non dimensional groups and being ∆ n = δ n /δ 1 . For the quartic equation Eq.( which plays a fundamental role in the general dynamics of the beam, since it influences the nature of the roots of Eq. . The main results deriving from the theoretical analysis presented in this paper, will be shown below. For the scope, the viscoelastic beam considered in Figure The beam length L is considered varying by means of the parameter α = R g /L, keeping R g = H/ √ 12 constant. Regarding the material of the beam, it should be observed that the investigation here presented focuses the attention on the peculiarity of polymers to be "materials in continuous change", meaning that they see the elastic constants E k and the relaxation times τ k deeply changing under some operational conditions, e.g. with the environmental temperature. In this perspective, it is not of great significance to take fixed these constants, however a real material will be considered as a reference, i.e. a selfadhesive synthetic rubber that has been experimentally characterized in Ref. Viscoelastic constants Table For the particular case considered, in terms of geometrical and material properties, and γ2 , and for γ 1 = 0.5γ 1 (solid lines), γ 1 = γ1 (dashed lines) and γ 1 = 5γ 1 (dot dashed lines). hence beam length, it is quite evident in Figure On the contrary, the motion is always oscillatory for any variation of θ 1 , as shown in Figure The beam under investigation, of length L = 50[cm], i.e. α = 0.0058, and material properties reported in Table γ2 , and for θ 1 = 0.9 θ1 (solid lines), θ 1 = θ1 (dashed lines) and θ 1 = 1.1 θ1 (dot dashed lines). linear hexahedron elements type (C3D8). The boundary conditions have been applied at the two extremities, at the middle plane of the beam, to simulate the simply supported BC. A constant force in the frequency domain, with unit amplitude, has been applied at the beam section x f = 0.4L, where the beam acceleration has been calculated (x = x f = 0.4L), through the steady-state dynamics module. In Figure length, with the aim to increase the range of interest under investigation, the controlled application of an axial pre-load may be strategic to further increase the width of the frequency range. Finally, the study here presented discloses aspects on polymers not highlighted so far, which further position them among the most versatile and tunable materials, crucial for all current and future applications. In this work an analytical model has been proposed which is able to accurately describe the transversal dynamics of viscoelastic beams, also taking into account the effect of axial pre-loads. The main purpose is to evaluate how these pre-loads determine a variation of the nature of the system's eigenvalues, and therefore on the type of vibrational motion of the beam at a certain resonance frequency. Because of the viscoelasticity, and the related damping distribution on frequency, the behaviour of the beam is not as simple and predictable as in the case of perfectly elastic beams. By applying a tensile or a compressive axial preload, one may observe the enhancement or the mitigation of a resonance peak, but this circumstance is incidental to a pivotal geometrical parameter, i.e. the beam length. Same FIG. observations have been made through a FEM analysis, which has provided results perfectly in agreement with those obtained from the analytical model. This theoretical model has made it possible to get new insights on how the mechanical characteristics of polymers can completely change the dynamic behavior of a beam. On one hand these findings are essential for all experimental applications that make use of beams to characterize the complex viscoelastic module, on the other they further point out the versatility of polymers, and how they increasingly reflect the perfect peculiarities that are required by the materials of the future. and for a tractive pre-load P = 2 * 10 -4 (b). Also in this case, it is possible to ascertain the good agreement between the FEM analysis (solid lines) and the theoretical model (dashed lines). [1] Chaudhary G., Prasath S.G., Soucy E., Mahadevan L., Totimorphic assemblies from neutrally stable units, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 118(42), (2021). [2] Terwagne D., Brojan M., Reis P.M., Smart Morphable Surfaces for Aerodynamic Drag Control, Advanced Materials [3] Wang S., Urban M.W., Self-healing polymers, Nature Reviews Materials (5), 562-583, (2020).