The enhancement of the fill factor in the current generation of perovskite solar cells is the key for further efficiency improvement. Thus, methods to quantify the fill factor losses are urgently needed. A classical method to quantify Ohmic and non-Ohmic resistive losses in solar cells is based on the comparison between the voltage in the dark and under illumination analysed at equal recombination current density. Applied to perovskite solar cells, we observe a combination of an Ohmic series resistance with a voltage-dependent resistance that is most prominent at short circuit and low forward bias. The latter is most likely caused by the poor transport properties of the electron and/or hole transport layers. By measuring the photoluminescence of perovskite solar cells as a function of applied voltage, we provide direct evidence for a high quasi-Fermi level splitting at low and moderate forward bias that substantially exceeds the externally applied voltage. This quasi-Fermi level splitting causes recombination losses and, thus, reduces both the short-circuit current and the fill factor of the solar cell. With reports of > 25% efficiency, The present paper discusses the influence of resisive losses on the fill factor of metal-halide perovskite solar cells starting with a literature overview (section 2). Departures from the maximum possible fill factor are then analysed in section 3 by light intensity dependent currentvoltage curves. Figure where the normalized open circuit voltage is defined as ( ) . Note that the FF only depends on Voc, the temperature T (via the thermal voltage kT/q) and the ideality factor nid and does not consider any resistive losses. In the SQ model, we have nid = 1, i.e. the red line in Figure Until recently, the fill factors of halide perovskite solar cells were not exceeding the nid = 2 line. Within the last two years, however, new results Note that this doesn't necessarily mean that perovskite solar cells generally have a large nid. The ideality factor is only infrequently reported thereby making meta-analyses on the topic difficult. A few notable exceptions are refs. show that there is the potential to substantially overcome the 80% barrier. While the fill factor is therefore key to further efficiency improvements, it is not common in the community to report key performance parameters determining the fill factor. The classical description of the fill factor of pn-junction solar cells would predict that there are four key criteria that determine the fill factor. The first and second parameters are the before-mentioned Voc and nid that determine FF0. The other two parameters are the series resistance Rs and the parallel or shunt resistance Rp. Usually, the open-circuit voltage within one technology varies only by a small amount. Hence, the effect of Voc on FF is important mostly for comparison between different technologies. In highly efficient and non-degraded solar cells, usually the parallel resistance extracted from the dark JV curve is high enough to not substantially reduce the fill factor. This leaves the ideality factor and the series resistance as the two key remaining parameters that have to be measured and understood for further device optimization. For Si solar cells as an example, there are a range of methods available Note that this is not the case for sufficiently doped semiconductors, where the majority carrier density (and thereby the conductivity) does not change with voltage and illumination up to a certain point, where the semiconductor undergoes a transition from low-level to high-level injection. Thus, if the transition happens outside the range of interest (i.e. one sun maximum power point), the series resistance would be fairly constant as a function of voltage and illuminaton. The fact that this is not the case for most thin-film solar cells has two consequences, namely (i) that the superposition principle did not yet adapt clear standards how to measure and report parameters such as Rs and nid that would support our understanding of fill factor losses. The superposition principle where J0 is the saturation current density of the solar cell. Here, we use the index l (for light) to highlight that we refer to the current density Jl and external voltage Vl of the illuminated (onesun) current voltage curve and the index d (for dark) to indicate the dark current. Equation Given that the dark current density of an ideal diode is a recombination current density, equation 2 can also be interpreted as saying that recombination only depends on voltage but not on voltage and illumination. Thus, if we were to apply 0.5 V forward bias to the solar cell, there would be a certain recombination flux within the solar cell that would not depend on the illumination intensity as long as we keep the 0.5 V constant. The concept of equation 2 is known in photovoltaics as the superposition principle and in the literature on photovoltaics two important types of deviations from the superposition principle have been discussed. The first version of the method applied here was introduced as early as 1963 by Wolf and Rauschenbach In order to better understand the effect of Rs on the three current-voltage curves, let us briefly recapitulate the one-diode equivalent-circuit model of a solar cell with a non-zero series resistance. It predicts that the current voltage curve under illumination is given by In the case of the shifted dark JV curve, the current density is given by Equations ( The easiest way to rationalize this difference in voltage drop is to imagine the situation at open circuit under illumination where Jl = 0 which must be compared to the situation in the dark where a forward current of Jsc * flows through the diode. For the dark current to have this magnitude, diode theory would predict that one needs a forward voltage that exceeds Voc under one sun conditions, by exactly Jsc * Rs. The blue symbols in Figure where FF is the absolute loss in FF due to the series resistance. If we assume typical values of Jsc = 20mA/cm2 and Voc = 1.1V, then a resistance of 6 to 10 cm2 would correspond to a (quite substantial) relative fill factor loss of around 11% to 18%. In addition to the comparison of the dark and light JV curve, it is also possible to involve the suns-Voc or Jsc/Voc-curve. These are based on a measurement of Jsc and Voc as a function of light intensity and provide a series-resistance-free version of the diode equation given by The Jsc/Voc-curve is particularly useful to determine the ideality factor via a fit of ln(Jsc) via Voc or by calculating the derivative By comparing the Jsc/Voc-curve to the dark or light JV curves, the series resistance can be calculated via or Thus, using equations ( In the previous section we have seen that the voltage-dependent determination of the series resistance Rs(V) enables us to distinguish between Ohmic and non-Ohmic contributions. As a next step we are going to examine how certain parameters of the layers within a solar cell stack influence both the Ohmic contribution (Rs,ext) and the non-Ohmic contribution (Rs,int) to the series resistance. We will do this by employing numerical drift-diffusion simulations using the software ASA. The parameters for the simulation are given in Table Figure where the total series resistance in the simulation saturates to a value that is slightly higher than the external series resistance. Thus, we note that there is a small nearly Ohmic contribution originating from those parts of the solar cell (i.e. absorber, ETL and HTL) that are explicitly simulated by ASA. Figure Having discussed an external series resistance in the previous section, we will now turn to the effect of a series resistance originating from one of the transport layers. In this case, we choose the PCBM-based electron transport layer as an example and increase its resistance by reducing the electron mobility within the PCBM. The upper row uses a relative permittivity of 30 which corresponds to the typically measured values. In figure Figure We note that in the case without field-screening (Figure To further illustrate the meaning of the resistance shown in Figure The first column (panels a and c) shows the situation for a higher mobility in the PCBM and the second column shows the situation for a lower mobility. The first row shows band diagrams in the dark and the second row shows the band diagrams under illumination. Within each column, the recombination current is identical and chosen such that the band diagrams under illumination represent the situation at the maximum power point. Figure Under illumination, the electrons and holes generated inside the perovskite absorber have to be extracted through the two charge transport layers. In Figure qV ext,l = 0.788 eV illuminated Figure It is obvious from the band diagrams in Figure where (V) is the photoluminescence intensity at a given voltage V and oc at open circuit. To examine the voltage dependent photoluminescence, we used spin-coated perovskite solar cells with the layer stack glass/ITO/PTAA/MAPbI3/PCBM/BCP/Ag, whereby PTAA is poly(triarylamine). The perovskite process uses a lead-acetate based precursor that leads to high open-circuit voltages > 1.2V that are at open circuit and not at the voltage defined by the source measure unit. Subsequently, we measured both the current voltage and the photoluminescence voltage curves at different illumination intensities using a  = 532 nm laser diode. From the PL intensities, we then determined the ∆E F (V) using equation 11. Figure where nid denotes the ideality factor of the recombination process. For the highest illumination intensity, EF(Voc)=qVoc = 1.23 eV while ∆E F (0) ≈ 1.15 eV , i.e. higher than the qVoc of many perovskite solar cells with a similar band gap. The difference between the Fermi level splitting at open and short circuit is about 80 meV corresponding to an on-off ratio φ sc φ oc ⁄ = 0.05. With an ideality factor nid = 2 we obtain a relative loss ∆J sc J gen ⁄ = 0.2 = 20% . This is a significant loss that directly translates into an efficiency loss due to weak charge carrier collection. In comparison, for Cu(In,Ga)Se2 solar cells, the measured on-off ratio was reported to be 1.7 % and the relative short circuit current loss was determined to be 4.3 % (ideality factor nid = 1.3). To better understand the apparent photoshunt that we have observed in the experimental data in Figure It is not a traditional shunt current that causes this behavior but instead it is an effect resulting from slow charge extraction at short circuit and low forward voltages. A reasonable assumption for the recombination current flowing in any solar cell at any bias condition would be to assume that it scales exponentially with the quasi-Fermi level splitting EF. Depending on whether the cell is in high-or low-level injection and depending on which recombination mechanism is dominant, the exact dependence of the recombination current on EF may vary. However, we may use an ideality factor n id to describe any deviation from a proportionality of the form exp(∆E F (V) kT ⁄ ). If we call the prefactor for this relation J0, we will therefore arrive at this form of the recombination current density The apparent photoshunt as plotted in Figure where Jshift is the current density under illumination that is shifted up into the first quadrant by adding the short circuit current density. The resulting current density is zero at V=0 by definition and will increase when applying higher external voltages. In the absence of recombination, we would generate a photocurrent Jgen at short circuit that would be given by J gen = J 0 exp(qV oc (n id kT) ⁄ ). However, in the presence of recombination we would have to subtract the recombination current at short circuit. Thus, we could determine the prefactor J0 of the recombination current density via and the total recombination current would consequently be given by Thus, equation ( Figure we obtain a voltage-dependent recombination current that quantifies the recombination losses at each voltage. We note that the recombination losses are substantial and reduce the Jsc by several mA/cm2 depending on the laser intensity. We also note that the exponential dependence of the recombination current on ∆E F (V) could lead to large errors if the value of ∆E F (V) was slightly off. However, the absolute values obtained are reasonable as the sum of recombination current and the measured Jsc does not exceed the expected range for perfect collection. The Jsc of the AM1.5G curve after the laser process to remove perovskite material adjacent to the cell area was 17 mA/cm2 (average of forward and reverse scan). The predicted recombination current at short circuit (by interpolation between the red and black curve) is about 4.5 mA/cm2, which would bring the total photocurrent in the absence of recombination to 21.5 mA/cm2, which is certainly a conceivable value for a MAPI solar cell with a ~ 300 nm thick absorber layer. A key advantage of the present approach of quantifying the voltage dependent recombination current is the possibility to notice weakly voltage dependent charge collection losses. In other photovoltaic technologies such as organic solar cells and thin-film silicon solar cells, charge collection losses are of overwhelming importance. However, they are often relatively easy to identify, because of their strong voltage dependence. In the last section, we have shown that voltage-dependent photoluminescence is able to quantify the recombination current along the whole JV curve and thereby allows us to also access the recombination current at short circuit. The downside of the approach is that it requires doing an additional measurement that may require using means (such as laser cutting) of avoiding the influence of signal from regions of the sample that are not contacted. The shifted current as shown e.g. in Figure The simple fact that the shifted currents appear to have a shunt, i.e. an Ohmic contribution at low voltages provides some insights into the magnitude of the quasi-Fermi level change in the sample. As seen in Figure When looking at equation 14, we note that the equation describing Jshift is not linear at all but composed of the difference of two exponentials. Thus, the question arises, how equation 14 produces this approximately linear behaviour. We can slightly rewrite equation 14 to obtain Hence, the shifted currents can already reveal certain non-trivial features of the voltagedependent photoluminescence that allow us to draw conclusions on the band diagram of the solar cell. As seen in Figure Unfortunately, we cannot make any strong statement about the magnitude of J rec (0) from the shifted current alone. According to equation 17, the shifted current will be equal to J rec (0), exactly if ∆E F (V) -∆E F (0) = ln(2)n id kT which corresponds to 36 meV for nid = 2. This value is substantially above the linear region, which implies that the recombination current at short circuit must be higher than Jshift at the voltage where it becomes visibly non-linear with voltage. Thus, when observing an approximately linear region up to a current of 1 mA/cm2 as seen in Figure Note that the concept of the shifted currents also lends itself to an analysis of literature data. Here, it is decisive to obtain measured data with a significant precision rather than picking data from the pdfs of publications. In the supporting information, we show some published data from recent high efficiency solar cells that we replotted in the style of Figure We discuss two approaches to shed light on recombination losses in perovskite solar cells that occur at voltages below Voc, i.e. in situations where the efficiency of charge carrier transport through both the perovskite as well as the charge transport layers affects the rate of recombination. In this situation, the recombination losses will be visible as a reduced fill factor and/or reduced short-circuit current density. All approaches shown in the paper share the common idea that deviations from the simple superposition principle, i.e. the ability to sum up dark current and photocurrent to obtain the current under illumination, are exploited to identify and quantify losses. All of these losses are recombination losses that have a resistive component, i.e. they would disappear if the conductivities of all layers within the solar cell were infinitely high. Thus, the methods all exploit the fact that ∆E F (V) ≠ qV is typically valid for all bias situations other than open circuit. Given that the losses we are interested in are both related to recombination and resistive effects, we can approach the task of quantifying these losses both from the perspective of methods aimed at quantifying resistive losses and methods aimed at characterizing recombination losses.