We address the outstanding problem of electron pairing in the presence of strong Coulomb repulsion at small to moderate values of the Coulomb parameter, rs 2, and demonstrate that the pseudopotential framework is fundamentally biased and uncontrolled. Instead, one has to break the net result into two distinctively different effects: the Fermi liquid renormalization factor and the change in the effective low-energy coupling. The latter quantity is shown to behave non-monotonically with an extremum at rs ≈ 0.75. Within the random-phase approximation, Coulomb interaction starts to enhance the effective pairing coupling at rs > 2, and the suppression of the critical temperature is entirely due to the renormalized Fermi liquid properties. Leading vertex corrections change this picture only quantitatively. Our results call for radical reconsideration of the widely accepted repulsive pseudopotential approach and show the need for precise microscopic treatment of Coulomb interactions in the problem of superconducting instability. Introduction.-The paring of electrons in the presence of strong repulsive Coulomb forces remained unsolved for nearly half a century until it was recognized that in the vast majority of low-temperature superconductors, the scenario of Cooper instability is of the emergent BCS type, implying a quantitatively accurate low-energy effective description in terms of the two (partially related) parameters: the energy-frequency cutoff ω 0 ≪ E F (E F is the Fermi energy; = 1) and the dimensionless effective coupling constant g ≪ 1. Within this effective BCS theory, the expression for the critical temperature reads T c = ω 0 e -1/g . ( For the phonon-mediated Cooper instability, one has ω 0 ∼ ω ph , where ω ph is a typical phonon frequency. (The exact choice of ω 0 is a matter of convention, because changes in ω 0 can be absorbed into g.) The emergent BCS regime implies that g can be decomposed into a product of two distinctive factors-the pseudopotential U and the Fermi liquid factor f FL : The pseudopotential is understood as an amplitude of the dimensionless attractive coupling between bare electrons near the Fermi surface (FS), and f FL is given by where z is the quasiparticle residue and m * /m 0 is the FS effective mass renormalization. It accounts for the fact that we are dealing with the correlated liquid rather than an ideal gas. Exponential sensitivity of the critical temperature to the small parameter g implies that the positive-definite factor f FL -if noticeably smaller than unity-can dramatically suppress the value of T c . The strength of Coulomb interaction is characterized by the dimensionless parameter (the Wigner-Seitz radius) r s = [(4π/3)a 3 0 n] -1/3 , where n is the number density and a 0 is the Bohr radius. Typical experimental values of r s 2 correspond to a moderately strong interaction. A priori one expects that Coulomb repulsion simply eliminates the possibility of phonon-mediated pairing in materials, but experiment tells us otherwise. The Coulomb pseudopotential framework, developed in the late 1950s By accounting only for logarithmic suppression of the frequency-independent repulsion near the FS, Refs. , with μ > 0 introduced in a rather uncontrolled fashion as a coupling constant characterizing screened interaction (if μ is computed from ρ 0 4πe 2 /κ 2 , where ρ 0 is the ideal gas FS density of states per spin component and κ is the Thomas-Fermi momentum, then μ = 0.5). The main effect of μ * is to reduce the magnitude of the phononmediated U as U → U -μ * , with most experiments sug-gesting that μ * ∈ (0.1 ÷ 0.15). The small values of μ * are explained by the large E F -to -ω 0 ratio, but neither its value nor its sign is derived from first principles, not to mention that Coulomb repulsion cannot be fully screened at finite frequency. A recent breakthrough in the precise computation of the Fermi liquid properties of a uniform electron gas In this Research Letter, we employ an implicit renormalization protocol and a generalized discrete Lehmann representation for extracting the effective coupling constant and critical temperature from the gap function equation Model.-The Hamiltonian of the uniform electron gas (UEG) on a neutralizing background is defined as Here a † kσ is the creation operator of an electron with mo-mentum k and spin σ =↑, ↓, ǫ k = k 2 2m0 -μ, and is the bare Coulomb interaction. The gap function equation in the singlet channel reads (5) Here Γ is the particle-particle irreducible four-point vertex, G is the single-particle Green's function, ∆ is the gap function, and λ ≡ λ(T ) is its eigenvalue. The critical temperature T c corresponds to the point where λ max (T ) = 1. We consider two approximations for Γ based on the the screened Coulomb interaction, both depending only on the momentum and energy transfer, Γ ωn,k ωm,p = Γ(ω mω n , pk). The RPA form is standard: , where Π 0 is the polarization function computed from the convolution of the bare Green's function. For simplicity we take the functional form of Π 0 to be that at T = 0, which is justified by the smallness of the critical temperature. To account for vertex corrections and estimate their role as a function of r s , we employ the Kukkonen-Overhauser ansatz Here Γ KO is already projected on spin-singlet state as required by the fermionic parity. The higher-order vertex corrections neglected in the RPA are encoded in the local field factors G ± (q) for which we adopt the ansatz proposed by Takada Finally, we introduce phonon-mediated interactions taken to have the same functional form as considered by Richardson and Ashcroft to study the very same problem of superconductivity in the UEG with electron-phonon coupling with the phonon dispersion ω 2 q = ω ph 2 (q/kF ) 2 1+(q/kF ) 2 and dimensionless coupling strength a. For every choice of the vertex function considered in this Research Letter the singleparticle self-energy was computed self-consistently from the convolution of G and Γ. Implicit renormalization approach.-For the simplest case when Γ = Γ ph , the eigenvalue λ(T ) is a linear function of ln T at low temperature T ≪ ω ph that can be written as As expected, the condition λ max (T c ) = 1 leads to Eq.( Coulomb interactions are included, screening and renormalization effects taking place in a broad frequency range above the phonon frequency ensure that λ max (T ) is an unknown non-linear function of ln T that can be used neither for reliable extrapolation towards lower temperature nor for evaluation of the effective low-energy coupling U . The implicit renormalization (IR) approach of Ref. When vertex corrections are accounted for Coulomb interaction and Γ = Γ ph + Γ KO , the Fermi liquid factor f FL remains essentially the same for all values of r s . However, changes in U are relatively small (less than 20%) only for r s < 1. The most significant difference is the shift in the point of onset of the Coulomb enhancement of U : from r s ≈ 2 to r s ≈ 3. This result underlines the importance of approximation-free high-order diagrammatic calculations. Nevertheless, the non-monotonic behavior of T c and U is a robust effect based on the dynamic screening mechanism that tends to make effective Coulomb interactions attractive at large r s . It is completely overlooked in the Coulomb pseudopotential treatment. If we take our value of T c at r s = 2 and try to reproduce it with the help of McMillan's formula, the phenomenological parameter μ * ends up to being close to 0.08. There exists yet another fundamental reason for nonadditive effects when two pairing mechanisms are combined (even if f F L factors are accounted for exactly). If λ i=1,2 and ∆ i are the largest eigenvalue and its eigenvector for matrix Γ i and ∆ 1 = ∆ 2 then the largest eigenvalue of Γ = Γ 1 + Γ 2 is always smaller than λ 1 + λ 2 . In Fig. Discussion and conclusion.-It is instructive to put our findings in the context of historic developments. That Coulomb interaction can induce Cooper instability through dynamic screening mechanism has been known for decades. Early work Several studies attempted to account for Coulomb effects on superconductivity beyond the Coulomb pseudopotential By separating the Coulomb suppression of the Fermi liquid factor f FL from its contribution to the lowfrequency pseudopotential U , we shed light on the origin of the small critical temperatures observed experi-mentally when compared with predictions of the Migdal-Eliashberg theory. We reveal that the Coulomb contribution to U changes from repulsive to attractive and conclude that the original interpretation of μ * is incorrect and misleading in two ways: (i) The scenario of enhancement of attractive U due to the dynamic nature of screening is ignored, leading to the false impression that μ * is always positive; (ii) strong renormalization of Fermi liquid properties is ignored, while it can easily reduce the effective coupling by a factor of 2. These two mistakes partially compensate each other in the phenomenological treatment, yielding reasonable effective coupling constants g within the freedom of choosing μ * . However, the actual microscopic picture behind the procedure is missed. The failure to appreciate the non-additivity of the phonon and Coulomb contributions to the effective coupling constant g-implied by the structure of Eq. ( N.V.P., B.V.S., and T.W. acknowledge support by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. DMR-2032077. X.C. and K.C. acknowledge support from the Simons Collaboration on the Many Electron Problem. This work relies on the NUMERICALEFT package 