We present measurements and simulations of superconducting Nb co-planar waveguide resonators on sapphire substrate down to millikelvin temperature range with different readout powers. In the high temperature regime, we demonstrate that the Nb film residual surface resistance is comparable to that observed in the ultrahigh quality, bulk Nb 3D superconducting radio frequency cavities while the resonator quality is dominated by the BCS thermally excited quasiparticles. At low temperature both the resonator quality factor and frequency can be well explained using the two-level system models. Through the energy participation ratio simulations, we find that the two-level system loss tangent is ∼ 10 -2 , which agrees quite well with similar studies performed on the Nb 3D cavities (Refs. 1 and 2). It is well known that material losses play a key role in limiting the performance of superconducting circuits for the quantum computation Due to numerous surfaces, interfaces, and defects present in the various material systems that comprise a superconductor, it can be difficult to directly pinpoint the impact a particular device region has on performance. To this end, superconducting resonators offer a simpler geometry that enables the systematic evaluation of various materials and interfaces. The development of high quality resonators also enables characterization of loss mechanisms on other materials in the quantum devices. For example, M. Checchin et.al. used a 3D superconducting radio frequency (SRF) Nb cavity (Q i ∼ 10 11 ) to identify a new loss mechanism in the high-resistivity silicon substrates In this work, 150 nm Nb film were sputtered on a c-axis sapphire substrate using DC magnetron sputtering technique. Prior to sputtering, the substrate surface was first solvent cleaned by applying ultrasonic power while immersing it sequentially in baths of heated NMP, IPA, Acetone and IPA. The solvent clean is followed by further cleaning by submerging the substrate in a heated standard clean solution followed by DI water rinse and spin drying. The substrate is then immediately loaded into the sputtering chamber withing, annealed at 200 • C for about 30 min and allowed to cool to room temperature under vacuum ( ∼ 4 × 10 -8 Torr) for 2 hours to remove the surface residuals and water vapors. The Nb film was patterned into co-planar waveguide (CPW) quarter wave (λ /4) resonators with a central trace width of 10μm and gap of 6μm by employing photolithography and fluorine based ICP reactive ion etching. On a 7.5 × 7.5mm 2 chip, there are nine resonators inductively coupled to a 50Ω feedline that the S21 transmission signals of all resonators can be measured using the vector network analyzer (see Fig. In order to assess the quality of the Nb film on the sapphire substrate, we carefully analyzed the film structure and chemical composition. As shown in Fig. The chip is packaged in a copper box coated with gold to improve the thermal contact with the mixing plate on the dilution refrigerator (DR). The intrinsic resonance of the box is simulated as 11GHz, which is specifically selected to eliminate interference with the device resonances. The feedline launchers are wire-bonded to the 50Ω printed circuit boards that are soldered to the non-magnetic SMA connectors. The whole enclosure is mounted inside a cryogenic μ-metal can with IR filters to minimize losses due to the magnetic fluxes and stray IR radiations Fig. where complex constant α accounts for the gain/phase shift, τ the cable delay, and φ 0 the circuit asymmetry. Q i , Q c , and f r are the resonator internal quality, coupling strength, and resonant frequency. The resonator coupling strength presented in this paper is Q c = 5e4. Using equation ( As we can see, the fitting residuals for both real and imaginary parts are less than 1%, which is suggestive of a high confidence fitting. We first measured the resonator Q i in the high temperature regime, where the quality of superconducting resonators is determined by the thermally excited quasiparticles that can be well described by Mattis-Barteen theory Here σ N is the measured normal state conductivity. The coherence factors g 1,2 are given by g 1 (1, 2) = Re(N 1 )Re(N 2 ) + Re(P 1 )Re(P 2 ), (3a) where N and P are generalized densities of states of the superconductor and the arguments 1 and 2 represent the quasiparticle energy ε and ε + hω. Combining with the measured Nb film T C and energy gap ∆, we can calculate the complex conductivity σ , and further get the surface impedance of the film Z s = R s + jX s = jω μ 0 /σ coth(d jω μ 0 /σ ), where d = 150nm is the measured film thickness. The resonator loss is determined by the film surface resistance as δ = α ω μλ R s when it is dominated by the thermally excited quasiparticles, where α is defined as the ratio of the magnetic energy stored in the superconductor to the total magnetic energy, which is also known as the conductor participation ratio. It is equivalent to the geometry factor, G, commonly used in evaluating the SRF 3D Nb cavity for the accelerator application. λ is the penetration depth and we take it as 80nm in this calculation. In Fig. When the temperature is below 1.0K, the resonator quality reaches its upper limit and remains constant at Q i ∼ 5 × 10 6 . This can be explained by additional temperature-independent residual resistance, R res , which arises from several sources such as random material defects or hydrides etc.. The total surface resistance is R s = R BCS +R res . Using the same α value to fit the data (red dash line), R res is found to be 14nΩ, which, FIG. after converting (R res = 6.3nΩ scales with √ f ), is larger than the SRF cavity value (R res ∼ 2.2nΩ). A possible explanation of this larger residual resistance could be that the planar resonator has multiple interfaces (MA, SA, and MS), while in the SRF cavity there is only one residual layer at the cavity surface. We also measured the resonator down to the DR base temperature (T ∼ 40mK), where the TLS is believed to dominate the resonator loss. According to the model, the TLS induces both power-and temperature-dependent resonator loss, but only temperature-dependent resonance frequency shift we can fit the measured data, as shown by the red dash line. In Eq. ( Additionally we can extract the TLS loss by fitting the resonator Q i as a function of the measurement power at fixed temperature: Here n = P in Q/hω 2 is the estimated average photon numbers injected into the resonator. Figure In conclusion, we carefully measured the Nb superconducting CPW resonator on the c-axis Sapphire substrate. We find that the BCS surface resistance of the Nb film is comparable to the Nb bulk used for the 3D SRF elliptical cavity. This is likely a result of the high structural and chemical quality indicated by various microscopy and mass spectrometry techniques. We also find that the residual resistance of the resonator is larger than what is typically observed in 3D Nb SRF cavities, which can be understood as an increase in the number of interface in the 2D planar resonator. At the low temperature regime, we find that the resonator is dominated by the TLSs that are possibly located in the native oxide Nb 2 O 5 layers. By properly choosing the simulation parameters, we find the TLS loss to be ∼ 10 -2 , which is close to the reported value in the 3D cavity. Therefore we demonstrate that high quality Nb films can be prepared on the sapphire substrate. 