Mode II fatigue crack growth under reversed shear and static biaxial compression was investigated in two bearing steels. Many aborted branches, quasi-orthogonal to the main crack, were observed along the crack face. The compressive stress parallel to the main crack hindered the growth of these branches and favored coplanar mode II crack growth. The crack face sliding displacement profiles measured by DIC were used to derive ΔKII,eff, at the main crack tip, using elastic-plastic FE simulations with crack face friction, by an inverse method. Frictioncorrected crack growth kinetics were obtained for mode II crack growth in both steels. Following the first works of Way ii. After reaching a few millimeters deep, the crack bifurcates, to grow mostly in mode I until failure. This paper will focus on the first stage, just after crack initiation, that is: shear-driven coplanar growth in a compressive stress field. Many papers In mode II, the effects of various extrinsic phenomena (crack face contact and friction, oxidation, plastic deformation of asperities, wear and debris formation) make the analysis of the crack growth kinetics and path complex An additional complexity is added since many authors The presence of a static biaxial compression is expected to influence this phenomenon as well. The purpose of this paper is first, to provide an experimental methodology for shear mode fatigue crack growth tests under an additional constant biaxial compression and second, to improve the understanding of mode II crack growth in conditions representative of RCF. To this end, tests on bearing steel cruciform specimens were performed at different shear loading ranges and static biaxial-compression. The near tip displacement fields were measured by DIC. A numerical model with an elastic-plastic constitutive model was developed to estimate the effective stress intensity factor allowing to establish a Paris law in pure mode II through the inverse method developed in This section describes all experimental and numerical details regarding the tests campaign reported in this paper. The tests were performed mostly on 16NCD13 bearing steel. One test was also run on 58NCD13 steel, representative of the carburized outer layer of bearing structures. The chemical compositions of the two steels are indicated in table The cruciform specimens were mounted on a biaxial servohydraulic tension-compression machine with four actuators of 250 kN capacity. No precracking was made for the tests on 16NCD13 steel, while a precracking in mode I was performed on 58NCD13 steel, to initiate approximately 1mm long cracks from both notch roots. In order to determine the loading conditions for shear-mode loading plus biaxial compression, a preliminary FE elastic computation (figure where a, b, c and d are geometry-dependent coefficients. Once this calibration is completed, the stress tensor in the notch coordinates system can be expressed as a function of the applied loads, and the inversion of these equations allows the computation of the time evolution of Fx and Fy necessary to submit a crack to a fully reversed cyclic shear stress, with a superimposed static biaxial compression, as shown in Figure -Test #1: The purpose of this preliminary test was to find which loading function must be applied to obtain mode II crack growth, without bifurcation. A fully reversed shear loading was applied, and its amplitude was reduced stepwise, while monitoring the crack path. Then, various combinations of reversed shear and biaxial compression were applied to observe the resulting crack path. -Test #2: One of the combinations of cyclic shear and biaxial compression, found to induce mode II crack growth during test #1, was applied during the whole test. -Test #3: The purpose of this test was to investigate the lower part of the Paris curve in mode II by continuously decreasing the shear stress range. -Test #4 was performed on 58NCD13 steel at 5 Hz, with loading conditions also summarized in Table where (i,j) designate respectively the line and column position of a pixel in an image. The crack indeed corresponds to a high and localized displacement gradient (figure Figure Figure Test #1 (figure When Δτ was raised again to 800 MPa (sequence 12), the two branches of crack #1 bifurcated back to mode II. (Fig. Test #3 (figure Such an oxidation gradient along the crack growth direction is not visible on specimen #4 (Fig. The application of the inverse numerical method described above on crack #1 for each of the three tests run on both steels allowed the computation of ΔK , at various stages. These cracks were chosen because they propagated the most in mode II. The evolution of ΔK , with crack length during test #2, run under constant shear stress range plus biaxial compression is compared to that of ΔK , on Figure is also plotted. When the crack is only 2.5mm long, the nominal and effective SIFs are nearly similar, which suppose that extrinsic mechanisms dissipate little energy at that stage. However, the difference between the nominal and effective SIFs (that is ΔKII,f) rises during crack propagation, which means that the energy dissipated by friction increases with the crack length. The inverse analysis of the measured crack sliding displacement profiles also provides an apparent friction coefficient, μ, for each crack length. The evolution of μ as a function of crack length during test #2 is plotted on figure The mode II growth rates measured for crack #1 during each of the three tests are plotted as a function of (rather than versus ΔK , for confidentiality reasons) on figure where C and m are material coefficients (not provided, for industrial confidentiality reasons). Mode I crack growth kinetics were obtained for the two steels at three different R ratios (-1, 0.05 and 0.5), using CT specimens. The influence of the R ratio was very limited, at least in the Paris regime, within which closure effects probably vanished at R = 0.5, so that KI,eff  KI,nom. The corresponding mode I crack growth kinetics are thus compared to the da/dN-KII,eff/KI,th curves, on figure Crack face friction plays an essential role in mode II fatigue crack growth, even when no normal compression is applied, because of crack face roughness, which leads to asperities contact and interlocking Anyway, the oxide layer between crack faces, also called "third body" by Godet Murakami & Takahashi As suggested by Kfouri at ±124°, while the highest peak value, responsible for the primary slip band ahead of the crack tip is at θ = 0°. Such an argument assumes that the branches initiate from the tip and then are left behind by the propagating main crack. However, if they do initiate from the flank ( = ±180°), due to an opening stress, their orientation, nearly orthogonal to the flank of the main crack is consistent with the peak values of rr:  = -180° (lower crack flank) when KII > 0 and:  = 180° (upper crack flank) when KII < 0. Anyway, once initiated, these branches undergo cyclic mode I A 3D FE model was developed, in which a secondary branch, inclined by 90° or 110° to the main crack flank was inserted at a distance b behind the main crack tip (figure To analyze the influence of the multiplicity of secondary branches on the evolutions of the SIFs at the main crack front, 3 orthogonal branches were inserted in the previous 3D FE model. The length of each branch was s = 0.10 mm, and the distance between them was also 0.10 mm. Several stationary elastic computations were performed for different values of b -the distance between the main crack tip and the nearest branch-in order to study the evolution of the shielding effect and the loading condition of the branch, as a function of b/s. Figure evolution of ΔKI for the branch nearest to the main crack tip with, or without, the other two branches. The latter two reduce ΔKI for the nearest branch. Thus, this branch is less likely to propagate, because of shielding effects from other branches. Consequently, the main crack has a better opportunity to win the crack growth competition. The influence of the branch cracks multiplicity on the shielding effect for the main crack is illustrated on figure Mode II fatigue crack growth under reversed shear loading and superimposed static biaxial compression was investigated in 16NCD13 bearing steel, as well as in 58NCD13 steel, representative of the surface layer of carburized bearings, in terms of carbon content, using cruciform specimens with a center crack. Many aborted branches, quasi-orthogonal to the main crack, were observed along the crack face. The influence of their inclination angle and multiplicity on the stress intensity factors at their tip, as well as their shielding effect on the main crack were analyzed by FE simulations. While the branches inclined by 110° were found to undergo nearly equal mode I and mode II loading ranges, those inclined by 90° undergo mostly cyclic mode I. When several such branches are present, their shielding effect on the main crack is stronger than that of a single branch. Biaxial compression was shown to hinder the growth of these branches and to favor coplanar mode II crack growth. The role of the compressive stresses applied parallel and normal to the main crack plane (Tx and Ty, respectively) was analyzed separately. Normal compression hinders the access of oxygen into the closed crack, inducing a gradient in crack face oxidation, and a transition from abrasive wear, near the side surfaces, to adhesive wear, at mid thickness. It reduces ΔKII,eff, but also KI at the tip of orthogonal branches. This oxidation gradient also leads to an evolution of the apparent friction coefficient during the crack propagation. Parallel compression reduces KI at the tip of orthogonal branches, and thus their shielding effect on the main crack, finally increasing ΔKII,eff. It makes mode II coplanar growth more stable. The crack face sliding displacement profiles measured by DIC were used to derive ΔKII,eff, at the main crack tip, using elastic-plastic FE simulations with crack face friction, by an inverse method. Friction-corrected crack growth kinetics were thus obtained for mode II crack growth in both steels, and compared to the crack growth kinetics in mode I. Contrary to previous studies on other materials, the Paris exponents of mode I and mode II kinetics were found here to be nearly the same. A observed in figure