We present a rigorous theoretical framework underpinning the technique of spin-echo modulated small-angle neutron scattering (SEMSANS), and show how the technique can be extended in order to generate spin-textured neutron beams with orbital angular momentum (OAM) via birefringent neutron spin-polarization devices known as magnetic Wollaston prisms. Neutron OAM beams are mathematically characterized by a "cork-screw" phase singularity e i φ about the propagation axis where is the OAM quantum number. To understand the precise relationship between the emergent OAM state and the variety of spin textures realized by various setups, we have developed a pathintegral approach that in the interferometric limit makes a judicious use of magnetic Snell's law. We show that our proposed technique produces a complex two-dimensional pattern of spin-OAM entangled states which may be useful as a probe of quantum magnetic materials. We compare our path-integral approach to the well-known single-path Larmor precession model and present a pedagogical derivation of magnetic Snell's law of refraction for both massive and massless particles based on Maupertuis's action principle. Spin texture is the emergent property of a physical system in which the system's spin is non-trivially coupled with its other dynamical degrees of freedom, such as the position, momentum, or orbital angular momentum (OAM); such a correlation between the spin and OAM degrees of freedom is called a spin-orbit coupling. These intricate correlations (often leading to entanglement) between the spin and the other degrees of freedom are responsible for a rich variety of thermodynamic phases of matter in which, for example, skyrmions and merons may materialize While conventional probes provide indirect signatures of topological excitations, spin-textured beams of particles with specific spin-orbit couplings (e.g., those with definite states of OAM) are strongly desired because they may act as direct probes of the target's topology An OAM state of a neutron is described by a phase e i φ , where φ is the azimuthal angle about the axis of propagation and ∈ Z is the OAM quantum number. This azimuthal phase leads to a number of interesting consequences. Firstly, the azimuthal component of the probability current J φ is non-zero: for concreteness, in cylindrical coordinates (r, φ, z) we find where m is the mass of the neutron, Im (•) denotes the imaginary component, ψ = f (r, φ, z)e i φ is the total wave function, and * signifies complex conjugation. When f = f (φ) as in the case of a paraxial beam (which can be written in Laguerre-Gauss modes In this paper, we investigate the preparation and propagation of a spin-textured neutron beam, and show how the spin texture relates to the OAM content of the beam. Neutron beams with tunable OAM offer a unique opportunity to observe quantum interference that is otherwise inaccessible in the traditional treatment of plane-wave scattering We also show how the uniform magnetic field regions produced by MWPs generate spin-textured neutron beams. Specifically, we propose to use multiple pairs of MWPs in the spin echo modulated small angle neutron scattering (SEMSANS) configuration (see Sec. II). Previous work carried out a theoretical analysis of neutron interferometers based on MWPs to test the violation of Bell-type contextual inequalities Starting from a path-integral representation of the dynamics in Sec. II, we approximate the neutron's full timeevolution using the interferometric limit, in which we only consider the two dominating spin-correlated classical paths. We explicitly show that this limit preserves unitarity in Appendix A. Our theoretical framework includes both the kinetic and potential energy contributions to the neutron's overall accumulated phase, which stands in stark contrast with the standard single-path Larmor precession approximation where only the potential energy along a single neutron path contributes to the accumulated phase. Essentially, the single-path approximation neglects all refractive effects of the neutron trajectory. On the other hand, the path integral in the two-path interferometric limit includes the inequivalent refraction of the two spin states of a spin-1/2 particle when subject to a sharp boundary between regions of magnetic field (for justification and discussion of the single-path approximation, see A MWP consists of two uniform triangular prisms containing oppositely directed magnetic fields as shown in Fig. MWPs are often used in spin echo small angle neutron scattering (SESANS) and SEMSANS. In SESANS, a MWP pair (the first arm) splits the neutron state into two parallel path states that impinge on the sample; the distance between the mode-entangled spin-path states is called the entanglement length ξ (also called the spin echo length). The entanglement length when in the SESANS focusing condition (all field magnitudes equal) is given by where λ is the wavelength of the neutron; B the magnetic field magnitude in each triangular field region; |L 1 -L 2 | the distance between MWPs (see Fig. In SEMSANS, only a single MWP pair is required (the sample is placed after the prism pair). However, unlike in SESANS, the detailed dynamics cannot be ignored since the second arm is no longer in perfect echo with the first, meaning that the two spin states will spatially interfere, thus generating a pattern of interference fringes on the detector. This spatial interference pattern from each single neutron is on the order of the size of the wavepacket. However, the interference pattern observed at the detector is indeed macroscopic as the few centimeter-width beam is made up of many such mutually incoherent neutrons. Usually, the two path states are focused in space at the detector plane, although the states can also be focused at any point after the second prism. The SEMSANS focusing condition is achieved by choosing where B 1 , B 2 ≥ 0 are the field magnitudes in the first and second MWPs, and L 1 , L 2 are the distances between the first and second MWPs to the detector, respectively. The entanglement length in SEMSANS is a function of the distance L s between the detector and the position of the neutron after exiting the second MWP: where |B 1 -B 2 | is the difference between the magnetic field magnitudes in the first and second prism The fringe pattern of the modulated neutron intensity is the fundamental observable in a SEMSANS experiment: the change of the amplitude of the fringe pattern due to scattering from the sample is enhanced when the entanglement length is close to the correlation length of the sample. More specifically, the ratio of the fringe amplitude of the scattered and unscattered beam gives the sample's correlation function In the familiar single-path Larmor precession model, the beam must be phase-focused to observe the intensity fringes: each neutron measured at some pixel on the detector could have taken a slightly different path through the instrument due to the beam divergence and finitesized source, so each neutron measured at that pixel will have a slightly different Larmor phase, which will result in a decrease of the fringe visibility. We can improve the contrast of the signal (i.e. "focus" the measured fringe pattern on the detector) by removing the beam divergence dependence in the Larmor phase (at least to first order) with a certain choice of fields in the MWPs Both SESANS and SEMSANS are methods of generating a high-fidelity, structured beam of mode-entangled neutrons. This work develops the mathematical framework that describes the spin-texturing and OAM state that can be produced using extensions of the SEMSANS technique with focused MWPs. A mathematical framework appropriate for SEMSANS must incorporate the possibility that a neutron may interfere with itself at arbitrary spatial positions, depending on specific experimental parameters. We will apply the usual path-integral formalism to model SEMSANS (for a pedagogical treatment of the path-integral, see The transverse and longitudinal intrinsic coherence lengths are parameters that determine the size of an individual neutron's wavepacket (e.g., the full-width halfmaximum of a Gaussian wavepacket). Shull originally reported a lower bound of 21 microns for the transverse intrinsic coherence length On the other hand, experiments in traditional neutron interferometry have reported much smaller transverse coherence lengths on the order of a few microns or less As is well-known in classical optics, a totally incoherent extended source of radiation can develop coherence after propagation, an effect that is mathematically described by the van Cittert-Zernike (VCZ) theorem, which in the far-field form of the theorem relates the degree of coherence to the Fourier transform of the intensity As an aside, under the assumption of a stationary beam (i.e., the beam is time-independent, so the density matrix commutes with the Hamiltonian), it is not possible in general to experimentally distinguish between a beam of plane waves or a beam of wavepackets if both ensembles overall have the same energy spectra and uncertainties Although beam coherence is important experimentally, the beam coherence has no effect on the final results of the following quantum mechanical calculations as these results apply to the mode-entangled states of a single neutron. However, one could calculate the beam coherence of our OAM beam for a given experimental configuration as we report the action of our proposed MWP setup on an incident neutron with arbitrary initial wavelength, position, divergence, and polarization. The primary limitation on the size of the beam coherence is the neutron flux: β t is inversely proportional to the beam-defining slit width, so a larger beam coherence length requires a longer count time to attain reasonable statistics. Regardless of the outcome of the experimental discrepancy of the size of the transverse intrinsic coherence length, our following theoretical results would still apply as the calculation only assumes that the intrinsic coherence length is non-zero. The necessity of this requirement is a subtle point: as we will show later, taking into account the wavepacket nature of the neutron is crucial in the path-integral in order to consistently include the contributions from both the kinetic and potential terms in the Hamiltonian in Eq. One can then consider an interferometric limit, where the neutron spin-path states are constrained to the paths geometrically determined by refraction; this limit is analogous to the geometrical optics limit for photon beams. The interferometric limit is similar to what is called the "semiclassical ray-tracing" approach used in Without loss of generality, we assume that the prisms' magnetic fields are either aligned or antialigned along the x-axis, and that the neutron travels in the yz plane (see Fig. where Û ± x are time evolution operators in the corresponding triangular field regions of the MWP, and the superscripts designates the field's orientation along the x-axis. The Hamiltonians in each region are where p is the momentum of the neutron, B x > 0 is the field magnitude, σx is the x Pauli operator with eigenvectors |σ x , and the symbol σ is an element of {↑, ↓}. Explicitly, the time evolution operators are where t i is the entrance time (incoming) and t o is the exit time (outgoing). We now derive the time evolution operator for a single triangular field region; without loss of generality, we take B + = B x x with B x constant and drop the superscript. A general expression for Ûx can be written in the basis of the incoming position state | r i and outgoing position states | r o : where the cross terms such as |↑ x ↓ x | vanish since |σ x with σ ∈ {↑, ↓} are the eigenstates of the Hamiltonian in Eq. where μ ↑ = -|μ| and μ ↓ = |μ|. To connect the fully quantum-mechanical expression of A σ to the interferometric limit, we express the amplitude using the standard path-integral formalism: where L σ is the Lagrangian for each spin state which is a quadratic function of ̇ r. The measure Dr denotes that the integral is taken over all possible paths from r i to r o . The transition amplitude A σ ( r o , r i ) can be evaluated exactly to yield and a magnetic-field dependent phase The magnetic phase can be shown to reduce to the wellknown Larmor phase in the single-path approximation (for example, see In reality, the amplitudes corresponding to the appropriate classical paths from r i to r σ ( r i ) will dominate over the others paths in the integral, with r σ ( r i ) determined from geometric considerations analogous to ray optics. This assumption amounts to constraining the path integral to classical paths r σ ( r i ) (straight lines in space-time neglecting gravity) for each spin state. Mathematically, this approximation is equivalent to inserting N -1 δ ( r o -r σ ( r i )) into Eq. ( (15) Here we have defined the classical wave vector of each neutron spin state as k σ = m rσ-ri to-ti = m v σ , with v σ being the spin-orientation dependent classical velocity; this simplification is possible because the Zeeman energy is constant inside each triangular region. Notice that the amplitude A σ,cl comprises both a kinetic phase term (i.e., the k σ dependent phase) and the magnetic field phase term. For more discussion on the kinetic phase, see Appendix A. In Eq. ( We now consider how discontinuous field boundaries affect the neutron classical spin paths. As shown in Fig. where θ i and θ oσ are respectively the incoming and outgoing angles of each spin state, is the field discontinuity across the boundary, and v iσ and v oσ are respectively the incoming and outgoing speed of the corresponding spin state. For simplicity, we take the initial speed and angle for both states to be the same. Following the standard definition, the refraction angles θ oσ are defined relative to the normal to the boundary between the two field regions. This formula is the magnetic extension of Snell's law in the non-relativistic limit; it can be derived from the variational principle of least action subject to conservation of energy (see Appendix B). Due to the smallness of the Zeeman energy compared to the kinetic energy in the current generation of MWPs, one can expand Eq. ( As a neutron enters a triangular region with a different field strength, its speed and magnetic Zeeman energy both change due to the conservation of total energy (i.e., kinetic plus potential). The neutron's magnetic-field dependent speed is given by where v 0 is the initial speed of the neutron before entering the MWP, the subscript i denotes which MWP is being considered, and the superscript ± denotes the corresponding field direction where we have used the convention that B i = |B ± i | ≥ 0. Notice that Eq. ( We will now consider the MWP arrangements displayed in Fig. where for now we are assuming no beam divergence, φ = 0, corresponding to the situation in Fig. In the subsequent calculation, we assume that the deflection angles at the boundaries are small, thus tan α iσ ≈ α iσ . Because the only difference between the angles α i↑ and α i↓ is their sign, it is convenient to state results of our calculation in terms of the magnitude of the angle, which we denote as In the parallelogram geometry, when the incoming neutron enters the first MWP with a divergence angle φ = 0 in the yz plane as shown in Fig. The deflection angles at the first and second hypotenuse interfaces in the case of a divergent beam now become Hence, the angles that the two spin states make with the z-axis at the two hypotenuse interfaces are given respectively by γ 0σ + γ 1σ and γ 0σ + γ 1σ + γ 2σ . To obtain focusing of the two spin paths in the triangular geometry, the magnetic field orientations in the second MWP need to be chosen as is indicated in Fig. Now we are ready to derive the geometric focusing condition for the SEMSANS configuration in the interferometric limit for both MWP configurations. We start by considering two MWPs of side length a separated by a distance δ 12 with hypotenuse interfaces parallel to each other as is shown in Fig. where (y 0 , z 0 ) are the coordinates where the neutron enters the first MWP and (y 1σ , z 1σ ) for σ ∈ {↑, ↓} are the coordinates of the two spin states at the first MWP hypotenuse (see Fig. To determine where the two spin states arrive at the second MWP's hypotenuse interface (y 2σ , z 2σ ), we set up the equations of lines with origin at the center of the first MWP. Thus, we need to solve the set of linear equations Doing so, we find We have ignored the refraction as the neutron leaves the first MWP and enters the second MWP because these refractive corrections are of order α 2 i . To obtain the position where the two spin states' paths focus on the detector, we establish the geometrical equations for the two spin state paths after the hypotenuse interface of the second MWP To second order in α i , we obtain the following result for the focusing position (y f , z f ): This result is equivalent to the focusing condition derived by the single-path Larmor precession approximation given in Eq. ( We can combine the geometry above and kinematics to calculate the total time t f σ the neutron spin state starting at (x 0 , y 0 , -a/2) with initial speed v 0 takes to arrive at the focusing plane. Using the time of flight t σ = L σ /v σ , where L σ is the distance travelled by the spin state at a constant speed v σ , one obtains to O α We now extend our calculation to include beam divergence. Generically, the neutron beam will have divergence angles in both the yz plane (which we call φ) and the xz plane; however, as shown in previous section, because our setup of MWPs in Fig. where the coordinate y 0 of the incoming neutron can be determined from the focusing position: Including beam divergence, the time the neutron takes to arrive at the focusing plane to O α 2 i , α i φ, φ 2 is It is straightforward to carry out calculations in the same spirit as in the previous section to obtain the following for the focusing position (y f , z f ): Interestingly, the focusing plane for the triangular geometry is different than for the parallelogram geometry, as the slope is defined by the relative strength of the mag-netic fields and is no longer always at 45 • . We also note that if one neglects the beam divergence φ and the initial position of the incoming neutron y 0 , we obtain the focusing condition in Eq. ( The time the neutron takes to arrive at the focusing plane to O α 2 i , α i φ, φ 2 is In this section, we establish the full unitary time evolution operator in the interferometric limit corresponding to the MWP configurations displayed in Fig. We can generically cast our operator at the exit of the second MWP in the form The coordinates r 2oσ = (x, y 2oσ , z 2o ) are those where the spin states exit the second MWP. Notice that Ûx does not affect the neutron trajectory in the x coordinate as shown in previous section. Similarly, for Ûy , the SEMSANS operator with fields aligned along the y axis, the neutron trajectory in the y coordinate is unaffected. Hence, the actions of Ûy and Ûx are independent of each other in terms of their geometrical paths. Furthermore, from the previous geometric considerations, we see that the two spin paths also propagate freely in regions without magnetic fields, namely between the first and second MWPs and from the second MWP to the focusing point r f . Therefore, there are additional operators Ûf in these two regions associated with this free propagation, which are given by Eq. ( where the superscripts P and T refer to the parallelogram and triangular SEMSANS setups, respectively, and Hereafter, we will omit writing the spatial components since they will be factored out when focused. From the geometrical results of previous section and the operator form of the MWP triangular fields in Eq. ( as well as for the triangular setup For the parallelogram setup without beam divergence shown in Fig. Ûf ( r bσ , r 0 ) = e iζ cos φ P,No Div + i sin φ P,No Div σx , Note that the incoming neutron state is a wavepacket, and the relative spatial phase variation φ P,No Div is the phase difference between two longitudinally separated plane wave components that contribute to the incoming wavepacket. Particularly, we assume that the distance ∆z 0 between the two initial spin states is within the "longitudinal coherence length" of the incoming wavepacket, which is given by the longitudinal intrinsic coherence length. Similarly, we can also find the operator for the parallelogram and triangular geometries with beam divergence. The general structure of these operators is similar to that of Eq. ( For non-divergent beams, we know from geometric consideration that y 0 ≈ y f . Moreover, for divergent beams, our unitary operators can be expressed entirely in terms of the focused positions y f by making use of Eqs. ( Surprisingly, the spatial variations of phase induced by the SEMSANS operator are the same for both geometries at the focusing plane: the only difference between the geometries is the angle of the focusing plane. This spatial variation is simply proportional to the y coordinate from the center of the focusing plane; we should then expect a robust interference pattern on the focusing plane since there is no blurring effect coming from averaging over the beam divergence φ. Here, the initial longitudinal spatial separation is assumed to be smaller than the neutron's longitudinal intrinsic coherence length (notice there is no initial separation required at the center of the focusing plane). One may be able to estimate the longitudinal coherence length by measuring the dampening of the interference fringes. Detector Plane So far, we have only considered neutron detection at the focusing plane defined as the plane where the two rays intersect after propagating through a pair of MWPs. It is important to account for the general case where the detector position is arbitrary (see Fig. where r = (x, y, z) is an arbitrary position. Since a MWP with a field oriented in the ±x direction does not alter the trajectory in the x direction, we will omit writing the x coordinate. In the usual experimental setup, the detector is situated at a plane parallel to the exterior edge of the MWPs a distance z away from the center of the first MWP. In order to determine the two spin paths contributing to the interference at the detector, we need to solve for r 0σ in the two equations that describe the two neutron spin paths past the second MWP: Formally, the operator can be easily written down similar to Eq. ( where r 0σ are the initial neutron positions which can be obtain by inverting Eq. ( Notice that due to the constraint on the classical path, we have expressed the spatially varying phase φ P, No Div in terms of the general final position of the neutron r. For an initial neutron with divergence angle φ, the spatial phase variations in the parallelogram geometry φ P, Div and in the triangular geometry φ T, Div are given by where we have used the following equation that relates the arbitrarily chosen detector position z to the previously defined distances L 1 and L 2 : There are two important differences between the expressions ( On the other hand, to produce the observable interference pattern that is due to the spatially varying phase described in Eqs. ( Hence, one can in principle estimate both the longitudinal and transverse coherence intrinsic lengths of the neutron. We now discuss the experimental protocol required to impart various spin textures and OAM densities to the incident neutron beam using pairs of MWPs in the SEM-SANS configuration, an example of which is diagrammed in Fig. where n⊥ = v × n with v being the beam propagation direction, and n ⊥ is the coordinate measured along the n⊥ -direction. We assume that the detector is a vertical plane and placed at the position such that Thus, the phase spatial variations can be generalized in a similar way: to O α 2 i , α i φ n, φ 2 n , we obtain where κ P,T n is found from Eq. ( where is the difference in the magnitude of the magnetic field in a single MWP pair, and As an aside, when concatenating two pairs of MWPs in the SEMSANS configurations with orthogonal magnetic field orientations, one needs to use the general expressions for the phase spatial variation shown in Eqs. (59)-( where κ x and κ y denote, respectively, the phase gradient imparted by the second (B 3 , B 4 fields) and first (B 1 , B 2 fields) pair of MWPs, and we have omitted the superscripts P, T. For the rest of this section, we will assume that both pairs of MWPs share the same ∆B n leading to κ x = κ y = κ. This choice of κ x and κ y is only possible for the parallelogram geometry because for the triangular case, one must fix not only the difference between the magnetic fields but also their sum. This choice for κ can be satisfied by a new geometric focusing condition that extends Eq. ( where B 1 is chosen to achieve the desired spin texture period and the various distances L i for i = 1, 2, 3, 4 are the distances between the midpoint of each MWP and the geometric focusing plane as shown in Fig. It is enlightening to consider the effect of Ûpair , Eq. ( one obtains the following experimentally observable pattern: where we defined |ψ s = Ûpair,spin |ψ s in . See Fig. If one is to use these spin-textured beams to probe a target whose magnetic correlation length is smaller than the one defined by the spin texture period, the fundamental scattering would not differ from that of an untextured neutron beam. However, in the opposite limit when the period of the spin texture is equal to or smaller than the magnetic correlation length, one must use the full quantum-mechanical description after the action of Ûpair in Eq. ( The magnetic fields of presently available MWPs are limited to about 150 mT by the maximum current of around 50 A that can be carried by their superconducting coils. The period of the spin textures that can be produced depends on the magnitude of the magnetic fields as well as on the distances between prisms and the neutron wavelength (see Eq. ( In this section and the following, we will focus on the nature of the quantum correlations generated by the action of our operator Ûpair . To better understand the nature of the entanglement realized by Ûpair , it is instructive to consider again both the spin and spatial components, and to express the neutron state in momentum space. Since our operator does not affect the propagation of the neutron along the z direction after the neutron has exited the last MWP, we only focus on the transverse xy plane by making use of the completeness relation for Expressing the operator in the momentum representation yields where we made use of r ⊥ ≈ r 0⊥ and | r = | r ⊥ ⊗ |z , and the integrals in k ⊥ and k 0⊥ are over R 2 . We must return to writing the full operator Ûpair with the explicit position-dependence for the sake of clarity when obtaining the Fourier transform of Ûpair . Thus, the momentum space representation of Ûpair,spin can be represented by the matrix Ûpair e i π 4 (δ +x δ +y + δ -x δ -y ) + e -i π 4 (δ -x δ +y + δ +x δ -y ) e i π 4 (δ -x δ -y -δ +x δ +y ) + e -i π 4 (δ +x δ -y -δ -x δ +y ) e -i π 4 (δ -x δ -y -δ +x δ +y ) + e i π 4 (δ +x δ -y -δ -x δ +y ) e -i π 4 (δ +x δ +y + δ -x δ -y ) + e i π 4 (δ -x δ +y + δ +x δ -y ) , where we have used the short-hand notation δ ±ν = δ [κ ± (k ν -k 0ν )] for ν ∈ {x, y} for the Dirac delta function. Because k 0 and k can be interpreted respectively as the incoming and outgoing wavevectors, the parameter κ can be interpreted as the transverse wavevector transfer. Next, we consider the action of the operator Ûpair given in Eq. ( where we have changed the integration variable from z 0 to z due to constraints from the classical path, while κ ± ⊥ = (κ x , ±κ y ) and in our setup we typically consider κ x = κ y = κ. Because we are using semiclassical kinematics to express all time dependence in terms of spatial coordinates, the explicit time dependence is encoded in the wavevector and spatial coordinates. In this form, we can see that Ûpair imparts transverse momenta to the initial state, which means that we can no longer write the outgoing state of the neutron as an unentangled state with respect to the tensor product decomposition H s ⊗ H k of the spin and momentum subsystems. Hence, the action of Ûpair can be thought of as an entangler of spin and the transverse momentum of the distinguishable subsystems. This point is crucial in understanding the novel scattering signatures of the OAM beams generated by our array of pairs of MWPs: even if the incoming state has no transverse momentum, the resulting outgoing beam displays quantum correlations between the transverse momenta and spin. The inherent periodicity in the spatial coordinates x and y is manifest in Eq. Generally, the coordinates of these special points take the form where m and n are either integers or half-odd integers. It is convenient to switch to polar coordinates (r, φ), where x -x m = r cos φ and y -y n = r sin φ are defined with respect to the origin (x m , y n ), and expand Ûpair around these points to O κ 2 r 2 . We also omit the overall global phase for the sake of simplicity. The expansion ∀(m, n) ∈ Z yields lim x→xm y→yn Ûpair,spin = 1 + κr l+ σ--l-σ+ , where σ± = (σ x ± σy )/2 are the usual spin-1/2 ladder operators and l± = e ±iφ are the OAM ladder operators. When m and n are half-odd integers (i.e., m + n ∈ Z), then the action of Ûpair,spin is given by Ûpair,spin = σz + κr l+ σ+ + lσ-. Finally, whenever m ∈ Z and n is a half-odd integer or vice-versa (i.e., m + n is a half-odd integer), we obtain Ûpair,spin = iσ y + κr 2 ( l+ + l-+ l+ -l-)σ z . (77) All three of these families of special points on the focusing plane will host a spin-orbit state with OAM quantum number = -1, 0, 1, with the specific OAM state determined by the initial neutron spin polarization. Similar expansions were found in previous work To connect the OAM content of the beam to the spin texture, one can define the OAM density L of the final state |ψ d = Ûpair |ψ in as where the OAM operator L = ( r -z d ) × p is defined with respect to an origin shifted along the z axis to be at the center of the general detector plane. Here, we have defined the initial state as a plane wave that propagates along the z direction as where, again, t i is some initial time, E 0 the initial energy of the neutron, and k 0z the initial wavevector of the neutron. Calculating the OAM density, we find L z ( r) =κ (y cos θ in sin 2κy + sin θ in (y sin φ in cos 2κy + x cos φ in )) . We plot a few examples of some OAM textures in Fig. While neutron beams are successfully utilized as indirect probes of many exotic phases of matter, such as quantum spin liquids and magnetic skyrmion lattices We have also presented a systematic theoretical investigation from quantum mechanical first principles of a SEMSANS setup of MWPs. Starting from a pathintegral representation of the unitary time evolution operator, a simplification is introduced by invoking the interferometric limit where the refraction of the neutron at magnetic field boundaries is taken into account by defining two opposite-spin correlated trajectories that interfere at the detector. Our approach is reminiscent of the connection between wave and geometric optics. An important consequence of the refractive effects on the two opposite-spin paths is the appearance of geometric focusing of these two states. Specifically, we have highlighted that there is an inherent assumption that the longitudinal and transverse coherence coherence lengths are larger than the spatial separation of the neutron's two spin states for such an interferometric limit to remain valid. Furthermore, we have shown that in addition to the usual magnetic-field dependent phase considered previously, there is a phase contribution coming from the kinetic-energy. However, under the assumption that the final position r f and time t f of the neutron's oppositespin rays coincide at the detection plane given that those rays started at the same initial time t i at different initial positions r iσ (within the quantum coherence volume of the neutron), the kinetic contribution to the phase cancels out. In this way, our formalism should allow the measurement of the transverse and longitudinal intrinsic coherence lengths of the neutron by measuring the distance (relative to the center of the detection plane) at which the interference fringes fade away. Finally, we concluded that the phase focusing condition described by Eq. ( To describe the OAM states generated by MWPs, we derived the quantum operator of our proposed SEM-SANS setup, where the magnetic field directions in the two pairs of MWPs are perpendicular to one another. This setup creates a spin-textured neutron beam where there is a lattice of points with respect to which the MWPs impart a rich variety of spin-OAM entanglement; these structures are a result of the interference between the two opposite-spin paths with momenta k ↑ and k ↓ . One important implication of this result is that the paraxial approximation usually used in neutron scattering may not be used for the analysis of OAM when using MWPs An analog of the unitary operator Ûpair for the case |ψ in = e -iωti |↑ z ⊗|k 0z (e.g., the state with θ in , φ in = 0) was experimentally realized using triangular coils (LOV prisms) Another surprising yet interesting result is that the refractive effects encoded in α i are not observable in the magnetic-field dependent phase up to O α 2 i , α i φ, φ 2 , because all of these refractive terms can be factored out as an overall global phase. The absence of α i arises from the fact that the refractive corrections to the two spin states' paths are both proportional to ±α i , meaning that they only differ by a sign. Hence, any linear correction O α 2 i , α i φ, φ 2 to the magnetic-field dependent phase that each spin state accumulates is always exactly equal but opposite. However, due to their opposite spins, the magnetic-field dependent phases are accumulated in opposite direction; therefore, both states acquire exactly the same correction. Because all of these corrections are to the phases of the coefficients A σ in Eq. ( which is indeed equivalent to the phase predicted by the single-path Larmor precession model. In order to obtain a non-trivial refractive correction to the magnetic-field dependent phases of the two oppositespin paths, one needs to consider the refractive correction to second order. The second order refractive effects will give corrections to both the geometric focusing condition and the phase-gradient. The O α 3 i , ... corrections to the phase spatial variations for both geometries are of the general form where A 1 , A 12 , A 2 , A φ , A 1φ and A 2φ are coefficients given in Appendix C that depend on the magnetic field strengths, the position and size of the MWPs, and the initial state of the neutron. We notice some interesting features. First of all, contrary to the lowest-order O α 2 i , α i φ, φ 2 calculation where the additional phase is proportional to the beam divergence φ, we find terms that are intrinsically due to the refractive effect of the beam even in the absence of the beam divergence. Secondly, A 1φ and A 2φ are contributed purely from the kinetic phase, and no cross-term α i φ appears in the magnetic field-dependent phase for the same reason that the first-order refractive correction vanishes. Therefore, to properly obtain the higher order refractive corrections, one must consider the kinetic phase. Last of all, we find that the correction to the phase spatial variation now depends not only in the distance a + δ 12 between centers of the MWPs, but also depends on the physical size of the MWP in a complicated way. by assuming the principle of least time. It turns out that Fermat obtained the correct result for light refraction. Interestingly, it is also known that Snell's law for nonrelativistic neutron optics follows Decartes' original result, with c i (c o ) → v iσ (v oσ ). Therefore, Snell's law for neutron refraction cannot be derived from Fermat's principle of least time. From a theoretical point of view, there should be a unified principle yielding both of these behaviors in the appropriate limits. In this section, we present a derivation of the magnetic Snell's law based on a stationary action principle which unifies both refraction laws for light and neutrons when the two media do not move with respect to each other. As will be shown, the difference arises from the distinction between massless and massive particles (in the non-relativistic limit). We start by considering the action for a relativistic particle in a potential V ( r) characterizing the medium dt L( r, ̇ r), (B3) where γ = 1/ 1 -v 2 c 2 , v is the velocity of the particle and c the speed of light. For refraction, V ( r) is constant in each medium with a discontinuous jump across the boundary. In Hamilton's variational principle, the action S is a functional of both the coordinate r and its first time derivative ̇ r. Its variation leads to the usual Euler-Lagrange equations of motion. However, for particles undergoing pure refraction, their energy is assumed to be conserved as they cross the boundary. Due to this extra constraint it is more convenient to use the action defined in Maupertuis's action principle where p = ∂L/∂ ̇ r is the usual canonical momentum. Since our potential V ( r) depends only on the spatial coordinate (and perhaps on the spin of the particle), in the optical potential limit, p is constant in each region and parallel to the displacement d r, resulting in the simplification where p and ds are the magnitudes of the canonical momentum and displacement, respectively. Since Maupertuis's action principle uses the constant energy constraint to eliminate ̇ r, one can express the magnitude of the canonical momentum p in terms of the particle's energy as For our experimental setup in Fig. where S AC,σ and S BC,σ are the classical actions in the two field regions with coordinates r A,B,C corresponding to the points indicated in Fig. Using trigonometric relationships between θ i , θ o , v iσ and v oσ , it is straightforward to obtain Snell's law for relativistic neutrons where p a = mv aσ / 1 - a with a = i, o. Moreover, since most of the current experiments with neutrons are carried out in the non-relativistic limit, the momentum simplifies to p a ≈ mv aσ , where due to conservation of energy. Then, for massive nonrelativistic particles we obtain the familiar The case of light, that is, relativistic massless particles called photons, is subject to the same variational principle with the same end result, Eq. (B11). However, for photons the dispersion relation is given by p a = ω a /c a , where ω a = E a is its energy. From conservation of energy and one obtains Snell's law for light refraction, Eq. (B2).