The discovery of metals as catalytic centers for nitrogen reduction reactions has stimulated great enthusiasm for single-atom catalysts. However, the poor activity and low selectivity of available SACs are far away from the industrial requirement. Through the high throughout first principles calculations, the doping engineering can effectively regulate the NRR performance of -Sb monolayer. Especially, the origin of activated N2 is revealed from the perspective of the electronic structure of the active center. Among the 24 transition metal dopants, Re@Sb and Tc@Sb showed the best NRR catalytic performance with a low limiting potential. The Re@Sb and Tc@Sb also could significantly inhibit HER and achieve a high theoretical Faradaic efficiency of 100%. Our findings not only accelerate discovery of catalysts for ammonia synthesis but also contribute to further elucidate the structure-performance correlations. The synthesis of NH3 is crucial for the industrial production, including fertilizer, chemical production and so on. At present, it is produced mainly by the traditional Haber-Bosch reaction, that is, the transformation of N2 and H2 to NH3 was successfully achieved under high temperature and high pressure. In addition, water is used as raw material to provide the hydrogen source required by NRR through hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), breaking away from the heavy dependence on fossil fuels of the Hubble process. Hydrogen is produced as a sustainable proton source by electrochemical splitting of water through hydrogen evolution. This method can reduce the restriction of thermodynamic equilibrium and control the direction and rate of reaction by changing the external field. In recent years, metals, metal oxides and transition metal chalcogenides have been extensively applied in NRR. However, the N2 activation and low Faraday efficiency are two major challenges for NRR. Usually, chemisorption on the catalyst surface is difficult due to the inertness of the NN triple bond, which will result in high overpotential and low yield of the NRR process. SACs are predicted to be high-performance NRR catalysts, including Nb-graphene, In this paper, all calculations were performed by the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) based on density functional theory (DFT). In addition, in order to better evaluate the catalytic performance, the quantum transport properties of catalysts were performed using NANOD-CAL package. The -Sb monolayer, a layered rhomboid bilayer structure composed of interlocking, folding and six-membered rings, has attracted more and more attention in the field of catalysis. Furthermore, the optimized lattice parameter of -Sb monolayer is a = b = 4.14 Å, which is consistent with previous experiments and theories investigations. The good stability is an important guarantee to maintain effective catalysis of SACs. Therefore, we calculated the binding energy of TM doped system to examine the stability of SACs, as shown in Figure The adsorption and activation of N2 is the most important process of NRR reaction, which will affect the overall reaction efficiency, because N2 adsorption is the basic premise for starting the subsequent hydrogenation process. Therefore, the ΔG*N2 greater than -0.30 eV is not further discussed. First, N2 chemical adsorption in both end on and side on configurations on the pristine -Sb monolayer is considered. Since every Sb atom in pristine structure has a perfect sp Next, we further analysis the ΔG*N2-N2H of TM@Sb based the first hydrogenation step (i.e., *N2 + H + + e -→ *N2H) via end-on and side-on patterns. As shown in Figure Here, the free energies of the detailed reaction pathways of the 15 TM@Sb were calculated to evaluate their catalytic activities. As a complement, 6 kinds of SCAs are capable of potentially distal and alternating reactions by end-on adsorption, and 9 kinds of SCAs catalyzed enzyme reactions through side-on patterns. For all electrode reactions involving electrons, the effect of the corresponding applied potential (U) is included in the free energy transfer of -neU. A smaller negative applied potential indicates a smaller overpotential. Figure Combined with the analysis in Figure where n(σ) and n(σ*) are the electron number of σ and σ*, respectively. Figure In order to achieve higher Faraday efficiency of NRR (fNRR), the catalyst should be able to effectively inhibit HER in addition to stability and activity screening. Therefore, selectivity of the catalyst was finally screened. In this case, the Gibbs free energy difference (ΔG = ΔG*N2 -ΔG*H) between *H (ΔG*H) and *N2 (ΔG*N2) was calculated to evaluate the actual catalytic activity of different catalysts. When the ΔG value is negative, it means that the adsorption of N2 on TM@Sb is more favorable than the adsorption of H. As shown in Figure After considering the limiting potential (UL) between NRR and HER, there are only Re@Sb and Tc@Sb ideal catalysts that meet the proposed screening criteria, as shown in Figure It is worth noting that unlike NRR process occurs under strong alkaline conditions and thermal catalysis, the desorption of NH3* is essential in the overall process. Subsequently, the charge changes of all possible pathways were considered to analyze main source of NRR performance. First, the charge variations of Re@Sb and Tc@Sb were illustrated by the Bader charge, as displayed in Figure In summary, we systematically explored the effects of TM embedded on the NRR catalytic activity of -Sb monolayer by performing high-throughput screening of DFT computations. This screening principle allows efficient design of catalysts and saves significant computational resources. Our results showed that the introduction of suitable dopant can effectively activated N2 molecule, thus improving its NRR activity. Besides, combination of the selectivity, stability and durability analyses as well as the synthetic accessibility supports the great potential of Re@Sb and Tc@Sb as NRR electrocatalyst. For the whole reaction pathway, Re@Sb enables distal, alternating and enzymatic pathways with limit potentials of -0.46 -0.55 and -0.48 V, respectively, while Tc@Sb enables the enzymatic pathway with a limit potential of -0.14 V. In particular, the NRR activity descriptor for the TM@Sb system was proposed. For the exploration of two-dimensional SACs in NRR and other electrochemical reactions, our work will stimulate more experimental and theoretical further efforts.