The seminal work by T. Kazimierczuk et al. [Nature 514, 343 (2014)] has shown the existence of highly excited exciton states in a regime, where the correspondence principle is applicable and quantum mechanics turns into classical mechanics, however, any interpretation of exciton spectra based on a classical approach to excitons is still missing. Here, we close this gap by computing and comparing quantum mechanical and semiclassical recurrence spectra of cuprous oxide. We show that the quantum mechanical recurrence spectra exhibit peaks, which, by application of semiclassical theories and a scaling transformation, can be directly related to classical periodic exciton orbits. The application of semiclassical theories to exciton physics requires the detailed analysis of the classical exciton dynamics, including three-dimensional orbits, which strongly deviate from hydrogenlike Keplerian orbits. Our findings illuminate important aspects of excitons in semiconductors by directly relating the quantum mechanical band-structure splittings of excitons to the corresponding classical exciton dynamics. Excitons are atom-like states in semiconductors formed by an electron and a positively charged hole. They are created by exciting an electron from the valence band into the conduction band, where the electron forms a bound hydrogenlike state with the hole remaining in the valence band For the hydrogen atom the connection of Rydberg spectra to classical Keplerian orbits is well established by the Bohr-Sommerfeld model. Semiclassical trace formulas The investigation of the phase space topology with similar methods as introduced by Gekle et al. A full description of excitons in cuprous oxide needs to consider the cubic O h symmetry of the system. Introducing relative and center-of-mass coordinates for the electron and hole and neglecting the center-of-mass momentum, the Hamiltonian for excitons in cuprous oxide is given by with the relative coordinates r and momenta p and the vector operators Î, Ŝh for angular momenta I = 1 and S h = 1/2. Here, the first term E g = 2.17208 eV is the gap energy between the uppermost valence band and the lowest conduction band accounts for the kinetic energy of the electron and hole. It includes the cubic band structure, described by the quasispin Î and the hole spin Ŝh with their components Îi , Ŝhi as well as the components of the momentum p i . Furthermore, m 0 is the free-electron mass, {a, b} = 1 2 (ab + ba) denotes the symmetrized product, c.p. stands for cyclic permutation, γ i and η i are the Luttinger parameters where ∆ = 0.131 eV is the spin-orbit coupling eff ≡ E Ryd /(E g -E) with E Ryd = 13.6eV/(γ 1 ε 2 ) ≈ 87meV the Rydberg energy of cuprous oxide, which means that the classical dynamics is the same for all values of n eff . The non-scaled action S is connected to the scaled value S by a simple linear scaling S po (n eff ) = Spo n eff . In semiclassical theories the density of states for systems with such a scaling property can be expressed as a Fourier series in the scaled action Spo with 0 (n eff ) the average density of states. The sinusoidal fluctuations of the density are related to the periodic orbits (po) of the classical system with A po and Spo the amplitude (including the Maslov index) and the scaled action of the orbits, respectively. To recover the scaling property for the Hamiltonian we introduce an energy-dependent coupling parameter ∆, i.e., with a fixed parameter n 0 . Note that the replacement ( for the periodic-orbit amplitudes In the quantum mechanical case the operators for position and momentum read r = r, p = -i eff ∇ r , with formed to the generalized eigenvalue problem for the squared effective Planck constant, i.e. λ = 2 eff , and thus the effective quantum number n eff . Eq. ( The decisive point of the scaling is that the eigenvalues in Eq. ( In the following all parameters are given in exciton-Hartree units which are obtained by setting = e = m 0 /γ 1 = 1/(4πε 0 ε) = 1. For the presentation of the results we focus on n 0 = 5, i.e., a principal quantum number, which is high enough that the adiabatic approach is valid, but low enough that the secular motion of the classical exciton orbits, which decreases with increasing n 0 , is sufficiently fast The scaled quantum spectrum shown in Fig. For comparison, the semiclassical results are shown in Fig. The structure of the classical exciton dynamics is illustrated in more detail in Fig. In summary, we have found signatures of exciton orbits in quantum mechanical recurrence spectra of cuprous oxide. We have revealed the classical phase space structure of yellow excitons in cuprous oxide and observed recurrence peaks in Fourier transform quantum spectra, which, by application of semiclassical theories can be directly related to two-dimensional periodic orbits in symmetry planes of the crystal or fully three-dimensional periodic orbits. The results have been obtained by using an adiabatic approach for the classical exciton dynamics and by application of a scaling technique to the quantum spectra. Considering these approximations and that the Bohr-Sommerfeld model already fails to predict the energy levels of the helium atom, it is remarkable that a classical picture is capable of describing the spectral features of excitons in Cu 2 O. Here, we have focused on the dynamics of Rydberg excitons with principal quantum number n = 5 in the (non-scaled) Cu 2 O crystal. The analysis will be extended to other dynamics regimes by varying n 0 . It will also be interesting to investigate the classical and semiclassical dynamics of magnetoexcitons In semiclassical theories with 0 (E) the average density of states. The sinusoidal fluctuations of the density of states are related to the periodic orbits of the classical system with A po , S po , and μ po the amplitude, action, and Maslov index of the orbits, respectively. In this treatment integrable and nonintegrable systems must be distinguished. The dynamics of integrable systems is regular and the motion is confined to tori characterized by action-angle variables J i and θ i . The action variables provide a set of constants of motion, where the integrals are evaluated along the independent paths C i on the torus obtained when the angle variable θ i is varied from 0 to 2π while all other angle variables θ j with j = i are kept constant. The frequencies ω i on the torus are given by When all frequency ratios are given by rational numbers the trajectories are periodic on resonant tori, otherwise they are quasi-periodic. The periodic orbits can be characterized by integer winding numbers M i that are defined by the number of cycles along the paths C i needed until the periodic orbit returns to its initial position. For two-dimensional integrable systems the density of states is given by the Berry-Tabor formula (4) * Email: main@itp1.uni-stuttgart.de where M = (M 1 , M 2 ) are the winding numbers of the periodic orbits with classical action S M and Maslov index μ M . The amplitudes of the oscillating terms in Eq. ( In non-integrable systems the periodic orbits are isolated. The semiclassical density of states is then given by Gutzwiller's trace formula where S ppo is the action of the primitive periodic orbit, M po is the monodromy matrix that describes the stability properties of the periodic orbit in the directions orthogonal to the orbit, and μ po is the Maslov index. For certain systems it is possible to introduce a scaling of the coordinates and momenta such that the phase space structure of the classical dynamics no longer depends on the energy E or an appropriately chosen scaling parameter. Examples are billiard systems can be introduced such that the shape of the classical orbits does not depend on w and the classical action of periodic orbits depend linearly on w, i.e., S po (w)/ = Spo w , with Spo the scaled action of the periodic orbit. The scaling parameter w plays the role of an inverse effective Planck constant eff or an effective quantum number n eff . Changing the external parameter from energy to w and inserting Eq. ( arXiv:2207.07378v2 [cond-mat.mes-hall] 21 Jul 2022 with constant periodic orbit parameters, where we have included the phase given by the Maslov index in the complex amplitude A po . In the semiclassical density of states (8) of a scaled system the complete set of periodic orbits lead to a superposition of sinusoidal fluctuations. The contribution of individual orbits to the spectrum is therefore not visible directly, but can be extracted by a Fourier transform of the spectrum from energy to time domain, or in the scaled picture from the w to the scaled action domain. The scaled semiclassical recurrence spectrum then exhibits peaks at the positions of the scaled actions Spo with amplitudes A po . The semiclassical recurrence spectrum ( can be calculated analytically and yields the quantum mechanical recurrence spectrum By comparing the quantum mechanical result Excitons in semiconductors like Cu 2 O are atom-like states formed by an electron in the conduction band and a positively charged hole in the valence band. Neglecting all details of the band structure an exciton can be described in a simple hydrogenlike model by the Hamiltonian The first term E g = 2.17208 eV is the gap energy between the uppermost valence band and the lowest conduction band where we introduced n eff via n 2 eff ≡ E Ryd /(E g -E) with E Ryd = 13.6eV/(γ 1 ε 2 ) ≈ 87meV the Rydberg energy of cuprous oxide. After subtracting E g and multiplying with n 2 eff the scaled Hamiltonian reads and therefore the classical dynamics becomes independent of n eff . The connection between non-scaled action S and scaled action S is then given by The semiclassical density of states therefore takes the form (8) when setting w = n eff / , and the recurrence spectrum exhibits δ peaks at scaled actions Spo of multiple repetitions of Keplerian orbits corresponding to the hydrogenlike Coulomb problem. The true exciton dynamics is much more complicated. A full description of excitons in cuprous oxide needs to include the cubic band structure of the crystal. This requires the replacement of the kinetic term in Eq. ( with the vector operators Î, Ŝh for angular momenta I = 1 and S h = 1/2. The kinetic terms can be split into the hydrogenlike term plus corrections due to the band structure H band (p, Î, Ŝh ), i.e. We here neglect the central-cell corrections The band structure terms included in H kin (p, Î, Ŝh ) depend quadratically on components p i of the momentum, and therefore the scaling transformation which does not depend on the momentum p and thus depends on n eff after multiplication of the total Hamiltonian by n 2 eff . To recover the scaling property of the system we introduce a scaled version of the spin-orbit coupling by the replacement The dependence of the total Hamiltonian on n eff can now be completely removed by the scaling, but the scaled classical dynamics depends on the constant factor n 2 0 , which determines the strength of the spin-orbit coupling. The classical dynamics of the scaled system corresponds exactly to that of the non-scaled crystal at energy E = E g -E Ryd /n 2 eff with n eff = n 0 . To calculate the classical dynamics of the yellow exciton series we resort to the adiabatic approach introduced in Ref. The classical exciton orbits are calculated by numerically integrating Hamilton's equations of motion Periodic orbits can be found by varying the initial conditions. We find periodic orbits confined to one-to threedimensional tori. The one-and two-dimensional orbits are located in the two distinct symmetry planes of the crystal with O h symmetry. The phase space exhibits mostly regular tori surrounding an elliptical fixed point given by a nearly circular orbit. The two-dimensional orbits show a secular motion of Kepler ellipses which can be characterized by two winding numbers M 1 and M 2 , whereby M 1 gives the number of Kepler ellipses and M 2 describes the secular motion by giving the number of circulations on the torus. For the three-dimensional orbits a third winding number needs to be included. M 2 then describes the secular motion in φ direction and M 3 describes the secular motion in θ direction. Additional periodic orbit parameters, which are needed for the calculations of the semiclassical amplitudes, can be calculated by integrating the corresponding equations of motion simultaneously. The equation of motion for the action is given by The stability properties of a periodic orbits are determined by the symplectic stability matrix M po , which is obtained by integrating over one period of the orbit with the initial condition M (0) = 1. Due to the symplectic structure of the stability matrix its eigenvalues appear in pairs λ i and 1/λ i . For the nearly circular orbits all stability eigenvalues differ significantly from one. The direction out of the plane is stable for the orbit in the plane normal to [100] and unstable for the orbit in the plane normal to 1. Sum λi+1/λi for the two-dimensional orbits at n0 = 5 in the plane normal to eigenvalues from one can only be resolved numerically for the orbits with the lowest ratios M 1 /M 2 . This can be seen in Fig. In this work we present results for n 0 = 5. This choice fixes the classical dynamics corresponding to the scaled exciton spectrum to that belonging to the exciton state at principal quantum number n = 5 in the non-scaled crystal. The value n 0 = 5 has been selected for two reasons. On the one hand, the secular motion of the classical exciton orbits in similar phase space regions becomes slower with increasing n 0 and non-trivial structures in the recurrence spectra occur only at higher values of the scaled action The one-dimensional orbits are isolated and their stability eigenvalues therefore differ from one. Their contribution to the density of states can be calculated by applying Gutzwiller's trace formula To calculate these amplitudes the action variables J 1 and J 2 are needed. In a two-dimensional integrable system the action of a periodic orbit is given by The action variables can then be calculated by differentiating Eq. ( In the quantum mechanical case the canonical commutation relations [r i , pj ] = i δ ij where the Planck constant is replaced by an effective Planck constant eff = /n eff . Using the corresponding operators in coordinate space given by r = r , p = -i eff ∇ r , the Schrödinger equation for cuprous oxide can be transformed to the generalized eigenvalue problem for the effective quantum number n eff . To solve the generalized eigenvalue problem (29) we use the basis set Here, N is the radial quantum number which is connected to the principal quantum number n via N = n -L -1 and L the angular momentum quantum number. The quasispin I and the hole spin S h are coupled via the spin-orbit coupling term H SO to the effective hole spin J. The total angular momentum quantum number is denoted by F = J + L and its z component by M F . As we neglect the central-cell corrections affecting the evenparity states, the electron spin S e and its z component M Se are good quantum numbers. They only result in additional degeneracies of the eigenstates and thus are not included in the basis For the radial part of the basis states we use the Coulomb-Sturmian functions with the associated Laguerre polynomials L 2L+1 N (x), ρ = r/α, and α an arbitrary positive real-valued scaling parameter. The Coulomb-Sturmian functions form a discrete and complete set in L 2 (R 3 ) independent of the scaling parameter α > 0 . with coefficients c. Using the ansatz with symmetric matrices A and B, the solution vector c, and the eigenvalues λ = 1/n 2 eff . The matrix elements of A and B, can be obtained analytically similar as in Ref. As parity is a good quantum number, the generalized eigenvalue problem decomposes into two blocks with even and odd parity which corresponds to even and odd angular momentum L. Those blocks further decompose into four blocks because of the cubic symmetry of the kinetic part of the Hamiltonian H kin and the quantization axis chosen parallel to one of the principal axis of the crystal. More precisely, as a rotation of 90 • about a four-fold symmetry axis of the group O h does not change the Hamiltonian and one of those axis coincides with the quantization axis it follows which is only fulfilled if M F -M F = 4m with m ∈ Z. With the symmetry plane orthogonal to the four-fold axis along the z direction it follows that N , L , J , F , M F | H kin |N, L, J, F, M F = N , L , J , F , -M F | H kin |N, L, J, F, -M F , where ∼ denotes similar matrices and thus their spectra are equal. They are similar because they can be transformed into each other by a basis transformation as only the arrangement of the basis vectors has to be changed. This explains the two-fold degeneracy of the Γ 6 and Γ 7 states. Thus the generalized eigenvalue problem (34) decomposes into four independent blocks, two for even and odd parity, respectively. This block structure is exploited to accelerate the numerical diagonalization using the LA-PACK routine DSYGVX The Fourier transform of the scaled quantum density of states where n eff,k denotes the kth eigenvalue of Eq. ( where ∆n eff is the size of the window, i.e., the length of the finite spectrum, and n 0 eff the center of the spectrum. To suppress the artificial side peaks a Gaussian window function is introduced with σ = ∆n eff /6. Unfortunately this further broadens the main peaks. For our calculations we used n 0 eff = 15 and ∆n eff = 30. As the quantum spectrum is a sum of delta distributions the Fourier transform can be carried out analytically where k = 1, . . . , k max numerates the eigenvalues n eff,k of the finite spectrum. same winding numbers M1 and M2 in the plane perpendicular to the [011] axis. The two-dimensional orbits approach the action of the nearly circular orbit (indicated by rhombi) of the corresponding plane with increasing M1/M2. Some threedimensional orbits with marked ratio M3:M2 are located in the area enclosed by orbits in the two different symmetry planes of the O h group. The orbits shown in Fig. eff = /n eff an effective Planck constant