This work aims to design a CMOS compatible, low-electrical power consumption modulator assisted by plasmons. For compactness and reduction of the electrical power consumption, electro-absorption based on the Franz-Keldysh effect in Germanium was chosen for modulation. It consists in the change of the absorption coefficient of the material near the band edge under the application of a static electric field, hence producing a direct modulation of the light intensity. The use of plasmons allows enhancing the electro-optical effect due to the high field confinement. An integrated electro-optical simulation tool was developed to design and optimize the modulator. The designed plasmonic modulator has an extinction ratio of 3.3 dB with insertion losses of 13.2 dB and electrical power consumption as low as 20 fJ/bit, i.e. the lowest electrical power consumption reported for silicon photonic modulators. In-and out-coupling to a standard silicon waveguide was also engineered by the means of an optimized Si-Ge taper, reducing the coupling losses to only 1 dB per coupler. Besides, an experimental work was carried out to try to shift the Franz-Keldysh effect, which is maximum at 1650 nm, to lower wavelength close to 1.55 μm for telecommunication applications. Ce travail vise à concevoir un modulateur optique assisté par plamsons, compatible CMOS et à faible consommation électrique. L'électro-absorption, basée sur l'effet Franz-Keldysh dans le germanium, a été choisie comme principe de modulation pour réduire la taille du dispositif et la consommation d'énergie électrique associée. L'effet Franz-Keldysh se traduit par un changement du coefficient d'absorption du matériau près du bord de bande sous l'application d'un champ électrique statique, d'où la production d'une modulation directe de l'intensité lumineuse. L'utilisation de plasmons permet en principe d'augmenter l'effet électro-optique en raison du fort confinement du mode optique. Un outil de simulation électro-optique intégré a été développé pour concevoir et optimiser le modulateur. Le modulateur plasmonique proposé a un taux d'extinction de 3.3 dB avec des pertes d'insertion de 11.2 dB et une consommation électrique de seulement 20 fJ/bit, soit la plus faible consommation électrique décrite pour les modulateurs photoniques sur silicium. Le couplage du modulateur à un guide silicium standard en entrée et en sortie a également été optimisé par l'introduction d'un adaptateur de mode Si-Ge optimisé, réduisant les pertes de couplage à seulement 1 dB par coupleur. Par ailleurs, un travail expérimental a été effectué pour tenter de déplacer l'effet Franz-Keldysh, maximum à 1650 nm, à de plus faibles longueurs d'onde proches de 1.55 μm pour des applications aux télécommunications optiques. Ultra-compact plasmonic modulator for optical inteconnects : Energy band structure of Ge and the influence of biaxial tensile strain In order to increase the operational frequency of the transistors, the semiconductor industry downscaled the size of the devices. There is an empirical law, called the Moore's law There are different physical effects that happen in the downscaled transistors and that limit the performances of modern circuits Furthermore, the cited delay reduces the operational frequency of the chip because the computational delay is equal to the propagation delay through the chip. This problem is known as the interconnect bottleneck and it is a major problem in nowadays high performance computer integrated circuits. The main problem of using Cu as a material for the intra-chip interconnects is that it is not a CMOS compatible material. Cu is a quick diffusion material into Si One of the long term solutions to the problem of the interconnect bottleneck could be achieved by the use of silicon photonics Another advantage of Si is that it is a widely available material and it has a low cost. It possesses a wide window with low optical losses (the main reduced losses are around 1.3 and 1.55 μm), a high optical damage threshold (the supported intensity is around 3 GW/cm 2 and depending on the doping and the fabrication processes it can reach 5 GW/cm 2 ) and good thermal conductivity. The good thermal conductivity is important to well dissipate the heat from the integrated circuit. Nowadays there are many optical communication systems One recent trend of silicon photonics is to carry the optical communications from the long-haul distances to intra-chip communications. It is believed that optical interconnects acting as a bus in a chip can overcome the limitations of metal interconnects and increase the performance. Furthermore, another of the most important arguments of the technology is that the main used material is Si which is a well-known material in the semiconductor industry. Being CMOS compatible, it allows using the well-established foundries Probably Si is one of the most studied materials in the history. In this case silicon photonics The use of the silicon-on-insulator (SOI) technology For setting an intra-chip optical interconnects, several elements are needed. Mainly, a source to produce the light within the integrated circuit, a modulator to encode the continuous wave (CW) light, a multiplexer to combine several wavelengths in one beam, waveguides to propagate the light from one point of the integrated circuit to another one, a demultiplexer to separate the wavelength and photodetectors to transform the information carried by the optical signal to the electrical one. A schematic view of an optical link with its elements is presented in Figure One important component to achieve an optical interconnect is the optical modulator It is worth to mention that Si is a centro-symmetric material making it difficult to design a modulator due to the absence of the Pockel's effect. Furthermore, Si possesses an indirect band-gap. This is a main difficulty in the design of optical sources since the electron excitation from the valence band to the conduction one requires the presence of a phonon to conserve energy and momentum. The fact that Si is transparent at the wavelength of 1.55 μm does not allow the design of photodetectors at this wavelength. This is why other materials are being introduced in the field of silicon photonics. One of those examples is the use of Ge. But even optical interconnects have its own challenges In the framework of this work, I want to develop a low power consumption modulator based on an electro-absorption effect. It will use the Franz-Keldysh effect (FKE) in germanium as the active principle of the deivce. To further reduce its power consumption we use a plasmonic structure as the optical waveguide to concentrate the light into the germanium core and reduce the size mismatch between photonic and electronic devices. The CMOS compatiblility is another main goal. Regarding the power consumption of the device we want that it is below 50 fJ/bit as stated in several roadmaps Taking this brief summary of the device we propose, we introduce the outline of the chapters of this thesis in which we explain how we will design it, the rational of why electro-absorption modulator, why the FKE, why plasmonic structures, etc. In the second chapter we introduce the basics and the state-of-the-art of silicon photonic modulators. For this, we do a small introduction to the device and its main characteristics. We explain the different effects that are used to perform the modulation and we do a state-of-the-art of the different photonic modulators that use the FKE. We also present all the silicon photonic plasmonic modulators. Since we are interested in low power consumption we explain at the end of the chapter the formulas used to calculate the energy consumption of modulators. In the third chapter we introduce the field of plasmonics. We explain its advantages and disadvantages. We also discuss on CMOS compatibility and the metals that can be used. The metalsemiconductor (MS) and metal-insulator-semiconductor (MIS) waveguides are also explained. We also explain the rationale of using a plasmonics waveguide which we advance here. Since the appearance of integrated optics Regarding the power consumption, designing the modulator using metals to propagate light at the interface will allow a reduction of the dimensions of the device with respect to the photonic ones. The reduction of the device will also decrease the energy consumption of this. Furthermore, the reduction in the dimensions of the device will increase the interaction of the effects (FKE, carrier dispersion plasma effect, etc.) in Ge due to a bigger intensity of the electromagnetic fields within the material. Additionally, there is a trade-off between the losses of the propagating modes in a plasmonic waveguide and the spatial concentration of the electromagnetic field. It means, the smaller the spatial concentration of the electromagnetic field into a plasmonic waveguide, the bigger the propagation losses. Consequently, in our design, we want to have a small footprint but we also need to take care about the propagation losses of the modulator. In the fourth chapter we explain the physics behind the FKE. We also derive mathematically the formulas to model the FKE. We present a simply generalized model and a more complete one. This model will be useful to calculate the main benchmarks of the device using the integrated electro-optic simulator that we introduce in the fifth chapter. Regarding the low power consumption that we want to achieve we advance that, we want to design an electro-absorption modulator rather than an electro-refraction one. The main advantages of both electro-absorption over electro-refraction effects are that it allows the design of smaller devices (small footprint) and consequently it will have lower power consumption. This is why as a first glance we will discard electro-refraction over electro-absorption. The active principle of the modulator we want to design is the FKE. This effect is present in both silicon and germanium. Nevertheless the effect is stronger in germanium rather than in silicon. It is worth to mention that germanium can be integrated well in a silicon photonic fabrication process. Furthermore, the use of the FKE does not induce any limitation in the speed of the device since the FKE is an instantaneous effect (it is in the sub-picosecond regime In chapter five we present the design of the plasmonic modulator which is the main objective of this thesis. We establish the benchmarks of the modulator that we want to achieve. We also explain the numerical tools that we are going to use to model the device and we present many structures to perform the modulation. We analyze the performance of each structure and we derive the main characteristics of the modulator mainly: the extinction ratio, the propagation losses, the energy consumption, etc. For this we developed an opto-electronic integrated simulator. We use a commercial electrical simulator called ISE-dessis to calculate the static electric field distribution in the proposed structure of the modulator. With this information we apply a Franz-Keldysh effect model to calculate the change in the absorption of the material (in our case germanium). Knowing the absorption of the material we use a finite-difference method (FDM) mode solver to know how the effective losses of the mode are changed due to the mentioned Franz-Keldysh effect. With this tool we can obtain the main figure of merit of the modulator, it means, we can know the extinction ratio, the propagation losses, the bandwidth and the power consumption. Using this tool we simulated many structures to act as a modulator and we selected the best performance. Knowing the good structure we optimized the device in order to increase the extinction ratio, decrease the propagation losses and reduce the power consumption. The initial idea of the device is also discussed in the fifth chapter. We advance that we will use a plasmonic waveguide that can guide the light in the interface between the metal and a semiconductor. It is called a metal-semiconductor (MS) plasmonic waveguide. Placing germanium in the semiconductor part of the MS waveguide we will be able to exploit the FKE to produce the modulation of the plasmon. We want that a significant part of the plasmonic mode is in germanium. The germanium will be deposited in the core of the waveguide. We also want that the waveguide is connected to two electrodes in order to induce a static electric field in the germanium in order to change the absorption of the material and modulate the plasmon supported by the MS plasmonic waveguide. One electrode can be placed in the metal of the MS waveguide and the other below the semiconductor of the MS structure using a doped region. Inducing an electric field in the germanium will allow changing the optical absorption of the material. Since the plasmonic mode is also present in the germanium this will change the effective losses of such a mode, hence, producing the modulation of the plasmon. We will show that using a MS waveguide in the core of the modulator leads to high propagation losses of the plasmon. Instead of this we can use a traditional metal-insulatorsemiconductor (MIS) waveguide. This waveguide, due to the use of an insulator layer, reduces the propagation losses of the plasmon. Finally, in chapter six we design the coupling to the optimized structure designed in chapter five from a standard Si rib waveguide. The objective is to excite the proper mode of the modulator from the mentioned Si rib waveguide. For this we use 3D Finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) simulations. We used the commercial tool called Lumerical®. In this chapter we analyzed many different coupling structures (butt-coupling, tapers, etc.), we optimized them to increase the coupling efficiency into the modulator and finally we select the best one to place it in the device designed in chapter five. In the last chapter we present the conclusions, the outline and the future perspective of this work. In this chapter we introduce the main characteristics of Si optical modulators. We explain the main effect for modulation in silicon photonics. We also do a state-of-the-art of photonic FKE modulators. Plasmonic modulators are also explained. Finally, we present the calculation of the electrical power consumption of these devices. Nowadays, the main application of silicon photonics is to try to substitute electrical interconnects by optical ones. The main objective is to increase the bandwidth and reduce the energy consumption. Furthermore, the main components of an optical interconnects are the light source, the modulator, the waveguide and the photodetector. One of the most important elements is the modulator. It can determine the bandwidth and it is the device which consumes a big portion of the power dissipated in the link. In this thesis we aim to design a compact and low-energy consumption modulator. The modulator is a device which transforms an electrical signal that carries information into an optical one that also carries the same encoded information. In this case photons are used to transmit the information through a waveguide instead of electrons. For this, the modulator changes the phase, the intensity, the frequency or the polarization of a continues-wave (CW) light beam. The structure of an optical modulator is represented in Figure The insertion losses are the optical losses from the input until the output of the device. They consist in both coupling and propagation losses through the device. Equation 1 quantifies this magnitude, Where Imax is the maximum intensity of the encoded light beam at the output of the modulator and I0 is the input intensity of the encoded light beam. It is represented in Figure The extinction ratio is related to the difference between the maximum intensity Imax and the minimum intensity Imin of the encoded beam. It is represented in the following formula: Where Imax and Imin are the maximum and minimum intensities of the encoded light beam. It is represented in Figure The power consumption is normally the electrical power consumption that the modulator employs to encode the light beam. It is given by the effort done by charging and discharging the electrical capacitance of the device. The electrical power consumption in energy per bit is given by, Where ΔEbit is the energy per bit, C is the intrinsic capacitance of the device and VDD is the driving voltage of the modulator. A deduction of Equation 3 is given at the end of the chapter. The optical power consumption is not normally given since it depends on the intensity I0 of the input light beam. Nevertheless, the insertion loss is a good measure of the optical power consumption since it is proportional to it. The operational frequency of the modulators measures the bandwidth of the modulator. It is a measure of the transmission velocity of the information. The operational voltage is the voltage that the modulator requires in order to perform the modulation. The device footprint is given by the area that the modulator needs in the wafer. Finally, the working spectrum is the wavelength range within which the modulator can work. In the following section we will describe the different effects that can be used in Si to modulate a CW beam of light from an electrical signal. Depending on the physical effect that the modulator uses to encode the information it can be classified as electro-absorption or electro-refraction device. In the case of electro-absorption devices the effect used changes the optical absorption coefficient of the material and consequently modulates the intensity of the optical light beam. On the other hand, electro-refraction devices change the refractive index of the material. In this case the phase of the optical CW beam is modified. The use of structures like ring resonators (RR) or Mach-Zenhder interferometers (MZI) can transform the change in phase into the change in the optical intensity. In the following sections, we explain the different effects used in silicon photonics to perform the modulation. They are divided on electro-refraction effects and electro-absorption effects. In this section we explain the electro-refraction effect used in silicon photonics. Those effects change the refractive index of the material in order to change the phase of the optical propagating signal. The main effects are the thermo-optic effect, the Pockels and Kerr effects and the plasma dispersion effect. In the thermo-optic effect the application of heat to the material is used to change the refractive index of it. Neither an electric field nor the injections of carriers are used in this effect. The thermooptic coefficient of Si A refractive index change of the order of 10 -3 happens when a temperature variation of 10°C is applied to Si. There are some problems like controlling the changes of temperature uniformly Another issue is that the operational frequency of the device is not big since heating and cooling down the material is a slow process. The operational frequency of thermo-optic devices is around 100 kHz. Some modulators When a static electric field is applied in a medium it may change its refractive index of the material. This effect is called the Pockels In the previous equation nr represents the refractive index of the material, E is the electric field, r is the electro-optic Pockels coefficient and s is the electro-optic Kerr coefficient. The Pockels and the Kerr effects change the polarizability of the material; consequently, the change in the refractive index depends on the polarization of the electric field with respect to the optical axes of the material. Pockels effect is present in crystals without inversion symmetry. Some materials which exhibit good Pockels effect are: indium phosphide (InP), gallium arsenide (GaAs) or lithium niobate (LiNbO3). On the other hand, the Kerr effect is present in any material. As explained before, the Pockels effect is not present in Si because it is a centro-symmetric material. Recent research showed that straining the Si, the centro-symmetry is broken and consequently a Pockels effect can be measured Regarding the Kerr effect, it can be measured in Si but it is a weak effect When the concentration of carriers is changed into a semiconductor it modifies both the refractive index and the optical losses of the material due to the Kramers-Kronig relations. This is called plasma dispersion effect or free carrier dispersion effect. When the number of carriers is increased in a semiconductor like Si, the refractive index decreases while the optical losses of the material are increased. Inversely, if the concentration of carriers decreases we have the opposite effect. The theoretical change in the refractive index and in the optical losses against the concentration of electrons and holes is giving by the following theoretical equations: Equation 6 Equation 7 Where Δn is the change in the refractive index of the medium, Δα is the change in the optical absorption of the medium, e is the electric charge of the electron, λ0 is the wavelength of the incoming light, c is the velocity of the light in vacuum, ε0 is the electrical permittivity of vacuum, n is the refractive index of the medium, Ne and Nh are the concentrations of electrons and holes in the medium, μe and μh are the mobility of electrons and holes and m * ce and m * ch are the reduced effective mass of electrons and holes. There is also an experimental study of the change of the refractive index and the optical absorption of the material in From Equation The Franz-Keldysh effect (FKE) As a conclusion, the FKE in Ge is stronger than in Si for the reasons explained in the previous paragraph. Several photonic modulators were proposed using the FKE in Ge. In this thesis we will use the FKE to produce the modulation of a plasmon. This effect will be detailed in chapter four. The FKE also depends on the strain that the Ge has. The first observation of FKE in Ge over Si is reported in The strain electro-optical effects of the Ge-on-Si PIN junctions are proposed to fabricate a modulator in In this thesis we are going to design a FKE plasmonic modulator. As stated in The Quantum Confined Stark effect (QCSE) An example, QW can be formed by a stack of SiGe/Ge/SiGe or InGaN/GaN/InGaN. The total thickness of one period is around 20 nm. The band-energy structure of a QW is represented in Figure When the QW is at equilibrium (in the absence of a static electric field) the wave-function is symmetrical for both electrons and holes. Furthermore, due to the quantum confinement electrons and holes are linked by Coulomb forces and form excitons. The absorption of the exitons occurs at photon energy smaller than the bandgap energy of the QW material (as example Ge or GaN). This energy is given by: ħω = E g + E el -E hl -E ex Equation 10 Eg is the bandgap energy of the material in the middle of the QW. Eel and Ehl are the electron and holes sub-band energy and Eex is the binding energy of the exciton. When an electric field is applied perpendicular to the QW it tilts the energy bands as shown in Figure The range of absorption of the QCSE is around 4000-6000 cm -1 As a conclusion of both electro-refraction and electro-absorption effects we explained that Si is a centro-symmetric material and consequently does not support second order nonlinear effects like the Pockels effect The most used effect in Si modulators is the plasma dispersion effect In the following section we present the state-of-the-art of silicon photonics electro-absorption modulators. We concentrate on the FKE photonic modulators since the active principle of the device that we design uses this effect as the active principle. The purpose of this thesis is to design an electro-absorption plasmonic modulator based on the FKE. In this section we present the current state-of-the-art of photonic modulators based on the FKE and plasmonic modulators with the objective of comparing our device with the previous state-of-theart. Since we will design a plasmonic modualtor that uses the FKE it will be interesting to compare our device with the state-of-the-art of photonic modulators that uses also the FKE. With this, we will be able to compare plasmonic modulator with a photonic one. After the work described in The structure of the monolithically integrated modulator and photodetector is represented in Figure An ultra-compact GeSi electro-absorption modulator is presented in The footprint of the device is ultra-compact. It is 600 nm wide and 50 μm long, giving an area of 30 μm 2 . As in the previous case, the modulator can operate in the wavelength range from 1539 to 1553 nm. The insertion loss for a 50 μm long device is 7.5 dB and the extinction ratio is around 1.3 times the insertion losses. The power consumption of the device is around 50 fJ/bit. It is CMOS compatible and has a 3 dB bandwidth of 1.2 GHz. An evanescent coupled electro-absorption modulator is presented in A Ge electro-absorption modulator integrated with a SOI waveguide is presented in The first demonstration of a FKE electro-absorption modulator working at 1550 nm is presented in For the metrics of the device, the extinction ratio is around 6.0 dB for a reverse bias voltage of 2.8 Vpp with insertion losses around 5.0 dB. The frequency of operation is 40 GHz at 2.8 Vpp. The active region has a size of 1.0x55 μm 2 . The modulator is designed in a 3 μm waveguide platform. Finally, in A set of two modulators: one is an electro-absorption modulator while the other is a resonant modulator are proposed. The former is made of a PIN structure with GeSn in the core. Reverse biasing the PIN structure induces an electric field in the GeSn material having a FKE that produces the modulation. The structure is butt coupled with a material whose bandgap is larger than the GeSn in order to guarantee transparency. In Table Metrics/Device MIT (2006) For presenting the state-of-the-art we describe the different modulators in chronological order. We also divide them in electro-refraction or electro-absorption depending on the method used for performing the modulation. We start with electro-refraction and later we continue with electroabsorption. The first plasmonic modulator that uses Si in its core region is presented in A Mach-Zehnder plasmonic interferometer (MZI) is presented in A proper simulation design of the modulators yields the following metrics: a modulation speed of 500 GHz, for an insertion loss of 8 dB, and an extinction ratio of 7.6 dB. The working voltage is around 5.6 V. It is said that the operational voltage can be reduced using a high-κ dielectric instead of the SiO2. In At the input and the output of the modulator two tapers are designed to allow the conversion from a photonic mode to a plasmonic one and converselly. The gold parts at the sides of the modulator act also as a contact to induce a static electric field in the gap of the slot waveguides. Furthermore, there is an overlap of the electromagnetic field of the plasmon and the static electric field induced in the slot. This enhanced the presence of the electromagnetic field of the plasmon and the static electric field induced by the Au side contacts into the slot. Using the Pockels effect has the advantage that the process is ultrafast and does not have the time speed limitation like the plasma dispersion effect in Si. We remind that the carrier dispersion effect is limited by the finite mobility of the carriers through the material. Furthermore, the low capacitance of the structure (mainly in the gap) and the high conductivity of the metal used do not limit the RC speed. It is said that the operational frequency of the device can be scaled until 65 GHz. The bias voltage used for the device is in the order of V=0.1 V. Regarding the electrical power consumption of the device it consumes 60 fJ/bit. In this work The device has an operational frequency around 40 GHz for a length of 29 μm. The wavelength range of the modulator is around 120 nm and it is centered on 1.55 μm. the performance of the device was tested at different temperatures of operation until 85 °C showing a low bit error rate (BER). It is worth noting that in this modulator the information signal is carried out in the phase of the plasmonic mode supported by the structure. For a 29 μm length the device has an insertion loss of 12 dB. In The stub is filled with a material or structure that is able to change its optical properties (E.g.: the optical losses) upon an application of a control signal (E.g.: the static electric field, etc.). In this way the quality factor Q of the stub is controlled in such a way that it produces a change in the transmission of the rib waveguide. When the stub is in resonance, the losses through the waveguide are increased. In this case, there is no transmission through the Si rib waveguide. While when it is out of resonance they are reduced and the transmission increases. Hence, producing the modulation. The material used to fill the stub must have an externally controllable absorption in order to change the quality factor Q. The use of Ge/SiGe multiple quantum wells (MQW) in order to exploit the QCSE or GeSi Quantum Dots (QDs) were proposed. The material used for the metal is Cu. The dimensions of the stub are critical in order to optimize the metrics of the modulator (mainly: the extinction ratio and the insertion losses). The design of the stub will also determine the amount of change of the absorption of the material filling the stub. To summarize, the design of the modulator is determined by the design of the stub. Such a design has a trade-off between the extinction ratio and the insertion losses. From a theoretical point of view this system is analogous to a microwave waveguide with a short circuit stub attached to it. This is widely employed to adapt impedance in microwave engineering. The authors report that which such a design it is possible to have an extinction ratio of 6.6 dB with low insertion losses around 8.5 dB. They specify that it is using SiGe/Ge/SiGe quantum wells. The length of such a design is around 0.5 μm. The power operation and the modulation speed are not specified in In In The device can work in the THz regime. Another advantage of the device is that it can work at both 1.3 and 1.5 μm. There is a trade-off between the device length, the extinction ratio and the insertion losses. In any case the device length is around a few μm. A good configuration of the device has a length of 2 μm, an extinction ratio of 1 dB and insertion losses of 18 dB. The insertion loss also includes the coupling losses from the photonic mode to the plasmonic one. Changing the SiO2 layer by Si3N4, the plamonic mode may be further enhanced within ITO, consequently the device length could be reduced. In A 4 μm long device provides an extinction ratio of 3 dB with a bias voltage of 6.5 V. The frequency operation of the device is in the sub-GHz regime and it is limited by the carrier velocity of the electrons which travel from the lateral pad to the Si-SiO2 interface in the core plasmonic waveguide. It is claimed in Another device which uses indium-tin-oxide (ITO) is presented in The electromagnetic field of the mode is concentrated in the insulator slot in the MIS. The slot is formed by insulator SiO2 and the conductive oxide ITO. This is a material whose optical absorption can be modified by means of changing the carrier concentration into the material. This is changed using a static electric field. The active principle of the modulator is the ITO layer in the MIS waveguide. Changing the carrier density of the material it changes its optical absorption. The efficiency of the extinction ratio of the modulator is 1 dB/μm in the wavelength range between 1.2-2.2 μm. For a device length of 5 μm the extinction ratio is 5 dB and the propagation losses are 2.8 dB. It is a compact modulator based on Si with a high 1 dB/μm extinction ratio. It is the best reported extinction ratio in the literature. This device can be integrated in a SOI technology bringing a good potential to efficient broadband communication within circuits. This record is due to the fact that placing the ITO layer between Au and Si enhances the static electric field in the slot where the effect takes place. Furthermore, the ITO slot extracts the static electric field from the Au which produces a reduction in the propagation losses of the device with respect to the structure of Figure The total coupling losses due to the coupling from the Si strip to the MIS waveguide is around 1 dB. The reported total insertion losses are around 4.8 dB and 19.1 dB for the device of 5 μm and 20 μm long devices. It is worth noting that in the structure of Figure Additionally, the broadband response of the modulator was measured and it can be seen that the modulator can operate from 1.2 μm to 2.2 μm. It has a good performance over the 1 μm long wavelength range. Regarding the operational frequency of the device there are two limiting factors. The first one is due to the RC delay time (RC limited) and the speed at which the accumulation layer in the MIS waveguide is formed (the accumulation layer is formed in the ITO material). For a 5 μm long device the RC limitation is found to be around 300 GHz. The estimated resistance is around R=500 Ω. The speed of the formation of the accumulation layer in the layer of ITO the calculations showed that it is in the THz regime for the 10 nm layers. Consequently, the modulator is RC limited and the operational frequency is around 300 GHz. The electrical power consumption depends on the capacitance C of the MIS waveguide. The measured C is C=7 fF for 5 μm length device. The operational voltage is around V=4 V and the energy consumption is around 56 fJ/bit. This value is close to the roadmaps presented in To summarize with the modulator of Figure An interesting plasmonic switch is presented in The extinction ratio are shown around 23-32 dB for a length of 5 μm. The driving bias voltage is around V=60 mV and the electrical power consumption is around 9 mW. As other plasmonic modulators and switches, this device suffers from many trade-offs between extinction ratio, insertion losses and the size (mainly the longitudinal dimension) of the device. To improve this performance it is interesting to use new materials exhibiting a large change in refractive index or absorption when a bias voltage is applied. As exposed before, good materials are ITO and VO2. In this modulator VO2 is a metal oxide that exhibits a transition from an insulating state to a conductive metallic state at the temperature of T=341 K. Using a static electric field or electromagnetic radiation allows this phase transition in the material. The transition time from metal to dielectric and from dielectric to metal depends on the direction of the phase change. The metal to dielectric transition it is in the time range of nanoseconds to milliseconds. Whereas the transition from dielectric to metal is faster and it happens at the femtoseconds scale. The structure of the modulator of When a current is applied into the metal part of the structure (Figure The losses of VO2 are too high to use this material as the core of the waveguide. This is why a small slot is used in the design (Figure In Depending on the dimensions of the geometry of the switch it can work in a strongly-hybridized regime or in a weakly-hybridized one. These regimes are different in the overlap of the VO2 with the light. Here, we only summarize the performance of these two regimes. Working in a strongly-hybridized design the efficiency of the 0.9 dB/μm and the efficiency of the 6.1 dB/μm. The optimal strongly-hybridized device has a length of 5 μm. This allows having an extinction ratio of 32.1 dB and insertion losses of 13.4 dB. In the insertion losses the losses due to the coupling from a Si waveguide and the propagation losses of the plasmon are included. On the other hand, in the weakly-hybridized mode the optimal device has an efficiency of the 0.3 dB/μm and an efficiency in the extinction ratio 3.6 dB/μm. For a length of the device around 5 μm the insertion losses are around 17 dB while the extinction ratio 22.7 dB. In the switch of Figure In Although several plasmonic modulator were proposed using metals like Au or Ag that are not CMOS compatible, the new plasmonic materials On the other hand, TCO materials can be used to perform a modulation of a plasmonic mode since this kind of materials can change the optical absorption upon an application of a static electric field. The proposed plasmonic modulator in A FoM that accounts for the extinction ratio, the mode confinement and the insertion losses were proposed. The materials used were indium tin oxide (ITO), aluminium-doped zinc oxide (AZO) and gallium-doped zinc oxides (GZO) were used to perform the modulation while TiN was used to support the plasmonic mode. Using these materials the operational wavelength of the modulator is at 1.55 μm. Among all the configurations used the best one is the one presented in Figure In the following Table Since the first GHz silicon photonic modulator In this section we summarized the main characteristics of key silicon photonics modulators. We only show a table with the main characteristics of the modulator. The structure that the modulator uses like Mach-Zehnder interferometer (MZI), ring resonator (RR) or disk resonator (DR); the operational frequency; the device footprint; the power consumption; the extinction ratio; the insertion losses; the working spectrum and the operational voltage. We are interested in particular in comparing the electrical power consumption of those devices with our FKE plasmonic modulator described in chapter five. Intel (2005) It is believed that photonics can reduce the energy consumption in the transmission of information As explained in this chapter there are many ways of performing Si integrated modulators As stated before the electro-absorption modulators base on the FKE and the QCSE do not need to use resonator structures (MZI, RR or DR) to modulate the intensity light and this allows both low electrical power consumption and a high operational speed due to the fact that they are more compact. On the other hand, the modulators that exploit the carrier dispersion effect need a MZI or resonant structures like a RR or DR and this increases the power consumption which is around pJ/bit. This is due to an increase in size of the structures. It means, electro-absorption modulators are more compact than electro-refraction ones. It is worth noting that RR or DR are more compact and consumes less energy than MZI's modulators. Most of the equivalent circuits of several modulators are represented by a capacitance C and a resistance R which is in serie with the mentioned capacitance C. To model the photocurrent and leakage current of the device a parallel current source is placed. The modulator that we are going to present in this work has such an equivalent circuit. It is represented in Figure There are several sources of dissipating energy in the modulators. The main sources of power consumption are given by: (1) The dynamic dissipation when the capacitance of the modulator is charged and discharged. The electrical equivalent circuits of most modulator (E.g. based on a PIN structure) are represented by a capacitance C and a resistance R. The electrical power consumption is related with the energy dissipated in the resistance R when the capacitance is charged and discharged. This is the electrical power consumption. (2) Insertion loss of the optical energy while performing the modulation. It refers to the optical energy consumed when the light passes through the modulator. And mainly present in electro-absorption modulators, (3) The energy consumed by the photocurrent. The optical energy absorbed in the modulator by the material generates free electrons in the conduction band and free holes in the valence band. Since in the materials there is a static electric field these carriers are swept out of the modulator. This leads to additionally electrical power consumption into the modulator. In this section we analyze the electrical power consumption due to the charge and discharge on the capacitance C of the modulator. It means the dynamic electrical power consumption. In the modulator that we designed in this work we have a stack of p-Si/Ge/Si3N4/Cu. The FKE and the absorption of light happen in the Ge where the optical field is present. The Ge is intrinsic. A bias voltage is applied between the p-Si (p doped Si) layer and the Cu. This induces a static electric field into the Ge and the Si3N4. This structure is similar to a capacitor in which the plates are the p-Si layer in the bottom and the Cu contact on the top. The dielectric is formed by Ge and a thin layer of Si3N4. When the light passes through the modulator some of it is absorbed due to material absorption in Ge. Since the optical field is present in Ge. This may generate free carriers. Nevertheless, despite the fact that there is a strong static electric field into the Ge, photocurrent cannot be generated due the presence of the Si3N4 insulator in the path to the electrical source. The same passes with the leakage current of the capacitor, it is reduced due to the presence of the Si3N4 layer. Consequently, we can neglect the energy consumed by the photocurrent and the leakage current in this section. The dynamic dissipation of the modulators is due to the current that flows in charging and discharging its capacitance. We remind that in our case the capacitance will be formed by the following stack of p-Si/Ge/Si3N4/Cu. The dissipation is produced by the resistor that is in serie with the capacitance. This resistor R is formed by all the series resistances present in the device. We also include the resistance of the device contacts and the driver circuit among others that may appear. In order to model the dynamical power consumption of the modulators we need to show a circuit which is the responsible of charging and discharging the capacitance C of the modulator together with the resistance R. For this circuit we will consider a CMOS inverter circuit. This inverter is responsible of charging and discharging the capacitance C of the modulator between 0 V and VDD. It is represented in Figure In Figure Another simplification done in this derivation is given by neglecting of the voltage drop Vdrop=IRR in the resistor R due to the current IR. For this we assume that the current IR is small. This is mainly due to the presence of the insulator layer of Si3N4 in the stack of the modulator. When the driver circuit starts to modulate the circuit the voltage across the capacitance C changes from VB to VB+VDD. This is represented by the label 'high' and 'low' in the Figure It is well known that the energy in a capacitance C at a voltage V is given by, Equation 11 Then, the energy in the capacitance C of the modulator is given by Where ΔECES is the energy stored in the capacitor C. Operating over this equation, we obtain, Now we would like to explain the physical reason of the first and second term of Equation Previously, the charge Q = CV DD was charged into the upper plate of the capacitor C by the source at VDD. The same charge needs to appear at the bottom plate of the capacitor C. This plate is charged at a voltage of VB. The energy employed by the source to charge this is given by ∆E B = QV B = CV DD V B was ΔEB is the energy employed by the source VB to charge the bottom plate of the capacitor C. When a charge ΔQ passes through a resistor R at a voltage V the energy dissipated by the resistor is, On the other hand, the change in voltage of a charge flowing throw a capacitor is given by, . We will use this formula to calculate the energy dissipated into the resistor R. In the circuit of Figure It is worth noting to mention that the energy consumed in the resistor in Equation 15 is independent of the resistor R. Furthermore, the resistor can even be nonlinear. Using Equation When the modulator is used to transmit information the number of charge and discharge cycles are given by the electrical signal that transmits the information. It is expected to have the same number of ones and zeros in the signal. Consequently, there is a complete charge, discharge of the modulator every 4 bits. Consequently, the electrical consumed energy per bit is given by, Consequently, knowing the capacitance C of the modulator and the voltage VDD employed to perform the simulation we can calculate the electrical energy consumption per bit. The objective of this thesis is to develop a low power consumption modulator. To achieve this reducing the electrical power consumption is a major objective. To achieve this objective first we selected an electro-absorption modulator because it consumes less than electro-refraction modulators. The main reason of this is that it is more compact. Having an electro-absorption modulator we selected the FKE in Ge to be the active principle of the modulator. The FKE changes the optical absorption of the material close to the band-edge of it when a static electric field is applied in the bulk material. Consequently, with the design of the modulator we would like a structure that allows us to obtain a high static electric field with a small voltage. Reducing the operational voltage will reduce the electrical power consumption according to Equation To reduce the operational voltage and to have a high static electric field in the Ge we want to use a plasmonic waveguide in the core of the modulator. This will allow reducing the cross section of the device beyond the diffraction limit of light. We will have a more compact structure which is smaller than if we use a photonic waveguide. The electrical power consumption will be lower than in photonic devices due to the compactness of the plasmonic structure. To summarize, we want to do an electro-absorption modulator that uses the FKE. Furthermore we want to design it in a plasmonic structure to reduce the electrical power consumption of the device. For this, we will introduce the field of plasmonic in the next chapter. In this section we introduce the field of plasmonics. We start describing the background of the topic with the traditional advantages and disadvantages of the field. We introduce the main plasmonic waveguides and finally we center into the metal-semiconductor waveguide and the metal-insulatorsemiconductor one. The later is explained in a more detailed way. We also explain the selection of the metal and the insulator of this waveguide. There are a lot of interests and ongoing researches in the field of plasmonics. Since the appearance of the bottleneck interconnects in the domain of electronic integrated circuits there are a lot of efforts in substituting electrical interconnects by optical ones. The building blocks of silicon photonics are bigger than classical electronic components. The main reason is that silicon photonics devices are limited in size by the diffraction limit of light. This means that the light cannot be confined in a size smaller than λ0/(2neff), where λ0 is the wavelength of the optical beam in free space and neff is the effective refractive index of the mode. The relation between photonics and electronics is represented in Figure Plasmonics tries to break the diffraction limit and offer subwavelength confinement. One of the first waveguides to provide a good confinement is based on the SOI technology. Due to the high difference in the refractive index between the cladding and the core they can confine the light in a small cross-section There are also several designs of dielectric slot waveguides The optical electromagnetic field is well confined at the surface of the metal and decays exponentially in the dielectric and in the metal. The penetration depth in the metal is very small and it almost determines the level of losses of plasmonic modes. In the top of Figure The use of SPPs allows reducing the critical dimensions of plasmonic devices while conserving the high operational frequency of photonic ones There are several plasmonic waveguides that were proposed There is another kind of photonic waveguides that use structures taken from microwave engineering. Some of them are like a coaxial waveguide We will select the MIS waveguide in our device due to the fact that it is CMOS compatible and that it provides relatibly low propagation losses which will lead to low insertion losses of the modulator. Trying to merge silicon photonics with plasmonics will allow reducing the size mismatch of photonic devices and electronic ones. This will facilitate the integration of both photonic and electronic devices in the same integrated circuit The extreme localization of SPP allows reducing the size of photonic devices breaking the diffraction limit of light and presenting a new concept in opto-electronic integration. The use of metal for propagating SPP can allow its use for propagating light as well as an electrical contact. The use of a metal to propagate light does not increase the RC delay time like in electrical interconnects. Furthermore, the current technology provides new techniques to fabricate small metallic features. This will further allow integrating both plasmonic and electronic devices in the same integrated circuit. The relation between the optical propagation losses in a photonic and in a plasmonic waveguide is represented in Figure Another source of losses in plasmonic waveguides is due to the scattering produced by the roughness of the metal layer at the interface with the semiconductor or insulator. If the interface of the metal-dielectric presents a high level of roughness then this also increases the propagation losses of the plasmonic mode. One of the leading lines of plasmonic is to try to reduce the losses of the modes. Several techniques were proposed like using a material with gain in the dielectric part of the waveguide (Figure In the case of using a gain material to compensate the losses the main idea is that this material compensate the propagation losses of the mode due to the metal present in plasmonic waveguides and devices. Nevertheless, since the optical losses of the plasmons are very high it is difficult to find a material with such a big gain. Furthermore, if we want to fabricate the device with CMOS processes then this restriction reduces the possible materials that can be used for compensating the propagation losses. In the case of using a small slot of SiO2 or Si3N4 between the metal and the semiconductor in a plasmonics waveguide we form a so called metal-insulator-semiconductor (MIS) waveguide. The use of the insulator slot reduces the propagation losses since it pushes out the electromagnetic field from the metal. This kind of plasmonic waveguide will be presented at the end of this chapter. To summarize, the main propagation losses in a plasmonic waveguide is due to the penetration of the electromagnetic field of the mode into the metal. Another source of optical loss is the scattering of the interface between the metal and the insulator or semiconductor used. Additionally, we have the absorption of the semiconductor material (E.g.: Ge) in some cases although this absorption can be neglected in the majority of the cases. Furthermore, the grain of the metal plays an important role in the optical losses of the modes. Among all these losses the main ones are the ones due to the damping factor of the metal used (penetration of the optical mode into the metal). Consequently, to design plasmonics devices a careful choice of the metal must be taken. We remind that an SPP is electromagnetic wave which is coupled to longitudinal oscillations of electrons in a metal. The simplest waveguide to propagate a SPP is the metal-semiconductor (MS) interface. An example of a MS structure is represented in Figure To obtain the dispersion relationship of this plasmonic mode, one needs to solve the Maxwell's equations and apply the proper boundary conditions in the MS waveguide. It is interesting to calculate the propagation losses of the supported plasmonic mode αMS. Another interesting parameter is the penetration depth of the electromagnetic field of the plasmonic mode into the metal l1 and into the semiconductor l2. It is also interesting to know some reference for the propagation losses to try to reduce the value. It is explained in the next section that adding a small (3-15 nm) insulator layer between the metal and the semiconductor of the MS waveguide will reduce the propagation losses of the plasmon. This waveguide is known as a MIS plasmonic waveguide. We will present it in the next section. The losses αMS of an SPP in an MS waveguide (derivation in Appendix B) is given by, Equation 18 Where n1 is the refractive index of the semiconductor, ε2= ε2'+ ε2'' is the permittivity of the metal and λ is the wavelength of the light in free space. Note that αMS depends on the third-power of the dielectric's refractive index n1. The penetration depth into the dielectric (derivation in Appendix B) is given by, To obtain l1 the distance at which the intensity of the optical electric field decays by a value of 1/e from the interface of the MS waveguide is calculated. The distance is measured perpendicular to the interface between the semiconductor and the metal. In a similar way the penetration depth of the SPP in the metal (derivation in Appendix B) is calculated. It is given by, From Equation We have presented the main characteristic of the MS waveguide. In the following section we introduce a small slot between the metal and the semiconductor is order to reduce the propagation losses and have a stronger confinement of the light into the waveguide. Comparing with Equation The MIS waveguide is a plasmonic waveguide formed by a stack of Metal-Insulator-Semiconductor (MIS). The insulator has a subwavelength thickness. Typically it is between 3 to 15 nm. The structure is represented in Figure In Figure From Figure In the interval 0<t<tmin we can see that we obtain a low loss plasmonic mode confined in the gap (bottom figure in Figure If t tends to infinite an SPP between the metal and the insulator is obtained. When t is decreased from tmin to lower values we obtain a so-called MIS mode which effective refractive index nMIS. When t reaches a value tmin then this mode disappears (top figure in Figure We remind that in the regime tmin<t<tmax there is not solution for any mode in the MIS waveguide. The effective refractive index of the mode in the MIS waveguide has a gap in the region tmin<t<tmax. Note that the MIS mode has fewer losses than the LG-MIS. In this case we are interested in using t<tmin to reduce the propagation losses of the modulator which use a MIS waveguide to propagate the light. The MIS waveguide supports only a plasmonic TM mode. Due to this mode condition and the boundary condition of the normal component of the electric displacement vector between the insulator and the semiconductor, it is expected to obtain a high optical electric field inside the slot. For, The Equation 21 can be simplified to, The real part of the effective refractive index nMIS is given by, Using the approximation of Equation Equation 24 Under the same approximation of Equation 22 the losses αMIS of the MIS plasmonic waveguide are giving by, Using the previous models we can approximate now the effective propagation losses of the MS waveguide αMS (Equation In this section we only wanted to do a rought comparison between the effective propagation losses in the MS and in the MIS. The selection of the materials will be explained in the following section. Now, we want to conclude that the MIS waveguide has less propagation losses than the MS. Furthermore, the MIS is CMOS compatible. In this thesis we want to design a CMOS compatible plasmonic modulator. For this, it is worth noting to mention that it is important to carefully select the materials. We design a plasmonic modulator that is composed by a MIS waveguide (Figure In this section we discuss the material used to fabricate the CMOS compatible plasmonic modulator in terms of materials for both the metal and the insulator. We also want to obtain low optical loss for the plasmonic mode and good electrical reliability. The material for the semiconductor is already fixed since we want to use the FKE as the active principle of the modulator. Consequently, Ge is used. As explained in the previous section the losses of a plasmonic mode are mainly determined by the penetration of the optical electromagnetic field into the metal. Another critical issue that determines the losses of the plasmonic mode is the crystalline quality of the metal deposited over the insulator in the MIS waveguide. One of the main disadvantages of plasmonic devices is that they use metals at optical frequencies. At those frequencies all metals (E.g.: Au, Ag, Al and Cu) possess a damping factor. This damping effect induces strong losses into the plasmonic modes that are much higher than the photonic ones. Ttraditionally for several plasmonic devices As a consequence, we discard them. On the other hand, in a CMOS environment, industry uses metals such as aluminum (Al) and Cu. Nevertheless, those metals are not much studied to design plasmonic devices In the following Table Ag Where, αMS is the losses of the plasmonic mode in the MS waveguide in dB/μm, λ0 is the wavelength of the light beam in free space and ε is the permittivity of the metal. Equation It is also known that in metallic interconnects the use of Al is being replaced by the use of Cu progressively In the following section we show why the use of the material Si3N4 is selected as the material for the insulator layer once we know that we will use CuCEA-Leti Now we need to select the insulator layer between the metal and the semiconductor. Since we use the FKE as an active principle to perform the modulation we use Ge as the semiconductor. In Those materials can act both as a conductor and as a diffusion barrier. This is why they are widely used in the electronic industry. However the optical losses that they present are very high for an optical application like our plasmonic modulator. In Table From the results of Table As the discussion above we select Si3N4 as the insulator layer for the MIS waveguide of the plasmonic modulator that we present in this work. It will both reduce the losses of the guided mode with respect to the Cu-Ge MS structure and act as a barrier against the diffusion of Cu into Ge. In this thesis the core of the plasmonic modulator will be formed by a MIS waveguide in which the stack is formed by cupper (Cu) as the metal, silicon nitride (Si3N4) as the insulator in the slot and germanium (Ge) as the semiconductor. We explain why we selected a Si3N4 material for the insulator in the previous section. We want to use a MIS waveguide to perform the modulation because with this waveguide you can achieve low propagation losses (it is linked to the insertion losses of a modulator) and the structure is easy changeable to induce a static electric field into the core of it (the semiconductor) to exploit the FKE in Ge. Thinking in an electro-absorption modulator, if you place a material in the core which changes the optical losses with a static electric field (E.g. Franzs-Keldysh effect in Ge, etc.) you can perform a modulation by using this effect. We selected the MIS waveguide instead of the MS one because the propagation losses of the MIS are smaller than in MS. Another point in favor of the MIS waveguide is that it is CMOS compatible. Regarding other waveguides, the slot waveguide was not selected because although it is easy to induce a static electric field in the core it has significant higher propagation losses than the MIS. The other mentioned waveguides like coaxial, V-grooves, ridges, metallic wires, etc. were not selected because either they are difficult to integrate into a chip or it is difficult to induce a static electric field into the core. As a first attempt we selected Ge in the core of the MIS waveguide to use the Franz-Keldysh effect to design an electro-absorption modulator. We also used CuCEA-Leti as the metal to propagate the plasmon because it is the metal with less propagation losses For this we calculate the value of tmin using Equation With this value (tmin=8.35 nm) we can obtain the effective refractive index nMIS using Equation The values used in this section are for silicon nitride nSi3N4= 1.9827 The FKE is the change in the optical absorption coefficient of a material under a static electric field applied on it. The optical absorption changes the material losses near the band-edge of the material (at the bottom of it), around the direct bandgap. We have already presented the FKE in the introductory chapter of section 2.2.4. The reason for designing an electro-absorption modulator using the FKE is to try to reduce the electrical power consumption of the modulator below 50 fJ/bit In The change in the permittivity ∆ε of the material when a static electric field is present in the medium is defined as, ∆ε(E, F) = ε(E, F) -ε(E, 0) Equation It was shown in Where B is a value related with the matrix element effects (it is related to transition probability by absorption of a photon). The other parameters θ and η are defined as, Where μ|| is the reduced effective mass of the electron-hole pair in the direction of the static electric field F and, Equation 30 Where E0 is the direct energy gap of the material and Γ is the broadening factor. Finally the parameters G(η) and F(η) are given by, And, Where Ai(η) and Bi(η) are the first and second order Airy functions and Ai'(η) and Bi'(η) are their derivatives. We plot both functions G(η) and F(η) in the following Figure Where Γlh and Γhh are the broadening factors of the light-and heavy-holes transition and ħθ lh and ħθ hh are the electro-optical energies of light-and heavy-holes transitions, they are given by, Where e is the unity charge of the electrons, ħ is the Planck's constant, F is the static electric field and μ lh,|| and μ hh,|| are the reduced mass of electron-holes pairs of light and heavy holes. The prediction of the values of Eg Γ (lh) and Eg Γ (hh) due to the biaxial tensile strain ε|| are important for the model. The deformation potential theory can predict this value and it is given by, In this section we presented a simplified model of the FKE. This model cannot be used directly as it is difficult to find a proper value of the parameter B in the literature. However, we can use it to check the other model presented in the next section. In this section we introduce a more complex model of the FKE. For this, we will explain the FKE in further details. In Figure When a static electric field is applied to the material, both the valence and the conduction bands are tilted as is represented in Figure A PIN structure is a diode in which there is an intrinsic semiconductor region sandwiched between n-doped and p-doped semiconductors. The highly doped n and p regions are used to take ohmic contacts. It is like a PN diode but with an intrinsic semiconductor in the middle. The PIN structure is normally used to induce an almost constant static electric field in the intrinsic part of the structure under a reverse bias. The Coulomb potential of electron-hole interactions is neglected in the present derivation. Without this simplification, the Schrödinger equation used to develop the FKE model does not have any analytical solution. Furthermore, in the case of the FKE under a constant applied electric field, the electrons and holes near the band-edge are the ones that most contribute to the absorption due to band-to-band transitions. In this section we solve the Schrödinger equation to develop the model of the FKE effect. The Schrödinger equation is given by, Where ħ is the Planck constant, e is the electron charge, F is the applied static electric field in the material, Φ is the wave-function of the carriers and mr is the reduced effective mass of the electronhole pairs given by, Where, me is the mass of the electrons and mh is the mass of the holes. Continuing with Equation 37 the total energy E of the photons is given by, Where kx and ky are the wave vector in the x and y-directions. The terms containing kx 2 and ky 2 represent the kinetic energy of the carriers while Ez represents the potential of them. To solve the Equation 37 we need to perform a change of variable from z to Z. This change is given by, Consequently, the Equation 37 transforms to, This is a well-known differential equation whose solutions are the Airy functions Ai(Z) and Bi(Z). The definitions of Ai and Bi are given by Equation In Equation The representation of both Ai(Z) and Bi(Z) can be seen in Figure Equation 45 The total solution of Equation 37 is given by, ψ k x ,k y ,E z (r) = e i(k x x+k y y) Equation 46 Where A represents an area. This is the well-known solution of the Schrödinger equation. Now, using the wave-function derived in Equation Where Ep is a constant which is related to the transition matrix element of the material. In Ge the value is Ep=26.3 eV Where c is the velocity of light in vacuum and kx and ky are the wave-vectors of the carriers. The kinetic energy Et of the carriers in the transverse plane x-y is defined as, Using the following equation which is an identity between the operators (it is further explained in And substituting the wave-function of Equation 46 in the previous formula, Equation 51 Redefining the equation with the following formulas, , τ = -E z ħθ F , η = E g -ħω ħθ F Rewriting Equation 51 and using Equation In Equation Furthermore, the indirect band-gap of Ge is around 1900 nm and it is less sensitive to the strain than the direct one. Due to this small influence a small shift in the indirect bandgap due to the strain will not affect the absorption at the direct-bandgap. Consequently, the equations derived in this section (where the indirect-bandgap is neglected) are valid for the Ge material. Nevertheless, it is worth noting that we are interested in the weakly absorbing regime of the material (Ge or SiGe); E.g.: slightly over the direct band-gap where the optical absorption of the material is large absorption variation that we want to exploit for modulation due to the application of a static electric field (Figure We can conclude that we can use Equation 53 to quantify the change in the optical absorption of Ge due to the FKE around the direct band-gap of Ge. In this work we will place Ge over Si to make the structure of the modulator. It is biaxial tensile strained due to the process explained in The FKE around the direct band-gap has been studied in bulk Ge in The band structure of biaxial tensile strained Ge is presented in Figure The effect of the biaxial tensile strain in the FKE in Ge can be also modeled with Equation e 2 Where, Eg lh is the energy bandgap of the light-holes, Eg hh is the energy band-gap of the heavy-holes, me Γ is the effective mass of the electrons in the Γ valley (Figure The values of the parameters in Equation 54 and Equation 55 are taken from As we stated before the FKE due to the indirect band-gap is three times smaller than the one in the direct one According to the study done in As we stated before, the core of the modulator will be formed by Ge and we will exploit the FKE in the electro-absorption modulator. In this chapter we introduced the formulas to model the FKE in bulk Ge and in the induced biaxial tensile strained Ge. We are interested in the latter since our modulator will be fabricated on SOI substrates, meaning that Ge will be over Si. It will lead to a tensile strain of 0.2 %. The strainted Ge model will be used to calculate the change in optical absorption of the material when a static electric field is applied. In chapter five, we will use this Equation 54 to simulate the behavior of the modulator that we propose. According to the study done in In order to calculate the main benchmarks of the plasmonic modulator, we perform integrated opto-electronic simulations. The simulation flow is described in Figure Using the commercial software ISE-dessis we calculate the static electric field distribution in a general structure as a function of the applied voltage between two electrodes. The main task is to design a structure that concentrates as much as possible static electric field in the Ge core. Knowing the static electric field distribution in Ge we calculate the change in the optical absorption of the material using the model described by Equation Equation 56 Where αeff is the effective losses of the mode when the voltages of the structure vary from V=V1 to V=V2. V1 and V2 are the voltages at which the modulator is driven. In the next flow chart we see the steps done with the results of the simulator in order to perform and integrated opto-electronic simulations. Using ISE-dessis we also calculate the intrinsic capacitance C of the modulator structure. Additionally, the access resistance R for the device is also theoretically calculated. The access resistance is the resistance that appears between the side contact and the Ge core of the modulator. Knowing this and the operational voltage used we are able to estimate the power consumption of the modulator. Furthermore, knowing C and R we can calculate the intrinsic bandwidth of the modulator. As a result of the integrated opto-electronic simulation we know the extinction ratio, the propagation losses, the operational voltage, the electrical energy consumption and the bandwidth of the structure. Knowing these parameters we start the process again changing any parameter of the structure and we start the integrated electro-optical simulation again in the process of designing the device. For the implementation of the integrated electro-optic simulator is done it is interesting to contrast the result of the simulator with the results obtained in several publications. This will allow us to validate the implementation of our simulator. It is desirable to compare the simulator optically. Both the optical and electrical simulations must be done separately since to the best of our knowledge there is not an integrated electro-optical simulation of a modulator. To calculate the static electrical field we use a commercial simulator called ISE-dessis. Since it is a widely used electrical simulator we do not validate it. Now, we center our comparison in the FDM mode solver. Mainly, we compare if the effective refractive index neff and the effective losses αeff of the mode are similar with the published values in the literature. For this we analyze the same structure than in the published paper and we compare the results mainly in neff and αeff. Sometimes it is difficult to reach a conclusion since in the publications not all parameters of the simulations (refractive index of the material, parameters of the mesh, etc.) are explained. The FDM mode solver used in this thesis was previously done at University of Paris Sud 11. Nevertheless it was only used for photonics and it admitted only two materials which are Si and SiO2. Furthermore, it was only tested for photonics waveguides using only these two materials. We improved this FDM mode solver by adding any kind of material including metals. Due to this modification it is necessary to test the code for plasmonics and the new materials. We compare optically the FDM mode solver with the following papers: As an example, we present in details the comparison between paper The first parameter that we compare is the effective refractive index of the mode supported in a branch of the MZI of the structure of Figure Again, in Figure In this section we try to measure the FKE in SiGe material to evidence a shift of the absorption band edge from 1647 nm For this purpose, we use a batch of standard photodetector structures represented in Figure We want to compare the FKE in Ge and in SiGe. For measuring the FKE in Ge we use the following configuration: n-Si, intrinsic Ge is placed and in Material 1 and p-Si. In this configuration the electrical electrodes are placed in contact with n-Si and p-Si. First, in this configuration we will measure the FKE in Ge and later in SiGe. To form SiGe in the cavity we anneal at 900°C to make Si diffuse into Ge to create SiGe and shift the absorption band edge to shorter wavelength. We do not control the percentage of Si diffused in Ge nevertheless to have the FKE around 1550 nm the percentage should be the following concentration: typically an addition of 0.75 Setting the structure of the Ge and SiGe photodetectors we place them in the following structure of Figure To evidence the FKE, we are interested in measuring the responsivity of the photodetector as a function of wavelength and reverse bias voltage. The reponsivity is defined as R=IPhotocurent/PPD. To measure the FKE using a photodetector we need to plot the responsivity R against the reverse bias voltage VPD which drives the photodetector. We expect that the responsivity R will increase with the reverse voltage for the wavelengths around 1647 nm due to the FKE. It means, when we increase the reverse voltage VPD, the absorption of Ge close to the band-edge also increases due to the increase in the optical absorption due to a larger static electric field in Ge. The increase of absorption translates into an increase of photocurrent and consequently into an increase in the responsivity R of the photodetector. By using SiGe instead of Ge in Material 1 we want to shift the maximum of the FKE to lower wavelengths.To perform this measurement we use the following setup drawn in Figure To drive the photodetector we set in the multimeter the value of VPD and we measure the photocurrent IPD when we inject a continuous wave signal with a power of PPD onto the photodetetor. We measure the responsivity as R=IPD/PPD. To properly measure the photocurrent, we need to substract the dark current of the photodetector. For this we do not inject light onto the photodetector (PPD=0 W) and we measure IPD=IDark when VPD is scanned from 0 to -5 V. To avoid burning the photodetector we set in the multimeter that the maximum allowed current is 1 mA. We estimate the power PPD thanks to the reference arm, setting a set of equations which involve PIn, POut and PPD. We assume that the MMI is balanced (we will demonstrate it experimentally later). The set of equations are the following, PPD=PIn-ILGC-3 [dB] Equation To verify that the MMI is well balanced and that we can apply Equation First, we will measure the I-V curve of the photodetector with a Ge core and another one with SiGe core to assess a good photodiode behaviour.The I-V curve of the photodiode with the Ge core is given in Figure In the next Figure From the measurements of Figure Having determined experimentally PPD and IPD, we can derive the responsivity R. Responsivity results for the photodetector with the Ge core is presented in Figure From Figure To confirm that the band-edge of the SiGe core is shifted to values lower than 1.5 μm we change the laser. We use a fixed laser around 1.3 μm and we measured one point for this wavelength. It is represented in Figure We concluded that we were not able to measure the FKE in Ge and SiGe photodetectors but we can say that we diffused too much Si into Ge. The difficulty in this first set of experiments was that the Si content in Ge cannot be precisely controlled by annealing in order to diffuse the Si into the Ge to form SiGe. We launched a second set of wafers with a new approach. In this case we will grow SiGe epitaxially with a controlled fraction of Si into it. We will measure the same photodetectors but instead of annealing the Si will epitaxially grow SiGe with the following concentration (typically an addition of 0.75 Although in our work we were not able to measure the FKE (there is not clear evidence), other researches at CEA-Leti measured the FKE using photodetectors. The results of their work is presented in Figure Our main objective is to design a CMOS-compatible, low electrical power consumption optical modulator. We want that the electrical power consumption is below 50 fJ/bit as stated in the reference roadmap In this chapter we present a design of an electro-absorption plasmonic modulator based on FKE in Ge to perform the modulation. We propose several structures that use the FKE as an active principle to produce the modulation. Among these structures we selected the best one which is composed of a plasmonic MIS waveguide as introduced in the previous chapters. One of the main tasks is to design a structure to concentrate the static electric field in the Ge core. It is important that the amount of static electric field into the Ge core varies with the voltage applied to the terminals of the structure. So, by changing the voltage it will be possible to change the absorption coefficient of Ge and produce intensity modulation. Another important point of the device is to concentrate as much as propagating light into the Ge core, where the FKE takes place. It is due to the fact that the changes in electro-absorption of the material happen in the Ge core. The overlap between the static electric field and the electromagnetic field of the optical mode will determine the extinction ratio of the modulator. It means, by maximizing the overlap between the induced static electric field and the electromagnetic field of the light, we maximize the electro-absorption effect and thus increase the extinction ratio of the modulator. We also study the reduction of the insertion losses of the device by reducing the propagation losses of the plasmon and the coupling losses from a standard Si input waveguide. A high bandwidth is also desirable. Furthermore, we want that the modulator is CMOS compatible. As a summary we want to design a plasmonic modulator using a plasmonic waveguide to propagate a plasmonic mode and using the FKE to produce the modulation in Ge. For this we propose several structures that we analyze by simulations. We select the best one and we optimize it by using the integrated electro-optical simulator descrived in the previous chapter. This simulator consists of a commercial electrical simulator to calculate the static electric field in the structure and calculate the modification of the absorption coefficient of Ge and a mode solver to evaluate the influence of the FKE on the effective refractive index and the effective losses of the plasmonic mode. A key point is to use the metal of the plasmonic waveguide as an electrical contact to induce the static electric field in the Ge core. The simulator was introduced in chapter four. In this chapter, we explain the desired benchmarks for the device and we propose several CMOS compatible FKE-based plasmonic modulator structures. Using the integrated electro-optical simulator we optimize the structures to increase the extinction ratio, reduce the insertion losses, reduce the electrical power consumption, etc. The goal of the thesis is to develop a new kind of plasmonic modulator for performing an efficient electro-optical modulation in an integrated configuration. We will discuss the different benchmarks of the modulator like the CMOS compatibility, the electrical power consumption, the insertion losses and the extinction ratio. As a first constraint we want that the proposed modulator is potentially able to be co-integrated with an electronic integrated circuit. For this, the dimensions of the device need to be small enough to match the dimensions of electronic elements. As shown in Figure An important parameter of the design of a modulator related with the electrical energy consumption is the operational voltage of the device. As a general rule, the higher the operational voltage of a device the higher the power consumption uses to be. This also happens with the intrinsic capacitance of the device. It means, the higher the capacitance the bigger the electrical power consumption. One of the parameters which affect the capacitance is the length of the device. When the length of the device is increased then the capacitance is also increased and consequently the electrical energy consumption of the modulator. We can see that the photonic modulator presented in Table One of the other constraints to impose to our design is that it has a low electrical power consumption in the order of a few fJ/bit. It is established in some roadmaps Setting the modulator as a plasmonic device will reduce the dimension of the modulator structure with respect to other photonic devices (both cross section and length). Reducing the size of the crosssection will increase the magnitude of the static electric field with respect to the same voltage; it means that with a lower voltage you induce the same static electric field as in a larger device. It is worth noting that modulators that use the carrier dispersion effect in a MZI configuration have an energy consumption around pJ/bit, which is well over the requirement of 50 fJ/bit reported by Regarding the insertion losses of the device we want to obtain smaller insertion losses than the reported plasmonic devices presented in Table In plasmonic devices, there is a trade-off between the confinement of light and the propagation losses of the optical mode as the higher the confinement of an optical mode, the higher the optical losses. Increasing the confinement of the mode will increase the electro-absorption effect and therefore lead to a compact device, limiting the impact of higher propagation losses on the total insertion losses of the modulator. The targeted value for the insertion losses of the device in this work will be less than 10 dB. We remind that the insertion losses are formed by the propagation losses of the plasmonic mode and the coupling losses which come from the coupling to the modulator form a standard Si waveguide. With respect to the extinction ratio of the modulators reported in the state-of-the-art of chapter two we can see that electro-absorption photonic modulators that use the FKE shown in Table As a summary we want to design a plasmonic modulator that uses the FKE with electrical power consumption less than 50 fJ/bit, an operational voltage less than 3 V, an insertion losses in the order of 10 dB and an extinction ratio higher than 3 dB. We also want a high bandwidth (>40 GHz). Furthermore, we want that the device is CMOS compatible. For this, we will propose and simulate many structures, select the best one and optimize it using the integrated electro-optical simulator developed in this thesis. As a general fact we want to use the FKE in Ge as the active principle of the modulator. So, the designed modulator needs to have a Ge core. In this core we need to find a structure to induce a static electric field using two or more terminals when a voltage is applied. Furthermore, we need to create a waveguide around the Ge in a way that the main part of the optical electromagnetic field of the plasmonic mode is in the Ge core. In this manner the effective losses of the plasmonic mode will change according to the application of the voltage to the structure. Changing the material absorption αmat, we change αeff of the mode. αeff is the effective losses of the plasmonic mode supported by the waveguide. We remind that the static electric field in the Ge induced by the voltage leads to variation of the optical absorption coefficient αmat of the Ge. Hence, producing the modulation. To summarize, we need to maximize the overlap between the static electric field induced by applying a voltage between terminals and the optical electromagnetic field. Both fields need to be present in the Ge core where the FKE is present to produce the modulation of the plasmonic mode. Another requirement of the modulator is that the static electric field must vary from almost 0 kV/cm until a maximum value of 100 kV/cm to produce an effective change of αmat. The breakdown static electric field of Ge is around 100 kV/cm, so, this value cannot be exceeded. Furthermore, a low voltage to produce such a change has to be considered in order to reduce the electrical power consumption of the plasmonic modulator as was explained previously. At the beginning of this section we present a summary of the structures that we analyzed. We present a summary of the main idea and we say the cause of having a small performance. Later, we concentrate on the two best structures the MS and the MIS configurations and we explain the optimization of them in more detail. Now, to compare the structures we need to introduce a Figure of Merit (FoM). We remind that the parameter αeff is related with the propagation losses of the modulator and Δαeff is related to the extinction ratio of it. It means, to obtain the propagation losses you need to multiply the parameter αeff by L, where L is the length of the modulator. The same multiplication must be done with the parameter Δαeff to obtain the extinction ratio. For the definition of Δαeff, it is given by Equation For inducing a static electric field into the Ge core first we thought about using a PIN structure in reverse bias. This structure is widely use in photonic modulators to induce a static electric field in the intrinsic region of the PIN. As a first approach we thought about a vertical PIN structure formed by pdoped Ge in the bottom below an intrinsic Ge core. An n-doped Ge is placed over the intrinsic Ge. The structure is presented in the following Figure The plasmonic slot waveguide formed by the horizontal stack of Cu-Si3N4-Ge-Si3N4-Cu supports a plasmonic mode whose optical electromagnetic field is concentrated in the Ge core. The normalized optical intensity distribution of the plasmonic mode supported by the structure of Figure The thin Si3N4 slot has the disadvantage that it is difficult to fabricate. Furthermore, the side metals of Cu in the plasmonic slot waveguide must be settled to V=0 V to avoid them to have a floating potential. Now, it is interesting to see how the presence of the metals that form the plasmonic slot waveguide affects the distribution of the static electric field in the structure of Figure The next step we did is to settle hDown and hUp equal to 0 nm. In this case hCu is equal to h (Figure The best FoM found trying to optimize the structure of Figure Now, we want to study a horizontal PIN structure. It is similar to the structure of Figure For this, we add a Si3N4 and a Cu layers over the intrinsic Ge as shown in Figure In the following structure we want to use a plasmonic slot waveguide in the horizontal direction. The structure is presented in Figure Structure Figure Exceeded Exceeded According with Table It is widely known that the electric field in a gate of a MOSFET (Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor Field-Effect Transistor) transistor is very high. We remind that in the gate of transistors a capacitance is present where the core of it is the dielectric that acts as an insulator. Consequently, to satisfy our needs we think that using a capacitor structure, similar to the one used in the gate of transistors, will allow obtaining a high static electric field. The stack of the structure of the proposed modulator is represented in Figure Ag For the different metals, we calculate the figure of merit Δαeff/αeff which accounts for the optimization of the modulator. It means, it is to increase the extinction ratio (Δαeff) and reduce the propagation losses (αeff) as stated before. We also present the maximum static electric field that appears into the Ge core in order to be sure that we do not exceed the breakdown electric field of Ge which is around 10 6 V/cm. The results are presented in the following Where Emax is the maximum static electric field found in the Ge core. From Table In the next step we try to pattern the metal of the modulator to try to see its influence in FoM Δαeff/αeff by reducing the metal in the lateral dimension of the modulator using a step on it. This modification is shown in the following Figure To study the influence of the parameter htop in the FoM= Δαeff/αeff, it is interesting to calculate Δαeff/αeff. For this, we represent the results for htop=0 and ∞ nm in From the results of Table Next we studied the influence of the buffer layer of thickness hbuff on the performance of the device. Since both the static electric field and the optical electromagnetic field are not highly present in the buffer layer, we expect a small influence in the FoM Δαeff/αeff of the parameter hbuff. We remind that the parameters were set to the values w=250 nm and h=350 nm for the reasons explained before. We vary hbuff from 50 to 400 nm. The results for hbuff=50, 200 and 400 nm are reported in the following According to Table It is also interesting to know how the pattern of the p-Ge layer of thickness hbuff changes the FoM Δαeff/αeff when it is confined laterally to a dimension equal to the width of the Ge core. It means, we reduce the infinite lateral dimension of the p-Ge layer shown in Figure Until now, the best structure is the one which is shown in the following Figure Now we study the influence of the doping level of the p-Si buffer layer which is between the SiO2 substrate and the p-Ge layer. We obtain the FoM Δαeff/αeff for the case where the Si layer is not intentionally doped with a concentration of holes of 10 16 cm -3 and for the case where it is p-doped with a concentration of holes of 10 19 cm -3 . We study this change for two different configurations, one for w=150 nm and h=400 nm as used previously (Table Knowing the structure of the modulator shown in Figure To do the optimization with respect to w and h of the structure of Figure From Table The best case of the FoM Δαeff/αeff for w=150 nm is the value 0.13 for a driving voltage V=3 V and a height h=350 nm. If we continue increasing the voltage (E.g.: V=4, 5, 6 ... V) the FoM is going to be bigger than 0.13 for a height h>350 nm. Nevertheless, we want to stop at V=3 V to limit the electrical power consumption of the device because when the driving voltage V is increased, the electrical power consumption of the device which is given by Equation We can see a similar effect in Table The best case of the FoM Δαeff/αeff for w=250 nm is the value 0.11 for a driving voltage V=3 V and a height h=350 nm. In the same way as for w=150 nm we also see that if we increase the driving voltage above 3 V we are going to increase the FoM Δαeff/αeff. Nevertheless we stopped at V=3 V to limit the electrical power consumption of the device as explained before. Comparing the results, we see that the best optimized device for w=150 nm (Table Once the modulator structure shown in Figure Now, it is interesting to compare the performance of the structure of Figure With respect to the propagation losses we see that the proposed modulator of Figure With respect to the driving voltage we see that it is similar to the photonic modulators that use the FKE. For most devices, it is around 3 V Comparing the performance of the device of Figure With respect to the extinction ratio of the proposed modulator of Figure With respect to the driving voltage the proposed modulator uses a smaller driving voltage that the summarized plasmonic modulators shown in Table To summarize the comparison of the proposed device with the photonic modulators that use the FKE and the plasmonic modulators we can conclude that although the proposed device in Figure Depending on the metal used for the top contact in Figure If we introduce a small slot (5-15 nm thick) of an insulator barrier between the metal and the semiconductor (Ge) we make the structure CMOS compatible. Furthermore, the formed MIS waveguide has less propagation losses αeff than the MS waveguide. It will be studied in the next section. The aim of this work from now on is to reduce the propagation losses of the plasmonic mode. In order to reduce the losses it is interesting to use a MIS waveguide instead of a MS structure. In this case, we not only reduce the propagation losses of the mode but also we can add an insulator diffusion barrier to the Cu metal to make it CMOS-compatible. Regarding the insulator barrier we have many options. It can be: Ti, TiN, Ta, TaN, SiO2 and Si3N4 studied in chapter three. Table First we need to evaluate how the presence of the insulator barrier affects both the distribution of the static electric field in the Ge core and the distribution and losses of the plasmonic mode. In this section we explain the parameters of the FDM simulation of the best structure which is the MIS. The mode solver used was implemented here: We perform a preliminary study of the static electric field distribution in the vertical cross-section x-x' of the structure of Figure In chapter three we calculated that the slot of the MIS waveguide needs to be smaller than tmin=8.35 nm to work in the low loss regime of the MIS waveguide. So, a thickness of 5 nm for the slot of the MIS waveguide will ensure that the static electric field is significantly present in the Ge core and it also ensures that we work in the low loss regime of the MIS structure. The former will increase the extinction ratio of the device while the latter will reduce the propagation losses of it. The extinction ratio of the structure (Figure As a first architecture to study the influence of the slot thickness on the static electric field we use the following dimensions for the structure of Figure The performances of the structure for 10 V reverse bias voltage are summarized in the following Table On the other hand, for the same structure of Figure Losses of the Plasmonic Mode In chapter three we calculated that the slot of the MIS waveguide needs to be smaller than tmin=8.35 nm to work in the low-loss regime of the MIS waveguide. So, a thickness of 5 nm for the slot of the MIS waveguide will ensure that the static electric field is significantly present in the Ge core and it also ensures that we work in the low-loss regime of the MIS structure. The former will increase the extinction ratio of the device while the latter will reduce the propagation losses of the device. The extinction ratio of the structure (Figure Regarding the thickness of 5 nm of Si3N4 it is still enough to act as an effective diffusion barrier for the Cu. The minimum value to act as an effective diffusion barrier for the Si3N4 is around 3 nm As a first consideration we used the structures of Figure We can appreciate that according to Figure When a voltage is applied to the structure, an accumulation of carriers at the interface between the Ge and the Si3N4 occurs. The refractive index of Ge will therefore also be modified close to the interface with the Si3N4. However the expected change is similar to the change in Si. According to reference In the following tables Table In Table If we look at the FoM Δαeff/αeff in Table On the other hand, from Table The best FoM Δαeff/αeff in the Table If we compare the influence of the Ge width w in the FoM Δαeff/αeff we see that in (Table Once the modulator structure of Figure In Figure In Figure There is a trade-off between the extinction ratio and the propagation losses of the device with respect to h. If we decrease h the extinction ratio increases while the propagation loss increasses. This reduces the FoM ER/PL. For the optimized value w=150 nm, the computed extinction ratio and the propagation losses of the modulators are plotted in Figure If the device length L is increased, then the extinction ratio is also increased at the cost of larger propagation losses. The extinction ratio per unit length is 0.11 dB/μm and the propagation losses is 0.37 dB/μm. In order to evaluate the operating wavelength range of the modulator, integrated electro-optical simulations were performed at different wavelengths for the optimal modulator (w=150 nm, h=250 nm). The resulting |Δαeff|/αeff FoM is plotted in Figure To further support the approximation of a constant static electric field that was done to plot Figure As a conclusion our modulator works optimally at a wavelength of 1647 nm. As we discussed in chapter four, it is theoretically possible to shift the operational wavelength to the communication band around 1550 nm. This can be done using SiGe instead of Ge in the core of the modulator. To shift the maximum peak of the FKE to 1550 nm we need to include an amount of Si (0.8%) into the Ge (99.2%) as was demonstrated in As can be seen in Figure Now we compare the different characteristics of the modulators like the extinction ratio, the propagation losses, etc. in the different structures proposed like the MS or the MIS modulators. Finally, we compare our best modulator structure with the state-of-the-art. For the MS modulator structure, according to Table We can see that adding a slot, the efficiency of the extinction ratio is decreased from 0.135 dB/μm to 0.11 dB/μm. The reason of this change is that the static electric field is high in the slot and therefore less in the Ge core as can be seen in Figure Regarding the propagation losses of the structure, we can reduce the losses from 1.065 dB/μm to 0.363 dB/μm by adding a slot to the MS structure to form a MIS structure. The reason of the reduced losses by adding a slot is because the presence of the slot modifies the boundary conditions of the electromagnetic field and then it is taken out of the metals. To summarize, adding a slot to the structure the extinction ratio is reduced from 0.135 dB/μm to 0.11 dB/μm. But for L=30 μm we still have a practical extinction ratio of 3.3 dB. The reason is that the static electric field also gets confined into the slot. Furthermore, we reduced drastically the losses from 1.065 dB/μm to 0.363 dB/μm. The reason of the reduced losses by adding a slot is because the presence of the slot modifies the boundary conditions of the electromagnetic field and then it is taken out of the metals. Hence, producing the reduction of the losses. Structures with the State-of-the-art The performances of the plasmonic modulator are now compared with the state-of-the-art of photonic modulator that uses the FKE summarized in Table The FoM of 0.34 obtained as an optimization of the MIS plasmonic modulator is below the FoM of 2-3 reported in some photonic electro-absorption modulators In comparison with the state-of-the-art of the reported plasmonic modulators summarized in Table A comparison between the state-of-the-art of photonic FKE modulators summarized in Table Regarding the propagation losses the reported value in At last, we want to remind that under 3 V bias voltage the static electric field present in the Ge core of the modulator is around 8x10 4 Vcm -1 . This value is below the 10 6 V/cm breakdown static electric field of Ge. Now we need to calculate other benchmarks like the electrical power consumption and the operational frequency of the device. To calculate the electrical power consumption we use Equation To calculate the electrical power consumption we need to know the driving voltage of the modulator (V) and the intrinsic capacitance of it (C). The driving voltage used is V=3 V as we explained early in this chapter. Regarding the intrinsic capacitance of the device we used ISE-dessis to calculate it. Doing the simulation we obtain a value of C=9 fF (for a device length around L=30 μm). It is interesting to know the change in the value of the capacitance C versus the driving voltage of the device V. We want to know if the capacitance C changes with V. The main reason is that applying different V will change the charge distribution in the device and consequently the capacitance C may change. For a value of w=150 nm, h=250 nm, hSi3N4=5 nm, hBot=40 nm and hBuf=60, the capacitance study is presented in Table C [fF]: 8.52 8. According to Table To use the formula given in Equation We simulated in ISE-dessis the tunneling of carriers through the thin Si3N4 barrier to estimate the current that passes through the device. We used two models called Fowler-Nordheim tunneling and non-local tunneling at interfaces and contacts. For the optimized device (w=150 nm, h=250 nm, hSi3N4=5 nm, hBot=40 nm and hBuf=60 nm, see Figure Consequently, for a capacitance C=9 fF and a driving voltage V=3 V we obtained an electrical power consumption around 20 fJ/bit. We will compare this value with the state-of-the-art at the end of this section. To calculate the cut-off frequency of the device we use the following Equation We already know the capacitance C of the device which is around C=9 fF. R is the access resistance which was calculated using Equation 61 in the previous paragraph. This resistance is the resistance between the side contact and the core of the modulator, it is mainly given by the p-Si (thickness hBuf) and p-Ge (thickness hBot) layers at the bottom of the modulator. The distance between the contact and the modulator were taken between 1.5 μm and 2 μm. For the distance of 1.5 μm we obtain a lower resistance than with the separation of 2 μm. Consequently, when the distance is shorter we obtain a higher bandwidth that we call Fmax and with the separation of 2 μm we obtain a lower value that we call Fmin. Consequently, if we place the side contact between 1.5 μm and 2 μm we will obtain an operational frequency between Fmin and Fmax. To calculate the resistance of the device we used the Equation Equation 61 Were ρ is the resistance of the p-Si and the p-Ge, both values were taken equal to 10 -4 Ω/cm, the distance L is 30 μm (the length of the device to have an extinction ratio of 3.3 dB according to Table Using the mentioned values for a distance of 1.5 μm we obtain Fmin=237 GHZ and an Fmax=475 GHz for a distance of 2 μm. It is summarized in Table If we compare the operational frequency of the device with the photonic modulators that use the FKE (Table Regarding the comparison with the plasmonic modulators (Table Regarding the electrical power consumption reported in Table In this chapter, we proposed a new design of a low electrical power consumption Ge based FKE electro-absorption plasmonic modulator. We have performed an integrated electro-optical simulation in order to determine the performances of the device. Using the static electric field distribution we calculated the change in absorption Δαmat occurring in Ge due to the FKE. FDM optical simulations were performed in order to determine the extinction ratio and the propagation losses of the modulator. The operational bandwidth, the maximum frequency and the electrical power consumption were also calculated. Using this method, we optimized the structure in order to maximize the FoM Δαeff/αeff. The optimized device has a compact active region of w=150 nm and h=250 nm and is fully compatible with the CMOS fabrication technology. For a length of L=30 μm the device has an extinction ratio of 3.3 dB and propagation losses of 11.2 dB, while working at a bias voltage of V=3 V. High-speed operation can be achieved with a cut-off frequency beyond 300 GHz. The energy consumption of such a device is around 20 fJ/bit which is well below the energy consumption of previous reported modulators The final objective of the work is to integrate the plasmonic modulator device into a photonic integrated circuit. For this it is important to study and optimize the coupling to the device from a standard Si rib waveguide. This study is the objective of next chapter. In this chapter we introduced the propagation losses of the device but the insertion losses of the device include both the propagation losses and the coupling losses to conventional standard Si waveguides. The coupling losses depend on the coupling scheme used to excite the modulator. In the next chapter we present different coupling structures. We select the best one and we calculate the coupling losses. With this information, we will derive the total insertion losses of the device. To fully integrate our plasmonic modulator into a photonic integrated circuit it is important to study its coupling with a standard Si rib waveguide. The core of the modulator has been optimized into the following dimensions: w=150 nm, h=250 nm, hSlot=5 nm, hBot=40 nm and hBuf=60 nm. The parameters are represented in Figure Knowing the parameters neff and αeff in both the MIS waveguide of the modulator and the Si rib waveguide we studied a butt-coupling approach to excite the modulator. In the butt-coupling structure the parameters of the modulator are fixed. Consequently, we select the proper dimension of the Si rib waveguide to match the effective refractive index neff between the Si rib waveguide and the plasmonic one into the modulator. This allows reducing the reflection from the interface between the Si rib waveguide and the plasmonic waveguide. In this butt-coupling structure we also analyzed the influence of the overlap between the modes in the Si rib waveguide and the MIS structure. Knowing the performance of the butt-coupling structure we try to engineer the coupling to try to improve the coupling efficiency. We introduced a taper between the Si rib waveguide and the plasmonic modulator. In this case, the structure is formed by the Si rib waveguide, followed by a taper and finally the plasmonic modulator is reached. It means, we have three different waveguides. The objective is that the effective refractive index in all the structures that are coupled varies in a continuous way and hence, minimize the reflection. First, we analyzed the performance of a Ge taper and finally we propose a Si-Ge taper. In the coupling study presented in this section we performed 3D Finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) simulations using the commercial software Lumerical® to study the propagation of the light from the Si rib waveguide to the optimized plasmonic modulator. Using this tool we obtain the value of the coupling efficiency. Furthermore, using Lumerical® we perform 2D simulations to calculate the overlap integral between the mode that we excite in the plasmonic modulator from the standard Si rib waveguide and the fundamental mode that we want to excite. This parameter gives the information of the fraction of electromagnetic field coupled in the fundamental TM plasmonic mode that we want to excite. We remind that we only want to excite the fundamental TM mode of the optimized plasmonic modulator. Regarding the FDTD parameters we used a square simulation window of 12 μm length, 5 μm wide and 4 μm high. Regarding the boundary conditions we used a perfectly matched layer (PML) in all the corners. We observed that there is not field in the boundary when performing the simulation. We used an automatic non-uniform mesh with a minimum mesh step of 2 nm. The maximum mesh step is around 10 nm. In the sensible areas like the slot of the modulator we used a uniform refinement of the mesh. In this case the maximum step size is around 0.5 nm (if the thickness of the slot is 5 nm then we have 10 mesh points inside the slot). The same is done for the abrupt interface between the Si rib waveguide and the optimized plasmonic modulator. Regarding the injection of light we place a modal source in the Si rib waveguide which excites a continuous wave temporal excitation. This source was configured to excite the fundamental TM mode of the Si rib waveguide in direction to the optimized plasmonic modulator (x-axis). To validate all the parameters set in the 3D FDTD simulation we reproduced the results obtained in First we analyze the effective refractive index neff and the effective optical absorption αeff. This modulator is presented in Figure As a conclusion, in the optimized modulator we want to excite the fundamental TM mode whose effective refractive index is neff=2.89 and the effective propagation losses are αeff=1491 dB/cm (0.1491 dB/μm). Consequently, in the Si rib waveguide which will excite the optimized modulator a TM mode must be present. The plasmonic modulator also supports other modes like a fundamental TE mode (green), a second order TM mode (red) and another second order TE mode (cyan). It is worth to mention that both TE modes (green and cyan) are photonic ones. Such modes have low losses (Figure Rib Waveguide In this section we study the properties of the Si rib waveguide which is used to excite the plasmonic modulator defined in the previous chapter. The structure of the Si rib waveguide is represented in the following Figure From the Si rib waveguide we need to excite the fundamental plasmonic TM mode in the optimized plasmonic modulator. For this we need to have a photonic TM mode in the input Si rib waveguide (green). From Figure The magnitude of the electrical field E and the magnitude of the magnetic field H of the Si rib waveguide for wSi=450 nm is represented in Figure In this section we study the simplest coupling configuration between the Si rib waveguide and the optimized plasmonic modulator. This configuration is called butt-coupling. It is represented in Figure We study the structure of Figure From Figure In Regarding the overlap integral when w=250 nm we see that only the fundamental TM mode is excited. Again, the overlap integral with the other fundamental TE mode is zero. We see that the overlap integral in the first 5 μm is increasing due to the stabilization of the mode. After x=5 μm the increase is not so rapid. It is worth noting to mention that the oscillations of Figure For both cases: w=150 nm and w=250 nm there is no beating with other mode since the rest of the overlap integrals are zero. In the case in which w=350 nm in Figure When w=450 nm we have a similar behavior as with w=350 nm. Now, we also may have a beating between modes. These modes are the fundamental TM mode (represented in pink in Figure As a conclusion of the analysis done in Figure In the next section we use the overlap integral calculated in Figure Now, we calculate the percentage of power of the source that couples to the fundamental plasmonic TM mode TIn the mode which is the one used to perform the modulation. This value is given by the multiplication of the total transmission TTotal and the overlap integral OI (it was calculated in Figure For the case of w=350 nm and 450 nm, part of the power of the source is coupled to other modes. They are the second order TE mode that appears for w>350 nm. The transmission to other modes TOther modes is given by, TOther modes=POther modes/PSource=TTotalxOIOther modes Equation Now that we know how much power is coupled to the fundamental TM mode that we want to modulate and to the other modes (the second order TE mode for w=350 nm and 450 nm) we can calculate how much light is scattered due to the interface between the Si rib waveguide and the plasmonic modulator. For this, we define the parameter TScattering which defines how much energy of the power source scatters. TScattering is defined by, TScattering=PScattered/PSource=TTotal-(TIn the mode+ TOther modes) Equation Until now we have analyzed the influence of the parameter w (width of the Ge core of the plasmonic modulator) on the coupling efficiency. We concluded that the best dimension is w=150 nm which coincides with the width for the optimized plasmonic modulator obtained in chapter five. Now, it will be interesting to study the influence of the Si rib waveguide wSi. Consequently, in the future study we will consider w=150 nm and we call it the optimized plasmonic modulator. To study the influence of the width of the Si rib waveguide wSi, we first calculate the parameter TTotal in the plasmonic modulator for different widths wSi. As was explained before we need a TM mode in the Si rib waveguide to excite the fundamental TM mode of the plasmonic modulator. We selected wSi=250, 350, 450, 625 and 800 nm to study the influence. TTotal is represented in Figure As a conclusion of this section a butt-coupling structure of Figure In the following Table In this section we will add a Ge taper between the Si rib waveguide and the optimized plasmonic modulator. There are several main factors that prevent a good coupling between the structures: the first is due to a different field distribution in the cross section of the waveguides that we want to couple. It is due to a profile mismatch of the modes in the cross section of the waveguides also leading to light diffraction. The second is the reflection that we have at the interface between the two waveguides. This is mainly due to a different effective index neff in both waveguides. It means, due to the difference of the effective indices of the modes in the waveguides there is reflection. In this section we will minimize the reflection between the waveguides. Although the reflection in the butt-coupling scheme was only 4% we will see how the scattering, the profile missmatch and the overlap integral behave. This may lead to an improvement of the coupling. For this, we will insert between the Si rib waveguide and the optimized plasmonic modulator a taper that matches both effective indexes of the Si rib waveguide and the optimized modulator. The structure that we want to use is presented in Figure To match such effective indices we want to place a taper between them. We analyzed several tapers for this purpose. They are summarized in Figure To know which case is the better we want to plot the parameter nEff,waveguide-nEff, mode to couple. Where nEff, mode to couple is the effective index of the mode in the respective tapers of Figure In the case of the Si rib waveguide we vary the parameter wSi to know the evolution of nEff,waveguide-nEff, mode to couple. In the same way in the Ge rib waveguide we vary wGe. Finally, in the metal taper over Si and Ge we vary wCu. The rest of the parameters are fixed and follow the same dimensions as the optimized plasmonic modulator for the reasons explained before. We summarize them: hSi=255 nm, hrib-Si=100 nm, hGe=255 nm, hrib-Ge=100 nm, w=150 nm, h=250 nm and hSlot=5 nm. In Figure It is interesting to mention that the metal taper over Ge also approaches zero when the parameter wCu is big. This is due to the fact that the optimized plasmonic modulator structure is reached when wCu tends to infinity. Furthermore, the two plasmonic tapers (red and blue in Figure Now we will analyze the intermediate Ge rib waveguide that we want to use as a taper between the Si rib waveguide and the optimized plasmonic modulator. A representation of this waveguide is illustrated in Figure Regarding the propagation losses αeff of the mode in the Ge taper we remind that Ge absorbs light at 1.647 μm (the operational wavelength of the optimized plasmonic modulator). The propagation losses of the Ge rib waveguide are presented in Figure Once the widths of the taper are chosen wtaper1=175 nm and wtaper2=250 nm. We need to optimize the length for the taper Ltaper. For this, we scan the length Ltaper between 100 nm and 4 μm to find the maximum of the transmission into the plasmonic mode TIn the mode given by Equation 63. It is represented in Figure From Figure In Figure First, we plot the parameter TTotal as a function of the distance traveled by light inside the optimized plasmonic modulator x. We did a similar plot with the butt-coupling configuration done in Figure We start by calculating the parameter TIn the mode inside the optimized plasmonic modulator. It is represented in Figure The next step is to calculate the ovelap integral between the electric field distribution excited in the optimized plasmonic modulator and the fundamental TM mode of the optimized plasmonic modulator. In is given in Figure Now, it will be interesting to calculate the scattering present into the optimized plasmonic modulator. For this we use Equation Comparing Figure We also studied the reflection at both interfaces of the Ge taper. The reflection in the first interface is RFirst=6.5% and in the second interface it is around RSecond=4.5%. Note that the second interface is a similar structure than the butt-coupling one, except that the butt-coupling interface is a Si rib waveguide with the optimized plasmonic modulator and the second interface of the Ge taper is between a Ge rib waveguide and the optimized plasmonic modulator. It is important to note that it is difficult to fully match the effective indices of the different waveguides by finding the proper dimensions of the waveguides. It is because of this small size mismatch in dimessions. Furthermore, the light absorption by the Ge in the taper also plays a role in the coupling efficiency. For this we measured the total transmission TTotal with loss and not loss in the material Ge due to the Ge absorbing. The transmission with loss TTotal, absorving=0.879821 while the Ge without loss gives a transmission of TTotal, non-absorving=0.887921. The amount of light of the source absorved by Ge is TTotal, non- absorving-TTotal, absorving=0.007. It means that 0.7% of light is absorved by the Ge in the Ge taper. Another factor that may influence the coupling efficiency is the amount of scattered light, which in this case is less than in the butt-coupling configuration. As we stated before, there are several factors that influence the good coupling from one waveguide to the other one. One is the difference in the effective refractive index neff that leads to reflection in the interfaces. Other is the mode profile mismatch. It means the mismatch between the field distribution in the cross section at the end of one waveguide and at the beginning of the other (it is represented in Figure As a conclusion we observed that TTotal and TIn the mode are smaller in the Ge taper than in the buttcoupling structure. Consequently, the butt-coupling approach is better than the Ge taper. This is the main conclusion to say that the butt-coupling structure is better. There are several factors that influence the worser result of the Ge taper. The first is that you have more reflection in the total structure of the Ge taper (RFirst=6.5% in the first interface of the Ge taper RSecond=4.5% in the second one). We obtain such a reflection because it is difficult to match the proper interface. In the buttcoupling structure R=4%. Additionally, the Ge taper has scattering light at both interfaces around 12% and 13% respectivelly. While in the butt-coupling it is around 20%. Finally, the Ge taper has material absorption which is around 0.72%. In the following Table In the previous section we tried to reduce the reflection and scattering at the interface by matching the different effective indices between the different waveguides that appear in the Ge taper configuration. Furthermore, we studied the reflections, scattering and mode missmatch. Now we will try to optimize the matching in the profile of the modes in different waveguides. It means, we want to maximize the overlap integral between the modes that are going to be coupled. For this, we will represent the mode profiles of the optimized plasmonic modulator and of the Si rib waveguide. The profile of the optimized plasmonic modulator is represented in Figure Regarding the field in the Si rib waveguide (Figure As described in the two last paragraph in the optimized plasmonic modulator the field distribution in the horizontal direction is around w=150 nm while in the Si rib waveguide the field in the horizontal direction is distributed around wSi=450 nm. In the vertical direction the spatial difference is smaller and it is around 50-70 nm. The fact that the main difference is in the lateral direction leads to a use of a horizontal taper. Consequently, we will study the use of a new taper in the form of the one showed in Figure In Figure We remind that TTotal captures all the light that passes the cross section of the modulators just 20 nm away from the interface between the Si-Ge taper and the modulator. The next interesting parameter is to study the influence of wtaper and Ltaper on the overlap integral between the mode at the end of the Si-Ge taper and the mode at the beginning of the modulator. For this, we selected the same values wtaper and Ltaper as in the previous section. The result is presented in Figure Comparing Figure Additionally, the Si-Ge taper is done by Ge which absorbs light at the operational wavelength of the modulator which is around 1.647 μm. It is used in the Ge taper. This is an advantage of the buttcoupling structure (where Ge is not used) since the Si is transparent and consequently there is not absorption of light. To calculate the amount of light absorved in the Si-Ge taper of the Ge taper we measured the parameter TTotal at the interface at x=0 μm (the interface of width wtaper2) for absorving and non-absorving Ge. For non-absorving Ge we set zero for the imaginary part of the refractive index of Ge in the tpaer. With this we obtained TTotal, absorving=0.996 for the absorving case and TTotal, non- absorving=0.999 for the non-absorving case. The amount of light absorved by the Si-Ge taper is then TTotal, non-absorving-TTotal, absorving=0.0034. It means that 0.34 % of the light pasing through the taper is absorbed by the Ge. In the following Table In this section we compare the three coupled schemes proposed in this chapter. Where RFirst is the reflection of the first interface and RSecond is the reflection in the second interface. TScattered, 1 is the maximum scattering in the first interface and TScattered,2 is the maximum of the scattering of the second interface. OIFundamlental mode, 1 is the overlap integral in the first interface and OIFundamlental mode, 2 is the overlap integral in the second interface. In the case of the butt-coupling structure there is only one interface, in this case we consider it as a second interface. This is why RFirst=0 and TScattered, 1=0 in the butt-coupling structure. The rest of the parameters were defined along the chapter. A schematic view of each one is represented in Figure In this chapter we studied the coupling scheme to the optimized plasmonic modulator from a standard Si rib waveguide. We started studying a direct butt-coupling scheme which give us a coupling efficiency around TIn the mode=0.76. We proposed several coupling schemes like the Ge taper and the Si-Ge taper. Among all these schemes the best one was the Si-Ge taper with a coupling efficiency around TIn the mode=0.84. This provides coupling efficiency around 8% better than the butt-coupling scheme. We realized that the increase in the complexity of the taper does not significantly increase the coupling efficiency. 7 Conclusion and Future Work The objective of the thesis was to design a CMOS compatible low electrical power consumption modulator based on the Franz-Keldysh effect in germanium. We selected a plasmonic waveguide configuration to reduce the size of the optical modulator and to increase the optical confinement leading to the reduction of the electrical energy consumption of the device. The first task was to design the plasmonic modulator. For this we developed an integrated electrooptical simulator which consists of a commercial electrical simulator (ISE-dessis) integrated with a finite difference method (FDM) mode solver. The simulator can model the Franz-Keldysh effect in germanium. With this integrated electro-optical modulator we can know the influence on the optical properties of the mode (mainly neff, αeff and TE fraction) induced by the presence of a static electric field. For example, we can calculate neff, αeff and TE fraction of guided mode versus the driving voltage V applied to the structure. I started from a FDM mode solver developed at IEF and I modified it to support plasmonic modes, metals and effects in germanium including the Franz-Keldysh effect. In the case of the Franz-Keldysh effect, the absorption coefficient of the material at the band-edge of the gap changes under a static electric field. To model the Franz-Keldysh effect, we used an explicit formula which predicts the absorption. It is integrated with the electro-optical simulator. First, we calculate the static electric field distribution in a desired structure with the commercial simulator ISEdessis. Knowing the static electric field distribution in germanium, we use the Franz-Keldysh effect model to calculate the new distribution of the germanium absorption. Afterwards, we import the structure to the optical FDM mode solver and we calculate the properties of the modes supported by the structure. Using this tool we can determine the effective index neff, and the effective losses αeff of the mode versus the voltage applied to the structure. Once this tool was developed we tested it with 10 publications to validate it. In the design chapter we tested several structures to induce electro-absorption effect in Ge based on plasmonic concepts. We studied several plasmonic waveguides for the optical structure of the modulator including slot waveguides, metal-semiconductor, metal-insulator-semiconductor, etc. We also tested several electrical structures to induce the static electric field like lateral and vertical PIN structures and capacitive structures. To compare all the structures we studied the extinction ratio and the propagation losses. For this, we defined the figure of merit Δαeff/αeff where Δαeff=αeff(V=VRef)αeff(V=0 V). As a result of the whole process of comparing all the proposed structures, the modulator with best performances was composed of a metal-insulator-semiconductor waveguide. The best material to place as a metal was a special copper with a process developed at CEA-Leti. Furthermore, the metal of the metal-insulator-semiconductor waveguide was used to guide the plasmon and as an electrode to induce a static electric field into the semiconductor (germanium). It was also used as a capacitive structure to induce a static electric field to perform the modulation. Once we identified the best structure we optimized it with respect to all the parameters and dimensions of it. The best performance of the device is an extinction ratio of 3.3 dB, an insertion loss of 13.2 dB for a length of 30 μm, a bandwidth larger than 40 GHz, CMOS compatibility and a dynamic electrical power consumption of 20 fJ/bit. Regarding the electrical power consumption we compared it with all the Franz-Keldysh effect modulators and all the plasmonic modulators that report the energy consumption. The result of this comparison was that the device proposed in this work has the lowest electrical power consumption reported in the literature. Once we designed and optimized the device we study the integration of this device in a standard integrated circuit. For this, we study by the means of mode analysis and 3D FDTD simulations three possible ways of coupling the plasmonic modulator with a silicon rib waveguide. The first approach is a butt-coupling configuration between the silicon rib waveguide and the optimized plasmonic modulator. The simulated coupling efficiency was around 76%. In a second approach we added a germanium taper between the silicon rib waveguide and the optimized germanium-based plasmonic modulator. The dimensions of the waveguides were settled to match the effective index at all the interfaces. The performance showed by this approach was not as good as in the butt-coupling scheme. The reason was the increase of the reflection at waveguide-taper interface and consequently reduced the power into the modulator. Furthermore, the Ge taper also absorbs light. Finally, in order to try to improve the overlap integral between the silicon rib waveguide and the optimized plasmonic modulator we investigated a Si-Ge taper. This taper showed an efficiency of 84%, overcoming the performances of the butt-coupling scheme. With the design of the optimized plasmonic modulator and the coupling scheme, we prepared the process flow for the whole fabrication and the layout of several configurations of modulators (Appendix C). The fabrication was launched at CEA-Leti but unfortunately it will finish after the end of this PhD. Regarding the operational wavelength of the designed plasmonic modulator, it is supposed to optimally work at 1647 nm where the Franz-Keldysh effect is maximum. It is desired to shift the maximum of the Franz-Keldysh effect to 1550 nm for telecom applications. It can be done by including some silicon into the germanium. For this, we fabricated test structures consisting of a lateral PIN diode formed by p-doped silicon, intrinsic germanium and n-doped silicon. Once fabricated, the structure was heated at high temperature to make silicon diffuse laterally to the germanium core to obtain silicon-germanium in the intrinsic core. We characterized the devices and we found some indication that the absorption edge of the SiGe material was shifted to wavelengths lower than 1550 nm. We faced the difficulty of controlling the amount of diffused silicon into the germanium using this technique. Knowing this, we designed a second batch of silicon-germanium PIN structures to try to shift the maximum of the Franz-Keldysh effect to 1550 nm. In this case, a mixture of silicon and germanium is directly epitaxially grown with a desired composition. The batch is still under fabrication at the time of writing and we expect to have the first characterization results at the end of the PhD. Unfortunately, due to finite time, several tasks could not be finalized. Firstly the first generation of CMOS-compatible, low-energy plasmonic modulator designed and fabricated in this work will have to be characterized once the fabrication will be completed. Secondly, it is necessary to complete the demonstration of the Franz-Keldysh effect at 1550 nm in a silicongermanium waveguide photonic waveguide. Once the Franz-Keldysh effect is demonstrated at 1550 nm a second generation of plasmonic modulator may be designed with a core of intrinsic silicon germanium instead of pure germanium. With this, we want to shift the operational wavelength of the device at 1550 nm. One of the main disadvantages of plasmonic modulators in general is the high propagation losses. Consequently, a reduction in the loss of metal-insulator-semiconductor waveguides is still necessary. To try to reduce the propagation losses a nanostructuration of the metal of the metal-insulatorsemiconductor waveguide could be investigated. It is well known that when the light travels in a medium which consists of a subwavelength periodic alternation of materials with refractive indices n1 and n2 the dielectric constant felt by the light is the mean of the refractive index constants present in the medium Another approach could be also to study the plasma dispersion effect in germanium for a germanium based electro-refraction modulator. To the best of my knowledge there is not a deep study of electro-refraction modulators in germanium. The structure may be photonic or plasmonic. In this appendix the permittivity of a metal is presented. For this we will use the Maxwell's equations and the Drude model for metals. It is important to calculate the so called plasma frequency of the metals. Below this frequency (in the infra-red and visible regime) the metals behave as a dielectric. Is at those frequencies when the metals are used in a waveguide to break the diffraction limit of light. The physical model of metals at telecommunication frequencies are described by Maxwell's equations and the Drude model. In the Drude model there is a set of carriers with density N and mass m that freely moves into a periodic array of cores. Metals possess a high density of carriers in the material. Consequently, there is not any discretization of the electron energy levels with respect to the thermal excitation kBT. When an electromagnetic field is present in the material the electrons oscillate around the positive ion cores. The collision frequency is given by Equation Where γ is the collision frequency and τ is the free electron relaxation time. The dispersion relation ω(k) relates the frequency ω of the oscillations with the wave-vector k. The plasma of electrons under the presence of an electric field E is described by Equation Where x is the electron displacement between the electron and the ion core, m is the mass of the electron, e is the unitary charge of the electron, γ is the damping factor and E is the electric field present in the material. If the material is excited by a monochromatic electric field described by Equation We can essay a solution of the form given by, 9 Appendix B In this section we are going to obtain the main characteristics of a metal-semiconductor (MS) plasmonic waveguide. We start from Maxwell's equations which we apply to the MS structure. We also impose the boundary conditions in the interface between the metal and the semiconductor. The objective of this study is to determine the penetration depth of the plasmonic mode supported by the MS structure into the metal. The losses of the plasmonic mode are also calculated. We will deduct that those losses are smaller than the losses of the plasmon in a metal-insulator-semiconductor (MIS) waveguide. This will be done at the end of chapter three. Where, D is the electric displacement field, ρ is the charge density, B is the magnetic field, E is the electric field, H is magnetic field strength and J is the current density. For a medium in which there is neither current J = 0 nor charge ρ = 0 we can obtain the wave equation from previous ones, ∇ x (∇ x E) = -μ 0 ∂ 2 D ∂t 2 Using the vector identity ∇ x (∇ x V) = ∇(∇ ⋅ V) -∇ When the propagation is in the x-direction we have, And in the y-direction, ∂ ∂y = 0 The system simplifies to, In Figure A similar analysis can be done for a TE polarized plasmon. Nevertheless the continuity of Ey and Hx leads to the following relation, A 1 (k 1 + k 1 ) = 0 Equation When the plasmonic mode is bounded, the perpendicular propagation constants ki, i ∈ {1, 2} in both mediums (the dielectric and the metal) is imaginary, since, And, Taking into account Equation 97 we can see that the wave-vector of the SPP will be bigger than the wave-vector of the free propagating light into the dielectric. Furthermore, the dielectric constant is complex in metals since they have absorption. It means that the component β will also be complex through Figure Using the fact that the imaginary part of the dielectric constants in metals is smaller than the real part (ε2''<ε2') we can obtain a simplified format for the real and imaginary part of the propagation wave-vector of the SPP, Equation 101 As stated before, the real part of the propagation wave-vector of the SPP (Equation And, Re{ε 2 ′ + ε 1 } < 0 Metals can fulfill these two conditions at telecommunication wavelengths (also in the visible and in the infrared regions). The dispersion relation of plasmonic mode for different wavelengths is represented in Figure As is represented in Figure There are still two more characteristics of the plasmonic mode. They are: the penetration depth and the propagation length. The penetration depth is the penetration of the optical electromagnetic field into the dielectric and into the metal. It is defined as the length from the metal-dielectric interface to the length at which the optical electromagnetic intensity drops until 1/e. The penetration depth into the dielectric is given by, The penetration depth into the metal is given by, The propagation length is the length in which the intensity of the propagating SPP drops by 1/e with respect of the initial intensity. It is given by, L p = 1 2β ′′ Equation Now we calculated the approximated losses of the plasmonic mode supported by the MS plasmonic waveguide. At the end of chapter three we are going to introduce a similar waveguide called metal-insulator-semiconductor (MIS) waveguide. At the end of chapter three we demonstrate that the MIS waveguide has less propagation losses than the MS waveguide. For this, we will use Equation As a result of the study done in chapters five and six, the plasmonic modulator designed will be fabricated. Before fabrication can be launched, it is necessary to elaborate a process flow and do the layout of the maskset. This chapter describes first the process flow which was established at CEA-Leti. Then we present the layout which was done partly at IEF and at CEA-Leti. This work was done in the frame of the ANR project MASSTOR (plasMon ASSisTed electro-optical modulatOR). The process flow is composed of seven lithographic levels. We start with SOI wafers of 440 nm thickness. The main steps are the following:  Definition of the input and output silicon waveguides and the grating couplers (Figure  Protection of the grating couplers and further etch of silicon down to the slab for the silicon waveguides (final result in Figure  Definition and etching of a cavity in Si in which Ge will be grown epitaxially (Figure  Definition and implantation of two regions of Ge for the future side contacts of the modulator (Figure  Definition of the Ge modulator waveguide and the lateral regions for the future contacts (Figure  Definition of the AlCu sides contacts of the plasmonic modulator (Figure An overview of the final layout is presented in Figure In addition, there are several test structures for the elementary building blocks like waveguides, grating couplers, electrodes to check their performances independently of the Ge plasmonic modulator circuit. These structures are also detailed later in this section. In Figure We implemented 384 plasmonic modulators in total. Although in chapter 5, we optimized the plasmonic modulator with respect to the parameters w, h, hSlot and L, in the layout we scanned both the width w and the length L of the Ge core to verify experimentally the optimal configuration. The dimensions of the optimized modulators is around L=30 μm and w=150 nm. We scan w and L around the optimimum, knowing that the smallest value allowed for 193 nm lithography is 100 nm :  The width w has the following values w ∈ {100,150,200,250,300,350,400,450,500} in nanometers.  The length L has the following values L ∈ {5, To extract the performances of the Ge plasmonic modulator waveguides alone, we also added a set of reference structures without modulators, arranged in the same configuration, as shown in Figure The layout of the fiber grating couplers is shown in Figure  TLM (Transmission Line Method) are useful to measure the resistivity of the doped layers like p-doped Si and p-doped Ge in our case (and therefore check the doping level) and to check the contact resistance.  Several electrode structures (in a short and open configuration) are also useful to perform the deembedding of the future RF measurements. hh [G(η hh ) + iF(η hh )]