Segregation and dissolution behavior of Mg alloyed with Ca and Al are studied by performing density functional theory calculations considering an extensive set of surface structures and compositions. Combining ab initio surface science approaches with cluster expansion for ordered surface structures we construct surface phase diagrams for these alloys. We utilize these diagrams to study segregation phenomena and chemical trends for surfaces in contact with a dry environment or with an aqueous electrolyte. We show that the presence of water dramatically impacts the stability and chemical composition of the considered metallic surfaces. We furthermore find that the two alloying elements behave qualitatively different: whereas Ca strongly segregates to the surface and becomes dissolved upon exposure of the surface to water, Al shows an anti-segregation behavior, i.e., it remains in Mg bulk. These findings provide an explanation for the experimentally observed increase/decrease in corrosion rates when alloying Mg with Al/Ca. I. Magnesium with its very low density of 1.74 g/cm 3 Despite having applications in such diverse fields, Mg based alloys suffer from two major limitations: poor ductility Alloying with Al and Ca has also an impact on the corrosion properties of Mg. Increasing the Ca content in Mg alloys leads to an increased anodic corrosion potential This picture is also confirmed by computations. Electrochemical potentials calculated using a Born-Haber cycle indicate that the Mg-Al intermetallic Mg 17 Al 12 is more cathodic than Mg, while the Mg-Ca intermetallic Mg 2 Ca is more anodic than Mg A step in this direction is provided by a DFT study looking at the segregation behaviour of various alloying elements substituting a Mg atom in the first layer for the single coverage of 1 9 ML (monolayer; at 1 ML all atoms in the topmost Mg layer would be substituted by an alloying element) In this study, we therefore employ DFT calculations and focus on the initial, i.e. non-oxidised state of Mg alloys with dilute bulk concentrations of Al and Ca, constructing surface phase and surface Pourbaix diagrams. To identify the stable surface structures, we consider two scenarios: i) the surface of as cast Mg-Al and Mg-Ca alloys in the absence of an oxidizing medium (in vacuum) and ii) the surface when the as cast alloy is exposed to a corrosive environment. Accounting for the relevance of water for wet corrosion we include it in the calculations for the later case, by modelling it as an implicit solvent All DFT calculations are performed in a plane wave based DFT framework and the projector augmented wave (PAW) approach as implemented in the Vienna Ab-initio Simulation Package (VASP) A key step in computing the segregation behavior of alloying elements on the Mg surface is to identify which surface structure is the thermodynamically most stable one for a given set of thermodynamic state variables. Since surfaces are thermodynamically open systems -they can exchange atoms with the bulk or with the environment to which the surface is exposed -the relevant state variables are temperature and chemical potentials of the chemical species forming the alloy. For the binary system considered here these are Mg alloyed with Al or Ca, i.e., μ Mg , μ Al , and μ Ca . The impact of pressure is small where the index i runs over Mg and the alloying element X. We note that the surface formation energy E surf σ (T, {μ i }) is nothing else than the Grand Potential Θ σ (T, {μ i }), which is routinely and very successfully used to compute bulk phase diagrams, e.g. in the Monte Carlo (MC) based ATAT code Here, E DFT σ is the DFT computed total energy of the surface structure σ. n i,σ represents the number of atoms of species i in the surface structure σ. A is the area of the surface unit cell described by the respective supercell and the factor two takes into account that the symmetric slabs we consider here consist of two equivalent surfaces. S surf is the excess surface entropy, which is dominated by configurational entropy. Further contributions include electronic or vibrational entropy, which are substantially smaller and will therefore be neglected in this work. For the ordered phases, the configurational entropy is zero, i.e., S surf = 0. It should be noted that by neglecting the entropy term, we are treating the ordered surface phases in the same way as line compounds in bulk surface diagrams. However, while a bulk line compound exists, as indicated by its name, only for a single bulk concentration, an ordered surface phase with zero configurational entropy can exist over a finite range of bulk alloying composition (see Fig. The surface structures are characterized by the local arrangement of the solute atoms in the first surface layers. Since, as will be shown later, solute energies already in the second layer are very close to the ones in Mg bulk we consider only surface structures with solutes in the first two layers. The solute concentration of a surface configuration σ is described by the coverage θ σ , which is defined by the number of solute atoms in this layer divided by its total number of atoms. A critical input for calculating the surface energies according to Eq. 2 are the chemical potentials. These potentials provide a high-level link between thermodynamic concepts and specific experimental condition or control parameters such as bulk composition, temperature, ion concentration in the case of wet corrosion etc. In this section we discuss their definition, how to obtain them from ab initio calculations, their physical and thermodynamic boundaries as well as how to translate experimental conditions into chemical potential and vice versa. The chemical potentials μ Mg and μ X describe the chemical reservoirs with which the Mg and X atoms are in equilibrium. Rather than using absolute chemical potentials as obtained when using the DFT total energies directly we follow common convention and reference our potentials with respect to a physically well-defined configuration. A major advantage of using a physics based reference is that the chemical potentials do not contain spurious pseudopotential and code specific contributions but just the code-agnostic energy difference between reference and actual value. The potential consists then of two parts (see Eq. 2): The DFT reference energy and the chemical potential μ i with respect to this reference. For the Mg-X alloy system natural reference systems are Mg hcp bulk (for Mg) and bulk fcc Al/Ca (for Al/Ca). Thus, the chemical potential for Mg bulk is μ Mg-bulk = 0, independent of the chosen DFT code or pseudopotential. This choice also implies that the bulk contribution in the slab region is completely eliminated (see Supplemental Material (SM), Sec. A [44]). As a consequence, the surface energy defined by Eq. 2 is by construction the excess energy necessary to create a surface from bulk. Since we focus here on substitutional surface structures, i.e. structures where a surface Mg atom is substituted by an Al or Ca atom, formally a Mg/X atom has to be brought/taken into/out of the thermodynamic reservoir μ Mg /μ X for Mg/X atoms, respectively. Thus, only the difference between the chemical potentials of the host and solute species enters in Eq. 2, i.e., E surf σ (T, μ Mg -μ X ). Fig. The latter equation simply means that the Mg reservoir is that of Mg bulk in the dilute solute limit. Since our focus will be on solid solutions and precipitation of Al and Ca occurring at bulk concentrations at about 1 at.% the difference can be safely replaced by the chemical potential of the alloying element alone. In a realistic scenario, the chemical reservoirs with which a surface is in contact are the bulk on one side and the environment on the other. Since the total number of solute atoms on the surface is negligibly small compared to the total number of solute atoms in the bulk or environment, the surface chemical potential (see SM, Sec. B [44]) will equilibrate towards one of these embedding chemical potentials through an exchange of solute atoms. In the following, we will discuss two scenarios (see Fig. In the dilute limit, i.e. in the absence of solute-solute interaction, the chemical potential of a solute atom X in Mg bulk is Here E N Mg represents the DFT total energy of Mg bulk with N atoms, E N -1 Mg+1X is the energy of the same bulk system with one Mg atom substituted by the alloying atom X. E X-bulk is the bulk reference of X. With this definition and at T=0 K the chemical potential μ X-in-Mg-bulk becomes ∆E X-in-Mg-bulk =119 meV for Al and 95 meV for Ca. The positive sign here implies that bringing an Al/Ca solute from its native bulk (i.e. Al or Ca bulk) into Mg is an endothermic reaction at T = 0 K. The solute concentration is then solely driven by the configurational entropy (second term in Eq. 5). If the surface is in thermodynamic equilibrium with its bulk, the surface chemical potential entering Eq. 2 becomes μ X = μ X-in-Mg-bulk (x X , T ), i.e., a given experimental scenario can be easily translated into a corresponding solute chemical potential. An obvious advantage of using the chemical potential is that it combines two independent variables (concentration and temperature) in a single one. This allows for an intuitive xy-representation of surface energies vs chemical potential in the absence of an explicit temperature dependence. This is the case for ordered surface structures where S surf = 0 in Eq. 2. Since the chemical potential is a rather abstract quantity, we select and discuss in the result section a few representative scenarios. For the Mg-X bulk alloys, we consider bulk mole fractions of 2 × 10 -2 and 10 -3 at 800 K for Al and Ca respectively, mirroring experimentally synthesized solid solutions in these alloys. When the surface is exposed to an aqueous electrolyte containing ions, we consider the chemical potentials for Al 3+ and Ca 2+ ions (Fig. The dependence of chemical potentials of Al and Ca on their ion concentrations where ∆G 0 Al 3+ and ∆G 0 Ca 2+ are the formation energies of Al 3+ and Ca 2+ ions respectively. For the standard hydrogen electrode potential (U SHE ) we chose -4.73 V, similar to previous studies The chemical potential of element X in its thermodynamically stable intermetallic phases is generally lower than that of its bulk phase. Therefore, they serve as upper bounds for the chemical potential μ X . For Al, the Mg containing intermetallic phase where Al has its lowest chemical potential is Al 12 Mg 17 . For Ca it is Mg 2 Ca. The respective chemical bulk potentials are μ Ca (Mg 2 Ca) = -0.23 eV and μ Al (Al 12 Mg 17 ) = -0.09 eV (see SM, Sec. D [44]). For chemical potentials μ X larger than these potentials the solid solution becomes thermodynamically unstable against the formation of Al 12 Mg 17 or Mg 2 Ca precipitates, respectively. This upper bound of the solute chemical potential allows us to compute the thermodynamic solubility limit of element X in Mg bulk as a function of temperature following Eq. 5. When kinetic barriers prevent the system from reaching its thermodynamically preferred configurations, it is possible to realize chemical potentials well above the critical solute potential μ X at which the intermetallic precipitates would form in thermodynamic equilibrium. Experimentally this can be achieved by methods such as rapid FIG. quenching (see SM, Sec. E [44]). In these cases, there still exists an upper limit of μ. As evident from Eq. 5, the upper limit of the (equilibrium) solute chemical potential in bulk Mg is μ X-in-Mg-bulk (x X , T ) < ∆E X-in-Mg-bulk . In the following discussions, we will therefore discuss both the equilibrium solubility limit and the ∆E X-in-Mg-bulk limit for supersaturated solid solution. To systematically explore the large configuration space of possible surface structures σ, we combine DFT calculations with the cluster expansion (CE) approach. The CE parameters are obtained by fitting to DFT calculations going over all possible symmetry-inequivalent configurations of the alloying atoms on the (2×2) and (3×3) Mg(0001) surface. The CE includes pair and triple interactions. In Fig. In Fig. To describe this transition in the phase diagram, we construct in the following an analytical expression for the surface energy of the disordered phase. From CE, we can obtain the energy of all possible surface configurations E CE σ , analogous to E DFT σ in Eq. 2. We then calculate the surface energies at T = 0 K following: The obtained E surf σ (T = 0 K, {μ i }) values are plotted in Fig. The coverage θ at which the energy E disorder θ reaches its minimum is the equilibrium concentration θ eq (T, {μ i }). It should be noted that with CE, we can also obtain θ eq (T, {μ i }) via grand canonical Monte Carlo simulation. However, in this work our focus is to build, as for the ordered surface phases, an analytical model for disordered surface phase E disorder . For the following analysis and discussions we will therefore use the equations outlined above. We now study the surface segregation behavior of Al and Ca in vacuum by applying the formalism outlined in Sec. II. We thus systematically substitute the Mg atoms in the top surface and the sub-surface layers of a Mg(0001) slab with Al and Ca atoms thus realising different surface structures and coverages. An illustration of some of the studied Ca substitutions in the surface and sub-surface layers of Mg are shown in Fig. We construct surface phase diagrams for Al and Ca substitution at the Mg(0001) surface. As a first step we construct the convex hull from the DFT-computed surface energies. These energies are obtained using Eq. 2 at T =0 K, μ Mg = μ Mg-bulk and μ X = μ X-in-Mg-bulk . The latter choice allows us to directly determine whether moving an X atom from the Mg bulk to the surface is energetically favorable (i.e., it reduces the surface energy by segregating to the Mg surface) or not. Fig. Next we construct the surface phase diagrams (Fig. Constructing the phase diagram in μ space allows us to include information from the bulk phase diagram, such as bulk phase transitions, in the same diagram. Specifically, the black dashed vertical line marks the solubility limit, i.e., the chemical potential at which the Ca/Al-Mg solid solution becomes thermodynamically unstable and starts to form Mg 2 Ca/Al 12 Mg 17 precipitates. For Ca, as shown in Fig. To connect to specific experimental scenarios the chemical potential can be expressed by physical quantities that describe the environment with which the surface is in thermodynamic contact (see Sec II C). In this section we will consider the initial state of as-cast surfaces, where the solute concentration at the surface and in bulk can be assumed to be in thermodynamic equilibrium (see Fig. In thermodynamic equilibrium the Al/Ca chemical potential in bulk and at the surface are identical. The chemical potential entering Eq. 2 to compute the surface energies can thus be substituted by Eq. 5, allowing us to write it as function of temperature and bulk composition. The resulting segregation isotherms are visualized in Fig. The right diagram (Fig. ingly low, preventing the surface from reaching thermodynamic equilibrium/ segregation isotherms in realistic time intervals. To rationalize the strong tendency of Ca to segregate to the Mg surface, as opposed to Al, we consider materials properties like the surface energies or the atomic radii of the involved elements. Looking first at the surface energies of Mg(0001) (γ = 34.7 meV/ Å2 ), Ca(111) (γ = 34.2 meV/ Å2 The atomic radii of Mg, Ca and Al are 1.60 Å, 1.98 Å and 1.43 Å To study the dissolution behavior of Al and Ca from the Mg(0001) surface in a corrosive environment we use again surface phase diagrams (Fig. 1. Impact of solvation on stability and dissolution of the substitutional elements on Mg(0001) A comparison of the surface phase diagrams for Ca and Al in the absence and presence of water (Fig. atoms is absent in the vacuum case. The solvation energy gain is apparently sufficient to overcome the impact of entropy, which dominates at low chemical potentials and favors disordered surfaces in the vacuum case. The screening of unfavorable electrostatic interactions and the ensuing gain in solvation energy, is an important stabilization mechanism for semiconductor/insulator surfaces in aqueous environment The same energy gain upon solvation is also observed for Al-substituted Mg surfaces, though at a smaller magnitude (Fig. To discuss realistic experimental scenarios we consider a few selected chemical potentials (see Sec. II C 2) that represent bulk (blue dashed lines) or solution concentrations in the electrolyte (dashed red and green lines in Fig. that the x-scale is different for Ca and Al in Fig. The opposite dissolution tendencies of Ca and Al, together with the Al/Ca coverages obtained from the computed surface phase diagrams and the computed electrode potential (work function) of these structures, have direct implications for the corrosion behavior of Mg upon alloying with these elements. To discuss these relations we compute the work functions for the various surface structures and coverages (Fig. In the context of micro galvanic corrosion these trends in the work functions indicate that Ca is likely to act as anode promoting the electron withdrawal, while Al is likely to act as cathode on the Mg surface, in good agreement with observations of corrosion experiments mentioned in the introduction, i.e., Mg shows anodic potentials in the presence of Ca and cathodic potentials in the presence of Al Based on an unified thermodynamic approach that allows us to treat ordered and disordered surface structures in the same framework, and by using chemical potentials as state variables, we construct phase diagrams for Mg surfaces alloyed with Al/Ca including bulk information in the same diagram. For Ca we find a strong tendency to segregate to the surface, as opposed to Al which shows an anti-segregation behavior, preferring to remain in a more bulk like environment. Generating surface segregation isotherms we predict the surface coverage expected for a given bulk concentration and temperature. Accounting for realistic environmental conditions suggested by experiment we identify the relevant surface coverage regimes. Comparing surface phase diagrams for initial state of pristine as cast alloys, i.e. surfaces in vacuum, with ones in contact with an aqueous environment, we find that the built up of a partial solvation shell around the protruding Ca atoms at the surface leads to the stabilisation of a low coverage ordered structure absent in vacuum. Furthermore we expect, based on the significantly higher thermodynamic stability of Ca 2+ ions in solution as opposed to Mg bulk, but also to Al 3+ ions in solution, and the resulting higher dissolution tendency of Ca, that an Al enrichment at the surface will occur under corrosive conditions. Invoking finally materials properties (like the work function) of all involved elements we rationalise the impact of Al and Ca alloying in Mg in the context of micro-galvanic corrosion and conclude that Ca/Al will be anodic/cathodic in Mg, i.e. the presence of Ca will promote corrosion and Al suppress it.