Pentacene is known to grow on isotropic silicon oxide surfaces in a substrate-induced phase with fiber textured crystallites. This growth study reports on the growth of pentacene crystallites on uniaxially oriented surfaces. Silica substrates have been treated by ion beam sputtering so that ripples with a lateral corrugation length of 38 nm and a surface roughness of 1.3 nm are formed. Pentacene thin films with a nominal thickness in the range from 20 nm up to 300 nm are deposited on top of the rippled surfaces. The films are characterized by atomic force microscopy and grazing incidence X-ray diffraction. Bi-axially oriented crystals are formed due to the grooves of the substrate surface opening up the possibility of a defined in-plane alignment of the crystals. In a first stage of thin film growth, the thin film phase (TFP) of pentacene is formed, while in the later stage the bulk crystal structure (C, Campbell phase) also appears. Due to the bi-axial alignment of the crystallites the transition from the thin film phase to the bulk crystal structure can be directly investigated. An epitaxial relationship with (120)TFP || (210)C and [-210]TFP || [1-20]C is observed which can be explained by an adaption of the herringbone layers of both crystal structures. This work reveals one possible microscopic mechanism for the transition from the metastable substrate-induced phase of pentacene to its equilibrium bulk structure. Polymorphism is a frequently discussed topic for pentacene within thin films The use of a substrate with defined surface corrugations -like the one formed on oxygen reconstructed Cu(110) surfaces -results in a different crystallization behavior of pentacene In this work, we study the crystallization of pentacene on an irregular corrugated surface consisting of uni-axially aligned surface ripples. A bi-axial growth of pentacene crystals is observed which allows a clarification of a possible microscopic mechanism for the transition from the thin film phase to the Campbell phase. Amorphous silicon dioxide substrates (Spectrosil 2000 by Heraeus) have been used as substrates. Ripples on the substrates have been prepared within a UHV chamber by ion beam treatment using Ar + ions accelerated with an energy of up to 800 eV towards the substrates up to a fluence of 1.2x10 Pentacene, purchased from Sigma Aldrich and used without further purification, was deposited via physical vapor deposition. The Knudsen cell which was used for this process was mounted orthogonally to the substrate surface to avoid any possible shadowing effects from the surface ripples. Pentacene films with thicknesses of 20 nm, 40 nm and 300 nm were deposited using a growth rate of 0.5 nm/min, controlled via a quartz crystal microbalance. Substrates were kept at ambient temperature during all the different steps. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) measurements have been performed on a Nanosurf Easyscan 2 with a 70 μm scan head in tapping mode. A silicon-spm-sensor tip of the type PPP-NCLR was used. Data were processed and analyzed using the software Gwyddion For the investigation of the crystallographic properties of the pentacene thin films various X-ray diffraction techniques were used to gain information on the alignment of the pentacene crystallites relative to the substrate surface and relative to the surface ripples. First, X-ray diffraction pole figures were performed using a lab-based Philips X-Pert system equipped with an Eulerian cradle. Radiation from a Chromium tube was used in combination with a secondary side graphite monochromator and a proportional counter as point detector. In the case of a pole figure, a constant diffraction angle (or scattering vector) was set and the angle  was varied continuously from 0° to 360° with intensity integration in steps of 3°, while the angle  was varied in steps from 0° to 90 ° with a step size of 2°. It should be noted, that the weak diffraction of our thin film samples only allows measurement of the most intense reflections. An additional complication is that peaks at large  -angles are difficult to detect Rotating grazing incidence X-ray diffraction (rot-GIXD) is a method that allows large volumes of reciprocal space to be measured from thin film samples. Further, the extension of the standard GIXD technique by an additional sample rotation enables the investigation of thin films with azimuthally (inplane) aligned crystallites, i.e. uni-axially, bi-axially, or even fully epitaxially grown thin film crystallites. The measurements were performed at the beamline XRD1 at Elettra Sincrotrone (Trieste, Italy). An Xray energy of 8.86 keV (wavelength of 1.40 Å) was used and diffracted intensity was collected by a Pilatus 2M detector (Dectris, Switzerland). For the measurements the sample was mounted on a setup utilizing a kappa-geometry. A defined incidence angle of 0.5° was used which is well above the critical angle of the pentacene films as well as that of the substrate material. For the rot-GIXD experiments, the samples were rotated azimuthally around the surface normal. An integration range of two degree was chosen, which means 180 images were collected during a full 360° rotation. Detector calibration and conversion of collected data to reciprocal space representation was done using the open access software program GIDVis The bare substrate surfaces, i.e. without pentacene, have been investigated after ion bombardment by ex-situ AFM investigations. The substrate appears rather similar over the entire surface (see Figure with σ being the root-mean-square roughness, ξ the lateral correlation length, and α the roughness exponent or Hurst parameter. The correlation function of the rippled substrate surface is depicted in Figure In a next step, the slopes across the ripples -given by the angle ß -are discussed. The density of the tilt angles ß is depicted in Figure areas incline up to this value relative to the average "mean" sample surface. Considering the central point of the broad distribution, it can be concluded that the ripple profile is rather symmetrical, in analogy to similar ion beam sputtering experiments A pentacene thin film with a nominal thickness of 20 nm was deposited on the rippled substrate surface; Figure The pentacene islands are hardly detectable, but compared to the bare substrate the root-meansquare roughness increased to σRMS = 3.0 nm. This increase can be attributed to the growth of pentacene islands. This image also does not show any morphological anisotropy of the pentacene islands. This is different to other organic thin films which show an anisotropy when deposited on rippled surfaces Figure To determine the alignment of the pentacene crystals with respect to the ripples, the thin films were investigated by X-ray diffraction (XRD). Typically, for such experiments, one starts with a specular XRD scan to test which net plane of pentacene crystals is formed parallel to the substrate surface. Surprisingly, the specular XRD measurements did not reveal any diffraction peaks originating from the organic layer. This means that there is no crystallographic plane that is parallel to the substrate. By performing polefigure measurements, the orientation distribution in all directions above the sample horizon of known poles (or net plane normals) can be determined These directions are across the ripples of the substrate surface perpendicular to the ripples direction, so it can be concluded that the pentacene crystals align with respect to the ripple direction. The second polefigure (Fig. Comparing the maxima of intensity for the two peaks of the thin film phase we observe that the observed intensity is different for the two different directions. This means that the thin film crystallites are more likely to form with an inclination of  = 8° and  = 0°, with a minimum at  = 180°.The data for the Campbell phase shows that the majority of pentacene in the Campbell phase grows at  = 180°, with a minimum at  = 0°. Please note, that the dominant parts of the thin film phase and of the Campbell phase are in opposite directions, i.e. they are rotated by 180° with respect to each other. Comparing the intensities of both phases a relative percentage of 60% and 40% was estimated for the thin film phase and Campbell phase, respectively. Repeating the same polefigure measurements for the 40 nm (data not shown) and extracting the same -scans at  = 8°, a comparable picture with maxima at = 0° and  = 180° is revealed (see Fig. Campbell phase shows that about 80% of pentacene deposited onto the surface is in the thin film phase while 20% is in Campbell phase. This is in good agreement with many observations showing that the thin film phase is dominant in the initial growth stages for pentacene crystals prepared on a flat surface; while the Campbell phase is dominant in thicker films Summarizing the in-house pole figure investigations (Fig. To obtain further information on the in-plane orientation of pentacene crystals grown on rippled silicon oxide surfaces, grazing incidence X-ray diffraction with rotation of the samples was performed. While polefigures are necessary to access diffraction information close or equal to  = 0°, GIXD is particularly helpful for diffraction information present close to the in-plane direction ( = 90°) which is hardly accessible using a standard polefigure setup. In Figure Besides the diffraction patterns, calculated peak positions and peak intensities are also plotted. The thin film phase (black circles) as well as the Campbell phase (red circles) are provided using the previously determined information from the polefigure measurements, i.e. the 001 planes incline by 8° relative to the substrate surface. Please note, that the presented peak positions are based on the conclusion of ideally fibre textured crystallites being present. It means that the absence of a peak in the experiment would mean that this particular crystal orientation does not diffract at this specific sample position. For the sake of visibility, the Laue indices of the calculated peaks are only given in Figure The discussion of the GIXD patterns starts around the specular direction close to qxy = 0. In case of Fig. In a following step, the diffraction peaks at larger scattering vectors (10 nm -1 to 20 nm -1 ) are analyzed. There are many different broad peaks meaning that nearly identical peak patterns are present in Fig. Using the entire data set of a rotating GIXD experiment allows extraction of the complete information regarding the orientation of the two phases relative to the surface ripples. Polefigure representations from this data are found to be a useful tool where they can be calculated by selecting a certain q-value of interest and calculating the corresponding  and  values for each data point with the selected q. Details on this calculation can be found within the open access software program GIDVis A second pole figure was calculated at 20. Crosses and circles give the pole directions for the two equivalent contact planes (see text). The crystallographic directions which are parallel to the surface ripples are given by black dots. Knowing of the crystal alignments from the pole figures, we can determine in a subsequent step how the molecules are aligned relative to the surface ripples and how the molecules of the two phases are oriented relative to each other. Figure An interesting result is the relation of the molecular packing of both phases relative to each other. Identical features for both crystal phases are observed: i) the long molecular axes of the pentacene molecule have the same alignment and ii) the aromatic planes enclose the same tilt angle with respect to neighboring molecules. An adaption of the herringbone layer of the thin film phase to that of the Campbell phase is geometrically possible. The (120) plane of the thin film phase and the (210) plane of the Campbell phase act as a quasi-twinning plane for connection of the Campbell phase with the thin film phase. This twinning plane leads to a defined angle between the (001) planes of both phases (compare Fig. The deposition of pentacene on flat SiOx surfaces typically results in the formation of the thin film phase already in the initial growth stages. On the deposition of more material, the Campbell phase become evident and develops more significantly compared to the thin film phase as the thickness increases. A very similar situation is observed for the growth on a rippled surface, a small amount of Campbell phase is present in the 40 nm film, but becomes more dominant in thicker films of 300 nm. This means that the thin film phase becomes less dominant with increasing film thickness. Recent results suggest the extinction of the thin film phase is a result of self-limited growth so that at larger film thickness the Campbell phase is favored The growth of pentacene islands on flat SiOx surfaces also results in the formation of islands which after the first monolayers develop a strong tendency towards 3D island formation with distinct terraces of about 1.5 nm step height The growth of pentacene reveals large differences in the diffraction pattern when either a flat surface or a rippled surface are used as the substrate. Specular X-ray diffraction on films grown on flat surfaces reveals a typical fiber texture with a common (001) contact plane with the substrate surface, but a random in-plane (azimuthal) behavior The nucleation at step edges is not observed for pentacene on silicon dioxide surfaces; therefore, it is surprising that the thin film phase is formed on rippled surfaces. Obviously, a substrate surface with a roughness of 1.8 nm, a roughness exponent of 0.7 and correlation lengths of 38 nm and 110 nm provides sufficient flat areas, so that a substrate-induced phase can be formed. The question arises why an 8° inclination of the crystallites is formed most often. The identified maximum surface slopes of the substrate at 8.5° might correlate to the nucleation sites of the crystallites due to sufficiently extended flat areas. Such a flat area of maximum tilt might coincide with an inflection point about half way down the ripple as schematically drawn in Figure In the in-plane direction, the dominating crystal growth directions of the thin film phase and of the Campbell phase are analyzed in combination with each other (compare Fig. This work investigates the growth of pentacene crystals on a rough silicon oxide surface. A substrate with uniaxially aligned surface ripples is chosen with a ripple height of a few nm and with an average lateral periodicity of about 87 nm. In the first growth stage the thin film phase of pentacene is formed, but also a small fraction of Campbell phase crystallites appears. At the advanced thin film growth stage, Campbell phase crystallites becomes more dominant. Biaxially aligned crystals are formed with a highly defined out-of-plane alignment of the crystallites, but with weak in-plane alignment. The dominant part of the pentacene thin film phase crystallites are analyzed in relation to the dominant part of the Campbell phase crystallites. A transition from the metastable thin film phase to the thermodynamically stable Campbell phase is concluded by the nucleation of the (210) plane of the Campbell phase at the (120) plane of the thin film phase. An explanation is given at the molecular scale by an adaption of the herringbone packing by the molecules of both phases.