Functional devices with ultrathin ferroelectric layers have been attracted as a promising candidate for next-generation memory and logic device applications. Using the ultrathin ferroelectric layers, particularly approaching two-dimensional limit, however, it is still challenging to control ferroelectric switching and to observe ferroelectricity by spectroscopic tools. In particular, conventional methods such as electrical measurements and piezoelectric response force microscopy are very limited due to leakage currents and the smallness of the ferroelectric signals. Here, we show that the ferroelectricity of ultrathin SrRuO3/BaTiO3/SrRuO3 heterostructures grown on SrTiO3(100) substrates can be measured using resonant x-ray reflectivity (RXRR). This experimental technique can provide an element-specific electronic depth profile as well as increased sensitivity to Ti off-center displacements at the Ti K pre-edge. The depth-sensitivity of RXRR selectively detect the strong polarization dependence of the Ti pre-edge features of ultrathin BaTiO3 layers while discriminating contribution of the SrTiO3 substrate. This technique verified that the BaTiO3 layer can be ferroelectric down to the lowest experimental limit of a critical thickness of 2.5 unit-cells. Our results can open a novel way to explore ultrathin ferroelectricbased nano-electronic devices. Ferroelectric materials have attracted tremendous interest due to their novel physical properties and potential nanoelectronic device applications. The electrically switchable spontaneous polarization of a ferroelectric layer enables electric-field control of its electrical transport, magnetic, mechanical, and optical properties. The critical thickness of ferroelectric thin films has long been an important issue. Here, we report an experimental technique for investigating ferroelectric signals in ultrathin ferroelectric BTO films, namely polarization-dependent resonant x-ray reflectivity (RXRR). The BTO films sandwiched by metallic SRO electrodes were fabricated on SrTiO3 (STO)(001) substrate using pulsed laser deposition. In the RXRR measurements, the pre-edge fine structure (PEFS) near Ti K absorption edge of the ultrathin BTO film was noticeably enhanced, evidencing the ferroelectricity of the BTO layer as thin as 2.5 uc. This is thinner than the previously reported experimental critical thickness for BTO ferroelectricity. The ultrathin BTO films with metallic SRO top-and bottom-electrodes were grown by pulsed laser deposition on atomically smooth TiO2-terminated STO (001) substrates. During the growth, the substrate temperature was maintained at 1000 K for both SRO and BTO growth. The ambient oxygen pressure was held at 100 mTorr and 5 mTorr for SRO and BTO, respectively. The thickness of each layer was monitored by using the specular spot intensity of reflection high-energy electron diffraction (RHEED) during the growth. Figure Both for tBTO = 3.5 uc and tBTO = 2.5 uc, the estimated electron densities of each layer were well consistent with the values expected from the atomic form factors at measured energy (approximately 1.33, 1.76, and 1.30 electrons per unit-cell volume for BTO, SRO, and STO, respectively). To elucidate the absence of enhancement, total electric field amplitude inside the heterostructure was simulated using the parameters obtained from the fit to x-ray reflectivity in Figure We performed RXRR measurements on the SRO/BTO/SRO heterostructures for selectively sensing the Ti K-edge absorption spectra of ultrathin BTO layers. Figure where λλ is x-ray wavelength, ρρ aaaaaaaa,jj is the atomic density of layer jj, rr ee is electron radius. ff jj + iiff jj with ff αααα (EE) = ff αααα The scattering factor of ultrathin BTO layer, ff BBBBBB = ff BBBBBB The non-resonant and resonant x-ray reflectivity curves are fitted using ff BBBBBB as a fitting parameter. The scattering factor of the STO layer was obtained by the reference STO Ti-K XAS (for the imaginary part) and its Kramers-Kronig transformation (for the real part). The SRO scattering factor was calculated by using reported atomic form factors of Sr, Ru, O atoms. The fitted RXRR curves (black curves in Figure To get the further insight on the ferroelectric-related PEFS, we measured the PEFS peak area of both samples. The PEFS peak area is proportional to Δrr BBTT The inconsistency with the previous PFM study on 2.5 uc-thick BTO films could be explained by two possibilities: the reduction of piezoelectric displacement obtained from RXRR and ferroelectric polarization pinning. As total piezoelectric displacement is proportional both to the ferroelectric polarization and film thickness, the expected piezoelectric displacement for 2.5 ucthick BTO can be significantly decreased about 50% of that for 3.5 uc-thick BTO rather than 24%. When the reduced piezoelectric displacement meets the detection limit of PFM, it is difficult to detect ferroelectric PFM hysteresis. Another possible explanation could be the ferroelectric polarization pinning. PFM measured the difference between oppositely aligned ferroelectric polarization, not absolute polarization value. Thus, PFM hysteresis would not be observed if the ferroelectric polarizations of 2.5 uc-thick BTO were not switchable because of interface dipoles or defects. In summary, we have investigated the polar structure of ultrathin ferroelectric heterostructures with 3.5 uc-thick and 2.5 uc-thick BTO layers using XAS and RXRR. The bulk-sensitive Ti-K XAS on ultrathin BTO heterostructures exhibited negligible enhancement of ferroelectric-related PEFS peak due to the dominant contribution from STO substrate. On the other hand, selectively achieved ultrathin BTO layer Ti-K spectra by RXRR shows clear enhancement in ferroelectricrelated PEFS peak, providing quantitative information on ferroelectric polarization. Interestingly, using RXRR, we found that the ferroelectric TiO6 distortion exists even for the 2.5 uc-thick BTO layer, which is thinner than the previously reported critical thickness for BTO ferroelectricity. These results suggest a novel way to investigate ferroelectricity in ultrathin limit. Microsc. 1998, 190 (1-2),45-51. 