β-Mn-type CoxZnyMnz (x + y + z = 20) alloys have recently attracted increasing attention as a new class of chiral magnets with skyrmions at and above room temperature. However, experimental studies on the transport properties of this material are scarce. In this work, we report the successful growth of the β-Mn-type Co9.24Zn9.25Mn1.51 and Co9.02Zn9.18Mn1.80 single crystals and a systematic study on their magnetic and transport properties. The skyrmion phase was found in a small temperature range just below the Curie temperature. The isothermal ac susceptibility and dc magnetization as a function of magnetic field confirm the existence of the skyrmion phase. A negative linear magnetoresistance over a wide temperature range from 2 K to 380 K is observed and attributed to the suppression of the magnetic ordering fluctuation under high fields. Both the magnetization and electrical resistivity are almost isotropic. The quantitative analysis of the Hall resistance suggests that the anomalous Hall effect of Co9.24Zn9.25Mn1.51 and Co9.02Zn9.18Mn1.80 single crystals is dominated by the intrinsic mechanism. Our findings contribute to a deeper understanding of the properties of CoxZnyMnz (x + y + z = 20) alloys material and advance their application in spintronic devices. Skyrmions have captured vast attention due to their various intriguing properties including the topological Hall effect (THE), the emergent electrodynamics, as well as their potential applications in low-power electronics and non-volatile memories Over the last decade, a large amount of research on skyrmions has been conducted on thin films or quasi-two dimensional systems Despite the extensive studies on CoxZnyMnz (x + y + z = 20) compound In this work, the high-quality Co9Zn9Mn2 single crystals were synthesized by the self-flux method. We systematically investigated the magnetic and transport properties of the samples. The magnetic susceptibility results show that skyrmions appear in the temperature range from 354 K to 360 K. Moreover, the longitudinal magnetoresistance (LMR) and transverse magnetoresistance (TMR) both display negative magnetoresistance, which is associated with the suppressed fluctuation of magnetic ordering by magnetic field. Importantly, we find that a detailed analysis about the Hall resistance suggests a main contribution of the intrinsic mechanism to the observed AHE in Co9Zn9Mn2. This assumption is further confirmed by the linear relationship between intrinsic anomalous Hall conductivity (AHC) and the magnetization, which is different from the previously reported skew scattering of Co7Zn8Mn5 alloy Single crystals of CoxZnyMnz (x + y + z) = 20 with different Mn contents were synthesized by using the Zn-flux method. Co (99.99%), Zn (99.99%) and Mn (99.99%) grains were mixed and placed in an alumina crucible. The crucible was then sealed in a quartz tube in a vacuum environment, and heated at 1100 °C for 2 days in the furnace before slowly cooled down to 900 °C. It was kept at 900 °C for 2 days before finally water quenched to get the samples. The resulting single crystals are very shiny with no regular shape as shown in the insets of Fig. The resistivity was measured by a standard four-probe method using a Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS-14, Quantum Design). In addition, upon cooling to around 120 K, the magnetic susceptibility χ decreases significantly with the decreasing temperature. This is because at low temperatures, the Co moment remains ordering, while the Mn moment remains fluctuating, resulting in disorder so causing eventually a gradual decrease in saturated magnetization Interestingly, there appears a sharp peak in both FCC and FCW curves around T C as shown in the insets of Fig. Meanwhile, all three anomalies disappear when the temperature is above 361 K. Therefore, the temperature ranges of the abnormality appearing in the x ́-μ 0 H curves and dM/dH vs μ 0 H curves are basically the same. In the inset of Fig. (1) In heavy fermion compounds above the Kondo temperature scale, a regime where f-electrons are not a part of the coherent excitations defined around a large Fermi surface and conduction electrons are thus scattered by local moments, the applied magnetic field would suppressed the electronic scattering rate from local moments and magnetic impurities, leading to negative simultaneous LMR and TMR Considering that Co9.24Zn9.25Mn1.51 and Co9.02Zn9.18Mn1.80 single crystals are metallic ferromagnet, leaving the suppressed fluctuations of ferromagnetic ordering as the mechanism behind In conclusion, we have successfully synthesized the chiral β-Mn-type 