Catalyst discovery is paramount to support access to energy and key chemical feedstocks in a post fossil fuel era. Exhaustive computational searches of large material design spaces using ab-initio methods like density functional theory (DFT) are infeasible. We seek to explore large design spaces at relatively low computational cost by leveraging large, generalized, graphbased machine learning (ML) models, which are pretrained and therefore require no upfront data collection or training. We present catlas, a framework that distributes and automates the generation of adsorbate-surface configurations and ML inference of DFT energies to achieve this goal. Catlas is open source, making ML assisted catalyst screenings easy and available to all. To demonstrate its efficacy, we use catlas to explore catalyst candidates for the direct conversion of syngas to multi-carbon oxygenates. For this case study, we explore 947 stable/ metastable binary, transition metal intermetallics as possible catalyst candidates. On this subset of materials, we are able to predict the adsorption energy of key descriptors, *CO and *OH, with near-DFT accuracy (0.16, 0.14 eV MAE, respectively). Using the projected selectivity towards C2+ oxygenates from an existing microkinetic model, we identified 144 candidate materials. For 10 promising candidates, DFT calculations reveal a good correlation with our assessment using ML. Among the top elemental combinations were Pt-Ti, Pd-V, Ni-Nb, and Ti-Zn, all of which appear unexplored experimentally. As we look to recast our energy infrastructure, we need to discover novel catalysts to support our new vision. Catalysts will allow access to key chemical feedstocks we have come to rely on today, but from renewable resources. One method of accessing carbon feedstocks is conversion of synthesis gas (syngas). Synthesis gas is a mixture of carbon monoxide and hydrogen. It may be accessed from renewable biomass feedstocks To run a screening, a clear objective is necessary (i.e. to achieve high selectivity and/or activity). The computational approach to catalyst discovery necessitates the observation of many different sites, on many different surfaces, for every material in order to understand how it might behave as a catalyst and therefore assess it against the objective. One binary material would require hundreds of DFT calcula- tions to fully uncover its behavior as a catalyst. Observation of adsorbed intermediate and transition state energies allow an understanding of the overall rate and overall selectivity to be developed through microkinetic modeling. Microkinetic models (MKMs) are well established for determining trends. Here, we used off-the-shelf pretrained graph neural network models, which required no upfront DFT data collection or model training, to explore 947 binary intermetallics as catalyst candidates. Looking at facets with miller indices not exceeding 1, we considered 16k surfaces, which yield 1 million adsorbate-surface configurations. To facilitate this process we developed and introduce a software package, catlas, which automates the process of generating slabs from bulk structures, placing adsorbates on the slabs, and performing inference on the adsorbate-surface configurations. Catlas orchestrates the distribution of these trivially parallelizable tasks so that many GPUs and/or CPUs may be used to accelerate the process. We then used an existing microkinetic model to project the selectivity as a function of two descriptor adsorption energies. The intermediate and transition state energies were correlated with the energies of *CO and *OH on the (111) surfaces of Face-centered cubic (FCC) pure metals to project the selectivity across a complex reaction network. The resulting selectivity heatmap (Figure All models considered were graph neural networks trained on the OC20 dataset. Model selection comes with a trade-off: lower mean absolute error (MAE) between model predicted values and DFT calculated values often requires higher computational cost. Inference where the adsorption energy is directly predicted from the initial structure (initial structure to relaxed energy -IS2RE -direct) is substantially cheaper than using ML to iteratively optimize the structure and predict the energy from the relaxed structure (structure to energy and forces -S2EF). These two schemes are shown in Figure Catlas was used to enumerate adsorbate-surface configurations for all surfaces with miller indices not exceeding one. Any relaxations with adsorbate desorption, adsorbate dissociation, or surface reconstruction were discarded. For each of the enumerated surfaces, once dense inference had been performed, the minimum binding energies for each descriptor (*CO and *OH) were computed and taken to be the representative energy for that surface. Analysis was performed on a per surface basis. No surface energy calculations were performed so it is not guaranteed that surfaces with good descriptor energies will appear experimentally or that their properties will dominate observed behavior. Because the MKM was developed for face-centered cubic (FCC) (111) surfaces, surfaces were discarded if they were not (111)-like (close packed). The selectivity information was determined by resolving the microkinetic model presented by Schumann et al. There were small differences in the selectivity map solved for this work, but the overall domain of interest was the same. The potential candidacy of binary transition metal combinations was considered using two criteria: (1) the minimum distance of any surface to the maximum observed selectivity towards acetaldehyde. The distance from the maximum selectivity was calculated for all surfaces. For each elemental combination, the minimum distance across all surfaces was calculated and was taken to represent the composition. (2) We counted the number of surfaces which lie in a descriptor space containing a projected selectivity greater than or equal to 0.1. If any part of the descriptor space bounded by an ellipse with radii equal to twice the mean absolute error (MAE) of the ML models has a selectivity greater than 0.1, then that surface was considered to be a candidate. This is repeated for all surfaces and the number of candidates for each metal combination was calculated. MAE was used as a proxy for uncertainty because uncertainty information is not available from the models. The architecture of catlas is summarized in Figure Catlas uses dask Parity plots comparing the GemNet ML predicted energies and DFT energies are shown in Figure There are still two important sources of error to consider: (1) differences between the actual intermediate and transition state energies and those propagated via scaling relations implicitly in the MKM and (2) differences between the DFT approach employed in the data used to train the GemNet models and the approach used to collect data for the MKM. Differences between the actual intermediate and transition state energies and those propagated via scaling relations implicitly in the MKM are relevant here because we are extrapolating the MKM to binary intermetallics with similar facets despite it being developed for unary surfaces. Although this approach will not perfectly treat all possibilities, it should treat the majority of cases well, and therefore is a useful tool for broad exploration. Figure The results of assessing candidates by the minimum distance to the maximum selectivity and the number of surfaces near high selectivity are summarized in Figure It is difficult to make comparisons between the results here and the best known materials because materials reported are highly modified. The proportions of slab surface motifs for the 16,000 surfaces considered here are shown in Table Exploring large design spaces for novel catalysts using DFT is infeasible. DFT surrogates have historically required the construction of expensive domain-specific DFT training data sets. Here, we show that off-the-shelf models pretrained on the OC20 22 dataset have achieved near DFT accuracy for a broad domain of materials captured in the dataset. We present catlas, an open source framework to parallelize and automate the process of evaluating materials as catalysts based upon descriptors. We demonstrate its efficacy by considering the direct conversion of syngas to multi-carbon oxygenates. With the well-posed objective for *OH and *CO descriptor energies from Schumann et al., we were able to screen 947 stable and meta-stable materials and discover a subset which may be well positioned for this chemistry. With the design space narrowed by our approach, candidates may be prioritized and tractably assessed using more detailed studies with DFT or by experimental investigation. The utility of catlas is underscored by the evolving understanding of the kinetics for the direct conversion of syngas to multi-carbon oxygenates. When an improved descriptor-based kinetic model is available, catlas may be used to assess potential catalyst candidates with ease. The generalized framework of catlas, makes it extensible. With clear objective descriptors, catlas may be used to discover catalysts for any arbitrary chemistry. Broderick acknowledges research support by the Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office of Basic Sciences, Data Science for Knowledge Discovery for Chemical and Materials Research program, under award DE-SC0020392. We would like to acknowledge Janice Lan from Meta AI Research for running and processing the OC20-like *CO data that was used here to make Figure 