Excitons, which are composite boson quasi-particles composed of bound electrons and holes, have many fascinating properties and great potential in practical applications. Though experimental studies on exciton dynamics are well-developed, the ab initio simulation ones still remain vacant until two years ago. Here, we apply the density functional theory (DFT) and many-body perturbation theory (MBPT) on 2D MoSi 2 N 4 to study its exciton-related physics and non-adiabatic ultrafast exciton dynamics theoretically and numerically for the first time. Due to its wide band gap, large exciton binding energy and similar 2D hexagonal crystal structure to transition-metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), we expect MoSi 2 N 4 to have distinguished excitonic properties. We calculate the photoluminescence (PL) spectra with final states as bright excitons, yet lots of them are contributed by the dark ones, and the results match the experimental ones perfectly. We also study the dark-exciton-involved processes, which were barely studied in the past but dominate in many physical processes, and obtain several main results like: (i) High scattering rates over the whole Brillouin zone (BZ) within the order of magnitude from 10 -2 fs -1 to 10 1 fs -1 ; (ii) Thorough analysis for the dynamics of the dark excitons at Λ valley, which have negative effective mass and the highest scattering rate among several exciton states; (iii) Simulate the time-resolved evolution of the excitons after photo-excitation with the real-time Boltzmann transport equation (rt-BTE) techniques, in which process excitons at K/K valley play an important role; (iv) Exciton dynamics with spin-valley locking at K/K valley are also discussed here; (v) A new approach is proposed for modulating the non-adiabatic effects for excitons, accompanied by a chiral phonon absorption/emission, by tuning the chirality of the external circularly polarized light. All the results show that the 2D material MoSi 2 N 4 is an ideal platform to study the exciton-involved physics and has great application value. Excitons were initially discovered to be pivotal in the photoexcitation, while gradually, they were also found to be dominant in a wide variety of physical processes, such as Bose-Einstein condensation Since the pace of theoretical research on exciton dynamics is slightly behind the pace of experiments and applications, there is a growing demand for a comprehensive theoretical description of exciton dynamics, especially at the ab initio computational level, which can help us to understand the exciton dynamics in materials directly. Although ab initio approaches are well-established to predict exciton binding energies, optical transitions, and radiative lifetimes, those for exciton dynamics and non-adiabatic processes have just been established recently. Through continuous attempts, scientists have finally achieved great success in describing the vivid and precise picture of exciton dynamics in real materials through in-depth analysis of exciton-involved many-body interactions, such as exciton-phonon (Ex-Ph) For the reason that 2D material MoSi 2 N 4 has a similar crystal structure to hexagonal transition-metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) In this paper, ab initio approaches based on the density functional theory (DFT) and many-body perturbation theory (MBPT) are utilized to calculate the electron, phonon and exciton properties of MoSi 2 N 4 . We explore many exotic exciton dynamic processes in MoSi 2 N 4 for the first time, such as the transport patterns of Ex-Ph scattering, which has a significant influence on various exciton-involved physical properties in most cases, photoluminescence (PL), scattering rates (SRs), and most importantly, time-dependent exciton Boltzmann transport during the photoexcitation process, which can be observed by time-resolved angleresolved photoemission spectroscopy (trARPES). We also note that our PL calculations are in perfect agreement with the experimental results, and all the results show MoSi 2 N 4 an ideal platform for studying the non-adiabatic exciton dynamics. 0.1 Crystal structure, electronic and phonon band structure for MoSi 2 N 4 MoSi 2 N 4 and its family materials have attracted increasing interests recently ever since they were discovered, for having similar crystal structure with 2D hexagonal TMDs and even better physical properties . Figure Figure where I and R represent the infrared and Raman activity, respectively. E and E correspond to the degenerate LA/TA and LO/TO branches, while A 1 and A 2 are the ZA and ZO branches, respectively. Phonon frequencies in MoSi 2 N 4 range from 0 meV to 129.88 meV, which offers a wide energy choice for the phonon-related scatterings. Thus, MoSi 2 N 4 is an ideal platform for studying the Ex-Ph coupling, which plays an important role in the exciton dynamic processes. Excitons are quasiparticles composed of the electron-hole pairs bound by the Coulomb interactions. The effects of excitons are enhanced in 2D materials due to the reduced screening effects, which makes them ideal platforms for studying exciton-related physics. Since MoSi 2 N 4 and TMDs share similar 2D hexagonal crystal structure and spinful electronic band structure, similar exciton spectra and exciton-involved processes are also expected in those two kinds of materials. Among the diverse exciton-involved processes, Ex-Ph coupling is always essential in all materials and has a great impact on all kinds of behaviors, such as the photoexcited process in TMDs. Thus, it's important to implement a study on these Ex-Ph scattering's impacts before focusing on the exciton dynamics. Although excitons are widely distributed in both momentum and frequency spaces, the ones receiving extensive attention are those with zero momentum (Q = 0 at Γ) and lower energies. The reason is not only because they are relatively easily excited, but also because only the excitons with Q = 0 can couple with photons. Excitons with Q = 0 and having significantly strong coupling strength with photons are called bright excitons. As shown in Fig. Therefore, excitons with non-zero momentum are receiving more and more attention in recent days. The emitting lights encode the information of this whole process, which is documented in the PL spectrum and observable by experiments. Figure The energy windows for the Ex-Ph coupling of those two bright excitons are marked by yellow and green dashed lines in Fig. Therefore, in order to figure out which momentum (for both exciton with Q and phonon with q = -Q) dominates in the Ex-Ph scattering process and generates bright excitons with Q = 0, momentum-resolved phonon-assisted photoluminescence (PL) contribution pattern for MoSi 2 N 4 with final exciton states of band #3 and band #8 (two bright excitons marked by the pink dots at Γ) are calculated by following Eq. ( In order to have a direct comparison with experimental results, we also calculated the integrated phonon-assisted photoluminescence (PL) spectra with Eq. ( We also compare the PL spectrums at different temperatures, as shown in Fig. Driven by their exotic physical properties and the explosion of applications, studies on excitons have gradually stepped out the Q = 0 point over the past five years, which opens the door to the long-forgotten physics of dark excitons with Q = 0. Besides, Ex-Ph coupling process has remained intriguing but mysterious for a long time, especially for the dark ones, which have a wide distribution in the momentum space and make differences in all kinds of physical processes. In this paper, we study the Ex-Ph scattering rates in the whole BZ where dark excitons dominate, based on the Ex-Ph coupling scenarios described in Eq. ( Starting from the simplified free exciton's Hamiltonian written as , where m * e (m * h ) is the electron(hole)'s effective mass, m * γ is the reduced mass, Q is the momentum of the whole exciton and p is the relative momentum describing the relative motion of the electron-hole pair to their orbit center. Therefore, the effective mass of exciton M (M = m * e + m * h ) is directly related to the second-other derivative of the exciton dispersion. Therefore we can obtain that the excitons at Λ valleys have negative masses, which is not common and makes their corresponding Ex-Ph dynamic process even more valuable to be discussed, as shown in Fig. In the Λ intravalley scattering process, excitons transit between different exciton energy states with phonons carrying q = 0, as marked by the orange circle at Λ valley shown in Fig. We also study the temperature dependence of scattering rates for the excitons at Λ valley from 100 K to 400 K, as shown in Fig. Compared with the time-resolved ultrafast dynamics experimental approaches, that have developed rapidly in recent years, such as tr-ARPES, the dynamic method being able to be used to study the time-resolved excitons from the viewpoint of first-principles has been barely realized. In order to have a vivid insight into the exciton non-adiabatic dynamic process, we employ rt-BTE here to simulate the exciton diffusion process after a strong photo-excitation from the semi-classic point of view. Such a process will start from the light-pulse-induced non-equilibrium state, where most excitons gather in the bright exciton states at Γ, and end with equilibrium ones. Exciton distributions in the Q space are calculated at the time of 20 fs, 100 fs and 200 fs, separately, as shown in Figure As shown in Fig. = +1 (-1). Chiral phonons with different l ph will have different vibration modes in the real space, which are illustrated in Fig. Figure The non-adiabatic effects and the dynamics of the excitons are barely discussed before. But in this work, they are successfully simulated and investigated with our self-developed codes. We also study the long-neglected excitons with non-zero momentum, which are found to be crucial in the exciton dynamics. Timeresolved Ex-Ph dynamics is studied by rt-BTE for the first time, i.e., the evolution of excitons after the photoexcitation, via our self-developed code. We conduct a comprehensive study on the non-adiabatic properties of exciton in MoSi 2 N 4 for the first time. Starting from the analysis of the PL process mostly contributed by the Ex-Ph coupling of dark excitons, we unveil their contributions to the brightexciton-photon coupling behaviors and discover their strong Ex-Ph scattering rates over the whole BZ, with values ranging from 10 -2 fs -1 to 10 1 fs -1 . We notice that at Λ valley, dark excitons have negative effective masses and some of them have the strongest Ex-Ph coupling effects, which originate from their distinctive intravalley and intervalley scattering processes. These findings can help us to have more insights into further exciton-related investigations, especially for the barely studied dark excitons. The time-resolved Ex-Ph dynamic results show that the whole system needs about 200 fs to get back to the equilibrium and Γ → K/K intervalley scatterings are essential in this process. We also propose a new way to modulate the Ex-Ph coupling and valley polarization, together with spin-valley locking effects, by us-ing the photon circular dichroism properties of photoexcitation, based on the conservation rules of spin, energy, momentum and pseudo-angular momentum in the electron-phonon scattering process. Both the non-adiabatic exciton dynamics and the spin-valley exciton dynamics at K/K will inspire scientists to explore more exciton-related physics in MoSi 2 N 4 , which will promote the development of their practical applications. We acknowledge the support from Tokodai Institute for Element Strategy (TIES) funded by MEXT Elements Strategy Initiative to Form Core Research Center Grants No. JPMXP0112101001, and from JSPS KAKENHI grants JP18H03678 and JP20H04633. T. Z. also acknowledges the support by the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS), KAKENHI Grant No. JP21K13865. T.Z. devised the project idea. M.K. performed most of the calculations. S.M. and T.Z. analyzed the results. All the authors prepared the main part of the manuscript and edited the manuscript. The Authors declare no Competing Financial or Non-Financial Interests. In real materials, their excitonic properties are strongly related to their electronic structures, especially their band gap. Therefore, the GW calculation is set to be the first step to study exciton physics, since it can offer a precise band structure of quasiparticles including the complicated electron-electron many-body effects. An one-shot G 0 W 0 calculation is conducted in our work, in which the formula of self-energy correction to the DFT eigenvalues can be written as, where ε nk is the DFT eigenvalue given by the exchange-correlation potential V xc in the local density approximation (LDA). Here, the generalized plasmon pole (GPP) model is used to calculate the selfenergy term in our calculation. The BSE kernel builds a bridge between bare exciton propagator and bare electron-hole propagator by including the effects of the bare exchange Coulomb repulsion and screened Coulomb attraction. The kernel can be expressed as a two-particle Hamiltonian matrix, where ε vk /ε ck is the eigenvalue of the hole/electron, f is the occupation number and the last two kernel terms K x and K c are the exchange and attraction part, respectively. By diagonalizing this BSE matrix, we can get the exciton states with each momentum Q in the adiabatic approximation, which are the stepping stones for our further non-adiabatic investigation. The 1st-order Ex-Ph coupling in materials is mainly contributed by the Fan-Migdal and the Debye-Waller self-energy terms and the dumping effects are only caused by the Fan-Migdal terms. Here, we discuss the 1st-order Ex-Ph coupling under Fan-Migdal approximation and the first-order exciton-phonon coupling matrix elements can be written as, where the A SQ vck is the projection coefficent from exciton state |S onto electron-hole basis |vc , g mnλ (k, q) is the first-order EPC matrix element, where m/n is the electron band index, ν/ν is the phonon branch index and k/q is the momentum for hole/phonon. The first-order EPI matrix is implemented with the density functional perturbation theory (DFPT), which is treated as a good approximation to the GW perturabtion theory (GWPT). With the firstorder exciton-phonon coupling matrix, the dynamical Fan-Migdal (FMd) self-energy can be given as, where N B is the Bose-Einstein distribution and the iω n will be replaced by iω n = ω + iη, in which η is the given broadening. The static Fan-Migdal (FMs) term Σ FMs SS is neglected here because it only includes the transitions which are virtual and there'll be no contribution to the renormalization of excitons' energy and excitons' lifetime. The Debye-Waller terms' effect on self-energy correction is temporarily not discussed here and will be included in future works. Besides, the non-excitonic terms are neglected here and only the Fan-Migdal term contributes to the excitons' lifetime. Thus the excitons' lifetime led by nonadiatic effect can be simply expressed under SERTA as and with the exciton-phonon coupling strength formula, the phonon-assisted PL spectrum can be predicted as With the help of PWSCF and PHONON distributions in Quantum ESPRESSO In the Ex-Ph coupling part, the numerical calculation is based on our self-developed code. MPI is used for parallel computation with high efficiency. We use the same k-meshes (24×24×1) for the calculations of electron, phonon and exciton. Eigenstates for electrons/holes on the closest two bands of each side of the forbidden gap are chosen as the basis of exciton envelop wave function according to the materials' electronic structure pattern. The Ex-Ph coupling is only calculated with the lowest 15 exciton bands due to their low occupation numbers and relatively strong coupling effects. And the rt-BTE method is based on the formula given in Ref. Here, we conduct the calculation on a, strictly speaking, bulk but optimized stable crystal structure of MoSi 2 N 4 . Studies have shown that this material is quasi-2D since there is little difference between the band structure of the bulk, monolayer and multilayer structures We also note that the phonon spectra in our paper are slightly different from the results given in Ref 