Topological superconductivity as an exotic quantum phenomenon with coupled nontrivial topological order and superconductivity together in a single substance has drawn extensive attention because of its novelty as well as the potential for quantum computation 1-6 . A direct idea for producing topological superconductors is to create superconductivity based on the well recognized topological insulators mainly focusing on Bi 2 Se 3 doped by metals such as Cu Therefore, this work points out a big pool and new direction for finding topological superconductors from topological thermoelectric materials. The results also demonstrate that the critical field measure is an easy and powerful method for the identification of topological superconductivity in the system where topological surface states and superconductivity coexist. Symmetry and topology are two of the main themes of modern physics, especially the condensed matter physics in recent decades. In two dimensions (2D), quantum (anomalous) Hall effects emerge with nontrivial electronic topology when the time-reversal symmetry is broken When the time-reversal symmetry is preserved, quantum Hall states then develop into the quantum spin Hall (QSH) phase Theoretical proposals followed by various experimental measurements have been carried out to address these two questions. Classified by the irreducible representations of the point group D 3d , the possible pairing symmetry of Bi(Te,Se) systems has been theoretically proposed as A 1g phase (s-wave), odd-parity A 1u phase The room-temperature phase and structure behaviours of Bi 2 Te 2.7 Se 0.3 at ambient pressure and high pressures were determined by X-ray diffraction measurements. The details for the experiments and refinements are given in Methods. The diffraction patterns and profiles indicate the occurrence of several phases at high pressures (Fig. Such a minimum was also observed in both Bi 2 Te 3 52 and Bi 2 Se 3 The experimental evidence for pressure-induced ETT in Bi 2 (Te,Se) 3 -based system through vari-ous techniques is summarized in Methods. For n-type Bi 2 Te 2.7 Se 0.3 , the ETT near 2 GPa has been firmly confirmed through the pressure dependence of σ, S, their power factor σS 2 , effective mass, and charge mobility The structural characters of the obtained four phases were further examined through highpressure Raman scattering measurements. The phonon modes appear in accordance with the structural symmetry of each phase (Extended Data Figs. GPa where the FWHM of the A 1 1g and A 2 1g mode changes slope (Extended Data Fig. Hall effect measurements at low temperature of 10 K were carried out to examine the validity of the nontrivial topological surface states under pressure. The Hall resistivity ρ xy vs magnetic field curves for representative pressures reveal the different nature of the carriers in the obtained four phases (Fig. The obtained surface mobility μ s is one order larger in magnitude than the bulk value μ b over the whole pressure region studied in Phase I, supporting the nontrivial topological state. As can be seen from Fig. We perform the first-principles calculations of the Bi 2 Te 2.7 Se 0.3 alloy in the R-3m phase under pressures (Fig. Furthermore, the evolution of energy contours of the top bulk valance band with increasing pressure (Fig. Among the obtained four phases, only Phase I carries on the topological states at room temperature. Therefore, topological superconductivity can be only expected in this phase. To verify this expectation, we then cool down the material and perform transport measurements. As expected, superconducting transitions are observed at low temperatures with a sudden resistivity drop at 4.3 GPa and even to zero value at 5.5 GPa, and the zero-resistivity states are always achievable for pressures higher than 5.5 GPa (Fig. The same spectroscopic features at room temperature (Extended Data Fig. indicate that the compound keeps the same electronic phases at low temperatures as determined at room temperature. The nontrivial topological states can coexist with the superconducting state in Phase I at pressures up to 10 GPa (Extended Data Fig. In the trivial superconductors without surface states, the critical field is linear in temperature. Denote ξ ∝ (1 -T /T c ) -1/2 as the coherence length of the superconductor, then superconductivity is killed when a flux quantum 1 -T /T c , which corresponds to the high-pressure cases as shown for 14.0 GPa and 16.8 GPa (Fig. In the topological superconductors with surface states, the critical field can have critical exponent of 2/3 in the temperature dependence. After the bulk superconductivity is killed, as we further increase magnetic field strength, the surface layer of the thickness ∼ l s prefers to remain superconducting. The new length scale l s , known as the extrapolation length, measures the coupling strength between the topological states and superconductivity on the surface. When a flux quantum is trapped in the area ∼ ζ 2 near the surface, superconductivity is killed, where ζ = (l s ξ 2 ) 1/3 combines the extrapolation length of the surface superconductivity and the coherence length of the bulk superconductivity. We then derive , which corresponds to the 6.4 GPa case of Fig. From the obtained experimental evidence for surface states, we believe the superconducting state of the Bi 2 Te 2.7 Se 0.3 alloy in Phase I can have nontrivial topology. When the bulk pairing is A 1g phase (s-wave), the bulk is fully gapped, surface states form the Fu-Kane model 56 in 2D, and Majorana zero modes should be found in the vortex cores on the surfaces. When the bulk pairing is A 1u phase, the fully-gapped bulk realizes topological superconductivity in class DIII in 3D 57 , and the the surface states are recognized as helical Majorana surface states, which should lead to an asymmetric surface tunneling spectroscopy The search for topological superconductivity in topological materials such as topological insulators has been longed for in condensed matter physics community during the recent decade. In this work, from carefully designed experiments, and detailed electrical transport, X-ray diffraction, and Raman scattering measurements, we first narrow down the coexisting window of the topological surface states and superconductivity for the same compound. We then apply the detection method proposed recently to measure the critical exponent of critical fields in the temperature dependence, regardless of microscopic details. Finally, we find both the topologically nontrivial and trivial cases for the different superconducting phases predicted by the theory, and hence besides evidence for topological superconductivity, at the same time we also validate this recently proposed method for identifying and distinguishing topological and conventional superconductivity. The current work thus realizes the long-standing dream for the topological superconductivity in most popular topological insulators Bi states in Phase I with the space group of R-3m and the bulk mobility in the followed phases at higher pressures. High-pressure Raman scattering measurements. Raman spectra were measured using a single-stage spectrograph equipped with a thermoelectrically cooled charge-coupled device. The Raman notch filters were of a very narrow bandpass, allowing Raman measurements down to 10 cm -1 in the stokes and anti-stokes. The 488 nm excitation incidents were used to illuminate an approximately 5×5 μm 2 spot on the surface of the sample. The excitation strength was monitored by using a power meter. The power of 1.5 mW (0.5 mW) was chosen for the measurements at room temperature (low temperatures). In both measurements, neon was loaded as a transmitting medium. The pressure was gauged by the the ruby fluorescence shift High-pressure resistivity and Hall effect measurements. For the high-pressure resistivity and Hall effect measurements, a nonmagnetic diamond anvil cell made of Cu-Be alloy was used for Physical Properties Measurements System from U.S. Quantum Design A standard four-probe method was used for the electrical transport measurements. The resistivity and Hall coefficient were determined in terms of the van der Pauw method The last phase (IV) of Bi 2 Te 2.7 Se 0.3 has the disordered body-centered cubic structure with the space group of Im-3m. No Raman active modes are expected for this symmetry. Our in-house built Raman system captures almost all these assigned features. For example, we observed the four Raman active modes for Phase I over the whole pressure range at both the room temperature (Extended Data Fig. We observed four Raman-active modes (2A 1g +2E g ) in the studied Bi 2 Te 2.7 Se 0.3 in the wavenumbers down to 10 cm -1 for Phase I. At both room temperature and low temperature, the frequencies of all these phonon modes change slope at around 2 GPa when increasing with pressure. Interestingly, the FWHM changes with pressure in different manners for the A 1g and E g mode. The two E g modes correspond to atomic vibrations in the plane of the layers, while the A 1g modes correspond to vibrations along the c axis perpendicular to the layers For the topological insulating state, the Hall resistivity does not exhibit a linear behaviour but has a resonant structure in weak magnetic field (Fig. The surface conductivity σ s xy can be expressed as: where d is the sample thickness, l is the mean free path, and μ s is the surface carrier mobility. The bulk conductivity σ b xy can be expressed by the semiclassical form: where n ef f is the effective carrier concentration and μ b is the bulk carrier mobility. Equations ( Pressure-induced electronic topological transition. The anomalies were observed in the studied Bi 2 Te 2.7 Se 0.3 from pressure dependences of the axial ratio c/a (Fig. These anomalies take place within the same structure of Phase I. These are not a result of structural transition but may be considered as experimental evidence for the possible electronic topological transition (ETT) in these compounds at their initial phase. Pressuredriven ETT was confirmed in Bi 2 Te 3 through the measurements of the Shubnikov-de Haas oscillations Seebeck coefficient measurements were recognized as an effective, sensitive, and powerful tool for detecting the ETT For Bi 2 Te 2.7 Se 0.3 with n-type carriers, we observed a minimum of the c/a ratio (Fig. For Bi 2 Te 3 , the experiments delivered rather rich information. An early study from their experiments. Meanwhile, superconductivity was observed at pressure of 11 GPa in powder sample with the mixture of Fluorinert FC-77 and FC-70 (1:1 in volume) as a pressure-transmitting medium Although the structure measurements on these samples were not carried out, these authors thought that superconductivity occurs in their samples in Phase II when the structural transition takes place from R-3m to C2/m. First-principles calculations. In order to calculate the surface electronic structure, the primitive cell of Bi 2 Te 3 parent compound is chosen as shown in Fig. We performed all the first-principles calculations in the framework of the density functional theory 3 . 5 . 7 . 8 . phases can be identified from the different profiles of their phonon modes. In the superconducting state of each phase, the Raman spectra have the same profiles compared with the normal state at the room temperature (Extended Data Fig. 25. Wray, L. A., Xu, S. Y., Xia, Y. Q., Qian, D., Fedorov, A. V., Lin, H., Bansil, A., Hor, Y. S., Cava, R. J. & Hasan, M. Z. Observation of topological order in a superconducting doped topological insulator. Nat. Phys. 6, 855-859 (2010). 26. Kriener, M., Segawa, K., Ren, Z., Sasaki, S. & Ando, Y. Bulk superconducting phase with a full energy gap in the doped topological insulator Cu x Bi 2 Se 3 . Phys. Rev. Lett. 106, 127004 (2011). 27. Levy, N., Zhang, T., Ha, J., Sharifi, F., Talin, A. A., Kuk, Y. & Stroscio, J. A. Experimental evidence for s-wave pairing symmetry in superconducting Cu x Bi 2 Se 3 single crystals using a scanning tunneling microscope. Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 117001 (2013). 28. Matano, K., Kriener, M., Segawa, K., Ando, Y. & Zheng, G. Q. Spin-rotation symmetry breaking in the superconducting state of Cu x Bi 2 Se 3 . Nat. Phys. 12, 852-854 (2016). insulator. Phys. Rev. B 83, 134516 (2011). 33. Hsieh, T. H. & Fu, L. Majorana fermions and exotic surface Andreev bound states in topological superconductors: Application to Cu x Bi 2 Se 3 . Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 107005 (2012). 34. Fu, L. Odd-parity topological superconductor with nematic order: application to Cu x Bi 2 Se 3 . Phys. Rev. B 90, 100509(R) (2014). 35. Venderbos, J. W. F., Kozii, V. & Fu, L. Identification of nematic superconductivity from the upper critical field. Phys. Rev. B 94, 094522 (2016). 36. Liu, Z. et al. Superconductivity with topological surface state in Sr x Bi 2 Se 3 . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 137, 10512?10515 (2015). 37. Shruti, V. K., Maurya, P., Neha, P., Srivastava, P. & Patnaik, S. Superconductivity by Sr intercalation in the layered topological insulator Bi 2