Several 2D carbon-based materials have been computationally designed in the last years due to the success achieved by graphene. Here, we propose a new 2D all-sp 2 carbon allotrope, named Irida-Graphene (IG), using a bottom-up approach. IG is composed of fused rings containing 3-6-8 carbon atoms. We employed density functional theory calculations and reactive (ReaxFF) molecular dynamics simulations to examine its mechanical, structural, electronic, and optical properties. Results showed that IG exhibits good dynamical and thermal stabilities. Its estimated elastic modulus varies between 80-113 GPa. IG is a metallic material and presents a Dirac cone above the Fermi level in the center of the band. The intense optical activity of IG is restricted to the infrared and violet regions. IG can act as a violet collector for photon energies of about 3.0 eV since it presents very low reflectivity and refractive index greater than one. The design Among them, the monolayer amorphous carbon A trend in developing new carbon allotropes has been to propose structures with non-hexagonal rings and large pores. The ultimate motivation is that carbon-based materials with non-hexagonal ring structures are better adsorber of Lithium atoms when contrasted with graphene In this study, we employed a bottom-up approach to computationally propose a new 2D allsp 2 carbon allotrope composed of 3-6-8 rings, named Irida-Graphene (IG). This name is due to its atomic arrangement that resembles the flower (Sisyrinchium Halophilum -Iridaceae) popularly called "Nevada Blue-Eyed Grass" in United States (see Figure The lattice structure of IG is shown in Figure All first-principles calculations were based on DFT theory as implemented in the SIESTA code to Γ = (0, 0). To estimate the optical coefficients, an external electric field of value 1.0 V/ Å was applied along three possible polarization planes. The optical coefficients were extracted from complex dielectric function = 1 +i 2 , in which the imaginary part, 2 , is derived from the direct interband transitions properties (used in this work) is given in reference The mechanical and thermal properties of IG were investigated by employing fully atomistic MD simulations with the reactive force field ReaxFF To calculate the mechanical properties, the IG structure was continuously stretched up to its complete fracture. The maximum applied strain was 50%. We obtained the following elastic properties from the stress-strain curves: Young's modulus (Y M ), Fracture Strain (FS), and Ultimate Strength (US). The length in the z-direction of the simulation box for the mechanical stretching and heating simulations is 20 nm to prevent spurious interactions between the sheet and its periodic images. The thermal stability of IG was simulated in a vacuum by heating the simulation box from 300 up to 10000 K under periodic boundary conditions. Before heating, the structure was thermalized and equilibrated within an NPT ensemble to eliminate any residual thermal stresses and adjust the simulation box dimensions in the xy-plane. The heating process is simulated by a linear temperature increase during 2 ns in an NVT ensemble, defining a temperature increase velocity of ∼ 197 K/ms. We calculated the von Mises stress (VM) per-atom values (see Supplementary Material). These values provide information on the fracture process once they reveal the fracture point or region. MD snapshots illustrating the fracture patterns and the melting process of IG are shown in the Supplementary Material. The MD snapshots and trajectories were obtained using the visualization and analysis software VMD The discussion is divided into three subsections: I) structural stability and mechanical properties and II) electronic and optical properties. The Supplementary Material presents the MD snapshots for the uniaxial tensile loading and the heating of IG. We examined the dynamical stability of IG by calculating the phonon dispersion relations along the high symmetry directions shown in Figure Figure In the first regime, between 0-15% and 14% of strain in the x-and y-direction, respectively, the stress rises sharply. In these regimes, the IG lattice keeps its integrity, but the carbon rings suffer deformations during the stretching process (see Supplementary Material). At 16% and 15% of strain for the tensile loading in x-and y-direction, respectively, the IG lattice suffers its first bond braking, producing a crack, which propagates rapidly through the structure. Above these critical strain thresholds (second regime for the stress-strain relationship), the stress drops abruptly, indicating the rupture of the IG lattice. The fluctuations in the curves shown in Figure The eight-membered rings of carbon atoms are responsible for the smaller mechanical resilience presented by IG when compared with graphene (about 1 TPa) x-direction and F S = 18.0% and U S = 95.1 GPa in the y-direction. It is worth mentioning that FS is obtained from the strain percentage corresponding to the largest stress value, i.e., the US. These mechanical properties are also similar to those for other graphene-like allotropes We further explore the thermal stability of IG by studying its melting process through ReaxFF MD simulations. In our heating ramp protocol, the temperatures vary from 300 K up to 10000 K during 250 ps. Figure In the first heating regime (300K-4000K), IG maintains its structural integrity. Beyond 4000K, the thermal vibrations lead to considerable changes in the original IG morphology. This structural phase transition is characterized by the first peak and discontinuity in the C V and total energy curves, respectively. M. L. Pereira Júnior et. al. The second heating regime (between 4000K-5500K) defined the IG transition from the solid to gas phase (melting process). The IG melting is denoted by the well-pronounced peak in the C V curve and a discontinuity in the total energy curve. The melting point occurs at 4176K. Importantly, this value is comparable to the melting point for the monolayer graphene (4095K) The complete IG melting takes place at 5500K. For higher temperatures, the total energy curve does not change the slope. The calculated band structure, related density of states (DOS), and partial density of states (PDOS) are shown in Figure IG valence bands are predominantly composed of 2p z atomic orbitals, with a small contribution of 2p y orbitals. On the other hand, the conduction bands are formed by also by 2s, 2p y , and 2p z orbitals with higher contributions. This trend for the higher contribution of 2p z orbitals to the conduction bands is typical in 2D carbon-based systems The α profile presented in Figure The second peak transition peak occurs within the violet region, about 3.0 eV. The maximum absorption intensities are approximately 2.0 × 10 5 cm -1 and 1.2 × 10 5 cm -1 within the infrared and violet regions, respectively. In the context of carbon-based materials, intense absorption within the infrared region denotes the presence of sp 2 -like carbons In summary, we carried out DFT and reactive ReaxFF MD simulations to propose a new 2D all-sp 2 carbon allotrope named Irida-Graphene (IG) by employing a bottom-up approach. IG is composed of fused rings containing 3-6-8 carbon atoms. To examine the structural stability of IG, we calculated the phonon spectrum. AIMD simulations were also used to confirm its structural and dynamical stability. All calculated phonon frequencies are positive, thus confirming the stability of IG. Moreover, the highest phonon frequency is about 47 THz, similar to graphene and indicating the presence of only sp 2 carbon-carbon bonds. In the AIMD simulations, the total energy per atom for the IG lattice fluctuates around a steady level during the heating process. The lattice structure maintained its planarity with no bond reconstructions at the final stage of the simulation. These features suggest that IG also has good thermal stability. In the calculated band structure, no band gap was found between the valence and conduction bands, indicating that IG is metallic. The DOS near the Fermi level is essentially formed by 2p z orbitals, confirming its metallic signature. A Dirac cone is situated above the Fermi level and in the center of the band at the Y -point. The intense optical activity of IG is restricted to the infrared and violet regions. A small optical activity in the ultra-violet zone were also noted. In the context of carbon-based materials, intense infrared absorption denotes the presence of sp 2 -like carbons. A small reflection activity of IG (around 5%) is note in the violet zone. All the incident violet and ultra-violet lights tends to be absorbed. On the other hand, almost 50% of the incident light is reflected in the infrared region. These results suggest that IG can act as violet collector for photon energies about 3.0 eV since it presents very low reflectivity and refractive index greater than one. Computational Materials Laboratoryhttps://www.lccmat.unb.br/