Understanding various macroscopic pressure-volume-temperature properties of materials on the atomistic level has always been an ambition for physicists and material scientists. Particularly, some materials such as zirconium tungstate (ZrW2O8), exhibit multiple exotic properties including negative thermal expansion (NTE) and pressureinduced amorphization (PIA). Here, using machine-learning based deep potential, we trace both of the phenomena in ZrW2O8 back to a common atomistic origin, where the nonbridging O atoms play a critical role. We demonstrate that the nonbridging O atoms confer great flexibility to vibration of polyhedrons, and kinetically drive volume shrinking on heating, or NTE. In addition, beyond a certain critical pressure, we find that the migration of nonbridging O atoms leads to additional bond formation that lowers the potential energy, suggesting that the PIA is a potential-driven first-order phase transition. Most importantly, we identify a second critical pressure beyond which the amorphous phase of ZrW2O8 undergoes a "hidden" phase transition from a reversible phase to an irreversible one. Macroscopic properties of materials are deeply rooted in their underlying atomic arrangement and interaction, and understanding these properties on an atomistic level has been a long-sought endeavor In addition to NTE, ZrW2O8 exhibits another interesting property, namely the pressure-induced amorphization transition (PIA). Perottoni et al. showed that above 1.5 GPa, crystalline ZrW2O8 transforms to an amorphous phase that persists after pressure release at ambient conditions To solve this outstanding problem and determine the atomistic origin of the NTE and PIA, in this study, we develop a machine learning (ML)-based deep potential (DP) for ZrW2O8 using training data from DFT calculations. ML-based potentials have the flexibility and non-linearity necessary to describe complex ordered and disordered interatomic environment from the perspective of "many-body" using a deep neural network The crystal structure of ZrW2O8 at 0 K to 430 K is cubic phase with P213 space group as illustrated in Fig. Once the DFT-level accuracy of DP is confirmed, we can use it to investigate the evolution of crystal structural properties of ZrW2O8 on heating by deep potential molecular dynamics (DPMD) simulations using a much larger system. Fig. To resolve the above controversy, we investigate the thermal expansion of neighboring atom pair distances (or bond length) and the degree of rigidity of cornersharing polyhedrons. In DPMD simulations, each atom at ri vibrates about its mean position <ri>. The atomic distances between two atoms can thus take an "apparent" value R = |<ri>-<rj>|, which is the difference between their mean positions, and a time-dependent "true" value r = |ri-rj| The amorphization transition under high pressure is another key feature of ZrW2O8. While the NTE and the PIA are believed to be closely linked Increasing the pressure beyond 1.4 GPa, the O-O RDF peaks vanish at distances larger than 8 Å (see Fig. Experiments have confirmed that the PIA in ZrW2O8 is irreversible at room temperature, and recrystallization only occurs when heated above 900 K (ii) For the amorphous with pressure above 3.8 GPa, the RDFs results show that the amorphous phase can be retained upon decompression, which we defined as the a II reversible phase. The same profiles of RDFs of a I and a II phases in Fig. Therefore, we suggest that amorphous phase undergoes a "hidden" phase transition from a I to a II amorphous phase at the second critical pressure of 3.8 GPa. The RDF of retained a III amorphous is slightly different from the a I and a II phase, but it exhibits the almost key features of amorphous phase (Fig. We have demonstrated that ML-based DP can reach an unprecedented level of accuracy in the atomic structural modeling of NTE and PIA materials over a wide temperature and pressure range using the example of ZrW2O8. The DP calculated NTE behavior and coefficient of thermal expansion in ZrW2O8 show great agreement with experimental results. By lattice dynamics study of local lattice vibrations, we have shown that both the current RUM and Tent models are only partially reasonable, and the NTE in ZrW2O8 originate from the large transverse vibrations of the O atoms in the middle of the Zr-O-W linkage. We further investigated the mechanism of PIA in ZrW2O8. We found that ZrW2O8 undergoes a first-order potential-driven amorphization transition above a critical pressure of 1.4 GPa, which is well comparable to experimental value. We also reveal that the migration of O atoms leads to additional bond formation that lowers the potential energy, suggesting that the PIA is a potentialdriven transition. Most importantly, we predicted that the amorphous phase undergoes a "hidden" phase transition from reversible a I to irreversible a II phase at a second critical pressure of 3.8 GPa, which shall be verified in future experiments. Our study on ZrW2O8 not only have important implications for future research on other NTE and PIA materials, but also opens the door for quantitatively accurate atomistic modeling of general materials with direct links to experiments. We believe that the DP method will play a pivotal role in future design of structural and functional materials whose properties depend sensitively on detailed atomic configurations. Carefully choose the ZrW2O8 configurations that used in the training dataset is crucial to the success of training process and accurate of DP. Because we focus on the NTE and PIA behaviors of ZrW2O8, we need all the characteristic configurations of crystal and amorphous at a wide temperature and pressure range. Most of configurations that we need are far from the ground state of cubic phase. In this work, we use the DP Generator (DP-Gen) to generate a set of training data that covers an enough wide range of relevant configurational space efficiently. DP-Gen is a concurrent learning strategy The initial training dataset in the first iteration is obtained by performing a 10-step ab initio MD simulation for randomly perturbed 44 atoms cubic cell at 50 K. After labeling candidate configurations, self-consistent DFT calculations were performed subsequently. The DFT calculations were performed using a plane-wave basis set with a cutoff energy of 500 eV as implemented in the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package 43, 44 , and the electron exchange-correlation potential was described using the generalized gradient approximation and PBEsol scheme In exploration step, the MD simulations were performed using LAMMPS code with periodic boundary conditions The time step in simulations is set to 1 fs. The optimized DP can be used to study the atomic dynamics driven by temperature and pressure via performing deep potential MD (DPMD) simulations. The DPMD simulations starting with 8 × 8 × 8 supercell (i.e. 7.3 nm 7.3 nm 7.3 nm) of optimized cubic α-ZrW2O8 phase containing 22528 atoms. All results about NTE and PIA of ZrW2O8 were executed by DPMD simulations. For NTE simulations, the equilibrium run is 50 ps, followed by a production run of 100 ps at a specified temperature. The lattice constant, true/apparent bond length (angle) were calculated by the average of 200 snapshots in 100ps of equilibrium state. For PIA simulations, cubic symmetry was imposed (isotropic changes in cell lengths) during NPT simulations. The "lattice constants" of pressure-induced amorphous phase is defined as √V 3 /8, where V is the volume of the simulated 8 × 8 × 8 supercell. The simulation time for compression and decompression were set to 50 ps and 100 ps, respectively. To prove the stability of retained a III amorphous phase, we lengthen the decompression time to 2 ns, and found the a III amorphous phase is maintained (Supplementary Fig. 