Recent experiments have pointed to a chiral p-wave-like superconductivity in epitaxial Bi/Ni bilayers that are spontaneously time-reversal symmetry breaking (TRSB), making it a promising platform for exploring physics useful for topologically protected quantum computing. Quite intriguingly, evidence has emerged that in non-epitaxial Bi/Ni bilayers, superconductivity arises due to the formation of NiBi3, which has been reported to host coexisting ferromagnetic and superconducting orders at the surface. We perform high resolution surface magneto-optic Kerr effect (SMOKE) measurements using a Sagnac interferometer on single crystal NiBi3 and find no sign of any spontaneous Kerr signal except for contributions from trapped vortices. This strongly indicates the absence of TRSB in NiBi3, whether due to TRSB in the superconducting state or any coexisting ferromagnetism, and we conclude that the superconductivity found in non-epitaxial Bi/Ni is distinctively different from that in epitaxial Bi/Ni. The quest to build a reliable quantum computer has stimulated intense research into quantum phases with quasiparticles that obey non-Abelian exchange rules and can be used for topologically protected quantum computing Superconducting epitaxial Bi/Ni bilayers provide a promising alternative candidate for chiral p-wave superconductivity. It was initially found in tunneling measurements that Bi layers deposited on Ni layers become superconducting with T " ≈ 4 K [9], and there are coexisting superconducting and ferromagnetic gaps when tunneling from the Ni side superconducting order parameter, which is the lowest angular momentum state allowed by this surface symmetry Real materials are complex. A radically different picture has emerged in Bi/Ni bilayers fabricated using other methods, highlighting the role of the intermetallic compound NiBi3. NiBi3 impurities were first detected in thermally evaporated Bi/Ni bilayers by X-ray diffraction (XRD) Although these reports of magnetic orders in NiBi3 differ quantitatively from the TRSB observed in epitaxial Bi/Ni bilayer by Sagnac interferometry For an even more stringent test of ferromagnetism, we measure the remanent Kerr signal by reducing the 1 T magnetic field back to zero at T = 1.8 K, as shown in the sequence I-II-III in Fig. In summary, we have provided strong error bounds of 20 nrad for any spontaneous Kerr signals in single crystal NiBi3, strongly indicating the absence of TRSB in NiBi3, whether due to the superconducting state or any coexisting ferromagnetism. We can therefore conclude that the superconducting phases in epitaxial and non-epitaxial Bi/Ni bilayers are distinctively different. In non-epitaxial Bi/Ni, superconductivity originates from the formation of an impurity NiBi3 phase Experiments at UC Irvine were supported by NSF award DMR-1807817, and in part by the Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation through Grant GBMF10276 to J.X.. The works at Hefei was supported by the Youth Innovation Promotion Association of CAS (Grant No. 2021117). *Email: xia.jing@uci.edu