The low temperature monoclinic, insulating phase of vanadium dioxide is ordinarily considered nonmagnetic, with dimerized vanadium atoms forming spin singlets, though paramagnetic response is seen at low temperatures. We find a nonlocal spin Seebeck signal in VO2 films that appears below 30 K and which increases with decreasing temperature. The spin Seebeck response has a non-hysteretic dependence on in-plane external magnetic field. This paramagnetic spin Seebeck response is discussed in terms of prior findings on paramagnetic spin Seebeck effects and expected magnetic excitations of the monoclinic ground state. Vanadium dioxide is an archetypal strongly correlated transition metal oxide, with a phase transition at ∼345 K in bulk between a high temperature, rutile metallic phase with 1D vanadium chains and a low temperature, monoclinic insulating phase with dimerized vanadium atoms. The vanadium dimers are thought to form singlets, greatly reducing the magnetic response of the VO2 at low temperatures 1-3 . The spin Seebeck effect (SSE) has proven useful in characterizing angular momentum transport in magnetic insulators The local SSE has been observed in paramagnets (Gd3Ga5O12 ≡ GGG, DyScO3 Thus far there are no reports of the nlSSE in paramagnets. In this work we report a nonlocal spin Seebeck response in VO2 films at low temperatures deep in the insulating regime. Given the expected nature of paramagnetism in this material, this observation is surprising. For a fully spin dimerized system, paramagnetic response is expected to be suppressed at low temperatures, unlike, e.g., a classical spin liquid (such as GGG). The "local" paramagnetism, as in the van Vleck mechanism, is expected to be temperature independent, not expected to transport angular momentum and thus should not contribute to the SSE response. The SSE is non-hysteretic as a function of B and has the expected dependence on orientation of magnetic field in-plane. With the field in-plane, the SSE signal grows in magnitude with decreasing temperature below an onset of detectability at approximately 30 K, with a sign inversion between 15 K and 10 K. The ∼100 nm thick epitaxial VO2 film was grown by reactive sputtering on top of an Al2O3 substrate (r-cut). A 4-mtorr argon/oxygen mix (8% O2) was used during deposition, and the substrate was kept at 520 °C during the growth and later cooled down at a rate of 12 °C min -1 . X-ray diffraction measurements confirmed single-phase growth, textured along (100) for VO2. Transport measurements were carried out on a TTPX Lakeshore cryogenic probe station, using As shown, an AC heater current at angular frequency ω = 2π × (7.7 Hz) is driven through a Pt wire, while the voltage across the other wire is measured at ω and 2ω using a lock-in amplifier. The overwhelmingly dominant signal at ω is due to capacitive coupling between the wires. Even in the absence of VO2 (e.g. Pt wires fabricated on SiO2/Si or sapphire substrates) there is a temperature-dependent, magnetic field-independent parasitic background signal at 2ω in this electrode and wiring geometry (see Supplemental Material Fig Below 30 K, a magnetic field-dependent 2ω signal becomes detectable, as shown in Fig. To confirm that this 2ω signal results from the spin Seebeck effect, it is important to consider the field dependence of the signal on the orientation of B in the plane of the film. As shown in Fig. However, our temperature profile simulations (see SI) show that the vertical temperature difference between detector Pt and underlying VO2 film is on the order of 10 -4 mK (Fig. Extensive additional control experiments are shown in the Supplemental Material. Concerns about charge leakage, unintended capacitive couplings, and other artifacts have been raised in nonlocal spin transport experiments in conducting samples to isolate directly M vs B for the VO2 films in our samples. The low temperature magnetization M in bulk VO2 crystals The sign reversal in the measured SSE between 10 K and 15 K is qualitatively similar to a sign reversal observed in nlSSE measurements on YIG films A triplon SSE has been reported in the local measurement configuration in the spin-Peierls system CuGeO3 We note one report in the literature To summarize, we have detected a spin Seebeck response in insulating VO2 films below 30 K that grows in magnitude with decreasing temperature. This response is nonhysteretic in B, has the expected SSE dependence on field orientation in the plane, and saturates at large B and low temperatures. Given the singlet-dimer nature expected of the monoclinic VO2 ground state, a detailed examination of angular momentum transport in this system is needed to explain these observations, and whether such an effect is a consequence of the transport of triplet excitations or a sign of the emergence of magnon-like excitations in a magnetically ordered phase below 35 K. See supplementary materials for additional control experiments and thermal modeling. substrates. When measuring the spin Seebeck signal, there is a background response at 2ω as detected by the lock-in amplifier (the signal sitting at the zero field, or zero-field offset) that changes slightly with temperature. To understand this, we patterned analogous devices, with the same size as the Pt wires for the VO2 measurements, instead on SiO2/Si substrates by the same fabrication methods. With different electrode and wiring configurations, we found that the zero-field offset either increases or decreases in the temperature range from 5 K to 20 K and remains essentially constant at temperatures above 20 K (Fig. For the data shown in Fig. Devices with the different wire separations were patterned on a different piece of VO2 film/sapphire substrate other than the device reported in the main text and the spin Seebeck signal was measured at α = 0 ∘ and low temperatures. For devices with wire separation 0.4 μm, the near-zero-field slope is negative at 5 K and 10 K, and becomes positive at 15 K (Fig. We used two-point lock-in methods to measure the resistance and capacitance between two nearby Pt wires, with 0.4 μm separation on top of the VO2 film on sapphire. An ac voltage with frequency f=2.01Hz is applied to the two Pt wires, and the voltage U between the wires and the current flowing through the VO2 film are measured simultaneously. The current has both x-component and y-component because of the capacitance between the wires, denoted as I x and I y . Then the resistance of the film is given by: R = U/I x and the capacitance is given by C = I y /(2πfU). Although VO2 is deep in the insulating regime, the resistance between two nearby Pt wires is not unmeasurably high in this configuration. This residual conduction has no obvious temperature dependence from 5 K to 30 K (Fig. 6. First harmonic signal on VO2/sapphire substrates. The first harmonic signal across the detector of the device on VO2/sapphire substrates is has no clear trend with field, as shown in the Fig. More specifically, the temperature difference between the detector and the underlying VO2 film is on the order of 10 -4 mK. This demonstrate that for reasonable values of all parameters, 