We study the performance of spin-component-scaled second-order Møller-Plesset perturbation theory (SCS-MP2) for the prediction of the lattice constant, bulk modulus, and cohesive energy of 12 simple, three-dimensional, covalent and ionic semiconductors and insulators. We find that SCS-MP2 and the simpler scaled opposite-spin MP2 (SOS-MP2) yield predictions that are significantly improved over the already good performance of MP2. Specifically, when compared to experimental values with zero-point vibrational corrections, SCS-MP2 (SOS-MP2) yields mean absolute errors of 0.015 (0.017) Å for the lattice constant, 3.8 (3.7) GPa for the bulk modulus, and 0.06 (0.08) eV for the cohesive energy, which are smaller than those of leading density functionals by about a factor of two or more. We consider a reparameterization of the spin scaling parameters and find that the optimal parameters for these solids are very similar to those already in common use in molecular quantum chemistry, suggesting good transferability and reliable future applications to surface chemistry on insulators. In recent years, wavefunction-based methods, popular in the quantum chemistry community, have begun to be regularly applied to condensed-phase systems. In particular, coupled-cluster theories, such as CCSD or CCSD(T)-the socalled gold standard of molecular quantum chemistry-yield promising results. As a lower cost alternative to coupled-cluster theory, second-order Møller-Plesset perturbation theory (MP2) is widely used in molecular quantum chemistry and has been increasingly applied to periodic systems. At the same cost, spin-component-scaled (SCS) MP2, Both SCS-and SOS-MP2 commonly deliver an accuracy that is better than CCSD and comparable to CCSD(T), suggesting that they could be especially promising methods for complex, insulating solids. Here, we test periodic SCS/SOS-MP2 for the calculation of the lattice constant, bulk modulus, and cohesive energy of 12 three-dimensional, covalent and ionic semiconductors and insulators, paying careful attention to the thermodynamic limit and complete basis set limit. The layout of this paper is as follows. In Sec. II, we briefly review the formalism of SCS/SOS-MP2 and provide details of our periodic MP2 calculations, basis sets, and density fitting. We also present the convergence of the HF energy and the components of the MP2 correlation energy to the thermodynamic limit and complete basis set limit, using carbon diamond as an example. In Sec. III, we present the accuracy of the calculated properties for 12 solids, including a scan over the spin-scaling parameters. We conclude in Sec. IV. The SCS-MP2 correlation energy can be split into two components, E ss (eV/cell) (d) FIG. where Electron repulsion integrals are given in Mulliken (11|22) notation and, as usual, i, j refer to occupied orbitals and a, b refer to unoccupied orbitals in the periodic Hartree-Fock (HF) determinant, which we assume to be spin-restricted. The primed summation indicates conservation of crystal momentum, where G is a reciprocal lattice vector. All calculations were performed with PySCF. To assess our ability to reliably access the thermodynamic limit (TDL) and complete basis set (CBS) limit, we first consider carbon diamond at its experimental crystal volume. In Fig. k and the MP2 correlation energy according to the form E k (numerically, we found that the inclusion of sub-leading corrections to the HF energy was most appropriate, as shown in Fig. In Fig. To summarize, in all subsequent production calculations, we use the TZ HF energy and the DZ/TZ CBS-extrapolated MP2 correlation energy and extrapolate to the TDL using results obtained with N k = 4 3 -6 3 (HF) and N k = 5 3 -6 3 (MP2). We studied 12 semiconductors and insulators, with diamond (C and Si), zincblende (SiC, BN, BP, AlN, and AlP), and rock salt (MgO, MgS, LiH, LiF, and LiCl) crystal structures. These solids were chosen based on their basis set availability, relatively simple crystal structures, and nonzero bandgap, as required for the application of MP2-based methods. We predicted the lattice constant a, bulk modulus B, and cohesive energy E coh of all solids using HF, MP2, and SCS/SOS-MP2 by calculating the total energy for ten different volumes in the range of ±10% of the experimental volume. We then fitted the energies to an equation of state given by a third-order Birch-Murnaghan form. The cohesive energy is calculated at the theoretically predicted equilibrium volume and is defined with respect to the energy of isolated atoms. Atomic energies of open-shell atoms were calculated with unrestricted HF and MP2 and the basis set superposition error was accounted for by adding crystalline basis functions. As an initial test of our methods and implementation, we have compared our calculated HF and MP2 results to those of Grüneis et al., common spin-scaling parameters, perform remarkably well for the prediction of the structural and energetic properties of three-dimensional covalent and ionic semiconductors and insulators. The performance of MP2-based methods can be broken down for each material, as shown in Fig. We finally assess to what extent further improvement is possible by a reoptimization of the spin-scaling parameters. In Fig. where |∆O| indicates the MAE of property O and • MP2 indicates the MP2 value. The weighting is such that the value of the cost function is the average error with respect to that of MP2; of course, different ways of averaging will give different optimal parameters. This average error is plotted in Fig. We have studied the performance of periodic SCS-and SOS-MP2 in the TDL and CBS limit, finding excellent agreement with experimental values. As shown in Tab. I the performance is significantly better than popular functionals for solid-state calculations, including PBE, T. Gruber and A. Grüneis, "Ab initio calculations of carbon and boron nitride allotropes and their structural phase transitions using periodic coupled cluster theory," Phys. Rev. B 98, 134108 (2018). S. Hirata and T. Shimazaki, "Fast second-order many-body perturbation method for extended systems," Phys. Rev. B 80, 085118 (2009).