Selective laser reaction sintering techniques (SLRS) techniques were investigated for the production of near net-shape non-oxide ceramics including SiC, Si3N4, and HfC/SiC composites that might be compatible with prevailing powder bed fusion additive manufacturing processes. Reaction bonded layers of covalent ceramics were produced using in-situ reactions that occur during selective laser processing and layer formation. During SLRS, precursor materials composed of metal and/or metal oxide powders were fashioned into powder beds for conversion to non-oxide ceramic layers. Laserprocessing was used to initiate simultaneous chemical conversion and local interparticle bonding of precursor particles in 100 vol% CH4 or NH3 gases. Several factors related to the reaction synthesis process-precursor chemistry, gas-solid and gas-liquid synthesis mechanisms, precursor vapor pressures-were investigated in relation to resulting microstructures and non-oxide yields. Results indicated that the volumetric changes which occurred during in-situ conversion of single component precursors negatively impacted the surface layer microstructure. To circumvent the internal stresses and cracking that accompanied the conversion of Si or Hf (that expands upon conversion) or SiOx (that contracts during conversion), optimized ratios of the precursor constituents were used to produce near isovolumetric conversion to the product phase. Phase characterization indicated that precipitation of SiC from the Si/SiO2 melt formed continuous, crack-free, and dense layers of 93.7 wt% SiC that were approximately 35 μm thick, while sintered HfC/SiC composites (84.2 wt% yield) were produced from the laser-processing of Hf/SiO2 in CH4. By contrast, the SLRS of Si/SiOx precursor materials used to produce Si3N4 resulted in whisker formation and materials vaporization due to the high temperatures required for conversion. The results demonstrate that under appropriate processing conditions and precursor selection, the formation of near net-shape SiC and SiC composites might be achieved through single-step AM-compatible techniques. Cha pter 1. Silicon carbide (SiC) and silicon nitride (Si3N4) belong to the covalent family of non-oxide ceramics. This category of materials consists of nonmetallic compounds where the parent posttransition metal or metalloid atom (e.g. Si, Al, B) is covalently bonded to carbon or nitrogen through hybridization of valence electrons Compared to the many studies conducted on AM of metals, polymers, or other ceramic materials like Al2O3, those focused on SiC and Si3N4 are limited. Both SiC and Si3N4 thermally decompose at their melting temperatures of 2730 °C and 1900 °C respectively. This makes AM processing using powder bed fusion-SLM incompatible with these materials, and all well-established SiC and Si3N4 methods rely on indirect AM. These approaches typically involve SiC or Si3N4 feedstocks consolidated using organic binders during green body shaping or pyrolysis of a preceramic polymer. After binder burn out or pyrolysis, molten Si infiltration (Mp=1410 °C) is commonly used to increase part densities, Aerospace composites, gas turbines, structural components, powerelectronics, nuclear reactors, semi-conducing materials, electromagnetic applications, abrasives The first studies on SLRS were conducted by Birmingham on the carburization (using C2H2) or nitridation (using NH3) in Si for the formation of SiC and Si3N4 For preliminary SLRS conversion, Si and its oxide phases (SiO2 or SiO) were selected based on their commercial availability and thermodynamic favorability for the for-reaction synthesis techniques. The carbonization and nitridation reactions of Si-based precursors are provided in Table where f is the mole fraction of metal in the composite precursor for zero volume change, v mx is the molar volume of the metal carbide or nitride, v m is the molar volume of the metal, v mo is the molar volume of the oxide, and y is the oxidation state of the metal species in the product (i.e +2) Thermodynamic calculations and preliminary experiments suggested that Si and or SiO2 might be viable for SLRS synthesis of SiC. However, the high spontaneous reaction temperatures for Si3N4 synthesis from SiO2 in NH3 are not favorable. The high minimum conversion temperature (1924 °C) for Si3N4 formation and low SiO2 precursor absorptivity at the laser wavelength (445 nm) prevented conversion of SiO2 in preliminary tests. Rather, silicon monoxide (SiO) was selected as an alternative precursor to SiO2 for Si3N4 production. Previous investigations indicated that particle size reduction is favorable for reactivity Syntheses were conducted using various silicon-based precursor materials to understand the reaction conditions that facilitate SiC and Si3N4 formation. Silicon and silicon oxide-containing powders were poured into cylindrical reservoirs (stainless steel, inner diameter: 25.5 mm, depth: 4.5 mm) and screened using a metal blade each precursor bed into an even layer, creating a flush powder surface representative of powder bed fusion. Each precursor bed was then inserted into the laboratory scale SLRS reaction chamber shown in Fig. To investigate selective laser reaction sintering of covalent non-oxides, Si and SiOx precursors were processed separately in the presence of 100 vol.% CH4 or NH3 gas. Results from irradiation of Si, SiO and SiO2 are presented in Table Silicon and silicon oxides can readily be converted to carbides using reactive laser processing. Others have indicated the reactive laser synthesis of SiC by reaction of CH4 from either powders The high optical absorptivity of Si at 445 nm, favored efficient photothermal energy conversion, high surface temperatures, and selective melting of silicon (Mp= 1410 °C) when processed in Ar. Photomicrographs in Fig. For a Si-CH4 gas-liquid reaction, the concentration profile of carbon into the Si melt pool might be determined by non-steady state diffusion, Eq. 2 where y is the distance into the melt, Co is carbon concentration at t = 0, Cm is the concentration at time t, and D is the diffusivity of carbon in molten Si (5 x 10 -4 cm 2 /s Microstructural assessment of SLRS processed-Si suggests that the accumulation of stresses was minimal compared to the conversion of metal precursors. The maximum volume change for conversion of Si to SiC is +3.4% and might be accommodated by residual porosity in the powder bed. While single layers of SLRS of SiC-containing materials were generally crack-free, accumulation of tensile or thermal stresses during multi-layer fabrication in initial SLRS studies Synthesis of SiC from SiO2 requires progressive reduction through a SiO intermediate according to Eqs. 3-4 SiO2(s) + CH4(g) → SiO(g)+CO(g) +2H2(g) Eq. 3 ∆Gr=757.07-0.4373T (kJ) SiO(g) + 2CH4(g) → SiC(s)+CO(g) +4H2(g) Eq. 4 ∆Gr=99.11-0.2160T (kJ) During SLRS, CH4 dissociation provides the carbon source for SiC formation from silicon oxides. Schei and Halvorsen note that if the molar ratio of available carbon to SiO2 is less than 3, silicon can be lost through low vapor pressure SiO(g). SiC can then be formed from the interaction of SiO(g) and dissociated carbon C Minimal vaporization of SiO2-x into the gas stream or onto the quartz tube was observed. This qualitative observation indicates that the laser-assisted reaction might be rapid and carbon readily available to prevent the loss of material through the formation of SiO(g). XRD phase characterization for the SLRS processing of SiO and SiO2 in CH4 suggests that significant phase fractions SiC can be produced from either precursor. For conversion of SiO(s), a product yield ratio of 34/66 wt% SiC/Si was obtained. Meanwhile, for the reduction of SiO2 (s), SiC was the only crystalline material found in the diffractogram. In both cases, the lack of diffraction peaks for SiO and SiO2 made the precise quantification of oxides difficult. The presence of the Si in Fig. Depending on the local temperature, disproportionation products can react to form SiC through Eq. 3 and 4 (this reaction occurs at experimental temperatures between ~1400 -1975 °C) or by Si carburization for the Si-O-C system The use of 100 vol% CH4 may also favor conversion by providing excess C to favor reactivity thereby suppressing SiO vaporization (Eq. 5) and whisker formation that has been observed by others Compared to traditional carbothermal reduction techniques of SiO2 and C(s), laser processing of SiO2 proved to be more efficient than traditional furnace processing. Li found that carbothermal reduction of SiO2/C mixtures in low CH4-concentration atmosphere was slow: ~75% SiC yield was produced after 150 mins at 1550 °C with a significant fraction of Si lost to SiO vaporization The selective laser reaction in 100 vol% NH3 of Si precursors was performed for Si3N4 production. Typical nitridation of Si powders occurs efficiently between 1100-1500 °C, where a combination of both α-and β are almost always formed Atkinson As the Si3N4 reaction front progresses, the Si surface must be exposed to NH3 for adsorption and gas decomposition. Nitrogen has no solubility in solid Si and diffusion of nitrogen through bulk α-Si3N4 and β-Si3N4 is extremely slow (with diffusion coefficients of 1.2 x 10 -12 cm 2 /s and 6.8 x10 -6 to 1 x 10 -10 cm 2 /s respectively Conversion of SiO2 to Si3N4 in NH3 (spontaneous at 1924 °C) was not achieved using the experimental processing conditions. Rather, selective laser processing of SiO in NH3 using the 3 W laser processing conditions produced 47.6% wt% Si3N4 (30.2 wt% α-Si3N4, and 17.4 wt% β-Si3N4 β) and 52.4 wt% Si (of the characterizable crystalline phases). XRD indicates irradiation reduces SiO to Si, where Si3N4 can be formed by vapor phase reaction or through nitridation of reduced Si intermediates. Fig. Results from sections 2.2.1 and 2.2.2 show SLRS conversion of Si and SiO2 by CH4, and Si by NH3 produced high non-oxide yields. Near net-shape precursor, mixtures were formulated in an attempt to improve the surface microstructure of SLRS samples by compensating for conversion-induced volume changes and better understand the impact of precursor-dependent gas-solid/liquid and vapor phase reactions when conditions favor complete reactivity. Laser power for processing of the precursor mixtures was increased to enhance chemical conversion by increasing temperatures at the laserinteraction zone The surface morphology processed regions are shown in Fig. Figs. 7-10 show that SLRS processing of 92/8 wt% Si/SiO2 in CH4 (4 W) produced ~94 wt% SiC with a continuous surface and cross-sectional microstructure with sub-millimeter special resolution. Inspection of the SEM images of the sample surface in Fig. 1. The mud-cracking of the surface produced by SiO2→ SiC SLRS was no longer present. This may be attributed to compensatory volume changes for the Si/SiO2 precursor. 2. The visibly distinct laser scan tracks associated with the formation Si→ SiC SLRS were far less pronounced for conversion of Si/SiO2 despite higher laser energy density. The addition of SiO2 might allow laser light to penetrate the powder before being absorbed by Si. Through this process, laser energy may be more evenly distributed between adjacent scan tracks due to the melting pool broadening as particles are converted. Cross-sectional SEM microscopy images shown in Fig. SLRS of the 69/31 wt% Si/SiO precursor material resulted in high Si3N4 yields of approximately 95%, however, surface and cross-sectional micrographs in Fig. Results in 2.2 suggest that metal and metal oxide species react through different mechanisms and rates. A composite system might be formed by reactive species by simultaneously converting metal and oxide species that have different base metal atoms. Results in 2.3.1.2 illustrated the high conversion efficiency of SiO2 to SiC by SLRS processing in CH4 without whisker formation. Similarly, our previous studies in The composite 94/6 wt% Hf/SiO2 precursor material was laser processed in 100 vol% CH4 using the methods and experimental apparatus described in 2.2.1. XRD results in Table The surface microstructure of the HfC-SiC composite shown in Fig. The covalent non-oxides, silicon carbide and silicon nitride were synthesized using SLRS of Si, SiO, and SiO2, precursor powders in 100 vol% CH4 or NH3 depending on the desired product. The composite material, HfC/SiC, was also SLRS processed using a Hf/SiO2 mixed precursor system in a CH4 atmosphere. X-ray phase characterization indicated that laser-assisted processing of Si to SiC, SiO2 to SiC, and Si to Si3N4 could produce significant product yields. A combination of 3C, 96R, 6H-SiC phases (up to total 100 crystalline wt% SiC), and a/β-Si3N4 (up to a total of 97.7 crystalline wt% Si3N4) were produced. For the Hf/SiC composite, the total yield was determined to be 85.8 wt%. These non-oxide yields are greater than previously reported in other SLRS studies From this study, there the several key results that are significant to the application of SLRS reaction synthesis techniques to SiC, Si3N4 and HfC/SiC composite additive manufacturing: 1. SiC: SLRS of Si and SiO2 in CH4 indicates that SiC formation can occur through gas-solid, gasliquid, or vapor-state reactions. Using the reaction conditions in this work, gas-solid and gas-liquid conversion mechanisms appeared to dominate due to the relatively high diffusion coefficient of C in Siliq (2-5x10 -4 cm 2 ). Precipitation of SiC from the Si/SiO2 melt formed continuous, crack-free, and dense layers of 93.7 wt% SiC that were approximately 35 μm thick. 2. Si3N4: SLRS formation of Si3N4 proved to be most efficient for nitridation of Si (97.7 wt%) in NH3. Nitrogen has no solubility in solid Si and is slow to diffuse through liquid Si (DN in Si (liq): 3.2 x 10 -8 cm 2 /s), α-Si3N4 (DN in α-Si3N4 (liq): 1.2 x 10 -12 cm 2 /s) and β-Si3N4 (DN in β--Si3N4 (liq): 6.8 x10 -6 to 1 x 10 -10 cm 2 /s). The Si3N4 formation mechanism is then predicated on gas-liquid or vapor-state reactions. The high ratio of α/β-Si3N4 from Si and Si/SiO precursor materials indicates that conversion between Si and SiO and NH3 occurred primarily in the vapor state. This gas-phase reaction did not produce the same conversion-induced volume changes seen in other systems. (adapted from