Niobium-zirconium (Nb-Zr) alloy is an old superconductor that is a promising new candidate for superconducting radio-frequency (SRF) cavity applications. Using density-functional and Eliashberg theories, we show that addition of Zr to a Nb surface in small concentrations increases the critical temperature Tc and improves other superconducting properties. Furthermore, we calculate Tc for Nb-Zr alloys across a broad range of Zr concentrations, showing good agreement with the literature for disordered alloys as well as the potential for significantly higher Tc in ordered alloys near 75%Nb/25%Zr composition. We provide experimental verification on Nb-Zr alloy samples and SRF sample test cavities prepared with either physical vapor or our novel electrochemical deposition recipes. These samples have the highest measured Tc of any Nb-Zr superconductor to date and indicate a reduction in BCS resistance compared to the conventional Nb reference sample; they represent the first steps along a new pathway to greatly enhanced SRF performance. Finally, we use Ginzburg-Landau theory to show that the addition of Zr to a Nb surface increases the superheating field B sh , a key figure of merit for SRF which determines the maximum accelerating gradient at which cavities can operate. Introduction. Superconducting radio-frequency (SRF) cavities are a key component of particle accelerators used, e.g., as light sources Many efforts have explored adding other elements to the SRF surface of Nb cavities, such as tin The superconducting properties of Nb-Zr alloys, however, are not as well characterized as those of other Nbbased superconductors. Literature studies As for the superheating field B sh , previous studies have addressed homogeneous superconductors To better understand the Nb-Zr alloy system, we use density-functional theory (DFT) and Eliashberg theory in the dilute limit (≤25% Zr), where the virtual crystal approximation (VCA) allows us to calculate a variety of superconducting properties. We confirm that the addition of Zr to Nb increases T c . We then switch from VCA to a supercell approach in order to directly account for lattice relaxation effects, which become important at higher Zr concentrations (up to 50% Zr), and focus on T c . With this approach, we find good agreement with the literature for random alloys at all concentrations, and we investigate the potential for ordered alloy structures to surpass the limitations of the random alloy. We synthesize Nb-Zr alloy surface layers of different Zr doping profiles using physical vapor and electrochemical methods and examine their material and RF superconducting properties. We find that the measured T c meets or exceeds literature values for Nb-Zr random alloys, in agreement with our calculations. We show that the enhanced T c likely translates to improved performance under RF conditions by comparing the BCS resistance of the alloyed sample to that of a reference Nb sample. Finally, we use GL theory to investigate how Nb-Zr surface layers with different thicknesses and compositions affect B sh . We incorporate spatial variations of multiple superconducting properties using realistic profiles of Zr concentration. We find that addition of Zr to Nb noticeably improves B sh , making Nb-Zr an excellent candidate for SRF applications. Superconducting properties of Nb-Zr in the dilute limit. We calculate the superconducting properties of Nb-Zr alloys in the dilute limit using VCA. We use Quantum Espresso (QE) Table Superconducting properties of Nb-Zr alloys at higher Zr concentrations. Previous experimental studies of Nb 1-n Zr n bcc random alloys have found moderately increased T c and greatly increased upper critical field B c2 compared to Nb across a broad compositional range from n = 0 to n = 0.5 )UHTXHQF\PH9 Quantitatively, this effect is captured in our VCA calculations (Fig. Examining our supercell calculations, we find that, for atoms at their unrelaxed, ideal bcc locations, the electronic DOS for Nb-Zr alloys resemble that of Nb with a rigid band shift, similar to what would be found in VCA. However, we find that the atoms tend to move away from their ideal bcc locations in a way that significantly reduces N (0). This final, reduced N (0) value varies only modestly with composition up to 50% Zr, ex-TABLE I. Calculated superconducting properties of Nb-Zr alloys using VCA and GL theory, including the electron-phonon coupling constant λ e and the superconducting gap ∆. Tc was calculated using the Allen-Dynes equation, isotropic Eliashberg theory, and Xie22 plaining the modest variations that are observed in T c . Figure We estimate the maximum attainable T c of an ordered Nb-Zr alloy of a given composition as follows. We note that the same force which drives ionic displacements in the Nb-Zr random alloy tends to break the symmetries of ordered Nb-Zr structures . Indeed, this Jahn-Teller-Peierls effect has been proposed as a driving force for bcc phase instability in binary alloys, including Nb-Zr Experimental verification. In order to validate our theoretical predictions, we measure the superconducting properties and RF performance of different Nb-Zr surface profiles. Samples were prepared using e-beam evaporation of a Zr target (base pressure: 1.3 × 10 -6 torr) on the Nb surface or electrochemical reaction with the Nb surface, followed by thermal annealing under 2 × 10 -7 torr vacuum, and a subsequent HF etch. The initial film thickness (20 -40 nm) and post annealing conditions (600 -1000 °C for 1/3 -10 h) were varied to modify the surface Zr atomic concentration. As probed by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, we observe 15-27 at.% Zr at the surface of evaporation-based samples (Fig. Resistance measurements using a Physical Property Measurement System under the AC transport mode demonstrate a T c of up to 13.5 K for evaporation-based samples that were annealed under 600 °C for 10 h. Even more impressively, the flux expulsion measurements indicate our electrochemically fabricated samples have a higher T c of 16 K. We point out that the 13.5 K and 16 K T c values are significantly higher than the literaturereported 11 K T c for Nb-Zr bulk alloys To assess the use of Nb-Zr alloys for SRF accelerator applications, we employ an electrochemical method to scale up the alloying process to be compatible with the Cornell sample test cavity B sh is the value of B a at which the superconducting Meissner state becomes unstable. It can be shown that α, β, and γ are related to the London penetration depth λ L , coherence length ξ, and thermodynamic critical field B c : We use Eq. ( We simulate inhomogeneous superconductors by treating the coefficients α, β, and γ as local quantities that vary spatially with material composition. For clean superconductors, these coefficients have been shown We use these relationships to obtain α(x), β(x), and γ(x) as follows. First, we consider a concentration profile n(x) in which Zr concentration n falls off exponentially with depth x in the material from a surface value n 0 on a scale set by δx: n(x) = n 0 e -x/δx . (see Fig. We calculate B sh using the linear stability analysis described in a reduction of BCS resistance. Moreover, our theoretical predictions provide a viable road map to further tune and improve T c and B sh . Overall, we have demonstrated that Nb-Zr alloys promise to be a new, feasible technology for accelerator physics.