The superconducting properties and structural parameters, including the Grüneisen parameter (γG), of the BiCh2-based (Ch: S, Se) layered superconductor LaO0.5F0.5BiS2-xSex were investigated. The superconducting transition temperature (Tc) increased with increasing Se concentration (x), and bulk superconductivity was induced by Se substitution. γG exhibited a larger value when x ≥ 0.4, where the superconducting properties were improved. These results suggest that the increase of lattice anharmonicity is preferable for superconductivity in LaO0.5F0.5BiS2-xSex. The discussion includes data for related superconductors REO0.5F0.5BiS2 (RE = Pr, Nd), where a positive correlation between γG and Tc is revealed for Se-poor samples. In addition, specific heat analyses suggest the presence of a low-energy optical phonon mode for LaO0.5F0.5BiS2-xSex. Following the discovery of superconductivity in Bi4O4S3 and LaO0.5F0.5BiS2 in 2012, BiCh2-based (Ch = S, Se) layered superconductors have since been developed Recently, we studied the relationship between the lattice anharmonicity in RE(O,F)BiS2 (RE = La, Ce, Pr, Nd) by estimating the Grüneisen parameter (γG) Therefore, additional investigation of the relationship between superconductivity and anharmonicity in BiCh2-based compounds is required to understand the superconductivity mechanisms in the superconductor family. In this work, we investigated the superconducting properties and lattice anharmonicity of LaO0.5F0.5BiS2-xSex, in which Se substitution at the inplane Ch1 site induces in-plane CP and bulk superconductivity Polycrystalline samples of LaO0.5F0.5BiS2-xSex (x = 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, and 1.0) were synthesized via a solid-state reaction Magnetic susceptibility (χ) was measured using a superconducting interference device (SQUID) magnetometer on a Magnetic Property Measurement System (MPMS3, Quantum Design) with an applied field of 10 Oe after zero-field cooling and field cooling (ZFC and FC). Specific heat was measured via a relaxation method using a physical property measurement system (PPMS, Quantum Design). The longitudinal sound velocity (vL) of the sample was measured using an ultrasonic thickness detector (Satotech-2000C). The actual composition was investigated by energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) using a scanning electron microscope (TM-3030, Hitachi-High Tech) equipped with an EDX analyzer SwiftED (Oxford). The γ G values of the samples were calculated using the following formula, as described in our previous studies where β V , B, V mol , and C V are the volume thermal-expansion coefficient, bulk modulus, molar volume, and specific heat, respectively. The parameters needed for the estimation of γG were calculated using equations (2-5, where dV/dT, ρ, vL, vS, vm, θD, h, kB, n, NA, and M denote the temperature gradient of the lattice volume, density of the material, longitudinal sound velocity, shear sound velocity, average sound velocity, Debye temperature, Plank's constant, Boltzmann's constant, number of atoms in the molecule (formula unit), Avogadro's constant, and molecular weight (per formula unit), respectively. (5) The superconducting properties of the obtained samples were investigated using magnetic susceptibility (χ) and specific heat (C). examined by ZFC data at 1.8 K was less than -1, but it increased with increasing x. Here, the shielding volume fraction exceeded -1 owing to the demagnetization effect for samples with bulk superconductivity, which has been commonly observed in BiCh2-based polycrystalline samples Se substitution in the examined samples results in an increase in in-plane CP The crystal structure parameters were investigated using Rietveld refinements, where the SXRD pattern and the refinement result at x = 0.8 (T = 301 K) are displayed in Fig. According to BCS theory, a high phonon energy is preferred for a higher Tc, as revealed in MgB2 In Fig. because Se substitution at the Ch1 site largely modifies the chemical bonding and electronic states Because the discussion above assumes an anharmonic rattling-like vibration in superconducting REO0.5F0.5BiCh2, we examined the presence of low-energy optical phonons in these samples using the specific heat. We performed low-temperature specific heat measurements for LaO0.5F0.5BiS2-xSex and LaOBiS2-ySey (thermoelectric phase). In materials with low-energy optical phonons, a peak is expected in the plot at a temperature corresponding to approximately a fifth of the phonon energy Se substitution for x = 0.6-1.0. However, we noticed that the contributions of optical phonon in (C-γT)/T 3 is large at x = 0.8 and 1.0. The large (C-γT)/T 3 values than β (see Table Polycrystalline samples of LaO0.5F0.5BiS2-xSex were synthesized. Using magnetic susceptibility and specific heat measurements, the superconducting properties of LaO0.5F0.5BiS2-xSex were examined, and the Tc phase diagram obtained. To investigate the lattice anharmonicity, the Grüneisen parameter (γ G ) was calculated using the sample density; sound velocity; Debye temperature; and crystal structure parameters, including the volume thermal expansion coefficient and specific heat. A larger γG value was observed at x ≥ 0.4, at which Tc was higher than that at x = 0.2, and bulk superconductivity was observed. In addition, the discussion including REO0.5F0.5BiS2 (RE = Pr, Nd) showed that Tc increased with increasing γG for samples with Se-free and Se-poor compositions. The trend suggests positive correlation between anharmonicity and superconductivity in the Se-poor samples. However, the data for the Se-rich samples deviate from the γG-Tc correlation. These results imply that superconducting states and/or the influence of anharmonicity on superconductivity are different between the Sepoor and Se-rich phases of REO0.5F0.5BiCh2. To reveal the origin of the anharmonicity, we measured the specific heat and observed a peak in (C-γT)/T 3 at 12.4-13.1 K for LaO0.5F0.5BiS2-xSex. Those results suggest the importance of anharmonic vibration on superconductivity in LaO0.5F0.5BiS2-xSex. 