Swarmalators have emerged as a new paradigm for dynamical collective behavior of multi-agent systems due to the interplay of synchronization and swarming that they inherently incorporate. Their dynamics have been explored with different coupling topologies, interaction functions, external forcing, noise, competitive interactions, and from other important viewpoints. Here we take a systematic approach and review the collective dynamics of swarmalators analytically and/or numerically. Long-term states of position aggregation and phase synchronization are revealed in this perspective with some future problems. Introduction. -There is a common saying that "birds of a feather flock together" which is often metaphorically used to highlight the similar attributes of people who are of same sort. Not only humans, it is found in nature that most of the living organisms have the tendency to stay in a colony and mimic the activities of their neighbors. Flock of birds, school of fish, herd of sheep are some very well-known examples of this very fact Swarming and synchronization are two very similar, but different phenomena. Swarming is self-organization behavior in space, whereas synchronization can be considered as self-organization behavior in time. In other words, in swarming, the external states of the entities are given core attention, whereas in synchronization, it is the internal states of the units that takes over. Over the past (a) Email: diba.ghosh@gmail.com few decades, studies on these two fields have evolved parallelly, though mostly they have remained disconnected. Although in the studies of mobile agents or moving oscillators, the effect of agents' motion on the phase dynamics has been contemplated, the reverse scenario has not been considered In this perspective article, we discuss the long-term asymptotic behaviors of the swarmalators under the bidip-1 arXiv:2208.14803v1 [nlin.AO] 25 Jul 2022 rectional effect of spatial and phase dynamics. We review the theoretical aspects and numerically analyze the long-term states for a lucid knowledge of such systems. By introducing a swarmalator model, we analyze the basic properties, like collision avoidance and minimal interparticle distance. In the case of global interactions among the constituents, we explore the dynamical states of the model with proper choices of interaction functions and also under the introduction of external forcing. The study is also accomplished with local interactions in the system and in presence of thermal noise. We further introduce attractive-repulsive phase coupling which brings competitive phase interaction and investigate such effect on the model. Finally, for better theoretical understanding of the emerging states, we study the dynamics of swarmalators when they are placed on a 1D ring. Model of swarmalators. -The bidirectional interplay between the spatial and phase dynamics of the swarmalators is described by the following pair of equations, for i = 1, 2, . . . N , where N is the number of swarmalators and x i ∈ R d (d = 2 or 3), θ i ∈ S 1 are the position vector and phase of the ith swarmalator, respectively. v i is the self propulsion velocity and ω i is the natural intrinsic frequency of the ith swarmalator. The alignment component of the swarming dynamics in Eq. ( Theoretical properties. -The presence of multiple interaction functions in the model makes it difficult to deal analytically. However, analytical progress can be made if we consider a particular instance of the model with the following choices where I att , I rep , and G are chosen as power laws with positive exponents α, β, and γ, respectively, where | • | represents the Euclidean norm. α and β play a crucial role in determining the aggregation structure of the system. We want to ensure short-range repulsion and long-range attraction among the swarmalators so that collision among them is avoided and the solution remains bounded We further assume F att and F rep to be even and bounded functions of their arguments. For notational simplicity we set, We define the following functionals Now, taking the sum over Eqs. Swarmalator dynamics under global interaction. -We consider a two-dimensional model of swarmalators 1 The spatial and phase couplings among the swarmalators are all-to-all, which means each swarmalator is influenced by the dynamics of other swarmalators present in the system. The two controllable parameters J and K determine the system's long-term dynamical state. Five different asymptotic states are found depending on the values of J and K which is contemplated in Fig. Order parameters. Different steady states emerge between the swarmalators in their spatial and phase dynamics. To investigate the phase coherence, a complex order parameter is defined as ), where Φ is the average phase of the swarmalators. R ∈ [0, 1] measures the phase coherence among all the units. In the static sync state, where all the swarmalators' phases are same, the value of R is 1. In all the other four states, R is strictly less than 1 as the phases are not synchronized. The correlation between the phases (θ i ) and the spatial angles (φ i = tan -1 (y i /x i )) is measured with the help of another order parameter, which is defined as By definition, the magnitude of S ± varies within 0 and 1. These values depend on the choices of initial conditions and for this we define S = max(S + , S -). Now, a nonzero value of S indicates the phases and spatial angles are correlated. In the static phase wave state, the phases are perfectly correlated with the spatial angles, θ i = ±φ i + C (± and C depend on the initial conditions), and S is exactly 1 here. The correlation decreases when the value of K is reduced from 0 to negative and it finally reaches the minimum value 0 in the static async state where swarmalators' phase are distributed uniformly between 0 to 2π. It is seen that the static async loses its stability beyond a critical phase coupling strength K c = -1.2J Effect of phase similarity both on spatial attraction and repulsion. Now, we consider F att (θ) = 1 + J 1 cos(θ) and F rep (θ) = 1-J 2 cos(θ) to investigate the behavior of swarmalators when phase similarity affects both spatial attraction and repulsion, respectively where R is the radius of the ring, î and ĵ are unit vectors along x and y directions, and C is a constant determined by the initial conditions. Following the nature of the ring phase wave, it is convenient to move to complex notation where the vector x k ≡ (x k , y k ) ∈ R 2 is identified as a point z k = x k + iy k in the complex plane. The existence and stability analysis involves complex identities which are easier to handle with our aforementioned choice α = 0, β = 2, γ = 2. We use Eqs. ( In Fig. The stability analysis of this state is done elaborately in ref. Swarmalators under external forcing. Think about a group of fireflies in a forest flashing simultaneously. If a flashing LED is placed in the center of the group, the flashing rhythms of the individuals get affected and synchronize with the LED flash. This kind of external perturbation can introduce new phenomena to the swarmalator system. To study the dynamics of swarmalators under external force, Lizarraga et al. where F , Ω, and x 0 represent the amplitude, frequency, and spatial position of the stimulus, respectively. The spatial dynamics here is same as Eq. ( Fig. Dynamics under local interaction. -In the previous section, we have studied the swarmalators where the spatial and phase interactions among them were global. But, in reality most of the real-world multi-agent systems manifest local neighbor interaction among the agents. This motivates us to study the swarmalators where the spatial or phase interaction among the units are restricted to local neighbors. Taking a step in this direction, Lee et al. where Λ i (r) is the set of indices of swarmalators lying within a distance r from the ith swarmalator (except itself) and N i (r) is the cardinality of this set. The phase dynamics is kept same as Eq. ( Competitive phase interaction. -So far we have discussed the results for swarmalators' long-term states where the phase coupling among the units was either positive (attractive) or negative (repulsive). But the coupling characteristic among the units of many systems is often more complex. It can be found in the neuronal networked systems where K a and K r are attractive and repulsive coupling strengths, respectively and p is the probability of attractive coupling. The swarmalator dynamics in this case is governed by Eqs. ( Time-varying phase interaction. The studies on swarmalators discussed so far are mainly based on static network formalism, i.e., the coupling scheme among the units does not change over time. It would be interesting to see what happens when we consider time-varying interactions where K a and K r are strengths for attractive and repulsive couplings, respectively and A, B are the corresponding adjacency matrices. N i (r) is same as the one used in Eq. ( where (x i , θ i ) ∈ (S 1 , S 1 ) denotes the position and phase of the ith swarmalator. The parameters J and K control the phase dependent spatial coupling and position dependent phase coupling, respectively. This reduced model given by Eqs. ( Conclusions. -In this perspective, we have made a concise review to explore the dynamical behavior of swarmalator systems. Theoretical analyses have revealed that under certain assumptions such systems possess some conserved quantities and finite-time collision avoidance can be assured. The long-term states of these systems have been analyzed numerically and theoretically under global interaction, addition of external forcing, local interaction, and competitiveness in the phase coupling with both static and time-varying coupling topologies. These studies have enfolded some captivating dynamics. More studies like oscillatory behavior with repulsive short-range interaction There are plenty to explore about the swarmalators given their complex behavior and interesting selforganizing patterns. Swarmalators with endowed orientation could reveal new collective states where the swarming properties include both aggregation and orientation. The role of the exponents α, β, and γ in determining the asymptotic states is not fully studied yet which demands more attention. A new but impactful direction of research would be to consider non pairwise interaction 