In this work we study the effect of engineered disorder on the local magnetic response of proximity coupled superconducting island arrays by comparing scanning Superconducting Quantum Interference Device (SQUID) susceptibility measurements to a model in which we treat the system as a network of one-dimensional (1D) superconductor-normal metal-superconductor (SNS) Josephson junctions, each with a Josephson coupling energy EJ determined by the junction length or distance between islands. We find that the disordered arrays exhibit a spatially inhomogeneous diamagnetic response which, for low local applied magnetic fields, is well described by this junction network model, and we discuss these results as they relate to inhomogeneous two-dimensional (2D) superconductors. Our model of the static magnetic response of the arrays does not fully capture the onset of nonlinearity and dissipation with increasing applied field, as these effects are associated with vortex motion due to the dynamic nature of the scanning SQUID susceptometry measurement. This work demonstrates a model 2D superconducting system with engineered disorder and highlights the impact of dissipation on the local magnetic properties of 2D superconductors and Josephson junction arrays. The effects of disorder and inhomogeneity on the superconducting properties of thin films have attracted both practical and theoretical interest, particularly in the presence of spatial correlations Given the effect of both correlated and uncorrelated disorder on superconducting systems, one open question is: how do spatial correlations in disorder affect the magnetic response of a 2D superconducting system? To explore this question, we used scanning Superconducting Quantum Interference Device microscopy (scanning SQUID microscopy or SSM) to measure the local diamagnetic response of arrays of niobium islands with proximity coupling via a thin layer of gold. Superconducting island arrays on normal metal can be a useful model for studying disorder in 2D superconductors, as both the disorder and critical current can be engineered by changing the spacing between superconducting islands Previously, We measured arrays with three types of island configurations: 1) ordered, 2) uncorrelated disorder, and 3) correlated disorder (Figure with standard deviation σ where z is the center-to-center distance between pairs of islands in the square lattice and = 5 μm is the correlation length For each array, the locations of the islands were patterned onto a 10 nm thick gold film with lateral dimensions 80 × 80 μm 2 using electron beam lithography, after which the niobium islands were deposited using electron beam evaporation. Transport measurements performed in a dilution refrigerator with a base temperature of 10 mK show two distinct transition temperatures: one from the niobium islands themselves entering the superconducting regime (T 1 ) and a second, lower transition temperature (T 2 ) marking the onset of phase coherence in the proximitized gold film The arrays were studied using a scanning SQUID microscope mounted in a helium-3 refrigerator at its base temperature, T = 400 mK. The scanning SQUID susceptometer used in this work consists of gradiometric concentric pickup loop and field coil pairs, with pickup loop inner radius r inner PL = 1.7 μm (outer radius r outer PL = 2.7 μm) and field coil inner radius r inner FC = 5.5 μm (outer radius r outer FC = 8.0 μm) (Fig. The susceptibility φ has a component φ that is in-phase with the applied field and a component φ that is out-ofphase with the applied field. The in-phase component is a measure of the local diamagnetic screening in a superconducting sample and hence the London penetration depth or superfluid density, while the out-of-phase component is a measure of dissipative currents. The measurements were performed at nominally zero applied global field, so that the only applied field was the local AC field from the susceptometer field coil. We imaged five arrays: one completely ordered, two with uncorrelated disorder, and two with correlated disorder, as summarized in Table The magnitude and spatial structure of the diamagnetic susceptibility is not constant as a function of the applied field. In Figure To explore the role of disorder in the inhomogeneous, nonlinear magnetic response of this engineered 2D superconductor, we have modeled the system as a network of 1D SNS Josephson junctions in which pairs of adjacent islands form junctions with critical current I c , or Josephson energy E J = I c Φ 0 /2π, determined by the junction length or edge-to-edge island spacing d (see Figure where R N is the normal state resistance, k B is Boltzmann's constant, and c 0 and c 1 are dimensionless fitting parameters which are of order 1 We model the field coil and pickup loop as 1D circular loops with radii r FC = 6.8 μm and r PL = 2.5 μm respectively (see Figure • dr is the gauge-invariant phase across the junction. Finally, we compute the flux Φ PL through the pickup loop due to the supercurrent flowing in the network to obtain a simulated in-phase susceptibility φ = Φ PL /I FC . It is not computationally practical to model the response of all ∼ 25, 000 islands in an array simultaneously, so we make two simplifying approximations. First, for each field coil position, we construct a network or graph containing only islands inside a "patch" of radius r patch = 17 μm = 2.5 × r FC around the center of the field coil. If the field coil is positioned z FC = 2 μm above the array, the magnitude of the field from the field coil at the edge of patch is ≈ 4% of the field at the center and junctions outside of the patch are at least r patch = 6.8 × r PL away from the center of the pickup loop. Therefore, junctions outside of r patch are both weakly influenced by the field from the field coil and inefficient at coupling flux into the pickup loop, such that they don't contribute significantly to the susceptibility signal. In practice, increasing r patch by 20%, from 2.5 × r FC to 3 × r FC , increases the simulated susceptibility by < 3% and does not significantly affect the spatial structure dius r cutoff = 0.9 μm of one another form junctions. We chose r cutoff = 0.9 μm so that 2ξ N < r cutoff < 2a, where ξ N = D/k B T ≈ 0.425 μm is the normal metal coherence length and a = 0.5 μm is the ordered array lattice constant A comparison of the in-phase susceptibility φ measured in the SSM experiments and simulated using the junction network model is shown in Figure The magnitude of φ depends strongly on the distance z FC between the field coil and the sample, and in this particular experiment there was significant uncertainty (∼ 2 -3 μm) in z FC . This is likely the cause of the discrepancy in the magnitude of φ at low field coil currents between Figure Although susceptibility simulations using the junction network model do exhibit nonlinearity with increasing applied field as the gauge-invariant phase θ across junctions in the network becomes large enough that sin θ ≈ θ is not a good approximation (see Figure Future work will focus on the magnetic response of ordered proximity coupled island arrays as a function of the island spacing over a wider range of local applied AC field. Such measurements will allow us to validate our model for the island spacing dependence of the junction critical currents, I c (d), and quantify how well the junction network model describes nonlinearities at higher applied field, which will in turn inform the design of future experiments on arrays with different geometries and materials. Beyond scanning SQUID microscopy, the prox- imity effect model systems introduced here could potentially be studied with time or frequency resolved imaging to better understand the dynamics causing dissipative behavior In summary, we have demonstrated the design, control, and measurement of a model superconducting system with engineered disorder to simulate the spatial evolution of superfluid density and phase coherence in 2D superconductors with micron-scale disorder. Scanning SQUID microscopy measurements reveal a magnetic response that is nonlinear and spatially inhomogeneous, and this response can be tuned by changing the disorder landscape. For small applied fields, the local diamagnetic response of the arrays is in good agreement with a model that treats the system as a network of Josephson junctions with island spacing-dependent Josephson coupling. However, we find that the onset of nonlinearity and dissipation with increasing applied field cannot be fully explained simply by considering the nonlinear (i.e., sinusoidal) current-phase relation of the junctions. This motivates future work on a theoretical description that incorporates the rich nonlinear and dissipative physics underlying this engineered, disordered 2D superconducting system. sic Energy Sciences under DE-SC0012649. The SSM measurements were, in part, supported by the Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation, Grant GBMF3429 "Ex-otic Emergent Particles in Nanostructures". Work at the University of Connecticut was supported by the State of Connecticut. In scanning Superconducting Quantum Interference Device (SQUID) susceptometry, a small single-turn field coil (FC) locally applies a magnetic field to a sample, and a pickup loop (PL)-concentric with the field coil and connected to flux-sensitive SQUID circuit-senses the sample's magnetic response Figure Figures S4 and S5 show the in-phase susceptibility φ and out-of-phase susceptibility φ respectively for all five samples listed in Table The signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of a SQUID susceptibility measurement increases with increasing field coil current I FC . At large field coil currents (Figure As mentioned in the main text, the ordered array begins to exhibit an inhomogeneous magnetic response at the highest local applied AC field (or field coil current I FC ), as can be seen in Figure This difference in φ between the top and bottom halves of the ordered array is most likely due to local heating of the gold film caused by vortex motion near the edges of the array, rather than to an intrinsic difference between the two halves of the device. If the junctions in the bottom half of the array simply had a smaller critical current (e.g., due to lithography or morphology differences), the bottom half of the array would have a weaker diamagnetic response than the top half for all values of the applied AC field (as the effective penetration depth for an ordered junction array with junction critical currents I c is Λ ∝ 1/I c ). However, the diamagnetic response of the ordered array appears to be very homogeneous for smaller applied AC fields (Figure To generate the susceptibility maps shown in Figures S4 and S5, the SQUID sensor is raster-scanned over the field of view. Typically starting at the bottom left corner of the field of view, data is acquired while the field coil and pickup loop are scanned horizontally to the bottom right corner, producing the bottom row of pixels. Then the sensor is returned to the left side of the field of view (without acquiring data) and its position is advanced towards the "top" of the field of view by a distance corresponding to one pixel. The process is repeated to acquire the next row of pixels. Vortex motion occurring when the sensor is near the bottom edge of the array (orange/yellow features at the bottom of Figure The diagonal feature near the center right of the array in panel (c) of Figures Figure sured before any heating due to vortex motion at the top edge of the array occurs. The SQUID sensor is scanned in a plane that is nominally parallel to the sample surface. A scan plane that is not exactly parallel to the sample surface, such that the SQUID sensor is slightly closer to the surface in some parts of the sample than in others, could also contribute to spatially nonuniform dissipation and heating even in a homogeneous sample. Lastly, Figure It is important to note how the change in disorder affects the shape of the resistance versus temperature graph. In C3, the islands begin to enter the superconducting phase at around 8 K. The sharper drop around 3.5 K represents when the system was sufficiently cool enough to have a proximity effect on the surrounding gold to get a supercurrent flowing through parts of the gold substrate. In the uncorrelated sample, the superconducting transition of the islands has a larger range . In C3, we can see that the islands begin to superconduct slightly below 8 K. This starts to level off around 5 K. Near 3.5 K, the slope increases from the gold experience a proximity effect from the islands until the sample reaches zero resistivity at around 0.8 K. In UC3, the island superconducting regime is more smeared out and the proximity-induced effect of gold requires lower temperatures to begin. Note that the data for UC3 was taken using a 3-point measurement, so the data was offset by a constant resistance and had a phase shift near 0 Kelvin, resulting in a seemingly non-zero resistance. and it takes a lower temperature for the gold to become a proximity-induced superconductor. For further details on the resistance versus temperature graphs for super-conducting island arrays, see Eley et al. In the model discussed in the main text, which we call the discrete junction network (DJN) model, we treat the system as a network or graph of n circular superconducting islands (nodes), all with the same diameter, D island = 260 nm, with center positions r i and superconducting phases φ i ∈ [0, 2π). We assume that pairs of islands (i, j) form 1D Josephson junctions (edges) with critical current I c,ij or Josephson energy E J,ij = I c,ij Φ 0 /2π. To simplify the problem, we assume that only islands whose centers lie within a radius r cutoff of one another form junctions, such that there are m junctions in total. As described in the main text, we assume that the junction critical currents depend on junction length or edge-toedge island spacing 2 , where d 0 = 240 nm is the minimum edge-to-edge island spacing in the ordered array and I 0 is a constant that corresponds to the maximum critical current per junction in the ordered array We remove from the network any islands that have fewer than 2 neighbors within the cutoff radius r cutoff because such islands are either completely isolated (0 neighbors) or can only satisfy the current conservation constraint (see below) if no current flows through the adjacent junction (1 neighbor). If two or more islands are overlapping (i.e., edge-to-edge island spacing d ij ≤ 0, see Figure For an applied magnetic vector potential A(r), assuming all junctions have a sinusoidal current-phase relation (CPR), the current I ij flowing from island i to island j is Given a network constructed as described above, the goal is to find island phases φ i that satisfy the following constraints: • Current conservation: for each island i, the sum of the currents entering i is equal to the sum of the currents leaving i. • Phase single-valuedness: for each loop (closed path) in the network, i,j in loop where f ∈ R is the frustration index of the loop and n ∈ Z is the number of flux quanta enclosed in the loop For a connected graph with n nodes and m edges, the number of basis cycles is m -n + 1 -n [current conservation constraint for each island i] -(m -n + 1) [phase single-valuedness constraint for each basis cycle ] = 0. We solve this nonlinear programming (NLP) problem us-ing the GEKKO Python interface to the APMonitor op-timization suite The field coil and pickup loop are approximated as 1D circular loops with radii r FC = 6.8 μm and r PL = 2.5 μm respectively (see Figure , where is the center of junction ij, and The resulting flux through the pickup loop Φ PL is found by integrating the z-component of B over the surface of the pickup loop. In practice, the pickup loop is discretized into a Delaunay mesh Finally the (in-phase) susceptibility is given by φ = Φ PL /I FC . The discrete junction network (DJN) model exhibits nonlinearity, namely decreasing diamagnetic susceptibility with increasing applied field, as the gauge-invariant phase θ across junctions in the network becomes large enough that sin θ ≈ θ is not a good approximation. Figure The junction network model scales poorly with the ratio of the field coil radius r FC to the typical center-tocenter island spacing. Given our field coil radius r FC = 6.8 μm, for the ordered array UC1 with lattice constant a = 500 nm, assuming a junction cutoff radius r cutoff = 0.9 μm and patch radius r patch = 17 μm = 2.5 × r FC , the total number of islands in the patch is n ≈ 3, 600 and the total number of junctions is m ≈ 14, 200. With such a large r FC , the number of junctions in the network (and therefore the number of variables and constraints in the NLP problem) grows very quickly with both r patch and r cutoff (see Figure Here we describe an alternative model of the system that we developed, which did not reproduce the measured susceptibility as effectively as the junction network model (DJN). In this model, which we call the continuous linear film (CLF) model, we treat the system as a continuous 2D superconducting film with inhomogeneous effective magnetic penetration depth Λ(x, y) = λ 2 (x, y)/t whose magnetic response is governed by a generalized 2D London equation where λ is the London penetration depth, t λ is the film thickness, H is the magnetic field in the film, J is the sheet current density in the film, and ∇ = ∂ ∂x , ∂ ∂y . For an ordered Josephson junction array, the low-field effective penetration depth is given in S.I. units by Λ = Φ 0 /(2πμ 0 I c ), where μ 0 is the vacuum permeability and I c is the critical current of each junction where d(x, y) is the "local island spacing", d 0 = 240 nm is the minimum edge-to-edge island spacing in the ordered array, and I 0 is a constant that corresponds to the maximum critical current per junction in the ordered array, which sets the overall strength of the screening in the system. To calculate d(x, y), we take the as-designed island positions (x i , y i ) and, for each island i, calculate the average distance to the island's 8 nearest neighbors. This gives an estimate of d(x i , y i ) at each of the island positions, from which we compute d(x, y) for any (x, y) within the film via linear interpolation. The arrays with correlated disorder (C2, C3) are locally ordered on a length scale given by the engineered correlation length, = 5 μm, so one might expect their local magnetic response at low applied fields to be approximately described by a local effective penetration depth Λ(x, y), as given in Equation Having defined the film's effective penetration depth Λ, we model the film's response to the field due to a current I FC flowing in the SQUID susceptometer field coil by self-consistently solving Equation 1 inside the film and the three superconducting layers of the SQUID, and Maxwell's equations in the vacuum regions between superconducting layers. We use the SuperScreen Python package 