Recent experimental advances [Liu et al., npj 2D Materials and Applications, 2019, 3, 23] propose the design of graphene nanoribbon spring (GNRS) to substantially enhance the stretchability of pristine graphene. GNRS is a periodic undulating graphene nanoribbon, where undulations are of sinus or half-circles or horseshoe shapes. Besides those, GNRS geometry depends on design parameters, like pitch's length and amplitude, thickness and joining angle. Because of the fact that parametric influence on the resulting physical properties are expensive and complicated to be examined experimentally, we explore the mechanical, thermal and electromechanical properties of GNRS using molecular dynamics simulations. Our results demonstrate that horseshoe shape design of GNRS (GNRH) can distinctly outperform the graphene kirigami design concerning the stretchability. The thermal conductivity of GNRS were also examined by developing a multiscale modeling, which suggests that the thermal transport along these nanostructures can be effectively tuned. We found that however, the tensile stretching of GNRS and GNRH does not yield any piezoelectric polarization. The bending induced hybridization change results in a flexoelectric polarization, where the corresponding flexoelectric coefficient is 25% higher than graphene. Our 1 results provide a comprehensive vision to the critical physical properties of GNRS and may help to employ the outstanding physics of the graphene to design novel stretchable nanodevices. During the last decade, graphene The exceptional physical and chemical properties of graphene, promoted the experimental and theoretical endeavours to fabricate novel graphene's 2D counterparts, and subsequently explore their intrinsic properties and application prospects. As a results of scientific accomplishments, 2D materials family is commonly considered as the most vibrant class of materials, in which new members are continuously introduced, either theoretically predicted or experimentally fabricated. Worthy to remind that despite the outstanding properties of pristine graphene, it is not an ideal material and naturally shows few drawbacks, such as the lack of an electronic band-gap and brittle failure mechanism Nonetheless, it has been also practically proven that graphene can show largely/finely tunable electronic, mechanical, thermal, optical and electromechanical properties, with accurately controlled mechanical straining For the employment of graphene in flexible nanoelectronics, its ductile and highly rigid mechanical properties are undesirable. Therefore, engineering of the graphene design in order to improve its stretchability is a critical issue Since the graphene is the frontier and symbolic member of 2D materials, commonly the experimental and theoretical methodologies that are applied for the graphene can be extended for the other members of 2D materials family. We are thus hopeful that the obtained results by this study may sever as valuable guides for the future theoretical and experimental studies on the design of 2D materials spring like structures. We conducted classical molecular dynamics (MD) simulations to evaluate the mechanical properties and thermal conductivity of graphene springs, using the large scale atomic/molecular massively parallel simulatior package where e i and v i are respectively the total energy and velocities of atom i, f i j and r i j are the interatomic force and position vector between atoms i and j, respectively. In the approach, first the structures were equilibrated at a constant volume and room temperature using the Berendsen thermostat method. Before the evaluation of thermal conductivity, in order to remove the effects of previously applied thermostat, we used constant energy (NVE) simulations. For the evaluation of effective thermal conductivity, individual simulations were conducted for 1 ns under the auto-correlation function (HCACF) to the thermal conductivity k, via the Green-Kubo expression: where k B is Boltzmann's constant, T is the simulation temperature, and V is the total volume of the graphene spring. In order to reach a converged thermal conductivity, several independent simulations with uncorrelated initial velocities were carried out and the acquired HFACFs were averaged. 3 Results Fig. The horseshoe shape design of GNR (GNRH) composes by connecting two circular arcs of the inner radius (h r ) with the intersecting angle (h θ ). When h θ = 0 • , GNRH looks like a series of connected semi-circles and for h θ > 0 • and h θ ≤ 45 • , the horseshoe design is obtained. For h θ more than 45 • , the semi-circles merge each other, which is not desirable. These parameters define the shape of a single horseshoe curve. Another curve with radius h r + h t creates a parallel curve, where h t defines the thickness of GNRH. We construct the horseshoe-shaped region on a pristine graphene sheet and removed atoms other than this region, which creates an initial atomic configuration for the GNRH system. After the initial preparation of spring structures, we removed the carbon atoms bonded with a single carbon atom along the lateral edges. Since these atoms can lead to instability in simulations. It is worth noting that the carbon atoms belong to the curved edges of the GNRS and GNRH system are not terminated with hydrogen atoms. With the defined geometrical parameters and initial atomic configurations for GNRS and GNRH, we consider the following parameter sets for estimating the mechanical and thermal properties. Parameter set s p -s t -s a : The starting value for s p is 9 nm (where the size effects are absent in pristine graphene The spring structures from the different parameter sets are made by cutting from graphene sheets oriented along the zigzag direction. Our comparative results discussed in the supplementary information †document however confirm that the orientation of original graphene sheet show negligible effects in the estimated properties. Fig. Further straining to 0.30, deflects the GNRS without increasing the peaks (Fig. The RS for the experimentally manufactured GNRS is about 0.35 for a system with thickness 50 nm Fig. Interestingly, GNRH with various h θ maintained the stress levels when increasing the strain range. We consider varying the width parameter h t in GNRH by keeping the other parameters constant to check its influence on the mechanical properties. The range of h t is limited by the choice of other two parameters. For example, consider h r equal to 5 nm and h θ is 45 Whereas, variation of h t effecting both RS and TS in GNRH. The increase in thickness, increases the separation between stress centers and decreases the TS, which lead to early failure and decrease in RS. This finding implies that changing of h t strongly influence the both RS and TS of GNRHs. The observations concerning the width effect on the mechanical response are in close agreement with the eralier report based on MD simulations When compared to GNRS, GNRH shows higher stress levels (dotted lines in Fig. The very strong repulsions exist between the semi-circular rings due to the minimum spacing. The very high deflections and smoothness of circular cross-sections helps to avoid the stress concentrations in GNRH, which helps to enhance the mechanical properties. As a total, very high value of RS is noted for GNRH. With increasing the system size (arc length of GNRH), RS tending to converge to a value of 2, which is about 17% higher than the graphene kirigami design keeping the stress-levels identical. We next study the thermal transport through the GNRS and GNRH systems. Fig. We employed a square sheet of pristine graphene with 16 nm side length to estimate κ 0 . The estimated value of κ 0 is 1000 ± 100 W/(mK), which is an average over 8 independent simulations. This value is in close agreement with earlier reports using EMD method Also, there exist a very strong conversion for the phonon mode polarization from out-of-plane to in-plane and opposite phase for the left and right parts of the unitcell When s t increases, the ratio of atoms on the boundaries to the total number of atoms decreases, which results in lower phonon-boundary scattering rate and subsequently facilitate the heat transport. As proposed in the previous work For GNRH systems with varying h θ is shown in Fig. As h θ increases, there is an increase in the radius of curvature of the junction region that connects the two semi-circular segments. The phonon transport through this increased curvature experiences significant scattering, which reduces the heat transfer and κ. The thermal conductivity for h θ 30 • and 45 • is nearly the same. We examine thermal conductivity for the GNRH samples used in estimating the effect of width on mechanical properties in Section 3.1. The effective thermal conductivity for 2.5 -1.6 -45 • and 5 -1.6 -45 • are 0.0084 and 0.0055. This represent that increase in h r , increases the radius of curvature and produce more edge localized phonon modes. These modes do not contribute for thermal transport, as a result the thermal conductivity decreases for 5 -1.6 -45 • GNRH system (see supplementary information †) However, the increase in h t increase the number of phonon modes in GNRH keeping the density of edge localized modes same. This reduces the edge scattering and increase the phonon transport, thus increase in κ The nanoscale electromechanical properties (piezoelectricity and flexoelectricity) have been gaining intense attention due to their ability to sustain large deformations. This feature adds many different applications in the energy conversion process. These properties are limited in pristine graphene due to the crystallographic symmetry. The structural and chemical modifications break the symmetry and induce polarization under mechanical deformations The bending deformation of pristine graphene induces a polarization due to the change of hybridization state of the carbon atom, known as pyramidalization To calculate the polarization in the atomic system, we utilize the charge-dipole (CD) model along with the short-range bonded interactions (Tersoff potential). According to CD model, each atom i is associated with charge q i and dipole moment p i For applying deformation, we have added left and right rectangular regions to the GNRS and GNRH systems by discarding the periodic boundary condition used in Section 2. These regions have equal s t or h t to the spring systems with 1 nm length along the spring longitudinal direction. The left and right regions helps to hold the given displacement, particularly during bending test, and relax the remaining system. We define a load cycle by prescribing the displacement of atoms to left and right regions for 1 ps time period, followed by a relaxation of 2 ps time period. Because of the non periodic boundaries, we perform simulations at different repetitions of sinus and horseshoe shapes in spring systems. These simulations help us to study the size effect on electromechanical properties. For every load cycle, we note the evolution of atomic configuration, corresponding charge and dipole moments. The total polarization of the atomic system is the sum of all atomic dipole moments divided by the volume of atomic system. For tensile deformation, we apply a displacement in longitudinal direction u x = εt load l 0 to the atomic system, where ε is strain rate equal to 1×10 8 s -1 as used in Section 2, t load is the loading time (1 ps) and l 0 is the initial length of the atomic system in longitudinal direction. The load cycles strain gradient (10 -3 nm -1 ) 0 0.5 continued to reach the strain ε xx of 0.4 for 9 -1.6 -2.5 and 2.5 -1.6 -0 • systems. The strain limit 0.4 corresponds to the linear rise in stress-strain response for these systems as shown in Fig. At each load cycle, the polarization is measured and the variation with strain is plotted in Fig. The variation in polarization with strain is nearly negligible for both GNRS and GNRH systems. The coefficient of variation for the polarization response is nearly equal to 1 for both GNRS and GNRH, similar to non-piezoelectric pristine graphene For bending deformation, we supply the following out-of-plane displacement field to the atomic system where x represent the atom coordinate in the longitudinal direction, K represent the inverse of curvature (strain gradient) of the bending plane. After prescribing the bending deformation, the atoms belongs to the left and right termination regions are held fixed. Whereas, the interior atoms are allowed to relax to energy minimizing positions using the conjugate-gradient algorithm. For the energy minimized configuration, we note the charges and dipole moments for each atom. From these, the relationship between polarization to strain and strain gradient as where P z is the out-of-plane polarization, μ zxzx is the out-of-plane bending flexoelectric coefficient, d zxz is the piezoelectric coefficient and ε xz is the strain component. Here the piezoelectric contribution (d zxz ε xz ) is removed from the total polarization, because the given bending deformation leads to a linear variation in ε xz along the x direction. The linear variation demonstrates that the induced deformation is symmetric and the resulting polarization due to strain is canceled out where u x is zero because of fixing the atom positions belongs to the left and right boundary and K eff is the effective strain gradient, which is equal to half of the given value of K. Substituting Eq. 5 along with zero piezo contribution in Eq. 4 leads to The polarization P z at various strain gradients K eff is plotted in Fig. Since the increased thickness unable to change the pyramidalization angle further, makes the polarization comparable with smaller thickness system. Further, the result of flexoelectric coefficient with length variation is given in Fig. Finally, the flexoelectric coefficient of GNRS and GNRH-0 • system is 0.25 times higher than the pristine graphene. Motivated by a latest experimental advance, we performed extensive classical molecular dynamics simulations to explore the mechanical, thermal conductivity and electromechanical properties of graphene nanoribbon springs (GNRS). In particular, we examined the effects of different GNRS design parameters on their physical properties. We found that by optimal design of GNRS systems, they can yield higher stretchability in comparison with kirigami counterparts. Horseshoe shape design of GNRS were found to show the better stretchability in comparison with other design strategies. In the aforementioned case, large deflections due to the strong repulsions between semicircular rings help to keep the load bearing at larger strain levels. Our analysis of deformation process reveals that the stress concentrations occurring near the peak portions of GNRS induce local failure of carbon bonds and lead to final failure of structure. The thermal conductivity of GNRS were found to be substantially dependent on the width of nanoribbon's width, due to the fact that phonon boundary scattering dominates the thermal transport. On this basis, we could establish the connection between the effective thermal conductivity of GNRS as a function of nanoribbon's width size, by extrapolating the molecular dynamics results to the diffusive heat transfer model by the finite element. This approach can be used to effectively estimate the thermal conductivity, but also suggest that the thermal transport of GNRS can be effectively tuned by changing the design parameters. The negligible variation between polarization and strain proves that GNRH and GNRS systems are non-piezoelectric similar to graphene. A linear variation of polarization with strain gradient is observed in bending deformation test. The flexoelectric coefficient for GNRS and GNRH-0 • is 25% higher than graphene. The decrease in μ zxzx with increasing h θ is due to the decrease of pyramidalization angle. Our extensive theoretical results highlight the superior stretchability, finely tunable thermal transport and improved flexoelectric coefficient of GNRS, and suggest them as highly attractive components to design flexible nanodevices. The obtained results will hopefully guide future theoretical and experimental studies, to extend the idea of nanoribbon springs for graphene and other 2D materials.