Laser-induced ultrafast demagnetization is a phenomenon of utmost interest and attracts significant attention because it enables potential applications in ultrafast optoelectronics and spintronics. As a spin-orbit coupling assisted magnetic insulator, α-RuCl3 provides an attractive platform to explore the physics of electronic correlations and related unconventional magnetism. Using timedependent density functional theory, we explore the ultrafast laser-induced dynamics of the electronic and magnetic structures in α-RuCl3. Our study unveils that laser pulses can introduce ultrafast demagnetizations in α-RuCl3, accompanied by an out-of-equilibrium insulator-to-metal transition in a few tens of femtoseconds. The spin response significantly depends on the laser wavelength and polarization on account of the electron correlations, band renormalizations and charge redistributions. These findings provide physical insights into the coupling between the electronic and magnetic degrees of freedom in α-RuCl3 and shed light on suppressing the long-range magnetic orders and reaching a proximate spin liquid phase for two-dimensional magnets on an ultrafast timescale. In correlated materials, microscopic degrees of freedom (e.g., electrons, phonons, excitons and magnons) are intertwined and their interplay is prominent to understanding the macroscopic properties of quantum materials Photoinduced demagnetization of magnetic insulators paves the way for launching ultrafast dynamics of spins, which cannot be reached in terms of conventional methods to modulate the microscopic magnetism Previous studies have found that α-RuCl3 has a substantial spin-orbit coupling and low-temperature magnetic order, matching the predictions of being a proximate quantum-spin liquid In this article, we employ ab initio calculations within the framework of real-time time-dependent density functional theory (TDDFT) The method has been recently extended to the real-time case, within the framework of time-dependent density-functional theory. In practice, the functional is an efficient and computationally affordable method to study the optical response of correlated systems driven out of equilibrium As to α-RuCl3, the converged effective Hubbard U terms (Ueff = U -J) with the ACBN0 functional are 1.96 eV for Ru 4d orbitals and 5.31 eV for Cl 3p orbitals, respectively. The parameters yield an indirect bandgap of Egap =1.05 eV [Figure in excellent agreement with the experimental observation (~1.0-1.9 eV) In previous studies, theoretical calculations based on density functional theory plus a Hubbard correction yield a relatively small bandgap (0.6-0.8 eV) in α-RuCl3 From the projected band structures of α-RuCl3 (see Supplementary Figure This is interpreted as the on-site Coulomb potential on the chlorine ions increasing the localization of the lone pairs and hence, the bandgap. Besides, we calculated the amount of charge transfer in the compounds. From Bader analysis (Note 1), the Ru atoms in α-RuCl3 have the charge of 6.94 e, in contrast to 8 e in the pristine valence orbitals of the pseudopotential. On the other hand, the charge of each Cl atom is 7.35 e (out of 7 e), denoting a significant charge transfer. Therefore, the orbitals of Ru atoms cannot be considered fully localized, and the use of large Hubbard U as a fitting parameter lacks a reasonable physical basis. Besides the in-plane AFM state, it is observed another possible modulated zigzag antiferromagnet order where the magnetic moments are oriented ±35 from the ab plane in experiments In the following, we focus on the photo-induced out-of-equilibrium dynamics in α-RuCl3 by altering the laser photon energies. The typical shape of the electric field introduced by the applied laser pulse is shown in Figure Given the equilibrium results in Figure . 1, it is clear that the light-induced reduction of U is crucial for the observed changes in the magnetic structure. In addition, we observe similar demagnetization for a longer laser pulse of 50 fs, as shown in see Supplementary Figure The intensities correspond to I0=0.5×, 1.5×, and 2.5×10 12 W/cm 2 , respectively. The laser pulse with perpendicular polarization and higher intensity introduces larger modulation of the atomic magnetic moments. We take the photon energy of ħ=0.5×Egap as an example. (b) The influence of laser polarization on spin propagation. Parallel (perpendicular) direction denotes the laser polarization along (perpendicular) to the magnetic moments shown in Figure The variations of the magnetic moments of individual Ru atoms are also provided in Figure We also investigate the impact of laser intensity on ultrafast demagnetization. From Figure Figure We carried out comprehensive calculations for the out-of-equilibrium electronic properties and photoinduced carrier excitations in α-RuCl3. Figure At the end of the laser pulse (~25 fs), a small amount of the valence electrons is effectively excited into the conduction bands, which play a role in the magnetic dynamics. For ħ=1.25×Egap, the photoinduced carrier population increases to 0.40 e/atom within 15 fs and then oscillates around 0.25 e/atom. Following the shapes of the laser pulses, the peak of carrier densities reaches 1.36 e/atom for ħ=0.5×Egap. The excited carrier concentration is also sensitive to the photon energies of the laser, i.e., longer wavelengths result in more significant carrier densities. This is attributed to the laser-induced collapse of the bandgaps and the laser pulses with smaller photon energies becoming resonant with the transient bandgaps. To validate the physical picture, we performed additional simulations from the modulated zigzag antiferromagnet order to track the magnetic dynamics and transient band structures (see Supplementary Figure The direct electronic and spin dynamics obtained from our first-principles calculations enable us to simulate the photoinduced response of α-RuCl3 at the atomistic spatial scale on a femtosecond timescale. Strong photoexcitation leads to an ultrafast insulator-to-metal transition and creates a high density of electron-hole pairs. The magnetic interactions are modulated as an effective non-magnetic state is obtained. It should be noted that the ultrafast process is not the result of collective magnetic excitation (e.g., magnons), which would keep the magnitude of the magnetic moment fixed, while decreasing its components along the local order parameter directions. We note that extracting information about the collective excitation should demand more effort from the model Hamiltonian and TDDFT methods In α-RuCl3, the collapse of the bandgap occurs when the electrons are excited by strong laser pulses. Our findings support that the photoinduced carriers are important to induce ultrafast melting of magnetic structures. Our results indicate that both the magnetic ordering and the Hubbard U are crucial to stabilize the insulating state. Thus, the melting of the bandgap is caused by a conspiracy of the dynamically reduced Hubbard terms and the melting of the magnetic moments. It is straightforward to understand that high power can easily destroy the spin orders in an ultrafast timescale because high-power laser pulse can induce higher carrier density. As for the wavelength dependence, the laser pulse with photo energy around half of the bandgap becomes more resonant with the transient bandgap and excite more carriers, which destabilize the magnetic orders. In experiments, the magnetic transition could be probed by the time-resolved linear magnetic dichroism and x-ray magnetic circular dichroism which is able to illustrate the magnetic difference. Photoinduced insulator-to-metal transition in α-RuCl3 can be detected in time-and angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy. It is noteworthy that a femtosecond laser-induced quantum-spin-liquid state is beyond the current study and will be the subject of future studies. In conclusion, our ab initio simulations revealed the nature of photon-driven electron and spin dynamics in α-RuCl3. We demonstrated that laser pulses can provoke a magnetic transformation between zigzag AFM magnetic order and disordered magnetic states with much smaller magnetic moments. In addition, the spin response is remarkably sensitive to the laser wavelength and polarization on account of the photoinduced insulator-to-metal transition and different excited carrier distributions. This subtle interplay suggests a way to modulate the electronic and magnetic structures using ultrashort laser pulses. Our work provides new insights into photoexcitation-induced magnetic phase transitions and may pave the way for suppressing the longrange magnetic order and realizing a quantum-spin-liquid state at ultrashort timescales. TDDFT simulations. The evolution of the spinor states and the evaluation of the timedependent Hubbard U and magnetization are computed by propagating the generalized Kohn-Sham equations within time-dependent density functional theory including mean-field interactions, as provided by the Octopus package 