Big pores, small pores, ordered pores, random poresthey all have a function and as is often found, show behaviour in new materials that is not always predicted or obvious at the outset. I started my research journey trying to put extremely thin films onto near-perfect III-V crystals to control (opto)electronic properties and when the first TEM on our campus showed remarkable pore growth and structure in InP almost 21 years ago, the electrochemical modification of the InP made more sense. In this paper, I will summarise a few aspects of research into porous materials and semiconductors, from porous InP that led to studies of other porous semiconductors such as silicon, GaN, ZnO and Indium Tin oxide (ITO), to periodically ordered photonic crystal porous structures and some optical, thermal and electrochemical properties, photocatalysis, studies in batteries and related that were enabled or modified by the porous structure. Porous semiconductors continue to receive considerable attention because of functionality afforded by random or ordered structuring on the nano or mesoscale, and the litany of discoveries and applications have shown that control of porosity continuously gives useful and sometimes surprising practical benefits and applications. For instance, a wide range of mono-and compound semiconductors can be rendered porous through electroless or electrochemical etching , and such top down approaches allow a high degree of control over porosity formation. Additionally, the resulting skeleton formed through these means allows the possibility for arrays or arrangements of nanostructured materials such as nanowires (NWs), mesoporous materials, nanorods, photonic crystals and many other structural forms. When the sizes of the remaining semiconductors is reduced, photonic and phononic confinement effects can alter (electro)chemical, mechanical, and other physical characteristics. Rechargeable batteries have been critical for enabling portable consumer electronics and are beginning to be used in electric vehicles. Current lithium-ion battery anode research involves significant investigations of semiconducting and metalloid materials, particularly Si as its theoretical specific capacity is >4000 mAh/g under deep cycling conditions. Previous theoretical studies showed that porous Si with a large pore size and high porosity can maintain its structure after Li ion induced alloying and swelling. Silicon has maintained a strong fundamental and applied research value, and recently has become one of the most significant materials, when structured on the nanoscale, for Li-ion battery anodes Transparent conducting oxides are also important for electronic and photonic devices. The trade-off between their conductivity and transparency Porosity has been the key enabler for many of the discoveries and applications for several semiconductor materials from electronics and photonics to energy storage, catalysis and batteries, and many more besides. This paper will focus on semiconducting materials in porous form and the investigations we have been doing across many areas of technical interest to ECS and beyond. These include Si, GaN, InP, ITO, ZnO, many metal oxides and also some 3D printed structures. Much of the early research on porosity in compound semiconductors has been on gallium arsenide and indium phosphide, inspired by the advances in controlled etching of compound semiconductors but also from progress in the formation of porous silicon Anodic etching protocols are now more common and our work complimented observations on other III-V porous semiconductors by examining the mechanism of pore growth, propagation and branching in (100)-oriented n-type InP wafers in strongly basic electrolyte such as KOH Anodization of highly doped n-InP in aqueous KOH results in the formation of a nanoporous sub-surface region beneath a thin (typically ~40 nm) dense near-surface layer. Linear sweep voltammetry showed a pronounced anodic peak corresponding to the formation of the porous region. Porosity in InP begins by the formation of surface pits the penetrate the surface. These were confirmed by AFM and by cross-sectional TEM as shown in the overview in Fig. The investigations over the years for porous InP focused on the mechanism, as there were several open questions for anodic etching and pore growth in III-Vs in general, and the uniqueness of pore growth on n-InP in KOH. We developed a model of porous structure growth that is based on pore propagation along <111>A directions. These porous InP structures, and related structures in GaAs and other compound semiconductors are complex but offer potential opportunities in photonics if the nucleation, growth and pore growth, merging and domain structure can be controlled. Possibilities include modified scattering, graded refractive index surface layers, photonic band gap tuning and other optical effects caused by either random or ordered arrays or pores in a single crystal semiconductor. Porous silicon was one of the first porous semiconductors that showed promise in optoelectronics and related fields. The discoveries of Canham, Lehman and Föll showed how quantum wires of silicon could allow quantum confinement and thus direct red light emission from what is normally an indirect bandgap semiconductor. Representation of metal-assisted chemical etching of silicon using Ag + ions in a H2O2/HF solution to form a Si NW porous layer. For p-type Si(100), the NWs are solid core with roughened outer walls. n-type Si(100) also forms a NW layer, but the internal structure of the NW is mesoporous. For Si (111) substrates, etching proceeds also along <100> directions, creating a more complex NW layer where domains of NWs are aligned at ~57 to other domains of NWs. These mesoporous Si NW layers are also intense red light emitters. We reported an investigation of photoluminescence from these highly porous structures. Mesoporous n + -Si(100) nanowires and nanocrystal-decorated rough surface p-Si NWs formed by MACE showed time-resolved photoluminescence (PL) measurements indicated long (tens of μs) radiative recombination lifetimes. The red luminescence at ~1.7 eV is visible with the naked eye, as shown in Fig. [001] [010] [100] Finally, the roughness and degree of porosity affect temperature-dependent propagation of phonons. In order to realize increasingly efficient thermoelectric materials and devices, various methods have been used to suppress with phonon propagation and heat conduction. The nanostructure of the roughness features and evidence of multi-phonon processes required to explain optical phonon mode shifts and asymmetric broadening with increasing temperature, may prove to be useful in explaining the uniquely suppressed thermal conductivities observed in Si NWs that are not coherent nor smooth. Surface roughness alone and the spectrum of roughness wavelengths may not be the sole basis for the several orders of magnitude reduction in thermal conductivity. Creating pores in III-N materials is conventionally more difficult than in many other semiconductors. Nitride compound semiconductors, particular those of wide bandgap, require electrochemical conditions that allow favourable charge transfer to drive an etching process, but also an electrolyte that facilities the decomposition of robust compounds that are relatively inert in acidic and basic solutions. Typically, generation of valence band holes that aid the dissolution of the III-N into a porous structure is more easily achieved under photoelectrochemical conditions using high energy photons near- resonant with the bandgap energy of the nitride semiconductor. Zinc oxide (ZnO) has been one of the most investigated wide bandgap semiconductors in recent decades. More recently, quasi-superlattices (QSL) of ZnO and related materials in with periodically heterojunctioned interfaces have shown spatially varying conduction band characteristics. Our solution-based approach to ZnO QSL involved iterative spin-coating with specific drying and annealing protocols to created periodic bilayered of dense and porous ZnO in thin film format with very high crystal quality for a porous layer. Near homoepitaxial growth was possible on SiO2-coated silicon substrates at a maximum temperature of 300 C that was c-plane oriented. The QSL morphology and some growth details are shown in Fig. The types of films can also be doped from solution processing and we also demonstrated Al-doping to form QSLs of AZO. The process is near-identical, allowing control of the number of layers that form the QSL with a similar bilayered structure of dense and porous AZO with high c-axis crystallinity throughout. Making porous transparent conducting oxides High performance Li-ion batteries (LIBs) are one way to provide high capacity or energy density, with good, long life cycling stability at high current density. One approach is to fashion a three-dimensional (3D) interconnected network which is often called an inverse opal (IO) Battery researchers have for a several years considered using materials with socalled functional porosity that wets a greater volume of electrolyte to a lot of the active material with small dimensions, to remove solid state cation diffusion limitations especially for faster charging rates. Metals foams Porous metallic materials can be useful in electrochemical technologies as supports, porous conductors with overlayers of active materials or as active electrodes in their on right either that is intrinsic to the high surface area of the porous metal. Porous materials, especially porous semiconductors, offer a very wide range of interesting properties compared to the bulk counterparts, that can allow different ways of exploiting their semiconducting nature. Many electronic material semiconductors can find application in optics and sensing based on exploitation of the electronic characteristics but also the properties made possible by lower refractive index, roughened or periodic porosity. Periodic porosity provide a photonic band gap and thus a method to selectively tune the energy range for transmission or reflection, random porosity and roughness can markedly influence heat conduction without adversely degrading electronic conductivity, useful for thermoelectric applications and may others. And many of the oxides of transition metal used so often in energy storage can be leveraged for other electrochemical technologies such as photocatalysis that would benefit from enhanced or tunable light absorption in several properties of the materials (photonic bandgap, electronic bandgap, surface plasmon resonance etc.). Porous version of semiconducting materials can provide opportunities for those materials use in application that otherwise may not have been considered. And or course, when you venture past semiconductors, there is a universe of possibilities and exotic properties and applications that await when designing and engineering pore structures for mechanical, biomedical, structural and other reasons. K (e)