Needle-in-a-Haystack problems exist across a wide range of applications including rare disease prediction, ecological resource management, fraud detection, and material property optimization. A Needle-in-a-Haystack problem arises when there is an extreme imbalance of optimum conditions relative to the size of the dataset. For example, only 0.82% out of 146k total materials in the open-access Materials Project database have a negative Poisson's ratio. However, current stateof-the-art optimization algorithms are not designed with the capabilities to find solutions to these challenging multidimensional Needle-in-a-Haystack problems, resulting in slow convergence to a global optimum or pigeonholing into a local minimum. In this paper, we present a Zooming Memory-Based Initialization algorithm, entitled ZoMBI, that builds on conventional Bayesian optimization principles to quickly and efficiently optimize Needle-in-a-Haystack problems in both less time and fewer experiments by addressing the common convergence and pigeonholing issues. ZoMBI actively extracts knowledge from the previously best-performing evaluated experiments to iteratively zoom in the sampling search bounds towards the global optimum "needle" and then prunes the memory of low-performing historical experiments to accelerate compute times by reducing the algorithm time complexity from O(n 3 ) to O(φ 3 ) for φ forward experiments per activation, which trends to a constant O(1) over several activations. Additionally, ZoMBI implements two custom adaptive acquisition functions to further guide the sampling of new experiments toward the global optimum. We validate the algorithm's optimization performance on three real-world datasets exhibiting Needlein-a-Haystack problems that vary in dimensionality from 6D to 11D and further stress-test the algorithm's performance across an additional 174 analytical datasets that vary in optimum needle width, optimum distance to edges, dimensionality, and initialization conditions. The ZoMBI algorithm demonstrates compute time speed-ups of 400x compared to traditional Bayesian optimization as well as efficiently discovering optima in under 100 experiments that are up to 3x more highly optimized than those discovered by similar methods MiP-EGO, TuRBO, and HEBO. Current optimization algorithms achieve good results on low-dimensional problems that are smooth and have wide basins of attraction. Examples of smooth manifolds with wide basins of attraction within material science include processand recipe-optimization problems such as tuning perovskite manufacturing variables to achieve higher efficiency This Needle-in-a-Haystack (NiaH) problem arises when only few optimum conditions exist within the entire dataset, resulting in an extreme imbalance. Interpolating the parameter space of an imbalanced dataset with an estimation function, such as a GP, results in smoothing over the optimum or over-predicting the properties of the materials found near the optimum Several challenges exist for the current landscape of computational tools that inhibit effective optimization of these complex NiaH problems. Firstly, the "needle" makes up only a small percentage of the total manifold search space, resulting in a weak correlation between the measured input parameters and the target property of interest, inhibiting discovery of the region containing the needle In recent literature, algorithms have been developed to address some of these challenges individually, but not all of them together. The first class of solutions bound the search space using a trust region approach to sample regions with higher probability of containing the optimum. Although these methods from existing literature address some of the challenges in optimizing NiaH problems, none of them have been designed specifically to quickly and efficiently discover a needle-like optimum within a haystack of suboptimal points, resulting in all of them falling short of a full solution. Therefore, in this paper, we design an algorithm that addresses all three of the challenges faced when optimizing NiaH problems by In this paper, we develop two major contributions: (1) the ZoMBI algorithm and (2) adaptive learning acquisition functions. Through the combination of these two contributions, the optimum region of a NiaH manifold can be quickly discovered in fewer experiments without pigeonholing into local minima. Thus, the three challenges of optimizing NiaH problems are addressed: (1) the challenge of finding a hypervolume within the manifold that contains the needle-like optimum The ZoMBI algorithm has two key features: (1) iterative inward bounding of proceeding search spaces using the m number of best-performing memory points within the prior search space and (2) iterative pruning of low-performing historical search space memory. The newly computed search space bounds are unique for each dimension, such that the optimum basin of attraction of complex, non-convex NiaH manifolds can be discovered. This algorithm leverages these two key features to guide the acquisition of new data towards more optimal regions while only fitting the surrogate within the suggested optimum region to resolve more detail of the space of interest, as shown in Figure Algorithm We define m as the number of retained memory points during an activation of ZoMBI. The m memory points are saved to memory while all other data are erased from memory. These are the historical data points that achieve the m lowest (for minimization) target values, y, and they are used to zoom in the search bounds. Using these memory points, the multi-dimensional upper and lower bounds of the zoomed search space are computed for each dimension, d. Let X := {X 1 , X 2 , . . . , X n } be a set of data points, where X j ∈ R d . Let f : R d → R be the objective function. We first assume that the points in X are in general position so that f (X) contains unique elements. Then, for each m ≤ n define X (m) = {X π(1) , . . . , X π(m) } where π is a permutation on {1, . . . , n} so that {f (X π(j) )} is in ascending order. If f (X) contains repeated elements, we may first remove the points with repeated f values and apply the definition Fast Bayesian Optimization of Needle-in-a-Haystack Problems using Zooming Memory-Based Initialization above. Then, for each d, the bounds are defined as: where B l d and B u d computed lower and lower bounds for each dimension, d, respectively. The bounds [B l d , B u d ] constrain the proceeding acquisition of new data as well as the computation of a GP, such that sampling cannot occur outsides of the bounded region. This constraining process operates independently for each dimension, such that each dimension has a unique lower and upper bound. To initialize the algorithm with data from the constrained space, i data points are sampled from the bounded region using Latin Hypercube Sampling (LHS). LHS splits a d-dimensional space into i * d equally spaced strata, where i is the number of points to sample uniformly over d dimensions with low variability, unlike random sampling that has high sampling variability Traditional BO acquisition functions, such as EI LCB Adaptive builds off of previous work that also tune sampling based on the number of experiments collected, n where n is the number of experiments sampled, and β = 3 and = 0.9 are hand-tuned initialization hyperparameters selected based on a priori domain knowledge of the function's performance on a variety of different problems. Having a large β and an close to 1 supports a gradual decay from very explorative to very exploitative, rather than a rapid decay. In the following section (Section 3.3), the dynamic EI Abrupt and LCB Adaptive are shown to both discover optima faster and avoid pigeonholing into local minima better than their static counterparts by actively balancing the ratio of exploitation to exploration using learned information about the quality and quantity of previously sampled experiments. EI Abrupt is a novel implementation that flips between the exploitative EI Through memory pruning, the number of experiments used to train the GP surrogate varies between [i, i + φ] for every α, rather than being proportional to n, where the number of initialization samples is fixed at i = 5. In this paper, we use φ ∈ [0, 10], i.e., once φ = 10, the activation is complete and resets to φ = 0. This is computationally favorable because {X i } ∪ {X φ } ⊆ {X n }. Thus, for a single α, the time complexity is O((i + φ) 3 ) ≈ O(φ 3 ), since i is fixed. Furthermore, since the range of φ is capped, a non-increasing sawtooth pattern in compute time is exhibited, illustrated in Figure Pigeonholing into the local minima of a function occurs when an optimization algorithm has insufficient learned knowledge of the manifold topology to continue exploring potentially profitable regions or when the algorithm's hyperparameters are improperly tuned, leading to overly exploitative tendencies In the next section, three real-world datasets are optimized using ZoMBI -each of these datasets have extreme data imbalances, illustrated in 7 within the specified ideal ranges of ZoMBI performance. The 6D Poisson's Ratio dataset has an imbalance of 0.82% optimum conditions, the 6D Thermoelectric Figure of Merit dataset has an imbalance of roughly 1.32% optimum conditions, and the 11D wildfire detection dataset has an imbalance of 4.16% optimum conditions. This range of ideal performance of ZoMBI between 0.05% and 5% optimum hypervolume is facilitated by the initialization set. Hence, to improve performance for narrower optima, either the number of initialization samples must be increased, or initialization conditions should be adjusted. Additional initialization conditions experiments of ZoMBI are shown in supplemental Section S-5. The first experimental dataset is 6-dimensional and consists of 146k materials from the publicly available Materials Project database with different mechanical properties, described by Poisson's Ratio, ν ν. A positive ν > 0, describes a material that expands when a compressive load is applied to the orthogonal direction The second experimental dataset is 6-dimensional and consists of 1k materials with different thermal and electrical properties, described by the Thermoelectric Figure of Merit, ZT . Since ZT values are always positive, there is no clear cutoff for what "optimum" conditions are, but with a threshold of ZT > 0.8, 1.32% of the total 1k materials are considered optimum. A higher ZT indicates that the material is better able to convert a thermal gradient into an electrical current where S is the Seebeck coefficient, σ is electrical conductivity, T is the average temperature, and κ is thermal conductivity. The ZT is computed for each material with valid thermal and electrical properties in the Materials Project database using BoltzTraP The third experimental dataset is 11-dimensional and consists of 128k meteorological conditions and an index, ψ, that determines whether the set of conditions has a high likelihood of generating or sustaining a wildfire in the state of California -publicly available from the California Irrigation Management Information System (CIMIS) weather stations A highly negative ψ indicates a high risk of wildfires. Hence, for this experiment, we aim to minimize ψ, to best detect meteorological conditions at high risk of wildfires. The dataset spans over two years of data collected from 2018 to 2020, during which over 2500 wildfires have occurred, burning over 24 million acres of land Figure Figure In this paper, we proposed the [Zo]oming [M]emory-[B]ased [I]nitialization (ZoMBI) algorithm that builds on the principles of Bayesian optimization to accelerate the optimization of Needle-in-a-Haystack problems by two-fold, firstly by requiring fewer experiments to achieve better optimum faster than existing MiP-EGO (2) the challenge of polynomially increasing compute times of BO using a GP surrogate (3) unwanted pigeonholing into local minima Solving a Needle-in-a-Haystack problem that arises from extremely imbalanced data is a significant challenge that has important implications in science and engineering, especially within the field of materials science Ultimately, the significance of developing the ZoMBI algorithm is to quickly and efficiently tackle difficult Needle-ina-Haystack optimization problems in extremely imbalanced datasets. In this paper, we showcased the ability of the developed algorithm to discover rare materials and conditions with highly-optimized properties in a short period of time using few experiments. Discovering rare materials quickly and efficiently enables widespread access to a new range of materials applications from engineering high-performance medical devices to ubiquitous solid-state cooling systems Supporting Information: Fast Bayesian Optimization of Needle-in-a-Haystack Problems using Zooming Memory-Based Initialization (ZoMBI) Alexander E. Siemenn In this paper, we provide analyses of three real-world datasets: (1) Poisson's Ratio The Thermoelectric Merit dataset has a sample size of N = 1, 063 experimental and simulated materials, publicly available from the Materials Project database The ZoMBI algorithm is designed specifically to tackle NiaH problems where the basin of attraction containing a global minimum is narrow A dataset with a global minimum near an edge is a challenge for ZoMBI to optimize unless the initialization set is altered. In this experiment, we evaluate the performance of ZoMBI across fifteen datasets, where each dataset moves the global optimum closer to an edge region of the manifold. All fifteen experiments are repeated but with an initialization set extending beyond the limiting edge of the manifold. Figure S-4(a) illustrates the minimum function values discovered by ZoMBI over 100 experiments for each of the fifteen 6D datasets with varying optimum distances from the center, using an initialization set of i = 5 with bounds [0, 1] 6 for each run. It is shown that once the optima begin to approach the corner (between distance 12-15 from the center), ZoMBI is no longer able to discover the minimum and plateaus performance across 100 sampled experiments. These results are explained by the intertwined nature of the iterative zooming feature of ZoMBI and the initialization set used to instantiate the optimization procedure. If the initialization is at the edge of a small initialization set, an edge-bounded optimum may be easily excluded from the internal initialization hypervolume. Hence, when ZoMBI computes a GP surrogate and zooms in its bounds, the global minimum is excluded because it was not contained sufficiently within the initialization bounds. To surmount this unfavorable mechanic, one may either increase the number of initialization points or extend the bounds of LHS sampling if known a priori that the global minimum of the manifold lies close to a boundary. performance degradation of edge-bounded optima is avoided entirely. Extending the initialization bounds allows the GP surrogate to extrapolate edge feature information, which ZoMBI can more reliably zoom inward on than features at the edge of the bounds. Since it was known a priori that the global minimum of the tested datasets existed at the upper limit of the manifold hypervolume, the upper limit of the LHS initialization set was extended. For an arbitrary and normalized d-dimensional manifold with an optimum existing at the upper limit of the manifold, LHS bounds are simply extended from [0, 1] d to [0, 1 + γ] d , where γ < 0. Although ZoMBI does not work out-of-the-box for every application, simple modifications can be made to a single step within the procedure to significantly improve optimization results for a breadth of dataset topologies without increasing the required number of sampled experiments. 3