High electronic transport and reasonable chemical stability of molybdenum disulfide (MoS 2 ) make it very suitable for electrochemical applications. However, its energy storage capacity is still low compared with other nanostructures. In this work, pristine and thermally oxidized MoS 2 (O@MoS 2 ) based hybrids are introduced by a simple method with enhanced capacitive performance thanks to the contribution of synergistic effects. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM), Transmission electron microscopy (TEM), X-ray diffraction (XRD), elemental mapping, UV-Visible, and Raman analyses are employed to investigate the morphological and crystalline structure of the introduced hybrids. In detail, the highest gravimetric capacitance of ~205.1 Fg -1 is achieved for the MoS 2 :O@MoS 2 hybrid with a mass ratio of 2:1 compared to pristine and other electrodes. This electrode is also accompanied by the longest discharging time and excellent cyclic stability of ~%113 after 2000 continuous charge-discharge cycles. In addition, photoelectrochemical testing of the introduced electrode leads to a ~63% increase in carrier photogeneration compared to MoS 2 due to the effective charge separation within the hybrid, which makes it suitable for water splitting and hydrogen production applications. Global population growth and the expanding energy use contribute to environmental pollution and climate change Beside supercapacitors, PEC water splitting is a low-cost, sustainable, and environmentally friendly method to generate clean hydrogen fuel PEC process mainly consists of four stages: light absorption, electron-hole generation, charge separation, and surface charge reaction that all together lead to the production of oxygen and hydrogen Until now, two-dimensional (2D) transition metal chalcogenide and oxide nanomaterials have been extensively investigated in energy storage/conversion fields due to their unique physicochemical properties Molybdenum oxide phases, like molybdenum trioxide (MoO3), are also widely used in energy storage systems. However, the poor electrical conductivity of MoO3 greatly limits its applications in energy conversion/storage In this work, MoS2 and its thermally oxidized structure (O@MoS2) were integrated into supercapacitor electrodes using an easy and cost-effective method that is comparable with other reports that are accompanied with toxic precursors, time-consuming and complex processes NMP and MoS2 powder (with initial flake size of <50 μm and 99% purity) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. 20 mg of MoS2 powder was mixed with 10 ml of NMP solvent. The bulk powder was exfoliated in an ultra-sonication bath for 180 min. The sample was left for one day and the upper part of the solution was collected for analysis and fabrication of electrodes. Bulk MoS2 and NMP was mixed and manually ground by mortar and pestle for 30 min. After being dried, the ground MoS2 powder was placed in an electric furnace at different temperatures of (200, 300, 400, and 500 °C) for 60 min in air ambient to obtain its oxide phase. 20 mg of the obtained powder was mixed with 10 ml of NMP solvent and sonicated for 180 min. The upper part of the solution was collected after one day of standing. Different mass ratios of MoS2 powder and O@MoS2 were combined as follows: MoS2:O@MoS2 (4:1), MoS2:O@MoS2 (2:1), MoS2:O@MoS2 (1:1), MoS2:O@MoS2 (1:2), and MoS2:O@MoS2 (1:4). Then the obtained mixtures were added to 10 ml NMP solvent and sonicated for 180 min to prepare the corresponding suspensions. Stainless steel (SS) substrates were used as electrodes for supercapacitors. The obtained suspensions were stirred and drop cast on the SS substrates followed by air drying at room temperature. Copper wires were soldered to the backside of the substrates by silver paste. All openings (except for the surface of the substrate) were sealed with epoxy resin to isolate them from the solution. The surface area and mass of active material of all fabricated electrodes were measured. The electrochemical performance of the electrodes was investigated using a three-electrode system at ambient temperature. The prepared working electrodes, Ag/AgCl reference electrode, and platinum counter electrode were used in 1 M Na2SO4 solution. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) tests were carried out under different scan rates of 5, 10, 20, 50, 100, and 200 mVs -1 in a 0.0-0.9 V potential window. Galvanostatic charge-discharge (GCD) tests were measured in the range of 0.0-0.9 V vs Ag/AgCl at different current densities. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) tests were done in a frequency range of 1000.00 kHz to 0.01 Hz in an open circuit potential of 0 V. The PEC performance of the electrodes was evaluated based on the three-electrode photoelectrochemical system under exposure to a visible light source (200 W). Current-voltage characteristics of the electrodes were measured in dark and under light illumination at a scan rate of 50 mVs -1 in 1 M Na2SO4 aqueous solution. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the samples were measured by a PANalytical X′pert Pro MPD diffractometer. The surface morphology of the electrodes was studied by a scanning electron microscope MIRA 3 LMU (Tescan Ltd) with Energy-Dispersive X-Ray Spectroscopy Mapping. Transmission Electron Microscope imaging was performed by Philips CM30. Raman spectra were measured by the Ocean Insight system (QEPRO-FL). The absorbance spectra of the suspensions were recorded using the UV-Vis-NIR Spectrometer (Varian). XRD analysis was performed to investigate the crystalline nature of the prepared samples. Fig. However, in the thermally treated MoS2 at 500 °C, both MoS2 and MoO3 phases are present. According to the inset of Fig. Energy-dispersive X-ray-spectroscopy (EDS) was also used to determine the elemental composition and mapping of pristine and treated MoS2 samples. Fig. Interestingly, the enhancement in the absorption intensity of the 2:1 solution could be due to the effective charge separation affected by the formation of the band offset between both materials (1 Where hν is the photon energy, α is the absorption coefficient, Eg is the bandgap energy, and A is a constant. The value of n depends on the type of semiconductor optical transition in which n=2 is The working electrodes were prepared by drop casting of the prepared solutions on the stainlesssteel substrate according to the experimental section. Fig. (1:2) and MoS2:O@MoS2 (1:4) electrodes including cyclic voltammetry (CV), galvanostatic charge-discharge (GCD), and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) analyses were performed in 1 M Na2SO4 electrolyte in a three-electrode system. Fig. Where I (V) is the current, m mass of active material, ν scan rate, and ΔV potential window. The calculated unit of the specific capacity is expressed in terms of Fg -1 . The maximum capacity of 199.92 Fg -1 is measured for MoS2:O@MoS2 (2:1) electrode at scan rate of 5 mVs -1 while for MoS2, O@MoS2, MoS2:O@MoS2 with mass ratios of 1:1, 4:1, 1:2, and 1:4 the values of 30.56 Fg -1 , 23.82 Fg -1 , 48.09 Fg -1 , 22.62 Fg -1 , 27.40 Fg -1 , and 24.01 Fg -1 are calculated, respectively. The spongylike structure of the MoS2:O@MoS2 (2:1) electrode and the emergence of synergistic effects between both materials have improved its electrochemical performance compared to other electrodes. In contrast, it is expected that more contribution of O@MoS2 in MoS2:O@MoS2 composite reduces the final conductivity of the electrode, which increases the charge transfer resistance and degrade its electrochemical performance. Fig. shows a comparison of the GCD curves of the MoS2, O@MoS2, and hybrid electrodes in the voltage range of 0 to 900 mV at a current density of 0.5 Ag -1 . The GCD curves of the electrodes are approximately linear due to the contribution of both EDLC and PsC behaviors. The specific capacity is obtained from the following relation according to the charge-discharge curves Where I is the constant current, t discharge time, m mass of the active electrode material, ΔV potential window, and Cs specific capacity in terms of Fg -1 . The MoS2:O@MoS2 (2:1) shows the highest capacitance value of 205.1 Fg -1 compared to other electrodes at a constant current density of 0.5 Ag -1 . In addition, the MoS2:O@MoS2 (2:1) electrode has the longest discharge time of 369.2.9 s compared with MoS2 (70.5 s), O@MoS2 (41.9 s), and 4:1 (41.5 s) electrodes at 0.5 Ag -1 . To further investigate the electrochemical properties of the electrodes, the EIS test is performed in a frequency range of 0.1 Hz to 1000 kHz at an applied potential of 0 V shown in Fig. Where C is the specific capacitance, V is the potential window, and t is the discharge time. The formation of the band offset within both structures prevents the recombination of electronhole pairs. As a result, the efficient separation of photocarriers improves the current density of the hybrid that making it suitable for PEC applications. Table The MoS2:O@MoS2 hybrids with different mass ratios were easily prepared, and their electrochemical performances were investigated in a three-electrode system in 1 M Na2SO4 electrolyte. The highest specific capacitance value of ~205 Fg -1 was obtained for the MoS2-O@MoS2 (2:1) hybrid at a scan rate of 5 mVs -1 . Its spongy-like structure not only increased the effective surface area but also provided more active sites for charge storage. In addition, the hybrid maintained about 113% of its initial capacitance after 2000 charge-discharge cycles indicating excellent cyclic stability. Furthermore, MoS2-O@MoS2 (2:1) hybrid displayed an enhanced photoelectrochemical performance compared with the individual MoS2 under light irradiation. The lower recombination rate of photogenerated carriers and efficient charge separation are responsible for this superiority. Thus, the introduced hybrid with improved (photo) electrochemical performance can be promising for energy storage and conversion applications.