Due to the rapid growth in the demand for high-energy-density Li batteries and insufficient global Li reserves, the anode-free Li metal batteries are receiving increasing attention. Various strategies, such as surface modification and structural design of Cu current collectors, have been proposed to stabilize the anode-free Li metal batteries. Unfortunately, the mechanism of Li deposition on the Cu surfaces with the different Miller indices is poorly understood, especially on the atomic scale. Here, a large-scale molecular dynamics simulation of Li deposition on the Cu substrates was performed in the anode-free Li metal batteries. The results show that the Li layers on the Cu (100), Cu (110), and Cu (111) surfaces are closer to the structures of Li (110), Li (100), and Li (110) surfaces, respectively. The mechanism was studied through the surface similarity analysis, potential energy surfaces, and lattice features. Finally, a proposal to reduce the fraction of the (110) facet in commercial Cu foils was made to improve the reversibility and stability of Li plating/stripping in the anode-free Li metal batteries. Li metal is regarded as an ideal anode for the next-generation secondary batteries, which affords the lowest electrochemical potential (3.04 V vs. the standard hydrogen electrode) and the highest theoretical specific capacity (3860 mA h g -1 ). Three surface structures with the different Miller indices, Cu (100), Cu (110), and Cu (111), were constructed for the MD simulations, as shown in the top panels of Fig. To investigate the features of Li deposition on the Cu surfaces quantitatively, we used the SSA method to compare the similarity between the structures of Li monolayers and the structures of Li standard crystal surfaces (See the Method section for details). Herein, the undermost ten Li monolayers close to the interface were sliced for performing the SSA method, as shown in the bottom panels of Fig. We analyzed the arrangement features of Li atoms on the Cu (100), Cu (110), and Cu (111) surfaces to study the detailed mechanism of Li deposition on the Cu surfaces. remain flat, and the potential energy surface of the Li atoms on the Cu (110) surface remains large variance and uneven (Fig. The simulations of Li homogeneous deposition on the polycrystalline Cu surfaces were performed, as shown in Fig. Our simulations are consistent with many previously reported results. For instance, a study of computational screening of CCs showed that increasing the fraction of the (111) facet on the Cu substrate surface could induce more uniform and dendrites-free Li deposition. Combined with these experimental works, we further infer that the Miller index of the Cu surfaces is an important factor in affecting the behavior of the Li deposition on the Cu surfaces. The arrangements of the Li atoms deposited on the Cu surfaces with the different Miller indices have different features and rules. By regulating the exposed surface of Cu foils, such as reducing the fraction of the (110) facet in commercial Cu foils, the deposition behavior of Li on the Cu CC can be effectively improved and promote the dendrite-free Li deposition in the anode-free Li metal batteries finally. In summary, we have studied the mechanism of Li deposition on the Cu surfaces with the different Miller indices by MD simulations using LiCu-NNIP with quantummechanical computational accuracy. The SSA results revealed that the Li layers on the Cu (100) and Cu (111) surfaces both prefer forming the Li (110) surface structure, but the Li layers on the Cu (110) surface prefer forming the Li (100) surface structure. The potential energy surfaces and lattice features were introduced to illustrate the mechanism of Li deposition on the Cu substrates. In addition, the simulations of Li deposition on the polycrystalline Cu surfaces and Li inhomogeneous deposition with the tip effect proved that the Cu (100) and Cu (111) surfaces have better performance than the Cu (110) surface. Thus, the suggestion of reducing the fraction of the (110) facet in commercial Cu foils was proposed to reduce the possibility of Li dendrite growth. This work provides new insights into the design and construction of Cu CC for improving the performance of anode-free Li metal batteries. All the MD simulations were performed with the parallel Large-Scale Atomic/Molecular Massively Parallel Simulator(LAMMPS). The NVT ensemble with the Langevin thermostat was used in all deposition simulations. Inhomogeneous Deposition Simulation Conditions: The lattice constants of the supercells used in the inhomogeneous deposition were about 8 nm×8 nm×20 nm. Li atoms were generated at the top of the supercell. The generation region was limited to a small region of 3.8~4.2 nm in both X and Y directions. The generation and falling rates) were the same as the homogeneous deposition conditions. The simulation with results depicted in Fig. An SSA method developed in this work was used to quantitatively analyze the surface structure of Li layers on the Cu substrates. The SSA method, modifying the similarity analysis method for evaluating the similarity of crystalline, disordered and molecular compounds, is based on Smooth Overlap of Atomic Positions (SOAP) and REMatch kernel. The generalized gradient approximation (GGA) with a parametrized exchangecorrelation function according to Perdew Burke and Ernzerhof (PBE) was used during the calculations.6 The valence electron wave functions were expanded in the plane wave basis sets, and the projector augmented wave (PAW) method was used to describe the core- electron interactions.7 The plane-wave cutoff energy was set to be