A critical limitation to the wide-scale use of classical molecular dynamics for alloy design is the limited availability of suitable interatomic potentials. Here, we introduce the "Rapid Alloy Method for Producing Accurate General Empirical Potentials" or RAMPAGE, a computationally economical procedure to generate binary embedded-atom model potentials from already-existing single-element potentials that can be further combined into multi-component alloy potentials. We present the quality of RAMPAGE calibrated Finnis-Sinclair type EAM potentials using binary Ag-Al and ternary Ag-Au-Cu as case studies. We demonstrate that RAMPAGE potentials can reproduce bulk properties and forces with greater accuracy than that of other alloy potentials. In some simulations, it is observed the quality of the optimized cross interactions can exceed that of the original 'off-the-shelf' elemental potential inputs. Classical molecular dynamics (MD) simulations have become ubiquitous tools for simulating complex behavior in materials systems on the atomic level for increasingly larger systems. Classical MD simulations are based on interatomic potentials, which approximate complex interatomic interactions using computationally efficient functions in analytical or tabulated form. These functions range from simple pair interactions to more complex formulations involving a gamut of other terms, e.g. bond-order or embedding terms that correct the energy of an atom based on its coordination, three-body terms that stabilize bond angles, or four-atom terms that control torsion. More recent work has proposed to substitute these physically motivated functions by data-driven machine learning formulations. MD simulations can achieve simulation sizes and times orders of magnitude larger than more rigorous ab initio methods such as density functional theory (DFT) due to the fast energy and force evaluation paired with linear O(N ) scaling of computational cost with respect to number of particles N , reaching on modern GPU implementations a performance of 100 million atom timesteps per node and second Despite the computational advantage of using classical MD, the limited availability of suitable interatomic potentials (IAPs) remains a substantial barrier to its widespread deployment. The NIST Interatomic Potential Repository Here we introduce the Rapid Alloy Method for Producing Accurate General Empirical (RAMPAGE) potentials, with the goal of bridging the gap between available multi-component IAPs and real engineering alloys, specifically, by using published elemental potentials as model inputs and fitting only the needed cross interaction terms. While an even simpler way has been previously proposed to produce alloy potentials, the Johnson Alloy Model (JAM) In the next section, we introduce the RAMPAGE framework where a separate cross term is introduced to overcome the JAM shortcomings. We then discuss two case studies of fitted Finnis-Sinclair RAMPAGE potentials for systems with starkly contrasting alloying behavior, a binary Ag-Al potential and a ternary Ag-Au-Cu potential and benchmark them against the corresponding JAM potentials. The fitted RAMPAGE potentials are then benchmarked against DFT data for a problem outside of the fitting input set (which are all based on bulk systems) to gauge their transferability, for which we chose desorption from a (100) surface. This is an important problem requiring fast potentials, since recent advances in combining a finite-element Poisson solver with an MD code have shown that field-evaporation from a realistic-size atom-probe tomography (APT) sample allows to understand, analyze and uncertainty-quantify APT results to an unprecedented degree, taking 3D atomic-scale characterization to a completely new level The embedded atom method was first introduced by Daw and Baskes in 1984 where φ αβ (r ij ) is the interaction or bond energy as a function of distance r for all atom pairs ij in the system and α (β) denotes the element type of atom i (j), by correcting it with the help of a many-body correction term F , the embedding function, which depends on pairwise density functions ρ, where adding the bracketed index α to the electron density switches the type from EAM to Finnis Sinclair (FS) In the original interpretation by Daw and Baskes, ρ was thought of as an electron density function, which gives the elemental or pair-wise contribution of an atom to the surrounding electron cloud, and the embedding function F described the potential energy that resulted from embedding an atom into that electron cloud Originally, in EAM the electron density terms are solely elemental, ρ β (r), assuming an atom of type β would always dump the same amount of electron density on a neighbor at a given distance r irrespective of that neighbor's type and size, thus the only cross-term is the pair potential φ AB . This assumption is removed within the Finnis-Sinclair (FS) formulation allowing for different functions for different types α and β, which introduces another cross element function, the electron density ρ α =β , besides the pair potential. The EAM formulation relies solely on interactions between two atoms. Therefore arbitrary multi-component alloy potentials can be generated by concatenating compatible binary EAM potentials. Likewise, binary EAM potentials can be built from pre-existing elemental potentials by reusing the element specific terms and fitting only cross interaction term(s). However, as the EAM framework makes no constraints on the form of the embedding function or electron densities, and the electron density term is on an arbitrary unit axis, re-using any pre-existing potentials requires these terms be mutually compatible. This is often a natural outcome when the elemental potentials are fitted by the same author One of the most common methods for rapidly developing new multi-component alloy potentials is the Johnson Alloy Model (JAM) The weighting factors ρ B (r)/ρ A (r) and ρ A (r)/ρ B (r) ensure that the resulting pair potential is well balanced; however, if one electron density is much larger than the other, one weight factor will approach zero while the other becomes very large, leading to an unbalanced pair potential. In addition, this method is still subject to the constrains of mutual compatibility, and the density function ρ A and ρ B need to be defined on ranges compatible with both embedding functions F A and F B . This makes JAM most practical when a set of compatible elemental and binary functions is developed by the same research teams, resulting in publications of comprehensive alloys libraries. In 2001, Zhou et al. published a database of EAM potentials for 16 metals While JAM potentials are easily constructed, the simplicity of the model with lacking control of the mixing enthalpy can lead to predictions of inaccurate alloying behavior. As an example, Figure In order to have good control over the mixing enthalpy, the potentials discussed in this work use the FS formulation. With the extra degrees of freedom provided by the cross-element densities, FS potentials have been shown to produce accurate fits in a variety of systems An EAM-FS model of a binary system requires nine functions φ AA , φ BB , φ AB , F A , F B , ρ AA , ρ BB , ρ AB , and ρ BA . Of the nine functions in a binary EAM-FS potential, six describe bonding between atoms of the same element. As online interatomic potential repositories As a consequence of using published elemental potentials, the complexity of fitting a binary EAM-FS potential is limited to three cross interaction functions; however, fitting can only be performed if the elemental potentials are compatible. There are no requirements within the EAM-FS formulation that enforce consistency across potentials. Individual authors make choices on cutoff radius, grid spacing and size. In addition, the ranges of electron density and embedding functions, which lie on arbitrary unit axes, and the form of the pair potential are all chosen based on individual reasoning. To ensure compatibility, the single-element potentials are initially scaled using Voter's invariant transformations The embedding functions, which take the sum of local electron densities as input, are transformed to a consistent maximum ρ value. In this work, a value of 400 was chosen. The electron densities are likewise scaled in order to preserve the original energetics and forces of the elemental systems using the appropriate value for s. The pair potentials are likewise scaled to have their minimum at 0.04% of the cohesive energy using the following transformations: Finally, for each case study, the largest cutoff radius among the constituent elemental potentials was applied to all functions. As EAM potentials are distributed in tabulated format with each function defined on discrete intervals, a cubic spline interpolation evaluates each component function for values not specified in the original elemental tables. Within RAMPAGE there are several functions for pair potential and electron density implemented. A full list of the functions within RAMPAGE is detailed in the supplemental information. Both RAMPAGE potential examples discussed in this paper use the same pair potential model. The pair interaction function is fitted to a standard Morse potential The Morse function was chosen in lieu of other functions because of its simplicity. With only three fitting parameters, D, α, and r eq , Morse potentials have been shown to reliably model a number of metallic systems was applied with m = 20 as suggested by Voter Each case study was fitted using a different electron density model. For the Ag-Au-Cu potential, the electron density functions were fitted as a linear combination of the original elemental functions, where with 0 ≤ S A,B ≤ 1. In this form, S A and S B are fitting parameters, and the effective shape of the density clouds is assumed to be related to the elemental functions. The key advantage of this assumption is that describing the electron density now requires just two fitting parameters, and no knowledge of the original functional forms of either the electron density or embedding function to which ρ acts as an input. When 0 ≤ S A , S B ≤ 1, equation 8 acts as a linear interpolation. For the potentials shown in this investigation, these values were allowed to exceed the elemental limits; however, the fitted results were within these limits for all potentials except Ag-Cu. The interpolated electron density model produced low quality Ag-Al potentials, thus the case study presented here adopted an electron density model of the form which was proposed by For the test cases investigated here, the training set for a binary system is generated from DFT calculations of 32-atom SQS cells consisting of a 2x2x2 FCC supercell, along with B2 and L1 2 intermetallics. These calculations provide the equilibrium lattice parameters, mixing enthalpies, and bulk moduli; the three quantities of interest (QOIs) that the resulting EAM potential aims to reproduce. Here, these calculations are conducted using VASP To compensate for the difference between standardized elemental potential and DFT-predicted lattice parameters and bulk moduli, a "rule-of-mixtures" approach is used. For each element, correction factors for the lattice parameters and bulk modulus are determined using where a, b, and c are the three lattice parameters and K is the bulk modulus. The moduli and lattice parameters calculated for intermetallics are multiplied with an effective correction factor, which is an average of the elemental correction factors weighted by composition. For a binary system, this would correspond to where c A1-xBx is the correction factor for a given property with elemental correction factors c A and c B and alloy stoichiometry given by x. This normalization of the training set data is required as elemental potentials may be fitted to experimental properties at a given temperature, ab initio calculations at 0 K, or may not include any properties and be fitted exclusively with force matching. Thus, without normalization, the training set data may exceed the bounds imposed by a given pair of elemental potentials. This creates an intractable fitting problem that can be rectified with the normalization procedure described above. The optimum values of all free parameters (five per Ag-Au-Cu binary, and eleven for the Ag-Al binary) are determined by minimizing the difference between the mixing enthalpy, bulk modulus, and lattice parameters for the training set structures as calculated within RAMPAGE by using the LAMMPS library interface versus corrected DFT where F represents the fitness of the potential with respect to matching the corrected ab initio values. The weight factor w i is associated with a given structure and is used in Section4.2 to bias a fits towards specific compositions. The weight factors w H , w K , and w a can in principle be freely chosen and can be used to preferentially skew behavior towards a given property in the final fit. Since their values however can drastically alter the behavior of the resulting potential, we have chosen a test set-based validation method which makes the weights part of the optimization problem. Equally, for some alloys, inclusion of the intermetallic phases into the training set can have significant effect on the optimization outcome. In order to have a data-driven selection of both weights and training structures, a matrix of weights and training data sets was developed and separate fits performed for each matrix point. The performance of these potentials was then assessed against a validation set of 17 SQSs. More details of the procedure are described in the supplemental information. In an extension of this approach, a Bayesian calibration framework was also developed to optimize and understand the limits of the parameter space, their correlations with each other, and the general performance of RAMPAGE potentials better, which can be found in Ref. The process discussed above was used within the RAMPAGE code package to fit potentials for the ternary Ag-Au-Cu and binary Ag-Al alloy systems. The Ag-Au-Cu system was selected as it is one of the few test systems that can closely approximate an ideal solid solution. This should provide the best case scenario for JAM potentials, which rely on a model that is predicated on the assumption of ideal mixing. The second case study applies RAMPAGE to fit Ag-Al binary potentials. Unlike, the first case study, Ag-Al is an immiscible system with extended low temperature solubility of aluminum in silver up to 20 atomic percent. Silver exhibits a maximum solubility of 23.5 atomic percent aluminum at 840 K, but the solubility limit rapidly becomes negligible as temperature decreases The silver, gold, copper alloy system provides a close approximation of ideal behavior for benchmarking RAMPAGE potentials. This system can be well described by simple models such as JAM and even within RAMPAGE, a simple interpolated electron density model was chosen due to its ease of optimization and favorable performance. The procedure for creating a ternary RAMPAGE potential requires one additional step after the three constituent binaries: Ag-Au, Ag-Cu, and Au-Cu are fit. Those three binaries are concatenated into a ternary potential. The only modifications that need to be made to the constituent binary potentials are insuring compatible cutoff radii and grid spacing for the numeric tables. However, before the fitting of the cross terms can begin, it is important to benchmark the accuracy of the elemental potentials, as elemental interactions remain unchanged through the fitting procedure. Therefore the quality of any RAMPAGE multi-component potential will be limited by the quality of the elemental potentials selected. Equilibrium properties of elemental copper, gold, silver, and aluminum from both DFT and MD are shown in Table There is good agreement between the DFT calculations, MD and experiment for the aluminum and copper potentials, where still the bulk modulus differs at most by 7% between DFT and experiment. However, larger discrepancies are found between DFT and MD/experiment for silver and gold, sized to 15% for the bulk modulus and 23% for the cohesive energy. The variance between the DFT data and experiment closely follows known trends in DFT error and uncertainty quantification Next we present results for the RAMPAGE potential when applied to the task of ripping atoms off (100) surface. The values of the computed energy barriers are presented in in Table Regardless of the surface, the largest deviations are observed from gold adsorbates, with a deviation of 0.2 eV for a silver surface and 0.5 eV for a copper surface. All other cross energy deviations are less than 0.1 eV. This would indicate that the selected gold elemental potential is relatively ill suited for simulations of sublimation or deposition, illustrating the need for careful selection of the constituent elemental potentials with respect to the target application. However, the cross interaction desorption energy deviations (with the exception of Au on Cu) are less than that of the elemental potentials and the sublimation energy deviation for adsorbates not including gold are sufficiently low, thus we can conclude that the energies are well fitted within the limits of the elemental potential for this ternary case study. The Ag-Al system provides a significant challenge for simple interatomic potential models such as EAM due to its peculiar phase diagram. While there is an extended solubility of aluminium in silver, there is very limited solubility on the Al-rich end Since the lattice constants of Ag and Al are very similar to within 1%, considering the Hume-Rothery (HR) rules, all these solubility effects should stem from the different valency (Al: +3, Ag: +1) and electronegativity (Ag: 1.93, Al: 1.61), and are thus chemical rather than geometrical effects. The different solubilities also follow the HR rule that a metal is more likely to dissolve a metal of higher valency, than vice versa. This can be quantified using ab initio calculations. Figure It was observed in the process of fitting potentials for the Ag-Al system that producing a single binary potential to describe both sides of composition space results in unacceptable compromises in the resulting QOIs. A simple model such as EAM-FS is unable to account for the change in bonding environment from d-to p-shell electrons. Thus, two RAMPAGE potentials were generated, each optimized to Ag-and Al-rich alloys. The training sets consisted of SQSs of 0.03125, 0.125 0.4375, 0.5625, 0.75, 0.88, and 0.96875 atomic fraction Al. A logistic function using the atomic fractions as input and set with an inflection point at 0.5 was used to generate error weights w i : (0, 1) in Eqn. 12. With the objective functions biased towards either Al-rich or Ag-rich alloys, the fitting and selection procedure remains largely unchanged from that discussed in Sec. 3.4 and the supplemental information. We find that the best fits was achieved by excluding intermetallic structures from the training set. The optimum Ag-focued fit was produced with an error weight set of w H = 1.6, w K = 1.2, and w a = 1.6 which biases the objective function away from bulk modulus, whereas the error weights that produced the best Al-focued fit put the greatest emphasis on lattice constant and least on bulk modulus with w H = 1.0, w K = 0.8, and w a = 1.2. The QOIs calculated by DFT, JAM, and the two RAMPAGE fits are shown in Figure To appropriately assess the forces resulting from the fitted cross interactions, and minimize contributions from the elemental potentials, forces are computed at the limits of solubility: using 108-atom Ag 75 Al 25 and Ag 22 Al 78 cells at 840 K. The elemental silver and aluminum potentials are well behaved with respect to DFT computed forces producing correlation coefficients of 0.997 and 0.990 and RMSEs of 0.031 and 0.091 respectively. These can be taken as the upper limits for force accuracy for the potentials in this case study. The pairs plots in Figure To benchmark the quality of the fitted potential for use in APT simulations, the desorption energies are computed and sown in Table The reproduction of this validation set data leads us to conclude that RAMPAGE fit is able to successfully model Al-rich Ag-Al alloys. A truly qualitative data-driven understanding of the model error and quality of the resulting interatomic potential requires a far more advanced statistical framework than that presented here. The complexity associated with a rigorous uncertainty quantification put it outside the scope of this work. A Bayesian framework for evaluating uncertainty in interatomic potentials can be found in ref. In this work, we present and describe the RAMPAGE code package for fitting multi-component interatomic potentials from published elemental potentials. Within the RAMPAGE framework, off-the-shelf elemental potentials are used as model inputs to efficiently fit cross interactions for multi-component alloy potentials. Binary Ag-Al and ternary Ag-Au-Cu case studies are used to present and benchmark the resulting fitted potentials. RAMPAGE potentials are fitted and compared against JAM potentials to show the performance of RAMPAGE potentials in predicting equilibrium properties and forces. It is demonstrated that for both well behaved, and immiscible alloy systems, RAMPAGE potentials are capable of reproducing equilibrium properties and forces. Due to the differing valances of silver and aluminum, two potentials are required to sufficiently model each solid-solution region. It was shown that RAMPAGE was able to bias the objective function to fit composition dependant potentials with a general training set. We then apply the RAMPAGE potentials to the problem of atomic evaporation on a (100) surface to benchmark the utility of RAMPAGE potentials in simulating APT and PVD processes. It was demonstrated that RAMPAGE potentials are able to model such processes with accuracy that exceeds that of the elemental potential inputs. Thus, RAMPAGE potentials are able to successfully capture cross interaction behavior for alloy systems with simulations not included in the training set of either the binary or elemental potentials. Therefore we conclude that the RAMPAGE fitting procedure is able to produce functional high efficiency EAM interatomic potentials and enable the modeling of multi-component systems which currently suffer from a lack of suitable potentials. The RAMPAGE fitting process for multicomponent EAM potentials can be broken down into three steps. First, elemental potentials are standardized, transformed, and then combined into baseline binary potentials. Second, the RAMPAGE fitting engine is employed to fit cross interactions to equilibrium properties. Third, the fitted binaries are assembled into multicompoent potentials. For example, to fit a four component A-B-C-D potential, the four chosen elemental potentials must be standardized, then binary systems A-B, A-C, A-D, B-C, B-D, and C-D must be fitted and combined. The pre and post processing steps are handled by scripts, and the fitting is handled by a compiled fitting engine that takes in an input file. What follows is a sample input file to the RAMPAGE fitting engine for a hypothetical A-B Finnis-Sinclair system. 0e-1 2.0e-1 0.0e+0 1.0e+0 # S_a 5.0e-1 2.0e-1 0.0e+0 1.0e+0 # S_b 2.5e-1 1.0e-1 0.0e+0 1.0e+1 # D_e 1.5e+0 6.8e-1 1.0e-1 1.0e+2 # alpha 2.9e+0 1.3e+0 0.0e+0 1.0e+2 # r_e 1.0 # weight factor for mixing enthalpy 1.0 # weight factor for bulk modulus The first line of the input file is the number of secondary processes to be run in parallel, and may take on a maximum value of one minus the number of processors available. At least one processor must be held in reserve for main RAMAPGE instance. The following three lines define the EAM model to be used and the functional form of the cross interactions. The next lines define the number of elements in the fit, followed by a line for each element defining the element symbol and the cohesive energy of the equilibrium structured given by the elemental potential in eV. "Interpolated" selects a 2 parameter model where cross-species electron densities are determined by linear interpolation/extrapolation of the elemental electron densities as shown in Equation "Voter" selects an analytical form for the electron density based on the hydrogenic 4s orbital as suggested by Voter in 1986. This model contains 2 free parameters, a A and a B , and takes the following form ρ AB (r) = r 6 exp(-a A r) + 2 9 exp(-2a A r) . "GenVoter" is a modified more general form of the Voter electron density with an additional scaling parameter S. The parameters for this model take the order S A , S B , a A , a B in the RAMPAGE input file. "GenVoter2" takes a form similar to that above, but now has free parameters Within this approach, the validation set consisted of DFT calculations of the QOIs for 17 FCC SQS given by A n B 32-n with n ∈ {1, 2, 4, . . . , 28, 30, 31}. And a test matrix of 64 QOI error weight vectors was constructed of the form: w H w K w a : for w H , w K , w a ∈ {0.8, 1.0, 1.2, 1.4, 1.6}. RAMPAGE fits were run with each weight factor vector in W QOI , and for each of the 64 resulting potentials, the QOIs for the validation set are recomputed using LAMMPS. The distribution of binary potentials are evaluated by the sum of root mean square errors of the QOIs with respect to DFT calculations. For the potentials discussed in Section 4.2, the RMSE vectors associated with each validation set structure were multiplied by an error weight consistent with the logistic function used to weight the training sets to silver and aluminum rich. The need for sensible choice of of training set and error weights is indicated in Figure The other was fitted with the 5 SQSs along with the L1 2 , and B2 intermetallic structures. The Ag-Au system is fully miscible with no stable intermetallics; however, restricting the training set to only alloy structures results in potentials that uniformly over-predict lattice constant and fail to match DFT mixing enthalpy for Ag rich compositions. Including non-ground state intermetallic structures resulted in fits that better captured the DFT data for both properties. As no general trend was found to guide the selection of training sets, the error weight optimization scheme discussed above was applied to several candidate training sets to find the training set that best reproduced the QOIs with the minimum number of structures. The final error weights and training sets for potentials used in the main text are shown in Table 1 