Tandem perovskite solar cells beckon as lower cost alternatives to conventional single junction solar cells, with all-perovskite tandem photovoltaic architectures showing power conversion efficiencies up to 26.4%. Solution-processing approaches for the perovskite layers have enabled rapid 2optimization of perovskite solar technologies, but new deposition routes are necessary to enable modularity and scalability, facilitating further efficiency improvements and technology adoption. Here, we utilise a 4-source vacuum deposition method to deposit FA0.7 Cs0.3Pb(IxBr1-x)3 perovskite, where the bandgap is widened through fine control over the halide content. We show how the combined use of a MeO-2PACz self-assembled monolayer as hole transporting material and passivation of the perovskite absorber with ethylenediammonium diiodide reduces non-radiative losses, with this dual-interface treatment resulting in efficiencies of 17.8% in solar cells based on vacuum deposited perovskites with bandgap of 1.76 eV. By similarly passivating a narrow bandgap FA0.75Cs0.25Pb0.5Sn0.5I3 perovskite and combining it with sub-cells of evaporated FA0.7Cs0.3Pb(I0.64Br0.36)3, we report a 2-terminal allperovskite tandem solar cell with champion open circuit voltage and power conversion efficiency of 2.06 V and 24.1%, respectively. The implementation of our dry deposition method enables high reproducibility in complex device architectures, opening avenues for modular, scalable multi-junction devices where the substrate choice is unrestricted. Multi-junction solar cells constitute the most practical way to achieve power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) beyond the radiative efficiency limits of single-junction solar cells. Multijunction technologies employ photo-absorbers with complementary bandgaps to collectively harvest a broader portion of the solar spectrum whilst minimising thermalisation losses upon hot-carrier relaxation. The highest performance solar cell report to date is from a triple-junction based on III-V semiconductors with a strain-balanced quantum well stack, achieving a PCE of 39.5%. Halide perovskites are generating enormous excitement as thin film absorbers for highperformance solar cells, showing a unique combination of features that include lowtemperature processing and a resilience to electronic defects. Vacuum deposition processes show great promise to overcome barriers related to large-area coating, integration into flexible, light-weight substrates and novel device patterns while ensuring high thickness control and conformal film uniformity, all with a solvent-free technique. To date, fully evaporated perovskite solar cells have achieved PCEs of 20.7% and 21.4% on small active area (< 0.2 cm 2 ) by co-evaporation and sequential evaporation, respectively, Nevertheless, only a handful of works have reported fully-evaporated perovskites for their application in multi-junction cells, with most of the examples focusing on deposition processes to combine perovskite and silicon subcells in a tandem fashion. In this work, we employ a 4-source co-evaporation technique to systematically vary the bandgap of FA0.7Cs0.3Pb(BrxI1-x)3 films from 1.62 eV to 1.80 eV for their subsequent integration in an all-perovskite tandem device. We show how contact layer optimisation by using (2-(3,6-Dimethoxy-9H-carbazol-9-yl)ethyl)phosphonic acid (MeO-2PACz) as hole transporting material (HTM) minimises interfacial recombination and leads to PCEs of 20.7% for a 1.62 eV perovskite, which is among the highest PCE reported for a vacuum deposited perovskite system. The addition of higher Br fractions to blueshift the absorption onset for wide bandgap subcells introduces defects, as demonstrated by a reduction in the photoluminescence quantum efficiency (PLQE) and a higher Urbach energy, which is particularly exacerbated at 1.80 eV where substantial phase segregation readily occurs. We demonstrate that ethylenediammouiunm diiodide (EDAI) is an effective passivation agent for these evaporated perovskites, resulting in PLQEs enhanced by an order of magnitude. Applying the HTM and EDAI dual-interface treatment yields devices with a VOC of 1.26 V for a 1.76 eV bandgap, which is 190 mV below the radiative limit and represents the lowest VOC loss reported in evaporated wide bandgap perovskite systems so far. Furthermore, we demonstrate the versatility of the EDAI passivation approach by applying it to solution-processed, narrow bandgap perovskite solar cells displaying a VOC of 0.86 V based on MA-free, Pb/Sn absorbers with a bandgap of 1. 28 Defects at the perovskite-hole transporting layer interface are known to cause significant nonradiative losses in p-i-n devices, Scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Supplementary Fig. To widen the bandgap of the perovskite for its use as a front subcell in a tandem device, we add PbBr2 as a fourth evaporation source to tune the bandgap by employing PbBr2:PbI2 rate ratios from 0.11 to 0.318. XRD patterns shown in Figure Nevertheless, the 1.80 eV-bandgap evaporated film exhibits several areas with Br-rich clusters, suggesting a suboptimal intermixing of compounds in samples with the highest explored Br content, which is known to drastically hamper stability. The subsequent PL decay of the 1.77 eV evaporated perovskite deposited on top of the MeO-2PACz/ITO contact shows faster (84 ns) mono-exponential decay with respect to that of the control 1.62 eV sample (394 ns), A major issue hindering the applicability of wide bandgap perovskites is their phase instability under illumination. To evaluate this, we use a 520-nm continuous-wave laser at 5 suns intensity (300 W/cm 2 ) to excite encapsulated samples and monitor their PL over time. Samples with bandgaps in the range between 1.62 and 1.77 eV show excellent emission stability, with no changes in their PL spectra over time at these photon doses (Figure Figure eV. The Urbach energy also rises with the bandgap energy from 13.5 meV to 19.0 meV. These observations indicate higher electronic disorder upon Br addition and are consistent with the increased trap densities revealed from the PL measurements (cf. Fig. With the losses associated with the front perovskite interface minimised by employing an HTM based on MeO-2PACz, we now focus on overcoming the losses arising from the rear perovskite interface. To this end, we passivate the 1.77 eV evaporated FA0.7Cs0.3Pb(I0.64Br0.36)3 perovskite using a post-treatment by spin-coating a layer of EDAI in mixed isopropanol and toluene (see Methods). We fabricate solar cells where the 1.77 eV evaporated perovskite is passivated with EDAI and show the JV curves in Figure To better understanding the passivation effect on the FF, we conduct a light intensity dependent measurement of the VOC and extract the ideality factor (Figure This result constitutes the first and highest-performing integration of an evaporated building block in an all-perovskite tandem architecture where the bandgaps of the absorbers employed harvest complementary regions of the spectrum. The high optical quality, pin-hole free character, and finely controlled thickness (cf. Our work employs a dual-interface treatment to maximise the performance of evaporated perovskite devices, which show great promise when implemented into tandem architectures. We employ a 4-source vacuum deposition method to demonstrate FA0.7Cs0.3Pb(IxBr1-x)3 perovskites of tunable bandgap. Engineering the device architecture via use of a MeO-2PACz layer as HTM demonstrates a 20.7% PCE in a 1.62 eV bandgap perovskite solar cell, which is highest MA-free device performance in a multi-source evaporated system. Several evaporation sources enable fine tuning of the halide content and we use it to report a phase stable FA0.7Cs0.3Pb(I0.64Br0.36)3 with a 1.77 eV bandgap and minimised non-radiative losses when treated with EDAI. This passivation method is versatile and reproducible, and we extend it to Pb/Sn based narrow bandgap perovskite solar cells to build a 2-terminal tandem solar cell that shows a PCE of 24.1% with an excellent VOC of up to 2.06 V. Our result is a key step towards all-vapour deposited tandems and encourages future work to develop narrow bandgap perovskites benefiting from the scalable, conformal and reproducible character of vacuum deposition methods. These systems open a myriad of possibilities for enhanced modularity including exploring new recombination layers not compatible with solution processed perovskites, and integration of advanced photonic strategies to push perovskite photovoltaics to their limits.