Axions and axion-like particles may couple to nuclear spins like a weak oscillating effective magnetic field, the "axion wind." Existing proposals for detecting the axion wind sourced by dark matter exploit analogies to nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and aim to detect the small transverse field generated when the axion wind resonantly tips the precessing spins in a polarized sample of material. We describe a new proposal using the homogeneous precession domain (HPD) of superfluid 3 He as the detection medium, where the effect of the axion wind is a small shift in the precession frequency of a large-amplitude NMR signal. We argue that this setup can provide broadband detection of multiple axion masses simultaneously, and has competitive sensitivity to other axion wind experiments such as CASPEr-Wind at masses below 10 -7 eV by exploiting precision frequency metrology in the readout stage. Axions and axion-like particles (ALPs) (denoted a) are CP-odd pseudo-Goldstone bosons whose couplings to matter respect a shift symmetry, and which may also make up the cosmic dark matter (DM) density acts as an effective oscillating magnetic field which couples to nuclear spins taking γ = 0.69 GeV -1 (γ/(2π) = 32.43 MHz/T) for the gyromagnetic ratio of 3 He. Several experiments are aiming to detect the axion wind, including CASPEr-Wind In this Letter, we describe a new detection mechanism which converts the small amplitude ALP signal into a small frequency shift in a large-amplitude NMR signal, allowing the use of precision frequency metrology to evade amplitude noise. The sample is an unusual phase of superfluid 3 He, the homogeneous precession domain (HPD), which may be understood as a Bose-Einstein condensate (BEC) of spin-1 magnons formed by Cooper pairs of the spin-1/2 helium nuclei in the B-phase of the superfluid 3 He is a Fermi liquid which forms a superfluid below temperatures of ∼1 K; the excitations of this superfluid are spin-1 magnons. When a static magnetic field B 0 = B 0 (z)ẑ is applied, the equilibrium magnetization is M = χ B 0 , where χ ∼ 10 -7 is the susceptibility which reaches a maximum at a temperature of 2.5 mK and pressures of 34 bar < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " t W v b 9 2 + q y u Q 1 9 / G J E a w r T / M 8 P H / 5 8 z l O I H n C g n h l 7 K 2 v r G 5 t V 3 Y K e 7 u 7 R 8 c q k f H H e G H H J M 2 9 j 2 f 9 x w k i O c y 0 p a u 9 E g v 4 A R R x y N d Z 3 K X 5 t 1 n w o X r s 0 c 5 D Y h F 0 Z i 5 I x c j m V i 2 e j X I z u j z s W < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " 0 8 J c 0 J 8 u r 7 o r K 0 g + 7 < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " A + in equilibrium is the constant magnon density. A striking feature of the HPD is that the precession frequency is spontaneously determined. One can view the HPD as a thermodynamic system at fixed particle number N M , where the chemical potential μ is set by minimizing the free energy F . In fact, μ is the local Larmor frequency, corresponding to an angular precession frequency ω L (z) = γB 0 (z), at the location z of the domain wall (DW) separating the HPD from the relaxed domain The aforementioned properties of the HPD may be understood through an effective description of the sample magnetization as described by the Bloch equations. With a static external magnetic field B = B 0 (z)ẑ (not necessarily homogeneous) the magnetization M in the HPD evolves as where M 0 is the equilibrium magnetization in the HPD, in T 1 has been introduced for later convenience; note that the transverse and longitudinal relaxation times are not independent because these components of the magnetization are locked together by the spin supercurrents at the constant tip angle β 0 Since the magnetization in the relaxed domain does not evolve, we can treat the equilibrium magnetization as belonging to the HPD only via M 0 = χB 0 F, where F is the HPD fraction of the sample. We parameterize M z = χB 0 F cos β 0 and M xy = χB F sin β 0 e -iθ , which are time-dependent through the HPD fraction F(t) and because B 0 is evaluated at the position z(t) of the domain wall. Suppose first that there is no transverse magnetic field, B xy = 0. For homogeneous B , Eq. ( so the HPD fraction decays exponentially from its initial value F 0 due to relaxation. Similarly, Eq. ( so that precession occurs at the local Larmor frequency ω L = γB 0 . Due to the DW motion, if the external magnetic field is inhomogeneous, B 0 in Eq. where v D ≡ hF 0 /T 1 = |z 0 |/T 1 is the instantaneous DW velocity at the height z 0 . Now, since the HPD precesses according to the magnetic field B (z) at the DW, we Taylor-expand where we have defined α ≡ ∇ z B 0 /B 0 | z0 as a tuneable parameter of the experiment. For the geometry defined in Fig. where ω 0 L = γB 0 (z 0 ). The linear downward drift of the precession frequency, ωL ≡ θ(t) = αv D ω 0 L < 0, is the key feature of the HPD. The effect of the axion wind on the HPD evolution can be directly computed by including B a as a source in the Bloch equations. We will first describe the effect qualitatively and estimate its parametric size, and then confirm this behavior with numerical simulations in the following section. In CASPEr, Larmor resonance is achieved when γB 0 = m a , and B a generates a tip angle δβ(t) = γB a t that grows linearly with time up to min[τ a , T * 2 ] where T * 2 is the dephasing time. The three principal challenges in this setup are (i) detecting the extremely small transverse field generated by δβ; (ii) tuning B 0 in steps of ∼ 10 -6 to achieve resonance at each possible axion mass, given the axion bandwidth m a v 2 a ∼ 10 -6 m a ; and (iii) generating a uniform B 0 to ensure that nearby spins do not dephase, thus preserving T * 2 > τ a . The HPD setup naturally sidesteps all of these challenges, as follows. Because the HPD is a macroscopic quantum state, the inhomogeneous B-field, which generates the linear frequency drift, preserves the precession phase in a macroscopic volume while scanning Larmor frequencies. This allows the HPD to probe many axion masses with the same field profile B 0 . In the HPD, the tip angle is fixed, so the torque from a transverse B a instead resonantly changes the number of magnons in the BEC when the local Larmor frequency is equal to m a , |∆N a | χB 0 B a V HPD τ a . The axion wind can thus be seen as a small chemical potential δμ a for magnons, as shown in Fig. g aN N 10 -10 GeV -1 αz 0 0.02 10 -7 eV m a . ( Note that since B a ∝ m a along the QCD line, the QCD axion frequency shift is independent of the mass: While Eq. ( The resonance can persist while the DW sweeps through a frequency bandwidth up to the axion bandwidth, giving a resonance timescale Define α * such that t r = τ a , e.g. Thus, depending on the choice of α, The scaling with √ t r is a typical feature of measurements exceeding the coherence time and arises from adding in quadrature the incoherent frequency shifts in each interval τ a On resonance when m a = ω L (t), the right-hand side contains a constant term 1 2 sin φ, and thus the solution for F (1) is which grows linearly with time. In fact, integrating Eq. ( where Ω ≡ αz0ω 0 L πT1 and S(x) and C(x) are the Fresnel sine and cosine integrals, respectively. ×10 -5 FIG. 2ρ DM γ v0 cos(mat+φ) for three choices of φ. Right: three realizations of the stochastic axion field Ba(t) given by Eq. ( The effect of the axion can be interpreted as a first-order contribution to the DW velocity ∆v D = -1 2 sin φ z 0 tan β 0 γB a , which then feeds back into the precession frequency because zz 0 = hF 0 -hF (0) (1 + F (1) ) ≈ (v D + ∆v D )t. In other words, the first-order frequency shift is ∆ω a (t) = ω 0 L α∆v D t, and integrating up to τ a we recover the parametric estimate of Eq. ( To validate the above analysis, we numerically solved the Bloch equations with an axion source, both for a monochromatic axion field and an axion field with the expected 10 -6 bandwidth from the DM velocity dispersion. Since the axion field is a random field with a known power spectrum, for the latter case, we used the timedomain axion field constructed from sampling the speed distribution according to the prescription in Ref. The sum is over groups of axion particles, each group having a speed ∈ [v j , v j + ∆v]. Here α j is a Rayleighdistributed random variable, φ j ∈ [0, 2π) is a random phase, and f (v) is the local DM speed distribution which we take to be Maxwellian with dispersion v 0 = 220 km/sec, boosted to the lab frame by v Earth = 232.24 km/sec. A key feature of the HPD setup is the possibility of observing daily modulation, since the same axion masses may be scanned multiple times throughout the day. However, for this analysis we fix v 0 to be transverse and leave a full daily modulation analysis for future work. Indeed, we use the stochastic field simply to validate our treatment of the coherence time, and we expect that our parametric estimates of the signal strength will differ by O(1) factors from a full treatment of the correlated components of ∇a To obtain a projected sensitivity for the HPD setup, we need to consider possible noise sources. Since we have already argued that the expected ∆ω a is (in principle) within the sensitivity of state-of-the-art atomic clocks, we will focus on irreducible noise sources. Fortunately, the unique properties of the HPD makes thermal noise a negligible concern. Unlike the case of a BEC of atoms, thermal fluctuations in 3 He do not cause the number of magnons in the condensate to fluctuate, but rather affect the normal fluid component of the 3 He superfluid. Thus, thermal noise will not lead to a frequency shift. In fact, the leading irreducible noise source is stochastic fluctuations in magnon number. Over a time interval ∆t T 1 , losses reduce the average number of magnons by N loss = n M ∆V HPD , where ∆V HPD = v D A∆t is the change in HPD volume over ∆t. This will lead to Poissonian "shot noise" of order σ N = √ N loss , which will cause the HPD volume and hence the frequency to fluctuate. Taking ∆t = τ a , the noise on the frequency shift is We leave the precise microscopic characterization of the stochastic noise to future work, including an analysis of surface and volume loss mechanisms, but we note that the quantized fluctuation of magnons in the HPD as parameterized by T 1 is a reasonable coarse-grained characterization of many such microphysical phenomena. Since the Larmor frequency continuously changes in the experiment, the number of axion resonances covered in a single run is given by roughly T 1 /t r ∼ 10 6 (αz 0 ), where t r is given by Eq. Choosing t r = τ a for the maximum sensitivity gives for couplings on the QCD line; the axion mass m a = 7 × 10 -8 eV is the largest mass which can be probed before the HPD destabilizes at large fields. Fig. axion-neutron coupling), as well as the projected sensitivity (red) from CASPEr-Wind In this Letter we have described a new proposed experiment for detection of the axion wind which exploits the macroscopic coherent properties of the B-phase of 3 He. In future work we plan to further improve the projected sensitivity by taking into account the correlations between the N measurements induced by daily modulation, as well as correlations between spatially-separated samples 