In the present work we detail how the many-body potential energy landscape of interatomic potentials for carbon can be explored by utilising the nested sampling algorithm, allowing the calculation of their pressuretemperature phase diagram up to high pressures. We present a comparison of three interatomic potential models, Tersoff, EDIP and GAP-20, focusing on their macroscopic properties, particularly on their melting transition and on identifying thermodynamically stable solid structures up to at least 100 GPa. The studied models all form graphite structures upon freezing at lower pressure, then the diamond structure as the pressure increases. We were able to locate the transition between these phases in case of the Tersoff and EDIP models. We placed particular focus on the state-of-the-art machine learning (ML) model, GAP-20, and calculated its phase diagram up to 1 TPa to evaluate its predictive capabilities well outside of the model's fitting conditions. The phase diagram showed a remarkably good agreement with the experimental phase diagram up to 200 GPa, despite a variety of unexpected graphite layer spacing. Above that nested sampling identified two novel stable solid structures, a strained diamond structure and above 800 GPa a strained hexagonal-close-packed structure. However, the stability of these two phases were not confirmed by DFT calculations, highlighting potential routes to further improve the ML model. Carbon is the fourth most abundant element in the universe, and while it readily forms a much wider range of compounds than any other element (including the bio-polymers crucial for life), its behaviour is just as rich in elemental form as well. Carbon atoms can bond to each other in fascinatingly diverse ways, forming a wide range of twoand three-dimensional allotropes, amorphous phases, clusters, fullerenes and multi-layered particles that give carbon one of the most diverse ranges of chemical and physical properties among materials. Several empirical interatomic potential models have been developed for carbon in the past 35 years. The many-body potential introduced by Tersoff While these studies provide a detailed picture on the microscopic properties of carbon potentials, our knowledge of their macroscopic properties is limited. In order to understand the reliability and predictive power of computational results, it is important to examine the potential models' macroscopic behaviour and evaluate their phase stability, unbiased by our chemical intuition. Ultimately, this also informs the development of new generations of potentials, such as machine learning-based models, highlighting strengths as well as areas for improvement. In the current work we aim to extend our knowledge of the performance of carbon models and calculate their pressuretemperature phase diagram, by performing an exhaustive and predictive sampling of the entire potential energy surface, using the nested sampling technique. In the current work we compare the behaviour of three widely used interatomic potential models for carbon, spanning a range in complexity, accuracy and computational cost. We first use the machine-learning potential, GAP-20 The nested sampling calculations were performed as presented in where ∆ is the isobaric partition function; β is the inverse temperature; A i , H i and Γ i are the observable value, enthalpy and phase space volume of the i-th configuration respectively, where Γ i = (K/K + 1) i and K is the number of walkers in the simulation. In an infinite system the heat capacity peaks would be divergent due to discontinuity of the first order in the corresponding enthalpy vs. temperature curves, but the finite size of these systems cause a broadening of the peaks. The temperature of a given transition and its error are ascertained from the combination of data from each of the three independent runs we performed at every pressure in order to test the convergence of the simulations: fits to Gaussian functions are performed in the region of each peak and the lower and upper bounds of the error are taken to be the minimum and maximum temperature values of the peaks' half-maximums. The simulations were run at constant pressure, and the bounding cell of variable shape and size contained 16, 32 or 64 particles, to be able to estimate the finite size effect. Previous calculations show that the small system size usually causes the melting temperature to be overestimated, however, the solid-solid transitions are less affected, with sampled crystalline phases usually remaining consistent across different system-sizes. For each calculation, the number of walkers, K, were chosen such that the resulting heat capacity peaks were sufficiently converged, thus predicted transition temperatures were generally within a range of 200K (exceptions are noted). Using a larger number of walkers means a sampling of higher resolution, with the computational cost increasing linearly with K. Initial sample configurations were generated randomly, with new samples generated by performing Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (all-atom) moves, as well as changing the volume and shape of the simulation cell by shear and stretch moves, with a step probability ratio of 5:3:2:2, respectively. A parallel implementation of the NS algorithm is available in the pymatnest python software package In order to compare the energies of configurations and phase stability predicted by the GAP-20 and GAP-20u mod-els, we employ Density Functional Theory (DFT) with the same input parameters as those used to generate the data on which the GAP-20u model was trained. DFT calculations are therefore carried out using the Vienna ab initio Simulation Program (VASP), with the dispersion-inclusive optB88-vdW exchange-correlation functional, Nested sampling runs with the GAP-20 potential were carried out with a system size of 16 atoms at ten different pressures between 0.1 and 1000 GPa. Due to the large computational cost of the GAP potential, fewer calculations were carried out with 32 atoms -at pressures of 1, 10, 50, 500 and 800 GPa -to assess the finite size effects at pressures where different solid phases are expected. The resulting pressuretemperature phase diagram is illustrated in Figure The melting curve predicted by the GAP-20 model follows these experimental features closely, with the melting temperature not changing significantly between 0.1 and 20 GPa. Fig- Up to 20 GPa the liquid freezes into the graphite structure. While at lower pressures the density of the graphite is found to be higher than that of the liquid, this trend changes, and at 20 GPa we can observe a maximum on the density curve, see bottom panel of Figure The explored graphite configurations are rich both in the distance of the graphite layers as well as in the relative orientation stacking patterns. Among the configurations generated by NS, we can find the energetically most favourable AB stacking variant, Although nested sampling simulations at 40, 50 and 100 GPa also explored graphite and hexagonal diamond structures to some extent, these phases remain metastable at any temperatures, as the cubic diamond structure becomes the dominant phase. Crucially, the change in the stable solid phase, from graphite to diamond, also corresponds to the change from a roughly vertical curve to one with a large positive gradient, as also observed experimentally. The predictive power of the model weakens eventually, and at extreme high pressure two new phases emerge as ground state structures of the model, both in the 16-atom and 32atom simulations. At 500 and 800 GPa the stable structure predicted by nested sampling is that of a strained variant of cubic diamond, where the strain is positive, in the direction of an arbitrary cubic axis and coupled with a compression Atomic position along normal vector (Å) along the perpendicular axes. Between 800 and 1000 GPa the system transitions to a highly compressed hexagonal close packed structure. This belongs to the P6 3 /mmc spacegroup, having two atoms in the unit cell, each with eight nearest neighbours. We will refer to this structure as strained hexagonal close-packed (strained hcp). Figure The phase diagram calculated with the Tersoff potential is shown in Figure Using the Steinhardt bond-order parameters[65] Q 4 and W 4 we are able to distinguish diamond and graphite configurations generated by nested sampling, and locate the phase transition between different crystalline structures. In Figure Nested sampling calculations using the EDIP potential were performed with 16 and 32 atoms, at pressures ranging from 1 GPa to 1500 GPa. The resulting phase diagram is Pressure (GPa) Enthalpy di erence/atom (eV) FIG. shown in Figure This large separation-bias persists at higher pressures, however the effect is diminished, which can be intuitively understood as the increased pressure (and P V energy) encouraging smaller volumes, and preventing thermal fluctuations from stabilising larger-separation structures. As the temperature decreases, there is less kinetic energy available to smear the energies of the optimised structure, and thus fewer large separation configurations can be energetically viable. In spite of EDIP's short interplanar cutoff and its effects, its description of the graphite melting line is remarkably accurate at only 32 atoms. Given the importance of the ratio between liquid and solid densities in shaping the melting line, and that graphite's volume is particularly sensitive to interplanar separation, these results show that an accurate description of graphite's phase space is essential for determining its melting behaviour. At a pressure of 10 GPa we begin to observe a small number of cubic and hexagonal diamond structures among the sampled configurations, around the freezing transition. However, these structures quickly lose thermodynamic relevance in comparison to the graphite phase. When pressure is increased to 20 GPa, the diamond configurations become energetically viable enough that the NS algorithm simultaneously samples them along with the graphite phase, such that we can identify a solid-solid transition. Figure In the current work we reviewed the performance of three interatomic potential models of carbon, focusing on their ability to reproduce experimentally observed macroscopic properties. We used the nested sampling technique to sample the potential energy surface of these models in a wide pressure range, calculating their pressure-temperature phase diagram and predicting crystalline phases. We emphasise that nested sampling is a unique tool that allows us the exhaustive exploration of the phase space and makes the calculation of the entire phase diagram a relatively straightforward process, while also being predictive and not restricted by known or considered crystalline structures. All three models, GAP-20, Tersoff and EDIP, predicted the graphite structure to be more stable at low pressures and the diamond structure at higher pressures, however, the transition between these as well as the location of the melting line differed considerably. Empirical potentials are often fitted to specific microscopic properties, for example to typical coordination of graphite and diamond structures, hence their high-temperature and highpressure behaviour cannot be expected to reflect accurately the diverse structural properties of carbon. Nevertheless, while the macroscopic properties of the Tersoff potential differ from the experimental phase diagram considerably, we found that the phase diagram of the EDIP potential to be very close to experimentally observed behaviour, both the predicted graphitediamond transition, as well as the melting line up to relatively high pressures. Machine learning (ML) potentials provide the state-of-theart description of atomic interactions, opening up new routes to materials discovery that are otherwise out of our reach, offering ab initio level accuracy at an affordable computational cost. However, the main criticism of ML potentials is that they are inherently best suited only to interpolation problems, and perform reliably only in the regime of configuration space where the potential was trained. This means that their behaviour in unexplored territory, in the region where the poten-tial is forced to use extrapolation, can be unrealistic or unphysical, limiting or even inhibiting their use in scientific discovery. Therefore, our results showing that the GAP-20 potential performs well and predicts the expected phase transitions reliably up to 300 GPa, well outside the original training con-Atomic position along normal vector (Å) ditions, is remarkable, emphasising the power of including a diverse range of atomic local environments in the training process. Moreover, the exhaustive exploration provided by NS also highlighted local weaknesses of the model, such as the unexpected graphite-layer distances or the very high pressure phases, offering areas for potential improvement and extensions of the GAP-20 model.