The phase and thermal driven transport properties of the T-shaped uncorrelated double quantum dot Josephson junction are analyzed by using Keldysh non-equilibrium Green's function equation of motion technique. In this setup, we have shown that the side-attached quantum dot provides an additional route for electron transmission which is affecting the transport properties by adjusting the interdot hopping between the main dot and the side dot. We began with investigating the impact of interdot hopping on Andreev bound states and Josephson supercurrent. When a small thermal bias is applied across the superconducting leads, the system exhibits a finite thermal response which is primarily due to the, thermally induced, quasiparticle current. The behavior of the Josephson supercurrent and the quasi-particle current flowing through the quantum dots is examined for various interdot hopping and thermal biasing. Finally, the system is considered in an open circuit configuration where the thermally driven quasi-particle current is compensated by the phase-driven Josephson supercurrent and the thermophase effect is observed. The effect of interdot hopping and the position of quantum dot energy level on the thermophase Seebeck coefficient is investigated. A quantum dot (QD)-based Josephson junction is made up of two Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) superconducting leads separated by a quantum dot. A DC Josephson supercurrent can flow across the junction without applying potential difference, as the Josephson supercurrent largely depends on the phase difference between the superconductors On the other hand, due to the limited temperature range, the thermal transport properties of the ordinary S-I-S Josephson junction and quantum dot-based junctions have not been widely explored. Despite this limitation, the thermal transport properties of Josephson junctions are recently attracting great attention Phase and thermal-driven transport properties of quantum dot-based Josephson junctions can be analyzed through a combination of three currents: quasi-particle current, interference current, and pair current In the present work, we provide a study of the low-temperature phase and thermal-driven transport properties of a system where uncorrelated double quantum dots are coupled with two superconducting leads in T-shaped geometry (figure To calculate the transport properties of the T-shaped double quantum dot Josephson junction, we use the generalized Anderson + BCS Hamiltonian in second quantization formalism. Ĥ = Ĥleads + ĤQD + Ĥtunnel + Ĥinterdot-hopping where h.c stands for Hermitian conjugate. Ĥleads is the Hamiltonian for left and right superconducting leads (α ∈ L, R). The first term, describes the free electrons in the superconducting leads; c † kσ,α (c kσ,α ) is the creation (annihilation) operator of electron with spin σ and wave vector k and energy k,α . The second term in Ĥleads is the BCS term and gives the information about the interaction between Cooper pair with temperature dependent superconducting energy gap which is given by where ∆ 0 = |∆ 0 |e iφα is the superconducting gap at absolute zero temperature with φ α as the phase of superconducting leads, T c is superconducting critical temperature, T α is the temperature of superconducting leads and k B is the Boltzman constant. ĤQD is the Hamiltonian for main dot (QD 1 ) and side dot (QD 2 ). QD 1 (i=1) and QD 2 (i=2) has energy diσ with d † iσ (d iσ ) as the fermionic creation operator (annihilation operator) of electrons with spin σ and n diσ = d † iσ d iσ is the number operator. We have neglected the onsite Coulomb interaction U i for simplification. Ĥtunnel is tunneling Hamiltonian between the energy level of the main dot and superconducting leads with interaction strength V k1 , α. Further, we have consider the symmetric coupling strength of QD 1 to the left and right leads i.e. V k1;L =V k1;R . The last term Ĥinterdot-hopping describes the interaction of electrons of two quantum dots via a hopping like term of strength t. Note that, there is no direct interaction between superconducting leads and QD 2 . Bogoliubov transformation is used to diagonalize the BCS part of the Hamiltonian. For this, we introduce a new fermionic quasiparticle operator β with coefficient u k and v k which satisfies the normalization condition By replacing the fermionic operator c k↑ and c † -k↓ with new quasi-particle operator, we get the effective Hamiltonian where is excitation quasi-particle energy of the superconducting leads.The coefficients u k and v k can be expressed as We have used Green's equation of motion method (EOM) to solve the above effective Hamiltonian (Eq. 5). To calculate the spectral and transport properties of T-shaped double quantum dot Josephson junction system, we need single-particle retarded Green's function of main quantum dot QD 1 which is defined in Zubarev notation The Fourier transform of the above retarded Green's function should satisfy the following equation of motion In Nimbu space, Green's function of the main quantum dot can be represented by a 2 × 2 matrix: By using Green's function EOM technique (Eq. 8), we obtain the following coupled equations for QD 1 After solving these closed set of coupled equations (Eq. 10-15) the expression for single particle retarded Green's function of the main dot with spin σ =↑ can be written as: In above Green's function (Eq. 16) I 1 , I 2 are the diagonal, and I 3 is the off-diagonal part of self-energy, which corresponds to the induced pairing, due to the coupling between the quantum dot and superconducting leads. The expressions for I 1 , I 2 and I 3 are Transforming the summation into integration and by defining the tunneling rate Γ α = 2πρ 0 |V kα | 2 where ρ 0 is the density of states in normal metallic state, we obtained the following expressions for I 1 , I 2 and I 3 : Similarly, the off-diagonal Green's function G r 21 (ω) can be calculated with the help of coupled equations Other Green's function can be obtained with the help of the following relations: By equating the denominator of single particle retarded Green's function G r 11 (Eq. 16) equal to zero, the energies of Andreev Bound States (ABS) can be analyzed which is discussed in section III. As discussed in section 1, for quantum dot-based Josephson junction, we can distribute the charge current in three parts The first term is quasi-particle current and is responsible for thermal transport in this system. The second term has no contribution to thermal transport and can be neglected here. The third term in current is due to cooper pair tunneling and is responsible for the supercurrent in the system. Here, we present the full derivation of Josephson supercurrent and quasi-particle current. For the current expression, we follow the formulation given in reference Where G r is Green's function of the main quantum dot with leads and g r is Green's function of the main quantum dot without leads. Σ r = Σ r L +Σ r R is the retarded self-energy due to coupling between the main quantum dot and superconducting leads. A(ω) is the denominator of Green's function and is defined as From Eq's. The retarded self-energy (Σ r α ) of α lead is defined as For simplicity, we assumed that both superconductors are identical and have a finite phase difference, Γ α = Γ L = Γ R = Γ, and where Γ is the symmetric coupling strength between the main quantum dot and superconducting leads. ρ(ω) is the modified density of state of the superconductor and can be defined as By taking the current conservation condition I L + I R = 0, the general formula of Josephson supercurrent for the superconductor-quantum dot systems can be written as Where G and Σ α are 2 × 2 Fourier transformed Nambu matrices. By using the Langreth relation we can write with (G r ) † = G a , ( Σr ) † = Σr On applying the fluctuation-dissipation theorem, we can define: , where f (ω) = 1 e ω/k B T +1 is Fermi distribution function and G a , G < are advanced and lesser Green's function respectively. Substituting the above relations in Eq. ( ( Similarly, we obtain the (G r Σr ) 11 and the Re[( Σr G r ) † -G r Σr ] 22 in Eq. By substituting Eq. ( Similiar to Josephson supercurrent, we can also derive the expression of quasi-particle current for superconductor-quantum dot systems by following the formalism given in reference By current conservation condition i.e. I L + I R = 0, the symmetrize form of current can be written as For the symmetric case (Γ α = Γ L = Γ R = Γ and ∆ α = ∆ L = ∆ R = ∆) the above equation becomes where . The expression of quasi-particle current for linear response regime (thermal gradient between superconducting leads will be small, ∆T → 0) can be simplified by using power series expansion of the Fermi-distribution function of left and right superconducting leads: In section 1, we have already discussed the origin of the thermophase effect. Within the linear response regime, the thermophase Seebeck coefficient S φ is defined analogous to the thermovoltage Seebeck coefficient and can be simplified using Eq. ( In this section, we present the numerical results and discussion for the T-shaped double quantum dot Josephson junction. Transport properties are discussed for uncorrelated quantum dots. The superconducting gap at absolute zero temperature (∆ 0 ) is considered as the energy unit, where ∆ 0 is in meV. In figure In figure As discussed previously, the origin of the thermophase effect is due to the vanishing total current in open circuit configuration i.e. thermal-driven quasi-particle current is compensated by the phase-driven Josephson supercurrent flowing in the reverse direction. In figure In figure The magnitude of TPSC not only depends on interdot hopping but also depends on the position of QD 2 energy levels whether it lies above or below the Fermi level. In figure Finally, we investigate the influence of interdot hopping and quantum dot energy levels on the thermophase Seebeck coefficient (TPSC). The magnitude of TPSC (S φ ) decreases with increasing interdot hopping when the energy levels of the side dot (QD 2 ) lie above the Fermi level and increase when energy levels of the side dot (QD 2 ) lie below the Fermi level. In the later case, when energy levels lie below the Fermi level, the equivalent level ( di ± t) of the quantum dot moves towards the Fermi level. Thus, the cooper pair tunneling increases with interdot hopping, and quasi-particle current is completely compensated by the Josephson current and the magnitude of TPSC peaks is enhanced. We believe that the results presented in this study can be tested experimentally with the advancement in nano-fabrication techniques. In this paper, we consider the uncorrelated quantum dots, and the effect of the Coulomb correlation will be explored in future work. The present study can also be extended to investigate the thermal transport properties in systems where double quantum dots are coupled with superconducting leads in series, and parallel geometry and also for multiterminal configurations. The concept of thermophase effect in quantum dot-based Josephson junction can be useful for future low-temperature thermal applications CONCLUSIONWe have addressed the phase-driven and thermal-driven transport properties through a T-shaped double quantum dot Josephson junction. For uncorrelated quantum dots, the impact of interdot hopping on Andreev bound states (ABS) and Josephson supercurrent are investigated. For a finite value of interdot hopping, Josephson supercurrent exhibits sinusoidal