One of the challenges in fusion reactors is the discovery of plasma facing materials capable of withstanding extreme conditions, such as radiation damage and high heat flux. Development of fusion materials can be a daunting task since vast combinations of microstructures and compositions need to be explored, each of which requires trial-and-error based irradiation experiments and materials characterizations. Here, we utilize combinatorial experiments that allow rapid and systematic characterizations of composition-microstructure dependent irradiation damage behaviors of nanostructured tungsten alloys. The combinatorial materials library of W-Re-Ta alloys was synthesized, followed by the high-throughput experiments for probing irradiation damages to the mechanical, thermal, and structural properties of the alloys. This highly efficient technique allows rapid identification of composition ranges with excellent damage tolerance. We find that the distribution of implanted He clusters can be significantly altered by the addition of Ta and Re, which play a critical role in determining property changes upon irradiation. One of the technological challenges of commercialization of fusion reactors from a materials perspective is the development of suitable plasma facing materials (PFMs) that can withstand severe environments, such as irradiation damages and huge heat flux Previous studies have shown that irradiation damages can be mitigated by alloying with small amounts of additives to W. For example, W-Ta alloys not only exhibit higher ultimate tensile strength (UTS) and prevent crack propagation The nanocrystalline W-based alloys were magnetron sputter deposited on a 475 μm thick Si (100) wafer capped with a 200 nm thick LPCVD Si 3 N 4 layer. The substrate was cut into a 20 mm × 20 mm in-plane size for the W-Re-Ta systems and into a 20 mm × 10 mm size for the W-Re and W-Ta systems. The sputter depositions were carried out without a substrate rotation to synthesize thin films with in-plane composition gradients The in-plane chemical composition gradient of the combinatorial films was determined using an Energy-dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy (EDS) in a Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope (FESEM, JSM-7600F, JEOL). The spot size used was 1 μm × 1 μm and the accelerating voltage was set to 15 keV. The film thickness values of the combinatorial samples were measured to be 1.0 ± 0.2 μm using a profilometer (DXT-A, Bruker) and confirmed with the cross-sectional TEM and SEM micrographs. X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements were performed in the Bragg-Brentano geometry (D8 advanced eco, Bruker). The film lattice parameter and FWHM were determined using the (110) peak. The lattice parameter was calculated through the d-spacing value using Bragg's law. For the crystallinity analysis, the FWHM value of the gaussian-fitted peak was measured. The cross-sectional transmission electron microscope (JEM-2100F, JEOL) images were taken for both un-irradiated and irradiated samples (at 200 keV). The 50 ~70 nm thick TEM samples were prepared by using a focused ion beam milling (3D FEG, Quanta) The electronic thermal conductivity (the electronic contribution of the thermal conductivity) was determined by the Wiedemann-Franz (W-F) law using electrical resistivity, which was measured by a custom-built 4-point measurement. A 4point probe was configured in a line array with 1 mm of a spacing. The film electrical resistance (R) was determined using a current input of 1 mA through a digital multimeter (3058e, RIGOL). Electrical resistance (R) was converted to resistivity (ρ) using film thickness (t) and a correction factor (F = 4.23 ~4.36) The electronic thermal conductivity (κ e ) was calculated through the W-F law where σ is electrical conductivity (1/ρ), L is the Lorenz number (2.44 × 10 -8 W ΩK -2 ), and T is the absolute temperature. The thermal conductivity determined by this method does not consider the thermal transport by phonons, which constitutes approximately 10 % of the total thermal conductivity for metals and alloys The hardness maps were determined by nanoindentation (KLA iNano) in the continuous stiffness measurement (CSM) mode and with a diamond Berkovich tip. Before running the experiments, a standard tip calibration was performed using a fused silica sample. The target load and strain rate used were 50 mN and 0.2 s -1 , respectively. The nanoindentation hardness values versus depth were determined using the Oliver & Pharr method First-principles calculations based on density function theory (DFT) were performed through the Vienna Ab initio simulation package (VASP). The generalized gradient approximation of Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof has been implemented. Host atom valence states were treated using -W, Re, and Ta with PAW-PBE W_pv, Re_pv, Ta_pv, and the interstitial impurity atom -He with PAW-PBE He. The energy cutoff of 520 eV and a 5 × 5 × 5 mesh of Monkhorst-pack points for the Brillouin zone integration were employed for the calculation. Pure W and binary (W-Re and W-Ta), ternary (W-Re-Ta) nanostructured alloys with composition spreads were prepared by a magnetron co-sputter deposition process with a substrate temperature of 500 °C, as schematically illustrated in Fig. All the combinatorial specimens prepared in this work can be located within a 40 mm × 40 mm area together, where a uniform irradiation condition can be assured by the He-ion irradiation source (KOMAC, Korea Multi-Purpose Accelerator Complex). He-ions with an energy of 200 keV and the fluence and flux of 2×10 17 ions•cm -2 and 1.1×10 13 ions•cm -2 s -1 , respectively were irradiated to the specimens in the growth direction of the films (see Fig. Irradiation-induced hardening have been characterized by comparing the hardness maps acquired before and after He-ion irradiation (Fig. A similar irradiation damage map can be acquired for the thermal property of the combinatorial thin film library. Fig. After He-ion irradiation, κ e was reduced for all the systems (see Fig. The changes in the lattice parameters of the combinatorial thin films after He-ion irradiation are presented in Fig. The periodicity of the atomic arrangement of the combinatorial specimens has been characterized by determining the FWHM (full width at half maximum) of the (110) peaks of the XRD patterns. Before He-ion irradiation, the W-Re and W-Ta systems have FWHM ranges of 0.30 ∼ 0.32 • and 0.36 ∼ 0.47 • , respectively, while the value for the W film is 0.21 • (Fig. After irradiation, the FWHM in all systems increases probably due to the formation of some defects such as vacancy, self-interstitial atoms (SIAs), and He-clusters (Fig. The irradiation damage maps shown in Fig. Different sizes and distributions of He clusters or bubbles due to the Re and Ta solutes lead to different degrees of degradation of the mechanical property. Large He-bubbles in W-Re results in severe irradiation hardening, because the defects interfere dislocation slips effectively In this study, combinatorial experiments for discovering He-irradiation damage tolerant PFMs have been carried out. Combinations of the combinatorial synthesis, a simultaneous He-ion irradiation experiment, and the high-throughput characterizations were used to systematically characterize the irradiation damages of a broad composition range of nanostructured W-Ta-Re alloys. This set of techniques allows a facile identification of the composition ranges with excellent damage tolerance in mechanical (W 91 Ta 9 and W 76-83 Re 10-13 Ta 7-11 ) and thermal (W 89-93 Ta 7-11 and W 87-90 Re 10-13 ) properties, as well as in microstructure (W 89-92 Ta 8-12 and W 77-82 Re 9-12 Ta 9-11 ). It has been revealed that the solutes of Re and Ta in nanostructured W significantly affect the formation and distribution of He-bubbles, which are closely related to the damage behaviors in microstructural and physical properties. We believe that the suggested method can be used to investigate a broader range of damage tolerant nanostructured alloys with various irradiation conditions, facilitating the discovery of advanced PFMs. Development of the bulk processing would be necessary for the practical application of the nanostructured W-alloys as PFMs. The lattice parameter of un-irradiated pure W film was determined as 3.1678 Å (c), which can be compared with the bulk value of 3.1648 Å. This difference gives 0.095% of the out-of-plane residual strain, which corresponds to -0.135 % of in-plane residual strain and -0.60 GPa of in-plane residual stress. In this section, we investigate the stabilities of substitutional Ta and Re atoms, as well as the interstitial He atom by calculating formation energies (E f ) of each of the atoms. The W supercell before inserting any point defect is composed of 3×3×3 BCC unit cells with a lattice constant of 3.185 Å (a total of 54 host atoms). We then inserted the Ta or Re atom to a substitutional position (Fig. where E X tot is the total energies of the relaxed supercell including the point defect, E p tot is the total energies of the crystal without any defect (pure W), μ i is the chemical potential of element species i, and n i is the number of elements of species i added to (n i > 0) or removed from (n i < 0) the supercell. The adopted chemical potential for W, Ta, Re, and He are -12.96, -11.85, -12.44 eV and -0.0071 eV, respectively The number of He atoms inserted varied from one to four, making the overall He concentration from 1.8 to 6.9 %. The formation energies of the interstitial He in the W, W 89 Ta 11 , and W 89 Re 11 systems can be calculated by: are the total energies of the supercells with and without TIS He atoms in the W 54-m Sol m systems and m, n He represent the numbers of the solutes and He atoms (m = 0, for the pure W case), respectively. Calculated E f as a function of He concentration can be seen in manuscript (see Fig. For the relaxed structures of W 100-x He x , (W 89 Ta 11 ) 100-x He x , (W 89 Re 11 ) 100-x , radial distribution functions (RDFs) were determined as shown in Fig. 