Optoelectronic devices based on two-dimensional (2D) materials have attracted intense research attention owing to their excellent performances of high sensitivity For the ideal case, a linear increase of photocurrent with incident power is expected (γ 1) since the photocurrent is solely determined by the photogeneration of electronhole pairs The desired superlinear photoresponse is mainly achieved by sophisticated 2D heterostructures and arrays In this work, we report the prominent and intrinsic superlinear power dependence of photocurrent based on homogeneous Ta2NiS5 at ambient condition. The photodetector manifests itself with a simple metal-Ta2NiS5-metal structure. Bias-dependent and spatial scanning photocurrent measurements suggest the photoconductive origin of the photoresponse so that the photocurrent is determined by the intrinsic material property of Ta2NiS5. The photoconductive devices feature a fast response of 31 μs, along with good sensitivity of 3.1 mS/W per □, and polarization-sensitive anisotropy. At the low intensity regime 1.5 15 μW/μm , photocurrent shows conventional sublinear power dependence. Upon increasing the power density 15 200 μW/ μm , the photocurrent becomes weakly superlinear. With illuminating power density higher than 200 μW/μm , strong superlinear power dependence is found with a giant power exponent γ 1.5 for the homogeneous 2D material. Different from the previous report Ta2NiS5 crystallizes in the orthorhombic system (space group Cmcm, D ) as shown in Fig. a, b, and c are the amplitude of Raman tensor elements. The φ , φ , and φ are the phases of the elements, and φ φ φ . θ denotes the angle between the polarization vector of incident light e and the a-axis of the crystal To examine optoelectronic properties of multi-layer Ta2NiS5, the as-grown single crystals are exfoliated by mechanical method, and device fabrications are performed by a home-built lithography system with lift-off procedures. the dark current which is also symmetric and linear with bias, proving the Ohmic contact of the device as an important prerequisite for high-performance devices In addition to the discussed device performance, an unusual phenomenon is found in the power dependence of the photocurrent. Fig. To explain the superlinear dependence of the photocurrent under high incident power, we provide a two-recombination-center (RC) model as illustrated in Fig. To account for the superlinearity, those two recombination centers (RCi, i=1,2) feature distinct parameters. Among them, the most critical two are the density of states (N ) and the capture cross-sections for electrons (S ). S describes the ability of RCi to capture the electron. Considering the described system at equilibrium, upon absorbing incident photons, electron-hole pairs are generated across the band gap (process A). The solid and hollow dots denote electrons and holes, respectively. Before those carriers are collected by the electrodes, there is a certain probability (mainly determined by S ) for the photogenerated electrons to be captured by RC1 (process B) or RC2 (process C). Similarly, RC might also capture the photogenerated holes from valence band (process E & G). Meanwhile, it is possible for the captured electron on RC2 to be thermally emitted to the conduction band (process D) before recombined with holes, while the captured holes might experience the similar procedure (process F). All those procedures influence the carrier population of the states and in turn vary the probability of each procedure. The probability between different processes varies dramatically with different orders of magnitude. For example, the cross-sections of process B, E, H (labeled in dashed line) are negligibly low due the large energy difference between initial and final states. All processes are considered in the model calculation despite its probability. It is worth to note that process A is the only one originating from the photoelectric transition. All remaining processes denote pure electric processes including thermal excitation, trapping, and nonradiative recombination. Other photoelectric transitions and occupation conditions are further discussed in Supplementary Section V. Based on the modulation frequency dependent measurement, all those procedures and resultant carrier population reaches equilibrium within hundred μs. Owning to the orders of magnitude higher capture rate for hole, the photocurrent is dominated by carrier concentration of photogenerated electron n in the conduction band Meanwhile, RC1 is less occupied. With higher incident power as depicted in Fig. The response of the photoconductive device can be analyzed by the proposed model. In the upper panel of Fig. With much lower density of states of RC2 shown in Fig. Regardless of the N /N setting, all curves exhibit a superlinear feature due to the negligible S . However, a higher N /N leads to a more prominent superlinear power dependence of the photocurrent which agrees with the discussed picture. To quantitively verify the proposed model, we perform the multi-parameter fitting as shown in Fig. The observed fast photoresponse speed also agrees with the proposed model. The superlinear photocurrent requires the presence of recombination centers. However, the strong superlinearity also requires the dopant density as well as the density of states for the in-gap states to be low. Only with low dopant density, the recombination center can be fully occupied at high illuminating power. Otherwise, superlinearity is not expected to be observed. The fast photoresponse speed is further contributed by the suppression of the recombination process under light illumination. While lowering the power, the response speed of the device drops as discussed in detail in Supplementary Section IX. As a result of superlinearity, the photocurrent is also expected to drop while expanding the laser spot. The deduction has been confirmed in our beam-size-dependent experiments as discussed in detail of Supplementary Section X. To test the Ta2NiS5 photodetector and observed superlinearity for potential applications, the imaging function of the device is evaluated. The fabricated device is transferred to the image plane of a camera and controlled by a translation stage so that it mimics the CCD of the camera after a complete scanning. A screen showing the image of an apple is used as the target with tunable brightness. The photos are exhibited in Fig. where M and N are the number of pixels per row and per column, respectively. I ̅ is the average value of the signal. As shown in Figure . 6b, the RMS contrasts of the image increase with the maximum detected power among all pixels. Notably, a superlinear trend is found, resembling superlinear photoconductivity. By supporting better imaging contrast, superlinear photodetector could be promising for future optoelectronic detection. The recombination center plays an important role in the superlinearity photoresponse. More sophisticated experimental tools and theoretical calculations might help to identify the origin of the in-gap states and extract their evolution upon light illumination for better understanding of the system. In summary, we report the optoelectronic characteristics of the photoconductive detector based on multi-layer Ta2NiS5 and discover a giant superlinear power dependence of photocurrent. The time-resolved, frequency-resolved, spatial-resolved, bias-resolved, and angle-resolved photocurrent measurements not only present a fast, endurable, and anisotropic photoresponse, but also suggest the photoconductive nature of the device which ensures that the device performance is determined by the material property of Ta2NiS5. Starting from illumination power density of 1.54 μW/μm , photocurrent presents a sublinear photocurrent with the power density. Around Ta2NiS5 single crystals were prepared by standard chemical vapor transport method. Stoichiometric mixture of Ta, Ni, and S powder was sealed in a 20 cm vacuum quartz tube with iodine as transport agent. The tube was loaded in a two-zone furnace kept at 950 °C and 830 °C. After a 5-day growth procedure, shiny and needle-like single crystals were found in the low-temperature zone. X-ray diffraction was tested by Bruker D8 Discover. Raman spectrum was tested by a home-built system using 632.8 nm laser. Multi-layer Ta2NiS5 flakes were mechanically exfoliated from bulk crystals and then transferred to a Si/SiO2 wafer. Devices were fabricated by self-made lithography system with lift-off procedures. Cr/Au (5 nm/70 nm) is deposited as electrodes and Ohmic contact has been proved by the I U measurement. 