Polymer nanocomposites (PNCs) offer a broad range of thermophysical properties that are linked to their compositions. However, it is challenging to establish a universal composition-property relation of PNCs due to their enormous composition and chemical space. Here, we address this problem and develop a new method to model the composition-microstructure relation of a PNC through an intelligent machine learning pipeline named nanoNET. The nanoNET is a nanoparticles (NPs) distribution predictor, built upon computer vision and image recognition concepts. It integrates unsupervised deep learning and regression in a fully automated pipeline. We conduct coarse-grained molecular dynamics simulations of PNCs and utilize the data to establish and validate the nanoNET. Within this framework, a random forest regression model predicts the NPs' distribution in a PNC in a latent space. Subsequently, a convolutional neural network-based decoder converts the latent space representation to the actual radial distribution function (RDF) of NPs in the given PNC. The nanoNET predicts NPs distribution in many unknown PNCs very accurately. This method is very generic and can accelerate the design, discovery, and fundamental understanding of composition-microstructure relations of PNCs and other molecular systems. Polymer nanocomposites (PNC) offer a broad range of properties that are intricately connected to the spatial distribution of nanoparticles (NPs) in the polymer matrices. Understanding and controlling the distribution NPs into a polymer matrix is a significantly challenging task. We aim to address this challenge via machine learning. Recently, machine learning has shown tremendous success in solving a wide range of materials problems, such as identifying the local structure of metallic nanoparticles on an oxide-support and defective graphene sheets, We attempt to solve the above problem using efficient encoding and decoding techniques that are used in computer vision and image recognition. An efficient encoding and decoding of data are critical for the performance of ML models. In ML literature, the encoding of data is commonly known as feature learning. Therefore, the objective is to establish an automated ML framework that could take the composition parameters as input and predict the long-range radial distribution of NPs in the polymer matrix. Towards this end, we consider a phenomenological model of PNC and perform coarse-grained molecular dynamics (CGMD) simulations within a carefully selected range of compositional parameters, which span a wide region of the phase space, including experimentally known phases. We then quantify the aggregation and dispersion states of filler NPs from the CGMD simulations data. In particular, we calculate the long-range radial distribution function (RDF) for 80 different combinations of composition parameters. This data is utilized to build the machine learning framework, code name nanoNET, that elucidates the composition-structure relationships. The nanoNET provides a robust machine learning method that enables intelligent interpolation in the composition and chemical space of a PNC without directly measuring its properties via physics-based computer simulations or experiments. This machine learning approach can accelerate the characterization, prediction, and fundamental understanding of polymer nanocomposites and other molecular systems. Model. A very generic phenomenological coarse-grained (CG) model of PNC is considered for this study. Here polymer chains are represented as a coarse-grained bead-spring model of Kremer and Grest 48 wherein a pair of monomers interact via the Lennard-Jones (LJ) potential of the form V(r) = 4ε -. The ε is the unit of pair interaction energy and the size of a monomer (d) is s. In addition, two adjacent coarse-grained monomers of a polymer chain are connected by the Finitely Extensible Nonlinear Elastic (FENE) potential of the form E = - The LJ interaction between a pair of monomers is truncated and shifted to zero at a cut-off distance r ( = 2.5σ. The NP is also modeled via the LJ potential. The diameter of an NP (D) is varied from 2σ to 5σ. The NP-NP interaction is truncated and shifted to zero at a distance r ( = 2.5D to represent attraction between them. The NP-NP interaction (ε )*+)* ) is varied from 0.1ε to 2.5ε. The polymer-NP (ε *+)* ) interaction is varied from 0.1ε to 1.5ε. The polymer-NP interaction is truncated and shifted to zero at a cut-off distance r ( = 2.5 × (D + d)/2. The chain length of the polymer is varied between N=25 to 40. We conduct CGMD simulations of the PNC for a wide range of polymer-NP interaction, NP concentration, NP-NP interaction, NP-polymer size ratio; and generate a database for training and developing the machine learning framework. The CGMD simulations are performed in an isothermal isobaric ensemble (NPT), wherein the temperature and pressure are controlled by a Nose-Hoover thermostat and barostat, respectively. We use the velocity-Verlet algorithm with a timestep of 0.005t to integrate the equation of motion. Here, τ = σI , -is the unit of time, and m is the mass of a monomer, All the simulations are conducted for a reduced temperature , and a reduced pressure P * = Pσ 0 ε ⁄ = 1, using the LAMMPS open-sourced code. Convolutional Neural Network Autoencoder. A convolutional neural network (CNN) is a special class of multi-layer artificial neural networks that is capable of recognizing visual patterns automatically and adaptively through learning. The architecture of the encoder consists of six convolution layers and six pooling layers arranged alternatively. The convolution layers perform the convolution of image segments and their activation. During the convolution, a kernel, which is a small matrix of numbers, is applied to the input tensor. A dot product between the kernel and the input tensor is calculated at each location of the tensor and passes as the output value in the corresponding position of the output tensor. We use a matrix of size (3,3) for the kernel of the convolution operation. The kernel moves across the input tensor with a stride of unity. Here the stride is defined as the distance between two successive kernel positions. This operation does not allow the center of the kernel to overlap with the outermost elements of the input tensor. Padding is used to overcome this situation wherein rows or columns of zeroes are added to each side of the input tensor. This ensures that the center of the kernel can fit on all the extreme elements of the input tensor. These operations produce a planer feature map. We repeat the entire process multiple times with different kernel matrices to create a 3D feature map of the input. Therefore, the output of a convolution layer will be a tensor of length and width equal to that of the input. The width of the tensor will depend on the number of filters, which is the number of planner feature maps generated during the convolution operation. The number of filters in the successive convolution layers of the CNN are 64, 32, 32, 16, 16, and 8, respectively. The kernel parameters are learned during the training. The output of the convolution layer is also passed through an activation function. Subsequently, a pooling layer, which is placed in between two successive convolution layers, shrinks the in-plane dimension of its input tensor. The Max-pooling method is used for the pooling operations. This autoencoder links the convolutional layers, pooling layers, de-convolution layers and upsampling layers without any intermediate dense neural network. Such an autoencoder topology ensures faster training convergency and attains a higher quality local optimum. The number of layers, dimension of the input image, number of filters, stride and padding are decided based on our initial studies to improve the accuracy and efficiency of the CNN. This network shows better performance for our system than any other state-ofthe-art method. The mathematical details underlying the construction of the CNN autoencoder can be seen elsewhere. Random Forest: The Random Forest (RF) algorithm is an ensemble learning method that can perform regression using a decision tree framework. The nanoNET is built using a CNN autoencoder and an RF regressor. We use 68 RDFs to build these two components of the nanoNET. The performance of the nanoNET is tested for 12 RDFs that are not used for model building. These 80 RDFs are calculated for a selected range of composition parameters that yield a large variety of NP distributions in a polymer matrix. Figure between NPs. Overall, our CGMD simulation-identified phases of PNC that are commonly seen in experiments, First, we focus on CNN autoencoder training with the RDFs data. All RDFs are converted to grayscale images of dimension 64x64 for machine learning purposes as discussed in the method section. We create two data sets -training and validation for establishing the autoencoder model. The training validation sets consist of 80% and 20% of the total RDF data. The CNN autoencoder is trained for 400 epochs. The mean square error during the training drops rapidly in the early stage of the training, as shown in Figure We now integrate the RF model and the decoder part of the CNN autoencoder and build the nanoNET that predicts the RDF of NPs for a given PNC, as schematically shown in Figure AI and ML offer exceptional promises to predict the behavior of a vast chemical and composition space of a material based on a relatively smaller number of training data points. However, it is challenging to develop an ML workflow that correlates two vectors of disparate dimensions. Here we tackle this problem using feature engineering for polymer nanocomposites. Specifically, we develop a model that correlates the composition of a polymer nanocomposite and the long-range spatial distribution of nanoparticles in it. As the composition vector and radial distribution function are of disparate dimensions, we use a data encoding technique to solve this problem. The quality of data encoding is very critical for the success of any ML pipeline and model development. We show that an unsupervised convolutional neural network provides a unique architecture to extract the vital features of images and create a latent space representation of an RDF. Subsequently, we use random forest regression to establish correlations between the composition parameters and the latent space representation of an RDF. Finally, the decoder is used to construct an RDF from the latent space variables that are predicted by a random forest for an unknown composition matrix. In principle, any dimensionality reduction technique such as deep neural network (DNN) autoencoders, principal component analysis (PCA), or t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-SNE) can be used for this purpose. However, the choice of method for dimensionality reduction plays a vital role in the model's overall performance. Our initial studies suggest that convolutional neural network autoencoder-based feature extraction from an RDF is most efficient for the current problem, and it improves the composition-structure ML model of PNCs dramatically. In summary, we develop a robust metamodel that enables intelligent interpolations in the physicochemical space of a polymer nanocomposite without direct simulations or experiments. In the present study, we use a very generic phenomenological model of polymer nanocomposite to construct the machine learning framework that predicts the nanoparticle distribution. This framework can be further expanded to study and predict structures and morphologies of other nanocomposite systems, including polymer-grafted nanoparticles, and polymer-grafted nanoparticles in a polymer matrix. Moreover, all-atom molecular simulations and experimental data can be utilized to build the ML pipeline. We expect that the mathematical framework of the nanoNET will be useful for predicting any spatial or temporal correlation of molecular systems.