We report a device fabrication strategy of making multi-terminal electrical contacts on small (< 1 mm) bulk quantum materials using lithography-based techniques for electrical transport studies. The crystals are embedded in a polymeric medium to planarize the top surface, and then standard lithography and microfabrication techniques are directly applied to form electrodes with various geometries. This approach overcomes the limitations of crystal thickness and lateral dimensions on establishing electrical contacts. We use low stress polymers to minimize the extrinsic thermal strain effect at low temperatures, which allow reliable transport measurements on quantum materials that are sensitive to strain. The crystal surface planarization method has enabled electronic transport studies such as in-plane anisotropy, Hall measurements on small, bulk BaTiS3 (BTS) crystals, and provides unique opportunities for two-dimensional (2D) heterogeneous integration on three-dimensional (3D) / quasi-one-dimensional (quasi-1D) bulk materials. Our strategy is general for many small, non-exfoliable crystals of newly synthesized quantum materials and paves the way for performing versatile transport studies on those novel materials. Electrical transport measurements on quantum materials not only play an important role in understanding the nature of electronic phases Manual bonding is still the most widely adopted method for making electrical contacts to those bulk crystals Currently, most of the advanced multi-terminal electrical transport studies on bulk single crystals rely on sophisticated sample preparation procedures such as focused ion beam (FIB) micro-patterning, where a lamella with a few micrometers thick is typically lifted out from a bulk crystal and then carved into desired patterns, such as Hall bar geometry, in order to study its charge transport behavior On the other hand, the simple idea of crystal embedding using epoxy resin has been applied to handle small bulk samples in situations such as microtome sectioning However, these epoxies typically exhibit relatively large CTE (coefficient of thermal expansion, ~ 80 ppm/K for NOA 61), and a significant amount of thermal strain (~ 1.6% at 100 K for NOA) could be introduced at low temperatures. To obtain reliable and reproducible transport measurements on quantum material systems that typically have strong electron-lattice interactions and are sensitive to strain fields, low-stress embedding medium is needed. In this article, we adopt the polymeric embedding approach and demonstrate a simple crystal planarization strategy that uses a low-stress polymer as the embedding medium, which allows reliable lithography-compatible multi-terminal electrical transport studies on small, bulk single crystals. We have chosen the quasi-1D hexagonal chalcogenide BaTiS3 as a model nonexfoliable quantum material system for this demonstration. Recently, a subset of the authors reported two unique electronic phase transitions and charge density wave (CDW) ordering in BTS at low temperatures using this approach We also demonstrate the direct microstructural patterning of Hall bars on pre-embedded crystals using plasma ion milling, and present detailed Hall measurements on micro-patterned Hall bar device. In addition, by integrating transferred electrodes on bulk crystals, we show that the planarized platform provides unique opportunities towards 2D/3D integration, which may lead to a completely new region of rich physics and device applications. Our method is generally applicable to many other non-exfoliable quantum systems and paves the way for advanced transport measurements on those novel systems that were previously impractical. Single crystals of BTS were synthesized using a chemical vapor transport method Figure Surface planarization is critical in enabling successful application of lithography techniques on sub-mm bulk crystals. Here, we take advantage of the controllable adhesion strengths between PI film and the flat silicon wafer, which serves as the crystal's temporary molding surface. The step height of the crystal-substrate boundary is reduced from the as-grown crystal thickness (5 -20 μm) to less than 200 nm after embedding, as shown by the surface profile scans in Figure Figure One of the biggest advantages of this planarization strategy is its compatibility with lithography and other standard microfabrication techniques. For instance, versatile electrode geometries and experiments as required can be designed to probe the underlying charge transport behavior of those non-exfoliable bulk systems with limited sizes. We have previously demonstrated the observation of multiple phase transitions in BTS from transport measurements along the chain axis (c-axis) using the same PI embedding method, and we have confirmed its validity and reliability by comparing the transport behavior with that from conventional manual bonding method and between repeated measurement scans, respectively Electrical conductivity anisotropy, a direct measure of crystal structural anisotropy and electronic anisotropy, is one of the most important characteristics of quantum materials Multi-terminal Hall bar structure is usually preferred in magneto-transport measurements to accurately and simultaneously determine transport properties such as carrier concentration, mobility, and magnetoresistance Hall measurements from PFIB-fabricated devices are shown in Figure Compared with the measurements on devices without FIB micropatterning, the resistance level is lower, whereas both phase transitions are maintained. The reduced resistance is mainly attributed to the increased carrier concentrations in the system, which potentially comes from the FIBinduced damage on the channel crystals during the milling processes. If the damage is from the surface layer, a final surface polishing step with a lower milling voltage could help reduce any extrinsic surface contributions to transport. In addition to the intrinsic physical properties of the quantum material itself, heterogeneous integration with other interesting systems opens new opportunities for studying rich physics from proximity effects In conclusion, we have demonstrated a simple and general crystal surface planarization strategy for making multi-terminal electrical contacts on small, bulk samples with standard lithography techniques, which can be readily used for multi-terminal transport measurements including anisotropy, magneto-transport, photocurrent, etc. The planarization strategy also provides unique opportunities for integrating 2D materials onto bulk quantum systems. The PIbased processing conditions presented here are optimal for strain-sensitive quantum materials and work best for crystals with thicknesses up to 30 μm. The lateral size is limited only by the lithography technique to be used; hence, bulk crystals with lateral dimensions even below 100 μm can be easily handled. Moreover, we anticipate this method will be broadly useful for transport studies of in situ strain engineering as well, where the freestanding PI film with embedded crystal (3D/quasi-1D, or even 2D) and pre-patterned electrodes is mechanically stretched. The on-chip integration of metal wire strain gauge becomes possible and can further accurately determine the strain applied onto the material. deposition processes, resulting in a BTS device on a freestanding PI chip with metal contacts. It is worth noting that no silane-based adhesion promoter (VM 651, HD MicroSystems) was applied prior to PI spin-coating for a higher peeling-off yield. All the processing steps including transfer and PI coating were performed in a fume hood environment with good ventilation to avoid inhalation of n-methyl-2-pyrollidone (NMP), which is the main solvent of PI precursor. were used to measure sample resistance in four-probe geometry, with an excitation current of about 100 nA. In-plane conductivity anisotropy was characterized by measuring standard temperaturedependent four-probe resistance along both the c-and a-axes during cooling and warming scans.