We report on the low-energy electron and fast neutron irradiated 4H-SiCstudied by deep-level transient spectroscopy (DLTS) and Laplace DLTS. Irradiations introduced two defects, Ec-0.4eV and Ec-0.7eV. They were previously assigned to carbon interstitial (Ci) labeled as EH1/3 and silicon-vacancy (VSi) labeled as S1/2, for the low-energy electron and fast neutron irradiation, respectively. This work demonstrates how Laplace DLTS can be used as a useful tool for distinguishing the EH1 and S1 defects. We show that EH1 consists of a single emission line arising from the Ci(h), while S1 has two emission lines arising from the VSi(h) and VSi(k) lattice sites. Electrically active radiation-induced defects in 4H-SiC have been extensively studied for decades. A whole variety of electrically active defects introduced by different radiation sources such as protons, electrons, neutrons, and ions have been revealed. Among them, two electrically active defects with deep levels at Ec-0.4eV and Ec-0.7eV in n-type 4H-SiC material have captivated special attention in the SiC community. They are peculiar as they always occur together, and independently of the radiation source. Although the origin of the EH1/S1 (Ec-0.4eV) and EH3/S2 (Ec-0.7eV) defects has now been resolved, they still cause some confusion in the analysis of DLTS data. The reason for this is the following: DLTS signals arising from the EH1 and S1, as well as signals from the EH3 and S2, are identical in the DLTS spectra and cannot be resolved. Since its first demonstration in 1974, DLTS has proven to be the most sensitive technique for measuring electrically active defects in semiconductors, as it can detect defects at concentrations of about 10 10 cm -3 . We used n-type nitrogen-doped 4H-SiC epitaxial layers, 25 μm thick. The SiC epilayers were grown on an 8° off-cut silicon face of a 350 μm thick 4H-SiC (0001) wafer without a buffer layer. This brings us to the main objective of this work. How can we distinguish the Ec-0.4eV level in the low energy electron (EH1) or fast neutron (S1) irradiated 4H-SiC samples? Following the examples of successful application of Laplace DLTS technique, we have applied Laplace DLTS to make further progress in understanding EH1 and S1 defects. Figure Laplace DLTS has provided another indisputable evidence that EH1 and S1 originate from different defects. Moreover, it provides direct evidence that EH1 consists of a single emission line arising from the Ci at the -h lattice site, in contrast to S1 which has two emission lines arising from the VSi at the -h and -k lattice sites. Therefore, Laplace DLTS can be used for easy and conclusive discrimination of the EH1 and S1 defects in n-type 4H-SiC material.