Bulk acoustic resonators support robust, long-lived mechanical modes, capable of coupling to various quantum systems. In separate works, such devices have achieved strong coupling to both superconducting qubits, via piezoelectricity, and optical cavities, via Brillouin interactions. In this work, we present a novel hybrid microwave/optical platform capable of coupling to bulk acoustic waves through cavity-enhanced piezoelectric and photoelastic interactions. The modular, tunable system achieves fully resonant and well-mode-matched interactions between a 3D microwave cavity, a high-frequency bulk acoustic resonator, and a Fabry Perot cavity. We realize this piezo-Brillouin interaction in x-cut quartz, demonstrating the potential for strong optomechanical interactions and high cooperativity using optical cavity enhancement. We further show how this device functions as a bidirectional electro-opto-mechanical transducer, with transduction efficiency exceeding 10 -8 , and a feasible path towards unity conversion efficiency. The high optical sensitivity and ability to apply large resonant microwave field in this system also offers a new tool for probing anomalous electromechanical couplings, which we demonstrate by investigating (nominally-centrosymmetric) CaF2 and revealing a parasitic piezoelectricity of 83 am/V. Such studies are an important topic for emerging quantum technologies, and highlight the versatility of this new hybrid platform. Acoustic resonators with long-lived modes have played an important technological role, in systems ranging from ultrastable oscillators to micro-electro-mechanical devices. For quantum applications, acoustic devices offer the promise of flexibly linking disparate quantum systems, through a wide variety of coupling pathways To achieve strong optical interactions with these acoustic modes, one can exploit phase-matched photoelastic coupling, known as Brillouin scattering Here we present, for the first time, a system integrating simultaneous piezoelectric and Brillouin coupling to a GHz bulk acoustic resonator, in a hybrid system containing both a microwave and an optical cavities. To demonstrate the mechanism behind this piezo-Brillouin interaction, we first present a single-pass configuration (i.e. without the benefit of optical cavity enhancement), using a microwave cavity to drive GHz phonon modes in x-cut quartz, and reading out scattered optical photons. We then incorporate an optical cavity to realize a fully resonant operation where both electromechanical and optomechanical coupling mechanisms are cavityenhanced, boosting interaction rates by orders of magnitude. The use of a modular Fabry-Pérot cavity offers frequency tunability to meet this multiply-resonant condition, while maintaining low loss optical modes. We observe strong optomechanical interactions (characterized by a cooperativity exceeding unity), even reaching strong coupling. Along with competitive coupling efficiencies and robust thermal properties, this reveals the potential of this hybrid platform for microwaveoptical transduction with quantum applications We further demonstrate that the optical performance of this system offers a highly sensitive method for detecting piezoelectrically-driven phonons, offering a new tool for materials analysis. We illustrate this by interrogating CaF 2 , revealing an anomalous piezoelectric coupling, which may indicate surface damage or lattice defects in the bulk Our hybrid platform (illustrated in Fig. The platform design centers around the use of an HBAR, that supports longitudinal elastic standing waves confined between the opposing surfaces of a crystalline substrate. At modest cryogenic temperatures (T ∼ 4 K), these Fabry-Perot-like acoustic modes can achieve quality factors at GHz (MHz) frequencies in excess of 10 7 (10 9 ), by working with high purity crystals with smooth surfaces For electromechanical coupling to the HBAR, we rely on resonant piezoelectric interactions with a microwave resonator as shown in Fig. The coaxial microwave cavity is resonantly coupled, via the piezoelectric effect, to an HBAR located above the central post. Electromagnetic simulations (Ansys High Frequency Simulation Software -HFSS) show that the electric field is oriented perpendicular (i.e. the zdirection; see Fig. where E 0 is the zero-point field strength, λ m (Ω m ) is the acoustic wavelength (frequency), A m is the effective area of the acoustic mode, and L m is the acoustic substrate thickness (see Supplement for derivation). The interaction strength of the microwave and acoustic resonators can be characterized by the electromechanical cooperativity, C em = 4g 2 em κμΓ . From this piezoelectricity and microwave simulations, we estimate the electromechanical coupling in this quartz system to be g em /2π = 298 Hz, corresponding to C em = 4.18 × 10 -8 . It is important to use cryogenic values for quartz piezoelectricity Optomechanical coupling is realized through Brillouin scattering, which is a three-wave interaction between optical pump/signal fields and an acoustic wave, mediated by photoelasticity , where E opt is the transverse electric field of the optical cavity (assumed to be along x here), p 13 is the relevant photoeleastic coefficient, and 0 ( r ) is the vacuum (relative material) permittivity where ρ is the density and c is the speed of light. Note that here we assumed that the acoustic mode area is defined by the optical mode area A opt /2 = A m (see supplement). Other acoustic modes are suppressed by a sinc 2 [(Ω -Ω B )/4∆ m ] envelope, that originates from the phase-matching condition. Drawing an analogy to cavity-optomechanics Brillouin scattering measurements are conventionally implemented in a single-pass configuration, where a strong pump can interact with acoustic phonons, scattering into backwards-propagating Stokes and anti-Stokes fields. In this configuration, a Brillouin-active phonon mode, with population n m , will scatter incident pump photons to an anti-Stokes sideband with power P sig = ( ω p )C sp om Γn m . Here, C sp om = Γτ -1 is the single-pass equivalent of a cavity cooperativity 3 Fully resonantly-enhanced piezo-Brillouin spectroscopy Including an optical cavity into this piezo-Brillouin system allows for resonant enhancements of both the optical pump and signal fields , where N cav is now the intracavity photon number and κ opt is the optical cavity dissipation rate. Note that, compared to the single-pass coupling rate, g om,0 acquires a factor of Lm Lopt , corresponding to a geometric filling factor between the acoustic and optical cavities. For our optical cavity geometry, even a modest finesse (F > 1000) results in optical linewidths that are orders of magnitude less than the mechanical frequency (i.e. κ/Ω m ∼ 10 -3 ). In this deeply resolved-sideband regime, it becomes necessary to use separate resonances to enhance the pump and signal, thus imposing an additional requirement that the optical mode spacing closely matches the acoustic frequency (∆ opt ≡ ω opt -ω p = Ω m ). Two features of this hybrid system allow us to meet this requirement. First, the Fresnel reflections at the vac- uum/dielectric interface produced by the HBAR cause the optical mode spacing to be wavelength-dependent. For instance, in our hybrid quartz cavity, over a ∼1 nm range in pump wavelength, we find 9 optical modes with spacings varying from 10.4 GHz to 11.5 GHz, which allows us to identify several pairs of modes with a fre-quency spacing that approximately match Ω B . Note that this variable FSR allows selective enhancement of either the Stokes or anti-Stokes process. While this coarse frequency-matching was possible in prior works This matching of the optical mode spacing to the mechanical frequency enables strong optomechanical interactions, which we illustrate in Fig. With this doubly-resonant optical enhancement established, we repeat the measurement from Fig. The cavity-enhanced data illlustrates several promi-nent features that are consistent with the underlying coupling mechanisms. On the tails of the central, phasematched peak (Ω m /2π=11.366 GHz), we see the other longitudinal modes, whose motion coherently interferes to yield Fano lineshapes. The apparent coupling rates of these modes are suppressed according to the optical phase-matching condition (sinc 2 [(Ω -Ω B )/4∆ m ]), as well as the piezoelectric mode-overlap (which suppresses coupling to even-index modes). Away from the central mode, the piezo-Brillouin spectrum is further suppressed by the optical and microwave cavity susceptibilities. There is also a significant Fano dip associated with the main peak at Ω m /2π = 11.366 GHz. This is a result of a residual Pockels-type electro-optic (EO) coupling in quartz ( Here, η opt and η μ are the optical and microwave portcoupling efficiencies (i.e., the fraction of the total loss rate attributable to the input/output port). Thus, one seeks to have greater-than-unity (and equal) cooperativities for both subsystems, as well as efficiently-coupled ports for transferring photons in and out. In the hybrid quartz cavity demonstrated in Fig. On resonance, (Ω m /2π = 11.366 GHz), we verify that the transduction efficiency scales as predicted with optical cooperativity. The experimental data (purple points) in Fig. The data presented in Fig. One such material not expected to have a piezoelectric response is CaF 2 . The Brillouin-active mechanical frequency for CaF 2 is ∼13.3GHz, which we can easily target by adjusting the microwave resonator and optical FSR. Doing so, we can repeat the experiment from Fig. This effective piezoelectricity could be attributed to imperfections distributed in the bulk or concentrated at the surface. If the acoustic response was derived from a piezoelectric coupling across a thin surface layer of 1 nm As in transduction, the fundamental noise floor of this technique is ultimately limited by the thermal noise of the acoustic resonator, which we can detect in the absence of the microwave drive (see Fig. and PFM Much progress has been made in both electro-optic and piezo-opto-mechanical transduction in recent years, reaching η ∼ O(10 -1 ) with minimal added noise , a stronger piezoelectric such as LiNbO 3 or BaTiO 3 can immediately improve η (e.g. by 50× for LiNbO 3 ). Recalling that this platform requires no nanofabrication on the sample, it is straightforward to make such material changes. There is also room for further optimization of mode-matching between the acoustic and microwave resonators. For example, a larger acoustic waist could increase C em by 80×, and a re-entrant microwave cavity (with increased field concentration) could increase C em by ∼ 10×. Other extensions based on planar microwave resonators, or piezoelectric superlattices may offer additional gains in electromechanical coupling, and merit further investigation. There is also significant room to improve the lifetimes of the component microwave and acoustic resonators, increasing the electromechanical cooperativity. For instance, this demonstration uses a non-superconducting copper microwave cavity, with a modest Q < 1000. Moving to a superconducting metal, there is ample evidence for both post and re-entrant cavities with Q > 10 7 Together, these improvements highlight a feasible path from the η = 1.2×10 -8 demonstrated here towards bidirectional transduction with near unity efficiency. Within the landscape of transduction platforms, piezo-Brillouin systems such as this have a unique set of advantages and constraints, and merit further investigation for quantum applications. Beyond transduction, we have demonstrated how this system presents a versatile platform for materials analysis and other technological pursuits. Specifically, Brillouin optical readout offers the ability to conduct precision spectroscopy of GHz motion with single-quanta sensitivity (i.e. a noise floor of 5.12 zm•Hz -1/2 ). We have demonstrated how this can be used to investigate parasitic piezoelectricity, with detectable electromechanical coupling as low as g CaF2 em /2π = 0.03 Hz. Note that most of the improvements of Table The experimental setup is illustrated in Figure Here, the main optical tone and the sideband act as the pump and probe, respectively. The beat note between the transmitted pump and probe is measured via a high speed photodetector and spectrum analyzer. The readout frequency of the spectrum analyzer can be synchronized to the frequency of the signal generator, effectively functioning as a scalar network analyzer. In the microwave-to-optical transduction configuration, the drive tone from the signal generator directly drives the microwave cavity, piezoelectrically exciting phonons from which the pump light scatters to achieve electro-optical conversion. For optical-to-microwave transduction, the optical probe is generated from the pump using the intensity modulator. However, instead of measuring the optical response of the probe (as in OMIT), the spectrum analyzer directly reads the signal leaving the microwave cavity. For the OMIT/transduction measurements performed on quartz, the transmitted pump serves as a local oscillator (LO) for high-frequency heterodyne detection of the signal sideband. In this configuration, it is not easy to attenuate the LO power (e.g. to avoid detector saturation) without also attenuating the signal. Therefore, for enhanced sensitivity in the CaF 2 measurements, we modify the circuit (green shaded box of Figure to avoid microwave crosstalk in the detection channel. The spectrum analyzer frequency can be offset accordingly to accommodate this shift between drive frequency and heterodyne frequency, resulting in a unique signal frequency to avoid any potential microwave crosstalk. Using this separate-path LO can introduce low-frequency phase noise (<1kHz) in the heterodyne beat note, which does not impact our measurements. In section 3 of the manuscript, we list the loss rates and the Q factors (finesse for optical cavity) of optical, acoustic, and microwave cavities (κ opt /2π = 2.2MHz, F = 5170, Γ/2π ≈ 500kHz, Q m = 22800, κ μ /2π = 17.1MHz, Q μ = 664) used for x-cut quartz demonstration of piezo-Brillouin spectroscopy. Figure Figure The Fabry-Perot optical cavity used in our platform consists of two dielectric mirrors with 99.9% reflectivity and a dielectric substrate (quartz or CaF 2 ) in the middle. The non-zero reflection of optical mode at the boundary of the dielectric media produces an intrinsic modulation of optical mode spacing. For the cavity geometry used here (11 mm vacuum, 0.5 mm quartz), we find modulation by ± 0.5 GHz around a mean spacing of 10.9 GHz. This variation allows us to find a mode spacing that approximately matches the Brillouin frequency. In the experiments here, we pump the lower-frequency mode, using the upper-frequency mode to resonantly match the anti-Stokes sideband. Since the mode spacing variation is larger than the optical cavity linewidth, the other (Stokes) process is strongly suppressed. In situ fine-tuning of optical cavity mode spacing at cryogenic temperatures is achieved through the use of a piezo-actuator that allows translation of one mirror position. With this, we can match the optical mode spacing to the acoustic mode within the both optical and acoustic linewidths (∆ opt ≈ Ω m ). The frequency tuning range is shown in Figure (> 1 GHz) intrinsic variation, plus fine-tuning via the piezo-actuator voltage (0V ∼ 150V) to match the optical mode spacing (red arrow) with the acoustic mode (green dashed line). In our experiment, we operate at optical wavelength of ∼ 1546.4 nm, indicated in back arrow in the figure. The electromechanical interaction Hamiltonian can be expressed as a product between piezo-induced stress field (σ(r) = c : d•E(r)) and strain field in the substrate (s(r)), given as H int = σ(r)s(r)dV , where c is the stiffness tensor, d is the piezoelectric tensor, and : is tensor product. In our system, the coupling occurs predominantly between the z-directional electric and strain field due to the microwave cavity design and material properties. Thus we consider longitudinal strain fields (s(r) = S z (r)) interacting with an electric field along the z-axis (σ(r) = c 33 d 33 E z (r)), resulting in H int = c 33 d 33 E z (r)S z (r)dV . Quantizing the electric (E z (r) = Ē0 (r)(a + a )) and strain fields (S z (r) = S0 (r)(b + b † )), the interaction Hamiltonian becomes where pz dV is a volume integral across the piezoelectric substrate. Acoustic strain field is assumed to be a standing wave in longitudinal direction and a Gaussian shape in transverse direction with mode waist proportional to the probing optical mode waist where r m is the acoustic mode waist and r opt is the optical mode waist), resulting in an expression λ m is the acoustic wavelength, s 0 = 2 Ω c 33 LmAm is the zero point strain, L m is the crystal thickness, and A m is the acoustic mode area. The microwave mode is concentrated around the central pin of a coaxial microwave cavity, resulting in a spherical mode shape with a radius of ∼3 mm. Meanwhile, mode waist (radius) of the cylindrical acoustic mode is ∼ 50 um, which is substantially smaller than that of the microwave mode. Moreover, the thickness of the crystalline substrate varies between 0.5 mm and 1 mm, which is also smaller compared to the microwave mode waist. As a result, the electric field parallel to the phonon propagation (ẑ-direction) within the microwave/acoustic mode overlap volume can be assumed to be uniform, where E 0 = Ω 2 0 r Vμ is the uniform zero-point electric field strength within the overlapping mode volume. We can obtain Electric field of the system through HFSS (3D high frequency simulation software). It is convenient to output the electric field values of the microwave mode when the E-field is at its maximum and H-field is is zero for a stored energy of Ω. E-field value from the simulation ( Ēsim (r)) follows, Within the microwave/acoustic mode overlap volume, we see uniform simulated electric field ( Ēsim (r) = E sim ẑ). In terms of zero-point field, simulated field amplitude can be expressed as, E sim = 2E 0 . Combining equations (S1), ( where t pz is the piezoelectric substrate thickness. There are three distinct cases of piezoelectric coupling that one can consider. Firstly, piezoelectricity can be distributed evenly throughout the entire bulk of the acoustic substrate. In this case, acoustic modes with an even longitudinal index (t pz = n λm 2 with even n) will have zero coupling rate (sin 2 πtpz λm = S5 0), while the odd index modes (t pz = n λm 2 with odd n) will have maximal coupling (sin 2 πtpz λm = 1). Secondly, substrates may have surface piezoelectricity on one side of the substrate. In this case, piezoelectricity is concentrated within a thin surface layer on one surface with thickness t (t pz λ m ), while the bulk remains non-piezoelectric, resulting in a simplification of the sin term in the coupling rate expression as sin 2 πtpz λm = ( πtpz λm ) 2 . Lastly, there is the case for surface piezoelectricity on both sides of the substrate. Here, the modulation of zero and non-zero coupling rate for even and odd indexed acoustic modes appears as in the bulk piezoelectricity case, while the non-zero coupling rate is proportional to t 2 pz as in the single-sided surface piezoelectricity case. With these observations in mind, we examine our experimental results in Section 5 (on X-cut quartz) and Section 7 (on CaF 2 ) of the supplement. Another aspect of g em is that it has a factor of 1/ √ L m . Although we are integrating along the full length of the substrate, the sin term results in values equivalent to integrating along an effective piezoelectric thickness of t pz < λ m /2. Hence the factor, 1/ √ L m , from strain normalization term remains throughout the expression of g em . Such dependency of g em in substrate thickness suggests that using thinner substrate is advantageous in achieving larger g em , which we will later discuss the supplement. Here, we derive the Brillouin optomechanical coupling rate, closely following prior studies where E j,0 = 2 ω j 0 r AoptLopt is the zero-point field, ω j is the j-th optical cavity mode frequency, A opt (L opt ) is optical mode area (optical cavity length), 0 ( r ) is vacuum (relative) permittivity, k j is j-th optical wavevector, and a j is the anhillation operator for j-th optical mode. Note that for simplicity, this model neglects modifications of the optical field due to the combined vacuum/dielectric composition of the cavity. Full modelling of the optical mode profile, in the presence of this dielectric interface, is possible through use of a transfer matrix model where U i,0 = 2 ρΩmAmLm is the zero-point displacement, ρ is crystal density, q i is i-th acoustic wavevector, and b i is the anhillation operator for i-th acoustic mode. Since we are using a plano-plano (as opposed to plano-convex) crystal for the acoustic resonator, our acoustic mode waist is not independently determined by the crystal geometry, but rather defined by the optical mode waist. Specifically, The photoelastic interaction Hamiltonian is given by where p 13 is the relevant photoelastic constant. In anticipation of the phase-matching requirement, we will consider intermodal coupling involving the j and j + 1 optical modes with wavevectors/frequencies which satisfy k j+1 + k j = q i and Ω m = ω j+1ω j . Since ω j ≈ ω j+1 , this yields the Brillouin phasematching condition from the main text (q i = 2nω j /c). Plugging in the appropriate definitions and making the rotating wave approximation, the interaction Hamltonian is Note that here we have assumed the crystal begins precisely at z = 0 (i.e. coincident with the mirror). In reality, the longitudinal component of this overlap integral will depend sensitively on the position of the acoustic standing wave within the optical standing wave. As shown in The interaction Hamiltonian can be be alternatively written in terms of the single-photon coupling rate, g om,0 , as following, Combining Equation S8 and S9, we obtain the single-photon coupling rate in the presence of an optical cavity, The x-cut quartz OMIT measurements from Figure Hz from Equation S10. For all data presented, experimental value is used unless specified. Optical cavity-enhanced g om is obtained by linearizing around a strong pump (H int = g om,0 a † j+1 a j b i ≈ N p g om,0 a † j+1 b i = g om a † j+1 b i ), giving the expression, g om = N p g om,0 , where N p is the inter-cavity pump photon number. In our case, the maximum cavity-enhanced g om achievable in our system is g om = 1.4 MHz from OMIT (N p ∼ 7 × 10 10 for 112 mW of pump power) In single-pass configuration without an optical cavity, we can consider an optical cavity with L opt = L m where the boundaries are defined by the acoustic crystal surfaces. This removes the filling-factor term ( Lm Lopt = 1) from Equation S10 in describing the single-pass single-photon optomechanical coupling rate, resulting in an expression, g om,0 = ω 2 j n 3 p 13 8c 2 ΩmρAmLm . Free-space cooperativity of an optomechanical system with an acoustic cavity but without an optical cavity is defined in reference where P p is the pump power, ω p is the optical pump wavelength, v g,p (v g,s ) is the group velocity of the pump (signal) light and Γ is the acoustic loss rate. Introducing group delay (τ = L m n/c), and inter cavity photon number (N p = P p L /( ω p v g,p )), the single-pass cooperativity can be re-written in a simpler form, Here, we consider the specific configuration in which one seeks to measure an optical sideband scattered from a (piezoelectrically-driven) phonon population. In particular, we analyze the optical power in the scattered sideband on both single-pass and optical cavity configuration, to illustrate the benefit of the optical cavity. In the absence of an optical cavity, a strong pump can still scatter off phonons to generate a Brillouin sideband. Following reference In the case where we do consider an optical cavity, it becomes natural to describe the optomechanical interaction through coupled equations of motion for the pump and signal fields. In the rotating frame, this can be written as, ȧs = i N p g om,0 b - where a in is the external pump drive field (P p / ω p = a † in a in ), a s (a p ) is annihilation operator for the signal (pump) mode, b is annihilation operator for phonons, κ opt (κ opt,c ) is optical cavity loss (coupling) rate. A more extensive Hamiltonian approach will be taken in the later state space model section of the supplement. Certain simplifications are made in this section (∆ o = 0, g eo = 0). In steady state, we obtain Inter-cavity pump photon number can then be written as From input-output formalism, Equation S14, and Equation S15, outgoing scattered signal field (a out ) is and the corresponding scattered signal power is Assuming everything was kept constant, we expect 16F 2 improvement in signal power by introducing an optical cavity with with a finesse, F. Beyond what is presented in Figure Pockel EO interactions, laid out in the following section. (This subsection closely follows the works of reference where ω p (ω s ) is optical wavelength of pump (signal) mode, Ω μ is microwave cavity resonance frequency, and c is annihilation operator for microwave cavity mode. In the rotating frame with H 0 / = ω p a † p a p + ω p a † s a s , we obtain an effective Hamiltonian where ∆ o = ω sω p is the detuning of optical signal frequency from optical pump. In the undepleted pump regime, we can linearize the Hamiltonian about a strong, coherent pump, giving the expression where g om = N p g om,0 , and N p is the intracavity pump photon number. The Heisenberg equations of motion for this Hamiltonian and the input-output relation between the fields are given by the following equations: The expression of electro-optic (EO) coupling (Pockels effect) in materials is studied in various sources where r 13 is the relevant linear electro-optic coefficient component. Electric fields of optical pump (E p ), optical signal (E s ) and microwave (E μ ) is defined as in the previous sections, with corresponding normalization factors of E p,0 = 2 ω p / 0 1 A opt L opt and E s,0 = 2 ω s / 0 1 A opt L opt . E μ,0 is the zero-point electric field obtained through HFSS (E μ,0 = E sim /2), uniform along the interaction region. Assuming identical optical pump and signal mode profiles in both transverse and longitudinal direction, the above expression simplifies into, EO coefficient in quartz is r 13 = 0.45 pm/V from crystal symmetry Incorporating a single-photon EO coupling rate into the state space model, we can compare our theoretical model to the transduction spectrum. In fact, we can even observe individual contributions from piezoelectric coupling and EO coupling to the net transduction. In Figure The apparent interference between piezoelectric and EO effect near the center peak is because of similar EM and EO cooperativities. In the relatively lossy acoustic cavity regime that we are operating, we can still reach C om > 1. However, we have relatively low C em = 5.6 × 10 -8 , which is greater than C eo = 2.8 × 10 -9 only by an order of magnitude. This is also observed in Figure One of the future paths to improve transduction, suggested in the manuscript, is using an acoustic cavity with better Q factor. Integration of a high-Q HBAR will bring about a significant increase in C em , while keeping C eo constant, thus suppressing the formation of such fano-like feature in future implementations of this design. Recall the transduction efficiency expression (S38) In our system, we can readily reach C om of 1 and η opt (η μ ) of 0.53 (0.43). Unity coupling efficiencies can be reached with ease by adjusting the microwave coupling pin to be over-coupled to the microwave cavity, and by having asymmetric optical cavity mirrors (i.e. creating a single-sided cavity). Also note that the Gaussian optical cavity mode is well-suited for achieving high fiber-coupling efficiency, a key challenge for low loss integration of a transducer. The expression therefore simplifies into in the limit of small C em (C em C om ) and assuming unity coupling efficiencies (η opt ≈ η μ ≈ 1). Thus, improving the transduction efficiency boils down to improving C em up to and above unity. Among the approaches that we can take to enhance C em , one obvious choice is to achieve stronger g em as it is quadratically related to C em . Rearranging Equation S4 in the bulk piezoelectric limit, As laid out in Table Simulating a re-entrant cavity, we obtain approximately 3× stronger electric field compared to the coaxial design ( 0.53 √ 2 × 10 -3 V/m → 1.8 √ 2 × 10 -3 V/m), resulting in a higher g em (C em ) by 3× (10×). Besides optimizing g em , we can also improve on other factors in C em ; namely, κ μ and Γ. This demonstration uses a non-superconducting cooper microwave cavity, with a modest Q < 10 3 . With superconducting materials, both post and re-entrant cavities can readily reach Q > 10 8 . Hence, in an ideal circumstance, κ μ can be boosted by > 10 5 ×. However, we have to consider practical limitations such as the combination of high laser powers with superconducting resonators and the restriction in the bandwidth of the device that high Q microwave cavity may impose. In reality, we will consider a conservative enhancement in κ μ by > 10 2 × as shown in Table We put the same CaF 2 that we study in section 5 of the main text under a IDS-PFM as a way to alternatively detect piezoelectricity (see Figure pm in an imaging bandwidth of 1kHz. For a 1 V drive amplitude, this yields a minimum detectable piezo-sensitivity of d eff = 2.2 pm/V. Minimum detectable piezo-sensitivity can be lowered by simply applying a larger drive voltage which was allowable in the case of CaF 2 , unlike thin films or materials having low dielectric breakdown potentials. For maximum applied voltage of 40 V, this implies a minimal detectable d eff of 55 fm/V. From data, we barely see any deviation from the ∼2.2 pm background. Even though the data may appear to have a non-zero slope (14 ± 40 fm/V), it is inconclusive that we detect any piezoelectricity since all data are within the standard deviation/error bar. We attribute the smaller but finite slope of 14 fm/V to influence of electrostatic forces. At high voltage especially, we can expect non-neglighble electrostatic forces and force gradients to act between the AFM tip and sample, which may lead to small but finite displacement of the tip position, even for the case of IDS-PFM (which is largely insensitive to cantilever-sample electrostatic effects Therefore, we observe no detectable piezoelectricity though IDS-PFM, meaning that parasitic piezoelectricity in CaF 2 is smaller than the detection limit of 55 fm/V. These results indicate the unlikely-hood of the parasitic piezoelectricity coming from an intrinsic surface layer, which requires piezoelectricity to Demonstration of single-pass piezo-Brillouin spectroscopy This sensitivity, combined with the modular construction of the system, makes it possible to investigate electromechanical couplings in a variety of materials. In particular, it enables us to probe possible anomalous piezoelectricity in non-piezoelectric materials. There is strong motivation for this type of study, as parasitic piezoelectricity may be a relevant loss channel for emerging solid state quantum technologies