The performance of superconducting qubits is degraded by a poorly characterized set of energy sources breaking the Cooper pairs responsible for superconductivity, creating a condition often called "quasiparticle poisoning". Both superconducting qubits and low threshold dark matter calorimeters have observed excess bursts of quasiparticles or phonons that decrease in rate with time. Here, we show that a silicon crystal glued to its holder exhibits a rate of low-energy phonon events that is more than two orders of magnitude larger than in a functionally identical crystal suspended from its holder in a low-stress state. The excess phonon event rate in the glued crystal decreases with time since cooldown, consistent with a source of phonon bursts which contributes to quasiparticle poisoning in quantum circuits and the low-energy events observed in cryogenic calorimeters. We argue that relaxation of thermally induced stress between the glue and crystal is the source of these events. Coherence times are a key benchmark for the performance of superconducting qubits, a technology from which quantum computers may be constructed shown to create excess quasiparticles in superconducting quantum circuits. However, identification of the full set of poisoning mechanisms is yet incomplete, as suggested by other results in which efforts were made to shield and isolate superconducting circuits Notably, a superconductor was recently shown to have one of the lowest residual quasiparticle densities ever measured in a quantum circuit Similarly, multiple dark-matter experiments using cryogenic crystals observe excess low-energy (10-100 eV scale) events of an unknown origin The burst-like nature and variation in rate with time since cooldown suggest a common mechanism for these backgrounds and disfavor the sources of nonequilibrium quasiparticles thus far identified by the superconductingqubit and dark-matter communities. For example, neither black-body IR that leaks from higher temperature stages The most probable hypothesis is that multi-atom lattice rearrangements, i.e. microfractures, causes these phonon bursts. The athermal phonons released in this process can break Cooper pairs in a qubit's superconducting films or be directly sensed in an athermal phonon sensor. If these microfractures are driven by stress caused by differential thermal contraction of a detector's materials or support structure-glue, clamps, metal films, etc.this hypothesis also naturally explains the time variation since cooldown: the system is slowly releasing thermal stress and coming into equilibrium. The CRESST dark-matter experiment has shown that stress-driven macroscopic fractures can cause phonon bursts We used two silicon crystals to study the effects of stress on the athermal phonon background: one mounted with a typical High Stress (HS) method and the other held with a new Low Stress (LS) method. The LS crystal was suspended by three sets of two 50 μm diameter aluminium wires (see Fig. Athermal phonon sensors optimized for high collection efficiency are a natural choice to study an anomalous phonon population capable of breaking Cooper pairs. We instrumented both the LS and HS crystals with functionally identical arrays of Quasiparticle-trap-assisted Electrothermal Feedback Transitions Edge Sensors (QETs) Aside from their mounting schemes, the HS and LS calorimeters were intentionally constructed and operated in as similar a manner as possible. The phonon-sensor designs are identical, and the sensors were fabricated onto (and the calorimeters later cut from) the same silicon wafer at Texas A&M University. The superconducting transition temperature (T c ) is an important indicator of performance for TES-based sensors We observed a background event rate approximately two orders of magnitude larger in the HS device compared to the LS device. With the well understood electrothermal response of our phonon sensors, we identified the background as composed of individual events occurring in lengths of time shorter than the O(10 μs) calorimeter response time, rather than as a continuous power source. The background spectra are shown in Fig. The background was divided into three energy bins for further analysis. The highest-energy events (85+ eV) with a saturated calorimeter response were binned together. In the range 38-85 eV, the backgrounds observed in HS and LS were similar; we therefore grouped them together into one bin. In the lowest-energy bin (3-38 eV), the backgrounds observed in the HS and LS calorimeters appear to substantially differ. To study the time dependence of these backgrounds, ∼80 hours of data were taken over a 5 d period, starting approximately 3 d after starting the cooldown of the calorimeters. During this period, the rate in each of the three energy bins (see Fig. As shown in Fig. In the lowest-energy bin in the HS calorimeter, a single exponential does not sufficiently describe the timedependent rate (χ 2 /(dof) = 4192/68). This bin is especially well-measured because it contains 2-3 orders of magnitude more events than any of the other bins. There may be similar deviations from our exponential model in the other time-series data that cannot be detected due to insufficient statistics. A sum of exponentials or a power law (as described in Ref. As the HS and LS calorimeters were functionally identical aside from their mounting method, we attribute the difference in their 3-38 eV backgrounds as due to stress created through thermal contraction in the rigidly joined copper mount-GE varnish-HS crystal system. When this stress relaxes (through e.g. a failure at the GE varnishsilicon interface or deformation of the copper mount near the varnish), many eV-scale bonds are broken effectively instantaneously with respect to the calorimeter response, releasing phonon energy which our sensors read out as a single event. If these events occur in the copper mount, they must originate within ∼ 200 μm of the the glue-silicon interface, as the athermal phonons to which the calorimeters are sensitive quickly thermalize in copper Within the 38-85 eV range, the event rate increased quasi-exponentially with decreasing energy and decreased with time, similar to the stress-relaxation process observed at lower energies in the HS calorimeter. However, the magnitude, spectral shape, and time dependence of the 38-85 eV rate were consistent in both devices (see Supplementary Table To demonstrate the plausibility of film stresses as a source of background events, we briefly sketch the physics of an aluminium film that becomes stressed when cooling from room temperature to close to absolute zero. Relative to a silicon substrate, aluminium will biaxially contract by a factor of about 4 × 10 -3 To contextualize our observation of stress-induced athermal phonons for the superconducting qubit community, we estimate reduced quasiparticle densities x qp based on simulations described in Sec. III F and Supplementary Note 2. We simulate the quasiparticles produced by our observed stress-induced phonon events as well as high-energy backgrounds (muons, etc.) in two representative quasiparticle dynamics limits: the recombinationdominated qubit in Ref. In the case of the qubit, we find that our stress-induced background would produce a reduced quasiparticle density of x qp ≈ 5.0 × 10 -8 , while high-energy backgrounds should induce x qp ≈ 1.5 × 10 -8 . The latter is in general agreement with the lower bound of x qp ≥ 7 × 10 -9 estimated in Ref. These estimates suggest that in the case of recombination-dominated systems similar to Ref. We observed that mounting a cryogenically cooled silicon crystal with GE varnish leads to a large rate of athermal phonon events with energies in the range of 10s-100s of eV per event. The mounting of crystals with other glue-like substances-e.g., vacuum grease More broadly, experiments which are sensitive to athermal phonon backgrounds may be sensitive to stress in their crystals from a variety of mechanisms. In addition to adhesive-based mounting schemes, using clamps to hold crystals can result in excess event rates In our calorimeters (see Fig. Our calorimeters were fabricated from a single 1 mm thick, 100 mm diameter polished high-purity wafer (Float Zone intrinsic silicon, >10 kOhm/square). Tungsten, aluminium, and gold films were deposited onto the crystal surface, and then photolithographically etched into the desired shapes. The T c s of the HS and LS devices were measured to be 44.3 and 53.0 mK, respectively. The fraction of the surface area of the calorimeters (including sidewalls and bottoms) covered by "active" aluminium fins (which collect athermal phonons into TESs) and tungsten TESs (which collect sub-gap phonons) were 2.8% and 0.29%. The "passive" areal fractions of aluminium, tungsten, and gold were 3.3%, 0.29%, and 0.037%, respectively. By design, these coverage fractions were similar to the calorimeter used in Ref. The HS and LS calorimeters were run inside a Cryoconcept HEXADRY UQT-B 200 dry (pulse tube based) dilution refrigerator. The refrigerator was located in a subbasement lab at the University of California, Berkeley, with minimal overburden and no radiation shielding (lead, etc.). No special radiopurity precautions were undertaken. The configuration of the refrigerator and pulse tube cooler were optimized to transmit minimal vibrations from the pulse tube to the cold stages of the refrigerator. Further, both the HS and LS mounting schemes are relatively insusceptible to vibrations. We operated the refrigerator in a "pulse tube off" configuration for short periods of time (up to 15 min) and did not measure any significant difference in noise, performance, or background (vs. pulse tube on) for either the HS or LS calorimeter. All data presented in this paper were recorded with the pulse tube on and with a stable refrigerator base temperature < 10 mK. We have also studied a low-stress "resting" configuration in which the calorimeter was sitting directly on a copper surface without being glued down; these devices were extremely susceptible to pulse-tube vibrations. The HS and LS calorimeters were located inside the same copper optical cavity, with a direct line of sight between them. The printed circuit boards used to read out the calorimetry signals were also located in this optical cavity, presumably leading to a subdominant scintillation background as described in Ref. The HS and LS calorimeters were read out using standard TES readout techniques (see, e.g., Ref. Approximately 80 hours of data were collected in 7 datasets, summarized in Supplementary Table Thanks to the well understood electrothermal feedback mechanism in TESs We multiplied this peak power by the integral of the pulse-fitting template (in units of time) to find the energy associated with the pulse. This method of calculating the energy absorbed in the TES is in general insensitive to the exact characteristics of the TES film (given films with similar α which are significantly colder than T c , as was the case for our calorimeters). Note that the energy measured with this approach corresponds to the energy absorbed in the TES, rather than the energy deposited in the phonon system. As described in Supplementary Note 1, the latter can be estimated by assuming a phonon collection efficiency of 25%. In the case of saturation, the temperature of the TES rises significantly above T c and the electrothermal feedback mechanism fails to completely capture the energy absorbed in the TES. Therefore, the energy of saturated pulses measured using this approach will be underestimated. The energy at which this saturation takes place depends on the T c of the film, among other factors, leading to the variation in saturation energy seen in Fig. Because we did not directly calibrate the phonon collection efficiency, we report energy as absorbed in the TESs rather than energy deposited in the calorimeter (aside from the estimates in Supplementary Note 1). Given the phonon collection efficiencies observed in similar calorimeters To ensure a consistent detector response, only the events passing three sets of data-quality cuts were considered for analysis. Events were required to pass • a "baseline cut" requiring the magnitude of the prepulse baseline to be in a range associated with consistent detector response, • a "slope cut" requiring the slope of the baseline before and after a pulse to be consistent with steadystate detector operation, and • a "chi-squared cut" requiring the shape of the pulse to be consistent with a representative pulse template. These cuts were designed to pass a large fraction of events. Passage fractions are summarized in Supplementary Table Pulses larger than a threshold associated with saturation failed to pass both the slope and chi-squared cuts, even for pulses associated with the expected response of the device. All such saturated pulses were therefore set to pass and were thus included in our reported (85+ eV) event rates. These pulses are outside of the main region of interest for this analysis. Cut passage fraction as a function of time was monitored by finding the passage fraction of randomly acquired traces as a function of time. Our reported event rates have been corrected by this measured passage fraction to account for cut efficiency. Note that the passage fraction did not significantly vary over time and was never less than 0.85, indicating that cut-efficiency time dependence cannot be the source of the rate variation described in Sec. II B. For our quasiparticle density estimates, we use a zero dimensional model in which the quasiparticle dynamics for the reduced quasiparticle density, x qp = n qp /n cp , are governed by where n qp and n cp are the number densities of quasiparticles and Cooper pairs, respectively, r ≈ (20 ns) -1 is the constant associated with recombination in aluminium E is the phonon energy of the event in a device substrate, f ≈ 0.5 In both systems, we use the actual measured behavior of our HS calorimeter to model g 0 and t 0 and thus construct g(t) and x qp (t). For events under the saturation threshold, we use event energies and timing without modification. For saturated events, in simulations that include high-energy backgrounds, we assign an energy of 100 keV (similar to Ref. We numerically simulate x qp (t) with the constructed g(t) in 25 μs time steps. After discarding an initial period, during which the simulation equilibrated, the simulated x qp (t) was plotted (see Supplementary Figure The processed datasets used for this study are available through figshare, with DOI 10.6084/m9.figshare.25337869. The data raw generated during this study are available from the corresponding author on request. Source data are provided with this paper. The code used during this study is available from the corresponding author on request. Cooperative Agreement No. DMR-1644779 and the state of Florida. This study was performed by the "SPICE/HeRALD" or "TESSERACT" collaboration in M. Pyle's UC Berkeley laboratory, with additional oversight and management from B. Sadoulet. W.A.P. performed critical precursor work on resting calorimeters. E.F., R.G., Z.H., N.K., A.M., B.N., and R.U. did precursor work on the LEE in the PD2/CPD detector, demonstrating that the excess was unrelated to radioactive backgrounds and suggesting stress relaxation as the likely source. The calorimeters used in this study were designed by C.F. and were fabricated at Texas A&M University by M. Platt in R.M. and N.M.'s laboratory. S.M., W.A.P., M.R., and R.K.R. developed the low-stress hanging technique, and X.L., M.R. and R.K.R. assembled the LS and HS calorimeters. The cryostat used for this study was constructed by R.A.P., Y.Y.C., C.W.F., S.M., W.A.P., M. Pyle, M.R., R.K.R., H.S.Q., B. Serfass, and S.L.W. DAQ and other software tools used in this analysis were designed by C.F., X.L., W.A.P., B. Serfass, B. Suerfu, and S.L.W. The main data analysis was undertaken by R.K.R. Studies of stress in alternative TES materials were carried out by M.L., G.W., V.Y. and J.Z. in C.L.C.'s laboratory. Cryogenic studies were performed in W.G.'s laboratory. Radioactive background modeling was performed in B.P.'s laboratory. Studies of different detector concepts and associated software development were undertaken by A.B., L.C., J.L., P.K.P., H.D.P., R.S., V.V., Y.W., and M.R.W, with M.G.S., S.A.H., D.M., P.S., and A.S. providing guidance and support as additional coprincipal investigators in the collaboration. All authors read and approved the manuscript, which was written primarily by R.B., M. Pyle and R.K.R. All authors contributed to the collaboration which produced this work. The authors declare no competing interests. A. Figure For comparison, we show the low-energy spectra measured with our HS and LS devices alongside the spectra observed in the CPD However, scaling by sensor volume (taken here as the aluminium volume) may be more appropriate if backgrounds originate in the sensor films (as hypothesized in Section 2.1 of the main text) rather than the bulk of the detector. The center subfigure of Fig. Given that the low energy background rate has been observed to decrease with time both in CRESST detectors Athermal phonons incident on a superconductor can break Cooper pairs in the superconductor, creating quasiparticles which can cause decoherence of superconducting qubits. The impact of "high energy" backgrounds on quantum circuit performance has recently been the subject of significant study To this end, we separate the background observed in our calorimeters into two regions: the first between 3 and 85 eV (the two lowest-energy bins in Fig. In the simplest terms, we can compare the relative powers of the high-energy and stress-induced backgrounds. For example, in our first dataset, we see a rate of approximately 672 eV/s of stress events in the HS calorimeter, 10.9 eV/s in the LS calorimeter, and 5.8 keV/s of high-energy backgrounds in either calorimeter-summing the energies observed directly in the case of stress backgrounds and assuming 100 keV per saturated event in the case of high-energy backgrounds. In radiopure underground cryostats, as suggested in Ref. In many quantum circuits, the average quasiparticle density depends not only on the power of phonons incident on the superconducting elements but also on the average energy of the phonon events. Inspecting Eq. (2) in Sec 3.6 of the main text, we note that if the system is dominated by recombination (i.e., s is small, as in many quantum circuits We simulated the time-dependent quasiparticle density in two cases: a recombination-limited superconductor modeled after Ref. In the recombination-dominated case (i.e., insignificant quasiparticle trapping), we simulate a time-averaged value of x qp ≈ 4.1 × 10 -8 due to stress events only and 5.0 × 10 -8 if energy from high-energy backgrounds is included. The simulated reduced quasiparticle density due to high-energy backgrounds alone is 1.5 × 10 -8 , which is comparable to the x qp ≥ 7 × 10 -9 lower bound estimated in Ref. Multiple works Previously discussed mitigation techniques include operating radiopure quantum circuits in low-background environments In summary, our simulations indicate that in the case of the recombination-dominated qubit, stress and highenergy backgrounds plausibly contribute about equally to quasiparticle poisoning, while experimental evidence The simulated residual quasiparticle densities are summarized in Table The low stress mounting technique described in this paper was developed over the course of multiple design iterations. As a general principle, the two most challenging aspects of this process were achieving high bond strengths and designing a setup such that the calorimeters could be bonded and transported without breaking the delicate and rigid structural bonds. The bulk wire from which the structural bonds is constructed is in general far stronger than needed to mechanically support the gram scale detectors. However, both the bond itself and the interface between the bond and bonding surface are relatively weak. Optimizing this strength required a campaign of varying the e.g. bond force, bond time, etc. and pull testing a number of samples using a mechanical pull tester. Obtaining a bond which was both well bonded to the substrate and mechanically strong at the bond foot required settings in a relatively narrow range. Heuristically, we found that the strongest bonds we obtained failed at ∼0.3 the bulk bond breaking strength and would fail with either the bond pad being separated from the substrate, or from the bond foot snapping off of the bonding wire where it was deformed at the "ankle." Structural bonds were made of 2 mil (50 μm) 1% Si aluminium wire from Tanaka, and were made on a manual WestBond wire bonding machine. To support the devices during bonding, we used a 3D printed plastic jig, as shown in Fig. the calorimeter when bonds were made would not move the calorimeter enough to break bonds which were already made. The jig was constructed out of two pieces, the first that supported and centered the calorimeter being bonded from the bottom, and the second clamping the calorimeter to the bottom jig by pushing downwards. This top jig was designed to only contact the edge of the calorimeter to prevent damage to the films patterned on the surface, and was made relatively small to allow for access to the bonding pads around the device. The jig was also designed such that when removed, the calorimeter would not move relative to the copper support to which it was bonded. This ensured that the device would hang evenly without contacting support structures when the jig was removed. The bonded device was transported to the cryostat while in the bonding jig to ensure that it would not be damaged during transport. The top and then bottom jigs were slowly removed, and the hanging device was mounted in the cryostat. In general, calorimeters could only be structurally bonded once due to bonding pad size constraints, so if the calorimeter was to be run again after completing a cryogenic run, it needed to be removed and stored without breaking the structural wire bonds. We found that it was easier to break these bonds when attempting to reinstall the bonding jig than it was to carefully transport and store the calorimeter in the hanging state. These suspended calorimeters were in general strong when accelerated side to side, but very weak when accelerated up and down. For example, the calorimeters would not be broken by moderate side to side manual shaking, but would easily be broken by even small (∼mm) scale drops onto rigid surfaces. During the initial development of this technique, we suffered from very poor (∼ 10%) yield, but through iterative improvements to our design and techniques have obtained significantly improved (∼ 80%) yields. Presumably additional engineering and process development could enable significantly higher (∼ 95%+) yields. a Modeled after a recombination-dominated qubit in Ref. b Modeled after a trapping-dominated superconductor in Ref. a Modeled after a recombination-dominated qubit in Ref.