We report the spin transport properties in a thin film of a naphthyl diamine derivative: N,N'-Bis(naphthalen-1-yl)-N,N'-bis(phenyl)-2,2'-dimethylbenzidine (-NPD). In a palladium(Pd)/-NPD/Ni80Fe20 tri-layer structure sample, a pure spin current is generated in the -NPD layer with the spin pumping driven by ferromagnetic resonance (FMR). The generated spin current is absorbed into the Pd layer, and converted into a charge current with the inverse spin-Hall effect (ISHE) in Pd. An electromotive force due to the ISHE in the Pd layer is observed under the FMR of the Ni80Fe20 layer, which is clear evidence for the spin transport in an -NPD film. The spin diffusion length in an -NPD film is estimated to be about 62 nm at room temperature, which is long enough as a spin transport material for spintronic devices. Pure spin current which is a flow of spin angular momenta is a dissipation-less information propagation method, and considered as one of energy-saving technologies in electronic devices. Organic molecular materials composed of light elements are promising for the spin transport because the spin-orbit interaction working as a spin scattering center is generally weak. At the beginning of molecular spintronics history, spin injection into molecular materials was performed by using a spin-polarized charge current In 2014, the spin transport in the conductive polymer PBTTT films was performed with the combination method of the spin pumping and the inverse spin Hall effect (ISHE) Therefore, the spin transport properties in thin films of typical molecular materials should be investigated more. In this study, a thin film of naphthyl diamine derivative (N,N'-Bis(naphthalen-1-yl)-N,N'bis(phenyl)-2,2'-dimethylbenzidine: -NPD) which is known as a typical hole transporting material of organic light-emitting diodes Figure where SHE is the spin-Hall angle corresponding to the conversion efficiency from a spin current to a charge current, and σ ⃗ is the spin-polarization vector of the J ⃗ . That is, if electromotive force due to the ISHE in Pd is detected under the FMR of Ni80Fe20, it is clear evidence for spin transport in an -NPD film. Electron beam (EB) deposition was used to deposit Pd (Furuuchi Chemical Co., Ltd., 99.99% purity) to a thickness of 10 nm on a thermally-oxidized silicon (Si/SiO2) substrate, under a vacuum pressure of <10 -6 Pa. Next, also under a vacuum pressure of <10 -6 Pa, -NPD molecules (Tokyo Chemical Industry Co., Ltd.; sublimed grade) were thermally evaporated through a shadow mask. During -NPD depositions, the deposition rate was set to 0.1 nm/s and the substrate temperature was atmospheric temperature. The -NPD layer thickness (d) was varied between 25 and 100 nm. Finally, Ni80Fe20 (Kojundo Chemical Lab. Co., Ltd., 99.99%) was deposited by EB deposition through another shadow mask, under a vacuum pressure of <10 -6 Pa. During Ni80Fe20 deposition, the sample substrate was cooled with a cooling medium of -2°C, to prevent the deposited -NPD films from breaking. For a control experiment, samples with a Cu layer instead of the Pd layer were prepared. Evaluation methods are similar to our previous studies with the spin-pumping and the ISHE Figure On samples with an -NPD film, broad and weak diffraction are observed at around 2 of 20°. However, no clear peaks from -NPD films were observed. Thus, the -NPD molecules in our samples are hardly oriented, which is consistent with general -NPD films prepared by thermal evaporation Figure where  and  are the angular frequency (2f) and the gyromagnetic ratio of 1.86×10 7 Oe -1 s -1 of Ni80Fe20, respectively where  denotes the damping constant As a control experiment, we tested samples with a Cu layer instead of the Pd layer. VSym with large deviation is observed in previous studies Another is the fit for the shortest  (~44 nm) by using relatively-large VSym data set. Almost data were included between these two dashed lines. Using the center value and the difference between the longest and the shortest values, the  in an -NPD film was estimated to be 62±18 nm at RT. Before confirming the validity of the  estimation, we discuss the possible spin pumping mechanism into and spin transport mechanism in an -NPD film on the basis of the electronic states in the film. The energy level difference between the work function of Ni80Fe20 of about 4.7 eV, and the HOMO level (5.7 eV from the vacuum level) or the LUMO level (2.6 eV from the vacuum level) of an -NPD film is not small. And there is no electrical injection in this study. Thus, these do not suggest that the spin transport via the HOMO or LUMO of an -NPD film is dominant. That is, as another way, it is natural to be considered that the impurities in an -NPD film and the impurity levels in the film are used as the dominant spin transport carriers and the mechanism, and/or hybridized orbit of the impurity levels and π-orbit in an -NPD film might be used. A theoretical model of the spin transport via quantum dots assumed in molecular films is suggested Next, possible origins of the non-negligible electromotive forces observed from samples with a Cu layer are discussed except for the oxidization of the Cu layer. First, hybridization effects between the -NPD film and the Cu layer should be considered. Although there seems not to be studies about hybridization effects between -NPD and Cu on the basis of the magnetic properties, it is no wonder that the hybridization effects between -NPD and Cu related to spin dependent phenomena exist, as similar to the case at the interface between Cu and C60 films The estimated  of 62±18 nm in an -NPD film at RT is relatively long among the molecular films prepared by thermal evaporation: 13 nm for C60 fullerene respectively. The reason that the spin diffusion length of amorphous -NPD films of about 62 nm and that of amorphous rubrene films of 132 nm The relationship between the molecular orientation and the spin diffusion length in molecular films in previous studies has not been investigated yet. We believe the spin diffusion length can be extended further in highly oriented π-molecular films, under the assumption that the spin transport via the electronic levels derived from the π-orbit in the molecular films is dominant. If the spin transport direction is along the direction that the π-orbit in the molecular films are connected between the molecules, longer spin transport may be possible. On the other hand, if the spin transport is dominantly not via the π-orbit, but via some impurity levels in molecular films, the longer spin transport may not to be expected. If the spin transport in π-conjugated materials is mainly due to the π-orbit, a highly molecular-oriented pentacene film and/or a pentacene single crystal must be good candidates to study the issue because a pentacene single crystal has an anisotropy of the electrical charge transport. However, thinking from the reported spin diffusion length of a pentacene film with "poor" molecular orientation of about 42 nm Utilizing the same sample structure, a pentacene film with "poor" molecular orientation should be used to study the anisotropic spin transport, as a control experiment. It is significant for developing the molecular spintronic devices to investigate its relationship between the molecular orientation and the spin diffusion length in the molecular films, although the spin diffusion length of several tenth nm is long enough for spintronic application. The above suggested the estimated  in -NPD films of about 62 nm itself is valid, while there are issues at the interfaces in samples to be solved. Spin transport properties of an -NPD film prepared by thermal evaporation were studied at RT. We achieved spin transport in amorphous-like -NPD films by using the combination method of the spin pumping and the ISHE. The spin diffusion length in -NPD films was estimated to be 62±18 nm at RT by investigating the -NPD film thickness dependence of the ISHE signals in the Pd, which is long enough to utilize as a spin transport material for spintronic devices. 