Over the past decade inter-atomic potentials based on machine-learning (ML) techniques have become an indispensable tool in the atomic-scale modeling of materials. Trained on energies and forces obtained from electronic-structure calculations, they inherit their predictive accuracy, and extend greatly the length and time scales that are accessible to explicit atomistic simulations. Inexpensive predictions of the energetics of individual configurations have facilitated greatly the calculation of the thermodynamics of materials, including finite-temperature effects and disorder. More recently, machine-learning models have been closing the gap with first-principles calculations in another area: the prediction of arbitrarily complicated functional properties, from vibrational and optical spectroscopies to electronic excitations. The implementation of integrated machine-learning models, that combine energetic and functional predictions with statistical and dynamical sampling of atomic-scale properties is bringing the promise of predictive, uncompromising simulations of existing and novel materials closer to its full realisation. Materials science as a discipline has benefited tremendously from the possibility of solving numerically the electronic-structure problem for a condensed phase of matter. Supported by the steady decrease of the cost of computation, the availability of high-quality opensource software The past decade has seen the rise of a different approach to the problem. Rather than solving directly a FIG. quantum mechanical problem to predict the properties y of a structure A, the idea is to use a small number of reference calculations to fit a more or less sophisticated functional form ỹ(A), that can then be used to achieve predictions that are (almost) as accurate as the underlying quantum calculations, but computationally much less demanding, and with a more benign scaling with system size (Fig. Sampling of disorder, and thermal fluctuations, is the perfect application for data-driven potentials. Computing finite-temperature properties involves generating a large number M of configurations A, consistent with the thermodynamic ensemble, and averaging over their properties, y = M A=1 y(A)/M . Even for liquid configurations, the fluctuations involve comparatively small structural differences, which makes it relatively easy for interpolative techniques such as MLIPs to achieve accurate predictions from a small number of reference configurations. It is not by chance that many of the early applications focused on the calculation of phase diagrams or phase transitions MLIPs have reached a considerable level of maturity, and so there is a good understanding of their mathematical foundations, (1) This expression accounts for the possible discrepancy between V REF and V ML . Applying the correction to each phase allows to recover relative free-energy differences which are not affected by the residual error of the ML approximation, which can be important in cases where free-energy differences are small, or dependent on energy contributions that are hard to capture by local MLIPs (e.g. proton disorder in ice Another idea that has facilitated greatly the use of ML for materials modeling is that of active learning. Even though MLIPs are widely used, and have transformed the landscape of atomic-scale materials modelling, they only replace one of the tasks that have made first-principles simulations successful. Having access to the ground-state (and excited state) electronic structure of a material allows evaluating all sorts of response properties where D λ is known as a Wigner D-matrix. In this notation (Ref. 25, Section 3.1) y|q indicates the regression weights for the q-th feature, and q|A; λμ the q-th component of the feature vector that describes the structure A. Crucially, for each feature there are 2λ + 1 components, indexed by μ that describe their behavior under rotation. It is easy to see that this linear model will be consistent with the requirements of Eq. ( holds true for each feature. These equivariant representations have been used to machine-learn force vectors Symmetry considerations underlie also the latest developments in geometric machine learning, with equivariant models Computing dipoles by predicting the position of localized centers of charge 100 , or constructing covariant descriptors by formally assigning fixed charges to the atoms and computing "operator derivatives" of atom-centered descriptors It is also worth noting that equivariant representations are not only useful to build symmetry-adapted models of tensorial properties. The vast majority of atom-centered descriptors used to build MLIPs can be understood in terms of symmetrized correlations of the atomic neighbor density Having simultaneous access to ML predictions of energy, forces and functional properties opens the way to simulations that describe all the aspects of the electronic structure of materials, and that use state-of-the-art sampling techniques to access static and dynamic behavior at finite temperature, without compromising on the cell size or trajectory length. Advanced data analytics can then be used to interpret the outcome of increasingly complex datasets and simulations. Another area in which ML needs to go beyond potentials to describe materials involves all properties associated with the electronic degrees of freedom. This involves both predictions of the conductivity (at least through the proxy of the density of electronic states at the Fermi level 120 ) as well as the estimation of the contribution to thermophysical properties arising from electronic excitations, An important practical issue that may slow down the adoption of this new class of integrated models has to do with the need to combine different frameworks, and different types of advanced simulation strategies. Even though general-purpose models that treat on the same footings potential energy and functional properties will become prevalent, there may still be cases in which one wants to combine models from different sources, and/or to implement complicated simulation setups that require their own dedicated software stack. The design of mod-ular software that can be easily interfaced with different packages, such as the atomic simulation environment (ASE) Machine-learning techniques have been incorporated, and largely normalized, as essential tools for the atomicscale modeling of matter. The progress in the field has been incredibly fast, and shows no sign of slowing down, with new ideas being proposed to tackle the limitations of the best-established approaches, from the incompleteness of some descriptors 