We calculate binding energies of four molecular solids using the Hartree-Fock (HF) and second-order Møller-Plesset perturbation theory (MP2). We obtain the energies within many-body expansion (MBE) as well as using periodic boundary conditions (PBC) to compare both approaches. The systems we study are methane, carbon dioxide, ammonia, and methanol. We use tight convergence settings to obtain the binding energies with a high precision, we estimate the uncertainties to be only few tenths of percent. We discuss several issues that affect the quality of the results and which need to be considered to reach high precision for both MBE and within PBC. For example, HF as well as MP2 energies within PBC benefited from the use of real-space Coulomb cut-off technique, the convergence of energies within MBE was improved by modifying the order of summation. Finally, numerical noise made the evaluation of some of the MBE contributions difficult and the effect was reduced by using smaller basis sets for the less critical terms. Molecular solids are materials important in many areas of science and industry, for example as pharmaceuticals. However, it is often difficult to obtain their binding energy reliably from theoretical approaches due to the need to describe accurately both interand intra-molecular interactions The natural way to treat molecular solids is by using periodic boundary conditions (PBC). Currently, density functional theory (DFT) approximations are widely used within PBC to study molecular solids As an alternative, the many-body expansion (MBE) can be used to obtain binding energies of molecular solids In this work we consider the binding energies at the HF and MP2 levels. For these methods one can find published results that vary by more than 20% We selected four systems for our study: methane, carbon dioxide, ammonia, and methanol. We made this choice to include systems with different binding properties. Specifically, the long-range electrostatic interactions are negligible for methane, but are more important for the other systems. Moreover, hydrogen bonds can be expected to dominate the binding of methanol. We expect that the different roles of the various interactions will affect the convergence behaviour of the calculations. Finally, the molecules are small, with up to 20 electrons, which simplifies the calculations. The structures of carbon dioxide and methanol were obtained from the Crystallography Open Database Table V ( Å3 ) Z μ (D) Methane Within the periodic boundary conditions (PBC) approach, the binding energy of a molecular crystal for method M, E M bind , is given by: where E M cell is the total energy of a unit cell, Z is the number of molecules per unit cell, and E M mol is the total energy of an isolated molecule in the gas phase. The calculations within periodic boundary conditions were performed using the Vienna ab-initio simulation package (VASP) The evaluation of the MP2 correlation energy is memory demanding due to the need to store all the overlap densities between occupied and virtual states for all the k-point pairs. For large number of k-points and basis-set sizes the calculation needs to be run over a large number of compute nodes so that the total memory is sufficient. However, this reduces the performance of the code as our systems are rather small and do not scale well. To bypass this issue, we modified the code to evaluate the MP2 energy only for a single combination of k-points at each run which substantially reduces the memory requirements per calculation. Within the MBE (or fragment) approach, the binding energy of a molecular crystal is assembled from a series of dimer interaction energies of a single arbitrary "reference" molecule with all other molecules in the crystal and higher-order n-body (n = 3, 4, . . .) non-additive interaction energies: where the index 0 denotes the reference molecule and indices i, j, k, . . . other molecules in the crystal. The summation thus runs over all non-equivalent dimers, trimers, etc., in a crystal, and Here, E i , E 0,i , E 0,i,j , and E 0,i,j,k is a monomer, dimer, trimer, and tetramer energy, respectively. As the summations in Equation 2 are infinite, a cut-off distance r cut needs to be introduced above which the contributions are neglected. We define distance between molecules as the average distance between all the pairs of atoms of the two respective molecules. For trimers and tetramers, the total intermolecular distance is a sum of distances of all the pairs of molecules in the fragment. The n-body energy for a given cut-off distance r cut is then the sum of the all the contributions with total intermolecular distance below r cut . Apart from distance criteria we also define "shells" of unit cells around the unit cell with the reference molecule. The unit cell with the reference molecule is "shell 0", the 26 unit cells around it are "shell 1", the next 98 cells belong to "shell 2" and so on. This is schematically shown for two dimensions in Figure Finite cluster HF and MP2 energies were obtained using the Molpro package To increase the precision of the results we set the convergence settings in Molpro as tight as possible. Specifically, we used energy=1.e-16, orbital=1.e-11, lowered the screening thresholds for the electron repulsion integrals, and set a tight convergence for F12 "forb=1.e-15". It was shown that weak convergence criteria can lead to a numerical noise that can dominate over the actual energy contributions, especially for three-body or four-body terms The evaluation of the HF energy in PBC is the simplest one from the four types of calculations performed in this work (HF and MP2 in PBC or MBE). However, it is also a calculation where considerable errors can be introduced. The reason for this is the Coulomb singularity in the exchange energy which leads to an error proportional to the volume of the Γ-point in the reciprocal space In Figure We note that this issue also occurs for hybrid DFT functionals and needs to be taken into account when energies obtained in different cells are compared, such as for adsorption energies or different phases of solids. The problem can be difficult to notice due to the typically smaller amount of Fock exchange in hybrid functionals. Moreover, if one uses k-point set and cell volume for which DFT energies typically converge for insulators or semiconductors (supercell side around 20 Å), the errors partially cancel, even though in an uncontrolled manner. Also the problem is not present for functionals which screen the long-range part, such as HSE We observe a similar improvement of the convergence with k-points and volume for the other systems as well when the Coulomb cut-off is used. A 2×2×2 k-point sampling is sufficient to obtain the energies of ammonia, carbon dioxide, and methanol solids to within 0.1 kJ/mol per molecule. For a 3×3×3 k-point grid the energies differ by around 0.001 kJ/mol per molecule from a denser k-point grid and can be thus considered converged. Note, however, that this small difference is observed for high basis-set cutoffs (above approx. 1200 eV), the energy differences can be larger for smaller basis sets. Finally, the energies of molecules that have a non-zero dipole moment need to be extrapolated to infinite cell volume. This extrapolation corrects the energy of ammonia molecule by only 0.02 kJ/mol compared to a value in a cell with a 21 Å side, for methanol the correction is 0.2 kJ/mol for the same settings. For methane and carbon dioxide we simply used a large enough cell to obtain E HF mol . The final binding energies were calculated from data obtained with a very high basis-set cut-off, 2100 eV for methane and methanol and 2000 eV for ammonia and carbon dioxide. While the binding energies are converged to within 0.1 kJ/mol for a basis-set cut-off of 1000 eV, we opted for a higher cut-off to reduce the uncertainty to around 0.01 kJ/mol. The final values of the HF energies are summarized in Table As with the evaluation of the HF energy, one encounters several possible issues when calculating the MP2 energy within periodic-boundary conditions and plane-wave basisset We now turn to the calculation of MP2 correlation energies of isolated molecules. We evaluate the energies at several basis-set cut-offs to enable extrapolation to the CBS limit, using 600 eV as the lowest value and increasing the cut-off in steps of 100 eV up to 1300 or 1400 eV for methane. Moreover, for each cut-off, we obtain the energies for different cell sizes starting from 7 Å and increasing in steps of 1 Å to enable extrapolation to the infinite cell volume. Since MP2 memory requirements grow quickly with increasing basis-set or simulation cell size, we were only able to use simulation cells up to 12 Å with an orbital cut-off of 1000 or 1100 eV. Smaller cells were used for higher cut-offs due to memory limits. We find that increasing the orbital cut-off by 100 eV reduces the computationally tractable cell-size by 1 Å. The extrapolation to the infinite cell volume can be done in several ways. It's important to note that for larger cut-offs (above 1200 eV) we have less datapoints available, limiting the accuracy of the fit. For smaller cut-offs (600 to 900 eV), the data contain numerical noise reducing the accuracy of the result as well. After some testing we used to following strategy: First, we fit the data obtained for the cut-off energy of 1000 eV in cells sized between 8 and 12 Å using a function E(x) = E ∞ + Cx -6 We now discuss the evaluation of MP2 energy for solids which is the most computationally demanding part of the calculations within PBC. The MP2 energy can be divided into two contributions: the direct and exchange MP2, dMP2 and xMP2, respectively. It is possible to evaluate the first efficiently using the RPA algorithm which scales linearly with the number of k-points N k The convergence of the dMP2 energy with the number of k-points for ammonia for three different basis sets is shown in Figure In practice, we obtain the ∆ correction with as high cut-off as possible and for as many k-points as tractable. The cut-offs and k-point sets for which we performed the largest xMP2 and dMP2 calculations are summarized in Table The values of exponent b suggest that the next order error, decaying as cut , governs the convergence of the binding energy, as for some systems studied in Ref. The final values obtained with b = 2.5 are in Tab. 4 together with the binding energies found for a fixed orbital cut-off of 1300 eV. One can see that the extrapolation procedure is necessary for carbon dioxide and methanol if one wants to reach a precision of 0.1 kJ/mol or better. We estimate that the binding energies have overall uncertainties of around 0.1 kJ/mol, this value does not include the error of the PAW approximation. The main sources are extrapolation of energy of isolated molecule to the infinite cell limit, errors stemming from the correction scheme for solids and errors of the basis-set extrapolation for the binding energy. The two-body energies are the dominant contribution to the MBE of the binding energy. For Hartree-Fock one observes Pauli repulsion for short distances and electrostatic interactions for all distances. The MP2 correlation falls off as r -6 with the distance r between the molecules which leads to a r -3 decay in solid. To reach high precision of the two-body energy the long-range contributions need to be accounted for. To accomplish this, we include all contributions from up to sixth shell. Moreover, the basis-set incompleteness errors need to be reduced as well, which is an issue mainly for MP2. We start the discussion with results obtained for methane which is the simplest molecule from our set. Methane has negligible long-range electrostatic contributions and its HF two-body term is thus dominated by Pauli repulsion. In fact, the twelve nearest molecules with intermolecular distance of around 4.2 Å from the reference molecule contribute around 99% of the HF two-body energy. The basis-set convergence is fast and improved by using the CABS corrections. For example, while the difference of the HF two-body energies is around 0.04 kJ/mol between the AVTZ and AV5Z basis sets, it's reduced down to 0.01 kJ/mol when the CABS corrections are added. We use the HF(CABS) energies obtained with the AV5Z basis set from all the molecules up to sixth shell to obtain the final two-body energy E 2b HF = 5.265 ± 0.002 kJ/mol. The uncertainty was estimated based on the difference between the data obtained with different basis sets and the convergence of the energy on the distance cut-off. We observed one potential issue when evaluating the HF(CABS) energies of methane. For the AVDZ basis set, the smallest basis-set used, the CABS corrections critically depend on the fitting basis set. The long-range contributions do not go to zero when a double-ζ fitting basis-sets are used. This issue is reduced when a larger fitting basis sets are used, as shown in Figure We calculate our final value for MP2 two-body energy of methane crystal by taking the MP2-F12 energy extrapolated using the AVQZ and AV5Z data and adding the correction to infinite r cut . The final value is then -15.254 ± 0.005 kJ/mol where we the estimated uncertainty is based on errors of extrapolation to the CBS limit and to infinite r cut . We now turn to the evaluation of the HF energy for carbon dioxide, ammonia, and methanol. For these systems the electrostatic interactions are important and the energies do not converge as quickly with the cut-off distance as for methane. In fact, the energy as a function of the cut-off distance oscillates as shown for methanol in Figure While the summation over unit cells improves the convergence, for numerical analysis it's beneficial to simplify the summation further. To this end, we separate the dimers according to the shell of the second molecule and sum all contributions within each shell. The data show a fast convergence with the index of the shell, see Table The long-range contributions are needed to reach high precision but their large number leads to increased computational effort when large basis sets are used. One would therefore hope that for large distances a small basis set (such as AVDZ or AVTZ) would be sufficient to obtain the shell contributions with an error well below 0.01 kJ/mol so that the use of a large basis set could be avoided. However, it turns out that the contributions of more distant shells have actually larger errors when larger basis sets (AVQZ or AV5Z) are used than with the small basis sets. This is illustrated by the shell contributions obtained for carbon dioxide in Table As expected, the largest two-body contributions come from the zeroth and first shell, that is from molecules either in contact with the reference molecule or in a close distance. For all three crystals the molecules in the second shell, in which the molecules are at least 8 Å away from the reference molecule, still have a significant contribution to the binding: The MP2 two-body energies are -0.35, -0.46, and -0.58 kJ/mol for ammonia, carbon dioxide, and methanol, respectively. For higher shells, the contributions have a similar magnitude for the three systems and sum to approximately -0.1 kJ/mol. We now turn to the basis-set dependence of the MP2 energies as a function of distance. For simplicity, we compare the energies obtained for different shells. As with HF, we want to see whether smaller basis-sets are sufficient to reproduce the values obtained with large basis sets and for which shells this happens. We use ammonia as an example and show the errors of AVDZ and AVTZ basis sets for different shells in Table The errors in the MP2 two-body terms can be reduced by extrapolation. In the case of canonical MP2, the error is reduced to around 0.2 kJ/mol when the AVDZ and AVTZ values are used. The result of extrapolation using the AVDZ and AVTZ data is not completely satisfactory, in agreement with observations in the literature Finally, the numerical errors in the HF two-body contributions of higher shells also affect the subsequent MP2 energies. For example, the sixth shell contribution of carbon dioxide becomes positive in the AV5Z basis set. The error is, however, below 0.01 kJ/mol and thus barely noticeable. In any case, we use the large basis set results only from shells with small indices and use AVQZ or AVTZ results for the distant dimers. Our final values are summarized in Table The three-body contributions can be sizable and the number of trimers required to reach convergence can be also high It was previously shown that the three-body terms are less sensitive to the choice of the basis set compared with the two-body energies The convergence of the HF three-body energy with the cut-off distance is fast only for methane. Here a distance cut-off of 18 Å is sufficient to essentially converge the three-body energy to a value of -0.199 kJ/mol. Adding contributions above this cut-off only varies the energy by around ±0.003 kJ/mol. The MP2 energy converges as r -4 cut , in agreement with the expected behaviour. However, there is little need to perform extrapolation. The MP2 energy obtained for a cut-off distance 20 Å is within 0.01 kJ/mol of the extrapolated value. We note that the F12 corrections show some noise which depends on the basis-set size. However, the noise is only few thousandths of kJ/mol for the small AVDZ basis set (with triple-ζ fitting basis sets in F12). The stronger electrostatic interactions present in the other systems lead to less systematic convergence, similar to the situation observed for dimers. And as with dimers, the convergence can be improved when the summation is reordered. When a trimer contribution E int 0,i,j is added for some r cut , we also include contributions of trimers E int 0,i,k , where the molecules k share the unit cell with the molecule j. In standard summation, the E int 0,i,k contributions would be included at higher cut-off distances. We observe improved convergence not only for methanol and ammonia, but also for carbon dioxide and both for HF and MP2. We demonstrate the improved convergence of three-body HF(CABS) and MP2-F12 energies for ammonia in Figure We were able to obtain the three-body energies in the AVTZ basis set up to a cut-off distance of 40 Å for methanol, 46 Å for ammonia, and 45 Å for carbon dioxide using the modified summation. Note that the energies contain also contributions from some trimers with higher total intermolecular distance due to the use of the modified summation. We estimate the three-body energy by its average value over the last 5 Å. We estimate the uncertainty as one half of the difference of the largest and smallest value of the three-body energy on the last 10 Å. We list the HF three-body energies and their uncertainties in Table The MP2 energies show a fast convergence, averages taken over intervals of 5 Å are essentially converged to within few hundredths of kJ/mol when the lower limit is at least 15 Å. However, to converge the uncertainty or spread of the values to a similar range requires a cut-off of around 30 Å. Importantly, the MP2 data of carbon dioxide and ammonia start to show effect of numerical noise above a cut-off of 30 Å. We therefore use the average from interval between 25 and 30 Å as the final value. The values of methanol do not exhibit such behaviour and we use all the values up to r cut = 40 Å. Overall, we find that all the HF contributions are attractive and all MP2 three-body . HF(CABS) and MP2-F12 three-body energies of ammonia as a function of the total intermolecular cut-off distance using the standard cut-off ("dist" data, red and black line) and using the summation where all possible trimers sharing the first two molecules are added at the same time ("cell" data, green and blue line). energies are repulsive. All the three-body energies are below 1 kJ/mol, apart from the HF value for methanol which is almost as large as the two-body term. This is due to strengthening of hydrogen bonds in trimers. The four-body terms are smaller compared to the three-body contributions yet they can't be completely neglected We again evaluate the four-body terms using the cell summation. Here all tetramers sharing the first three monomers and with the last monomer in the same unit cell are added to the energy at the same r cut . The cut-off distance at which is the contribution added is given by the shortest total intermolecular distance of all such fragments. We were able to evaluate the four-body contributions using a cut-off distance of 40 Å for methane, ammonia, and methanol and 45 Å for carbon dioxide. These cut-offs required around 10 000 individual four-body terms. For the estimates of HF energies we take the average of HF energies on the last 5 Å, the uncertainty is again given by the spread of the values. The final HF values and their uncertainties due to cut-off are summarized in Table Interestingly, while the four-body contributions are smaller than the three-body energies, the uncertainties do not decrease proportionally, apart from ammonia. While increasing the cut-off further could reduce the uncertainties, the values are close to the limits given by the numerical precision. For example, we see that increasing the cut-off for methane deteriorates the precision of the result and we use only data up to a distance of 30 Å. Figure One can also see in Figure Even with the large relative uncertainties in the MP2 four-body terms, they represent only a fraction of per cent of the total MP2 binding energy. This is not surprising as MP2 accounts only for two electron excitations. For this reason we expect the MP2 five-and higher-body interactions to be negligible. We collected the final HF and MP2 binding energies obtained using MBE and within PBC in Table Considering the HF binding energy, the PBC approach is superior to MBE for precise calculations. The main reason is the simplicity of setting-up the calculations and the fact that polarization is treated up to infinite order within PBC. In contrast, MBE requires the evaluation of a large number of fragments and the non-additive terms converge slowly. The reordered summation that we used improves the convergence as it effectively accounts for interaction with the whole unit cell at once and the electrostatic moments of unit cells are typically smaller than the moments of the monomers. The interaction or non-additive energy is subsequently smaller and the oscillations observed for the binding energy as a function of the cut-off distance are reduced as well. The main contributions to the non-additive terms in HF likely come from polarization and can be accounted for by polarizable force-fields We found that the main caveat in the HF calculations within PBC is the Coulomb singularity in the exchange term Turning now to MP2 energies, we again find an excellent agreement between the MBE and PBC values with the differences being only a fraction of percent (see Table Another issue with the MP2 calculations within PBC is the need to perform several extrapolations. Specifically, the extrapolation to infinite volume for the isolated molecule and the extrapolation with the basis-set size were problematic. However, there is one subtle positive point about the PBC calculations based on plane-waves. Unlike the gaussian basis sets which are defined for a specific small set of cardinal numbers, the size of the plane-wave basis-set can be chosen at will. For example, we found that the dependence of the binding energy on the basis-set is noisy for methane and carbon dioxide. In such cases, one can compute additional points between the upper and lower limits to try to improve the quality of the fit. The MBE calculations require more human time to set-up the computer scripts compared to PBC. However, once the set-up is automated the small size and embarrassing parallelizability of the calculations become benefits. The MP2 energy converges quickly with the order of MBE and the cutoff distance, even though the correlations are considered "long-range". Compared to the PBC results, the uncertainties are smaller for MBE-based MP2, apart from methanol. Due to these reasons, the MBE scheme is preferable for MP2. One possible issue are the numerical errors which can reach similar magnitude as the data The use of explicit correlation (F12) for MP2 was one of the main benefits of the MBE calculations. This avoids the need to perform extrapolations which is a substantial simplification, especially for the user. Interestingly, the F12 was the most important for short-range dimers, canonical MP2 was sufficient for long-distance dimers and nonadditive terms. One can expect that the F12 scheme will offer similar simplifications of the computational workflow also within PBC We now compare our results to other MP2 data in the literature. We find a very good agreement with the binding energies of carbon dioxide obtained using periodic LMP2 Finally, we compare our MP2 values to data obtained with other correlated methods. Specifically to binding energies obtained using RPA with GW singles corrections Table We presented a detailed evaluation of HF and MP2 binding energies of four molecular solids within periodic boundary conditions and using many-body expansion. We tried to obtain the contributions with high precision to understand the significant sources of errors. The values obtained with the two approaches agree well even though some of them have higher uncertainties. Within PBC, the use of the Coulomb cut-off technique was crucial to speed up the convergence of both HF and MP2 energies with respect to volume and k-points. Otherwise the computational and memory requirements are currently limiting, especially for MP2. The convergence of MBE with real-space cut-off deteriorated with increasing importance of long-range electrostatic interactions, as expected. We reduced this issue by reordering the summation, adding some terms that would otherwise contribute at higher cut-offs. Numerical noise appeared already for two-body terms, especially for large basis sets. This should make one cautious when fitting force-fields on energies obtained for large distances. Finally, it's simpler to evaluate the HF energy within PBC while the situation is less clear cut for MP2. Currently, the combination of lower level energies obtained for the whole system with MBE corrections seems to be the most efficient approach for obtaining binding energies for post-HF methods. This is supported by examples in the literature using it both for solids and finite clusters 