A superconductor is stable if it does not quench. Quench is a short-time physics problem. For its deeper understanding of, and how to avoid quench, the physics behind stability has to be analysed. A previously suggested dynamic relaxation model is re-considered and applied to YBaCuO 123 and BSCCO 2223 high-temperature, thin film superconductors. Parallel to this investigation, an unconventional approach using an electrical resistance network (a cell model) is applied to introduce a method how to estimate the extent by which, in resistance measurements, exact determination of critical temperature of superconductors is possible. This resistive cell model, when considering its numerical convergence behaviour, in a side result may provide an alternative explanation of (at least a contribution to) bending of resistivity vs. temperature curves, and perhaps also an alternative to standard explanations of the thermal fluctuations impact on these curves. The dynamic relaxation and the resistance models provide a parenthesis that correlates, in terms of the Ginzburg-Landau order parameter, (i) solution of superconductor stability problem (the main objective of this paper), with tentative explanation of (ii) bending of the resistivity curves near critical temperature and (iii) with predictions from thermal fluctuations. Superconductor stability A superconductor is stable if it does not quench. Quench can be avoided by application of stability models to design, manufacture, handling and operation of superconductors. Traditional stability models are described in Quench is a short-time physics problem. As extension of standard stability calculations, numerical methods have been suggested by the present author But, and this is the main subject of this paper, superconductor stability against quench, with numerical simulations, still is not at its end. A new holistic, multi-physics approach is needed to treat the stability problem adequately. It requests integration of the relaxation problem into the stability analysis. A recently suggested "microscopic stability model" Stability analysis needs taking into account relaxation of the superconductor after disturbances. The property "microscopic" means that calculation of relaxation time of the electron system, after a disturbance, is performed by step by step particle-particle selections (single electrons as candidates for pair re-organisation). In the present paper, the model is integrated into (is a correction to) the proper stability calculations that as previously are performed numerically to yield temperature vs. time excursion; these are provided by extensive Finite Element (FE) simulations. From the FE results, the relaxation model yields corresponding, final equilibrium temperatures (the temperature of the state when relaxation is completed). The question is after which experimental or simulation time relaxation will be accomplished. As a general rule, thermal equilibrium is obtained in a superconductor substance when it fulfils the Meissner effect (a state that is independent of the history, i. e. regardless whether it is obtained under field or zero field cooling conditions). This is accounted for in the numerical calculations in each of the very large number of single FE elements. Parallel to this investigation, an unconventional approach using an electrical resistance network (a cell model) is applied to introduce a method how to estimate the extent by which, in resistance measurements, exact determination of critical temperature of superconductors is possible. When the stability model is integrated into the cell model, it suggests, as a side result, postulation of a non-local, transition boundary layer, expressed as a temperature uncertainty, θT ρ , around critical temperature. Within θT ρ , the resistivity curve, under heat-up, continuously approaches the normal conduction value. Curved resistivity vs. temperature, instead of a sharp jump, is frequently observed in experiments. As another side result, this study may also, though weakly, contribute an alternative to predictions of the thermal fluctuations problem. More importantly, the transition boundary layer, θT ρ , questions existence of a sharp, uniquely defined critical temperature but allows a sharp estimate of its uncertainty when it is obtained from resistance measurements. The dynamic relaxation model is a parenthesis that correlates, in terms of the Ginzburg-Landau order parameter, the solution of superconductor stability problem (the main objective of this paper) with side results of this study (a tentative explanation of bending of the resistivity curves near critical temperature and an alternative to standard assumptions of thermal fluctuations). The literature reports magnetic relaxation measurements to determine pinning potentials, like in Nb 3 Sn, in the BSCCO family and in MgB 2 /Fe superconductors. In contrast to these studies, focus of the stability model We do not address statistical electron pair decay and recombination in dynamical equilibrium. These relaxations, at any temperature 0 ≤ T < T Crit , exist without disturbances. Instead, the paper is focused on electron pair decay and re-condensation, after temporal, local disturbances, of the decay products to electron pairs. A second question is whether relaxation rates after disturbances, possibly under thermal run-away, are large enough to re-organize superconductor stability to obtain a new thermodynamic equilibrium, as the sole state by which zero-loss current transport is possible. Superconductor stability against quench thus is an aspect of the relaxation problem. Analysis of relaxation requests calculation of relaxation time and relaxation rates. Critical current density after a disturbance neither is uniform in the conductor cross section nor is it constant in time, compare Excitations (thermal, magnetic, or simply from transport current exceeding critical current density, the flux flow state) disturb dynamic equilibrium between (i) decay of electron pairs and (ii) single electron (and quasi-particle) recombination rates. In the equilibrium state, both decay and recombination rates are equal. In a vivid description, the meaning of quasi-particles is explained by R. D. Mattuck (see Appendix, after Eq. 11). In the literature, relaxation of the superconductor electron system from an excited state to a new dynamic equilibrium, is expected to follow an exponential decay law, exp(-t/τ), of the density, c(x,t), of excited electron states, by recombination to electron pairs. The relaxation time, τ, usually is considered as constant. But relaxation cannot be completed instantaneously. It is more realistic to calculate relaxation time as a sensitively time-dependent quantity, τ = τ[T(t)], see later. This step has been realized in the relaxation model by a multi-physics approach using analogies between relaxation in superconductors with re-organisation processes in nuclear and multiparticle physics. The question is not whether the decay products might be correlated or uncorrelated (in the uncorrelated case they might not find partners in the strict BSC sense: no electron with momentum -k' and spin down, no electron with momentum -k'' and spin up might be available In analogy to Sects. 2 to 5 of Because of propagation of the thermal wave initiated by a disturbance, decay in space means that the increased concentration, c(x',t 1 > t 0 ), resulting from a disturbance occurring at any arbitrary position, x', of excited states, is distributed by a transport process to positions x ≠ x'. A transport mechanism that particularly simply can be described is diffusion, but it has to be shown that diffusion, while it is a simply described transport mechanism, is the realistic assumption, see later Decay in time means that the disturbed, total wave function, ψ(x,t > t 0 ), that describes all electron states and decay products, returns to its equilibrium shape by recombination processes at al co-ordinates, x. The steps "decay in space" and" decay in time" in Eq. ( The first term of this equation has been shown to be small against the second. Contributions to relaxation time from both items have to be summed up to lifetime, τ = t Eq , of the total disturbed system until dynamic equilibrium of the total electron state is accomplished; time t Eq (T) thus is the time interval that the system, at all co-ordinates, x, needs to arrive at the new equilibrium, at the same temperature, T', that the system attains under a disturbance above the smaller T of the preceding step. Calculation of total lifetime, τ, has to strictly follow selection rules, using "Coefficients of fractional parentage" (cfps), a concept applied in atomic and nuclear physics, the handling of which has to obey the Pauli exclusion principle. Because of the Pauli principle, calculation of, τ, has to proceed in a stepwise manner, with calculation of the cfps in each step, at each temperature, T' (a "sequential model"). Calculation of τ, accordingly proceeds in a series of temperature steps the individual values of which are provided as results from the FE calculations of temperature excursions. Calculation of τ is the more complex the larger the temperature and, as a consequence, the larger the number of decayed electron pairs. Their number and, accordingly, the number of calculations steps, depends on the density of electrons at given temperature. The number of electron pairs that may result from recombination of single electrons to pairs is given by the Ginzburg-Landau order parameter. In their theory of phase transitions, Ginzburg and Landau postulated existence of an order parameter, Ψ, that in an expansion of the free energy density, within the active part of the electrons, determines the number of electron pairs available for zero-loss current transport. (for explanation of the functions a(T) and b(T) in Eq. (2a), see standard volumes on superconductivity, e. g. In its original formulation, Ψ was assumed as an unspecified physical quantity (a complex number) that characterizes the thermodynamic state of the superconductor, The square │Ψ│ 2 is identified as the density of electron pairs. In the present paper, we consider the ratio of the density of electron pairs, n S , to characterize the state of the superconductor, at temperature T < T Crit , in relation to its value at T = 0. Apart from the constant n S (T=0), f S in Eq. (2c) equals│Ψ│ 2 . The f S fulfil, like in the original formulation of the order parameter, the conditions in Eq. (2b). In the following, the ratio f S = n S (T)/n S (T=0) therefore is assigned "the order parameter" (it is a direct approach to the state, Ψ, of the superconductor by the rather simple ratio f S , Eq. 2c). Complications thus do not arise when relaxation time, τ, has to be calculated. This is the proper subject of Relaxation does not mean recombination of a strictly limited number of single electrons (the decay products from a disturbance) to electron pairs but re-organisation of the total electron body, i. e. of all electrons as far as they are "available". Available means: The percentage of electrons, the active ("busy") part, ξ, of the total electron body, that thermally can be excited to states located in small energy intervals above E F + ΔE and below E F -ΔE and that contribute by (i) electron pairs, in dynamic equilibrium with (ii) single electrons to thermal and electrical transport and also constitutes the electron contribution to total specific heat (and is responsible for the Meissner effect). In the literature, the fraction, ξ, is indicated, for low-T C and high-T C superconductors, as roughly 0.1 and 10 per cent of the total electron body, respectively. It is not clear the ξ = 10 per cent contribution in high temperature superconductors might be very precise, rather it is just a rough estimate. Using ΔE = 60 meV at T = 0, with the classical, BCS T-dependence of ΔE and with 2 ΔE(T = 0) = 3.52 k B T Crit and k B the Boltzmann constant, according to In view of these uncertainties, we can only perform a sensitivity analysis showing the impact by which the ratio, ξ, indicating the active part in relation to the total electron body, is reflected by the equilibrium temperature excursions (see later, Figure Contrary to the stepwise, cfp-organized procedure This expression neglects the dynamic aspects of the relaxation process. It does not explicitly integrate the step-wise sequence of a large number of statistical, single electron or quasi-particle generation and recombination processes. Instead, Eq. ( A correct calculation of the re-organisation of decay products to electron pairs has to include, for each electron, n, that "looks" for (selects) its partner, n', to form a pair, the calculation of its own cfps from the Each of the steps (j), (jj), has to observe the Pauli selection rule. Since it implicitly assumes simultaneous re-organisation of the decay products, the concept suggested in Fortunately, both the direct (stepwise, microscopic) method Relaxation rates in both concepts Relaxation time, as a consequence of decreasing relaxation rate, as is shown in This conclusion contradicts Buckel and Kleiner Another potentially alternative explanation is suggested in the papers by Gray et al. Contrary to the situation described in The model The conclusion from ). There we have: "The word superconductor is used only to mean a material with a definite phase transition and critical temperature." (correction by the present author: "definite", here written in Italics, probably means "completed"). But critical temperature is a dynamic, equilibrium electron state unto which a series of non-equilibrium states may converge when no more disturbances, besides statistical equilibrium fluctuations between decay of electron pairs and re-condensation of decay products to pairs, have to be compensated. Another item to be explained is determination the spatial structure of electron pairs in a superconductor volume. It is hardly correct to assume, as has been made in In the present paper, electron pairs are understood as correlations, in a correlated Fermi system a statistical concept, they are not solid particles that would densely occupy a superconductor volume. Complications (like penetration of magnetic field lines, mentioned in A more attractive explanation of the spatial structure of electron pairs, directly from BCS-theory, is provided in As mentioned, electron pairs cannot be regarded as minute, materials entities (a solid, coherent particle of charge 2e). Instead, they are correlations between electrons j and k, with the j and k continuously exchanged (replaced by other electrons j' and k' that randomly, but under observation of quantum-mechanical selection rules, are identified from a very large number (a statistically filled repository within the active electron body), of single electrons or quasi-particles. The selection and recombination processes, replacements of j and k by j' and k', as simulated in Yet the explanation In dynamic equilibrium, the porosity separates the number of electron pairs from the number of single electron or quasi-particle states (strictly speaking, their densities). Another problem arises with respect to current across a superconductor/normal conductor interface: Can it be described always as a "transport process"? Which conditions get electrical current or heat flow a "transport" process? This is not very trivial, but the discussion is postponed to the Appendix where some general aspects of transport processes (electrical and, as a parallel, multi-component, heat transfer processes) are discussed. The literature reports a great number of electrical resistivity, ρ El (T), or of conductivity, σ El (T), measurements that yield curves with remarkable deviations from the expected, sharp increase of ρ El (T) or of decrease of σ El (T) at T Crit . This is schematically illustrated in Figure We make an attempt to explain, by a two-component, resistive cell model, the observed rounding of the transition curves by a correlation with variations of the superconductor order parameter (here in the approximation suggested in Glover III The cell model described below does not rely on fluctuations of superconductivity (in The cell model instead relies on calculation of an effective resistivity or conductivity of two phases co-existing in parallel, not separated in space, in a common superconductor material. The model considers a sole (electron) body that according to its temperature separates into two thermodynamic, different phases, not into different materials and accordingly is not identical to e. g. two-liquid models. Two-fluid models are well known in standard superfluidity and superconductivity literature, in classical fluid dynamics and in nuclear physics where a liquid-drop model (the nucleus imagined as an incompressible liquid) serves for calculation of nuclear binding energy. In contrast to The two-phase model in the following applies a resistance network. Description of the effective resistivity of this network is given in terms of a (pseudo-) porosity. This has to be defined clearly. The porosity is solely based on the order parameter of the superconductor electron system and its temperature dependency. It separates the density of single electrons and quasi-particles from the density of electron pairs. The Russell cell model Network and cell model will be applied first to the region T < T Crit . A tentative, but well-explained extension to T > T Crit will be made in Sects. Let k Core denote, in a traditional application of this model, the thermal conductivity of spherical "inclusions" completely embedded in a continuum (a matrix or "shell"). In a thermal super-insulation, for example, this is the vacuum, or a gas of at least a very low residual pressure. In a continuous thermal super-insulation, the inclusions (the "core") in the evacuated space are minute, solid particles (powders or fibres; we do not consider evacuated, highly reflecting multi-foils). The thermal conductivity (if it exists, see again the Appendix, or compare The procedure is applicable to any other continuum, not only to evacuated space filled with solid particles. If porosity, Π, is known, the effective, integral conductivity, k, according to the Russell cell model reads and applies to also resistivity when k is replaced by ρ = 1/k. In order to apply the Russell cell model, or any other traditional cell model, to also superconductors, the "inclusions" (the core) have to be interpreted as being composed of sets of electron pairs, and the "shell" is given by the overwhelming number of single electrons or quasi-particles, all of them as decay products arising from disturbances. To get application of Eq. ( With increasing temperature, the number of "inclusions" (sets of electron pairs) goes to zero at the phase transition; the porosity of the total, then normal conducting (NC) electron body accordingly approaches Π = 1. The electrical resistivity of this state, a finite value, ρ El,NC (T), is obtained from experiments. Electron pair, zero resistivity, ρ El,Core = ρ El,SC (T), cannot successfully be applied in Eq. ( The ratio 20 is not the real problem; instead, it is the "existence" of resistivity or conductivity components. This situation shall be explained by an analogy of this problem known from multi-component heat transfer. There, it is the existence of total thermal conductivity or thermal resistivity that is in question. In case any of several heat transfer components, like radiation, cannot be described as a conductivity (which may happen in thin, partly transparent films), it is not clear that total heat flow could be explained in terms of a total resistivity or conductivity, which means they are not given ("might not exist") as quantifiable expressions). See again the Appendix for more explanation. Predictions of the cell model may diverge at very small and very large values of the porosity (this is apparently a weak point of all cell models). Application of this model to superconductors thus might become critical when, under warm-up, the number of electron pairs near T Crit goes to zero when, as mentioned, the porosity approaches Π = 1. In the present case, the resistivity must converge to the (as assumed, very small) finite value ρ El,Core if Π → 0. If this is the case, the cell model is confirmed to be applicable to the present problem, at least in view of this condition. Formally, satisfaction of this and other single conditions can easily be checked (here, just by assuming Π = 0 in Eq. 3). A more complete, general check whether the procedure works correctly requests a set 1 to 7 conditions to be fulfilled, see the contribution [20], p. Deb 1, and literature cited therein, how to calculate conductivity of particle beds. When conductivity is translated into resistivity, and (for example, condition 2) ρ Bed = ρ El,eff → ρ El,Shell (T), for Π = 1, all these conditions (with the exception of No. 7 that does not apply), are satisfied by the procedure described in the present paper (an Excel sheet). But it is necessary, and has to be controlled, too, that also all elements of a numerically generated set of resistivity, ρ El (T), in dependence of temperature, not only a single value, converge to the limits given in conditions 1 to 6 of [20], compare Figure For Figure Porosity in the following has to be explained as a function of the ratios by which electrons, in their two conducting phases, contribute to total electrical conductivity. Contribution of the phases is solely related to temperature dependence of the ratio of particle (electron pair) density at temperatures T and T 0 (T 0 taken as a reference value). At different temperature, this ratio, f S (T) = n S (T)/n S (T 0 ), as mentioned approximates the Ginzburg-Landau order parameter (strictly speaking, its square), Using n S for density of electron pairs, and since n S depends strongly on temperature, the fraction 1 -f S needed for derivation of the (pseudo-) porosity cannot be constant, which means the pseudo-porosity, too, is a function of temperature, Π(T) = 1 -f S (T), and since temperature depends on time, T = T(t), under disturbances, also the porosity is a function of time during a disturbance. The number, N CP , of electron pairs in an arbitrarily, small volume, V SC , of the superconductor material then is given by The distance of two electrons forming an electron pair can be approximated roughly by the Pippard coherence length ξ (the range of the wave function for relative motion of the electron pair, Blatt A Cooper pair of size (correlation length) 10 2 to 10 3 nm, with atoms of size 10 -1 nm covers (10 3 ) 3 to (10 4 ) 3 electrons which means the correlation of each Cooper pair overlaps with "billions and billions of others, very different from a Bose gas" The number M of overlapping electron pairs cannot be constant but is a function of temperature, T. This follows from the temperature dependence of the coherence length in the dirty limit, see With increasing T, the length ζ(T) increases, which means, with ς ≈ l, the mean distance between two conduction-band electrons (about 0.1 nm), and ζ 0 the Pippard coherence length, about 100 to 1000 nm, the ratio ζ(T)/ς, and accordingly, M, becomes very large. Eq. ( In any case, within one electron pair, there is a very large number of other electrons that in turn correlate to electron pairs and overlap within this distance, as schematically indicated in Figures thus should amount to at least M = 10 6 to 10 But at T very close to T Crit , handling of the procedure collides with limitations set to the applicability of Fortran routines or of Excel sheets. When declaring real and integer variables as "Real*16", the smallest possible deviation that can be simulated, T -T Crit , is 10 -16 K. This sets a limit to the porosity obtainable from Eqs. (2) to (4). Accordingly, numerical sets of porosity, Π(T), and of resistivity, ρ El (T), are generated, the individuals of which, at T = T Crit -10 -16 K, converge to Π(T) = 1 and to the pure, normal conduction resistivity, ρ El (T) = ρ El,NC (T). As is to be expected, the more temperature approaches T Crit , the larger, trivially, is the contribution within the Russell model to ρ El (T) by the normal conducting phase, ρ El,NC (T). This means the temperature dependence of ρ El,NC (T), the resistivity of the normal conducting phase, too, increasingly determines the excursion with temperature of the total resistivity, ρ El (T). Can we extend the results from Figures The attempt in the following will be restricted to T Crit -2 K ≤ T ≤ T Crit + 2 K. This result shall be transferred to Sect. 4 to suggest a tentative (as will be shown, small) contribution for understanding of the thermal fluctuations problem (the full curves in Figure For this purpose, we divide the plane ρ El,SC vs. T in Figure From Figure The interval, δT ρ , results from solely these symmetry operations, it is not determined in experiments performed in each quadrant. Width of this interval depends on the sensitivity by which ρ El,SC (T) decays from ρ El,NC (T) when temperature is slightly reduced below T Crit . Values of the width are given in Sect. 5. An interesting question is whether the derivation of the interval δT ρ could be applied to also the extent of the proximity effect, but this needs separate investigations. While the behaviour of the calculated ρ El (T) in Figure First, a straight, vertical line, at exactly T = T Crit , could be observed only in case composition of the material is absolutely stoichiometric and perfectly in the clean limit (mean free path of electrons exceeding coherence length), in zero magnetic field and without weak-links. Nonstoichiometry and magnetic field influence presumably are most important sources of bending and its uncertainties. Trivially, derivation of the pseudo-porosity might be erroneous (or, frankly speaking, even the whole cell model might not be applicable at all to superconductors), but the observed convergence of the results speak in its favour. Also exact measurement of the curve ρ El (T) at temperature very close to T Crit is (potentially) extremely difficult, with possibly significant experimental errors. As another argument speaking in favour of deviations from the sharp increase of ρ El (T) much stronger than predicted in Figure Annett But in both cases This remark does not question Landau's theory of second order phase transitions in superconductors. But it is striking that, as an alternative explanation, the curvature of the resisitivity vs. T diagrams, simply might result from the T-dependence of the order parameter. Should this observation not be mentioned? In In any case, bending of ρ El,SC (T) from the sharp increase expected at T Crit and deviations of the calculated ρ El,SC (T) from the experimental curves, can at least qualitatively be explained by the resistance model with temperature-dependent order parameter; it is thus not a "phenomenon" (this sounds as if a situation physically cannot be understood). The results instead are in-line, though weakly, with expectations from thermal fluctuations. It therefore appears the observations made with ρ El (T) are simply, at least partially, the physical consequence of the strong temperature dependency of the order parameter (and the weak temperature dependence of the normal conduction resistivity). The boundary layer, δT ρ , is not a materials layer but, in the ρ El (T)- The non-local resistivity layer δT ρ is not associated with any solid boundary nor does it belong to a specific materials section. In the present picture, existence of δT ρ in the end results from the phase change that is quantified by the temperature dependency of the order parameter (its approximation in Eq. 2c) in a homogenous material the temperature of which is not uniform. It is thus within the temperature interval, δT ρ , in Figure Besides conclusions drawn from solely the relaxation model (from the results condensed in Figure A general problem arises if the superconductor cannot relax to thermodynamic equilibrium within reasonable experimental or computation (simulation) time. In reality, this is a problem of all standard (and up to now, also of the reported [4 -6] numerical), stability calculations. The basic question behind reads: Is superconductor stability against quench just a matter of conductor geometry (diameter of fibres, thickness of thin films, aspect ratios), resistance, thermal diffusivity, critical and transport current distribution etc? In short, is it reduced to solely engineering aspects like they are considered in standard stability calculations? How can we obtain deeper understanding of the physics behind? The "physics behind" is a problem of the dynamic behaviour of the total (emphasis is on "total") electron body and, after disturbances, its with local heat source, Q(x,t), resulting from a disturbance, at a simulated process time, t. In Eq. ( The problem is twofold, items (i) and (ii): simulations. This is not to be confused with numerical convergence. Equilibrium temperature, T(x,t Eq ), of the electron system with t Eq > t' (using the simulated process time, t'), with FE calculations presently can be obtained, in first approximation, when using a correction, a shift Δt(t'), that depends on simulation time, t'; the obtained T(x,t') has to be used to calculate Δt(t') and the result, in this approximation, has to be added to t'. The Δt(t') should, however, be obtained at the temperature of the electron system, but this temperature is presently not available from the FE results. We therefore have provisionally applied with T(x,t') the standard FE result. A solution of this problem might be found if Δt(t') is calculated iteratively; but this needs more investigations. In any case, T(x,t Eq ) by Eq. ( Each single relaxation step, of a series initialized at a temperature, T(x,t), requests for its completion a very small time interval, ∂t(t'), and all the ∂t(t') (a very large number) have to be summed up to the total Δt(t'). Values of Δt(t') have up to now been reported only for filaments It is not clear that the results for filaments obtained in The Δt(t') within the temperature region T(x,t) << T Crit are tiny, mostly below 10 -9 ms, but if a disturbance starts very close to T Crit , the shift becomes substantial, see later, Table For the present, thin film situation, to illustrate the extreme case resulting with the exponent n = 0. It is clear that numerical simulations delicately depend on input parameters, details of conductor geometry (very different thicknesses and aspect ratios of very different materials layers involved, an issue that Finite Element calculations do not like at all), and on convergence schemes. Yet the results provide exact and time-resolved energy balances, temperature, critical current and transport current distributions that cannot be obtained with traditional stability models. Each of the simulation times, t', has to be understood as indicating individual (initial) start points (local disturbances, here at the centroid, x) caused by local events (absorption of a heat pulse, flux flow losses or simply a local temperature increase resulting from a disturbance at another, arbitrary positions, x', within the whole conductor cross section). But the series t' and t Eq might be intermixed, which means the overall structure of T(x,t) would be lost, a value T(x,t'') might become smaller at a time t'' > t', which is impossible. This situation request more investigations. But with T(x,t Eq (x)] the local equilibrium temperature, resulting from a disturbance 1 occurring at a position x' that is overlaid onto the impact received from a disturbance 2 occurring at another position, x'', which means, after a different time shift, the totally resulting equilibrium temperature, given at the common t Eq that reflects the interfering t Eq,1 (x') and t Eq,2 (x''), with appropriate book-keeping in principle could be obtained provided a method can be found that does not rely on solutions of Fourier's differential equation in its original, basic form (calculation of temperature excursion in systems with existing temperature gradients). As a consequence, the sequence of T(x,t') in total, i. e. the whole set of curves, not only the centroid curves in Figures Since the Δt(t') are different for each T(x,t'), the whole set of equilibrium temperatures, T(x,t Eq ), for any position x, is distorted against T(x,t') which results in also distorted critical current density and distorted stability strictly the specific Δt(t') are taken to calculate t Eq (t') = t' + Δt(t') for the plot of T(x,t Eq ). From the relaxation time given by the term Δt(t') in Eq. ( The flat ellipse in Figure The curves in Figure As has been shown in In turn, without variations of T Crit , J Crit and B Crit, and if density of transport current is below critical current density (no flux flow losses), the temperature distributions would be flat and would not show any temperature run-away to catastrophic divergence. As before  For a clear understanding of how to avoid quench, the physics behind stability has to be analysed on a microscopic level.  Stability analysis and predictions of superconductor stability may be of limited value if they do not consider superconductor relaxation after disturbances.  Taking into account superconductor relaxation into stability calculations is mandatory if temperature of the electron system has already increased to values near critical temperature. This is shown for the thin film situation (the present paper) and confirms previous findings of the author reported for NbTi and for YBaCuO 123 filaments.  If superconductor temperature, T(x,t') approaches critical temperature very closely, distribution of the calculated equilibrium temperatures on the time axis presently may become chaotic: the t Eq cannot be ordered if there are several disturbances occurring in parallel, a situation that can be expected from e. g. local flux flow losses.  Superconductor order parameter is the parenthesis that holds together (i) solution of the stability problem (unique identification of the temperature excursion on time axis), and as side results, (ii) bending of the specific resistivity, (iii) presently to only some extent, the impact of the thermal fluctuations problem, both at temperature near T Crit . The order parameter thus is a very indicative quantity predicting the excursion with time of the superconductor under disturbances.  Curvature of the resistivity at temperature below and above T Crit suggests definition of a non-local, resistivity "transition boundary layer" that may exist without any solid interface but is distributed throughout the superconductor volume. it is expressed as a temperature uncertainty interval, δT ρ , around critical temperature. From the curves ρ El (T), gradients in the order of 0.1 to 1 (Ω m/K) can be extracted that allow to roughly estimate the uncertainty, at any position x, by which critical temperature can be determined from resistivity measurements of these materials.  From the same resistances model, critical temperature, if it is understood as a sharply, with zero tolerance defined physical (thermodynamic) quantity, then would be a fiction. But exactly this follows from (a) the microscopic stability model (by the strong divergence of relaxation time) and (b) from the finite, non-zero temperature interval δT ρ .  A still open question concerns how temperature of both electron system and, in parallel, the lattice, could be achieved from numerical simulations, in order to apply Eq. (  All conclusions presented in this paper result from properties of many-particle systems (as previously explained, an analogy to nuclear physics), thermodynamic considerations (temperature uniquely defined under solely thermal equilibrium) and from an analogue to standard, multi-component heat transfer principles (solid conduction plus radiation in thin films). Figure ). Strong deviations from the linear relationship would be expected only at T << T Crit . The extrapolated ρ El (T) serve for definition of a residual resistivity in the superconducting state if there were no electron pairs (like under very large magnetic field). In the cell model described in Subsect. 3.1 of the present paper, the resistivity ρ El,SC (T) = 0 (or near zero) is obtained if pseudo-porosity Π(T) << 1 or if we have the ideal case (no downbending, but the expected standard, sharp decrease of ρ El,SC (T) to finally zero at T < T Crit ). In both cases, the ideal value ρ El,SC (T) = 0 results solely from contribution of the electron pairs to conductivity in that all normal conducting components are short-switched. The following is a discussion of the question whether complex electrical or thermal transport processes can be described in terms of potential differences or temperature gradients, respectively. The readers if not very interested in details of, or parallels to, multi-component, conduction heat transfer, for clarification may go directly to [25, 26] (there with correspondingly calculated examples). Using the extrapolated ρ El (T) in Figure (ii) allow conductivity components to be calculated independent of each other, experimentally be separated and algebraically be added to a total conductivity? In heat transfer calculations, summation of conductive and radiative components to total heat flux q Total = q Cond + q Rad (Ws/m 2 ), beyond doubt is correct, clearly from phenomenological viewpoints. But it is, in general, not correct to simply add corresponding conductivity components, λ Cond , λ Rad (W/(m K), to a total, solid plus radiative conductivity, λ Total = λ Rad + λ Cond . This is a thermally "exotic" example of energy transport (but is realistic, because it can come up in thin films). The components might be coupled by the temperature profile in a sample, which means they would not be independent of each other or even would not exist at all (in the meaning of "existence" explained above). In this then not clear that a temperature gradient and thus a radiative conductivity would exist at all positions within a sample including its boundaries. In multi-component heat transfer, also a total conductivity therefore exists only (and total heat flux can be calculated from a temperature gradient taken over the total sample thickness) if a temperature gradient exists, everywhere within the sample, which means: if temperature profile, T(x), is differentiable in x, at all positions. By analogy, the simple, algebraic addition of electrical current components, I k , in Eq. ( The parallel to heat transfer is obvious. Total electrical current, I, could be calculated only if all components in Eq. ( While quasi-particles resemble real particles quite closely, "the real particle plus as cloud of agitated particles (virtual energy states), constitutes the quasi-particle (the cloud screens the real particle, which means a quasi-particle interacts only weakly with other quasi-particles." (this citation, set in quotation marks, is from R. D. Mattuck, Quasi-particles thus are not locally specified, materials bodies, they rather are correlations between real particles and excitations, like electron pairs are better described by correlations between single, real particles, each of elementary charge, e, not by materials bodies of charge 2e. The distance between electrons i and j of a pair is not uniquely defined, which means consideration an electron pair as a solid particle of charge 2e is doubtful. The question thus remains whether it is possible to explain a current without recourse to potential differences and "resistances"? If so, are all the components in Eq. (6-9) of In multi-component heat transfer, this is quite different since radiative conductivity is obtained as the result of a differential process: The optical thickness is extended to infinity, and the radiative conductivity converges to an expression based on just the wall temperature of a container that houses the non-transparent sample (interestingly not on internal sample temperatures). In Eq. ( But if the other components cannot be explained by resistances, can they really be separated from I q ? In summary, items 1 and 2: (1) Total, multi-component heat transfer (heat flow or heat flux) cannot be calculated from temperature gradients and conductivity or diffusivity values if any component of the energy equation cannot be written in terms of a conduction process, i. e. by a differential expression. (2) Total, multi-component current cannot be calculated from electrical potential gradients if any component of total current is not of Ohmic type. The cell model explained in this paper thus is applicable only in case there are no non-Ohmic contributions to total resistance and total current. temperature. Results are obtained using either the microstability (relaxation) model Figure Figure Figure Figure Figure In Figure The commercially available, Finite Element code used in the transient temperature field calculations 5 in the standard expression J Crit [T(x,t)] = [1 -T(x,t)/T Crit ] n , the temperature, e. g. T(x,t') = 89.239 K (at x = centroid coordinate of turn 96) is reached, as predicted by the Finite Element calculations, at Also at most of the other simulation times, t', the correction of the t' to the corresponding equilibrium values, t Eq , is tiny. But the situation may change strongly if temperature increases more closely to T Crit . Under the same disturbance, with the same exponent n, at the same position (increase of centroid temperature solely by conduction), we have at T(x,t') = 91.933 K obtained from the FE calculations a Δt(t') = 1.191 e-3 ms and t Eq = 4.201 ms (the open red circles in Figure