The purpose of this note is to establish two continuum theories for the bending and torsion of inextensible rods as Γ-limits of 3D atomistic models. In our derivation we study simultaneous limits of vanishing rod thickness h and interatomic distance ε. First, we set up a novel theory for ultrathin rods composed of finitely many atomic fibres (ε ∼ h), which incorporates surface energy and new discrete terms in the limiting functional. This can be thought of as a contribution to the mechanical modelling of nanowires. Second, we treat the case where ε h and recover a nonlinear rod model -the modern version of Kirchhoff's rod theory. Since the first boom in research on carbon nanotubes in the 1990s, we have been experiencing discoveries of a wide variety of 1D nanomaterials. These include nanowires, nanorods, nanopillars, and nanowhiskers As such thin structures only have tens of nanometres in diameter, they exhibit unusual deformation behaviour under external loads (e.g. great flexibility, anisotropy or surface effects). Despite the fast-paced progress, loading experiments remain challenging due to the need of specialized and highly precise measurement devices, so advances in mechanical modelling and computational studies of nanomaterials are still very desirable. Elastic theories for one-dimensional rods or beams witness a long history (see where y : (0, L) → R 3 is the deformation of the rod and d 2 : (0, L) → R 3 and d 3 : (0, L) → R 3 are the so-called directors, which form an orthonormal frame (∂ x 1 y,d 2 ,d 3 ) moving along x 1 . The scalars κ 2 = ∂ 2 x 1 y • d 2 and κ 3 = ∂ 2 x 1 y • d 3 are called curvatures and τ = ∂ x 1 d 2 • d 3 is the torsion. Young's modulus is denoted by E and torsional rigidity by J -the latter is calculated for the shape of the cross section S ⊂ R 2 of the rod. The second moments of area are I s = S x 2 s dx 2 dx 3 with s = 2 or s = 3. In For the purposes of identification of Young's modulus and Poisson's ratio, Kirchhoff's rod theory has already been applied to nanowires. In the present article, we treat continuum limits of discrete energies of the type where Λ ε k is an ε k -fine cubic crystalline lattice in the shape of a thin rod, y (k) its deformation and the matrix y (k) (x) describes the deformation of an atomic cube around the point x. Such cell energies W cell cover the case of nearest neighbour and next-to-nearest neighbour interactions and appeared previously e.g. in Section 2 sets up basic notation and introduces model assumptions that are common for the rest of this article. We also formulate a compactness theorem that complements theorems on Γ-convergence in the following sections. Having appeared in We seek a limiting energy functional E lim for the continuum model. To get a nontrivial limit with k → ∞, we multiply the energy E (k) by the volume element ε 3 k and divide it by the fourth power of the rod thickness h k , which is the energy scaling corresponding to bending and torsion without extending the rod, cf. Figure 1. To model an ultrathin rod composed of a small number of atomic fibres, we let the interatomic distance ε k → 0+ and keep h k /ε k fixed. This is the content of Section 3, which includes the Γ-convergence Theorem 3.1 -our main contribution. Remarkably, even though this new bending/torsion theory for ultrathin rods thus derived can be related to the findings in 2. When the numbers of atoms in the rod in the directions x 1 , x 2 , x 3 are large, we speak of a thin rod and study the simultaneous limit with ε k → 0+ and h k → 0+ in such a way that h k ε k → ∞. In this regime, which we investigate in Section 4, all discreteness fades away and we recover the continuum functional from In our forthcoming paper If S ⊂ R n , we write |S| for the n-dimensional Lebesgue measure of S. In the whole text, we reserve the letter C for a generic positive constant whose value may vary from line to line, but is independent of the quantities involved in a limit passage. We use standard notation for function spaces: namely the Lebesgue spaces and weak convergence (f k f ). Further, A •j denotes the j-th column vector of a matrix A ∈ R m×n ; R 3×3 skew stands for the space of all 3-by-3 skew-symmetric matrices; e i = Id •i , 1 ≤ i ≤ 3, are the standard basis vectors in R 3 , and |u| and |A| = Tr A A denote the Euclidean and Frobenius norms of u ∈ R n and A ∈ R m×n , respectively. All vectors, unless otherwise specified, are treated as column vectors. For an open set Ω ⊂ R n we write Ω ⊂⊂ Ω if Ω ⊂ Ω and Ω is compact. Finally, V ⊥ is the orthogonal complement of a subspace V in an inner product space X. Our starting point is an atomistic interaction model for an elastic rod. We consider a cubic atomic lattice Λ k , given by where 1 k is the interatomic spacing and L > 0 denotes the length of the rod. Its cross section is the polygonal set ∅ = S k ⊂ R 2 (possibly not simply connected) determining a cross-sectional lattice L k := S k ∩ Z 2 and for which there is a set is a fixed cross section that does not depend on k we will speak of an ultrathin rod. The rod's thickness is then comparable to the typical interatomic spacing. By contrast, in a thin rod the scaled cross section 1 k S k eventually exhausts a domain of diameter h, where 1 k h 1. We use the symbol Λ k for the lattice of midpoints of open cubes with sidelength 1/k and corners in Λ k . These set-ups may be described simultaneously by our fixing a positive null sequence (h k ) with h k ≥ 1/k that we choose as equal to 1/k in the ultrathin case and for which we suppose kh k → ∞ for merely thin rods. We then assume that there exists a fixed bounded Lipschitz domain S ⊂ R 2 such that the above S k is the unique largest (in terms of cardinality) connected set of the form (2.1) that is contained in kh k S. The lattice Λ k corresponds to an undeformed reference configuration that is subject to a static deformation y (k) : Λ k → R 3 , which stores elastic energy into the rod. As the energy originates from interactions of nearby atoms we introduce a rescaling to atomic units by passing to a rescaled lattice with unit distances between atoms. Points in this lattice are distinguished using the hat diacritic -here for k stand for the sets of all x = (x 1 , x2 , x3 ) such that the corresponding downscaled points x lie in the lattices Λ k , Λ k , respectively. We introduce eight direction vectors z 1 , . . . , z 8 : This allows us to collect into a matrix the information about the deformation of a unit cell Then the matrix Īd = (z is the discrete gradient of ŷ(k) = id. Note that a discrete gradient has the sum of columns equal to 0. There are two more important subsets of R 3×8 : It is desirable to have the deformations defined on a common domain Ω := (0, L) × S, independent of k, in order to handle their convergence. Given a positive null sequence (h k ) such that h k ≥ 1/k (and Furthermore, we introduce an interpolation of ỹ(k) so that it is also defined outside lattice points. simplices as in We thus obtain ỹ(k) : [0, L k ] × Sk → R 3 , where we have abbreviated for any face F of Q(x) with face centre x F . ∂x 3 , we proceed with an auxiliary result. Lemma 2.1. There are c, C > 0 such that for any k ∈ N, h k > 0 and lattice block Q( Proof. The statement is contained in [Sch09, Lemma 3.5]. We now construct an extension to 'ghost atoms' in a tubular neighbourhood of the rod whose rigidity is controlled by the original atom positions. For m ∈ N set We suppress m, which will be a fixed constant, from our notation. Lemma 2.2. There are extensions y (k) : Λ ext k → R 3 such that their interpolations ỹ(k) satisfy and 3 ) and apply the following extension procedure consecutively for i = 1, . . . , 8: Due to [Sch09, Lemma 3.1] and the property of lattice geodesics within L k , this distance will then be controlled by for some uniformly bounded R. We repeat this extension step 8m times. Remark 2.1. The construction implies that for ultrathin rods, the following local estimate holds: For any In the expression for total elastic energy, we group contributions from individual atomic cells (cf. Definition 2.1. We say that W : R 3×8 → [0, ∞) is a full cell energy function if the following assertions hold true: (E2) W attains its minimum (equal to 0) at and only at all rigid deformations, i.e. defor- (E3) W is everywhere Borel measurable and of class C 2 in a neighbourhood of SO(3) and the quadratic form associated with We say that W : R 3×8 → [0, ∞) is a partial cell energy function if it fulfils (E1) together with (E2') W equals zero for all rigid deformations, (E3') W is everywhere Borel measurable and of class C 2 in a neighbourhood of SO(3). Trivially, we see that W ≡ 0 is a partial cell energy function. To model surface energy, let T be the power set of {1, . . . , 8}. We classify the cells centred at Λ ,ext k = kΛ ,ext k by the set of corners they share with Λk , i.e. for the specific choice m = 1.) Also note that on the lateral boundary, i.e. for x1 . Our total elastic interaction energy reads where W cell is a full cell energy and W surf (t, •), W end (t, •) with t ∈ T are partial cell energy functions according to Definition 2.1. In order to avoid artificial contributions we assume that the values of W surf (t, y) and We remark that the terms involving W end for cells near the rod's endpoints vanish as k → ∞ for both ultrathin and thin rods. While for thin rods also the lateral boundary contributions vanish, this is no longer the case for ultrathin rods. Our set-up allows us to model extra-cross-sectional interactions of atoms which lie in different atomic cells but which are, in fact, their mutual neighbours due to the cross section's potentially jagged shape. We write Q cell and Q surf (t, •) for the quadratic forms generated by ∇ 2 W cell ( Īd) and ∇ 2 W surf (t, Īd), t ∈ T, respectively. Example 2.1. To explain the motivation behind W surf and W end , let us consider a simple mass-spring model with harmonic springs for a rod with its cross section determined by 2 )} (m := 1). The aim is to rewrite using W cell , W surf , and W end (K 1 > 0 and K 2 > 0 are constant stiffnesses). While in the bulk, we set , and W end in turn include surface terms, e.g. The auxiliary square Q (x e ) = x e + (-1 2 , 1 2 ) 2 centred at x e := ( 3 2 , 5 2 ) is adjacent to two physically relevant cross-sectional squares, so in particular, the atoms with x -coordinates (2, 2) and (1, 3), belonging to different 'real' atomic squares Q ( 1 2 , 3 2 ) and Q ( 3 2 , 3 2 ), can still interact -this interaction should be comprised in W surf (t k (x e ), •). Like this, E (k) is expressible by (2.4). After adding a suitable penalty term positive in a neighbourhood of O(3) Īd \ SO(3), such W cell , W surf , and W end fulfil all the assumptions for our results to apply. (2.5) Proof. See [Sch06, Lemma 3.2]; the claim is only restated in our notation. We provide a compactness theorem that complements our Γ-convergence results in the following sections and is also the first step towards their proofs. It is based on a now well-known result about geometric rigidity from We fix a null sequence (h k ) with Then, there exist a (not relabelled) subsequence (ỹ (k) ) and a sequence of piecewise constant mappings where R ∈ SO(3) a.e. and R(x ) that are independent of x 2 and x 3 . Moreover, we have and , (2.9) where u Note that in the ultrathin case one has h k = 1/k and so hence also to the same inequality with Ω ext k replaced by (- Except for the specific choice of the discontinuity set, these statements are thus proven in We remark that, for a suitable choice of translation vectors c k (which does not change the energy), ỹ(k) -c k → ỹ in H 1 (Ω; R 3 ). We now specialize to ultrathin rods for which the cross sectional lattice L k = L is assumed to be fixed. We set h k = 1/k and fix m = 1. Since also L ext k , L ,ext k , S k (which equals S without loss of generality) and S ext k are independent of k, we drop the subscript. In addition to ∇, we define several other difference operators, applicable to any f : whose interpretations are '2D-differences in the x 2 x 3 -plane' (divided by 1/k or not), '3Ddifferences' and 'averaged difference in the x 1 -direction', respectively. Note that the functions ∇2d k f (x 1 , •) and ∇2d f (x 1 , •) are piecewise constant on lattice squares of the form x +(-1 2 , 1 2 ) 2 , where x ∈ L , and ∇2d f (x) is independent of k. The functions ∇k f and ∆ 1 f are piecewise constant on lattice blocks that are centred in points of Λ Direct computation shows: and so, with all columns grouped together, (3.2) Recall that Ω = (0, L) × S. In order to specify an appropriate limit space we first note that in view of Theorem 2.4 and (2.5) it suffices to consider limiting configurations ỹ ∈ H 1 (Ω; R 3 ) and d 2 , d 3 ∈ L 2 (Ω; R 3 ) that do not depend on (x 2 , x 3 ). We will then simply write ỹ ∈ H 1 ((0, L); R 3 ) and d 2 , d 3 ∈ L 2 ((0, L); R 3 ). The following observation shows that the convergence in L 2 (Ω, R 3 ) to such ỹ and d 2 , d 3 is naturally described in terms of asymptotic atomic positions and independent of our interpolation scheme, cf. also Remark 3.3. For a sequence (y (k) ) ∞ k=1 of (extended) lattice deformations and ỹ We note here that for x ∈ L the map ỹ(k) (•, x ) is nothing but the piecewise affine interpolation Theorem 3.1. If k → ∞, the functionals kE (k) Γ-converge to the functional E ult defined below, in the following sense: (i) (liminf inequality) Let (y (k) ) ∞ k=1 be a sequence of (extended) lattice deformations such that their piecewise affine interpolations (ỹ (k) ) ∞ k=1 , defined in Section 2, converge to ỹ ∈ H 1 ((0, L); R 3 ) in L 2 (Ω; R 3 ). Let us also assume that there is a sequence of (extended) lattice deformations (y where R := (∂ x 1 ỹ|d 2 |d 3 ) and the class of admissible deformations is The relaxed quadratic form Q rel cell : R 3×3 skew → [0, +∞) is defined as Remark 3.1. In comparison with the rod theory in Remark 3.2. Let us comment on the existence of a minimizer in (3.3). Fix A ∈ R 3×3 skew and let for any x ∈ L ,ext , the function J is a positive semidefinite quadratic form. It thus attains a minimum and a minimizer (α, g) of J can be chosen in linear dependence on A, so Q rel cell is a quadratic form as well. Besides, since the components of Remark 3.3. One could also consider limiting configurations with an explicit dependence on x . Due to the discrete nature of L, however, only a subspace of H 1 (Ω; R 3 ) can be realized as limits of interpolated deformations ỹ(k) . That is, ỹ(k) can converge to ỹ in L 2 (Ω; R 3 ) if and only if ỹ is piecewise affine in x , more precisely, if for a. e. x 1 ∈ (0, L) and x ∈ L one has ỹ(x Similarly, limiting directors (d 2 , d 3 ) are restricted to be gradients with respect to x of such functions. By Theorem 2.4, (2.4) and (2.5) one still has Γ-convergence with such a class of limiting configurations if E ult is extended by the value +∞ outside of H 1 ((0, L); R 3 ) × L 2 ((0, L); R 3 ) × L 2 ((0, L); R 3 ). and Γ-convergence as well as compactness claims would still hold (see e.g. [Sch07, Corollary 3.4] or In this section, we prove Theorem 3.1(i). We may assume that kE (k) (y (k) ) ≤ C and so (2.6) holds true by (2.4) and (2.5). We set Ω ext = (0, L) × S ext . Let R (k) be as in Theorem 2.4. By (2.8) and in analogy with ), up to a subsequence. In our discrete setting we instead need to study The L 2 -boundedness of {G (k) } implies the boundedness of { Ḡ(k) } in L 2 (Ω ext ; R 3×8 ) by (2.3). Hence Ḡ(k) Ḡ for a subsequence, which we do not relabel. We state a proposition about the structure of Ḡ. where Proof. Formula (3.2) enables us to find the longitudinal and transversal contributions separately. 1. Longitudinal contributions. We consider the piecewise constant function and observe that for each This converges weakly to (A similar property is also used in [BS22, Proposition 4.6].) In view of [MM03, equation (3.10)], the first column of G reads for some G 1 ∈ L 2 ((0, L); R 3 ) and hence 2. Transversal contributions. Here the left 3 × 4 submatrix of some Ā ∈ R 3×8 is referred to as the left part of Ā, whereas the other 3 × 4 submatrix as the right part of Ā. First let us look at the left part . We define the auxiliary function and its two-dimensional discrete gradient is equal to ) and bounding the max S ext with a successive maximization over L ,ext and over the interpolation tetrahedra, we have Integrating over Ω ext k shows that α In particular, for any x ∈ L ,ext and i, j ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4} with |z i -z j | = 1 considering the triangle T = conv{x , x + (z i ) , x + (z j ) } ⊂ S ext we still have Our piecewise affine interpolation scheme and the definition of α is independent of x and piecewise constant in x 1 for x ∈ (0, L) × T . Therefore ∇ α left (x) does not depend on x ∈ T either and we may conclude that ∇2d α ) and so, since x and i were arbitrary, ∇2d (α and the restriction of α left to (0, L) × L ext is well defined. Similarly we find α right ∈ L 2 (Ω ext ; R 3 ), the weak limit of α It would be nice to express α right in terms of α left and R. We see that and so For the discrete gradient of the above expression, we have ∇2d α (3.5) From (2.9) and (2.6), we see that ) k∈N is bounded in L 2 and therefore has a subsequence weakly converging to, say, F . Moreover, convergence (2.7) gives Indeed, for x ∈ L ,ext and i, j ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4} with |z i -z j | = 1 we let T = ( k + 1 2k , x ) + conv{0, -1 2k e 1 , zi , zj }, = -1, 0, . . . , kL k , so that ỹ(k) is affine on every T . Also set T = T and let χ k be the characteristic function of T . Since ∇2d as k → ∞ by (2.8). Since x and i were arbitrary, (3.7) now follows from (2.7). Thus in (3.5), we combine (3.6) with (3.7) to obtain the limit 3. Finally we bring all contributions together: To finish the proof, we set α := (α left + α right )/2 (restricted to (0, L) × L ext ), and use (3.8) as well as With the help of Proposition 3.2, the proof of Theorem 3.1(i) can now be completed following is the quadratic form generated by ∇ 2 W tot (x , Īd). Using (2.4), the non-negativity of W end and the frame-indifference of W tot , we can write ] and note that χ k → 1 boundedly in measure on Ω ext . As both W tot (x , •) and ∇W tot (x , •) vanish at Īd, a Taylor expansion yields where ω(t) = o(t 2 ), t → 0. We deduce that if the second term in (3.10) goes to zero. But that follows from the boundedness of Ḡ(k) in L 2 (Ω ext ; R 3×8 ) and the cut-off by χ k forcing L ∞ -convergence of the fraction involving ω. We substitute in Q tot the representation of Ḡ. By Proposition 3.2, The definition of Q rel cell lets us eliminate G 1 , which only depends on x 1 , and conclude that lim inf Remark 3.5. Although in continuum theories with homogeneous materials, it can be proved that (an analogue of) the minimizing x 1 -stretch g in (3.3) is 0 Proof of Theorem 3.1(ii). Thanks to the Γ-liminf inequality, it is enough to show lim sup R 3 ) are arbitrary for the time being. We interpolate and extend the sequence ỹ(k) to a piecewise affine mapping on Ω ext k as in Section 2.3 (by now applying Lemma 2.2 to S ext k instead of S k and then restricting ỹ(k) to Ω ext k , as no new external atomic layers are needed) so that ess sup The rescaled discrete gradient of ỹ(k) is where β denotes the usual piecewise affine interpolation of As in (3.9), frame-indifference for the energy defined in (2.4) yields where We would like to find the limits of F (k) and 1 k F (k) so that we can let k → ∞ in (3.12). Fix i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , 8}. For x ∈ S ext we denote by x an element of L ,ext that is closest to x. Taylor expanding the functions d 2 , d 3 , q ∈ C 2 ([0, L]; R 3 ) about x1 we deduce that Similarly, we get by the C 3 -regularity of ỹ uniformly in x ∈ Ω ext . Finally, the function β, being uniformly continuous, satisfies for any i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , 8} and so We first note that by W end (t, •) ≤ Cdist 2 (•, SO(3)), (3.13) and (3.11), so that this term can be neglected in what follows. Now Taylor's approximation in (3.12) gives Next we turn to the case that (ỹ, d 2 , d 3 ) ∈ A, but R = (∂ x 1 ỹ|d 2 |d 3 ) only belongs to H 1 ((0, L); R 3×3 ). Approximation will allow us to build upon the already finished part of the proof. As this can be done in analogy to Let (α(x 1 , •), g(x 1 )) be a solution of the minimizing problem in the definition of 3 ) with d 3 ∈ C 2 ([0, L]; R 3 ) and ỹ(j) belonging to C 3 ([0, L]; R 3 ) such that ỹ(j) (0) = ỹ(0); this gives (ỹ (j) |d 3 ) ∈ A. For every j ∈ N, β := R (j) α (j) and ∂ x 1 q := R (j) g (j) we can construct, by the first part of the proof, (ỹ 3 , R (j) α (j) and R (j) g (j) , respectively. Finally, diagonalize (take ỹ(k,j k ) for a suitable sequence (j k ) ∞ k=1 ) and the proof is finished, since the integral in (3.14) behaves continuously in R, β and ∂ x 1 q with respect to the required topologies. We now consider the situation of 'thin rods' when the cross section of the rod is not given by a fixed 2D lattice L but rather by a macroscopic set hS ⊂ R 2 whose diameter h = h k satisfies 1 k h 1 so that Ω = (0, L) × hS is eventually filled with atoms. Again, L > 0 stands for the rod's length and the cross section is defined in terms of S and S k as described in Section 2.2. For convenience we also assume that |S| = 1 and that the axes are oriented in such a way that As in Section 3.2 in view of Theorem 2.4 and (2.5) the convergence in Theorem 4.1 is stated in terms of the piecewise affine interpolations ỹ(k) and their rescaled gradients ∇ k ỹ(k) on Ω = (0, L) × S and it suffices to consider limiting configurations ỹ ∈ H 1 ((0, L); R 3 ) and d 2 , d 3 ∈ L 2 ((0, L); R 3 ). We remark that, by Theorem 2.4, one could equivalently consider the Γ-limit in the L 2 loc (Ω) topology. Also, the convergence could be alternatively formulated in terms of L 2 convergence of piecewise constant interpolations of ỹ(k) | Λk and the piecewise constant ∇k ỹ(k) to ỹ and R Īd, respectively; see Γ-converge to the functional E th defined below, in the following sense: k=1 be a sequence of lattice deformations such that their piecewise affine interpolated extensions (ỹ (k) ) ∞ k=1 , defined in Section 2, converge to ỹ ∈ H 1 ((0, L); R 3 ) in L 2 (Ω; R 3 ). Let us also assume that 1 (ii) For every ỹ ∈ H 1 ((0, L); R 3 ), d 2 , d 3 ∈ L 2 ((0, L); R 3 ) there is a sequence of lattice deformations (y (k) ) ∞ k=1 such that their piecewise affine interpolated extensions ) for s = 2, 3, and The limit energy functional is given by where R := (∂ x 1 ỹ|d 2 |d 3 ) and the class A of admissible deformations is as in Theorem 3.1. The relaxed quadratic form Q rel cell : R 3×3 skew → [0, +∞) is defined as Remark 4.1. Theorem 4.1 is in direct correspondence with the Γ-limit in and with Q 2 derived from Q 3 by the auxiliary minimization (3.1) in Since Q cell is convex, we obtain the existence of a minimizer α by the direct method of the calculus of variations. Strict convexity of Q cell on R 3×3 sym Īd implies that the minimizer is unique in V. Further, by analyzing the Euler-Lagrange equations as in Remark 4.3. As mentioned in Example 2.1, cell energies given by a sum of pairwise interactions may not satisfy assumption (E2) if they do not include an additional penalty term which prevents them from being minimized on improper rotations. Besides, a deficiency of our approach in terms of physical modelling is that interatomic potentials from molecular dynamics are typically bounded near infinity, so the growth assumption (E4) does not apply. However, even energies that are O(3)-invariant and do not grow quadratically away from SO(3) can be treated in case of 'sufficiently thin' rods. Following [BS22, Section 2.4], let us suppose that W cell only fulfils (E1), (E3), but also the following alternative assumptions: (E4.1) there is a constant η > 0 such that W cell ( y) ≥ η for every y ∈ V ⊥ 0 \ U ± , where U is the neighbourhood of SO(3) from (E3) and U ± := U ∪ (-U). Since reflections may lead to unnatural folded configurations with zero energy, we also add a nonlocal term to E (k) to avoid colliding atoms, see To prove Theorem 4.1(i), let us assume that k -3 h -4 k E (k) (y (k) ) ≤ C, whence (2.6) holds due to (2.4) and (2.5). Without loss of generality passing to a suitable subsequence, we obtain the piecewise constant R The following proposition is contained in (4.4) Dividing (4.3) by the rod thickness h k and using (4.4), we derive where we have set Fix Ω ⊂⊂ Ω. Let us prove that In the first place, shifts by a preserve weak convergence so that in L 2 (Ω ; R 3×8 ), In the second place, due to our construction of R (k) as constant on intervals of length h k , the difference R (k) (• + a 1 ) -R (k) can only be nonzero on interfaces of those intervals of constancy. Estimate (2.9) then implies that where the last step followed from (2.6). Thus ) is L 2 -bounded for an analogous reason as ( Ḡ(k) ), the convergence L 1 → 0 combined with (4.7) establishes (4.6). By definition, R (k) is constant on Q, so the remainder term in (4.5) equals In (4.9), ∇ k ỹ(k) (• + ta) is L 2 -bounded uniformly in t by (2.8) and as above we see that ) converges to 0 in L 2 (Ω ; R 3×3 ) uniformly in t, so the whole term vanishes in the limit. Thus, passing to the limit in (4.5), we conclude that Ḡ•i -Ḡ•j = G(z i -z j ). The assertion now follows by summing over j and using that 8 j=1 Ḡ•j = 8 j=1 z j = 0. We can now finish the proof of Theorem 4.1(i). By (2.4), the non-negativity of W surf and W end , and the frame-indifference of W cell , we estimate as in (3.9) Īd dx , where ᾱ(x) := α(x) -x 2 c 2 (x 1 ) -x 3 c 3 (x 1 ). Thus the definition of Q rel cell lets us conclude that lim inf Proof of Theorem 4.1(ii). In the nontrivial case that (ỹ, d 2 , d 3 ) ∈ A, we first additionally suppose that ỹ ∈ C 3 ([0, L]; R 3 ), d 2 , d 3 ∈ C 2 ([0, L]; R 3 ). For β ∈ C 1 (R 3 ; R 3 ) to be fixed later, define the sequence ỹ(k) (x) := ỹ(x 1 ) + h k x 2 d 2 (x 1 ) + h k x 3 d 3 (x 1 ) + h 2 k β(x), x ∈ {0, 1 k , . . . , L k } × We extend and interpolate the sequence ỹ(k) on Ω ext k in the same way as in Section 3.4 so that, in particular, (3.11) holds true again. The rescaled discrete gradient ∇k ỹ(k where β denotes the piecewise affine discretization of β| Λext k described in Section 2. As in (3.12) we obtain Hence, Taylor's approximation in (4.10) yields For general (ỹ, d 2 , d 3 ) ∈ A with R = (∂ x 1 ỹ|d 2 |d 3 ) ∈ H 1 ((0, L); R 3×3 ) we may proceed by approximation exactly as in Section 3.4, now using that the solution α(x 1 , •) of the minimizing problem in the definition of Q rel cell is such that α ∈ L 2 (Ω; R 3 ) and ∂ xs α ∈ L 2 (Ω; R 3 ), s = 2, 3. j Because of lattice squares that only share one corner, in the ultrathin case S k might not be Lipschitz, but as a finite union of squares the domain is still very regular so that all necessary claims hold. Thus we can choose S = S k for ultrathin rods.