With an ongoing discussion on the oxygen diffusion along crystal defects remaining, it is difficult to study this phenomenon in Al containing intermetallic materials due to its rapid and passivating oxide formation. We report here the observation of enhanced oxygen diffusion along crystal defects, i.e. dislocations and twin boundaries, in the C15 Al 2Ca Laves phase and how the presence of oxygen induces structural changes at these defects. Three main phases were identified and characterized structurally by aberration-corrected, atomic resolution scanning transmission electron microscopy, analytically by energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy and electron energy loss spectroscopy. Unlike the C15 bulk phase, the twin boundary and dislocation transformed into a few nanometer wide amorphous phase, which depletes in Al and Ca but is highly enriched in oxygen. The dislocation even shows coexistence of the amorphous phase with a simple Al-rich A1 fcc phase. This A1 phase only depletes in Ca, not in Al (Al remains at bulk concentration), and is also enriched in oxygen. The Al-rich A1 phase is coherent with the C15 matrix. Electron energy loss spectroscopy revealed the amorphous phase to be Al2O3. We thereby show as one of the first studies that oxygen diffusion along crystal defects, especially also at the twin boundary can induce the formation of an amorphous oxide along themselves. The identification of oxygen-induced transformation at strained defects has to be considered when the material is exposed to air during plastic deformation at elevated temperatures. Magnesium alloys belong to the lightest structural metals but exhibit low room temperature ductility and creep resistance. Al and Ca additions to such alloys were found to be beneficial in order to improve their creep resistance Alumina scales forming on crystalline interfaces and surfaces were already studied extensively in dry and humid oxygen atmospheres since the 19 th century The used material was cast at a target Al:Ca ratio of 2:1 to obtain the Al2Ca alloy and was subsequently heat treated at 600 °C for 24 hours under Argon atmosphere. Cast alloys were not quenched but cooled in the furnace under argon atmosphere. However, processing under these conditions and considering a heat of formation of -1657 kJ/mol for (γ-)Al2O3 [011] zone axis orientation, which fits to the expected C15 Laves phase crystal structure (Figure Detailed analysis of the twin inside the bulk reveals two perfectly intact twin boundaries (Figure Local chemical analysis across the amorphous and A1 crystalline areas of dislocation 2 in Figure It appears that strain containing defects in Al2Ca including dislocations and twin boundaries are the reason for fast oxygen diffusion, and as a consequence, for oxygen-induced structural changes. This is supported by comparison of the appearance of the amorphous regions along dislocation 2 and the twin boundary. While comparable in length, the dislocation even being slightly longer, the twin boundary has a wide amorphous region at the surface, which narrows down along its length, while the dislocation appears to have a constant width of the amorphous region along its entire length. This suggests that the higher strain at the dislocation core (typically up to about 10 % for edge dislocations) leads to even higher diffusion rates for oxygen than the twin boundary. In conclusion, we show the oxygen diffusion-induced formation of amorphous Al2O3 along crystal defects, i.e. a dislocation and a twin boundary. At the dislocation a coexistence of an oxygen containing Al rich A1 phase and the amorphous alumina phase has been observed. From the chemical composition of the two phases, we believe that a loss of Ca precedes the reduction of Al within the structurally transformed region, suggesting a transformation sequence of C15 Al2Ca + O2 → A1 Al(O) phase → amorphous Al2O3. Understanding the role of oxygen diffusion pathways is crucial for using the material reliably, as already small amounts of oxygen can lead to structural transformations along defects. 