In the past few years, there is a renewed interest in using multimode fibers for a wide range of technologies such as communication, imaging and spectroscopy. Practical implementations of multimode fiber in such applications, however, are held back, due to the challenges in dealing with modal dispersion, mode coupling and the fiber's sensitivity to mechanical perturbations. Here, we utilize these features of multimode fibers to generate all-fiber reconfigurable spectral filters. By applying computer-controlled mechanical deformations to the fiber, along with an optimization algorithm, we manipulate the light propagation in the fiber and control its output field. Using this approach we demonstrate tunable bandpass filters and dual-band filters, with spectral resolutions as low as 5pm. In the past decade there is ongoing effort to utilize multimode optical fibers (MMF) in a wide range of photonic applications such as optical fiber communication The traditional way to unscramble information transferred by MMFs is using spatial light modulators (SLM) that shape the wavefront at the input and/or output of the fiber In this work, we apply computer-controlled deformations to MMFs to realize all-fiber, reconfigurable spectral filters. To this end, we apply local bends at multiple positions along the fiber. The bends change the local propagation constants of the fiber's guided modes and induce mode mixing, thus changing the fiber's wavelengthdependent transmission matrix. The curvatures of the bends are determined by an optimization algorithm that finds the optimal configuration that maximizes the overlap between the output spectrum and a target spectrum. Using this configuration, which we call fiber piano, we realize reconfigurable spectral filters with a 5pm resolution. The experimental setup is depicted in Fig. Figure To demonstrate spectral shaping, we realize a tunable bandpass filter, by maximizing the output intensity at different spectral bands (Fig. Figure Since the spectral bandwidth of the fiber is inversely proportional to the fiber's length To compare the performance of our system with its optimal limit, we numerically simulate the operation of the fiber-piano by computing the transmission spectra through a MMF with controlled local macro bends. We model the fiber-piano by numerically propagating scalar waves through curved segments of a MMF, separated by straight segments. Each curved segment simulates a macro bend induced by an actuator, where the travel of the actuator corresponds to a change in the radius of curvature of the segment. We use 44 discrete values for the radii of curvatures in the range of 1cm to 8cm, which roughly corresponds to the range of curvatures induced by the actuators in the experiment. To find the field at the output of the fiber, we calculate the transmission matrix (TM) of each segment and propagate the input field by multiplying it by the TM's of all the segments. To calculate the TM of the curved segments, we use "BPM-matlab" We start by simulating propagation through a fiberpiano with the same number of actuators as in our experiments, 28 curved segments separated by straight segments. The fiber we simulate is a 2m-long step-index MMF, with a numerical aperture of 0.22 and a core diameter of 50μm. We excite the 50 first modes of the fiber, corresponding to the roughly 50 modes we excite in the experiment (see Fig. It is instructive to compare the enhancement obtained by the fiber piano to the optimal enhancement one expects to achieve, for example using a perfect spatial light modulator at the proximal end of the fiber. We therefore look for the input field that maximizes the peak-tobackground ratio using the same bend configuration that was found by the optimization algorithm for some arbitrary input. To this end, we first calculate the TM of the bent fiber as described above. Next, by multiplying the Hermitian conjugate of the TM by the target pattern (a focused spot in the desired ROI), we get the input field that maximizes the intensity in the ROI To further explore the performance of the fiber-piano under optimal conditions, we simulate the achievable enhancement in a loss-free system, for an increasing number of fiber modes and actuators. Intuitively, the enhancement should rise as these two parameters are increased since they provide more degrees of freedom for the optimization process. The number of curved segments in the simulation is set by the number of actuators we simulate. The number of guided modes in the fiber is set by changing the core diameter while keeping the numerical aperture of the fiber fixed. We fix the total fiber length to 20m, and excite all the guided modes of the fiber with equal amplitudes and random relative phases. To neglect loss in the simulation, we force the transmission matrix of each segment to be unitary. In Fig. We experimentally realized all-fiber spectral shaping by applying computer-controlled deformations to a multimode fiber. As a proof of concept of this approach, we demonstrated a tunable bandpass filter with FWHM of 245pm, and a dual-wavelength filter with the same spectral width. Next, we showed the possibility to achieve narrower bandpass filters, using longer MMF, and achieved FWHM bandwidths as low as 5pm. Finally, we ran numerical simulations to test the performance of the fiber under optimal conditions. We show that with the fiber-piano it is possible to achieve peakto-background ratios that are above 70% of the ratios obtained for optimal wavefront control. In the high resolution configuration, where a camera that images the distal end of the fiber is used to select one spatial channel, one can simplify the detection method by replacing the camera with a SMF that is spliced at Figure the distal end of the MMF along with a telecom photodiode. Our method demonstrates a first step towards realizing an all-fiber modulator for tailoring the spatialspectral waveform at the output of multimode fibers, a key ingredient in a wide range of applications that are based on multimode fibers. The propagation of each wavelength in the fiber is determined by the curvature of the bends, set by the travel of each actuator. Therefore, the spectrum at each spot on the distal end of the MMF is determined by the travel of each actuator. The optimization algorithm searches for the travels that maximize the intensity in a desired wavelength band (in the low resolution configuration) or in a desired ROI on the camera (in the high resolution configuration). Since the propagation of the light in each curved segment depends on the deformations induced by all the actuators prior to it, the ideal way to deal with such an optimization problem is using a nonlinear optimization algorithm. Here we use the simulated annealing (SA) algorithm The optimization parameters we used are initial temperature T of 20, with a cooling function that scales as Tα i , where i is the iteration number and α is 0.97 (0.99) in the experiments (simulations). The cost function maximizes the intensity in the spectral (spatial) window in the spectrum (image), normalized by the total intensity. We run the algorithm until we observe a sequence of 30 iterations without any improvement in the cost function. To decrease the probability of converging to local minima, at each iteration we add with some probability p a weak perturbation to the optimal configuration of actuators and increase p as the temperature decreases. To measure the response time of the fiber-piano, we use the low resolution configuration and optimize the system for a specific spectral window. Then we switch between the optimal configuration of actuators and some other configuration. The response time of the system is measured by the time it takes to reach from 10 to 90 percent of the maximal intensity. We find that the rise time is 45ms, whereas the fall time is 10ms, as shown in Fig. To test the stability of the system, once we find the optimal configuration, we keep the actuators in the same position and record the output spectrum over time. We find that the spectrum maintains its shape and the overall transmissions fall by approximately 30% after 10 hours (see Fig. To simulate the operation on the fiber-piano, we chose 44 values for the radii of curvature, which model the bends induced by the piezoelectric actuators. The inverse of the radii of curvature are equally spaced between the maximal and minimal values. We compute the 44 transmission matrices (TM), C 1 , ...C 44 , that cor-respond to the 44 values of the radii of curvature, by propagating the fiber's guided modes in the curved segment and projecting the output fields on the fiber mode basis. We then compute the TM of the fiber, which is deformed by M actuators, by alternatively multiplying each one of the M transmission matrices of the M curved segments, T i ∈ C 1 , ..C 44 ; i ∈ 1, .., M , with the diagonal matrix D: T f iber = DT M D...T 2 DT 1 D. D represents the phase accumulated by each guided mode in a straight fiber. Fig. 