LiB, a predicted layered compound analogous to the MgB2 superconductor, has been recently synthesized via cold compression and quenched to ambient pressure, yet its superconducting properties have not been measured. According to prior isotropic superconductivity calculations, the critical temperature (Tc) was expected to be only 10-15 K. Using the anisotropic Migdal-Eliashberg formalism, we show that the Tc may actually exceed 32 K. Our analysis of the contribution from different electronic states helps explain the detrimental effect of pressure and doping on the compound's superconducting properties. In the search for related superconductors, we screened Li-Mg-B binary and ternary layered materials and found metastable phases with Tc close to or even 10-20% above the record 39 K value in MgB2. Our reexamination of the Li-B binary phase stability reveals a possible route to synthesize the LiB superconductor at lower pressures readily achievable in multianvil cells. Materials with covalent honeycomb layers are a promising avenue in the search for thermodynamically stable high-temperature superconductors. Quintessential among these compounds is the conventional superconductor with the highest critical temperature (T c ) at ambient pressure, MgB 2 (T c = 39 K) A simple phase in the binary Li-B system may offer an alternate path towards modulating MgB 2 -type superconductivity. A "metal-sandwich" (MS)-type structure, predicted to stabilize under pressure In this study, we evaluate the thermodynamic stability of LiB and related Li-Mg-B phases and consider the superconductivity of the LiB, MgB, and intermediate ternary LiMgB 2 compounds using the fully anisotropic ME formalism. Based on prior findings revealing an unusual response of the LiB y and LiB compounds to compression and our present calculations of the Li-B phase stability at different (T ,P ) conditions, we conjecture that the desired layered LiB could be obtained in a metastable form at lower pressures. We show that alloying LiB with Mg does not lead to thermodynamically stable layered compounds but the study of their superconducting properties provides further insights into MgB 2 -type superconductivity. Our calculations predict a T c for LiB under ambient pressure that is much higher than previously reported. To reduce the errors arising from the empirical μ* parameter, we performed calculations with similar settings for LiB and MgB 2 , and determined that the former should have a critical temperature near 80% of the latter. At elevated pressures, we find that the T c of LiB is strongly suppressed as a result of the concurring reduction of the density of states at the Fermi level and the hardening of the important low-frequency phonon modes. Similarly, with electron or hole doping, no improvements in critical temperature can be attained, suggesting that LiB, just as MgB 2 The density functional theory (DFT) calculations were performed with the nonlocal van der Waals (vdW) functional optB86b-vdW The Quantum ESPRESSO package The EPW code Structural characterization and thermodynamic stability analysis of Li-B binary compounds listed in Fig. It had been predicted that compressed LiB y would not be fully transformed into LiB but would remain in the sample in a more Li-rich form These observations reveal that LiB does not need to be thermodynamically stable with respect to LiB 3 and LiB y to form 59 . Because of the high strength of the boron chains in LiB y that can survive 1,200 K temperatures We propose that delithiation of LiB y prior to compression could promote the formation of LiB. The possibility of pushing LiB y outside its natural stability range to prime the compound for the synthesis of metastable LiBH and LiBH 2 derivatives was discussed in Ref. [57]. The presented analysis 57 of a previous LiB y hydrogenation attempt LiH value estimated at -0.83 eV at zero temperature is sufficient to move the lower stability boundary down to x ≈ 0.510 (y ≈ 0.96). A similar effect could be achieved by heat-treating the material at high temperatures, which has been successfully used to extract about half of Li from the LiBC compound In the scenario proposed in this work, a 16:15 sample would be destabilized at a noticeably lower pressure, around 3 GPa, and might ultimately yield a larger fraction of the desired LiB phase. The actual pressure needed to induce the transformation is difficult to evaluate from first principles because one would need to model the kinetics of the rebonding process. Performing the experiment at elevated temperatures would help the system overcome barriers but, at the same time, would make LiB less stable due to an unfavorable vibrational entropy contribution and raise the transformation pressure by 1-2 GPa at 300 K (see Supplemental Fig. Mixing different chemical elements is another way of stabilizing particular morphologies. A systematic screening of layered motifs in dozens of M-B and Li-M-B chemical systems uncovered only a few possibly synthesizable compounds, such as Li 2 AlB 4 , Li 2 VB 4 , and Li 2 TaB 4 In the present study, we focus on exploring the part of the Li-Mg-B ternary phase space shaded in red in Fig. To probe the propensity of the two metals to mix, we selected the 8-atom LiB and the 14-atom Li 2 MgB 4 base structures and sampled possible decorations of the metal sites in laterally expanded supercells with up to 48 and 28 atoms, respectively. We found segregation of Li and Mg into homonuclear layers to be unfavorable. The lowest-energy structures shown in Fig. The configurational entropy is not expected to stabilize the Li 1-x Mg x B pseudobinary either: even if structures with different random populations of the metal sites by Li and Mg had the same energy, which we actually found to be dispersed by at least 30 meV/atom, the free energy would be lowered by at most -18 meV/atom at x = 0.5 and 600 K. We conclude that the proposed layered Li-Mg-B morphologies are not thermodynamically stable to be obtained with standard bulk synthesis methods. It may be worth investigating the possibility of synthesizing these metastable phases with thin-film deposition methods. The following analysis of these hypothetical materials' properties is aimed at establishing beneficial features for the MgB 2 -type superconductivity. The presence of an additional metal layer in the MS structure sets it apart from the common AlB 2 -type prototype The electronic and vibrational properties of the MS phases have been discussed in detail in Refs. [23, 26, and 27], and here we overview the key features. As shown in Fig. The phonon dispersion and the phonon density of states of LiB are shown in Fig. The superconducting critical temperature of LiB under ambient conditions has been previously estimated using the McMillan expression for T c , which relies on the isotropic e-ph coupling strength Shifting to the anisotropic properties, we plot in Figs. As discussed in Ref. [65], one can introduce several different matrices to describe the anisotropy of the e-ph (or any other, for that matter), pairing interactions. The most fundamental is the matrix Λ defined as where i and j are states on the ith and jth portions of the FS, and g kk ν is the e-ph matrix element for the scattering between the electronic states k and k through a phonon with wave vector q = kk , frequency ω qν , and branch index ν. The total DOS is N F = i N i , with N i the DOS per spin at the Fermi level from the ith FS region. Then, one can define the pairing interaction matrix, as well as the asymmetric e-ph coupling matrix, Within the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) theory, the critical temperature is defined by the BCS equations with the largest eigenvalue of this matrix, and the isotropic coupling constant (which is always smaller) which also defines the eph specific heat renormalization. The anisotropic mass renormalization, measured, for instance, in quantum oscillations experiments, is given by At 0 GPa, we separated the Fermi surface into three parts: two concentric cylinders along the Γ-A direction of different radii and one along the K-H direction, as denoted by the labeled FS regions in Fig. with N σ+ζ = 0.507, N ζ = 0.173, and N π = 0.020. Our analysis of this matrix shows that the main contribution to λ comes from the B-σ states entangled with the intercalant ζ states (region S Γ1 ), with minor coupling from the intercalant ζ states (region S Γ2 ), and nothing from the B-π states (region S K ). As a point of comparison, we also solved the fully anisotropic ME equations for MgB 2 , and found, as expected, its π and σ band two-gap structure, as shown with N σ = 0.146 and N π = 0.194, in very good agreement with the former studies 66,67 . As mentioned above, LiB lacks any contribution to λ from the π states, while they give rise to 23% of the coupling in MgB 2 . Furthermore, we find that the offdiagonal terms representing the interband transitions in LiB are much smaller than the main diagonal term corresponding to the intraband scattering on the S Γ1 FS sheet. On the other hand, in MgB 2 , the off-diagonal terms are about 25% and 50% of the two diagonal terms, respectively. The following analysis reveals that compression has a dramatic effect on the compound's superconducting properties. As found previously The band structure of LiB also undergoes notable changes at low pressures up to 3 GPa (see Supplemental Fig. In Supplemental Fig. Upon increasing pressure, the e-ph coupling displays a monotonic decrease as both the DOS at the Fermi level and the contribution to λ of the low-frequency phonons are strongly reduced. As shown in Fig. The two-gap structure of LiB is retained under pressure although significant changes are observed in the FS topology. For example, as can be seen in Supplemental Fig. Next, we examine if it is possible to favorably modulate the key electronic and vibrational features of LiB through electron (e) or hole (h) doping in order to further increase the T c . To simulate doping, we employed the jellium model, in which the extra charge added to the system is compensated by a uniform background of opposite charge. In our calculations, we have fixed the unit cell and allowed only the optimization of atomic positions. Under a doping level of 1/6 electrons or holes per unit cell at 0 GPa, the electronic structure of LiB undergoes only minor changes compared to the undoped case, as shown in Supplemental Fig. As can be seen in Supplemental Fig. The superconducting gap structures and Γ-plane crosssection Fermi surfaces for the two doping cases are shown in Supplemental Fig. In this section, we assess the electronic, vibrational, and superconducting properties of the hypothetical MS2-MgB phase, shown to be only metastable in previous The electronic band structure and DOS of MgB are shown in Fig. The phonon dispersion, isotropic Eliashberg spectral function α 2 F (ω), and cumulative e-ph coupling of MgB at ambient pressure are presented in Fig. The superconducting gap on a cross-section FS plane through Γ and the anisotropic gap ∆ k as a function of temperature are illustrated in Figs. Dividing the FS into two subsets, one for the B-σ sheets and one for the B-π and Mg-ζ sheets, we calculate the band-resolved symmetrized matrix Λ ij : MgB = with N σ = 0.254 and N π+ζ = 0.676. Like for MgB 2 and LiB, the dominant contribution to λ comes from the coupling of the B-σ states with the in-plane E 2g phonons. Furthermore, MgB captures desired key features of the former, having both B-π and intercalant electrons present at the Fermi level, that play important roles in indirectly strengthening the coupling of the σ electrons and enhancing the T c . In this section, we explore the electronic, vibrational, and superconducting properties of a predicted nearstable compound in the Li-Mg-B phase space: LiMgB 2 , an orthorhombic structure with P mmn symmetry, in the B 2 -(LiMg)-B 2 -(LiMg) stacking sequence. This phase was chosen for further study because its composition bridges the divide between LiB and MgB, while having one of the smaller unit cells of the phases discussed in this work, with lattice parameters a=3.073 Å, b=12.045 Å, and c=5.291 Å. is that the B-π Dirac cones do not lie at the Fermi level as in LiB, instead dropping approximately 1 eV below E F . Finally, we remark that the Mg-ζ and Li-ζ states have nearly equal contributions to the N F , while the B-π contribution exceeds that of the B-σ states, as is the case for MgB and MgB 2 . The phonon dispersion of LiMgB 2 along with the phonon DOS and the isotropic Eliashberg spectral function are displayed in Fig. Given the similarity of the key electronic and vibrational features that drive the e-ph coupling in MgB and LiMgB 2 , it is not surprising to find that the superconducting multigap structure illustrated in Fig. Lastly, to quantify the contribution of different electronic states to the e-ph coupling in this compound, we can make a similar FS division to that of MgB: one for the B-σ sheets and one for the B-π and ζ surfaces [see Fig. with N σ = 0.714 and N π+ζ = 1.385. Though MgB and LiMgB 2 have the same total λ, a smaller percentage in LiMgB 2 can be attributed to the σ states, 44% as opposed to 47%. Interestingly, nearly the same contribution in these two compounds comes from the diagonal term corresponding to entangled π and ζ states, ∼ 30%, though LiMgB 2 has a larger degree of e-ph coupling arising from interband transitions. Therefore, the drop in T c , compared to MgB, stems mostly from the minute decrease in the B-σ coupling triggered by the addition of Li. In this work, we argue that the delithiation of the known starting LiB y material prior to compression would facilitate the synthesis of the LiB superconductor, leading to its formation at lower pressures readily achievable in multianvil cells. Our examination of the LiB superconducting properties using the ME theory indicates that an anisotropic treatment is as essential in this compound as in MgB 2 . We predict a critical temperature for LiB in the 32-42 K range, a factor of three times higher than estimates based on an isotropic description of the e-ph interaction. We further demonstrate that neither pressure nor doping can enhance superconductivity, with the T c expected to drop below 10 K at 20 GPa. Our analysis of the Li-Mg-B phase space identifies several metastable layered materials with excellent superconducting properties. In particular, we find the critical temperature in MgB and LiMgB 2 to exceed or approach that of MgB 2 , as summarized in Fig. 