Learning miniaturization science remains challenging due to the non-intuitive behavior of microscale objects and complex assembly approaches. Traditional approaches for creating microsystems require expensive equipment, facilities, and trained staff. To improve as well as democratize microdevice education, we created a new educational activity that enables students to build and test advanced microfluidics by leveraging "sticker" microfluidics, composed of double-sided dry film adhesive layers. Along with T-mixers and bubble generators, our activity is the first to enable students to build a valve and F-mixer in the classroom setting. This helps emphasize less intuitive aspects of device manufacturing such as the creation of complex 3-dimenstional shapes with layers and layer alignment. In addition, this paper provides the first reported quantitative data on significant improvements in student knowledge and confidence from building and testing several common devices. All 11 students had substantial improvements in conceptual mastery and confidence after the activity. Student responses to a guided reflection highlight how the activity supports a variety of learning needs and preferences. Given the impact on student learning, our low-cost activity helps reduce global barriers to miniaturization science education. Microsystems have significantly impacted the world around us, and are found in smartphones Laboratory and hands-on activities offer an effective method to supplement traditional lecture to create such learning experiences. Unfortunately, microsystems-focused activities can be difficult to implement in the classroom setting due to challenges in getting access to microchips and microdevices suitable for teaching Our work complements and extends the excellent body of work in microfluidics education with several key innovations. First, our activity includes well known microfluidics (Fig This activity was performed during the 4 th week of the Georgia Institute of Technology Wallace H. Coulter Department Biomedical Engineering Course "Translational Microsystems". During the first three weeks of class, the following topics were covered in a more traditional lecture format: biomedical microsystems, scaling laws, photolithography, soft lithography, surface micromachining, microcontact printing of proteins, and advanced microfluidics. Each lecture used a handout in which both student and instructor worked together to fill in key information. The activity we focus on in this paper then occurred during the fourth week. Within the class, all 11 students permitted their data to be used in the study, 2 undergraduates and 9 graduate students. Of these students, 3 had no prior experience with microdevices, 3 had 0-1 years of research experience with microdevices, and 5 had more than 1 year of research experience with microdevices. The activity we created occurred over two consecutive days in the class. On the first day, teams of students assembled several microfluidics devices. On the second day, the teams then tested the devices they had created. Each course day lasted 75 minutes. We designed the activity to promote both affective and cognitive practices to promote an effective learning experience Each device is composed of substrate, such as glass or acrylic, several laser cut layers of dry film adhesive (i.e. double sided tape), and a fluidic interface layer composed of polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) (Fig The high adhesive strength of the tape helps facilitates device construction and can provide an important learning opportunity. While it facilitates bonding and prevents leaking between device layers, each layer can only be applied once and cannot be removed if misaligned. This mirrors what occurs with traditional microdevice fabrication, where misalignment of layers cannot be easily repaired and the misaligned devices must be discarded. Hence, via experience, students learn why precision is needed when adding additional microdevice layers since devices with misaligned layers can not be salvaged. In anticipation of mis-assembled devices, extra kits for each device were available for each team. We also created fully assembled devices, which could be reviewed by each team at any time, and later used if assembly of their device was not successful. On the first day of the activity, students were placed into teams composed of two or three individuals, and provided with kits that included all necessary materials for device construction as well as handouts. The handout and kits were designed to encourage teams to construct devices in an independent manner at their own pace. Instructors provide support, help troubleshoot, but do not lead the activity. As such, students have the opportunity to learn from errors, such as misassembled devices, misaligned layers, or inadvertently wrinkled layers that do not provide a water tight seal. The accompanying handouts (ESI) include step-by-step instructions and pictures on how to assemble each device, with an example shown in Fig 2 . The handout encourages teams to construct the devices in the following order of complexity, beginning with the T-mixer (3 layers), then the droplet generator (4 layers) and F-mixer (4 layers), and finally the valve (5 layers). The handout also includes questions related to device assembly and manufacturing to help reinforce skills related to manufacturing, alignment, and translating 2-dimensional drawings of layers into 3-dimensional devices. To assist with assembly, some materials such as scotch tape and tweezers were also available to the whole class. On the second day of the activity, the same student teams tested each microfluidic device using syringes, ancillary tubing, mineral oil, and water with food safe dyes added. The same accompanying handout also includes instruction related to testing the devices with accompanying questions. However, the handout provides less explicit instructions than with assembly. Instead, the needed syringes are simply listed with a written description of the desired outcome. Students could choose to use either gravity fed fluid flow or hand actuated syringes to feed the mixing devices. To induce gravity fed flow, students could either hold an open syringe partially filled with water above the device, or place the device in a ring stand. This more open yet structured format invites experimentation, observation, and reflection that helps students learn from misconnected fluidic ports. Instructors provided support with troubleshooting and also invited teams to collaborate with each other in cases where one team was having difficulty with a particular device. To facilitate comparison between mixers, the handout encouraged the students to test their devices in a different order than assembled (T-mixer, F-mixer, droplet generator, valve). In the T-mixer, students added yellow and blue water and can observe that the fluids do not mix (Supplemental Video 1). In the Fmixer, students will see the water gradually turn green as the blue and yellow inlet fluids mix (Supplemental Video 2). We note for instructors that hand actuation syringes worked best for the droplet generator, specifically to suspend blue water droplets in mineral oil (Supplemental Video 3). Similarly, hand actuation worked well for students actuating the valve, and enabled them to understand how pressure differentials between the fluidic channel and valve channel modulated flow (Supplemental Video 4). As a result of completing this activity, students should be able to do the following: -Understand the difference between micro and macroscale mixing, specifically laminar versus The effectiveness of the in-class activity was evaluated using a pre-post knowledge test developed for this activity (Supplemental Materials) as well as a guided reflection administered 1 week after the activity. The knowledge test was composed of 9 open ended short answer questions with topics broadly related to microfluidic scaling physics, operation of microfluidic valves, fluid mixing at the microscale, droplet creation, and the effects of air bubbles in microfluidics. The manufacturing questions asked students to draw cross section and top views of a mixer, valve, and droplet generator, in addition to asking students to reflect on the role of tolerances in microdevice manufacturing. As part of the knowledge test, students were asked to rate their confidence in their answers on a scale of 1 (least) to 5 (most confident). Each question was scored by the course instructor on a scale of 0 to 10, with a maximum score of 90. In addition to the objective knowledge tests, we asked students to record the subjective learning experience in two ways. First, we included a prompt in the post-test asking students to self-report what they learned. After 1 week, students were asked to complete a structured reflection consisting of four open-ended questions: 1) Which devices did you understand better? 2) Which devices are you more confused about? 3) What are three things that you learned that you found most important? 4) How did your understanding of microfluidic mixing change? For data analysis, we report confidence weighted scores for the knowledge test rather than confidence and accuracy score separately. Confidence weighted scores were calculated by multiplying the score for each question (0-10) by the student's confidence in their answer All open-ended self-identified learning responses were evaluated and categorized into the following categories: New design and physical insights, setup and troubleshooting areas, layer by layer design learning, new fabrication methods, significant positive experience, and the societal need for similar devices. These categories emerged from the data and were generated by the course instructor. All student comments are available in the supplement information (Supplementary Table After completing the activity, the students' confidence-weighted scores related to microdevice physics significantly increased. The pre-assessment knowledge test helped establish both the knowledge level and confidence of the students understanding of concepts covered. There was a broad spread in the student's pre-test confidence weighted scores for both new concepts and for concepts covered in the course (Fig However, student confidence weighted pre-assessment scores related to manufacturing were lower than the pre-assessment scores for the physics questions. We presume that there could be multiple reasons drive the lower pre-assessment scores related to manufacturing. First, is the availability of resources to develop an understanding of physics and manufacturing. Although macroscale physical phenomena do not match microscale behaviors, students interested in this topical area can get access to media and other educational resources that convey many of these concepts. Unfortunately, fewer resources are available that help convey concepts related to layerby-layer construction of 3D shapes and spatial reasoning. Moreover, the resources that are available can still be difficult for students to internalize into a generalizable expertise. Another possible explanation is that students may have prior coursework in physics and less in manufacturing. Our activity promotes expertise in this area by asking students to organize layers and construct multi-layer working devices whose operation depends on successful alignment. Students directly observe how planar shapes assemble into more complex 3D shapes and how tolerances ease assembly. Overall, the resulting high confidence weighted post-assessment scores (Fig 4 ) suggest the activity played a key role in developing expertise in manufacturing concepts. As before, we also examined student knowledge alone and student confidence independently to increase the rigor of our approach. Student knowledge and confidence in manufacturing concepts all increased in a statistically significant manner. While it is not clear whether the activity alone or whether the activity synergized with traditional lectures, it is clear that offering the activity in the context of a microsystems course can play a key role in the development of expertise. indicator of the number of years of research experience with microdevice. As expected, PhD students in year 2 or greater had statistically higher weighted pre-assessment scores then students in the BS/MS program, which can be attributed to their prior experience. Regardless of degree program, all students demonstrated significant improvements between pre and post assessment scores after completing the activity (Supplemental Figure Student self-identified improvements in device understanding one week after the activity correlated with device complexity (Fig In an effort to gather feedback on opportunities for improvement, especially related to student learning, our guided reflection included a prompt in which students could comment on whether the activity increased their confusion. All students reported no additional confusion related to the devices built and testing in the activity (Fig Student self-identified learning demonstrates that our activity supports the development of expertise in diverse backgrounds. To better understand what concepts were the most important to students, the self-identified learning responses were categorized into groups (Fig The similar responses suggest that the activity was impactful as students were still able to identify key lessons learned 1 week after the activity. -ended short answer questions asked 1 week after the activity suggest that the activity was memorable and helps develop mastery. a) Most students reported a deeper understanding of all the devices built. b) All students reported no additional confusion arising from the activity, with a single notable comment that the student felt confused about more traditional fabrication methods. c) The diversity of comments shows that each student valued different aspects of the activity. This suggests the activity supports individualized development of mastery that helps fill key knowledge gap. In addition to the empirical evidence of learning, readers interested in adopting this activity may be interested in our learning related observations as we facilitated the activity. Overall, student displayed positive and enthusiastic reactions to the activity. Body language and focused discussion suggested that students engaged with the activity and predominantly completed the activity in an independent fashion, with an occasional clarifying question. Students also enjoyed experimenting with their completed systems, with one team creating a mini-competition to determine which individual could apply more pressure (and fluid) in their T-mixer, and thus have a channel dominated by a single colored fluid, rather than a split stream. Another team experimented with different pressures in the droplet generator and observed that a certain ratio of flows was needed to create droplets instead of two streams of oil bisected by colored water. Most teams were able to construct functional devices with the parts initially distributed, only 2 devices of 20 were initially misassembled. When a spare-kit was provided, all teams were able to construct the devices. The most common challenges associated with assembling the devices were correctly orienting and aligning the layers, and ensuring that the layers were completely flat and able to provide a water-tight seal. Providing an opportunity to misassemble a device and quickly learn receive visual feedback was a key aspect to the learning activity overall. When provided with a spare kit and the opportunity to view a correctly assembled device prepared ahead of time, all teams were able to assemble all devices. We observed that students adopted many different strategies for completing the device assembly and testing, including using hands instead of tweezers, working together, and/or taking turns experimenting/observing (Fig In future iterations of this activity, we plan on making several changes. First, while the time allotted for the activity was sufficient (2 sessions at 1.25 hours each), students verbally communicated that double this amount of time for additional exploration of the device function would have been welcome. Second, we will replace the coverslip bottom of the devices with more substantial, thick glass slides as several coverslips inadvertently broke during assembly. A best practice that we will continue is having a backup kit for each device for every 2-3 teams. We also recommend having one to two fully assembled devices of each type that can provided to teams for visualization and experimentation if necessary. ) Some students preferred a team approach to attach fluidic ports whereas other teams d-e) preferred to take turns. Regardless of the approach taken, there was 100% success with regards to building and testing the devices. Key to this success rate was having several spare reserve device kits enabling students to have multiple attempts if needed at assembly. There are several limitations with the current study. First, we have only been able to test student learning in a cohort of 11 students. While this is enough to confirm that the activity confers benefit, additional testing could include control groups and different interventions to further investigate the impact of microfluidic activities on student mastery. Second, our activity was administered in the broader context of a class that taught concepts related to microfluidic devices. As such, it is unclear if the activity alone teaches students important concepts or if student improvements are from including the activity in the context of a lecture-based course. Although the activity did include concepts that were not taught in the class, the class itself may have provided foundational structure and concepts relevant to student learning that improved student overall understanding. Our work is unique in the context of the many excellent educationally focused papers describing microfluidic and microdevice activities. Prior to this work, the most complex structure constructed or tested in a classroom setting was a multi-layered serpentine channel Our data shows that our activity promotes significant gains in student knowledge and mastery for microfluidic physics and manufacturing. One unique aspect to our approach is that it helps students develop better spatial reasoning skills after completing this activity as evidenced by an improved ability to draw 2D top view and cross-sectional drawings of 3D microdevices that could achieve a desired outcome. This skill is key to both designing new microfluidics and communicating how to recreate another microfluidic as evidenced by the common practice of including cross-sectional drawings of microdevices in research reports. In addition, by providing quantitative data, our work also helps motivate the use of microfluidic learning activities in the classroom setting and addresses the overall lack of data in the field as a whole. Only two other studies have measured student learning . Finally, one key advantage to our approach is that it utilized double-sided tape to create microfluidic devices, which is a well established tool in the microfluidics community that has been used to create a variety of economical devices as exemplified here 