We study the superconductor-insulator transition (SIT) in the ground state of the attractive honeycomb Hubbard model in the presence of a staggered potential (a mass term), using a combination of unbiased computational methods, namely, exact diagonalization and quantum Monte Carlo simulations. We probe the nature of the lowest-energy charge excitations across the SIT and show that they are bosonic, as inferred (and shown in the strongly interacting regime) in a previous study of the same model in the square lattice. Increasing the strength of the staggered potential leads to a crossover in which bosonic low-energy excitations give way to fermionic ones within the insulating phase. We also show that the SIT belongs to the 3d-XY universality class, like in its square lattice counterpart. The robustness of our results in these two lattice geometries supports the expectation that our findings are universal for SITs in clean systems. The theory of conventional superconductors describes the emergence of pairing among repulsive charges by means of a Fermi surface instability in a metal (or Fermi liquid) Motivated by understanding the nature of SITs in clean strongly correlated systems, as well as their possible experimental exploration in experiments with ultracold fermionic atoms, in a previous work Here we study the SIT in the ground state of the attractive Hubbard model in the presence of a staggered potential in the honeycomb lattice geometry. Our main goal is to directly probe the nature of the lowest-energy charge excitations across the SIT, which we find to be bosonic, and study their crossover to being fermionic upon increasing the strength of the staggered potential in the insulating phase. For this, we compute the one-particle (fermionic) and two-particle (bosonic) gaps, which are more precise probes of the nature of the lowest energy excitations than the probes used in Ref. The presentation is organized as follows. In Sec. 2, we introduce the attractive Hubbard model in the presence of a staggered potential in the honeycomb lattice geometry, present its phase diagram, and discuss limiting regimes that can be solved analytically. We also briefly introduce the unbiased computational techniques used to study this model. In Sec. 3, we discuss how the phase diagram of the model is obtained using exact diagonalization and quantum Monte Carlo simulations. This is where we show that the SIT belongs to 3d-XY universality class. Section 4 is devoted to studying the one-particle (fermionic) and two-particle (bosonic) charge excitations across the SIT and how the nature of the lowest-energy one changes from bosonic to fermionic upon increasing the strength of the staggered potential in the insulating phase. Our results are summarized in Sec. 5. Our model of interest is the SU(2) honeycomb Hubbard model in the presence of a staggered potential where ĉ † iσ (ĉ iσ ) are the fermionic creation (annihilation) operators at site i, with (pseudo-)spin σ =↑, ↓, and niσ = ĉ † iσ ĉiσ is the corresponding (pseudo-)spin siteoccupation operator. The nearest-neighbor, i j , and next-nearest neighbor (NNN), i j , hopping parameters are denoted by t and t , respectively; the strength of the on-site attractive interaction by U < 0, and the strength of the staggered potential by ∆ [s i is either 0 or 1 depending on the sublattice to which i belongs to, see Fig. Compared to the model studied experimentally in Ref. To understand the interplay of the different terms in Eq. with 2 k y . The first question one can ask is how large ∆ needs to be for the ground state at half filling to transition between the semi-metal ground state for ∆ = 0 to the band insulator for ∆ t. The answer to that question depends on the NNN hopping amplitude t . For t = 0, the Dirac cones of the upper and lower bands, touching at the high symmetry points K and K of the first Brillouin zone, split, generating a direct gap (= 2∆) for any nonzero value of ∆. After including a nonzero t , the direct gap is still obtained so long as t ≤ t c = t/3 [see Fig. , as depicted by the dashed-dotted line in the U = 0 plane in Fig. A second important limit that can be promptly understood is the t = 0 case for U = 0. In this regime, see Ref. Much larger lattices can be studied by means of projective quantum Monte Carlo (PQMC) simulations. Within this approach, the ground state |Ψ 0 is obtained projecting a trial wave function |Ψ T , via |Ψ 0 = lim Θ→∞ e -Θ Ĥ |Ψ T , where Θ is a projector parameter. This approach works provided that the overlap between the trial wave function and the ground-state of Hamiltonian (1) is nonzero, Ψ 0 |Ψ T = 0, and that |Ψ 0 is nondegenerate For our simulations, we considered two trial wave functions, the half-filled Fermi sea of the noninteracting part For nonzero U , the surface formed by connecting the points (which report ∆c) delimits the insulating (∆ > ∆c) and superconducting (∆ < ∆c) phases. (b) The phase diagram obtained from PQMC calculations in larger lattices, using a scaling ansatz for results obtained in lattices with L = 6, 9, 12, and 15. In both panels, the onset of the supersolid regime (or an SU(2) antiferromagnetic Mott insulator in the repulsive language of the Hamiltonian and a Hartree-Fock solution. We found the latter to converge more quickly with increasing Θ so all results reported are obtained with that trial wave function for Θt = 40, which is sufficiently large for the convergence of the expectation values of all observables studied here. Since our PQMC calculations are carried out within the canonical ensemble for N ↑ = N ↓ , they do not suffer from the sign problem In the next section, we discuss in detail how the phase diagrams reported in Fig. Before explaining in detail how we locate the phase transition using exact diagonalization and PQMC simulations and how we probe its universality class, let us briefly comment on the overall structure of the phase diagrams in Fig. In our exact diagonalization calculations, to identify the critical value ∆ c , for any given value of U and t , we use the fidelity susceptibility for which one needs to compute the fidelity of groundstate wave functions for slightly different Hamiltonian parameters; we modify the staggered potential by δ∆ = 10 -3 in our calculations. Continuous phase transitions can be identified by large peaks that appear as a critical point is crossed In Fig. with respect to ∆ was used to track the SIT in a related model In the context of ultracold fermionic atoms experiments, we note that double occupancy was originally used to identify the Mott insulating regime The critical points in our PQMC simulations are identified using the scaling of the pair structure factor where ∆i is the pair annihilation (creation) operator at site i. Long-range order in the superconducting phase means that P s is extensive in V , but the way such behavior is approached when decreasing the staggered potential from the insulating phase is controlled by the critical exponents. In Ref. The previously mentioned operator mapping brings a direct analogy: The s-wave pair structure factor translates into the zero-momentum occupancy for hardcore bosons in the effective model, n k=0 = (1/V ) i,j b † i bj , which is known to diverge when approaching the transition from the normal side as n k=0 ∼ ξ 1-η In Fig. The analysis in Fig. The 3d-XY universality class of the transition advances that the lowest energy charge excitations across the transition are bosonic In this section, we study the nature of the lowestenergy charge excitations across the SIT and their behavior with increasing ∆ in the insulating phase. For this, we compute the one-particle (m = 1, fermionic) and two-particle (m = 2, bosonic) gaps where E 0 (x) is the ground-state energy with x-fermions. For m = 2, we always add/remove one fermion with (pseudo-)spin ↑ and one with (pseudo-)spin ↓, namely, a pair. Hence, in what follows, we call the m = 2 gap the pair gap. The one-particle and pair gaps in Eq. ( in the gaps computed for those system sizes, and even more so as |U | and ∆ increase. This suggests that our PQMC estimation of the crossing points does not suffer from significant finite-size effects. Compiling results like those depicted in Fig. We used unbiased numerical calculations to study the SIT in the ground state of the attractive honeycomb Hubbard model in the presence of a staggered potential. We directly showed that the lowest-energy charge excitations are bosonic across the transition, and cross over to fermionic in the insulating phase. The former is consistent with the finding that the SIT in this model belongs to the 3d-XY universality class. The results obtained in the honeycomb lattice are qualitatively similar to those in the square lattice Given that, in the absence of nearest-neighbor hoppings, the Hamiltonian considered here has already been simulated in optical lattice experiments c |, as for U = 0 and |U | > |U c |, we expect that any non-vanishing value of the staggered potential ∆ leads to an insulating ground state.