Organic-inorganic multiferroics are promising for the next generation of electronic devices. To date, dozens of organic-inorganic multiferroics have been reported; however, most of them show magnetic Curie temperature much lower than room temperature, which drastically hampers their application. Here, by performing first-principle calculations and building effective model Hamiltonians, we reveal a molecular orbital-mediated magnetic coupling mechanism in twodimensional Cr(pyz)2 (pyz=pyrazine), and the role that the valence state of the molecule plays in determining the magnetic coupling type between metal ions. Based on these, we demonstrate that a two-dimensional organic-inorganic room-temperature multiferroic, Cr(h-fpyz)2 (h-fpyz= halffluoropyrazine), can be rationally designed by introducing ferroelectricity in Cr(pyz)2 while keeping the valence state of the molecule unchanged. Our work not only reveals the origin of magnetic coupling in 2D organic-inorganic systems, but also provides a way to design room temperature multiferroic materials rationally. Multiferroic materials, in which two or more ferroic ordering coexist, have attracted great interest due to their potential for technological applications, such as sensors, spintronics, and storage devices. In this work, specific model Hamiltonians are proposed, in combination with first-principle calculations, to rationally design room-temperature multiferroicity in the two-dimensional organic-inorganic system Cr(pyz)2. We reveal that a molecular orbital-mediated magnetic coupling mechanism determines the interactions between magnetic ions. Using such magnetic coupling mechanism, we introduce multiferroicity in Cr(pyz)2 successfully by fluorinating the systems and consequently design a two-dimensional organic-inorganic room-temperature multiferroic. Origin of high temperature ferromagnetism in Cr(pyz)2. To more efficiently reveal the magnetic coupling mechanism and investigate possible multiferroicity in Li0.7[Cr(pyz)2]Cl0.70.25 (THF), we "exfoliate" the experimental bulk structure (with P4/mmm symmetry) to obtain a Cr(pyz)2 monolayer (with P4/nbm symmetry), considering the fact that the THF molecules, as well as the LiCl layer, are neutral and nonmagnetic, therefore likely having a weak interaction with the Cy(pyz)2 layer. Besides, the Cr(pyz)2 monolayer structure has been shown to be stable at 400 K in a very recent work. Meanwhile, each pyz molecule also shows a local magnetic moment of about 0.6 μB which aligns antiparallel with those of adjacent Cr ions, which thus leads to a ferrimagnetic ground state of Cr(pyz)2 monolayer. In order to gain an in-depth understanding of the magnetic coupling in the Cr(pyz)2 monolayer at the orbital level, we calculate the band structure and orbital projected density of states of its ground state. As shown in Figure II of Supplementary Materials (SM)]: the degenerate dxz/dyz and nondegenerate dxy, dz 2 and dx 2 -y 2 orbitals, consistent with the square planar crystal field. The occupied spin-up dxy, dxz/dyz and dz 2 orbitals are located at about 2.5-3 eV below the Fermi level, exhibiting in principle a magnetic moment of 4 μB/Cr. The unoccupied dx 2 -y 2 is located at 2.5 eV above the Fermi level. Thus, the FM coupling between Cr ions is mediated by the pyz molecules. We will denote it as molecular orbital-mediated magnetic coupling. Furthermore, the valence states of Cr and pyz in Cr(pyz)2 monolayer are +2 and -1, respectively, same as those in the bulk structure. where J is exchange-coupling parameters between the spins and A denotes the single-ion anisotropy parameters. Here, only the spins of Cr ions are considered in the effective spin Hamiltonian model. Moreover, the Cr-Cr interactions that we considered only include the nearestneighboring Cr-Cr interactions (see the inset of Figure High temperature multiferroicity in fluorinated Cr(pyz)2. Let us now focus on whether multiferroicity would appear in Cr(pyz)2 monolayer system. As aforementioned, fluorination can induce or increase ferroelectricity in organic-inorganic hybrid systems. We first construct the simplest Cr(h-fpyz)2 monolayer structure (as shown in Figure Our above calculations therefore show that state-IV has the lowest energy among the four considered states. However, one may wonder what is the true ground state of the Cr(h-fpyz)2 monolayer with the rotational degree of freedom for each h-fpyz molecule. In order to obtain such ground state in this system, we build a novel Ising-like model Hamiltonian using the Property Analysis and Simulation Package for materials (PASP) , where H n indicates the n-th nearest-neighboring pair interaction term between molecules. Here, the nearest-, next nearest-and third nearest-neighboring interactions are considered (see in Figure The overall anti-parallel alignment of the eight h-fpyz molecules in the primitive cell of the ground state (see in Figure The appearance of such checkboard pattern AFE ground state can be understood intuitively from the extracted values of the coupling parameters Jn,αβ (see Table In order to estimate the magnetic Curie temperature of Cr(h-fpyz) Furthermore, such similar magnetic coupling strengths indicate that the magnetic Curie temperature of the Cr(h-fpyz)2 monolayer structures in Figure μC/cm 2 ), The calculated energy barrier is around 0.23 eV/h-fpyz (as shown in Figure The energy barrier between the ground state and state-IV (having the in-plane polarization) is also calculated (see Fig. To summarize, we achieve a rational design of a two-dimensional organic-inorganic roomtemperature multiferroic. An effective triple-orbital model is built and reveals a molecular orbitalmediated FM coupling mechanism between Cr ions in the Cr(pyz)2 monolayer. Using this model, the valence state of the bridged molecule between magnetic metal ions is proven to determine the coupling type between metal ions. By maintaining the valence state of the bridged molecule and taking advantage of our proposed original Ising-like model Hamiltonian, a new two-dimensional organic-inorganic room-temperature multiferroic, Cr(h-fpyz)2, is designed. Its ground state is antiferroelectric, but there are stable ferroelectric states at room temperature that enable multi-state storage. This work not only sheds light on molecular orbital-mediated coupling in organicinorganic frameworks, but also provides a guideline to design new multiferroics with high magnetic Curie temperature.