This work demonstrates the unique approach of introducing divacancy imperfections in topological Stone-Wales type defected graphene quantum dots for harvesting both singlet and triplet excitons, essential for fabricating fluorescent organic light-emitting diodes. Here, we first reveal that structural relaxation of these systems establishes the high-spin triplet state as the stable ground state at room temperature, thereby significantly increasing their potential in designing spintronic devices. Our extensive electron-correlated computations then demonstrate that the energetic ordering of the singlet and triplet states in these relaxed structures can trigger both prompt and delayed 1 The development of unique materials with tunable electronic and optical properties, required for optimizing the performance of optoelectronic devices, has been a crucial theoretical and technical challenge in recent years In this work, we propose for the first time, an efficient mechanism of exploiting the structural relaxation process associated with the suitable incorporation of divacancy and Stone-Wales (SW) type topological defects in graphene quantum dots (GQDs) for promoting both prompt and delayed fluorescence of varied wavelengths, which is crucial for designing fluorescent organic light-emitting diodes (FOLEDs). The formation and reconstruction of in situ atomic point defects (single vacancy and double vacancy) and topological anomalies like SW-type bond reconstructions, created ubiquitiously during facile synthesis of graphene, has been precisely imaged by atomic resolution microscopy techniques like scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) and aberration corrected transmission electron microscopy (ac-TEM) Theoretical studies have also affirmed the relative stability of various types of DV reconstructed structures Even though a considerable amount of literature is available on the microscopic imaging, identification of real-time dynamics of carbon vacancies and their energetics in graphene nanostructures, there is no report till date to highlight the variation in electronic and optical properties due to structural relaxation of DVs in SW-defected GQDs. In this work, we perform extensive electron-correlated computations based on the Pariser-Parr-Pople (PPP) model Hamiltonian and configuration-interaction (CI) methodology to systematically explore for the first time, the imprints of structural relaxation in modulating the electronic and optical properties of hydrogen-passivated GQDs having divacancy imperfections as well as armchair, zigzag and topologically SW-reconstructed zigzag (reczag) edge terminations. In order to compare and rationalize different computational approaches, we have also employed the TDDFT methodology to compute the absorption spectra of these systems. Our computed results demonstrate that structural relaxation, divacancy-position, and spin multiplicity are pivotal in determining the energetic ordering, decay channels for prompt as well as delayed fluorescence of tunable wavelengths and the marked optical absorption spectral features of singlet and triplet states. The divacancy defect is introduced at (i) the centre and (ii) the reczag edge of the GQD and their optimized structures are obtained by relaxing the configurations using the Gaussian 16 program package The electron-correlated computations on these optimized structures are then initiated by applying our theoretical model based on Pariser-Parr-Pople (PPP) Hamiltonian Here, the first term indicates the kinetic energy of the p z electron having spin σ, when it delocalizes from the i th carbon atom to its adjacent j th carbon atom. The parameter t ij represents the hopping matrix term between adjoining carbon atoms while c † iσ (c iσ ) creates (annihilates) the p z electron at i th location. The value of hopping matrix element, t 0 , is selected as 2.4 eV when the bond length between adjacent carbon atoms, R 0 , is 1.4 Å. In this work, the magnitude of hopping matrix elements corresponding to C-C bond lengths shorter or longer than 1.4 Å are derived from the relationship t ij = t 0 e (R 0 -R ij )/δ , with δ = 0.73 Å The last term in this equation depicts long-range Coulomb repulsion with the parameter V ij incorporating screening effects in accordance to the Ohno relationship 19 wherein, the screening effects are simulated by the dielectric constant (κ i,j ) of the system and R i,j denotes the spacing between adjacent carbon atoms (in Å). The screened parameters with U = 8.0 eV, κ i,i = 1.0 and κ i,j = 2.0 (i = j) are employed, in agreement with our earlier studies For determining the singlet optical absorption spectra of our GQDs, electron correlated computations are performed by implementing the MRSDCI methodology. For this objective, a code developed by our group The transition electric dipole matrix elements between different excited states, necessary for calculating the optical absorption spectra, are then derived from the eigenfunctions generated from this CI matrix. Thereafter, the excited states leading to peaks in the absorption profile are discerned and their corresponding reference eigenfunctions with coefficients above a predetermined convergence criterion are taken into consideration to create the new reference space for performing the next MRSDCI calculation. These steps are repeated in chronological order until convergence of the excitation energies and optical absorption spectra of the system are achieved within an acceptable tolerance. In order to make the computations attainable, a small number of initial low-energy occupied orbitals are frozen and upper high-energy virtual orbitals are deleted to reduce the set of active MOs. The transition dipole components and excited state energies are employed to compute the Lorentzian line shaped ground state optical absorption cross-section σ(ω) given by, where, ω, ω i0 , ê, r, α and γ represent the frequency of incident radiation, energy difference (in frequency units) between ground (|0 ) and excited (|i ) levels, polarization direction of incident radiation, position operator, fine structure constant and absorption line-width, respectively. For computing the triplet absorption spectrum, the same methodology is adopted by considering the many-electron wave-functions having triplet spin multiplicity and then deriving the corresponding transition dipole elements and excited triplet state energies. For the purpose of authenticating our PPP-model-based configuration-interaction (PPP-CI) results, the optical absorption spectra of the optimized configurations (B3LYP/6-31g(d)) are computed by employing the TD-B3LYP approach using the Gaussian 16 program package A schematic representation of this mechanism is illustrated in fig. We now investigate the role of structural relaxation and electron-electron correlation in governing the optical spectral features of all the above considered divacancy and SW-defected GQDs. For this purpose, PPP-CI and TDDFT methodologies are adopted to compute and analyze the linear absorption spectra for both the spin multiplicity states, since it is feasible for these GQDs to exist in either of these states at high temperatures. The precision of our CI results, in the absence of experimental data, are validated by the large dimensions However, in case of GQD-DV2-594, this excitation leads to an extremely small hump at energy 0.93 eV, which is hardly perceptible in the optical absorption spectrum. These results are primarily a consequence of electron-electron correlations coupled with broken particlehole symmetry due to DV and SW-type imperfections in these GQDs. (iii) The second peak of GQD-DV1 and GQD-DV2, dominantly due to |H → L transition, has mixed x -y polarization with higher magnitude of the transition dipole moment along the y axis, while this peak gets predominantly x-polarized for GQD-DV1-585. (iv) The position of the most intense (MI) peak is in the UV range for GQD-DV1 while it shifts to the violet range for its relaxed configuration. This is in stark contrast to the reverse trend demonstrated by SW-defected GQDs having divacancies at the reczag edge, wherein the MI peak shifts from violet to UV range on relaxation. In addition, the magnitudes of these red/blue-shifts are quite comparable to each other. (v) The strength of the most intense peak of GQD-DV1 decreases significantly after relaxation, while no such trend is observed for GQD-DV2. (vi) The optical absorption peak profile (peak pattern as well as peak intensity) is drastically altered when the DV-defected GQDs undergo relaxation. In case of the computed PPP-CI triplet one-photon absorption spectra, the peak positions represent the excitation energies of the higher triplet states with respect to the lowest triplet state. A detailed examination of this spectra (Figs. A comparison of the MI peak energies of the singlet absorption spectra of GQD-DV1-585 and GQD-DV2-594, obtained from TDDFT and PPP-CI approaches (Table In summary, we have successfully captured the signatures of structural relaxation in governing the electronic and optical properties of SW-defected GQDs with divacancy by performing extensive electron-correlated computations based on the PPP Hamiltonian and TDDFT approach. It is observed that the geometry of the relaxed systems is critically dependent on the position of the divacancy in these structures. Our results conclusively show that structural relaxation switches the electronic ground-state configuration of these systems from low-spin singlet to high-spin triplet state. The thermal stability of this high-spin triplet ground state of the relaxed systems at and above the room temperature significantly augments the applicability of these materials in designing spintronic devices. Notably, our computations reveal that the energetic ordering of the singlet and triplet states of the relaxed systems facilitates the possibility of achieving both prompt as well as delayed fluorescence of different wavelengths and the tunability range of the emission wavelengths is determined by the position of divacancy in these SW-defected GQDs. Our findings signify that the entire singlet and triplet optical absorption profile (peak pattern as well as intensity) is substantially altered due to structural relaxation. Specifically, the nature of shift exhibited by the most intense absorption peak of the relaxed GQDs with respect to their unrelaxed counterpart depends on the location of the divacancy. The magnitude of this shift is determined by the spin multiplicity of the energy states. The spin multiplicity also has distinct imprints on the entire absorption peak profile of these systems. Also, all these marked features of the optical absorption spectrum can be more accurately described by the PPP-CI methodology as compared to the TDDFT approach. In conclusion, our results provide new insights to the novel concept of exploiting SW-defected GQDs with divacancy for designing highly efficient optoelectronic and spintronic devices. 