Periodic tilings can store information if individual tiles are decorated to lower their symmetry. Truchet tilings-the broad family of space-filling arrangements of such tiles-offer an efficient mechanism of visual data storage related to that used in barcodes and QR codes. Here, we show that the crystalline metal-organic framework [OZn 4 ][1,3-benzenedicarboxylate] 3 (TRUMOF-1) is an atomic-scale realisation of a complex three-dimensional Truchet tiling. Its crystal structure consists of a periodically-arranged assembly of identical zinc-containing clusters connected uniformly in a well-defined but disordered fashion to give a topologically aperiodic microporous network. We suggest that this unusual structure emerges as a consequence of geometric frustration in the chemical building units from which it is assembled. In 1704, Sébastian Truchet described a variety of visually appealing patterns generated by a single square tile painted differently either side of its diagonal. Truchet tilings have since been generalised to encompass any periodic covering of space (partial or complete) with one or more tiles that have been decorated to reduce their symmetry. 2 Breaking colour-inversion symmetry, for example, gives barcodes and QR codes as simple Truchet tilings in Truchet tilings with curved paths. The positions of the square tiles are translationally periodic, but the continuous pattern produced by the arc decorations is aperiodic. Projecting any such tiling onto the underlying unit cell (shown in red) gives an average structure with partial occupancies. For large systems, one expects equal occupancies of each of the four possible arc orientations. B More complex Truchet tilings can be generated using a combination of different decorated and undecorated tiles. In this particular example, based on the trihexagonal tiling of the plane, the connected path of line decorations forms a single percolating network that spans the entire system. one and two dimensions, respectively: each strip or pixel encodes a binary state that is exploited in their application as machine-readable information stores. More complex Truchet tilings store information in aperiodic patterns of loops and networks in two or three dimensions [Figure The framework pores of as-synthesised samples contain solvent, which can be exchanged with other solvents and/or removed by heating under vacuum. The empty framework adsorbs a range of gases (including CO 2 ) and has a BET surface area of 765 m 2 g -1 . Its thermal stability is very similar to that of MOF-5, and its adsorption enthalpies are about twice as large. In all these various respects (covered in greater detail in the SI), TRUMOF-1 behaves as a conventional MOF. To test whether this Truchet-tile description of TRUMOF-1 is physically reasonable, we carried out a series of ab initio density functional theory (DFT) calculations. Our approach was to calculate the geometry and cell optimised 0 K energies of periodic realisations ('approximants') The experimental measurement with greatest sensitivity to structural disorder and its correlation in crystalline materials is single-crystal diffuse scattering. The topology of TRUMOF-1 is unusual in a number of respects. The MOF network is a fully 6-connected net with nodes arranged on a periodic lattice (as in MOF-5) but its connectivity is aperiodic (in contrast to MOF-5). No two crystals have the same network connectivity-i.e. they store different information-despite sharing the same statistical properties. In these senses, the system is intermediate to conventional crystalline MOFs, on the one hand, and amorphous MOF derivatives with continuous random network structures, on the other hand. There is no reason to expect that TRUMOF-1 should be the unique MOF with a Truchet-tile Each cluster is connected to six neighbouring clusters, some of which will be in planes above or below that shown here. The surface of the solvent-accessible pores is shown as a grey outline. Note that, despite the periodic arrangement of inorganic clusters, the pore network is disordered. There is a qualitative similarity to the network structure shown in Figure 