Isolated, micro-meter sized diamonds are grown by micro-wave plasma chemical vapour deposition technique on Si(001) substrates. Each diamond is uniquely identified by markers milled in the Si substrate by Ga + focused ion beam. The morphology and micro-grain structure analysis, indicates that the diamonds are icosahedral or bi-crystals. Icosahedral diamonds have higher (up to σ h = 2.3 GPa), and wider distribution (∆σ h = 4.47 GPa) of hydrostatic stress built up at the microcrystal grain boundaries, compared to the other crystals. The number and spectral shape of SiV - color centers incorporated in the micro-diamonds is analysed, and estimated by means of temperature dependent photoluminescence measurements, and Montecarlo simulations. The Montecarlo simulations indicates that the number of SiV -color centers is a few thousand per micro-diamond. Colour centres in diamond have become well established architectures for quantum technologies Here we report a novel approach to fabricate MDs with large ensembles of SiV -color centers, and to calculate their number density. Firstly, isolated and high crystal quality micro-diamonds (MDs), are grown by micro-wave plasma chemical vapour deposition (MWCVD) technique on silicon. Each MD is uniquely identified and addressed by micrometer-wide markers milled in the Si substrate by focused ion beam (FIB) technique in the scanning electron microscope chamber. The micro-structure and morphology of individual MDs is investigated by a combination of scanning electron microscopy (SEM), atomic force microscopy (AFM) and polarised confocal Raman spectroscopy. Finally, the number density and spectral shape of SiV -ensembles in MDs is investigated and * lachlan.j.rogers@quantum.diamonds calculated by temperature dependent photoluminescence spectroscopy, and Montecarlo simulations. These simulations qualitatively reproduce the ensemble spectra by realistically simulating individual SiV -spectra for a given number of SiV -centres ranging in axial strain, transverse strain, and temperature. It is possible to estimate the number of SiV -centres to be a few thousand per MD. Micrometer-sized diamonds, were grown by MWCVD with CH 4 and H 2 as precursor gases, directly on Si(001) substrates without any seeding procedure. The MDs nucleate on the defects of the SiC/Si(001) thin layer which is formed during the CH 4 plasma process, with a density below 1 mm -2 . The X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis (see supporting material) clearly indicates the formation of a SiC layer both in the C 1s and Si 2p signals. The atomic concentration of the SiC layer is 26 % ± 1 % calculated from the integral peak intensities (see section section D), considering that thenm XPS penetration depth ranges between 5 -10 nm, it corresponds to a few SiC monolayers. The formation of a SiC interlayer enables the nucleation, and crystal growth of diamonds without any seeding procedure The growth process (see section D) has been optimized to form MDs with well defined crystal facets, having the so-called crystal quality (intensity ratio between the Raman signal of C sp 3 and sp 2 ) higher than 99.5% measured by Raman spectroscopy In order to measure and to correlate the structural and optical properties of specific diamond crystals, six different MDs, with various morphology and structure, were identified by SEM and labelled by focused ion beam (FIB) milled markers. Figure Both SEM and AFM analysis shows a similar crystal size of ∼ 2 μm for every MDs, indicating that all crystals nucleated in a similar stage of the CVD process. Each MD presents well-defined {100} and {111} crystal facets, but the overall crystal shape and morphology are different. Indeed, the diamond crystal shape is determined by the growth velocity parameter α = √ 3v 100 /v 111 , where v 100 and v 111 are the growth velocity of the {100} and {111} surfaces, respectively The SEM and AFM images in Figure Differently, the SEM and AFM images in Figure In order to get more insights into the diamonds' microstructure, the crystal height profile along the two orthogonal Si[100] and Si[010] directions, together with the stereographic map of the crystal facets distribution A summary of the facet distribution for MD1 -6, obtained by AFM and stereographic map analysis, is reported in Figure Confocal Raman spectroscopy is a very powerful technique to analyse the micro-structural properties of diamonds, such as crystal quality, twins formation and lattice stress In equation 1, d represents the Raman tensor element which depends on the crystal electrical polarizability. The Raman tensors R 1 and R 2 are associated to transverse optical (TO) phonon modes along the [100] and [010] crystal directions, respectively. Differently, R 3 relates to the longitudinal optical (LO) phonon mode along the [001] crystal direction. The overall measured Raman scattering intensity I measured is a combination of the three different phonon modes, and it can be expressed by equation 2. In equation 2, e i and e s are the linear polarization vectors of the incident laser beam and scattered light, respectively. Thus, the Raman scattered intensity strongly depends on the relative orientation between the diamond crystal axis and the incident/scattered polarization directions of light. This enables to distinguish crystal grains with different crystallographic orientations. In this work, e s is set along the Si substrate [010] crystal direction, denoted as y in the Porto Raman notation. Differently, the angular rotation φ of the linearly polarized incident light e i is controlled by a rotating λ/2 waveplate, being e i =[cosφ sinφ 0]. Detailed studies of the angular dependence of the diamond Raman scattering intensity for different crystal facets can be found in references A typical Raman spectrum obtained from the MDs is reported in Figure In order to analyse the micro-structure of the MDs, Raman spectra are recorded at different laser light polarizations (0 ≤ φ ≤ 360 • , in steps of 3 • ), in five different diamond positions, labelled in Figure The micro structural results, obtained from Raman scattering of the icosahedral crystals, are summarized in Figure Analogously, all MDs have been analysed by Raman spectroscopy with the procedure reported in Figure C. SiV -Photoluminescence spectroscopy Photoluminescence (PL) spectra were recorded for numerous MDs under 514 nm excitation, which is known to efficiently excite SiV -centres despite being far detuned. The characteristic SiV -PL band was observed in all of the MDs, and the zero-phonon line at 737 nm was investigated in high resolution. At room temperature there is considerable thermal broadening of this optical transition, and so features were difficult to identify. However, a range of SiV -fluoresence intensities were observed. The sample was cooled to liquid-helium temperatures (below 10 K), and the cryogenic PL spectra exhibited a stable and repeatable pattern of sharp peaks across the ZPL. Typical examples are shown in Figure The spikiness of each MD spectrum was calculated by first taking a moving-window average of 50 points to obtain the smoothed "band shape". The area between the measured spectrum and this smoothed band shape was divided by the area under the band (for normalisation) to produce a quantitative description of the spikiness. Spikiness values of 5.8 × 10 -2 , 9.5 × 10 -2 , and 1.2 × 10 -1 were obtained for the three MD spectra shown in Figure The SiV -transition energies are predominantly influenced by the presence of strain. Axial strain (along the 111 SiV -symmetry axis) shifts the overall transition energy, and transverse strain increases the splitting between the four ZPL components. At cryogenic temperatures the splitting of the excited-state spin-orbit doublet is enough to cause thermalisation of the excitedstate population, and this leads to the higher-energy (blue-shifted) peaks decreasing in intensity relative to the lower-energy peaks. Thermal broadening of the ZPL components also alters the shape of the SiV -spectrum. Using detailed parameters for these effects from the lit- erature, a SiV -spectrum simulator was created capable of producing the expected spectrum given information about temperature and strain. The running-average smoothed spectral data was used as a probability distribution for randomly sampling the ZPL central position for each SiV centre, and transverse strain was sampled from an exponential distribution to represent the majority of centres having low strain but some high-strain outliers. Temperature was set to match the 8K measurement temperature, and each simulated SiV -centre was scaled by a brightness factor sampled from a flat distribution (not all colour centres are in the confocal microscope focal spot). Summing the individual simulated SiV -spectra provided Monte Carlo ensemble simulations of the measured MD spectra. For a chosen number of SiV -centres, 200 simulated ensemble spectra were generated and their spikiness calculated. The histograms in Figure A probability distribution of the number of SiV -centres contributing to the measured MD spectrum was obtained by comparing the heights of these histograms at various ensemble sizes with the experimental spikiness. The MD spectrum featured in Figure In summary, we demonstrate the fabrication of MDs with large ensemble of SiV -centers by MWCVD on Si(001) substrates. The morphology and micro-structure of the diamond crystals are fully investigated and correlated to the stress formed at the grain boundary regions. We have demonstrated a novel Montecarlo simulation technique to evaluate the number of SiV -centers in each MD, based on temperature dependent PL measurements. The fabrication of MDs with a large density of SiV -centers represents a viable solution for numerous applications. Bio-marking can benefit from the bright fluorescence within a biological transparency window. Spatially confined colour centre ensembles are also of interest for fundamental investigations including optical trapping and a recent proposal for strong light-matter coupling in cavities MDs were grown on Si(001) substrates consisting of 15 x 15 mm 2 chips cleaved from a 4-inch, 500 μm thick, and n-type (1-10 Ωcm) wafer. Si(001) chips were rinsed in acetone and isopropanol, followed by piranha etching for 15 minutes, and finally cleaned by RF oxygen plasma. CVD growth was performed using the MWCVD Seki 6500 reactor at a chamber pressure of 70 Torr, with a CH 4 to H 2 ratio of 1.5%, at a substrate temperature of 900 • C for 120 minutes. The SEM analysis was performed using a ZEISS Auriga electron microscope (acceleration voltage 5 kV, aperture size 30 μm) equipped with a FIB gun. The markers were fabricated by FIB using 30 kV Ga + ions and 1 nA current, they are about 2 μm deep and 30 μm wide, to be easily addressed by optical microscopy. AFM measurements were carried out by a Bruker Dimension ICON SPM microscope at 256 samples/line and 0.3 Hz. The data are analysed with the open-source software Gwyddion Room temperature confocal Raman spectroscopy and SiV -PL were performed with a Renishaw inVia system equipped by a green laser (514 nm), 2400 lines/mm monochromator, 50x 0.9 NA objective, and CCD camera detector. Polarised measurements are obtained by using a motorised (3 • /step) rotating λ/2 waveplate on the laser beam, and a polarizer on the scattered beam. Low temperature PL measurements were performed on a galvo mirror home-built confocal set up, operated using the Qudi software suite X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis was performed using an AXIS Ultra DLD spectrometer (Kratos Analytical Inc., Manchester, UK) with a monochromated Al Kα source at a power of 180 W (15 kV , 12 mA) at a pressure of ∼ 1 × 10 -9 mbar, a hemispherical analyser operating in the fixed analyser transmission mode and the standard aperture (analysis area: 0.3 mm × 0.7 mm). To obtain more detailed information about chemical structure, high resolution spectra were recorded from individual peaks at 20 eV pass energy. The specimen was analysed at an emission angle of 0 • as measured from the surface normal. Assuming typical values for the electron attenuation length of relevant photoelectrons, the XPS analysis depth (from which 95 % of the detected signal originates) ranges between 5 to 10 nm for a flat surface. XPS data processing was performed using CasaXPS software version 2.3.15 (Casa Software Ltd., Teignmouth, UK). All elements present were identified from survey spectra. The atomic concentrations of the detected elements were calculated using integral peak intensities and the sensitivity factors supplied by the manufacturer. Binding energies were referenced to the Si 2p 3/2 peak at 99.4 eV for Si(100). The accuracy associated with quantitative XPS is about 10 -15%.