Motivated by recent advances in the creation of few-body atomic Fermi gases with attractive interactions, we study theoretically the few-to-many-particle crossover of pair excitations, which for large particle numbers evolve into a mode that describes amplitude fluctuations of the superfluid order parameter (the "Higgs" mode). Our analysis is based on the hypothesis that salient aspects of the excitation spectrum are captured by interactions between time-reversed pair states in a harmonic oscillator potential. Microscopically, this assumption leads to a Richardson-type pairing model, which is integrable and thus allows a systematic quantitative study of the few-to-manyparticle crossover with only minor numerical effort. We first establish a parity effect in the groundstate energy, i.e., a spectral convexity in the energy of open-shell configurations compared to their closed-shell neighbors, which is quantified by a so-called Matveev-Larkin parameter discussed for mesoscopic superconductors, which generalizes the pairing gap to mesoscopic ensembles and which behaves quantitatively differently in a few-body and a many-body regime. The crossover point for this quantity is widely tunable as a function of interaction strength. We then compute the excitation spectrum and demonstrate that the pair excitation energy shows a minimum that deepens with increasing particle number and shifts to smaller interaction strengths, consistent with the finite-size precursor of a quantum phase transition to a superfluid state. We extract a critical finite-size scaling exponent that characterizes the decrease of the gap with increasing particle number. A fundamental question in physics is how the constituents of interacting systems behave collectively to yield the emergent properties of matter In this Letter, we show how the excitation spectrum of a paired superfluid emerges at large particle numbers, with a Higgs mode that describes amplitude fluctuations of the superfluid order parameter. The key theoretical advance that allows us to interpolate between the few-and many-particle limit is the use of an integrable pairing model, which treats the interaction be- * johannes.hofmann@physics.gu.se tween time-reversed states exactly. Corresponding experiments in the few-body limit were recently carried out in two-dimensional harmonically trapped atomic Fermi gases In order to highlight the crucial role of pair interactions, we consider a model [stated in Eq. ( We study the following Hamiltonian: Here, ε j is a single-particle energy labeled by a primary quantum number j, and the energy level is d j -fold degenerate with degenerate states distinguished by a second quantum number m. For a two-dimensional (2D) harmonic oscillator, for example, we have ε j = j + 1 (j = 0, 1, . . .) (all energies are expressed in units of the harmonic oscillator energy) with d j = j + 1 per spin and m = -j, -j + 2, . . . , j is the angular momentum projection within a shell j. Furthermore, we define the particle number operator in a given shell where c † jm creates a fermion in a state (j, m) and c † j m creates a fermion in a corresponding time-reversed state (i.e., with opposite spin and angular momentum). The interaction term couples pairs of fermions annihilated by We briefly comment on the link with a contact interaction: In occupation number representation, the contact interaction contains a matrix element where φ j,m (r) is the single-particle wave function of the state with quantum number (j, m). For an oscillator potential, where Eq. ( In the present case, the interaction (1) connects pairs in time-reversed states of the 2D harmonic oscillator, (j, m; j, m) → (j ′ , m ′ ; j ′ , m ′ ). Fermionic systems with pairing interactions as in Eq. ( . This constraint can be incorporated into the Bose gas solution is created by acting on the empty state |0⟩ with the same creation operators as for the Bose problem Here, the E ν are generalized pair level energies (called roots), which are the central objects in the Richardson solution, and L is a cutoff on the single-particle spectrum. In particular, the energy of the state ( with additional single-particle contributions of blocked levels. The state ( Here, the first two terms are the same as for noninteracting bosons and the last term, which couples different occupied levels, comes from the hard-core constraint on A j . We solve the Richardson equations (8) iteratively starting from a noninteracting configuration with a set of blocked and pair-occupied levels, the latter setting the initial conditions for the roots E ν (for alternative solution methods, see Refs. Roots derived from degenerate levels are split in the complex plane, and with increasing interaction strength there can be singular points at which two or more roots merge or bifurcate. These singularities are not reflected in the energy Figure Here, E open where ∆ solves the gap equation, with For the harmonic oscillator, ∆ ∼ √ N for large N such that the Matveev-Larkin parameter is extensive. By contrast, for small particle numbers and interaction strength, its value is set by the perturbative result with d n F the degeneracy of the Fermi level, which scales as O( √ N ) with a much smaller magnitude. Indeed, a full solution of the pairing model agrees with this picture as shown in Fig. We proceed to discuss excited states, which are the main results of the Letter. Figure The minimum of the first pair excitation is interpreted as the few-body precursor of a quantum phase transition between a normal and a superfluid state few-to-many-body crossover, which we describe in the following. Figure To describe the few-to-many crossover quantitatively, we show in Fig. In summary, we provide a description of trapped Fermi gases with attractive pairing interactions that captures the full crossover between the few-body and the manybody regime. Our results indicate that the finite-size scaling of the quantum phase transition sets in early and is observable in experiments with few-body Fermi gases. Moreover, the pairing model used here is very versatile, in particular, it can be used to compute correlation functions 