When impinging on optical structures or passing in their vicinity, free electrons can spontaneously emit electromagnetic radiation, a phenomenon generally known as cathodoluminescence. Free-electron radiation comes in many guises: Cherenkov, transition, and Smith-Purcell radiation, but also electron scintillation, commonly referred to as incoherent cathodoluminescence. While those effects have been at the heart of many fundamental discoveries and technological developments in high-energy physics in the past century, their recent demonstration in photonic and nanophotonic systems has attracted a lot of attention. Those developments arose from predictions that exploit nanophotonics for novel radiation regimes, now becoming accessible thanks to advances in nanofabrication. In general, the proper design of nanophotonic structures can enable shaping, control, and enhancement of free-electron radiation, for any of the above-mentioned effects. Free-electron radiation in nanophotonics opens the way to promising applications, such as widely-tunable integrated light sources from x-ray to THz frequencies, miniaturized particle accelerators, and highly sensitive high-energy particle detectors. Here, we review the emerging field of free-electron radiation in nanophotonics. We first present a general, unified framework to describe free-electron light-matter interaction in arbitrary nanophotonic systems. We then show how this framework sheds light on the physical underpinnings of many methods in the field used to control and enhance free-electron radiation. Namely, the framework points to the central role played by the photonic eigenmodes in controlling the output properties of free-electron radiation (e.g., frequency, directionality, and polarization). We then review experimental techniques to characterize free-electron radiation in scanning and transmission electron microscopes, which have emerged as the central platforms for experimental realization of the phenomena described in this Review. We further discuss various experimental methods to control and extract spectral, angular, and polarization-resolved information on free-electron radiation. We conclude this Review by outlining novel directions for this field, including ultrafast and quantum effects in free-electron radiation, tunable short-wavelength emitters in the ultraviolet and soft x-ray regimes, and free-electron radiation from topological states in photonic crystals. CONTENTS IV. Future perspectives 18 A. Quantum effects 20 1. Recoil effects 20 2. Quantum interference and waveshaping effects 20 3. High-order effects in quantum electrodynamics 22 B. Ultrashort-wavelength emitters 22 C. Nanophotonic dielectric laser accelerators 23 D. Inverse-designed free-electron radiators and accelerators 23 E. Free-electron lasing in nanophotonic structures and other exotic effects 23 F. Topological effects in free-electron radiation 24 G. Non-equilibrium emission processes with free electrons 24 H. Fully integrated on-chip systems 24 V. Conclusion 25 VI. Authors' contribution 25 VII. Data availability 25 VIII. Acknowledgments 25 A. Appendix: Unified theory of coherent cathodoluminescence 25 1. Cherenkov radiation 26 2. Transition radiation 26 3. Coherent excitation of SPPs by free electrons 26 References 26 The interaction of free electrons with light and matter is a century-old field of research, that has had profound implications in electron microscopy, radiation sources, and highenergy particle detection. At the heart of this field lies a few fundamental discoveries, unveiling various conditions in which free electrons can convert part of their energy into photons. How can charged particles emit light? This fundamental question has driven much development in theoretical and experimental physics in the twentieth century. Perhaps the original interest in this question can be traced back to early discoveries in radioactivity, where luminescence from liquids was used to detect the presence of radioactive substances. Free electrons and other types of charged high-energy particles usually carry large kinetic energies compared to the energies of optical photons often controlled with nanophotonics, and can in principle emit photons with any energy below the kinetic energy of the electron (including at optical frequencies). The perspective of enhancing and controlling freeelectron radiation with nanophotonics thus applies to wide spectral ranges. There has been a recent surge of interest in research at the intersection of free-electron physics and nanophotonics. In all of the above-mentioned applications, recent works Previous works reviewed experimental results in electronlight interactions, providing frameworks to calculate electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) and cathodoluminescence (CL) in classical and quantum regimes. A. Free-electron-light interaction mediated by nanophotonic structures Free electrons can emit light in many different ways. Radiation generally occurs when the electron (with charge q and propagating at velocity v) interacts with a structure or medium supporting photonic modes such that energy-momentum conservation is satisfied. In general, one can predict which modes are excited by a free electron by considering the phasematching condition: 61 where ω is the photon frequency, and k its wavevector. This condition requires that the electron velocity and the mode phase velocity coincide. From this formula, many situations in free-electron radiation can be readily analyzed. For example, one immediate consequence of Eq. ( A typical interaction of an electron beam with a sample is shown in Fig. In the grazing-angle interaction zone, the phase-matching condition from Eq. ( More specifically, as shown in Fig. Overview of free-electron radiation in nanophotonics. Schematic of an electron beam interacting with a sample. Radiation can occur from events in the "grazing-angle interaction zone" (a-d) or in the "impact interaction zone" (e). In this Review, we discuss interactions of free-electrons with nanophotonic structures made of materials as listed in (f), and of geometries as listed in (g). In ; or from emitters in the sample excited in the electron energy loss volume (shown in blue). Emission from fluctuating current sources can be modeled by taking into account their occupation level dynamics and the nanophotonic environment in which they emit. In a bulk medium, free electrons propagating faster than the phase velocity of light in the medium can excite photonic modes (such that the velocity component of the photon phase velocity is equal to the electron velocity, as per Eq. ( When propagating in periodic media, free electrons can spontaneously emit photons in the form of Bloch modes. In the impact interaction zone, one way in which electrons can radiate is transition radiation (TR), which occurs when an electron crosses the interface between two media with distinct electromagnetic properties. From an electromagnetic perspective, TR originates in the continuity relation of the fields at the interface. Beyond the simple TR effect, the more general family of impact interaction effects appear in almost all experiments, whenever some fraction of the incoming electrons penetrates into the sample. In this impact interaction zone, the electron kinetic energy can be transferred to the material, allowing subsequent emission processes. Those emission processes can be understood as arising from fluctuating current sources associated with bound polarization (e.g., from excited electrons in defects, excitons, etc.). Such bound polarization is qualitatively similar to electrons in atoms or molecules, and thus their light emission (and nanophotonic shaping perspective) is understood from the perspective of bound-electron radiation engineering, which is a dominant paradigm in nanophotonics currently. Therefore, in this process, the phase-matching condition does not describe the coupling of free electrons with light. However, photonic engineering can still be used to enhance and control radiation. This type of radiation is commonly referred to as incoherent cathodoluminescence (ICL). Since this process is equivalent to what is referred to as scintillation in other fields of physics (e.g. as observed with x-rays, γ-rays, 67 α and β particles (2) establishment of a non-equilibrium steady-state of bound electrons The fundamental physics of radiation by free-electrons (without nanophotonics) has been known for decades in the context of macroscopic electrodynamics and high-energy physics. The fundamental physics of electron-light interaction has a long history, dating back to the early 1900's and has resulted in several cornerstone discoveries in fundamental physics. Perhaps the most celebrated of those effects is Cherenkov radiation (CR), given its many analogues in other systems, TR was originally proposed by Ginzburg and Tamm in 1945. All of the original observations discussed up to this point were performed with bulk media and high-energy electrons. The first occurrence of free-electron radiation in structured media was done in 1953 by Smith and Purcell who observed visible radiation from ≈300 keV electrons flying above a metallic diffraction grating. The core of this Review is to discuss recent developments in nanophotonics which have enabled a plethora of new effects and a new framework to understand free-electron emission. Specifically, we discuss how the interplay of free-electron physics (and more generally high-energy physics in the case of scintillation) has enabled the control and enhancement of the above-mentioned emission effects. A historical timeline of free-electron radiation, from the discovery of its fundamental building blocks to recent effects enabled by nanophotonics, is shown in Fig. Given the nanometer scale spatial resolution of electron beams in most electron microscopes, free-electron radiation has been considered as a spectroscopic probe to study nanophotonic structures. In this section, we describe the basic organizing principles of this Review, which help to sort out the different effects under a general formalism that highlights the role and prospects of nanophotonics in this field. All of the effects in the grazing-angle interaction and impact interaction zones have a common physical origin: they result from the coherent interaction between the photonic eigenmodes of the structure and a current source J(r,t) (describing the particle trajectory). The current distribution can be equivalently described in time and frequency domain. In the following, we consider a trajectory of the form r(t) = vt (with the initial position at t = 0 taken to zero without loss of generality): where q is the electron charge. The particle propagates along the linear trajectory defined by the velocity vector v = vr . The unit vector parallel to v is r and the orthogonal space is denoted as {r j,⊥ } j=1,...N-1 (where N is the dimensionality of space). Given the mismatch in energies between the incoming electron (> 1 keV in most settings) and the emitted photon energy (few eV's in the visible to near-infrared (NIR)), one can often safely neglect the quantum emission recoil, and therefore consider the trajectory to be unaffected by radiation processes. This current source can be plugged into Maxwell's equations in free space, resulting in an evanescent near field, The current distribution in Eq. ( with , and T is a normalization time. In this spectral function, f α is the occupation factor of microscopic state α with energy E α , J αβ represents the matrix element of the current density operator J ≡ e m ψ † (-ih∇)ψ, and ω αβ = [E α -E β ]/h. The current density matrix and the occupation functions can depend on position, as they depend on the electron energy loss density. Direct calculation of radiation from the stochastic current source described in Eq. ( Recent milestones enabled by nanophotonics after ~2000 (a) Enhanced free-electron-light interaction Considering the current source in Eq. ( where The main assumption in deriving this equation are small losses and weak dispersion, which are valid in most cases we consider in this (b) SPR: in a periodic medium, free electrons can emit a Bloch photon. (c) TR: when going through a discontinuous interface between two media (such that ε(r) is discontinuous), free electrons can emit a surface plasmon at the interface. (d) Incoherent cathodoluminescence (ICL), also known as electron scintillation, occurs in materials with radiating energy levels, such as in semiconductors or in defect-doped media. A free electron impinging on the material can convert part of its energy into a cascade of secondary electrons and excite radiating sites, such as diffusing electron-hole pairs or excited states in implanted defects. In such materials, optical emission can be modeled as a small (perturbative) non-equilibrium loss function Im(ε(ω)) at the emission wavelength. This review focuses on types of spontaneous emission that have been enhanced or controlled using nanophotonics. Other types of spontaneous emission from free electrons, not covered in this Review, include bremsstrahlung, betatron radiation, and undulator radiation. work, and can be relaxed further by using the dyadic Green tensor directly The total energy radiated by a dipole can be calculated as an integral in frequency domain, . Eq. ( Further physical considerations can be made to evaluate the mode-electron overlap. The mode profile F m (r , r ⊥ , ω) has a given polarization distribution, but only the polarization along the beam propagation contributes to emission. The spatial dependence of the field profile results in evanescent coupling strengths in many scenarios, as will be made evident for excitation of SPPs and electromagnetic bounds on coherent CL (sections II B 4 and II C). The spectral dependence of the emitted energy is encoded in g(ω, ω m ), such that Im(g) ≈ πδ (ω 2ω 2 m ) ≈ π 2ω m δ (ωω m ) in the limit of small losses (where Im denotes the imaginary part). Therefore, radiation in eigenfrequencies of the photonic structure are strongly enhanced. The term labeled "phase-matching" in the master equation Eq. ( where sinc(x) = sin(x)/x is the sinc function, and Λ is the length of interaction. The phase-matching term becomes a Dirac delta function for large interaction lengths Λ, thereby highlighting the critical importance of phase-matching in physical settings with extended interactions. Compared to Eq. ( (2) weighting each intersection by the mode-electron overlap term in Eq. ( To gain further physical insight with this formalism, we must consider specific photonic environments, which will be described by various eigenmode distributions, and are discussed in the next sections. CR in its simplest embodiment occurs in a homogeneous dielectric medium (of index n) and consists in the spontaneous emission of plane waves by a charged particle (see Fig. Quantum corrections to this formalism can be introduced, taking into account recoil, SPR is a natural extension of CR to periodic media as the spontaneous emission of Bloch photons 59 (see Fig. , where c G m,k are coefficients of the mode's Fourier expansion. We then get the following expression for the energy spectral density: The δ function in Eq. ( where λ is the photon wavelength, and m the Bloch mode index. The emission angle θ is measured, as in the case of CR, with respect to the electron propagation direction. This simple relation enables us to make quick predictions of the radiation spectrum (in the absence of resonant enhancement), knowing the structure periodicity along the electron trajectory. Several observations of SPR from various periodicities and electron energies are shown in Fig. Early work on SPR was essentially focused on metallic structures. Many theoretical studies focused on SPR and CR in 2D, where the structures are assumed to be invariant along the third dimension and the electron beam is assumed to be a "sheet" beam. In higher dimensions, the point-like nature of the electron must be considered, and the photonic band structure gives greater flexibility in tuning the coupling between the electron and photonic modes. Considering the case of a three-dimensional periodic PhC, we get the following expression, as previously reported in Ref. where ∂ S is the contour defined by ω = ω m,k . This formula shows that the radiated power is proportional to the Fourier coefficient |c G n,k (ω) • r |, describing the coupling of the current density with the electromagnetic field at the electron location. Also, the emitted power is proportional to the inverse of the transverse group velocity. This suggests a path to strongly enhance emission from electrons using engineered bands in PhCs. To describe transition radiation within the same framework, we consider the simplified case of a charge impinging at normal incidence on a perfect conductor (see Fig. SPPs can be excited by free electrons As expected from the master equation Eq. ( Another perspective that the field of nanophotonics brought to research on free-electron radiation is the idea of setting electromagnetic bounds from first principles. Nanophotonics research led to the formulation of universal bounds on various photonic processes, 164 such as scattering and absorption, 165 focusing, 166 Raman scattering, 167 and near-field optical response. Coherent CL can be interpreted as a scattering problem, and is therefore amenable to recent work on electromagnetic bounds. where τ ∈ {rad, loss}, ξ loss = 1, ξ rad = η(1η) ≤ 1/4 (with η the ratio of radiative to total energy loss), k = ω/v, and k ⊥ = k 2k 2 = k/β γ (with γ the Lorentz factor). K n is the n-th order modified Bessel function of the second kind. The power bounds from Eq. ( The analytical bound also reveals several interesting physical behaviors. Namely, there exists a regime of near-field interaction between the beam and the structure where slow electrons are favored (i.e., they radiate more efficiently). Recent works also highlighted the possibility of strong interactions between slow electrons and plasmonic near fields. Another interesting feature is the apparent divergence of the bound in the limit of small losses, which suggests mechanisms to strongly enhance free-electron radiation with high-Q resonances, a path which we discuss in section III C 1. All of the previous types of radiation were forms of coherent CL, which naturally give themselves into control via shaping of the photonic eigenmodes, as we explained in the previous paragraphs. We now consider the case of ICL, or electron scintillation, and propose ways to control and enhance this form of radiation. The method we propose here is readily transferable to scintillation from other types of high-energy particles, such as x-and γ-rays. ICL is usually observed when a beam of electrons is bombarding a material directly (and is therefore occurring in the impact interaction zone), as depicted in Fig. We can calculate the emitted energy by the stochastic current distribution in Eq. ( This expression makes explicit the way in which ICL (where the light emission results from spontaneous emission) can be controlled by photonic shaping via the eigenmodes F m (r, ω). It is also apparent that ICL can be enhanced by optimizing the overlap between a given eigenmode and the current correlation function S(r, ω) (for example, by optimizing the overlap between the photonic eigenmode and the energy-loss density of the high-energy particles). Another formulation of ICL can be obtained by using electromagnetic reciprocity and the Green's function directly (instead of its eigenmode expansion), yielding the following expression for the power spectrum per unit solid angle and frequency: 25 where we also assumed that the current correlations are uniform and isotropic in the material (corresponding for example to uniform energy loss), and Eq. ( Eq. ( (1) the emitted ICL from the structure (at a given frequency ω, direction Ω, and polarization i) and ( The previous section suggested several ways in which one can control CL with engineered nanophotonic structures. In this section, we describe several methods to experimentally measure (coherent and incoherent) CL from nanophotonic structures in electron microscopes; we also review experimental demonstrations and nanophotonic techniques to control and enhance CL. It is worth noting that CL in electron microscopes was an already-established technique before the 2000's, given its widespread use in gemology and materials science. Apart from optical-CL instrumentsin which an electron beam is generated under moderate vacuum via discharge in a chamber (small enough to be mounted on a standard optical microscope)most modern CL instruments are based on a scanning electron microscope (SEM) or a transmission electron microscope (TEM). Fig. from the edge of the nanostructure in an electron microscope 206 might also be realized via cathodoluminescence microscopy in the future. Next, phase-sensitive imaging measurements were performed utilizing both angle-resolved CL and hyperspectral angle-resolved cathodoluminescence to characterize the farfield phase signal from scattering off of plasmonic nanostructures allowing for the reconstruction of the angle-dependent phase distributions 207 and the coupling between nanoparticles and SPPs. Several TEM-based CL instruments are similar to their SEM analogues, as shown in Fig. Physical analogues of free electrons are convenient platforms to observe some of the above-mentioned physical phenomena. There are many free-electron analogues in the context of CR, since it is a general wave phenomenon, with analogues in classical and quantum electromagnetics, superfluid hydrodynamics, and classical hydrodynamics. The spectral-angular distribution of coherent CL effects is, to first order, embedded into their dispersion relation (e.g., Eq. ( Kong ( It was first proposed by Van den Berg that even perfect reflectors with sinusoidal corrugations could significantly alter the angular distribution of SPR. Coherent CL effects are strongly linearly polarized, with limited tunability of the polarization angle. For instance, the polarization angle in SPR is set by the propagation direction of the electron beam. The control of the linear polarization angle and the generation of spin angular momentum in CL has therefore received recent interest, with some notable works shown in Fig. In CR, small components of circular polarization can be acquired when considering spin-polarized electron beams. As coherent CL relies on the excitation of photonic eigenmodes, phase relationships between different wave vector components are constrained, which prevents the control of the radiation far-field profile. With the promise of on-chip electron-driven light sources, there has been a growing interest in manipulating the far-field spatial distribution of emitted radiation in CL. If successful, this effect could be leveraged to realize integrated sources and collimators into a single component, with some notable works shown in Fig. The design of a CR lens was first proposed by adjusting the boundary of the Cherenkov target based on ray optics considerations to concentrate light into a focal spot. The most general type of far-field wavefront engineering, holography, has also been proposed using tailored nanophotonic structures (see Fig. C. Enhancing free-electron-light interactions in nanophotonics The existence of fundamental bounds on CL, as presented in section II C, begs the following question: could one enhance coherent CL with nanophotonics to achieve emission efficiencies approaching such bounds? The possibility of resonant enhancement in electron-light interaction is highlighted in the phase-matching relation Eq. ( Photonics can also provide CL enhancement via band structure engineering in periodic structures. Specifically, the perspective of enhancing SPR and CR was first proposed in two-dimensional periodic PhCs, where the intersection of the electron plane with photonic band structures can be manipulated. The process of light emission from fluctuating current sources in samples pumped by high-energy particles is called ICL (for free-electron pumps) or scintillation (for x-and γray pumps). From the multi-physics picture illustrated in Fig. a. Material engineering. ICL can be enhanced by engineering the electronic band structure of emitting materials, and specifically available defect states or band gap to make bright emitters. Such techniques are also ubiquitous in the context of brighter and faster x-ray scintillator development, which rely on the development of new materials In the context of ICL, two-dimensional materials and van der Waals heterostructures have received particular attention, given their bright emission properties and exceptional nanophotonic properties. Scintillation and ICL being in essence spontaneous emission, they can be enhanced with nanophotonics in two distinct ways: (1) via direct enhancement of the rate of spontaneous emission by shaping the density of optical states The possibility of nanophotonic scintillation enhancement for x-and γ-ray application was recently revived by the availability of large-scale deposition and patterning techniques compatible with state-of-the-art scintillators in x-ray and nuclear imaging. Early work demonstrated enhanced light extraction provided by a PhC coating atop a bulk scintillator In this section, we outline several research directions, which we believe will significantly flourish in the next few . Samples "P2" and "P6" refer to two different designs of antireflection coatings on scintillators. Reproduced with permission from Ref. years. In particular, we highlight the use of nanophotonics in enabling these novel applications of (quantum) electron-light interactions. A. Quantum effects Much of the content of this Review can be understood in purely classical terms: in terms of solutions to the classical Maxwell's wave equation in a dielectric medium, with a source J(r, ω) (a moving electron). Even in the case of ICL (scintillation), the radiation may be understood in terms of radiation from classically non-deterministic current sources, although the correlations of the current sources may be dictated by the quantum statistics of the radiating currents (e.g., Bose-Einstein or Fermi-Dirac statistics). Nowadays, there is a great deal of effort in theoretically predicting, as well as experimentally isolating, genuinely quantum mechanical effects in freeelectron radiation, which may not be described in terms of the classical wave equation with a source. In this section, we give a brief outline of the different types of quantum effects that can emerge in free-electron radiation. For more discussion of such effects (with different emphasis), we refer the reader to Ref. As discussed in section II, much of the spectral and angular properties of coherent cathodoluminescence may be understood from the phase-matching relation Eq. ( Another way by which quantum effects can alter light emission by electrons is through electron waveshaping. One might imagine that controlling the wavefunction of the emitting electron will control the emitted radiation in much the same way that controlling the shape of the current density in Maxwell's equations controls the radiation. The situation in quantum mechanics is more subtle, as the wavefunction of the electron does not represent a smeared out charge density. If it did, one could imagine that simply expanding or compressing the electron wavefunction transverse to its motion would change its radiation (e.g., by Cherenkov or Smith-Purcell emission): tunable transverse coherent size has shown that the intensity does not depend on the electron wavefunction. The key constraint that enables the dependence on the wavefunction is that the measurement system performs postselection on the electron (by conditioning the measurement on the electron state). Without electron post-selection, the radiation intensity is independent on the electron wavefunction. A third class of important effects, which are now a rich and vibrant field on their own, is related to strong-field interactions, in which an electron can interact with a strong external field, leading to absorption or stimulated versions of coherent CL (see Fig. Free electrons are ideal platforms to generate high-energy radiation, since they carry large kinetic energies (in the keV to MeV range in most electron microscopes) that can be converted into electromagnetic radiation. Among the effects we have discussed in this Review, SPR displays the most evident wavelength tunability, via the incident electron velocity and the structure periodicity. In Fig. Other avenues, such as scattering of electrons with graphene SPPs The time-reversal process of free-electron emission generation is particle acceleration. Similarly, nanophotonic development leads to new designs, device miniaturization, and performance improvement in particle accelerators. Experimentally, an inverse-designed (see section below), waveguide-integrated, microscale dielectric laser accelerator was fabricated and tested, showing acceleration gradients around 30 MeV/m in a recent demonstration. Computational inverse design has now penetrated every single field of nanophotonics. As discussed earlier in this Review, the various coherent mechanisms by which a free electron can emit light (e.g., CR, SPR, TR) can be thought of as elementary processes of spontaneous emission in which an electron transitions to a state of lower kinetic energy while emitting a quantized mode of Maxwell's equations (a photonic quasiparticle Net stimulated emission by a beam of electrons forms the basis for a number of developed and developing technologies. In the microwave domain, these effects form the basis for established high-power microwave sources such as travel-ing wave tubes and klystrons used in space communication systems. As of this writing, free-electron lasing based on coherent CL in nanophotonic systems is yet to be observed, despite reported signatures of superradiance at THz frequencies, 114 shown in Fig. Lastly, other unconventional effects in free-electron radiation, such as backward CR, remain unobserved as of this writing. Originally predicted in left-handed materials, Topological photonics Several recent advances show that free electrons can serve as probes for photonic topology. In Ref. Furthermore, free electrons can serve as pumps for photonic topology. It has been shown that free electron beams can drive nonreciprocity in metallic waveguides, therefore giving rise to unidirectionally-propagating modes. The recent development of a general framework to predict non-equilibrium radiation phenomena such as scintillation (or ICL) reveals the sensitive dependence of the scintillation spectrum on the non-equilibrium distribution of the excited electrons generated by the high-energy electron beam. The use of compact nanoscale structures to convert energy from free electrons into radiation has spurred interest into realizing fully on-chip systems. This perspective is enabled by the realization of on-chip electron emitters, such as field emitter arrays. It was first realized that Smith-Purcell and Cherenkov systems could be fully integrated on chip In conclusion, we have provided an extensive review of the fundamental physics and applications of free-electron interactions with nanophotonic structures. We first proposed a general classical framework to model cathodoluminescence as the excitation of photonic eigenmodes by the free-electron current density. This excitation can be coherent, as is the case for all coherent CL effects, or partially incoherent, as is the case for ICL and scintillation. This framework enabled us to re-derive fundamental formula in free-electron physics, and to provide a unified method to shape and enhance CL. It also enabled us to derive fundamental bounds on electromagnetic radiation from free electrons in arbitrary nanophotonic environments. Those methods have been confirmed and observed thanks to the development of experimental methods to observe and characterize light emission from free electrons in nanophotonic structures. Specifically, we reviewed the development of CL and EELS measurement techniques in SEM and (ultrafast) TEM. The several experimental methods we reviewed have enabled the measurement of all optical properties of interest: spectral, angular, time, spatial, polarization distributions, and quantum correlations. They can also be complemented by measurement of the electron properties with EELS. Finally, we shared our enthusiasm for a few avenues in free-electron radiation enabled by nanophotonics, namely the emerging fields of ultrafast, topological, and quantum effects in electron microscopy, the design of ultrashort-wavelength emitters pumped by free electrons, miniaturized particle accelerators, novel inverse-design techniques applied to freeelectron emitters, and the aspiration to reach stimulated emission and lasing by free electrons in nanophotonics. While the realization of some of those effects might still be a few years ahead of us, we believe that the strong interest from our community has already demonstrated the potential of nanophotonics in controlling and enhancing CL. Future developments in the field might unlock some of the most promising prospects in free-electron physics, such as the realization of widely tunable integrated light sources from x-rays to mm-wave, particle accelerators, and high-energy particle detectors. They should find direct applications across particle detection and acceleration, electron microscopy, dosimetry, water sanitization, medical imaging and therapy. The data that support the findings of this study are available within the article and upon request for Fig. CR in its simplest embodiment occurs in a homogeneous dielectric environment and consists in the spontaneous emission of plane waves by a charged particle (see Fig. with Θ the Heaviside function (Θ(x) = 1 if x > 0, otherwise Θ(x) = 0). Here, the Cherenkov angle is defined such as cos θ = (β n) -1 . The Heaviside function defines the wellknown Cherenkov threshold β n > 1, which is equivalent to satisfying the phase-matching condition from Eq. ( To describe transition radiation within the same framework, we consider the simplified case of a charge impinging at normal incidence on a perfect conductor (see Fig. Excitation of SPPs is often considered in tandem with TR, since it typically occurs at the interface between two media supporting SPP. This phenomenon is observed even in the absence of corrugation at the surface because the electron point nature enables coupling directly to the SPP modes. Our formalism captures this effect by considering emission into the SPP modes rather than free space modes as before. For simplicity, we consider an electron flying parallel to a planar interface at r ⊥ = 0 (reduced to a 2D problem). We consider the simplified case of a lossless interface between a dielectric (relative permittivity ε 1 > 0) and a metal (relative permittivity ε 2 < 0). The p-polarized modes take the form (in the (r , r ⊥ ) basis): ε 2 e -|k 2,⊥ |r ⊥ e -ik r . (A8) And the following dispersion relation: We obtained the following expression for the energy emitted by the free electron per unit length: with the phase-matching condition: which can be solved graphically by finding the intersection of the SPP's dispersion and the electron line ω = vk . Such an intersection always exists for the lower branch (corresponding to the excitation of a SPP).