Smart electronic circuits that support neuromorphic computing on the hardware level necessitate materials with memristive, memcapacitive, and neuromorphic-like functional properties; in short, the electronic response must depend on the voltage history, thus enabling learning algorithms. Here we demonstrate volatile ferroelectric switching of Sn2P2S6 at room temperature and see that initial polarization orientation strongly determines the properties of polarization switching. In particular, polarization switching hysteresis is strongly imprinted by the original polarization state, shifting the regions of non-linearity toward zero-bias. As a corollary, polarization switching also enables effective capacitive switching, approaching the sought-after regime of memcapacitance. Landau-Ginzburg-Devonshire simulations demonstrate that one mechanism by which polarization can control the shape of the hysteresis loop is the existence of charged domain walls decorating the periphery of the repolarization nucleus. These walls oppose the growth of the switched domain and favor back-switching, thus creating a scenario of controlled volatile ferroelectric switching. Although the measurements were carried out with single crystals, prospectively volatile polarization switching can be tuned by tailoring sample thickness, domain wall mobility and electric fields, paving way to non-linear dielectric properties for smart electronic circuits. The quest towards smart electronic circuits that emulate biological learning is motivated by artificial intelligence applications combined with the ever present need for lower energy consumption. Ferroelectric materials with non-volatile and electrically switchable polarization states have long been considered for high-efficiency memory applications in traditional CMOS electronics. Meanwhile, ferroelectrics can in principle enable memcapacitive circuitry. Indeed, ferroelectric materials and their derivatives have long been known and are widely used in tunable dielectric applications. The challenge of memcapacitance, however, is that capacitance must exhibit a well-defined history of applied bias (or current), perhaps with at least two distinct non-volatile values. By contrast, tunable dielectric circuits are intentionally designed to exhibit little or no hysteresis. Here we will show that volatile ferroelectric switching is one path to enable memcapacitive phenomena without introducing atomic-scale disorder. In this paper, we explore ferroelectric switching under conditions where nucleating domains will not achieve equilibrium geometry of their domain walls. In particular, we have probed localized ferroelectric switching in single crystals of uniaxial Sn2P2S6 Remarkably, we find that the ferroelectric hysteresis loop is strongly controlled by the direction of the initial spontaneous polarization, where the loop shifted along the voltage axis towards the polarity that does not switch the initial polarization. Meanwhile, symmetric properties are observed near existing ferroelectric domain walls, ruling out a spectrum of external artefacts as a genesis of the observed phenomena. Given the large degree of polarization-induced shift, the regions of maximum dielectric tunability and microwave conductance both approach lower voltage thresholds. Therefore, local dielectric properties and conductivity in Sn2P2S6 become dependent on the electric field history associated with domain nucleation and growth, enabling further consideration of Sn2P2S6 a suitable candidate for memelectronic materials towards neuromorphic systems. Our results are supported by finite-elements numerical modeling of domain nucleation within Landau-Ginzburg -Devonshire theory and point to instabilities of newly switched domains in thick samples due to charged domain walls as the origin of the strong dependence of switching hysteresis on polarization orientation. Finally, we remark that although volatile switching may be undesirable for memory applications, it is a sought-after property for active circuits, such as relaxation oscillators, which can mimic neuronal spiking activity and exhibit a broad array of intriguing temporal dynamics. The topography (Figure In general, the contrast in SMIM-G signals at DWs has been linked to different phenomena: The SMIM-C and SMIM-G loops show distinctively different behavior dependent on whether a pixel is located within the domain of initial -P or +P polarization or located at a DW. For the -P domain surface, the SMIM-C capacitance starts out fairly constant, before a steep decrease is observed around low negative voltages (Figure To obtain further insight in the polarization reversal and domain growth process in Sn2P2S6 and understand the strong asymmetry of the hysteresis loops measured by SMIM, we performed finite-elements numerical simulations using a Landau-Ginzburg-Devonshire (LGD) approach. Details of the LGD approach applied for simulation of polarization reversal in ferroelectrics can be found in Refs. In both cases the diagonal tensor of dielectric permittivity with 11 = 22 = 84 and 33 = 30 was used. We used values of spontaneous polarization Ps = 3 C/cm 2 and coercive field Ec = 10 kV/mm to calculate the LGD parameters ( and ). A single rectangular pulse of the electric bias with amplitude of 10 V and duration ranging from 250 ms to 750 ms was applied to the tip in the simulations. After termination of the pulse, the bias was dropped to 0 V to study relaxation of the switched structure for up to 10 s. Resulting maps illustrating the polarization evolution at different time steps and values of applied bias are shown in figure To better highlight the different types of switching behavior, we plotted dependences of the switched volume (areas with P / Ps < 0 mC/cm 2 ) as functions of the time in all considered cases (Fig. We have demonstrated a nanoscale tunable and polarization dependent behavior of ferroelectric Sn2P2S6 that is underpinned by reversible nucleation and instabilities of domains. Both dielectric properties and conductivity are dependent on voltage history and are able to be modified using the nucleation, growth, and oscillation of DWs as a tuning knob. We envision memelectronic devices based on transient ferroelectric switching to create a specific domain matrix to tailor subsequent resistive and capacitive response to low voltages dependent on whether domain nucleation occurs. Moreover, the origin of the enhanced SMIM-G signal was identified as domain wall vibrations, consistent with literature Single crystals of Sn2P2S6 were synthesized via the vapor transport technique. Briefly, elemental Sn (Alfa Aesar Puratronic 99.9999+%), P (Alfa Aesar Puratronic 99.999+%) and S (Alfa Aesar Puratronic 99.9995%) in the near-stoichiometric ratio Sn:P:S 2:2.2:6. Elements were sealed in a 12 cm long ampoule with a 13 mm ID together with ~100-200 mg I2 (Alfa Aesar, 99.5%) as a vapor transport agent. The sample was placed in a two-zone reflecting furnace with the hot end at 700 o C and the cold end at 650 o C. The crystals were allowed to nucleate and grow for 100 h, yielding naturally faceted samples with a maximum diameter of 15 mm. We used X-ray diffraction via a Bruker D8 Discover Davinci with Cu K radiation to determine the orientation of the facets and polished the crystals accordingly. The Sn2P2S6 crystal was mechanically cleaved and a sample of ~2 mm thickness was chosen for measurements. SMIM measurements were performed in ambient conditions on a Bruker Icon instrument. The PrimeNano Scanwave TM Pro electronics module was used to generate microwaves and detect the reflected signal. Coaxially shielded probes (nominal force constant 8 N/m, nominal resonance frequency 75 kHz, tip material TiW) were used. To separate SMIM-C from SMIM-G signals, the demodulation angle was adjusted until only capacitive contrast was measured on an Al dot standard sample with metal electrodes on a SiO2 substrate. For improved separation, SMIM signals were further separated by post-processing in Python using vector rotation using vector rotation of the combined SMIM-C and SMIM-G signals treated as vector components with minimization of the signal from the dust particles in the SMIM-G channel as the optimization criterium. Finite element LGD simulations of the domain growth for a thick and a thin film was performed using COMSOL Multiphysics software suite. More details about application of LGD approach for simulation of ferroelectric switching can be found in the following papers. 