We demonstrate the back-end integration of broadband, high-NA GaN micro-lenses by microassembly onto non-native semiconductor substrates. We developed a highly parallel micro-fabrication process flow to suspend micron scale plano-convex lens platelets from 6" Si growth wafers and show their subsequent transfer-printing integration. A growth process targeted at producing unbowed epitaxial wafers was combined with optimisation of the etching volume in order to produce flat devices for printing. Lens structures were fabricated with 6 -11 μm diameter, 2 μm height and root-mean-squared surface roughness below 2 nm. The lenses were printed in a vertically coupled geometry on a single crystalline diamond substrate and with μm-precise placement on a horizontally coupled photonic integrated circuit waveguide facet. Optical performance analysis shows that these lenses could be used to couple to diamond nitrogen vacancy centres at micron scale depths and demonstrates their potential for visible to infrared light-coupling applications. Micron-sized optical elements are important components for the coupling of light between free-space and matter based systems. Dielectric micro-lens arrays (MLA) are commercially available and commonly used to focus light onto the photon-sensitive regions of CCD There are two main routes to fabrication of micro-optics on semiconductor substrates, either additive materials patterning on the substrate, or direct fabrication of optical surfaces into the material itself. There are a number of techniques available for the fabrication of additive components, including imprint lithography 2 Fabrication and device transfer Fig. The SiO x layer is removed by RIE dry etching (5 sccm CHF 3 , 15 sccm Ar, 30 mTorr, 120 W RF-power) to restore the GaN lens surface. AFM surface roughness analysis on a GaN micro-lens after SiO x removal showed a surface roughness on the order of 1.4 nm r.m.s. The suspended micro-lenses are transfer-printed to receiver substrates (single crystalline (SC) diamond or GaN/AlN waveguide facets) using a custom transfer print system with sub-micron spatial precision The success of the heterogeneous integration scheme detailed above relies on the flatness of the released membrane devices in addition to the back-side smoothness. If the membrane devices are too bowed, it becomes impossible to achieve a good contact with the receiver substrate, leaving an air cavity between the substrate and the device surface, which in the case of micro-lens devices can lead to interface reflections and distortion of the desired lens behaviour. Appropriately flat membranes are achieved via careful optimisation of the growth process for the GaN heteroepitaxial layers. The structures used for micro-lens fabrication in this work are grown by metal organic vapor phase epitaxy (MOVPE) on Si(111) substrates. As-grown, the multilayers consist of a 0.25 μm AlN nucleation layer, a 1.7 μm graded Al x Ga 1-x N buffer (with AlN mole fraction x decreasing from 75 % to 25 %), and a 2 μm GaN layer (i.e. a total thickness of ca. 4 μm nitride material). By growing in succession layers with a decreasing Al content, each layer has a slightly larger relaxed lattice constant than that below it, so that the epitaxial growth induces compressive stress. This stress counteracts the post-growth cooldown related tensile stress originating from the thermal expansion mismatch between the silicon substrate and the nitride epitaxial layers. Post-growth, the wafer-bows are functions of the residual stresses and thickness of the individual epilayers. For membranes released from the growth substrates, their bows are also dependent to these in-built stresses in the remaining layers and related to the wafer bow The focal lengths of the three lenses printed onto SC diamond substrate, shown in Fig. Figure The expected focal length of the three example micro-lenses is calculated using 3D FDTD simulations (Lumerical) in which the lenses are created to match the form factor of the measured devices, based on the AFM profiles, as shown in Fig. The shortened focal lengths found in the FDTD simulations in comparison to the GO approximation shows the necessity of using a full Maxwell solver to accurately predict the micro-lens performance. The diffraction effect evident in the simulations is known as focal shift and well documented for small scale micro-optics Expected and measured focal lengths agree well for lenses 1 and 2 , but the results for the highest-aspect ratio micro-lens 3 are more challenging to extract due to the lack of a clear signature of the focal spot. This may be partially due to the reduction of contrast due to the decreasing lens aperture, as visible in Fig. which indicates potentially comparable performance to high-end oil immersion objectives. Table We have demonstrated parallel fabrication of GaN micro-lenses and their deterministic dry-transfer to CVD-grown single crystalline diamond. Careful optimisation of the growth and fabrication steps enables direct contact printing of flat membrane devices onto semiconductor substrates. The etch depth of the micro-lenses strongly affects the released device flatness, highlighting the interplay between material stress profile and etch geometry. The lens imaging measurements show good agreement with FDTD simulations, which are compatible with schemes for efficient coupling to diamond NV -centers at a range of 0.1 to 10 μm depth from the material surface. Additionally, we printed a GaN lens on a GaN/AlN waveguide facet, showing compatibility of additive micro-optics with μm-precision transfer, even when partially suspended in air. The print demonstrates both the flatness of our devices and the flexibility of the transfer-printing approach for end-fire coupling. Future work aims to demonstrate light collection from nitrogen vacancy centres in diamond or color centres in GaN We quantified the bandwidth of the employed tungsten lamp by taking a spectrum with a fibre-coupled spectrometer, measuring the lamp unfiltered and after inserting our green color filter. We estimated the effective spectrum by multiplying the filtered spectrum with the quantum efficiency of the green pixel given by the camera data sheet, leading to a 10 dB bandwidth in the wavelength window λ = 525 ± 50 nm, as illustrated in 