In PBS particle therapy, a short treatment delivery time is paramount for the efficient treatment of moving targets with motion mitigation techniques (such as breath-hold, rescanning, and gating). Energy and spot position change time are limiting factors in reducing treatment time. In this study, we designed a universal and dynamic energy modulator (ridge filter, RF) to broaden the Bragg peak, to reduce the number of energies and spots required to cover the target volume, thus lowering the treatment time. Our RF unit comprises two identical RFs placed just before the isocenter. Both RFs move relative to each other, changing the Bragg peak's characteristics dynamically. We simulated different Bragg peak shapes with the RF in TOPAS and validated them experimentally. We then delivered singlefield plans with 1Gy/fraction to different geometrical targets in water, to measure the dose delivery time using the RF and compare it with the clinical settings. Aligning the RFs in different positions produces different broadening in the Bragg peak; we achieved a maximum broadening of 2.5 cm. With RF we reduced the number of energies in a field by more than 60%, and the dose delivery time by 50%, for all geometrical targets investigated, without compromising the dose distribution transverse and distal fall-off. Our novel universal and dynamic RF allows for the adaptation of the Bragg peak broadening for a spot and/or energy layer based on the requirement of dose shaping in the target volume. It significantly reduces the number of energy layers and spots to cover the target volume, and thus the treatment time. This RF design is ideal for ultra-fast treatment delivery within a single breathhold (5-10 sec), efficient delivery of motion mitigation techniques, and small animal irradiation with ultra-high dose rates (FLASH). Particle therapy uses the Bragg peak and thus their more localized dose deposition in tissues, thus delivering more conformal radiation delivery and less integral dose. Pencil beam scanning (PBS) is the most advanced particle therapy delivery technique which was brought into clinical practice at Paul Scherrer Institute (PSI) in 1996 PBS treatment delivery could benefit considerably from shorter treatment delivery times. A shorter field delivery duration will improve patient comfort. Hypofractionation with short treatment delivery time could also increase patient throughput and reduce treatment costs for a relatively expensive modality Treatment delivery time with PBS depends both on the beam-on time and the dead time (the time required to change energy layers and/or lateral position) between pencil beams. Beam-on time can be reduced significantly by using high-intensity beams Particle therapy centers use cyclotrons, with fixed extraction energy, or synchrotrons, which can adjust energy pulse-to-pulse. A synchrotron-based facility produces sharper Bragg peaks at lower energies compared to a cyclotron-based facility same holds for particle beams (e.g. carbon and helium) vs proton beams, as well as low energies vs higher energies One way to reduce the number of energy layers (and in turn, the number of spots) required to cover the full target volume is to broaden the Bragg peak by using a ridge filter (RF). Over the last two decades, many RF designs were proposed and used clinically for particle therapy In this article, we propose a new RF unit that comprises two identical RFs placed just before the isocenter. Both RFs are movable relative to each other to change the Bragg peak's characteristics dynamically. We designed the RF using Monte Carlo simulations validated against measurements performed at the PSI Gantry 2 facility. We then delivered single-field plans with and without RF to three different geometrical targets in water, to evaluate uniformity, penumbra, and treatment time reduction. In this article, we studied the performance of our dynamic RF only with protons. However, we expect the method described in this paper to be applicable to other particle therapy facilities as well. Our dynamic RF unit consists of a first (M) and a second (N) RF. These RFs are arranged transversally in line after each other along the proton beam path. The M-RF is movable relative to the N-RF to vary the energy/momentum spread of beam dynamically. Depending on the relative positions of the RFs, protons will see different thicknesses of material, and therefore loose different energy and generate different Bragg peaks with variable broadening. Figure In Figure In Figure The displacement between the RFs can be varied continuously between the extremes shown in Figure The RF shape was created through an iterative design process with the aim of achieving a uniform depth dose curve spread of a several millimeters with a fall-off comparable to a pristine Bragg peak for all energies commonly utilized for treatments at our clinic (70-230 MeV). Selecting the material was the first step in designing the RF. It was selected to reduce the multi-Coulomb scattering-related increase in beam size. The scattering probability decreases for material with high radiation length. Therefore, Polyethylene would have been the ideal material due to its low radiation length (44 g/cm2) and low density (0.88-0.96 g/cm3). However, it is incompatible with stereo lithography (SLA) 3D printing, so we utilized Resin (40 g/cm2 and 1.19 g/cm3). Second, we determined the period of the ridges and the maximum broadening we wished to obtain. The former is influenced by the material's water-equivalent depth, while the latter is influenced by the beam size. We were able to produce a depth dose curve independent of the beam position by selecting a maximum thickness of 4 cm, 2 cm per single ridge, and a period of 0.55 cm. Finally, the final dose distribution was produced by optimizing the RF shape (e.g. the base thickness and ridge slope), taking into account printing restrictions on the peak width. Figure In the design process, to generate the depth dose curves and the phase space of the beam with RF, taking into account multi-Coulomb scattering, secondary particle production, and energy straggling effects, we used Monte Carlo simulations performed in TOPAS (TOol for PArticle Simulation) Proton beam measurements of Bragg curves and lateral dose profiles were carried out at PSI Gantry 2 The spot positioning and the dose calculation on geometrical targets were carried out using an inhouse developed MATLAB script for experimental use. Using this code, we were able to calculate the dose distribution in water for simple geometries placed at various depths. Each plan was first calculated using pristine Bragg peaks and then utilizing the new depth dose curves generated with the RF. The dose distribution was calculated on a regular spot grid (in the transverse plane) of 0.4 cm for a single field. In Table By studying the machines log files, we were able to determine the dose delivery time and to isolate all contributions to treatment time (spot changing time, energy layer changing time, and beam-on time). The beam-on time is the time required to deliver the dose and the dead time is the sum of spot and energy layers changing time. The time required to change the spot location in the U and T directions determines the spot changing time. Even though our RF allows all possible combinations, in this study we decided to stick to the two simplest cases: full maximum broadening, and a combination of maximum and minimum broadening. We generated SOBPs in these two configurations and evaluated their quality (against no-RF SOBPs) looking at two quantities: first, in terms of dose uniformity where dmax and dmin are the maximum and minimum dose within the SOBP width (defined as the distance between the proximal and distal 90% dose) In this section, we will discuss the findings of our simulations and compare them to measurements. We will start by examining the depth dose curves generated with three distinct RF's configuration, then look at the SOBP in terms of lateral fall-off and uniformity. The influence of the RF on the dose profile will be investigated, and the penumbra and flatness will be compared to dose distributions without RF. Following that, we will demonstrate experimentally how, using the RF, we may reduce the delivery time for geometrical phantoms. Depending on the position of RFs we can generate different kinds of broadening in the depth dose curve. In Figure We assume that different momentum spread values cause the mismatch in the distal fall-off between measurement and simulations. The deviation in uniformity is probably due to the limited quality of the printing. Figure The comparison data-simulation has been performed for several SOBP at different depths. We found, that with the help of the RF, we can lower the number of energy layers from 63 % to 75 %, depending on the dimension and position of the target, without compromises in distal fall-off and uniformity of the SOBP. The dose profile perpendicular to the beam direction was measured with the CCD camera at various depths of a cubic and a spherical target in a Plexiglas phantom irradiated without and with the RF (in the maximum broadening configuration). Figure ( with dmax and dmin the maximal and minimal dose about the center of the beam profile over 80% of the FWHM at a depth of interest, respectively) The sphere and box measured dose profiles (Figure In particular, for the sphere, the penumbra is 0.63 cm for the horizontal profile and 0.65 cm for the vertical profile. The horizontal profile is the same with RF as without, but the vertical profile is 1.04 times larger due to the ridges of the RF. For the box, the penumbra is 0.57 in the horizontal and 0.6 cm in the vertical profile with and without RF. To prove experimentally the advantages of the use of the RF, we deliver different plans created with the geometrical shapes presented in Table Table Compared to a plan without a RF, a plan with a RF reduces the number of energy layers and, as a result, the number of spots. Depending on the shape and position of the target, the number of spots can be lowered from 60 % to 70 %, and the energy layers from 17 % to 70 %. The overall dead time reduction for boxes is slightly higher than for spherical targets, but it is more than 50 % in both cases (it varies from 55 % to 65 %). This is because the most significant benefit for the spherical target is a reduction in the number of spots (up to 62%) while the number of energy layers required remains almost unchanged. For box targets, on the other hand, energy layer time reductions contribute almost as much as spot number reduction, thus resulting in a higher dead time reduction. Overall delivery time can be reduced by 40-50 % for all evaluated targets; however, the reduction is greater for boxes and more superficial targets. With the help of the RF, the delivery time for geometrical targets of 200 cm 3 or less can be reduced to less than 10 seconds, as shown in Figure In Gantry 2, since the steering magnets are situated upstream of the last bending magnet, the beam is almost completely perpendicular to the patient (parallel scanning), with only small variations of a few mrad. We investigated how the Bragg curve changes when the beam has an angle of 2 or 4 mrad, which is the maximal variation in Gantry 2 PSI. The results for a 100 MeV beam are shown in Figure As the energy of the beam diminishes, the beam's size increases. Due to the 0.55 cm width of a single ridge, we may see differences depending on whether the beam's center is in the valley or the peak. We investigate this phenomenon by simulating the depth dose curve in water for different energies. As example, we illustrate in Figure The effect of the misalignment between the two sides of the RF on the shape of the SOBP is an important error to consider. We simulated the effect of shifting the upper side by 0.5 mm and 1 mm. The findings for a 100 MeV beam are shown in Figure In this work, we have experimentally demonstrated the feasibility of the universal and dynamic RF to generate Bragg peaks with different broadening as desired for the treatment. As shown in Figure As shown in Figure To see the effect on dose delivery time with RF (peak-to-peak configuration), we irradiated different geometrical shapes at our facility with Gantry 2. As shown in Figure As a part of the feasibility study, we also performed an extensive robustness analysis. Our RF design works perfectly with parallel beams (parallel scanning) and it is independent of spot position. The main limitation comes with downstream scanning: in this case, our RF works only for a small scanning area of 16 cm *16 cm. Additional challenges to practical realization in the clinic is the high alignment accuracy required (greater than 0.5 mm), and the speed of the motor drive needed to use the dynamic nature of the RF without adding dead time. Our treatment delivery technique with RF is currently at the experimental stage; for clinical translation, further intensive investigation of treatment planning with different tumors is necessary. We are currently investigating an implementation in our in-house treatment planning system of plan optimization with different configurations of the RF (including the 'hybrid' one). In our proof of principle study we have shown experimentally a RF design that adapts the Bragg peak broadening for a spot and/or energy layer based on the requirement of the dose shaping. Additionally, our RF could be already used for small animal irradiation studies with FLASH dose rates, as the peak-to-peak configuration of our RF gives 2.5 cm SOBP for low energy beams. In a longer term, this innovation could enable ultra-fast treatment delivery, with positive impact on efficiency when using motion mitigation techniques, clinical implementation of FLASH irradiations, patient throughput, and costs of treatment. In this article, a concept for a dynamic and universal RF has been introduced and its ability to achieve variable Bragg peak broadening demonstrated using both Monte Carlo simulations and measurements. With the design described here, maximum broadenings of the Bragg peak up to 2.5 cm could be achieved and the number of energy layers required to generate different SOBP could be reduced by a factor of three independently of maximum energy, corresponding to a reduction in delivery time of 50% without compromising flatness or penumbra. As this design is not patientspecific or beam model-specific, it is easily adaptable for other particle therapy facilities (both, cyclotron and synchrotron-based facilities) too. In addition, by moving the RF a few millimeters, the new design provides flexibility in selecting different Bragg peak broadenings for a spot and/or energy layer based on the requirement of the target shape without making any changes in beamline or nozzle design. As such, it could potentially ease the treatment of mobile tumors using currently time consuming techniques such as gating and breath-hold. 's dimension (T and U are the dimensions perpendicular to the beam direction (z)), position and dose prescription