Pressure-induced magnetic phase transition is attracting interest due to its ability to detect superconducting behaviour at high pressures in diamond anvil cells. However, detection of the local sample magnetic properties is a great challenge due to the small sample chamber volume. Recently, optically detected magnetic resonance (ODMR) of nitrogen vacancy (NV) centers in diamond have been used for in-situ pressure-induced phase transition detection. However, owing to their four orientation axes and temperature-dependent zero-field-splitting, interpreting the observed ODMR spectra of NV centers remain challenging. Here, we study the optical and spin properties of implanted silicon vacancy defects in 4H-SiC, which is single-axis and temperature-independent zero-field-splitting. Using this technique, we observe the magnetic phase transition of Nd2Fe14B at about 7 GPa and map the critical temperature-pressure phase diagram of the superconductor YBa2Cu3O6.6. These results highlight the potential of silicon vacancy-based quantum sensors for in-situ magnetic detection at high pressures. The ability of pressure to alter the electronic, magnetic and structural properties of matter is a vital feature widely used in fundamental and applied sciences studies 1-8 . High-pressure techniques have been applied in many fields, including physics, material sciences, geophysics and chemistry, leading to many unusual and important phenomena that have been observed under pressure The high sensitivity and high resolution of in-situ magnetic detections in DAC chamber were achieved by utilizing nitrogen-vacancy (NV) centres centres are versatile solid-state spin quantum sensors that have been used to detect a wide variety of physical parameters, such as magnetic and electric fields, temperature, strain, spins, pressure and electrical currents Micron-sized diamond particles with ensemble NV centres have been placed inside the DAC chamber to measure the Tc-pressure phase diagram of a superconductor Defects in silicon carbide (SiC) could also be utilized to measure magnetic properties under extreme conditions. SiC is a widely used semiconductor due to its unique properties, such as mature inch-scale growth and micro/nanofabrication Here, we investigate and characterize the optical and spin properties of the implanted silicon vacancy defects at the culets of the 4H-SiC anvil, which exhibit single-axis and temperature-independent zero-field splitting. The experimental results show that the photoluminescence (PL) spectrum blueshifts and the ZFS parameter D increases with pressure at a rate of 0.31 MHz/GPa. We probed the pressure-induced magnetic phase transition of a Nd2Fe14B magnet at around 7 GPa at room temperature. Finally, the Meissner effect of a YBa2Cu3O6.6 superconductor at different pressures was observed, yielding its Tc-P phase diagram. These experiments demonstrate the feasibility of using VSi defects in SiC as novel quantum sensors and open up applications to study superconducting phenomena under extreme conditions. The experimental configuration used in our experiments is shown in Fig The altered probability density and the electronic structure of the silicon vacancy due to compression may also contribute to the decrease of the photon counts and ODMR contrast We then study the VSi defect spin properties at high pressures. The ODMR spectra at zero external magnetic field are shown in Fig. Through the coherent control of VSi defects, one could detect the noise spectroscopy of the magnetic materials The SiC anvils with VSi defects could be used to study magnetic and superconducting properties of materials under compression. By utilising the ODMR spectrum, we have studied the pressure-induced magnetic phase transitions of a common magnet Nd2Fe14B. A small piece of Nd2Fe14B sample is placed on the surface of the culets. The PL images of the implanted shallow VSi defects and Nd2Fe14B sample on the culet surface are presented in Fig. GPa, but then it has a sharp reduction at around 7 GPa. This phenomenon demonstrates that the Nd2Fe14B sample reversibly changes from a ferromagnetic phase to a paramagnetic phase at ~7 GPa, in good agreement with the literature Recently, extreme conditions have been applied to synthesize and study novel superconducting materials claiming the critical temperatures well above 200 K , where a, b, δTc are fitting parameters, and Tc is the critical temperature We further investigate the critical Tc at different pressures. Fig. The VSi-based in-situ magnetic detection technologies could open up several immediate research possibilities in materials science. First, using the higher NA objective, better detectors In conclusion, we realize in-situ magnetic detection of magnetic materials using an implanted VSi defect ensemble in SiC-based anvil cells under high pressures. By studying the optical and spin properties of the implanted VSi defects, the experiments show that the PL spectrum has a blueshift and the mean counts decrease under high pressure. At the same time, the ZFS parameter D increases with pressure with a small coefficient of 0.31 MHz/GPa, which is much less than that of the NV centres in diamond. Moreover, the spin coherence time remains invariable with pressure, which is vital to probe noise spectroscopy of magnetic materials at high pressure without a direct magnetic signal. Based on these results, the pressure-induced magnetic phase transitions of the magnet Nd2Fe14B sample are detected in the range of 6-10 GPa using the ODMR methods at room temperature. Finally, we map the superconductor YBa2Cu3O6.6 Tc-pressure phase diagram by ODMR technology at low temperatures. Tc-pressure phase diagram. The Tc under ambient pressure (blue dot) is measured through a magnetic property measurement system (see Supplementary text 2 for more details). The Tc under pressure (red dots) is inferred from the ODMR splittings. The shadow area represents the superconducting state, and the transparent area is the normal state for YBa2Cu3O6.6. The error bars obtained from the fitting standard deviations are smaller than the symbol sizes.