Vortices are topological defects of type-II superconductors in an external magnetic field. In a similar fashion to a quantum anomalous Hall insulator, quantum anomalous vortex (QAV) spontaneously nucleates due to orbital-and-spin exchange interaction between vortex core states and magnetic impurity moment, breaking time-reversal symmetry (TRS) of the vortex without an external field. Here, we used scanning superconducting quantum interference device microscopy (sSQUID) to search for its signatures in iron-chalcogenide superconductor Fe(Se,Te). Under zero magnetic field, we found a stochastic distribution of isolated anomalous vortices and antivortices with flux quanta Φ 0 . By applying a small local magnetic field under the coil of the nano-SQUID device, we observed hysteretic flipping of the vortices reminiscent of the switching of ferromagnetic domains, suggesting locally broken-TRS. We further showed vectorial rotation of a flux line linking a paired vortex-antivortex with the local field. These unique properties of the anomalous vortices satisfied the defining criteria of QAV. Our observation suggests a quantum vortex phase with spontaneous broken-TRS in a high-temperature superconductor. Vortices are singularities in the phase winding of the complex order parameter of a superconductor. Abrikosov vortices with quantized fluxoid nucleate when an external field H exceeds the lower critical field H "# or when cooling through the critical temperature T " in a finite H [1]. Spontaneously generated vortices without any applied magnetic field, or anomalous vortices, requires breaking time-reversal symmetry (TRS) inside the superconducting ground state [2]. Breaking TRS in a superconductor is a non-trivial effect which leads to exotic excitations [3-5]. Certain heavy fermion superconductors have spin-triplet pairing which can break TRS [6-8]. Spontaneous boundary current, yet to be found, is a direct manifestation of the underlying TRS breaking. Spontaneous vortices thus signify a similar origin as they are associated with supercurrent around interior boundaries of the topological defects. Superconductors with strong spin-orbit interaction and exchange coupling offer another route to break TRS. The mechanism is in analogy with a quantum anomalous Hall (QAH) state in a magnetically-doped thin-film topological insulator be used to distinguish spontaneous vortices in superconductors generated quantum mechanically from those that occur thermally. The quantum regime is reached by a large superconducting gap relative to the Fermi energy which maintains well-separated vortex core states at finite temperature. The magnetic impurity induces circulating current which modulates the phase of superconducting order parameter. Strong spin and orbital exchange interactions make it energetically favorable to nucleate a vortex around the impurity moment compared to a vortexfree state. The iron-chalcogenide superconductor FeSe0.5Te0.5 (FST) Scanning superconducting quantum interference device (sSQUID) microscopy There were trapped vortices in an FeSe0.5Te0.5 flake sample when the applied flux Φ $ was relatively large. We followed the exact same field cooling and measurement procedure as we did on a conventional superconductor with similar diamagnetic strength which also calibrated the external field and Φ $ We avoided such inhomogeneity by choosing suitable pieces from the small flake samples after exfoliation. Since the diamagnetic susceptibility was directly proportional to superfluid density, the uniformity in susceptometry (Fig. Our extensive sample characterizations at different length scales also suggested uniform superconductivity up to the sample size Surprising vortex patterns appeared when |Φ $ | < Φ % , the low-field regime where no vortex was expected or observed on a conventional superconductor (Fig. The FST samples we used contained a dilute amount of interstitial Fe (<1%) to act as impurity magnetic moments. At such low concentration, the impurity moments did not form long-range magnetic order The number of vortices and antivortices from all these cooling cycles gave us statistical insights of the peculiar random vortex patterns. When |Φ $ | < Φ % , the number of vortices/antivortices in FST fluctuated towards both sides in similar amplitudes against a flat baseline from the Nb control sample (Fig. Having established the existence of anomalous vortex and its connection with magnetic impurity, we study the flux profiles of spontaneous vortex-antivortex duos to understand the origin of randomness. Duos which located close to each other (Figs. The variation in the shape of the duo could be understood when considering the magnetic energy of the flux line. The decay length we observed of a typical isolated vortex was around 10 μm (Fig. In order to study the switching of vortex-antivortex pair under magnetic field, we focused on a different FST sample (Fig. The hysteresis in the switching was better visualized in a flux-field diagram (Fig. The magnitude and polarities of the pair revealed vectorial rotation of magnetic impurities moments under the application of H ) . The total flux of the vortex (antivortex) was 1.0 Φ % (-0.6 Φ % ) when the contrast reached its maximum at H ) = 57.6 G (Fig. Remarkably, each dipolar pattern agrees well with the theoretical calculations of a single QAV nucleated at a magnetic impurity carrying a local moment canted away from the normal of the surface The emergent behavior of the QAV was a local effect in the low excess Fe impurity (<1%) samples we measured. In this regime, the vortex cores were still well-separated such that formation of vortex-antivortex was more favorable than parallel alignments of the moments due to the lower free energy of the pair. Lowering the Fe impurity would reduce the probability of finding the QAV. On the other hand, increasing the Fe impurity density would decrease their average distance to be much smaller than the coherence length so that the vortex cores would start to overlap heavily. They might develop long-range ferromagnetic order by an RKKY-like interaction through the assistance of spin-orbit coupled supercurrents The TRS-broken topological vortex matter we observed may be harnessed for quantum information technology In conclusion, we used sSQUID microscopy and directly observed a novel form of vortex with spontaneously broken TRS in Fe-based superconductor Fe(Se,Te). QAVs and its antivortices occurred stochastically at zero magnetic field due to the spin-orbit coupling between the impurity moment and vortex core-states. By applying a small local magnetic field from the nano-SQUID probe, we observed ferromagnetic-like hysteretic switching loops, following a vectorial rotation of the flux line threading the impurity spin. Our observation and manipulation of QAV may enable new possibilities for superconducting information technology in a promising material platform. 