We propose a practically feasible time-periodic sinusoidal drive protocol in onsite mass term to generate the two-dimensional (2D) Floquet second-order topological superconductor, hosting both the regular 0-and anomalous π-Majorana corner modes (MCMs) while starting from a static 2D topological insulator/d-wave superconductor heterostructure setup. We theoretically study the local density spectra and the time dynamics of MCMs in the presence of such drive. The dynamical MCMs are topologically characterized by employing the average quadrupolar motion. Furthermore, we employ the Floquet perturbation theory (FPT) in the strong driving amplitude limit to provide analytical insight into the problem. We compare our exact (numerical), and the FPT results in terms of the eigenvalue spectra and the time dynamics of the MCMs. We emphasize that the agreement between the exact numerical and the FPT results are more prominent in the higher frequency regime for close to the 0-quasi-energy mode. The quest for first-order topological superconductors (TSCs) has been engaging substantial attention among the quantum condensed matter physics community for the past two decades. These TSCs have become the breeding ground for realizing the Majorana zero-modes (MZMs) FIG. On the other hand, the realm of non-equilibrium systems involving Floquet generation of topological bands provides us with the on-demand control of the topological properties of a system In the current literature, there exists a few proposals, relying upon the periodic kick or step-drive protocol to realize the FHOTI and FHOTSC phases hosting only the 0-modes In this article, we begin with a 2D topological insulator (TI) and d-wave superconductor heterostructure to generate the 2D FSOTSC hosting 0-and π-MCMs using a harmonic drive in the onsite mass term (see Fig. The remainder of the article is arranged as follows. We introduce our model Hamiltonian, the driving pro-tocol, and the formalism in Sec. II. The numerical results obtained using the Floquet operator are discussed in Sec. III. We topologically characterize the dynamical 0-and π-MCMs in Sec. IV with appropriate topological invariant. Sec. V is devoted to the discussion of analytical results obtained from the FPT and its comparison with the exact (numerical) results. In Sec. VI, we discuss some relevant points related to our results with their outlooks. Finally, we summarize and conclude our article in Sec. VII. In this section, we introduce our model Hamiltonian, driving protocol, and the formalism used to deal with the dynamical problem. We consider a system consisting of a 2D TI in proximity to a d-wave superconductor (see Fig. where, (k) = (m 0 -4γ + 2γ cos k x + 2γ cos k y ), the hopping (SOC) strength is denoted by γ (λ); m 0 and ∆ stand for the on-site crystal field splitting and d-wave superconducting pairing amplitude (assumed to be induced via the proximity effect), respectively. For static systems, such mean-field d-wave pairing has been theoretically considered before in Refs. where T = iτ 0 σ 0 s y K and C = τ y σ 0 s y K with K representing the complex-conjugation operator. Apart from these discrete symmetries, H(k) also respect the following spatial symmetries: mirror symmetry along-x with xy = H(k y , k x ), and mirror rotation-II with We consider the following time-dependent harmonic drive where, V represents the strength of the drive and Ω = (2π T ) is the frequency (time-period) of the drive. It is evident that V (t) satisfies V (t + T ) = V (t). Hence, the full Hamiltonian H(k, t) = H(k) + V (t) is also timeperiodic i.e., H(k, t + T ) = H(k, t). The Fourier components of H(k, t) reads as Exploiting the frequency-zone scheme, one can construct the infinite dimensional time-independent Floquet Hamiltonian as [77] However, the Fourier components H α having α > 1 vanishes akin to the mathematical form of the drive. Here, the size of the Hamiltonian H ∞ F (k) acts as the bottleneck in the numerical studies, especially when either the frequency of the drive is comparable to (or less than) the bandwidth of the system or the drive encompasses higher-harmonics of the sinusoidal function in Eq. ( where, U (k; t j + δt, t j ) = e -iH(k,tj )δt ; with δt = t N and t j = jδt. However, U (k; t j +δt, t j ) can be calculated more efficiently using the second-order Trotter-Suzuki formalism as follows Note that, we need to calculate e -iδtH(k) only once due to its time-independent nature. We choose the time increment δt in such a way that U (k; t, 0) remains always unitary. Following Eq. ( In this section, we provide all the numerical results obtained using the Floquet operator and the time-evolution operator discussed before. As discussed earlier, we can obtain the Floquet operator U (k; T, 0) adopting Eq. ( While exploring the time-evolution of the Floquet modes, we observe that the MCMs are not generated only after the full-time period T rather they start appearing after a certain intermediate time. We can track the trails of the MCMs throughout the drive by analyzing the total density of states (TDOS) of the MCMs present in the 0and π-gap. The TDOS at quasienergy can be computed as a function of t as One can find E m (t) from the eigenvalues of U (k; t, 0). We illustrate E(t) as a function of t in Fig. We topologically characterize the regular 0-and anomalous π-MCMs employing the dynamical nested Wilson loop technique. The detailed discussions regarding this method can be found in Refs. Here, the subscript represents the 0-and π-gap. We can construct U (k; t, 0) in a straight forward manner using Eq. ( where, Q x, ,k (t) = I+U † (k+∆xex;t,0)U (k;t,0) 2 ; with ∆ x = 2π L x and e x representing unit vector along the xdirection. The eigenvalue equation for W x, ,k (t) can be written in the form W x, ,k (t) ν x, ,μ (k, t)⟩ = e -2πiνx, ,μ (ky,t) ν x, ,μ (k, t)⟩ , Owing to the gapped nature of the ν x, ,μ (k y , t), one can configure two sets out of the eight ν x, such that ν x, ,μ ∈ ±ν x, . We construct the dynamical nested Wilson loop operator in the subspace of ±ν x, as with , ∆ y = 2π L y , and e y is the unit vector along the y-direction. We can write down the eigenvalue equation for where, ν ±νx, y, ,μ ′ (k x , t) represents the dynamical secondorder branches. Here, the k x dependence of the ν ±νx, y, ,μ ′ (k x , t) originates from the fact that the eigenfunctions of the dynamical first-order Wilson loop operator depends explicitly on the choice of the base point. However, its eigenvalues are independent of the specific choice of the base point. We define the average quadrupolar mo-tion as Note that, the particles complete a round trip during the time-interval t ∈ [0, T ], since U (k; 0, 0) = U (k; T, 0) = I. We hence obtain two fixed-points: 2 ) = 0 (mod 1). For a topologically trivial system, ⟨ν +νx, y, ,μ ′ ⟩(t) starts from 0 (mod 1) and evolves back to 0 (mod 1) during t ∈ [0, T ] and their motion can be adiabatically connected to zero, when boundary is imposed [see Fig. After investigating our setup numerically, we tie-up with the FPT We employ the interaction picture to obtain the full time-evolution operator. Following the perturbation theory where, the time-evolution operator in the interaction picture U I (k; t, 0) can be written in the form of a powerseries as where, H I (k, t) = U 0 (0, t)H(k)U 0 (t, 0). Within our analysis, we truncate the series after the first-order term in U I (k; t, 0) as the higher order terms become messy large expressions with smaller in magnitude. Following the periodic cosine drive [Eq. ( where, φ = 2V Ω and J n is the Bessel function of first kind. However, U P (k; t, 0) does not satisfy the unitarity condition. It is possible to recast the same at t = T by exponentiating U I (k; t, 0) and exploiting U 0 (t, 0) = I. Due to the loss of unitarity condition, U P (k; t, 0) does not facilitate the calculation of average quadrupolar motion [Eq. ( It is evident from the H eff (k) that only the SOC and the d-wave pairing term get modulated by the drive, whereas the hopping, as well as the crystal field splitting term m 0 , is unaffected by the application of the drive. The bulk gap ∆G(T ), obtained from H eff (k), at k = (0, 0) and (π, π) remain unaltered as compared to the static band gap obtained from H(k). However, the instantaneous bulk gap ∆G(t) as function of time t(≠ T ) can be modulated with respect to the static band gap due to the presence of other time-dependent non-vanishing terms in Eq. ( Having investigated the quasi-energy spectra, obtained employing OBC and depicted in Fig. Although, as we increase the time above the time-period T (t > T ), we observe that there is a clear mismatch between the numerical and the analytical approach even for Ω = 5.0 [see Fig. Nevertheless, we obtain a more clear picture of the time-evolution of the MCMs from the investigation of U (0, 0; t, 0) FIG. the TDOS D 0 (t) [Eq. , respectively. We choose Ω = 1.5, while all other model parameters take the same value as mentioned in Fig. Fig. In this section, we discuss various aspects of the harmonic drive protocol and compare our FPT with the Brillouin-Wigner (BW) perturbation theory The formalism we introduced in Sec. II is not limited to the specific form of the drive [Eq. ( Following the drive protocols mentioned in Eq. (19a), (19b), and (19c), we show the quasi-energy spectra for a finite-size system in Fig. The time-periodic harmonic drive, that we introduce in Eq. ( (c) corresponding to two cases. In case I, the counterpropagating 0-and π-edge modes intersect with each other at k = 0, π [see Fig. Interestingly, in the step or kick drive protocol, one can analytically derive the Floquet operator In the BW perturbation theory where, H m 's are defined in Eq. ( Thus, to obtain a coherent picture from both the FPT and the BW perturbation theory, one needs to consider the higher-order terms in Eq. To summarize, in this article, we consider a timeperiodic harmonic drive protocol to generate the 2D FSOTSC anchoring both 0-and π-MCMs. We demonstrate our results for two cases. In the first case, we start from a static model which is topologically trivial, and the driven system hosts only the π-MCMs [see Fig. 