The mechanical properties of β-Sn single crystals have been systematically investigated using a combined methodology of micropillar tests and rate-dependent crystal plasticity modelling. The slip strength and rate sensitivity of several key slip systems within β-Sn single crystals have been determined. Consistency between the numerically predicted and experimentally observed slip traces has been shown for pillars oriented to activate single and double slip. Subsequently, the temperature-dependent, intermetallic-sizegoverning behaviour of a polycrystal β-Sn-rich alloy SAC305 (96.5Sn-3Ag-0.5Cu wt%) is predicted through a multi-scale homogenization approach, and the predicted temperature-and rate-sensitivity reproduce independent experimental results. The integrated experimental and numerical approaches provide mechanistic understanding and fundamental material properties of microstructure-sensitive behaviour of electronic solders subject to thermomechanical loading, including thermal fatigue. This paper proposes an anisotropic, intermetallic size-dependent, multi-scale crystal plasticity homogenization model that predicts the mechanical behaviours of a β-Sn-rich solder alloy SAC305 (96.5Sn-3Ag-0.5Cu wt%). The rate-dependent crystal plasticity of β-Sn, contributing as the major phase of the SAC305 alloy, has been established through systematic single crystal micropillar testing, characterisation and crystal plasticity modelling with a range of crystallographic orientations under various loading rates at room temperature. Slip system properties have been extracted based on the experimental and crystal plasticity simulated load-displacement response, and both single and double slip have been captured such that the plastic anisotropy is investigated in depth. A polycrystal SAC305 representative volume element that employs the material properties established from the multi-scale homogenization captures the rate-sensitive, temperature-dependent mechanical behaviour, which is compared to independent macro-scale experiments. The research provides the link from single crystal properties through to thermomechanical response of solder components. The family of Sn-Ag-Cu (SAC) alloys are currently widely used as Pb-free solders Micropillar compression tests have been extensively used to understand and extract the micromechanical properties for various single crystal materials The research sheds new light on the following aspects: • The anisotropic, rate-dependent β-Sn material properties have been determined through combining the single crystal micropillar experiments and CPFE modelling. The literature data on the β-Sn properties has shown strong scattering and no direct crystal plasticity model has yet been conducted. • The anisotropic material properties of the SAC305 alloy have then been determined through a multi-scale modelling strategy, with the knowledge from the micropillar tests and considering the detailed microstructure, such as intermetallic-containing eutectic regions. • The obtained SAC305 properties have been validated through a systematic comparison to several independent tensile tests under various loading rates and temperatures. Therefore, it provides the fundaments to investigate the thermomechanical behaviours of SAC305 solder joints subject to in-service conditions. Micropillars were fabricated within bulk 99.99% tin (HP Sn) samples, which is β-Sn at room temperature. Two samples were prepared; sample 1 in Figure An array of square-section micropillars of ~5 μm mid-height width and ~13 μm height (Figure The in situ uniaxial micropillar compression tests were set up within a Quanta FEG 450 SEM using a displacement-controlled Alemnis nanoindentation stage with a 10 μm diameter circular flat punch indenter. The pillars were deformed at room temperature with the applied displacements, loading and unloading (displacement) velocities, engineering strains and loading rate given in Table Typical force-displacement responses of pillars with different crystallographic orientations are shown in Figure Figure Loading is in the Z-direction. Unit cells showing the crystallographic orientation of the pillars as indicated in the inset figures. In this section, the crystal plasticity finite element (CPFE) formulation is briefly introduced for the β-Sn single crystal, and the development of model micropillar compression tests presented. These models are used with the experimental data to determine the β-Sn material properties after which an assessment is presented of the observed slip system activations through comparisons of the experimentally observed and model predicted slip traces. A rate-dependent, dislocation-based crystal plasticity framework is used for β-Sn A multi-part finite element model, shown in Figure The crystal slip properties are extracted by matching the modelled micropillar loaddisplacement curves with those measured from the micropillar tests by virtue of minimizing the errors in the reaction forces simultaneously at both loading rates, which provides the best-fit reflection of the micropillar response in the experiments. The rate sensitivity governing parameters (i.e. the activation energy ∆H and volume ∆V) are assumed to be the same as those that were calibrated from creep tests show a comparison of the 'nominal' stress-strain response as calculated from the experiment and simulation, using the load and displacement data an initial pillar sizes from, for pillars 1 and 2 subject to different loading strain rates, respectively. In addition to the strong anisotropic response in terms of crystallographic orientation (see Figure Bieler and co-workers have previously carried out slip analysis of SAC305 alloys, which contains multi-phases i.e. β-Sn and intermetallics (Ag3Sn and Cu6Sn5), but they did not explicitly modell the properties of pure β-Sn There are three different ways to identify potential slip activation on the free surfaces of the micro-pillars based on slip traces: (i) the direct experimental observation of slip traces against known crystal orientation through SEM imaging (see Figure The experimentally observed slip traces and the CP model predicted traces of slip system 2 ((010) [001]) are compared in Figure The SAC305 model established by The detailed microstructure of SAC305 alloy and corresponding solder joints is complex and can be categorized at several scales, which are depicted in Figure A multi-scale modelling approach is used to capture the mechanical performance of the characterised microstructures at the aforementioned scales. The β-Sn phase is assigned directly the material properties determined above from the β-Sn pillars, indicated in Figure where r̅ IMC is the average characteristic IMC size (in μm) within the SAC305 crystal, considering both Ag3Sn and Cu6Sn5 phases. The slip strengths of the other slip systems are obtained by applying the CRSS ratios provided in Here, λ1 and λ2 control the slip system hardening and recovery rates respectively, and are found to be related to the average IMC radius (in μm) The IMC size within a given solder alloy is physically determined by the undercooling reached prior to -Sn nucleation during the solidification process where the minimum and maximum values were quantified as soldered and at a sufficiently long duration, respectively. The temperature sensitivities of both the elastic moduli and slip strengths (the latter deduced from the temperature sensitivity of yield stresses) are taken to be those determined by All other properties required remain unchanged and are given in Table Strong temperature sensitivity is predicted at all strain rates investigated here. In addition, the predicted flow stresses are reasonably consistent with independent tension tests on polycrystal SAC305 samples Both the sensitivity to loading rate and temperature are important in the temperaturedependent creep behaviour of Sn-based solder joints The predicted flow stresses of the homogenized polycrystal RVE are consistent with the independent experimental measurement, thus justifying the property determination and the multi-scale homogenised SAC305 model. Figure This paper presents a step-by-step experimental calibration and model development of rate-sensitive mechanical performance of β-Sn containing alloys, and multi-scale homogenisation which considers the role of anisotropy and key microstructural features (e.g. IMC phases and their distribution in eutectic regions). Major conclusions include: i) The differing β-Sn slip system strengths and rate-sensitivity governing parameters have been quantified through comparison of micro-mechanical testing experiments with crystal plasticity simulations. ii) Together these enable the construction of a multi-scale homogenised model that enables prediction of polycrystalline multi-phase SAC305 alloys over a useful temperature range (25 to 125 o C) to predict the performance of components and support the understanding of the failure mechanisms of solder joints during thermal cycling. iii) A mechanistic link from fundamental β-Sn single-crystal properties through to polycrystal multi-phase SAC305 alloy behaviour over temperature and strain rate has been demonstrated, providing a useful predictive capability for SAC305 solder joints under thermal cycling conditions for a given IMC size, or the evolving IMC size if known. (GND), respectively. The evolution of SSD density is related to the effective plastic strain rate ṗ and accumulated plastic strain p in a recovery rule, where recovery corresponds to the fact that shear resistance saturates when a large deformation applies: Here, λ1 and λ2 control the slip system hardening and recovery rates respectively and are determined from micro-pillar tests as detailed below. The effective plastic strain p is given by: where ε p is the plastic strain tensor. The GND density term ρGND in eq.( 