We explore the possibility of using superfluid helium for direct detection of sub-GeV dark matter (DM). We discuss the relevant phenomenology resulting from the scattering of an incident dark matter particle on a Helium nucleus. Rather than directly exciting quasi-particles, DM in this mass range will interact with a single He atom, triggering an atomic cascade which eventually also includes emission and thermalization of quasi-particles. We present in detail the analytical framework needed for modeling these processes and determining the resulting flux of quasi-particles. We propose a novel method for detecting this flux with modern force-sensitive devices, such as nanoelectro-mechanical system (NEMS) oscillators, and derive the sensitivity projections for a generic sub-GeV DM detection experiment using such sensors. Although the existence of dark matter (DM) has been definitively supported by gravitational evidence Direct detection experiments achieve the greatest sensitivity when the fundamental excitation of the target material corresponds to the recoil energy or momentum scale from the scattering dark matter. Therefore, superfluid 4 He, with a spectrum of quasi-particle excitations with momenta keV In lieu of these previous proposals, in a previous theoretical work The basic physics processes are illustrated in the pentaptych of figure 1. In the first panel, the recoiling helium atom inherits the ∼ MeV momentum scale of the DM. It will proceed and scatter against other helium atoms, which themselves will scatter in turn, and so on, producing an avalanche of atoms (second panel). At the end of this atomic cascade, the initial recoil momentum has been distributed over a large number of daughter atoms moving isotropically with respect to the initial scattering location. These atoms have a de Broglie wavelength comparable or larger than the inter-atomic distance of ∼ O(1) Å. At this level, the 2-2 elastic scattering becomes subdominant and each low momentum atom interacts with the superfluid background and radiates quasi-particle excitations (including but not limited to phonons), as shown in the third panel. In our previous theoretical work, we focused on constructing an effective field theory (EFT) to describe this process Figure The organization of our paper is as follows. In section 2, we review the elastic scattering between a DM particle and an initial helium atom. The calculation produces the helium recoil rate profiles for DM of different masses. In section 2.2, we review other scattering processes that may happen in the superfluid, and explain that they are subdominant for the sub-GeV regime. In section 3, we review the well known quantum mechanics treatment of helium-helium atomic cascade. In section 3.2, we review our previous theory proposal's result on the Lagrangian construction of helium atoms emitting quasi-particles. The calculation provides a quasi-particle production rate for a helium atom of an arbitrary momentum. In section 4.1, we review the parameters of quasi-particles and show that they are thermalized by the time all quasi-particles are radiated from the slow helium atoms. In section 4.2, we determine the temperature of the thermalized quasi-particle system by two different methods -an analytical approximation or a Monte Carlo simulation. In section 5, we calculate the momentum signal on the oscillator sensor in a realistic spatial configuration. Finally, we present the experimental constraints on the DM-Nucleus coupling strength. The five sections are chronologically ordered, with each section feeding a particle profile to the next section (see fig. 2 Dark matter scattering off Helium atoms We begin by considering the DM scattering rate off helium atoms via elastic nuclear recoil, which is the dominant process in the sub-GeV DM mass range. As shown in fig. The differential DM-Helium cross section is where A = 4 is the atomic number of Helium. To arrive at the last result, we have taken the massive mediator limit m φ q max and approximated the nuclear form factor as F (q 2 ) → 1, which is justified by the fact that the inverse momentum of a sub-GeV mass DM, /q, is much larger than the nucleus size ∼ fm. The differential nuclear recoil rate dΓ/dq 2 is linearly proportional to the number of target helium atoms N He , the local DM density ρ = 0.3 GeV/cm 3 , and depends on the DM velocity distribution f χ (v) and the differential cross section (eq. (2.2)), where in the second line we have introduced the DM-nucleon reduced mass, μ χn , and the DM-nucleon cross section σ χn = . The DM velocity distribution f χ (v) in our local frame is taken as the Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution with an escape velocity cutoff v esc , where the normalization factor The Heaviside function in eq. (2.4) constraints the DM velocity in the galactic frame to be below the escape velocity. Here we choose the velocity dispersion The recoil momentum of the Helium atom is the essential quantity which governs the spectrum of the produced quasi-particles. By using eqns. (2.2-2.4), we obtain the differential Helium recoil rate shown in fig. In addition to elastic scattering off individual helium atoms, there are several other DMinduced processes, which are subdominant in the MeV-GeV DM mass range targeted in this paper, but may become dominant for DM masses either below MeV or above GeV. In the sub-MeV mass range, the DM de Broglie wavelength is larger than several Å, spanning several helium atoms in the liquid. Such a light DM particle could directly produce quasiparticle excitations via coherent scatterings. At higher masses above a GeV, the exchange momentum is large enough to trigger excitation and ionization of helium. Coherent quasi-particle production. The general scattering rate involving both coherent and incoherent quasi-particle production can be derived using the many-body quantization method where the form factor S(q, ω) is the Dynamic Structure Function (DSF) of the superfluid. At low momentum, q ∼ keV, the DSF is measured from the neutron energy loss in neutron scattering experiments To compare elastic scattering with coherent emission of quasi-particles, we show their respective event rates in fig. coherently with the superfluid. The coherent scattering rate is derived from eq. (2.5) by integrating over q 2 up to q c = 4.5 keV, with the DSF data given in Charge exchange, ionization and excitation processes. In the mass range above ∼ 0.1 GeV, the DM kinetic energy and helium nuclear recoil energy are larger than 100 eV, which is sufficient to excite or ionize a helium atom. Considering the interactions among helium atoms, the elastic scatterings are still predominant and neutral helium atoms constitute the majority of the final products after these processes. This is illustrated in fig. The recoil energy is dissipated in the following channels: (1) ionized atom conversion into neutral atoms, (2) neutral atom cascade, (3) quasi-particle production by atoms, (4) decay of excited atoms into IR photon and singlet and triplet dimer excimers A 1 Σ + u and a 3 Σ + u . Existing efforts in the literature In this section we will discuss the theoretical description and the details of our simulation of the neutral atomic cascade. We simplify the DM-helium scattering model by considering only the neutral atoms portion of the cascade. This is justified by the numerical analysis in A recoiling helium atom with momentum in the keV to MeV range has de Broglie wavelength smaller than the inter-atomic distance in the superfluid. Therefore, the initial scattered atom triggers a cascade, i.e., a series of 2 → 2 scatterings among helium atoms within the fluid. Because the kinetic energy is comparable to the helium atomic potential The first term is an initial plane wave, the second term is an outgoing spherical wave weighted with a scattering amplitude f Ψ (θ, k), and k is the reduced momentum in the center-of-mass frame (equal to one half of the incoming atom momentum in the lab frame). Expanding eq. (3.1) in terms of Legendre Polynomials P l , the Schrodinger equation of the system can be solved numerically, and the scattering amplitude f Ψ (θ, k) depends on the phase shift δ l (k), where l is the angular index of the Legendre expansion. In using phase variation For the convenience of comparison with the next section, in fig. The elastic scatterings keep dissipating the energy to more and more helium atoms, and decreasing their momenta. When a helium atom's momentum drops below 10 keV, the atom's de Broglie wavelength becomes comparable to the inter-atomic distance of the superfluid. The moving atom then collectively scatters against the surrounding atoms in the fluid and produces quasi-particles. Unlike the case of sub-MeV dark matter directly producing quasi-particles Λ is the cutoff scale of the superfluid EFT. We can estimate Λ using the inverse of the atomic space, Λ ∼ O(1) keV. For the phonon, the cutoff is related to the energy density of the superfluid ρ and the sound speed of phonon, Λ = (ρ c s ) 1/4 0.83 keV. J 0 is the number density operator of the superfluid, and its normalized matrix element is the Dynamic Structure Function (DSF) where ρ is the superfluid mass density, v He is the initial helium velocity, and S(k, ω) is the DSF. For the purpose of comparing the elastic atomic scattering cross-sections with that for quasi-particle emission, in fig. Elastic Exp. data The rate of helium emitting one quasi-particle (green, orange, and blue lines) and the experimental rate of elastic atomic scattering (red dashed line). The helium atom momentum is the lab frame momentum, consistent in all curves. The elastic atomic scattering rate is converted from the experimental scattering cross section given in expectation of low energy scattering originates from the two requirements: (1) helium atoms predominantly radiate quasi-particles rather than elastically scatter with each other in the superfluid; (2) quasi-particle modes only exist below ∼ 7 keV. The first requirement shows that the vector coupling in eq. (3.4) must exist. The second requirement restricts the momentum integration to an upper cutoff ∼ 7 keV. Below the cutoff, the emission rate increases with the momentum of the atom because of the phase space enhancement. Beyond the cutoff, the emission rate decreases because the phase space integration in eq. (3.5) has reached its maximum, leaving powers of helium atom momentum only in the denominator of the result. The curves in fig. In this section, we will present our simulation results about the developing helium cascade and the radiation of quasi-particles from fast moving helium atoms. We do not include the subsequent quasi-particle decays and quasi-particle self-interactions, whose treatment is postponed for the next section. Because of the large number of daughter particles which must necessarily be produced to conserve both energy and momentum, little information about the overall final structure of the shower may be gleaned from a direct analytical treatment. However, because the individual interactions of the shower constituents are quantum mechanical and probabilistic, the problem is amenable to a Monte Carlo approach. In particular the distance that each helium atom travels between interactions, the type of interaction it experiences, and the subsequent evolution of its daughter particles are all properly described by probability distributions (all necessary results were derived and/or collected in The momentum-dependent cross section σ el of elastic atomic helium scattering is known from experiment where n He = ρ/m He denotes the number density of helium atoms in the superfluid. The total cross section of these processes defines a mean free path and thus a probability distribution that describes the distance an energetic helium atom is expected to travel before interacting with the superfluid to produce either another energetic helium atom or a quasi-particle. The respective probabilities for each type of daughter particle are given by Note that the cross sections and consequently the length scale of the probability distribution are all functions of the helium momentum. At this point we have all the ingredients needed to describe the structure of the Monte Carlo simulation: each simulated event begins as a single helium atom at the origin with its momentum oriented along the z-axis. Using this momentum we evaluate the cross sections of both processes and sample the resulting distribution to determine what type of interaction the helium atom experiences and where this interaction occurs. The momenta of daughter particles are sampled from the appropriate differential rates provided in sections 3.1 and 3.2 above, and the cross sections of those daughter particles are evaluated anew. In this way the simulation proceeds recursively generating new daughter particles and tracking their trajectories between collisions. This process is depicted schematically in the second and third panels of fig. In fig. In this section we investigate the effects of interactions between the quasi-particles produced at the end of the cascade. These interactions may thermalize the ensemble of quasiparticles. In order to determine whether this actually occurs, we first do a back-of-theiphone estimate comparing the quasi-particle interaction rate nσv and the quasi-particle production rate Γ inel , for a given recoil energy or momentum. After that, we present the theoretical solution of last scattering surface and the thermal temperature. More accurate results from our simulation are presented in section 4.3. We consider the two well known types of excitations with analytic dispersion relationsphonons and rotons. The "phonon" refers to a quasi-particle with momentum below ∼ 1.2 keV; its dispersion is linear with a small cubic correction: where c s = 240 m/s is the sound speed, Λ = (ρc s ) 1/4 is the UV scale of the superfluid, and γ ∼ O( where m * 0.16m He is the effective roton mass. Several relevant interactions are well studied in the literature 2 Phonon-roton scattering is the most complicated among these processes. There is existing controversy over the leading orders of cross section in the scenario that the initial roton is not at the exact bottom of the dispersion curve. In a following theory project, we will elaborate on the novel development of the last process, and discuss the different results involving initial phonon and roton states. Using the parameter values of eqns. (4.1) and (4.2), we find that the cross sections are of similar magnitude, σ v ∼ 10 -6 -10 -7 keV -2 . With those ingredients, we are now ready to check for thermalization. If at the end of the atomic cascade, when all quasi-particles have just been produced, the quasi-particles have already experienced multiple interactions, we can safely claim that the quasi-particle system is thermalized. We perform a back-of-the-envelope estimation as follows. From fig. During this time, the quasi-particles (with velocity O(100) m/s) may expand up to ∆R ∼ 100 m/s × 10 -11 s = 10 -9 m = 1 nm. We then estimate the the interaction rate nσv for quasi-particle self-interactions as We see that the corresponding timescale ranges from 10 -14 s (for P ini ∼ 1 MeV) to 10 -11 s (for P ini ∼ 20 keV). This timescale is smaller than the timescale of 10 -11 s for producing the quasi-particle shower. Therefore, quasi-particles dissipated from P ini 20 keV recoil momentum will interact with each other multiple times, i.e. become fully thermalized, by the time when all quasi-particles are produced. When considering recoil momenta 20 keV, only a few quasi-particles are produced at this scale, and they infrequently interact with each other. Thus we treat these quasi-particles as free-streaming from the beginning. In the following, we present our procedure to derive the thermalized distribution of quasiparticles. First of all, we estimate the last scattering surface of the final quasi-particle "plasma" system, assuming an isotropic configuration distribution. Borrowing from the analogous concept in Cosmology where N is the total number of quasi-particles, σ is their interaction rate, and V = 4πr 3 /3. The solution of the previous equation gives the last scattering radius R ls = 3N σ/8π. N is estimated by assuming that all final quasi-particle excitations have energy 1 meV: N = P 2 ini /2m He 1 meV . Plugging in the numerical values from the previous subsection, we find the magnitude of the last scattering radius R ls to be O(1) to O(10) nm, smaller than the distance between the sensors in realistic detectors. Therefore, the relevant distribution detected by the sensors is the thermalized spectrum of quasi-particles. The number of quasi-particles is not fixed, but can change due to a) decays of unstable phonons (with momenta below 1.2 keV) to other phonons; b) decays of other quasi-particles to stable quasi-particles with momenta between 1.2 and 4.6 keV Using energy conservation, the initial recoil energy equals the total energy of the Bose-Einstein ensemble: where 4 3 πR 3 ls is the volume of the thermal system. The momentum integration runs from 0 to 4.6 keV because we assume only phonons and stable quasi-particles exist in the thermalized distribution. We can use our MC simulations described in section 3.3 to provide a numerical estimate for T from the previous subsection. The simulation provides averaged values of the different scattering cross sections between quasi-particles of all types. These cross-sections can be used in eq. ( One potential problem with our simulations is that the expression for the phonon-roton scattering cross section is only valid for phonons that have a much smaller momentum than the roton The previous analysis and simulations are applicable to various types of dark matter searches in superfluid helium. One such proposal is the HeRALD experiment Detector setup. In order to study the quasi-particle flux onto a generic device, we consider a simple detector model as follows. We assume a large supply of 2D squareshaped sensors of area a × a, which are placed on a 3D grid inside a superfluid target, with an inter-sensor distance of d. The distance between the event and the closest target sensor is up to half of a diagonal √ 3d/2. Each sensor at the cell vertex first receives the signal from its own octic cube. Therefore, we simplify the geometry and study the events happening within a cube of volume d 3 with a sensor at the center (see fig. We also model the detection as an event free streaming to the sensor of area a 2 from a distance r. Assuming the equilibrium quasi-particle ensemble to be isotropic (which is confirmed in our simulations), the probability of a single given particle reaching the surface is given by the ratio between its solid angle to the detector Ω(θ, φ, r, a) and the total solid angle 4π. The solid angle Ω(θ, φ, r, a) belongs to a leaning pyramid configuration and is solved numerically using Mathematica build-in commands. If P ini > 20 keV, the quasi-particles reach thermalization. Then we calculate the differential profile, dN/dp, the number of quasi-particles with given momentum p, according to a thermal distribution: where V is the last scattering volume estimated from eq. ( We estimate the number of events using energy conservation. According to the simulation results in section 3.3, for the estimation of the quasi-particle flux we further assume that most of the quasi-particles are rotons. Quasi-particle momentum (keV) Differential number dN/dp Generated by 20 keV recoil momentum Generated by 100 keV recoil momentum Generated by 1000 keV recoil momentum Figure O(1) keV threshold. Sensors of momentum threshold ∼ O(1) keV are capable of detecting single quasi-particles. Taking 1 keV threshold as an example, as long as at least one quasi-particle reaches the sensor, the event can be counted as detectable. There is a higher probability of detection when the particles are streaming from a closer distance and a normal angle from the sensor. We thus extract this probability between the event and the nearest sensor: Here p min is the threshold momentum of the sensor, and N (p min ) is the total number of quasi-particles with momentum above threshold, which is integrated from eq. (5.1). We plot an example density plot for this probability function in the left panel of fig. where radial distance r = x 2 + y 2 + z 2 , the zenith angle θ = tan -1 ( x 2 + y 2 /z), and the azimuth angle φ = tan -1 (y/x). The spatial efficiency eventually depends on the recoil The initial recoil momentum from the DM is 100 keV, the sensor area is 100 × 100 μm 2 . Here we vary the zenith angle θ along the horizontal axis, while setting the azimuth angle φ = 0. The probability increases as the event radial distance decreases and as the direction gets closer to the normal (θ = 0). momentum P ini , the sensor distance d, and the sensor area a 2 . We show the spatial efficiency function eq. ( Here the number N is the total number of quasi-particles without the cap of p min . Similar formalism can be applied to O(100) keV threshold. For example, we estimate that at least 25 quasi-particles are required to trigger a 100 keV threshold sensor. Therefore, the cumulative sum in eq. ( Despite these changes, the spatial efficiency function follows the same formalism (5.3). As shown in fig. Sensitivity projection. DM with a given mass could generate a recoil momentum of any value with the rate distribution shown in fig. In fig. where q min is the cutoff by N > 1 in eq. ( We have proposed a new method of detecting sub-GeV DM using the spectrum of the quasi-particle excitations in superfluid 4 He generated as a result of a DM collision with a He nucleus. The key idea is to leverage modern force-sensitive devices, such as NEMS os-cillators, to detect the momentum flux of the quasi-particles. With a kg-year exposure, we have demonstrated that this superfluid experiment can strongly constrain the DM-Nucleus interaction within the sub-GeV mass range. Our study is also the first to theoretically study (1) the production of quasi-particles from the resulting helium atom cascade; (2) the thermalization and decoupling of quasi-particles; and (3) the temperature of the thermalized quasi-particle system in a superfluid DM detector. The findings include: • The DM collision initiates a cascade of helium atoms which gradually lose momentum by elastic scattering, and later, once they reach O(10) keV, by radiation of quasiparticles. • Quasi-particles generated by a recoil momentum P ini O(10) keV will thermalize as a result of their self-interactions. For P ini O(10) keV, the quasi-particles are free streaming from the beginning. • The temperature of the thermalized quasi-particles system generated by sub-GeV DM is O(1) Kelvin. These results lead to a prediction of the detectability of events in the vicinity of a NEMS sensor. With a 10 kg-yr exposure and a 1 keV momentum threshold, the ideal detector setup is able to push the DM-nucleon exclusion region down to about 10 -41 to 10 -43 cm 2 . For a calculation of the multi-phonon production in a crystal target over the whole keV to GeV DM mass range, see