LaSb 2 is found to be an example of an exceptionally pressure sensitive and tunable, two dimensional compound. In-plane electrical resistivity of LaSb 2 under pressure up to 12.9 kbar was measured in zero and applied magnetic field. The charge density wave transition (observed at ∼ 350 K at ambient pressure) is completely suppressed by 6-7 kbar with significant (in comparison with the ambient pressure) increase in Fermi surface gapping and transition hysteresis just above ambient pressure. LaSb 2 is a member of the light rare-earth diantimonides RSb 2 (R = La-Nd, Sm) family in which the members all crystallize in the orthorhombic SmSb 2 structure. [1, 2] Single crystals of the members of the family were grown decades ago and basic physical properties were reported. This potential pressure sensitivity is experimentally addressed in this following by measurements of electrical resistivity of LaSb 2 in zero and applied magnetic field under pressure up to 12.9 kbar. We find that LaSb 2 is remarkably pressure sensitive with T CDW being suppressed to below 150 K by ∼ 4 kbar and very likely fully suppressed by ∼ 6 -7 kbar. In addition we find that the resistive anomaly associated with T CDW changes dramatically when T CDW drops below the solidification temperature of the pressure media, suggesting that LaSb 2 is sensitive to even small deviations from purely hydrostatic pressure conditions. Finally we infer that for some pressure less than ∼ 2 kbar there is a significant change in the degree of hysteresis in T CDW (changing from ∼ 2 K at ambient pressure to more than 50 K above 2 kbar) and in the amount of Fermi surface that is gapped by the CDW transition (changing from roughly 10% at ambient pressure to ∼ 50 % above 2 kbar). Large single crystals of LaSb 2 were grown out of antimony flux. Standard, linear four-probe ac resistance at ambient pressure and under pressure was measured on bar -shaped samples in a I||ab geometry. The 0.25 μm diameter Pt wires were spot-welded to the sample and then the contacts were covered with Epo-Tek H20E silverfilled epoxy for better mechanical stability. The contact resistance values were ∼ 1Ω or lower. The frequency used was 17 Hz, typical current values were 3-5 mA. Magnetoresistance was measured in a transverse configuration, H||c, I||ab. The measurements were performed using the ACT option of a Quantum Design Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS) instrument. Pressure was generated in a hybrid, BeCu / NiCrAl piston -cylinder pressure cell (modified version of the one used in Ref. 17). A 40 : 60 mixture of light mineral oil and n-pentane was used as a pressure-transmitting medium. This medium solidifies at room temperature in the pressure range of 30 -40 kbar, Resistivity measurements up to 380 K at ambient pressure are shown in Fig. An example of the resistivity data taken under pressure (P LT = 0.1 kbar is presented in Fig. This last observation allows us to shorten the measurements time by evaluating the CDW transition hysteresis under pressure from comparison of H = 0 data on cooling and H = 140 kOe on warming. A subset of such data is shown in Fig. The temperature-dependent resistivity data taken at different pressures allows for the construction of a P -T phase diagram for LaSb 2 presented in Fig. To further explore the effects of applied pressure on LaSb 2 , in figure The base temperature resistivity (Fig. The exponent n ranges from ∼ 3.3 to ∼ 3.7 as pressure is increased, initially varying only weakly as T CDW is weakly suppressed. As T CDW is suppressed more rapidly, n increases from 3.3 to 3.7. Once T CDW is suppressed to zero, n(P ) flattens. It is noteworthy that whereas the low temperature resistivity (ρ 1.8 K , n) appears to be not very sensitive to T CDW (P ) crossing T solidif ication (P ) line, the changes in ∆ρ CDW /ρ CDW on this crossing are abrupt and unambiguous. This is actually not too surprising if the effects of non-hydrostaticity are thought to be a broadening of the resistive feature of the transition rather than a significant change in the low temperature state. If T CDW is well above base temperature or the T ≤ 15 K range of power law fitting, then the affects of this broadening will be long past, at higher temperatures. On the other hand, the∆ρ CDW /ρ CDW is inherently associated with the T CDW temperature region. As mentioned above, the ambient pressure data (Fig. (ii) the size of the CDW -like anomaly is significantly different. We believe that neither some difference in the in-plane direction of the current, nor possible temperature lag due to the thermal mass of the cell (rates of ∼ 0.3 K/min were used) could explain these drastic differences. (Note, that at ambient pressure similar relative size of the anomaly was observed in Ref. 11, and no abrupt change of hysteresis under pressure in the same or similar cell and measurements protocol was reported in Ref. Fermi surface of LaSb 2 Regardless of possible complications caused by PTM freezing, and possible change of electronic structure in 1 kbar range, the data show that the CDW transition in LaSb 2 is very fragile, so that 6-7 kbar pressure is enough to suppress T CDW to T = 0 K, this corresponds to overall pressure derivative of ∼ -50 K/kbar, that is more than an order of magnitude larger in the absolute value than that for LaAgSb 2 A clear change in the base temperature magnetoresistance (MR) (figure Our data on CDW suppression in LaSb 2 could be compared with the evolution of superconductivity in LaSb 2 under pressure in this material. 