Polarization-dependent reflectivity measurements were carried out over a broad frequency range on single-crystalline ZrGeSe and ZrGeS compounds, which are closely related to the prototype nodal-line semimetal ZrSiS. These measurements revealed the strongly anisotropic character of both ZrGeSe and ZrGeS, with a reduced plasma frequency for the out-of-plane direction E c as compared to the in-plane direction E ab. For E ab the optical conductivity spectrum consists of two Drude terms followed by a shoulder or plateau-like behavior and a distinct U shape at higher energies, while for E c one Drude term is followed by a peak-like behavior and the U shape of the profile is less developed. Under external pressure, two prominent excitations appear in the out-of-plane optical conductivity spectrum of ZrGeSe, whose frequency position and oscillator strength show a weak anomaly at ∼3 GPa. Overall, the pressure-induced changes in the profile of the E c conductivity spectrum are much enhanced above ∼3 GPa. We compare our results to those recently reported for ZrSiS in a quantitative manner. The ZrSiS-type family of square-net materials with the general formula WXY (with W = Zr, Hf; X = Si, Ge, Sn; Y = O, S, Se, Te) has been extensively investigated experimentally and theoretically in recent years, since they provide an ideal platform for exploring exotic states of quantum matter, namely the nodal-line semimetal phase The WXY compounds crystallize in the PbFCl-type structure in the tetragonal space group P 4/nmm. Their crystal structure consists of slabs with five square nets, with a stacking sequence [Y -W -X-W -Y ] Previous frequency-dependent reflectivity measurements on ZrSiS for the polarization of the incident radiation along (E ab) and perpendicular (E c) to the layers revealed a highly anisotropic optical response, in very good agreement with density-functional-theory (DFT) calculations In this paper, we study the polarization-dependent optical response of two other members of the compound family WXY, namely ZrGeSe and ZrGeS. Similar to Zr-SiS, we find a highly anisotropic character of the optical conductivity with a much reduced metallic character along the out-of-plane direction. In particular, the pressure-induced appearance of two new excitations in the out-of-plane optical response is confirmed in the compound ZrGeSe. We compare the optical conductivity of the various compounds under ambient and high-pressure conditions in a quantitative manner. ZrGeSe and ZrGeS single crystals were grown by chemical vapor transport method An infrared microscope (Bruker Hyperion), equipped with a 15× Cassegrain objective, coupled to a Bruker Vertex 80v FT-IR spectrometer was used for carrying out the polarization-dependent reflectivity measurements at ambient and high pressure, both at room temperature. The ambient-pressure reflectivity measurements were carried out in the frequency range 200-23.000 cm -1 on surfaces cleaned with alcohol. As reference, a commercial Al mirror was used. The reflectivity results for ZrSiS are consistent with those in Ref. For the generation of pressures up to 6.0 GPa a Diacell CryoDAC-Mega (AlmaxEasyLab) diamond-anvil cell (DAC) was used. The out-of-plane surface of ZrGeSe single crystals, with the size of about 210×190×80 μm 3 , was carefully cleaned with isopropanol and loaded in the hole of a CuBe gasket inside the DAC. Finely ground CsI powder served as quasi-hydrostatic pressure transmitting medium and to ensure the sample-diamond interface during the optical measurements. The pressure was determined in situ using the ruby luminescence technique A. Ambient-pressure optical response The ambient-pressure reflectivity spectra of ZrGeSe, ZrGeS, and ZrSiS are depicted in Fig. The strongly anisotropic optical response is also revealed by the polarization-dependent optical conductivity σ 1 , as depicted in Fig. For ZrGeS, the plateau-and peak-like behavior observed in the E ab and E c σ 1 spectra at low frequencies, respectively, is least developed, i.e., the low-frequency limit of the U-shaped optical conductivity is the lowest among the three compounds. According to Ref. The optical conductivity and corresponding reflectivity spectra were simultaneously fitted with a phenomenological Drude-Lorentz model (Fig. in this case. The values of the in-plane and out-of-plane ω pl for ZrSiS are in very good agreement with the values calculated in Ref. The previous study on the prototype nodal-line semimetal ZrSiS has revealed pronounced pressureinduced changes in the out-of-plane optical response, with the appearance of two new excitations The corresponding optical conductivity spectra σ 1 of ZrGeSe for E ab and E c are plotted in Figs. For a quantitative analysis, the optical conductivity spectra were fitted with a phenomenological Drude-Lorentz model. As examples, we show in Figs. tivity spectrum of ZrGeSe shifts to higher energies with increasing pressure [see Fig. Our pressure-dependent optical data for ZrGeSe thus confirm the recent observation of pressure-induced excitations in the out-of-plane optical response of the closely related compound ZrSiS The nodal-line semimetals ZrGeSe and ZrGeS, which are closely related to ZrSiS considered as the prototypical nodal-line semimetal, show a pronounced anisotropy in the optical conductivity, with a reduced plasma frequency for the out-of-plane as compared to the in-plane direction. For both polarization directions, a characteristic profile of the optical conductivity is found, similar to the results for ZrSiS reported in Ref. . Lattice parameters a and c, and the ratio c/a from Ref.