Glass transitions are widely observed in various types of soft matter systems. However, the physical mechanism of these transitions remains elusive despite years of ambitious research. In particular, an important unanswered question is whether the glass transition is accompanied by a divergence of the correlation lengths of the characteristic static structures. In this study, we develop a deep-neural-network-based method that is used to extract the characteristic local meso-structures solely from instantaneous particle configurations without any information about the dynamics. We first train a neural network to classify configurations of liquids and glasses correctly. Then, we obtain the characteristic structures by quantifying the grounds for the decisions made by the network using Gradient-weighted Class Activation Mapping (Grad-CAM). We consider two qualitatively different glass-forming binary systems, and through comparisons with several established structural indicators, we demonstrate that our system can be used to identify characteristic structures that depend on the details of the systems. Moreover, the extracted structures are remarkably correlated with the nonequilibrium aging dynamics in thermal fluctuations. When a liquid is cooled while preventing crystallization by quenching or adding impurities, a liquid state can be maintained below melting temperature, resulting in a socalled supercooled liquid state. Further cooling of the supercooled liquid results in a dramatic increase in the viscosity of the liquid and yields a glass (more generally, an amorphous solid). In such a system, the particle motion is frozen, and the structure remains disordered. Various materials, e.g. oxides, alloys, polymers, and colloids, take on glassy states. Glassy materials are generally considered disordered and homogeneous because they basically cannot be distinguished from simple liquids that are also disordered in structure using analytical methods such as neutron, X-ray, or light scattering and other two-body correlations in the density field. However, dramatic changes to their properties can occur, for example, a 15-order-of-magnitude increase in the viscosity from a temperature change of only approximately 20% Heterogeneity in particle motion develops in supercooled liquids near the glass transition temperature, and the spatial length scale increases on such a glass transition Many attempts have been made to explore the specific structures that exist in supercooled liquids. For instance, icosahedral-like structures in metallic glasses In recent years, machine-learning approaches have been widely used to investigate the characteristic structures governing glass dynamics In this work, we propose a method to extract the characteristic multi-particle structures of glasses solely from the static configurations using a deep learning-based approach. To this end, we work on the classification problem for the random structures in glasses and liquids using a convolutional neural network (CNN) The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we summarize the simulation methods and protocols used for sample preparation for the deep-learning tasks. In Sec. III, we introduce the CNN and Grad-CAM, and provide a brief explanation of the established struc-tural indicators used as a reference. In Sec. IV, the results of the structural analyses are presented, and the correlation between distinct indicators, as well as the predictability of our method with respect to the dynamics, is discussed. Finally, in Sec. V, we provide a summary of this study and an overview of future research directions. In this study, we consider two distinct systems: the Kob-Andersen model (KAM) where the subscript ij indicates that the variable is between particles i and j, ij sets the energy scale, σ ij determines the interaction range, and r c ij is the cutoff length. The dynamics of the particles obey φ ij , whereas φ * ij is the reference standard LJ potential. The smoothed LJ potential φ guarantees the continuity of the potential and force at cutoff distance r = r c ij , thus eliminating undesired artifact effects owing to the introduction of the cutoff Both systems are composed of two different types of particles (A and B) and are characterized by different parameter sets, such as ij and σ ij . In the case of the KAM, the LJ parameters are nonadditive: σ AA = 1, σ AB = 0.8, σ BB = 0.88, AA = 1, AB = 1.5, and BB = 0.5. Therefore, the concept of "particle size" is not well defined in the KAM system. For the ABM, on the other hand, the parameters are simply additive; thus, we can unambiguously say that particle A is small, and B is large (that is, σ AA = 5/6, σ AB = 1, σ BB = 7/6, and ij = 1) regardless of the combination of types of particles i and j. All observables were nondimensionalized using characteristic length σ * , characteristic energy * , and particle mass m * (the characteristic variables are listed in Table We train a neural network to distinguish two classes of systems, "glass" and "liquid," based purely on the instantaneous configurations. Then, the characteristic structures of glasses are identified by extracting the meso-scale structures that the trained network relied on to provide a correct classification. In this section, we explain the methods used to achieve these classifications and identifications of characteristic structures. We first perform supervised learning to train a CNN Importantly, when we feed the particle configurations, ρ(r) = N i δ(rr i ), obtained from the MD simulations into the CNN, they are gridized by the mapping operator M: ρ ≡ M(ρ) (see Supplemental Material for technical details). Here, the tilde indicates that the variable is grid-based. We also mention that in the padding process at the convolutional layers, we use circular padding to properly consider the periodic boundary conditions. Once a CNN is able to classify glasses and liquids correctly after training, we aim to extract the characteristic mesoscale structures that the CNN relies on when classifying. This identification of crucial information is called "class activation mapping" (CAM). The first-proposed simple CAM where y C is the score for class C (C ∈ {glass, liquid} in the current setup) before softmax, Ãm is the m-th feature map activation of a convolutional layer, A m k,l is the (k, l) component of Ãm , and Z = uv is the normalizing factor for the global pooling calculation. The rectified linear unit ReLU simply returns x if x > 0 and zero otherwise. Thus, in this Grad-CAM method, the characteristic part of the input information is identified as the weighted sum of the feature maps after a specified convolution layer (usually the last layer), and the weights are obtained depending on the global average of the sensitivity (gradient) of the output with respect to each pixel of the feature maps. Importantly, this method can be applied to networks with any architecture if the backpropagation is tractable. The results presented in this paper are all particlebased Grad-CAM scores, Γ = N i Γ i δ(rr i ), obtained using the inverse mapping operator M -1 : Γ ≡ M -1 ( LC ), where Γ i is the Grad-CAM score of particle i. We simply call Γ the Grad-CAM score. Note that, hereinafter, all particle-based variables are coarsegrained and normalized (see the Supplemental Material for technical details, including the precise definition of Γ i ). In this study, we compared the results of the proposed method with those of handcrafted structural indicators to interpret the obtained Grad-CAM score Γ. The first reference indicator is the volume of the Voronoi cells Υ that particles reside in (here, we call them volumes, although they are in fact areas because the system is 2D). The volume of the Voronoi cell allows us to quantify the so-called free volume of each particle, which is considered a significant static characteristic that explains the divergence of the viscosity in glass transition (the free volume theory) The Voronoi cell to which particle i belongs can be uniquely defined without the introduction of any additional parameters, as follows: where D(a, b) is a function that provides the 2D Euclidean distance between points a and b. The point r in the equation is an arbitrary point in the system that is independent of the particle density field ρ(r). The volume of the Voronoi cell for particle i can then be obtained as Υ i ≡ V(V (r i )), where V(V ) is the operator that outputs the volume of the region V . To achieve Voronoi tessellation, we used the freud Tong and Tanaka To calculate the TT-OP, we first look at each particle (e.g., particle o) and its neighbors (the particles sharing the edges of the Voronoi cell with center particle o). Then, particle o's TT-OP, Θ o , is obtained as the average difference between the angle formed by particle o and two of its neighbors that are adjacent to each other, θ 1 ij , and the corresponding ideal angle θ 2 ij (i.e., that is obtained when the distances between particles are exactly the same as the sum of their "radii"; see the Supplemental Material for more details and a schematic of the definitions of θ 1 ij and θ 2 ij ): where N o is the number of particles neighboring particle o (this number agrees with the number of neighboring pairs of neighbors). The TT-OP Θ = N i Θ i δ(r-r i ) is defined as a particle-based indicator, and it has been shown that, for various systems, the spatially coarse-grained TT-OP predicts the dynamic propensity very well As a measure of the dynamic heterogeneity that appears originated from a specific configuration of particles, the so-called dynamic propensity is usually employed is the displacement vector of the particle i at time t, ds i ≡ 1 Ni j d s j (the sum for j runs over the neighbors of i including i itself, and N i stands for the number of particles involved here) is the average displacement vector of the cage to which particle i belongs, and the superscript s is the sample index (which distinguishes different realizations of the velocity distribution at t = 0). The dynamic propensity field ∆ is then defined as the average of the sample-dependent values of the CRD field, As the value of N s , we basically employed N s = 30 unless stated otherwise. In refs. where ) is the coarse-graining kernel and ξ X is the coarse-graining length for variables X ∈ {Γ, Υ, Θ, ∆}. For the calculation of the coarsegraining of the variables X, the cutoff distance r c X in P (r) is introduced, which is fixed as r c X = 2ξ X in this study. We employed this coarse-graining procedure (it is slightly different from the one employed in ref. Grad-CAM The CNN introduced in Sec. III A was run over 250 epochs. During the training process, 4,000 training data samples (for both glasses and liquids: 8,000 samples in total) were provided with the correct labels indicating whether the samples were glasses or liquids. For both systems (KAM and ABM), the learning stage proceeded smoothly, and the classification accuracy reached almost 100% both for the training and validation data after these relatively small epochs. The same degree of accuracy was achieved for the test data (the results for the test data are summarized in Table. II). We stress here that the calculation cost for the training part is very low in our setup: the entire 250 epochs of learning only took approximately 8 h using an NVIDIA Quadro P4000 (GP104GL). Subsequently, using Grad-CAM, we further extracted the characteristic structures that the CNN relied on when identifying glass samples as glasses. Notably, this calculation requires only a trivial cost (much less than a second for each sample). We present the typical results obtained for the KAM system in Fig. used for the analyses in the following sections (or already used in Figs. Coarse-grained structural indicators exhibit spatially smooth profiles as already presented in Figs. where δ∆ ≡ ∆ -∆ is the deviation from the global average ∆, r is the distance from the reference particle i, and • |r|=r stands for the spherical average over particle pairs separated by a distance r. Since we aim to smooth out the intra-domain noises here, we employ the decay length r * defined by C ∆ (r * ) ≈ 1/e as the coarse-graining length ξ ∆ . In Fig. We would like to stress that the coarse-graining of the dynamic propensity ∆ introduced here seems not just an artificial operation but a physically reasonable one. To show this, we prepared 100 independent isoconfigurational samples and considered four different ensembles. For three of the ensembles, we employed N s = 30, and completely different sets of samples are composed for each. We call these ensembles e i 30 (i ∈ {A, B, C}) Only in the forth ensemble, all 100 samples are used (N s = 100): we call this e 100 . Because the number of samples is different, we expect that the ensemble e 100 should provide the statistically most reliable result. In Fig. The coarse-graining lengths ξ α for structural indicators α(α ∈ {Γ, Υ, Θ}) are then determined in the same manner as the one in ref. As a reference, we also present the results without the coarse-graining of the dynamic propensity ∆ (that is, results with ξ ∆ = 0) in Supplemental Material (Figs. Now we ask the following question: Are the extracted structures correlated with some material properties, for example, the dynamics? To address this, we compared the Grad-CAM scores (Γ) with the dynamic propensity (∆). Owing to the computational cost, we calculated the propensities only for the configurations shown in Figs. For each configuration, we performed MD simulations with 30 different initial velocity distributions and calculated the dynamic propensity field ∆ following the procedure summarized in Sec. III E. Regarding the temperature during the measurement of the dynamics, we considered temperatures slightly above the glass transition point, T * , (whose empirical definition is provided in the Supplemental Material; the obtained values are T * ≈ 0.37 for KAM and T * ≈ 1.0 for ABM) because we cannot expect any cage-breaking relaxational dynamics below T * within the computationally accessible time window. To investigate the possible temperature dependence of the dynamics, we performed simulations at temperatures up to approximately 1.5T * . We stress again that although the initial velocities follow the specified temperatures (which are higher than the glass transition point T * ), the initial configurations are drawn from the sample at T G = 0.05 (those shown in Figs. To quantify the correlation between Γ and ∆ further, we calculated the Pearson's correlation coefficients, C Γ,∆ . Although the coarse-graining length of ∆ is dependent on the value of δ (i.e., the time scale), for simplicity, we employed a fixed value for each system here (see Table The "time" evolution of the correlation between Grad-CAM score 1 -Γ and dynamic propensity ∆ as a function of the intensity of the cage-relative displacement δ. Each simulation was performed for 3 × 10 8 steps, and δ(t) during those simulations is plotted on the abscissa for each plot. Different markers are used to distinguish different temperatures as shown in the legend. The vertical dotted lines indicate the delta values visualized in Figs ature regime under study and concerns nonequilibrium aging dynamics. In this section, we measure two distinct local multibody structural indicators to interpret the Grad-CAM score Γ. Because these indicators are handmade, we can take advantage of their interpretable nature. In the Supplemental Material, we present the two-body correlation function g(r) for reference (Fig. Voronoi volume. -The Voronoi volume Υ is the first interpretable local multiparticle structural indicator. In this subsection, we briefly explain the obtained Υ values for the KAM and ABM systems. A typical result for the KAM system is shown in Fig. These distinct trends are derived entirely from the difference in the set of interaction parameters ( ij and σ ij ) and the number ratio of the particle species (N A /N B ). For instance, in the KAM system, the interaction energy is most stable when different species are in contact, and the interaction range is also the shortest in this situation (see Table Tong-Tanaka order parameter. -The second interpretable structural indicator is the TT-OP Θ. As mentioned in Sec. III D, of the various locally defined structural indicators reported to date, TT-OP captures the dynamical behavior of many classes of glasses very well, especially universally. The characteristic structures of glasses in terms of the TT-OP are specified by small values of Θ i , which means that the local structure is highly ordered. The results for the KAM system are shown in Fig. To interpret the Grad-CAM scores (Γ) obtained by our method, we further calculated the Pearson's correlation coefficients between different indicators for both the KAM and ABM. The results are summarized in Fig. We call the correlation coefficients between the Grad-CAM score and the Voronoi volume C Γ,Υ and define those between different pairs in a similar manner: C Γ,Θ and C Θ,Υ . Although the results below are mostly those for the glass configurations only, we also mention the results for the liquids when we discuss their differences from those of the glass samples. Finally, we stress that, in the main text, all correlations are based on the Pearson's definition. As presented in the Supplemental Material, however, we also obtained semi-quantitatively consistent results using Spearman's definition. Below, we explain the results for the ABM and KAM systems. ABM. -In the ABM system, C Γ,Υ (the Grad-CAM score vs. the Voronoi volume) is the largest in terms of the intensity (Fig. KAM. -In the case of the KAM system, C Γ,Υ and C Γ,Θ for glasses are negative and positive, respectively, at odds with the results for the ABM (Fig. Summary of this subsection. -Interestingly, although we could interpret the Grad-CAM scores in terms of other conventional indicators (the Voronoi volume and the TT-OP) to some extent in both the KAM and ABM, the correlations are not perfect, and Grad-CAM seems to blend different indicators in an "appropriate" manner. In particular, we emphasize that the precise recipe of such blending is obviously dependent on the system details. Therefore, it would be meaningful to regress the obtained Grad-CAM score field Γ symbolically to achieve a fuller interpretation using recently invented methods Tong-Tanaka order parameter. -Interestingly, the correlation between the TT-OP and the dynamic propensity, C Θ,∆ , reaches high values: 0.885 and 0.790, respectively, in the KAM and ABM systems (1 -Θ and Θ were employed). It is unexpected that the TT-OP provides a good predictability of the dynamics even in the KAM (the correlation is higher in the KAM than in the ABM). This good predictability is achieved maybe because we employed the additive convention of the reference angle θ 2 ij or because we focused on the non-equilibrium aging dynamics. We also note that the high correlation with dynamics is observed only for long-time regimes, and the correlation is very low around the α relaxation regime (δ ≈ 0.3). Further comprehensive investigations are necessary to identify the cause of the unexpectedly high predictability. In the KAM system, the qualitative trend is the same as those for correlations of other indicators (C Γ.∆ and C Υ,∆ ): it starts from a small value and follows an upward convex curve. In the ABM system, in contrast, the time evolution of C Θ,∆ is qualitatively different from those of C Γ,∆ or C Υ,∆ . It is high even at the early-stage small δ regime and changes in a non-monotonic manner with the increase in δ: it increases only a little bit, reaches the maximum value at δ * ≈ 0.148, remains almost at the same level, and then starts decreasing. Summary of this subsection. -To summarize, first, the Voronoi volume has the largest correlation with the dynamics in both KAM and ABM systems, in terms of the C max α,∆ . Regarding the comparison between the Grad-CAM score and the TT-OP, the latter shows a stronger correlation in the ABM system (note again that the TT-OP is known to be a good descriptor of the dynamics in the ABM) while the former outperforms in the KAM. The results presented in this article indicate that the characteristic structures extracted by the Grad-CAM capture information consistent with that of other coarse-grained structural indicators proposed in previous works G. Do the coarse-graining lengths have a structural origin? Thus far, we have shown that, coarse-grained with proper choices of ξ α , structural indicators show strong correlations with the dynamics ∆. In this subsection, we discuss whether we can find the structural origin of these "proper" coarse-graining lengths. To this end, we measured the same spatial correlation functions as the one in Eq. 8 for structural indicators. The results are presented in Fig. In both systems (KAM and ABM), the length scale r Γ defined here as C Γ (r Γ ) = 0 is roughly half of the optimal coarse-graining length ξ α used in the aforementioned analyses (ξ α = 8.0 for KAM and ξ α = 5.0 for ABM). Because r Γ is expected to correspond to the average domain size, the length scale ξ α ≈ 2r Γ corresponds to the average distance between domains with the same sign of δΓ ≡ Γ -Γ. This correspondence suggests that the dynamical domains become larger than the static ones due to collective excitations of nearby mobile domains (that are expected to be indicated by low values of Γ). This picture is consistent with a recent theoretical work To further give a concrete interpretation of the coarsegraining length on a purely structural basis, we must understand the interactions between domains via the elastic field. To provide useful data for such an exploration of new understandings, it is important to perform a comprehensive measurement of Γ for equilibrated well-annealed low-temperature samples. We leave this problem as a future work. In the closing remarks for this section, we discuss the relation of our work to several recent works using machine learning-based methods. Recently, much effort has been dedicated to challenges in explaining the heterogeneous slow dynamics of glasses from a purely structural perspective. For instance, in refs. Because our method similarly does not require any information about the dynamics, we can say that it is also unsupervised in regard to dynamics prediction. Accordingly, it is non-trivial and interesting that the structures extracted using our method exhibit a strong correlation with the long-time heterogeneous dynamics at a longer time than the α relaxation time, as was the case for methods in refs. We also note the quantitative difference in the predictability of different machine-learning methods with respect to the dynamics. Although we cannot make direct quantitative comparisons because of the varied setups in the references, our method provides the highest-level performance in terms of the simple correlation coefficient between extracted characteristic structures and long-time dynamic propensity: for our 2D ABM and KAM system, the correlation between the Grad-CAM score and dynamics reached approximately 70% and 90%, respectively. In this work, we proposed a method to extract the characteristic structures of amorphous systems solely from a couple of classes of static random configurations by means of classification with a CNN and quantification of the grounds for classification using Grad-CAM. We applied the proposed method to two qualitatively different binary glass-forming mixtures, viz. the ABM and KAM, and showed that our method could automatically extract the system-detail-dependent mesoscopic characteristic structures of glasses. The proposed method has three outstanding features. First, our method can extract characteristic structures solely from the instantaneous static structures without any information about the dynamics. Second, the extracted characteristic structures are system-dependent; in other words, our method automatically identifies the tailor-made structural indicator suitable for each distinct system. Finally, the extracted structures are strongly correlated with the dynamic propensity. The time evolution of the correlation reveals that the characteristic structure is closely related to the dynamics at a longer time scale than that for the α relaxation, where the mean intensity of the cage-relative displacement is of the order of unity: δ 1. Moreover, such a correlation is robust over a wide range of temperatures, at least in the range T * ≤ T ≤ 1.5T * . We again stress that, unlike in the previously reported studies, our dynamic propensity quantifies the nonequilibrium aging processes, not the intra-metabasin equilibrium relaxational dynamics, and is coarse-grained. In addition, we discuss several future research directions. First, we should conduct a similar analysis using well-annealed glass configurations because the equilibrium dynamics are important to understand the properties of glasses more deeply. In particular, it is challenging to determine whether the characteristic structures that our method extracts for equilibrium glass configurations are correlated with the equilibrium dynamics. Moreover, our method can find the characteristic structures from the static configurations alone, even when the microscopic physical quantity that characterizes the two classes (e.g., the dynamic propensity) is not available, as long as the two different classes are defined, for example, by specifying macroscopic quantities such as the temperature. Therefore, it allows us to directly ask, for example, whether we observe any structural differences between normal and ultrastable glasses In general, we expect that the extracted structures are dependent on the precise setup of the classification problem, such as the temperature choice for each class. It would be interesting to compare the characteristic glass structures obtained from different reference high temperatures. Further, such structures could be sensitive to the details of the protocols, for example, the network architecture or the number of epochs. The investigation of the effects of these factors would be valuable. The authors thank Satoshi Koide, Takenobu Nakamura, Hayato Shiba, and Ludovic Berthier for fruit- ij that is realized when all the particles are just in touch with each other (the distances between particles are all equal to the sum of radii for each pair). Note that, in this article, we employed the LJ parameter σij as "the sum of radii" for the particle pair i and j. As evident in Fig. We also note that C α,∆ at a longer-time scale does not always reach the maximum at a larger value of ξ α than that for a shorter-time counterpart. For example, in the case of the TT-OP in ABM, it shows the largest value of C Θ,∆ at a short time (δ ≈ 0.3) but the peak position (ξ * Θ = 5.0) is larger than the optimal ξ Θ = 3.0 for a long-time dynamics (δ = 3.0). In the main text, we coarse-grained the dynamic propensity ∆ to smooth out the intra-domain noises in accordance with the coarse-grained structural indicators. Such a coarse-graining operation of ∆ results in higher values of the correlation coefficients C α,∆ compared to the case without coarse-graining. In this subsection, we present the results without the coarse-graining of ∆ as a reference. We mention that in previous works, the dynamic propensity was not coarse-grained. In the top row of Fig. We further present the visualization of the structural indicators without coarse-graining in Fig. In Fig. The averages and the standard deviations of the correlation functions of different structural indicators are summarized in Table We employed the cage-relative displacements to exclude the undesired effects due to anomalous fluctuations that are specific to two-dimensional systems Importantly, we discarded a test sample for which the trained CNN gave the wrong classification (only 1 out of 2,400 samples: in the case of liquid in the KAM) to rule out the possible influence from such an abnormal sample, e.g., when evaluating the probability distribution function shown later in Fig.6. However, we would like to mention that the investigation of such sam-