Spherical-cap-shaped interfacial nanobubbles (NBs) forming on hydrophobic surfaces in aqueous solutions have extensively been studied both from a fundamental point of view and due to their relevance for various practical applications. In this study, the nucleation mechanism of spontaneously generated NBs at solid-liquid interfaces of immersed nanostructured hydrophobic surfaces is studied. Depending on the size and density of the surface nanostructures, NBs with different size and density were reproducibly and deterministically obtained. A two-step process can explain the NB nucleation, based on the crevice model, i.e., entrapped air pockets in surface cavities which grow by diffusion. The results show direct evidence for the spontaneous formation of NBs on a surface at its immersion. Next, the influence of size and shape of the nanostructures on the nucleated NBs are revealed. In particular, on non-circular nanopits we obtain NBs with a non-circular footprint, demonstrating the strong pinning forces at the three-phase contact line. When hydrophobic surfaces are immersed into aqueous solutions, spherical-cap-shaped interfacial bubbles can be obtained on these surfaces By definition, the formation of interfacial NBs is heterogenous nucleation. Its mechanism has been conjectured by Harvey et al. Basically, it is the entrapment of gas in crevices on surfaces. These bubble nuclei then can grow by diffusion or in case of strongly reduced pressure by gas expansion. Experimentally, for macro-sized bubbles, several experimental techniques have been applied to quantitatively validate this bubble nucleation model, such as a Berthelot tube, centrifugation, shock wave, acoustics, etc However, less studies have been performed on the nature of the crevice which is necessary to lead to NB nucleation, though on the microscale some studies were recently performed On a nanoscale, Checco et al. investigated the entrapment of air in 20 nm wide nanoholes on nanopatterned surfaces, employing the transmission small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) method Generally speaking, there are two approaches to make interfacial NBs In this study, we are trying to get closer to this goal of reproducible and controllable NB formation on solid-liquid interfaces by studying how NBs form on immersed nanostructured surfaces. The NB nucleation on hydrophobic surfaces with different nanostructures will be investigated. Experimental evidence of spontaneous entrapment of gas in surface nanostructures will be provided. Moreover, the study will reveal the crucial role of pinning and implies that the size, density, and even the morphology of NBs can be controlled through surface nanostructures. The spontaneous nucleation of NBs was first studied on nanopits fabricated on spin coated polystyrene (PS) films on silicon substrates. During spin coating, the decreasing thickness of PS films will cause the inhomogeneous coating of the films On sample 2, their width varied from about 50 nm to 250 nm. The effect of the nanopit size on the NB entrapment was then investigated on the two samples. The tapping mode AFM (TMAFM) image of sample 1 in air is shown in Figure On the surface, nanopits with typical diameter of 80 nm and depth of 4 nm are visible. The probability density function (PDF) of the nanopits' depth and width is discussed in the supporting material (see Figure After that, NB coalescence Therefore the nanopits become visible again after the coalescence process. The coalescence of NBs makes it possible to compare the sample surface in air and in DI water with and without NBs. Figure On sample 2, nanopits with a larger range of width were obtained. The width of nanopits varies from about 50 nm to 250 nm. The PDFs of width and depth are again shown in the Supporting Material (Figure We believe that the uniform distribution of NBs on sample 2 is related to the spin coating speed during sample preparation. Sample 2 was made with a high spin coating speed, which can lead to an uniform roughness, thus resulting in uniform nucleation of NBs. One can see that there are now three types of air entrapment on sample 2, as marked by 1, 2, and 3 in Figure The third case is for nanopits of less than 100 nm in width, as demonstrated in Figure On these nanopits, regular NBs with higher contact angle are generated, similarly as already done on sample 1 above, with similar nanopit extensions. In this study, these NBs are referred to as protruding NBs. The classification of planar and protruding NBs is based on the value of the contact angle. The contact angles of the nanobubbles were determined from the NB cross sections. Assuming that the NBs are spherical-cap-liked objects, their contact angles can be calculated by measuring their height and footprint diameter. However, it is well known that a topography image obtained from an AFM is actually the convolution of the AFM tip and substrate morphologies This results in about 2% underestimation of NB contact angle, as shown in a comparison of the corrected and uncorrected contact angles for protruding NBs in the supporting information (Figure With the corrected NB contact angles, the trapped NBs are classified into two groups (please refer to Figure In this study, the NBs with contact angles of 0o or even slightly less are referred to as planar NBs. The others are protruding NBs, of which contact angles are normally larger than 10 o. To get a better understanding of the profile for the planar NBs, the cross sections for all the planar NBs in Figure The height H of planar NBs is thus slightly negative, and correspondingly also the contact angle. The measured contact angles for all planar NBs are shown in Figure Additionally, the contact angle (gas side) of the entrapped NBs is in between 5° and 30° and increases with the NB width, as shown in Figure Here L is the pinning length and Lc=4σ/P0=2.84 μm, following from surface tension σ and ambient pressure P0. The relation between sinθe and the NB width L is given in Figure The process of NB formation on nanopits can be thought of consisting of two steps, as illustrated in Figure The curvature of the liquid interface inside the nanopit will start changing its direction outwards. Thanks to the diffusive influx, the liquid-air interface will grow out of the cavities until it reaches its equilibrium value determined by the air oversaturation in water. For nanopits with larger width, it might need much higher diffusive influx and the meniscus cannot so quickly appear above the nanopit mouth, i.e., diffusive equilibrium may not be achieved. This two-step NB nucleation model is consistent with the experimental observation. Based on the experimental results, a schematic is presented to illustrate the air entrapment on nanostructured surfaces (Figure The experimental results obtained from sample 1 and sample 2 reveals that the size and position of the formed NBs could be tuned by modifying the nanostructures. NBs are normally believed to be of spherical-cap-shaped, as that shape is energetically the most effective one. However, stable NBs also require pinning and thus their shape may also be tuned by that of the surface nanostructures. Indeed, by surface energy minimization, Dević et al. showed how chemical heterogeneities determine the shape of nanodroplets For a non-circular chemical or geometric surface pattern, it may indeed be energetically advantageous for a NB or nanodrop (ND) to have a non-circular footprint. In this study, an ultrathin PS film (sample 3) was used to generate a porous surface with irregular shapes of pores. The nanopores were fabricated with assistance of NBs. As previous revealed The existence of stable non-spherical-cap-shaped NBs highlights the relevance of pinning for NB formation, namely here at the edge of the irregular surface cavities on sample 3. On regular smooth sample surfaces with rms (root mean square) roughness about 0.2 nm Similarly, as in above mentioned numerical study of NBs and NDs on chemically heterogenous surfaces The non-spherical-cap-shaped NBs indicate that the NB footprint is directly related to the corresponding surface nanostructure to which it is pinned. NBs can change their shape to adapt to that of the surface nanostructures on substrates and they do not necessarily be spherical-cap-shaped. This implies that not only the size and locations of the NBs, but also the shape of NBs can be tuned by nanostructures. In summary, the spontaneous nucleation of NBs on nanostructured surfaces was investigated. Three categories of air entrapment were observed, namely protruding NBs on nanopits with widths in between 50-100 nm, planar NBs on nanopits with widths of reported on graphene surfaces The NB caused generation of nanostructures on PS surfaces is mostly due to the presence of surface forces at the three phase contact line and the high inner pressure of NBs Through experiments, we found that the type of NB assisted nanostructures is strongly related to two factors, namely the NB size and the thickness of the PS films. Nanostructures tend to form namely on ultrathin PS films (with thickness from 3 nm to 7 nm). This is mostly because the polymer chain entanglement density is greatly reduced with decreasing sample thickness, as motivated theoretically Sample 3 was first immersed into DI water and smaller NBs (with width less than 50 nm) were formed on the surface. After that, NBs disappeared and a porous PS surface was obtained. Water was then removed from the sample and the sample was kept in an vacuum chamber for 4 h to remove the remaining water. The experiment in fluid was performed to study NB nucleation. A commercial AFM (Resolve, Bruker) operating in tapping mode was used for imaging the sample in both air and deionized (DI) water. A silicon cantilever (NSC36/ALBS, MikroMasch) with a quoted tip radius of 8 nm and stiffness of 0.6 N/m from the manufacturer was used for the scanning in air and DI water. The measured resonance frequencies of the cantilever in air and water were about 55 KHz and 16 KHz, respectively. While imaging in air and liquid, the drive frequencies were slightly lower than that of the selected resonance. A scan rate of 2 Hz with a 0° scan angle was used. All experiments were performed at an ambient environment (temperature: In all three experiments, the sample surfaces were first scanned in air by tapping mode AFM (TMAFM). Then they were immersed into DI water to perform liquid imaging. The image scanning began immediately within 10 minutes after immersing the surface into water. For sample 1, the scanning lasted for more than 5 hours. For sample 2, the scanning lasted for more than 10 hours. The free oscillation amplitude of the cantilever at working frequency was about 290 mV. The larger setpoint oscillation amplitude of about 280 mV (namely 96.5% of free amplitude) was applied for liquid imaging to minimize disturbance of AFM tips to NBs. As mentioned above, nanopits of different sizes were obtained on PS films. For sample 1, the distributions of the nanopits' width and depth are shown in Figure In the analysis of Figure 3D mesh plots of the same areas selected in Figure For sample 2, the distributions of nanopits' width and depth are shown in Figure Studies on surface NBs have been suffering from artifacts for years as explained in For the samples used in this study, there are potentially three kinds of artifacts, namely solid particles, liquid objects The nanobubble coalescence experiment was performed to distinguish nanobubbles from solid particles and blisters. It is well known that nanobubbles can move and coalesce to generate larger ones under higher scan load The second approach to distinguish NBs from solid particles and blisters is an amplitudedistance curve measurement above the spherical-cap-like objects. During extension or retraction motion of an oscillating tip relative to a NB, the amplitude of the tip shows gradually decreases with reducing tip-sample separation distance To distinguish NBs from liquid contamination (PDMS droplets, for example), we applied degassing experiments It is well known that a topography image obtained from an AFM is actually the convolution of the AFM tip and substrate morphologies 