Perovskite chalcogenides have emerged as a new class of semiconductors with tunable band gap in the visible-infrared region. High quality thin films are critical to understand the fundamental properties and realize the potential applications based on these materials. We report growth of quasi-epitaxial thin films of quasi one-dimensional (quasi-1D) hexagonal chalcogenide BaTiS3 by pulsed laser deposition. We identified the optimal growth conditions by varying the growth parameters such as the substrate temperature and H2S partial pressure and examined their effects on the thin film structure. High resolution thin film X-Ray diffraction shows strong texture in the out-of-plane direction, whereas no evidence of in-plane relationship between the film and the substrate is observed. Grazing incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering and scanning transmission electron microscopy studies reveal the presence of weak epitaxial relationships of the film and the substrate, despite a defective interface. Our study opens up a pathway to realize quasi-1D hexagonal chalcogenide thin films and their heterostructures with perovskite chalcogenides. Mid-infrared materials are of substantial interest due to their broad range of applications such as molecular fingerprint imaging, optical telecommunication, and remote sensing IR materials with intrinsic optical anisotropy can enable novel photonic devices such as polarizing filters, light modulators, and polarization sensitive photodetectors Chalcogenide perovskites have been studied extensively in the recent past and have indeed emerged as a new class of semiconductors that demonstrate exciting electronic and optical properties Synthesis of high-quality chalcogenide perovskite thin films presents various challenges such as chalcogen-cation partial pressure mismatch, slow diffusion kinetics and use of highly corrosive and reactive chalcogen precursors. Despite these challenges, epitaxial BZS films In this article, we report the growth of quasi-epitaxial BTS thin films by pulsed laser deposition (PLD) on single crystal oxide substrates. We carried out detailed growth studies by varying the substrate temperature and the Ar-H2S partial pressure to understand the effect of these process parameters on the structure of BTS films and achieve highly textured films of BaTiS3. We performed structural and surface characterization of the as-grown films using high-resolution X-ray diffraction, X-ray reflectivity, atomic force microscopy, and grazing incidence wide angle X-ray scattering and scanning transmission electron microscopy. BTS thin films were grown from a phase pure stoichiometric BTS target in a background gas mixture of hydrogen sulfide (4.75 mol%) and argon (Ar-H2S) on single crystal oxide substrates. Due to the high propensity for the loss of sulfur at high temperatures, conventional sintering methods may result in the formation of nonstoichiometric chalcogenide perovskites. Therefore, a high-pressure torsion (HPT) Structural information obtained from high resolution X-ray diffraction (HRXRD) studies was used as the primary criterion for optimizing the growth parameters for BTS thin films. All the characterization were performed on as-grown films without any further annealing. Strong out-of-plane textured BTS films were observed on perovskite oxide substrates STO and GSO, with the strongest texture on STO (001), while polycrystalline films were observed on c-plane sapphire substrates. Films grown on other perovskite oxide substrates such as LAO and LSAT did not show an out-of-plane texture in XRD. Figure It is reported to grow in two different orientations such as a-axis out-of-plane with b-c inplane orientation, or c-axis out-of-plane with a-b in-plane orientation [100] direction of STO, where resulting in a lattice mismatch of ~1% and 0.1% respectively (lattice mismatch, f =100% x (1-2d[001] BTS /3d[100] STO)). A schematic of the two possible in-plane orientations of BTS viewed along [100] direction of STO is shown in figure An inaccessible region or a "missing wedge" exists in the GIWAXS pattern in Figure We also performed a detailed scanning transmission electron microscopic (STEM) study to characterize the interface between the BTS film and STO substrate with atomic resolution and check for the existence of an epitaxial relationship. Figure We suppose the amorphous layer is formed due to the corrosive damage of STO substrate caused by H2S during BTS growth at high temperature and/or ionized argon ions. Thus, we show that the proposed quasi-epitaxial relationship exists despite the presence of an imperfect substrate-film interface. Additionally, we have also identified local regions of BTS films where the (110) [001] BTS // (001) [100] STO epitaxial relationship was observed without an amorphous region. This suggests that if the Ar-H2S induced damage during the deposition can be avoided, heteroepitaxial growth of BTS can be achieved on STO substrates with a sharp interface and c-axis oriented in the in-plane direction. This is desirable for exploiting the large optical anisotropy of BTS for polarization dependent infrared optics and optoelectronics. We have further performed electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) to map the distribution of elements across the heterointerface. Figure The limited availability of structurally similar and lattice-matched substrates and non-corrosive chalcogen precursor are the major challenges in the epitaxial thin film growth of BTS. New strategies need to be devised to improve the substrate-film interface and thus obtain high-quality epitaxial films with large grain growth. Optical and optoelectronic characterization of BTS thin films is a part of our ongoing work. This study opens up opportunity to investigate the fundamental properties and realize exciting optoelectronic and photonic devices in infrared chalcogenide perovskite thin films and heterostructures. Quasi-epitaxial BTS thin films has been demonstrated by pulsed laser deposition. The growth parameters such as the substrate temperature and H2S partial pressure were varied and their effects on the thin film structure were examined, as measured by X-ray diffraction, to understand the effect of the process parameters on the microstructure of the BTS thin films. X-Ray diffraction shows strong texture in the out-of-plane direction, whereas no evident in-plane relationship between the film and the substrate is observed by laboratory scale high resolution diffractometer. GIWAXS and STEM studies revealed the presence of two epitaxial relationships between the film and substrate, despite the existence of a thin amorphous layer at the interface -(110) [001] BTS // (001) [100] STO and (010) [100] BTS // (001) [100] STO. This work emphasizes on the challenges in the thin film growth of high-quality epitaxial chalcogenide perovskite, such as lack of easily available epitaxial substrates, cation-chalcogen vapor pressure mismatch and the use of corrosive background gas. It is extremely important to improve the film-substrate interface during the growth to achieve high-quality epitaxial films and is a part of our ongoing studies. The BTS thin films were grown by PLD using a 248 nm KrF excimer laser in a hydrogen sulfide compatible vacuum chamber specifically designed for the growth of chalcogenide perovskites. Single crystal perovskite oxide (Crystec GmbH) substrates such as STO, LAO, LSAT and sapphire were pretreated by annealing at 1000 o C for 3 h in 100 sccm O2 and subsequently cleaned in acetone and IPA prior to deposition. The chamber was evacuated to a base pressure of ~ 10 -8 mbar and then backfilled with high purity argon gas. The substrate was heated up to the growth temperature in an argon partial pressure of 10 mTorr. A dense poly crystalline 1-inch BTS pellet synthesized by high pressure torsion process was used as the target, which was preablated before growth. Argon -H2S (4.75%) gas mixture was introduced into the chamber right before the growth to achieve growth pressures in the range of 1-20 mTorr. The fluence was fixed at 1.0 J/cm 2 and the targetsubstrate distance used was 75 mm. The films were cooled postgrowth at a rate of 5°C/min at an Ar-H2S partial pressure of 200 mTorr. The high resolution out of plane XRD scans were carried out on a Bruker D8 Advance diffractometer using a Ge (004) two bounce monochromator with Cu K⍺1(λ = 1.5406 Å) radiation at room temperature. XRR measurements were done on the same diffractometer in a parallel beam geometry using a Göbel (parabolic) mirror set up. AFM was performed on Bruker Multimode 8 atomic force microscope in peak force tapping mode with a ScanAsyst tip geometry to obtain the surface morphology and roughness. GIWAXS experiments were conducted in vacuum conditions and at room temperature using a Xenocs Xeuss 3.0 laboratory instrument with an incident wavelength of 1.5406 Å. An incident angle of 0.5° was used for GIWAXS. X-ray scattering data was recorded on a Pilatus 300k area detector at a sample-detector distance of 72 mm. STEM sample preparation was performed using a Thermo Scientific Helios G4 PFIB UXe Dual Beam equipped with an EasyLift manipulator. Standard in situ lift-out technique was used to prepare the TEM lamella. The lift-out region was first coated with the thin e-beam deposited W and followed by a thicker 2μm ion-beam deposited coating to avoid ion-beam damage to the BTS film. The sample was milled and thinned down to ≈100nm using a 30kV beam and final polishing to remove residual surface beam damage was carried out using a 3kV ion beam. Atomic-resolution STEM imaging and EEL spectroscopy was performed using the aberration-corrected Nion UltraSTEMTM 100 at CNMS, ORNL operated at 100 kV with a convergence angle of 30 mrad. HAADF-STEM images were acquired on the annular dark field detector with a collection angle of 80-200 mrad. Core-loss EELS spectra were collected using a Gatan Enfina EEL spectrometer. A collection semi-angle of 48 mrad and an energy dispersion of 1 eV per channel were set for EELS acquisition. To improve the signal-noise ratio, we have applied principal component analysis (PCA) to EEL spectrum images. A power law was used to model the background signal prior to each core-loss signal.