Energy absorbers and energy-harvesting devices have been under the scope of scientists and engineers for decades to fulfill specific technological needs, mainly concerned with sound and vibration absorbers, and efficient mechanical energy converters. In this paper, as a proof of concept, we build a mass-in-mass device to study the response of a linear absorber immersed in one of the spheres composing a linear array of equal elastic spheres. Spheres barely touch one another and can thus sustain nonlinear solitary wave propagation only. The linear intruder absorbs a given amount of energy depending on the frequency content of the incident solitary wave. A numerical simulation is developed to account for the experimental finding. The validation of the numerical model allows for the theoretical study of the energy absorbed by any number of intruders, and to demonstrate that the former increases exponentially with the latter, indicating that only ten of the intruders is enough to absorb the system energy. A detailed study of the transmitted energy from an external source into the chain reveals that, due to nonlinearity, the array of spheres is able to convert almost any mechanical shock to a well defined solitary or trains of solitary waves, whose frequency content is nearly independent on the excitation amplitude. This property leads to the design of a device, which is optimized to absorb energy over a broad frequency range. Mass-in-mass (MIM) systems Applications of locally resonant MIM in the domain of seismic isolation have been recently proposed Here, our paper deals with a system taking advantage of a succession of compact resonators embedded in a nonlinear phononic lattice made of an alignment of nonresonant spherical particles: such a lattice supports solitary wave with compact spatial and time support. This means that the waves propagating along these lattices have a well-defined frequency content that can be tuned to match the frequency of the inclusions. This contrasts noticeably with NES (a nonlinear damper embedded in a linear system): our system is a nonlinear lattice inducing a TET while a linear resonant damper further dissipates irreversibly the mechanical energy. It is thus possible to adapt any excitation to the frequency response of the damped linear resonator. As a proof of concept, we build a mass-in-mass device to study the response of a linear absorber immersed in one of the spheres composing a linear array of equal elastic spheres. Spheres barely touch one another and can thus sustain nonlinear solitary wave propagation. The linear intruder absorbs a given amount of energy depending on the frequency content of the incident solitary wave. A numerical simulation is developed to account for the experimental finding. The validation of the numerical calculation allows for the theoretical study of the energy absorbed by any number of intruders, and to demonstrate that the absorbed energy varies exponentially with the intruder number, indicating that only a few intruders is enough to absorb the system energy. A detailed study of the transmitted energy from an external source into the chain reveals that, due to nonlinearity, the array of spheres is able to convert almost any energy pulse to a well-defined solitary or trains of solitary waves, whose frequency content is nearly independent on the excitation amplitude. This property leads to the design of a device, which is optimized to absorb energy at a broad band. The paper is organized as follows: In Sec. II experimental devices, measurements protocols, and intruder preparation are given. In Sec. III the main features of the solitary wave passage through a sphere holding an in-mass intruder are investigated experimentally. In Sec. IV numerical simulations are developed and contrasted to experimental results. The intruder energy and the energy transferred due to solitary wave passage are studied. These results are generalized to the case of several spheres holding intruders. The progressive energy transfer from solitary to intruders is investigated. Finally, in Sec. V discussions and conclusions are given. Bakelite spheres have been chosen to illustrate the proof of principle, because this material is easy to machine compared to steel beads used in previous experiments. Bakelite has low density ρ = 1775 kg/m 3 , is nearly incompressible, Poisson ratio ν = 0.44, and has a relatively low Young's modulus, Y = 3.9 GPa, that can accommodate large strain with low plastic deformation. In addition, it is fairly elastic material, i.e. weakly dissipative. The chain is made of 16 equal beads, with radius R = 19 mm and mass M = 51 g, see Fig. As an experimental benchmark, we first study the solitary wave propagation in the absence of the bead containing the intruder. Solitary waves are excited at one free end of the chain through the impact with the striker, (R s = 4.5 mm) at speed, V s = 0.45 m/s. As in early work In order to provide a methodology that allows for the efficient exploration of the main design parameters of the absorber, we first develop a numeric modeling, which includes relevant experimental details. Indeed, our numerical simula- tion based on a Runge-Kutta algorithm allows for the exploration of the main features of solitary waves in interaction with a localized vibration in an alignment of N particles, by solving the nonlinear system of N equations, , and ν n , the instantaneous displacement, the radius, the Young's modulus, and the Poisson coefficient, respectively, of particle n. We approximate the main mechanism responsible for the dissipation as an internal viscoelastic behavior of the bulk material, which can be expressed as, An intruder is designed as a linear harmonic oscillator with a linear dissipation. If a particle contains an intruder we replace and solve the equation of the concerned degree-offreedom n in Eq. 1 by the coupled system of equations, where F c , representing the contact forces acting on the left and right side of the bead, is equal to the right-hand side of the Eq. 1, where u n (t) is the instantaneous displacement of the inner intruder, and where k and c are the elastic constant and the viscous friction coefficient, respectively. Our calculations accurately reproduce the solitary wave propagation and attenuation, see Fig. In order to study how energy is transferred and dissipated to the local oscillator, we define the energy of sphere n as, and the energy of the intruder writes, The total chain energy (E T = ΣE n ) evolution in time can be calculated numerically and the case with intruder compared to that without intruder, see Fig. In this section we investigate how the transfer of energy depends on the resonance frequency of the local oscillator. In practice this can be done by changing the spring constant by simply replacing the stiffness of the polymeric layers. In order to isolate the effect of the intruder stiffness, we perform this analysis numerically, neglecting the dissipation of the beads, but we consider that the rate of energy dissipated by the intruder is close to the experimental value, c ≈ 12 N s/m. For soft springs [k = 10 3 N/m, see Fig. Positions (m) that the conditions to achieve optimized energy transfer to the oscillator depend on both the intruder frequency response and the frequency content of the incident solitary wave. Indeed, maximum overlap of both spectra leads to better energy transfer, as depicted in Fig. To explore which parameters optimize the energy absorption of the oscillator, we vary both the inner spring constant and the intruder mass. Forces at contacts 10 and 25, with the oscillator located at sphere 15, for three values of spring constant, are presented on Fig. We now focus on the effects of adding consecutive beads with oscillators to the chain and explore how these oscillators contribute to the absorption of energy from the incident solitary wave. The experimental study of this configuration can be laborious, and since numerical calculations presented pre- viously captures all the experimental observations, we take advantage here to extrapolate these effects from simulations only, in a first attempt. If an incident solitary wave crosses the region of successive oscillators, a certain fraction of the energy carried out by the solitary wave is transmitted forward to the next oscillators, while the rest is reflected backward or absorbed. Figure To complete the description we investigate how the energy effectively injected into the chain and how its spectral distribution can be tuned to the frequency response of intruders in order to achieve optimal energy absorption of any excitation. We first explore the effect of the duration of the external impact (impactor-first chain's bead ) on the frequency content of the solitary wave generated. Three parameters influence this impact duration, the Young's modulus, the speed, and the size of the impactor. Using the numerical simulation, we observe that changing the Young's modulus by 3 orders of magnitude produces a factor 3 variation in the duration, see Fig. The effect of striker speed can be visualized through the comparison of Fig. 2 ) -1 reduced mass between masses m 1 and 2 κ 1,2 is defined below Eq. ( From Eqs. and However, total energy transmission also occurs for M s > M. Indeed, in the framework of beads' collision, the generation of secondary waves, which occurs if M s > M, can be interpreted as the generation of more than one collision during the striker impact In conclusion, a chain of beads, barely touching one another, in which one bead holds an intruder has been built as a proof of principle of an energy absorber. Numerical solutions of the set of coupled equations quantitatively account for the main features of the absorption process observed experimentally through the tuning of the oscillator dissipation, which allowed for the validation of the mechanical model of the system. A generalized systematic numerical study demonstrated that embedded oscillators constitute an efficient manner of pumping the energy from the solitary waves propagating in the chain, leading to an energy absorption that is nearly exponential in the number of oscillators. The analysis shows that in order to obtain optimized energy absorption, the oscillator resonance frequency has to be less than the typical frequency content of the incident solitary wave. In addition, nonlinearities due to Hertz's potential allows for energy absorption in a broad band of excitation frequencies. This property of the chain is due to the fact that the selected solitary wave is dominated by material parameters but it is a weak function of the striker speed. Finally, when the intruder damping is small, generation of secondary solitary waves occurs through radiation. In such a case, the process of energy absorption still holds, but its duration increases with the typical dissipation time. In this study, we have thus probed the concept of an efficient dissipation in a given frequency band, stemming from the nonlinear conversion of any mechanical excitation. Prac-tically, our laboratory prototype, an alignment of noncohesive spheres including resonant dampers, has two limitations: it has no restoring lateral force preventing the alignments to buckle, and no tensile strength. Therefore, a more concrete implementation requires a rigid guide to align the spheres (e.g. a cylindrical tube) and a compression force to maintain the cohesion (e.g. an internal spring or the own weight of the device to be protected), as proposed in a patented granular chain-based vibration filter In order to further characterize the experimental system, and as a check of consistency, the frequency response of the intruder has been measured by exciting a bead embedding an intruder by means of an electromagnetic shaker. An additional accelerometer, glued on the bead, allows for the measurement of the instantaneous displacement U(t) imposed by the shaker to the embedding sphere. As in all other experiments the intruder is a miniature acceleration glued on the polymer layer, which measures its own acceleration, from which one gets its displacement u. Experimental results in Fig. In addition, the damping coefficient is found close to c ≈ 12 N s/m. Both values are obtained through a fitting procedure to the experimental data, using the theoretical frequency response of the experimental system, that is, where ũ(ω) stands for the Fourier transform of u(t) and m = 3.7 g is the known mass of the inner accelerometer. Both the resonant frequency and the damping coefficient consistent with the value obtained in-situ, from the fit of a wave experiment (see the main paper). The effect of the oscillator mass on the reflected and transmitted energy solitary waves is presented in Fig. The effect of the dissipation of the intruder oscillator on the amplitude of transmitted and reflected waves is also investigated (Fig. In the paper, the case of a light intruder has been investigated. In this Appendix, we explore how transmitted and reflected solitary wave are influenced by a heavy intruder. For all cases investigated, the total mass of all beads is kept at a constant value, i.e. if the intruder mass is increased the respective holding sphere mass is decreased in order to keep the sum of both masses equal to the experimental value. The time evolution of solitary wave propagating through an array of 46 spheres, where nine successive spheres contain equal intruders, starting at sphere number 15 is shown in Fig. For sake of completeness, a detailed variation of solitary wave transmission and reflection with intruder mass is shown in an animation, see [52], whose snapshot is given in Fig. To provide experimental proof of the energy absorption features of our system and further consistency with numerical simulation, we build a chain of 16 Bakelite spheres in which a segment, of four consecutive beads holding each of them an intruder of mass and stiffness equal to that of intruder sensor, is included. Figure To experimentally explore how the chain without intruders distributes the input energy, we impact the chain with distinct impacters and investigate how solitary waves of a characteristic frequency distribution develop. For stiff impacters, a nearly single solitary wave is injected into the chain, Figs. A7(a), A7(c), and A7(e). The respective frequency contents, Figs. A7(b), A7(d), and A7(f), does not vary significantly with impacter radius as predicted by numerical simulations. Interestingly, when the mass of impacter is increased and the stiffness is decreased, the collision time increases significantly and, as predicted by numerical calculations, the generation of a train of solitary occurs. The separation of the pulses composing the train is more evident as the excitation propagates along the chain, Fig. 