Spin-triplet superconductivity is known to be a rare quantum phenomenon. Here we show that nonsymmorphic crystalline symmetries can dramatically assist spin-triplet superconductivity in the presence of spin-orbit coupling. Even with a weak spin-orbit coupling, the spin-triplet pairing can be the leading pairing instability in a lattice with a nonsymmorphic symmetry. The underlining mechanism is the spin-sublattice-momentum lock on electronic bands that are protected by the nonsymmorphic symmetry. We use the nonsymmorphic space group P 4/nmm to demonstrate these results and discuss related experimental observables. Our work paves a new way in searching for spin-triplet superconductivity. Introduction. The spin-triplet superconductors, which are the superconducting analogy of the 3 He superfluid 1 , have been long-pursued. They have been proposed to be natural candidates for the topological superconductors During the past decades, the spin-orbit coupled systems have attracted more and more research attentions. The spinorbit coupling (SOC) has been revealed to play an important role in various exotic condensed matter systems such as the topological materials In this Letter, we show that the spin-triplet superconductivity can be stabilized by nonsymmorphic symmetries in the spin-orbit coupled systems. Even with a weak SOC, the spintriplet pairing can be the leading pairing instability in a lattice with a nonsymmorphic symmetry. We specify our study with the nonsymmorphic space group P 4/nmm (#.129). Due to the nonsymmorphic symmetries, the sublattice degree always exists in the system. In the presence of the SOC, the sublattice degree intertwines with the spin degree. Correspondingly, the spin, sublattice and momentum are locked with each other, forming a spin-sublattice-momentum lock texture on the normal-state energy bands. The spin-triplet pairing state is always favored due to spin-sublattice-momentum lock when there is a pairing force between the two sublattices. We first briefly review the space group G = P 4/nmm, which is nonsymmorphic. There are 16 symmetry operations in its quotient group G/T with T being the translation group. More specially, G/T can be written in the following concise direct product form 45 in a sense that symmetry operations are equivalent if they differ by a lattice translation. We specify the symmetry group with a quasi-2D lattice shown in Fig. Low-energy theory near (π, π). A standard group theory analysis shows that the space group P 4/nmm merely has one single 4D irreducible representation at the Brillouin zone corner (π, π), i.e. the M point, in the spinful condition With the above preparation, we can construct the lowenergy effective theory near M. As all the symmetry operations in G/T preserve at (π, π), we need to derive the matrix form of the symmetry generators of G/T . By a careful analysis, we obtain the matrix form of the symmetry operators as, I = s 0 σ 1 , M y = is 2 σ 3 and S 4z = e is3π/4 σ 3 , where I, M y and S 4z stand for {I|τ 0 }, {M y |0} and {S 4z |0} respectively (details in SM). In the matrix form, s i and σ i (i = 1, 2, 3) are the Pauli matrices for the spin and the two sublattices respectively, and s 0 and σ 0 the corresponding identity matrices. The above matrices are actually a set of irreducible representation matrices for space group P 4/nmm at M. Besides the crystalline symmetries, the time reversal symmetry is T = is 2 σ 0 K with K the complex conjugation operation. The low-energy effective theory near M for group P 4/nmm is generally depicted by the sixteen Γ = s i σ j matrices. In deriving the effective model, it is convenient to first constrain the system by the time reversal symmetry and the inversion symmetry, and then consider the constraints of other crystalline symmetries. After some algebra, we classify the symmetry allowed Γ matrices along with the k-dependent functions, and obtain the low-energy effective Hamiltonian as follows where m(k) = t(k 2 x +k 2 y ). Notice that k x/y is defined according to the M point here. To have a more intuitive impression on the effective theory in Eq.( Spin-sublattice-momentum lock. In centrosymmetric systems, the local inversion-symmetry breaking can intertwine the different degrees of freedom Based on the low-energy effective theory in Eq.( Superconductivity. For the effective theory in Eq.( where are the density operators for the A and B sublattices in Fig. From the interactions in Eq.( ). The pairing orders can be further classified in accordance with the symmetry group of the system, and we classify the momentum-independent pairing orders and present the results in Table .I. As shown, the pairing orders belong to five different pairing symmetries in the A 1g , B 2g , A 2u , B 2u and E u representations of the D 4h group, with the A and B representations being 1D and the E representation 2D. To show the meaning of the pairing orders clear, we list the explicit form of the superconducting pairing as follows ). As mentioned, the inversion symmetry in space group P 4/nmm exchanges the two sublattices. ∆A1g and ∆B2g are spin-singlet pairings with even parity, and ∆A1g occurs in the same sublattice while ∆B2g is between the different sublattices. ∆B2u is the intrasublattice spin-singlet pairing with odd parity, whereas ∆A2u and ∆Eu are the odd-parity spin-triplet pairings between the different sublattices. To find out the superconducting ground state, we solve the following linearized gap equations (details in SM) where we have used the fact that ∆A1g and ∆B2u can only result from the intrasublattice interaction U , and ∆B2g , ∆A2u and ∆Eu only arise from the intersublattice interaction V . In Eq.( In According to Eqs.(5)(6), the superconducting instability can merely arise from the attractive interactions. Moreover, a direct calculation shows that the superconducting susceptibilities always satisfies χ B2u < χ A1g and χ A2u = 2χ Eu (details in SM), meaning that the B 2u and E u pairing states can never be the ground states. Consequently, in the condition with U < 0 and V > 0, i.e. the intrasublattice attractive and intersublattice repulsive interactions, the ground state is always the A 1g state; and in the condition with U > 0 and V < 0, the B 2g and A 2u states can be the superconducting ground states. If both of the interactions are attractive, the A 1g , B 2g and A 2u pairing states can appear in different regions in the parameter space, and the corresponding phase diagram is presented in Fig. A remarkable feature in the phase diagram in Fig. Experimental signatures. The different states in the phase diagram in Fig. In summary, we find that the nonsymmorphic lattice symmetries can greatly assist the spin-triplet superconductivity in the presence of SOC. In a system respecting the space group P 4/nmm, the nonsymmorphic symmetry makes the spintriplet A 2u state be the leading pairing instability because of the spin-sublattice-momentum lock on electronic bands. Topologically, the spin-triplet A 2u state is trivial. The triv-iality can be easily understood from the concentric Fermi surface structure arising from the fourfold band degeneracy at M according to the parity criterion for centrosymmetric superconductors Appendix C: Spin polarization on the energy bands In this part, we present the detailed calculations for the spin polarization on the energy bands based on the low-energy effective theory near the M point in the main text. The effective Hamiltonian near M can be solved as where with k written in the polar coordinates (k x , k y ) = (k sin θ, k cos θ). In Eq.(C1), |φ 1 (k) and |φ 2 (k) are the two degenerate eigenstates corresponding to eigenvalue E -= tk 2 -λ 2 k 2 + t 2 k 4 sin 2 2θ/4, while |φ 3 (k) and |φ 4 (k) are the two degenerate eigenstates with eigenvalue The sublattice-distinguished spin operators are s A/B,i = s i (σ 0 ± σ 3 )/2. Straightforwardly, the spin polarization on the E -bands can be calculated as s A/B = φ 1 |s A/B |φ 1 + φ 2 |s A/B |φ 2 , which turns out to be s The spin polarization on the E + bands can be calculated similarly. For the Fermi surfaces near the G point, according to Eq.(B2), the spin polarization can be obtained as Comparing the results near G and M, one immediately comes to the conclusion, the spin polarization is vanishing small for small Fermi surfaces near G, while it is nearly fully polarized for small Fermi surfaces near M. Notice that the Fourier transformation for Eq.(D1) is as follows: β for boson and ω n = (2n+1)π β for fermion. According to Eq.(D2), we must calculate F (k , τ = 0) firstly. To do this, we consider the Gor'kov equations According to the Gor'kov equations, we can derive the following equations , where G 0 (k, iω) is the normal-state Green function. In the weak-coupling condition, ∆ is small and we have where we have used the identity G 0 (-k, -iω) = G † 0 (-k, iω). The normal-state Green function can be written in the band basis where s is the band index, and |u s,k (ξ s,k ) is the eigenfunction (eigenenergy) for band s. Accordingly, the anomalous superconducting Green function is where we use |u * s ,-k to lable (|u s ,-k ) * . In the weak-coupling condition, the superconductivity is mainly contributed by electrons on the Fermi surfaces. Moreover, since the system in our consideration possesses both the time reversal symmetry and inversion symmetry, the electron on the Fermi surfaces can always form Cooper pair with its time reversal or inversion partner, namely s = s or s = s, and Correspondingly, the superconducting order parameter in Eq.(D2) is where only the electronic states on the Fermi surfaces are taken into account in the weak-coupling condition. In calculating the frequency summation in Eq.(D9), we have used the relation |z|→∞ For each irreducible representation channel, the superconducting order parameter ∆(k) can be expanded according to the corresponding bases. Considering the orthonormality of the basis functions, we have In our consideration the interaction is k-independent, and in the continuum condition we have In Eq.(D12), 2 dξ s,k is a temperature-dependent constant with ω 0 the energy cutoff near the Fermi energy, and D(θ) = 2dk /dξ s,k is the density of states on the Fermi surface. By solving the characteristic equation -Uχ(T c ) = I, we can get the superconducting ground state. In the main text, we consider superconductivity induced from the phenomenological density-density interactions n i (q)n i (-q) + 2V n 1 (q)n 2 (-q)], (D13) In the superconducting channel, i.e. k = -k , we have The interactions in Eq.(D14) can be expanded according to the superconducting orders. When we consider Fermi surfaces near the M point, we need to expand the interactions according to the pairing orders classified at M which is shown in the main text Based on Eqs.(D12)(D15), we can ge the linearized gap equations for each irreducible representation channel shown in the main text. Based on the wave functions in Eq.(C1), we can calculate the superconducting susceptibility for each irreducible representation channel at M shown in the main text straightforwardly In the above equations, D ± and |u ± s are the density of states and the eigenstates on the Fermi surface contributed by the energy band E ± respectively. According to the results in Eq.(D16) it is obvious to notice that, in the intrasublattice pairing channels χ A1g > χ B2u and in the intersublattice channels χ A2u > χ Eu . Moreover, considering that χ A2u + χ B2g = χ A1g , if we compare the A 1g state with a special case in the intersublattice pairing channels where χ A2u = χ B2g , i.e. the phase boundary between the A 2u and B 2g state, one can find that the A 1g state can never be the ground state for 2|U | < |V | assuming V attractive, which is consistent with the phase diagram in the main text. where U is the onsite interaction and V is the intersublattice nearest-neighbour interaction. By doing a Fourier transformation, (E3) In the superconducting channel, we set k = -k and get Apparently, the onsite interaction can only contribute the constant intrasublattice pairing order. For the intersublattice part, we have 2 term in Eq.(E5), which is exactly the consideration in the main text. In this part, we provide more details on the numerical simulation for the Knight shift and the spin relaxation rate, and present a rough numerical estimation for the in-plane upper critical field, for the superconducting ground states in the phase diagram in the main text. In the nuclear magnetic resonance, the Knight shift K ss and the spin relaxation rate 1/T 1 are measured through the static spin susceptibility. In the general condition, the spin susceptibility is defined as (F1) In our consideration, the Knight shift in the nuclear magnetic resonance reads The spin relaxation rate is In the above equations, S α s (s = 1, 2, 3 and α = A, B) is the spin operator for sublattice α in the Nambu space (ψ † (k), is 2 ψ(-k)), with ψ † (k) being the basis for the normal-state Hamiltonian shown in the main text. Specifically, ⊗ τ 0 , with τ 0 = I 2×2 in the Nambu space. E km and φ m (k) are the energy and wavefunction for the mth eigenstate for the superconducting Hamiltonian respectively, and A(q) in Eq.(F3) is the structure factor which is set to be 1. In the numerical calculations, we set the superconducting transition temperature k b T c = ∆ 0 /3.53 with ∆ 0 the zero temperature pairing order, and consider the T -dependent superconducting order ∆(T ) = ∆ 0 f (T /T c ) with f (T /T c ) being the BCS-type normalized gap presented in Ref. For the superconducting ground states in the phase diagram in the main text, the in-plane upper critical field of spin-triplet A 2u state is larger than the Pauli limit. Here, we show this by carrying out rough numerical simulations for the pairing orders in presence of the in-plane magnetic field. We consider the following Hamiltonian where H mag = Bs 1 σ 0 is the in-plane Zeeman field, and H ef f and H int are shown in the main text. In the calculations, we set the parameters as, {t, t , μλ} = {1.0, 0.8, 0.3, 0.2} for the A 1g and A 2u states, and {t, t , μλ} = {1.0, 0.8, 0.3, 0.1} for the A 1g for the B 2g state. For the Hamiltonian in Eq.(F4), we solve the superconducting gap equation ∆(k) = -1 N k UF (k , τ = 0) itinerantly. In solving the gap equation, for the A 1g channel we choose U = -0.8 which leads to pairing order in the absence of the Zeeman field ∆ 0,A1g = 0.06; and for the B 2g and A 2u channels, we set V = -1.0 corresponding to the pairing orders in the absence of the Zeeman field ∆ 0,B2g = 0.11 and ∆ 0,A2u = 0.07. Turning on the in-plane magnetic field, we get the pairing orders in Fig. 