Recently, a 2D orthorhombic silver-organic framework, Ag3C20 monolayer, was synthesized by assembling organic molecules linked with multiple aryl-metal bonds. Herein, via first-principles study, we demonstrate that owing to the unique bonding feature, Ag3C20 monolayer not only exhibits strong mechanical anisotropy, but also possesses various tunable direction-dependent Dirac states. Around the Fermi level blow, the intrinsic Dirac points form two antiparallel quasi type-III nodal lines protected by mirror symmetry, which can further evolve into hybrid nodal loops under tiny strains. Intriguingly, near the Fermi level above, a special semi-Dirac state can emerge under a critical strain by merging two type-I Dirac cone, which harbors direction-dependent strongly localized fermions, normal massive carries, and ultrafast Dirac fermions at the same time. These findings suggest that the mechanically sensitive Ag3C20 monolayer is a promising 2D material to realize the interesting Dirac physics and highly anisotropic multiple carries transport. 2D Dirac materials, possessing linear band dispersion near the Fermi level like that of graphene In terms of the anisotropy of band dispersions, Dirac nodal line As for the semi-Dirac state Beyond the traditional organometallic frameworks, Chi et al. All our first-principles density functional calculations are performed in the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package Without any lattice constraint, the freestanding Ag 3 C 20 ML is fully relaxed to be a completely planar structure in an orthorhombic lattice with Pmmm symmetry (No. 47), as shown in Figs. 1a. The equilibrium lattice parameters are optimized to be a = 1.14 nm and b = 0.83 nm, which are quite consistent with the experiment results depend on the ionic peri-Ag-C and armchair covalence C-C bonds in perylene motifs, and that along the a-axis up on the bay-Ag-C and zigzag C-C bonds. In view of such interesting structural features, hereafter well focus on the anisotropy of Ag 3 C 20 ML in both mechanical and electronic properties, and the possible coupling between them. To explore the mechanical properties of Ag 3 C 20 ML, we first examine its elastic strain energy U (ε) per unit area caused by in-plane strains, which can be expressed as, for a 2D system. Thereinto, the standard Voigt notation (3) where θ is the polar angle with respect to a-axis; s and c denote sin(θ) and cos(θ), respectively. The calculated Y(θ) and v(θ) of Ag 3 C 20 ML are displayed in Figs. The electronic band structure, as depicted in Fig. The identified multi-crossing Dirac points are reminiscent of the Dirac nodal lines Owing to the mirror symmetry protections mechanism, the topological properties of Ag 3 C 20 ML should be charactered by the topological invariant ζ 0 , which is suitable for type-A topological nodal line semimetals To demonstrate the anisotropy of the lower-energy band dispersions around nodal points in the nodal line (taking the D 1 , D 2 and D 3 as examples, see Fig. . Here i (= L or R) indicates the two Dirac bands, including left (L) and ring (R) bands, like that in Fig. Semi-Dirac State. As is known, applying mechanical strain is an effective approach for engineering the electronic properties of 2D materials. In the following, we will focus on two aspects: (i) the evolution of nodal lines formed by B 1 and B 2 blow the Fermi level, and (ii) the Dirac cone and Semi-Dirac state formed by B 2 and B 3 above the Fermi level. The evolution of the nodal lines. Under the three types compressive strains, the two nodal lines all shift along opposite direction along k y axis. After they touch the boundary of BZ at the high symmetry Y or Y' point under a critical strain (about 0.8%, 1.5%, and 2.2% for biaxial, uniaxial b and uniaxial a strains, respectively), their geometry transform from the two open lines into one closed loop (see Fig. As for uniaxial a tensile strains, the quasi-type-III nodal lines are almost unchanged. However, the interesting evolutions can be found in the other two types of strains. With the increase of the uniaxial b and biaxial strains, the two nodal points in the k y axis gradually moves close to Γ, and meet with each other at the center of BZ under ∼4.2% and ∼5% for uniaxial b and biaxial strains, respectively (Fig. Dirac cones and semi-Dirac state. Finally, let's turn our attention to B 2 and B 3 near the Fermi level above. There is a sizable bandgap between B 2 and B 3 bands for all the considered tensile and compressive uniaxial a strains. Under modest uniaxial b and biaxial strains, however, the two gapped bands will crossing with other, and form some intriguing isolated Dirac cones. Specifically, two pair of isolated Dirac cones (Figs. In summary, based on the recently synthesized Ag 3 C 20 ML, we perform a systematical first-principles study about its mechanical and electronic properties. Our results show that Ag 3 C 20 ML has strong mechanical anisotropy due to its particular structure constructed by multiple aryl-metal bonds. Associated with this, it also holds two types of desirable Dirac states, including Dirac nodal line and semi-Dirac cone with highly anisotropic band dispersions. Specifically, its intrinsic Dirac points form two antiparallel nodal lines near the Fermi level blow. Moreover, around the certain Dirac points of the nodal lines, type-I, -II and -III Dirac dispersions can all be found in the low-energy bands. Under a modest strain, the open nodal lines can evolve into a closed hybrid nodal loop, and a special semi-Dirac cone can be induced above the Fermi level, which holds multiple direction-dependent fermions, including superheavy localized fermions, normal massive carries, and ultrafast massless Dirac fermions. Given these, it is reasonable to believe that the synthesized Ag 3 C 20 ML should be a promising platform for constructing the much flexible nanodevices exhibiting interesting topological physics and highly anisotropic Dirac carries transport.