Density-functional theory may be used to predict both the frequency and the dipole moment of the fundamental oscillations of molecular crystals. Suitably polarized photons at those frequencies excite such oscillations. Thus, in principle, terahertz spectroscopy may confirm the calculated fundamental modes of amino acids. However, reports to date have multiple shortcomings: (a) material of uncertain purity and morphology and diluted in a binder material is employed; (b) consequently, vibrations along all crystal axes are excited simultaneously; (c) data is restricted to room temperature, where resonances are broad and the background dominant; (d) comparison with theory has been unsatisfactory (in part because the theory assumes zero temperature). Here, we overcome all four obstacles, in reporting detailed low-temperature polarized THz spectra of single-crystal l-alanine, assigning vibrational modes using density-functional theory, and comparing the calculated dipole moment vector direction to the electric field polarization of the measured spectra. Our direct and detailed comparison of theory with experiment corrects previous mode assignments for l-alanine, and reveals unreported modes, previously obscured by closely-spaced spectral absorptions. The fundamental modes are thereby determined. Alanine (C 3 H 7 NO 2 ) is an amino acid which is naturally occurring in the human body. It is the simplest amino acid to demonstrate chirality. Alanine was one of the earliest amino acids, fundamental to early life for metabolic processes and protein formation Low-energy hydrogen bonds, such as those which constitute crystalline l-alanine, are associated in energy with electromagnetic radiation in the terahertz (THz) region. For this reason, terahertz spectroscopy has served as an effective probe of the intermolecular interactions of a wide range of biomolecules Returning now to molecular crystals, the precise origins of the terahertz modes are poorly understood. They are usually inferred from the mode energy and crystal structure. In contrast to the bulk of experimental data reported, which does not use polarized radiation, polarized ('anisotropic') THz spectroscopy distinguishes vibrational modes with respect to crystal symmetry via the orientation of the dipole moments We now focus on alanine. While it has been intensely studied in the low-energy spectral region First, density-functional theory (DFT) calculations, while prolific Secondly, the precise characterization of l-alanine in the terahertz region is hampered by the lack of highquality samples. Previous studies have commonly used blends containing l-alanine in a binding medium for pel- lets Thirdly, the use of crystals permits the modes associated with different crystallographic axes to be excited by linearly polarized radiation. Polarized THz spectroscopy provides direct information to compare to DFT modeling concerning the dipole moment direction. Fourthly, the polarized data allows us to separate modes which were previously obscured. Fifthly, by measuring at low temperatures, where resonances are sharper, we have been able to observe previously unidentified modes with unparalleled clarity. We now outline our theoretical approach. Further details are provided in the Supplemental Material. Zwitterionic amino-acids have proven very difficult to model with DFT methods to the accuracy required for obtaining THz spectra comparable to experiment. Key to our modeling is the choice of an appropriate DFT functional. The B97-3c functional was chosen on three grounds: it includes an appropriate basis set, is fast and accurate in modeling non-covalent interactions that are important for this crystal. The B97-3c functional has been successful in modeling other molecular crystals Since accurate modeling of the experimental terahertz spectrum of l-alanine has proved to be difficult We now characterize the samples. Single crystals were grown using the solvent evaporation method We now present our results. Anisotropic THz spectra of l-alanine were measured using synchrotron radiation at the Australian Synchrotron. The light was polarized using a rotatable wire-grid polarizer. The polarized experimental transmittance spectra of l-alanine are shown in Fig. The polarized spectra of l-alanine coincide well with the unpolarized spectrum (Fig. With the incident electric field of the THz radiation polarized in the a-direction, absorption bands are observed at 2.74, 3.12, and 3.26 THz, with a broad absorption band at 4.25 THz, which is not completely resolved as it reaches the noise floor. These experimental results are in good agreement with the DFT calculation when the vibration-induced dipole moment direction is taken into consideration. For dipole moments along the a-direction, DFT calculation predicts vibrational modes at 2.76, 3.16, 3.33, and 4.28 THz. Additional modes are calculated at 5.46 and 6.33 THz, beyond the experimental frequency Previous work using unpolarized light As mentioned above, the polarization data exhibits frequency cutoffs of approximately 4.5 THz for the a-axis, 5.7 THz for the b-axis, and 7.5 THz for the c-axis, which is the same for the anisotropic spectra. These results are consistent with and extend a previous report on the reflection THz spectrum of l-alanine In summary, our DFT modeling of dipoles excited along specific crystal directions agrees very well with our experimental polarization results. This lends confidence to the physical basis of the DFT calculations. Specifically, the success of the B97-3c functional in providing very accurate mode calculations has verified that weak hydrogen and van der Waals bonds are critical to the origin of the fundamental modes of l-alanine. Experimentally, through the use of polarized THz spectroscopy, closely-spaced absorption bands have been now separated, confirming an additional mode at 3.30 THz (with a dipole moment along the b-axis). Comparison with the DFT modelling has also extended the assignment of modes made in previous work This research used the THz/Far-IR beamline at the Australian Synchrotron, part of ANSTO, the Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation. We thank D. Appadoo and R. Plathe for assistance. Numerical modeling was assisted by the National Computational Infrastructure (NCI), supported by the Australian Government. We thank AINSE Ltd for financial assistance (Award-PGRA) to enable this research, also supported by Australian Research Council DP160101474. The energy convergence tolerance, in self-consistent field cycles, was 7 × 10 -14 hartree/atom (2×10 -12 eV/atom). The geometrical convergence criteria were: maximum energy gradient 4 × 10 -6 hartree/bohr (2 × 10 -4 eV/ Å), RMS energy gradient <10 -6 hartree/bohr (5 × 10 -5 eV/ Å), maximum atomic displacement 10 -5 bohr and RMS displacement 4 × 10 -6 bohr. A Monkhorst-Pack grid of 13×13×13 was used to ensure this high level of convergence. Full geometry optimization was performed, including both atomic positions within the unit cell, as well as the unit cell parameters. The fully converged geometry resulted in a band gap of 5.12 eV. This is 8% above the experimental band gap of 4.75 eV In all DFT computational packages, the normal mode analysis is performed in the harmonic approximation. In effect, the calculations assume absolute zero of thermodynamic temperature; thermally-induced non-linearities are ignored. We designed our experiment to match this assumption, by measuring at low temperatures. At non-zero temperatures, anharmonic effects come into play. These may be monitored by tracking the change of frequency of the mode with temperature. Generally speaking, the modes decrease in energy (or "red-shift") as temperature increases. We have previously observed this phenomena for l-alanine In principle, it may be possible to calculate the true potential along the vector of each normal mode and check by how much each mode deviates from the harmonic potential as a function of temperature. However, this is beyond the scope of the present work, where the main focus is on polarization. That is, we calculate the direction of the change of dipolar moment obtained by the modeling in the harmonic approximation and compare this directly with the measurements taken using light polarized along specific crystal axes at low temperature. Unpolarized temperature-dependent spectra have been measured on a Fourier transform spectrometer (FTS) to observe modes in the range 1-8 THz (30-250 cm -1 ) (see Fig. The absorption bands observed in Fig. Polarization measurements were carried out on a separate FTS system (Bruker IFS125) with the Australian Synchrotron being used as a bright THz radiation source. A 6-μm multi-layer mylar beamsplitter was used with a 4.2 K silicon bolometer, also at an unapodized resolution of 0.015 THz. A polyethylene (wire) grid polarizer was used to polarize the synchrotron THz radiation incident on the samples. III. COMPARISON OF C-AXIS SPECTRA Spectra for polarization along the c-axis were measured using two different crystals, since the c-axis was the mutual axis for the two crystals used; one was sanded to be in the a-c-plane and one in the b-c-plane. Fig. The crystal with b-c-plane geometry shows absorption bands at 5.85 THz and 6.33 THz, where the alternate crystal in the a-c-plane geometry does not. One may postulate that the origin of these features could be contaminates, since they only appear in one sample. However, a more likely explanation for these additional features is as components of the a-axis modes. While known a-axis vibrational modes are not seen at lower frequencies, it is usual that higherfrequency absorptions are stronger. So a small component of an axis other than the c-axis could have a strong effect at large frequencies. There are DFT calculated modes in the a-axis at 5.43 THz and 6.30 THz. There is only one mode calculated in b-axis in this region, at 6.51 THz. Thus, these modes can also be reasonably assigned to those calculated in the a-axis. The rest of the spectra for the c-axis for each crystal is highly reproducible, which is commensurate with pure samples. The 1 2 0 and 0 4 0 reflections were measured for the l-alanine single crystal grown with the normal face in the a-c-plane. Figure Neutron scattering probes the entire bulk of a sample, since uncharged neutrons interact only with the nuclei of atoms and penetrate into the bulk. This corresponds well with the THz spectroscopy measurements which also probe the bulk of the sample. V. COMPARISON TO UNPOLARIZED SPECTRUM For ease of comparison, Fig. First, it is clear that the absorption bands in the unpolarized spectrum are all reproduced in one of the polarized spectra. The anisotropic technique of polarizing the incident beam successively along each of the three principal axes of the crystal thus effectively works to separate out the vibrational modes associated with electric dipole moments directly along each crystallographic direction. Secondly, the unpolarized spectrum has no significant contributions from the a-nor the b-axes above approximately 5.1 THz, since all the light along these directions has been absorbed in this region. Thus, only the features corresponding to the c-axis contributes to the spectrum in this region. The features seen from 5.7 THz to 6.9 THz in the unpolarized spectrum are the non-resonant features associated with the c-axis. Thirdly, the inset of Fig. 