The rare-earth nitrides form a series of structurally simple intrinsic ferromagnetic semiconductors, a rare class of both fundamental interest and application potential. Within the series there is a wide range of magnetic properties relating to the spin/orbit contributions to the ferromagnetic ground states. We report an x-ray magnetic circular dichroism investigation of the spin/orbit magnetic dipole alignments of Sm and Gd ions in epitaxial GdxSm1-xN films. The Sm spin-alignment expectation value Sz is seen to be strengthened by the Gd/Sm exchange interaction, providing guidance concerning the composition for an angular momentum compensation point (where the volume-averaged total angular momentum of a film is zero). The lanthanides are the series of the periodic table across which the 4f shell is sequentially filled, imbuing them with the strongest angular momentum and magnetic moments among all stable elements. The strong spin-orbit coupling within the 4f shell ties the orbital moment firmly to the spin so that the net magnetic moment is of mixed spin and orbital character. Furthermore, the limited extent of the 4f wave function reduces the orbital angular momentum quenching that is a feature of transition metal compounds; indeed the orbital moment can dominate the net magnetic moment. The rare-earth nitrides (RN, with R a lanthanide element) form in the very simple NaCl structure which provides a fertile ground to investigate the spin/orbit magnetism that stems from the partially full 4f electron levels The magnetism of the parent materials, GdN (x = 1) and SmN (x = 0) illustrates the range of magnetism in the RN series. Both are ferromagnetic, with Curie temperatures (T C ) of ∼ 70 and ∼ 30 K, respectively, resulting from an indirect exchange mechanism that links the 4f alignments via the R 5d and N 2p states Similarly to multilayer structures, the Gd-Sm exchange interaction in Gd x Sm 1-x N disrupts the tendency of the Zeeman interaction to align the Sm 3+ orbital magnetic moment (μ L ) with an applied field. The alignment (antialignment) of the Gd 3+ (Sm 3+ ) spin magnetic moments with an applied magnetic field (Figure The simplest model for the magnetic state of Gd x Sm 1-x N would treat the Sm 3+ and Gd 3+ ion moments as fixed at their values in SmN and GdN. This model suggests that under full ferromagnetic order the saturation magnetisation is linear in x and for some appropriate composition there exists a net zero magnetisation, a magnetisation compensation point. Within that model the net magnetisation ( M ) ranges from -0.035 μ B to 7 μ B per R ion (with respect to the spin-moment direction in the solid solution) with the compensation point occurring at x = 0.005 (Figure Furthermore, the same behaviour seen for the net magnetic moment must also manifest for the net angular momentum, J, meaning that under full FM order J must also pass through zero as x varies from 0 to 1, giving an angular momentum compensation point (Figure Here again the simplest model uses a linear interpolation between the ground state angular momenta of GdN and SmN, but unlike the magnetisation there is no simple measurement of the angular momenta of the parent materials. The spin-only magnetism in GdN clearly indicates that J = S = 7/2, and Hund's rules suggest that J = L -S = 5/2 in SmN. However, an atomcentred treatment of the magnetism of SmN based on realistic crystal-field and exchange interactions and reproducing the orbital-dominant ground state moment of 0.035 μ B per Sm 3+ ion yields an eigenstate of neither L z or S z This description of the magnetism of the Sm 3+ ion, in which the 4f spins are ferromagnetically aligned in the ground state, but without their maximum potential magnitudes, accommodates the factor of ≈ 2 increase in the Sm spin polarisation that is seen in XMCD measurements performed on GdN/SmN superlattices Zeeman Only the expectation value of the spin-alignment S z in the 4f shell of the Sm 3+ ion. Appealing to the ion-based model of McNulty et al. Gd x Sm 1-x N films were grown in a Riber 32p molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) system on 100 nm thick (0001) AlN buffered Si, heated during growth to between 450 and 700 • C depending on the composition. The growth rate was held to 100 nm/h. High purity rare-earth metals were evaporated from conventional effusion cells to achieve the desired composition under nitrogen rich conditions (P N2 ≈ 2.1 × 10 -5 Torr). The composition of the solid-solutions was measured to within x ± 0.04 using Xray fluorescence (XRF) spectroscopy. X-ray diffraction confirmed (111)-oriented FCC NaCl structure, typical of the rare-earth nitride series. Field in-plane SQUID magnetometry was performed in a Quantum Design Magnetic Property Measurements System (MPMS) capable of temperatures as low as 5 Kelvin and fields up to 7 Tesla. These measurements determine the temperature-and hysteretic fielddependent net magnetic moment across the para-to ferro-magnetic transition. In the present system that net magnetic moment is overwhelmingly dominated by the Gd ions, motivating support of the ionic-species resolution capability of XMCD to investigate the Sm 3+ alignment separately. That alignment relates specifically to the 4f -shell spin and orbital states, suggesting the use of XMCD at the M 4,5 edge, which interrogates alignment in the 4f shell. However, the surface sensitivity of XAS at the ∼ 1 keV M-edge renders it unsuitable for the present study, and we have used instead XMCD at the L 2,3 edges of Gd and Sm. The hard-x-ray lanthanide L edge measurements probed the full ≈ 100 nm thickness of the films. The L edge involves excitation into the 5d band, coupled to the 4f spin alignment by the strong 5d-4f exchange interaction. Thus, we report here the results of XMCD at the Gd and Sm L 2,3 edges to probe separately the alignment on the two cations. The measurements were performed at temperatures down to 5 K and fields up to 6 T at the BL39XU beamline at the SPring-8 synchrotron in Japan. All XMCD was performed at 10 • from grazing incidence. XMCD at the two edges, L 2,3 , separated by the spinorbit interaction in the 2p core-hole state, can in principle yield information about the spin and orbital alignments in the final 5d state, though the failure of the XMCD sum rules for the L 2,3 edges prevent their use in the present case To aid the interpretation of the XMCD results, we present field-cooled magnetization and hysteresis loop measurements (Figure The near-zero magnetic-moment of Sm in the ferromagnetic state of SmN ensures that the magnetisation of Figure Figure A subtle contrast between the Gd x Sm 1-x N (Figure The feature that appears at ≈ 6.709 keV in Figure The influence of the solid-solution composition on exchange interactions is also seen in the temperaturedependent XMCD strengths, shown in Figure Returning to the results of Figure We have probed the alignment of the moments in Gd x Sm 1-x N by L-edge XMCD tracing out the spin alignments S z independently on the Sm 3+ and Gd 3+ ions. Special care was taken to follow the XMCD signal amplitudes and the spin alignments S z of the two ionic species as a function of the composition across the GdN/SmN solid solutions. The XMCD study was supported by thorough magnetisation studies of the films. It is noted that the magnetisation is overwhelmingly dominated by the Gd 3+ spin alignment, since the magnetic moment on the Sm 3+ is more than two orders of magnitude the smaller. Magnetic measurements revealed the temperature-dependent magnetisation as well and complete hysteresis curves in the ferromagnetic phase that were used to inform XMCD measurements and limit those to magnetic fields adequate to ensure saturated magnetisation. There was excellent agreement between the magnetisation and Gd S z , but it is only XMCD that is capable of revealing the spin alignment S z on the Sm 3+ ions, the primary outcome of the study. The sign of the Sm XMCD, opposite to that in SmN, immediately identifies that the alignment of the Sm and Gd spins by the Sm-Gd exchange interaction dominates the Sm 3+ Zeeman interaction, which on its own acts to align the orbital magnetic moment in SmN 