The ability to control and manipulate elastic waves is important for applications such as structural health monitoring, signal processing, and vibration isolations. In this paper, we investigated the feasibility of using the Rays Inserting Method (RIM), an approach originally proposed for optical elements, to design structural components for flexural wave manipulation. The RIM entails a simple process that allows to design thickness variations in a thin plate with a desirable refractive index distribution for an intended wave path. Based on this method, a focusing/collimating lens and a waveguide that rotates the wavefront by 45 were designed and studied. Frequency domain simulations and time-based experimental characterizations were carried out. The results demonstrated that the effectiveness of the RIM for designing variable thickness structures for manipulation of flexural wave propagation along desired paths. The ability to control and manipulate the propagation of elastic waves is important for many applications such as structural health monitoring To design a medium with desired elastic wave control properties (e.g., collimation, splitting, bending), the spatial distribution of refractive index must be obtained, which is not always straightforward. The transformation methods The RIM is a technique that was originally proposed by Taskhiri and Amirhosseini to design dielectric optical devices The RIM was initially used to design three dielectric optical devices: power splitter, bend, and flat lens In this work, we investigate the feasibility of using the RIM for the design of elastic wave lenses. In the two-dimensional (2D) cartesian coordinates, an inserted ray starts from a point (x0, y0) with a refractive index of n0 and an angle of α0, and ends at a point (xs, ys) with a refractive index of ns and an angle of -αs, as shown in Figure where a x ̂ and a y ̂ are the unit vectors in the x and y directions, t is an independent parametric variable that varies from 0 at the incident edge to ts at the exit edge. x(t) and y(t) are provided in the supplementary material. The refractive index along the inserted ray can be obtained by using the Eikonal equation ) 1 4 . Here, ω is the angular frequency, E is the Young's modulus, ρ is the density, and  is the Poisson ratio According to Snell's law, the relationship between the refractive index, n, and the phase , where c0 refers to the phase velocity of the flexural wave propagation through a thin plate with a constant thickness of h0. Therefore, the refractive index of each spatial point in an elastic wave lens or waveguide obtained by using Eq. ( To illustrate the procedures of utilizing the RIM approach, we first plot the wave path trajectories of a flexural wave lens (Figure The paths start from the incident edge at x0 = 0 m and y0 varying from 0.04 m to 0.08 m with an angle of α0 = 0 o , and the paths exit with an angle of αs=45 o . Using these desired trajectories, the refractive index distributions were calculated based on Eq. ( Note that only the refractive indices along the inserted rays can be calculated by using the RIM. The refractive indices at other locations were obtained by using interpolation with the MATLAB software. The more rays inserted between the input and output edges, the more accurate and smoother the distribution of the obtained refractive index will be. To validate the lens and waveguide designs, numerical simulations in COMSOL were carried out for the structures with thickness profiles obtained in Figures Poisson's ratio v = 0.33). Perfectly Matched Layer (PML) boundary condition was used to reduce the boundary reflections for frequency domain analyses. For the flexural wave collimator, a point source located at (0, 0) with a frequency of 60 kHz was used for excitation. For the flexural waveguide, a line source located at x = 0 m and y ranging from 0.04 m to 0.08 m with a frequency of 60 kHz was used. The full field wave propagations for the collimator lens and waveguide are plotted in Figures Furthermore, more complex wave trajectories realized by using the combination of multiple elements were investigated. The following scenarios for manipulation of an input plane wave were studied in the simulations: i) focus and collimation with two cascaded lenses (Figure Defects introduced in the simulations (white blocks in Figures Experimental studies were also carried out to validate the performance of the collimation lens and the 45 waveguide. The experimental setup and the fabricated variable thickness structures are shown in Figure In conclusion, we have demonstrated, through simulations and experiments, that the Rays Inserting Method (RIM) is a viable technique for designing various structures (e.g., lenses and waveguides) for controlling flexural wave propagation in a thin plate. The RIM starts with the introduction of desired wave path trajectories, from which the refractive index distribution of a structural element can be calculated. The refractive index distribution, in turn, can be realized by using a variable thickness structure and its thickness profile can be obtained through Snell's law. Combining several variable thickness structure elements, complex wave trajectories can be realized for cloaking, isolation, and obstacle avoidance purposes.