Processing maps are key to guiding the thermo-mechanical processing (TMP) of superalloys. However, traditional processing maps are incapable of delimiting failure, which is an essential factor to be concerned about during the TMP of superalloys. Employing isothermal hot compression experiments and finite element analysis (FEA), the present study examined the failure behaviors of a powder metallurgy (P/M) Ni-based superalloy and constructed processing maps with failure domains based on the predicted failure threshold. The micromechanical Gurson-Tvergaard-Needleman (GTN) damage model was employed in the FEA to model the cavity-driven intergranular fracture of the superalloy. Deformation temperature and strain rate were considered in the range of 1050 ~ 1150 C and 0.001 ~ 1 s -1 , respectively. The FEA results reveal that the maximum tensile stress locates at the outer budging surfaces of the samples, which causes failure initiation and subsequent propagation into longitudinal cracks, being Ni-based superalloys possess exceptional tensile, creep, and fatigue properties at high temperatures The typical P/M processes include powder preparation, hot isostatic pressing (HIP), hot extrusion (HEX), forging, and heat treatment As addressed by previous studies, the failure of the P/M Ni-based superalloys under a relatively low strain rate is dominated by the collective behaviors of cavities. To this end, the continuum-based micromechanical GTN model with damage criterion could be employed to describe structural damages and predict the failure threshold based on void nucleation, growth, and coalescence during the deformation of the P/M alloys As the crack formation is very sensitive to the TMP parameters (i.e., strain, strain rate, and temperature) Experimental and computational methods The material of interest is a Ni-based superalloy, with the chemical composition listed in Table The isothermal hot compression experiments were carried out using Gleeble 3500-GTC thermal-mechanical testing system. High-temperature lubricant and Ta and graphite sheet were applied at both ends of the sample to prevent adhesion to the indenter as well as to reduce the influence of friction on the stress field of the sample during compression. Temperatures in the range of 1050 ~ 1150 C and strain rates of 0.001, 0.01, 0.1, and 1 s -1 were considered. For each testing temperature, the heating rate was 5 C/s, and the temperature was held for 5 min before compression. In addition, to ensure the reliability of the experimental data, the deformation temperature was automatically compensated by the Gleeble machine. The total true strain was -0.69. The true stress-strain curve was outputted directly from the Gleeble machine. When the desired strain was achieved, the sample was immediately water quenched to retain the deformed microstructure. Microstructures of the samples were observed by using a scanning electron microscope (SEM, Tescan/Vega) with secondary (SE) and back scattered electron (BSE) detectors. In the GTN model, the void volume fraction, f, is defined as the ratio of the voids' volume to the material's total volume. The yield condition Φ as a function of f of the GTN model is defined as where q = √ where f ̅ F = (q 1 + √q 1 2 -q 3 ) q 3 ⁄ , f c is a critical value of the void volume fraction, f F is the value of the void volume fraction at which there is a complete loss of stress-carrying capacity in the material. f c and f F model the material failure when f c < f < f F due to mechanisms of nucleation, growth, and coalescence of voids. When f ≥ f F , total failure at the material point occurs. In Abaqus/Explicit, an element is removed once all of its material points have failed. The evolution of the equivalent plastic strain in the matrix material is obtained from the equivalent plastic work where ε̇p l is the plastic flow that is assumed to be normal to the yield surface and defined as In terms of void growth and nucleation, the total change in void volume fraction, f ̇, is defined as where f ̇growth is the change from the growth of existing voids and f ̇nucleation is the change due to the nucleation of new voids, which are defined as f ̇nucleation = Aε̅ ̇m pl where ε N and s N are the mean value and standard deviation of the normal distribution of the nucleation strain, respectively. f N is the volume fraction of the nucleated voids. Abaqus/Explicit Material properties were listed in Table Particularly, the values of q 1 , q 2 , and q 3 were chosen to be the same with most of the studies in the literature Processing maps were constructed based on the DMM A dimensionless parameter, η, normalized from the non-linear dissipator J by an ideal linear dissipator (m=1) is given by The parameter η is called efficiency of power dissipation, the variation of which with temperature and strain rate represents the constitutive behavior of the material and constitutes a power dissipation map. The flow instability during hot deformation was defined in the continuum criterion developed by Kumar and Prasad The variation of the instability parameter with temperature and strain rate constitutes the instability map. In addition, the failure strains numerically predicted from FEA simulations for hot compression of the Ni-based superalloy in the present study constitute the failure map, which will be superimposed on the power dissipation and instability maps to construct the processing maps with failure domains. Representative microstructures of the samples before compression are shown in Fig. Moreover, the flow stress is also greatly dependent on strain rate. The lower the strain rate, the lower the stress. The peak stress at a strain rate of 0.001 s -1 retains only ~10% of that at a strain rate of 1 s -1 . Although both temperature and strain rate greatly affect the deformation behaviors of the material, it is worth noting that the variations of the temperature alter the characteristics of the flow curves, while at the same temperature, the shapes of the stress-strain curves are similar for different strain rates. The deformed configurations of the samples that show cracks are examined, as shown in Fig. The deformed configurations of the samples with the contour of the maximum principal stress simulated by FEA up to ε T = -0.36 under different hot compression conditions are displayed in Fig. In addition, consistent with the aforementioned analysis, the samples experience more severe tensile stress under lower temperatures due to more concentrated dislocations and higher strain rates due to shorter time for dislocation slips. The maximum principal stress is 330, 280, 240, 180, and 140 MPa for deformation temperatures increasing from 1050 to 1150 C, respectively. The percentage of stress decrease is 57.6% at 1150 C relative to that of 1050 C. Nevertheless, it can hardly notice the difference among the stress contours of different strain rates. In this regard, temperature dominates the evolution of the local stress in the sample over the strain rate. Furthermore, it is noteworthy that the variation of friction coefficients between 0.3 and 1.0 does not noticeably affect the stress contours of the samples after hot compression. The influence of friction coefficients is quantitatively examined in Fig. These observations may indicate that temperature is a more controlling processing factor than the strain rate in the failure behaviors of the P/M Ni-based superalloy. To further examine the deformation and failure process of the samples with the increase of external strain, four representative deformation conditions are selected to cover low temperature/strain rate to high temperature/strain rate. From Fig. where the failure strain decreases with the decrease of strain rate under the intergranular fracture mode. The mechanism underlying such behavior will be elaborated in Fig. Comparing Fig. Moreover, the sample remains intact when -ε T = 0.41, and failure does not occur until ε T is around -0.65 for T = 1150 C, albeit higher strain rate results in more failures than a lower strain rate, being opposite to the scenarios when T = 1050 C. Nevertheless, the overall failure trend evolving with temperature and strain rate agrees well with that observed in experiments (see Fig. In the GTN model, materials failure is modeled through void volume fraction, which is evolving to strain. Figs. 9-10 respectively plot void volume fraction due to growth (VVFG) and void volume fraction due to nucleation (VVFN) as a function of strain from the element that first fails (i.e., the element that has the maximal evolution of VVFG and VVFN among all the elements). It can be seen that the VVFG decreases to a value slightly smaller than zero upon the increase of the strain, which is due to the closure of the initial voids under the compressive load. While VVFN keeps zero at the initial deformation stage. Then, the VVFG and VVFN vary very slightly and plateau with the increase of strain, respectively, and both suddenly rise very quickly till plateau starting from a critical strain. This critical strain varies among temperatures and strain rates, which is the failure strain ε f and its value is the same as the one extracted based on Fig. In addition, based on Figs. 9-10, the magnitude of the failure strain ε f increases with the increase of temperature and with the decrease of strain rate, with temperature playing a more important role than strain rate, which is consistent with the aforementioned analysis. To quantitatively examine the influence of strain rate and temperature on the failure strain ε f , the average and standard deviation of ε f calculated from different temperatures as a function of strain rate and calculated from different strain rates as a function of temperature are plotted in Fig. Firstly, for the flow instability ξ(ε) (see the yellow shaded regions in Fig. Secondly, judging from the value of the black labels in Fig. The strain rate that permits η  0.7 is very low in the range from 0.001 to 0.003 s -1 , while the deformation temperature can be in a wide range from 1050 to 1150 C except that the temperature should be lower than 1120 C for -ε T = 0.1. As larger η represents better hot deformation properties of materials, the above results indicate that the hot deformation window for the alloy is comprised of -ε T from 0.3 to 0.6, very low strain rate in the range from 0.001 to 0.003 s -1 , and temperature in the range from 1050 to 1150 C. Next, it is observed that the failure first occurs at -ε T = 0.4 for temperature lower than 1060 C and strain rate as low as 0.001 s -1 . This phenomenon can be attributed to the high degree of work hardening at low temperatures and a long time of intense stress imposed on the samples during low strain rates to permit sufficient time for damage initiation and propagation. Then, at -ε T = 0.5, the samples will mostly fail once the temperature is lower than 1110 C regardless of the strain rate. This hints that the deformation temperature plays a dominating role over the strain rate in terms of failure, which echoes the aforementioned analysis. Moreover, the value in pink labels, i.e., the failure strain ε f , increases with the increase of strain rate. This trend means the sample will occur failure earlier under a lower strain rate, in agreement with the above analysis for failure in Fig. where the sample failed earlier under a lower strain rate for the same deformation temperature. Furthermore, at -ε T = 0.6, the sample will fail under all the deformation conditions considered, except a small deformation window with a temperature higher than 1140 C and strain rate as low as 0.0015 s -1 . Thus, to avoid failure of the sample, the deformation window in consideration of failure should be an external compressive strain -ε T < 0.6 and temperature higher than 1110 C. Finally, the deformation window in light of the flow instability, efficiency of power dissipation, and failure can be defined for the Ni-based superalloy. The deformation can be around 0.5 in terms of compressive true strain that is corresponding to a 40% nominal compression of the sample to avoid failure, but no less than 0.2 to avoid flow instability. The deformation temperature should be in the range of 1110 ~ 1150 C to avoid failure. The strain rate should be in the range from 0.001 to 0.002 s -1 to guarantee relatively large power dissipation. In summary, we employed isothermal hot compression experiments and FEA to study the deformation and failure of a P/M Ni-based superalloy. Compression of the sample under different temperatures and strain rates was performed till a nominal strain of 50%. The GTN model with failure criterion was employed in the FEA to model the nucleation and growth of the voids in the superalloy. Experimentally, it is found that the stress-strain curves of the superalloy exhibit typical dynamic recovery and dynamic recrystallization rheological characteristics, and the failure morphologies are surface stripes along the loading axis of the sample. Next, with FEA simulations, it is demonstrated that the maximum tensile stress concentrates at the center of the outer bulging surfaces, which causes failure to initiate and propagate, being consistent with the experimental observations. In addition, the variation of the friction coefficient between 0.3 and 1.0 doesn't evidently affect the failure threshold. Then, the critical strain that initiates the failure is determined by FEA and it is further revealed that temperature dominates over strain rate in determining the critical failure strain. Specifically, the critical failure strain remains nearly insensitive to strain rate and increases in a third-order polynomial with the increase in temperature. Furthermore, processing maps constituted by the flow instability map, power dissipation map, and failure map are constructed to determine the optimized window for hot deformation of the superalloy. A 40% nominal compression of the superalloy under temperatures