Tin Selenide (SnSe) thin films were grown onto glass and alumina substrates by Chemical Vapor Deposition (CVD) method. The structural, micro-structural and morphological characterizations of the as grown thin films were investigated using XRD, SEM and Raman spectroscopy which reveals that the films on glass are phase pure oriented SnSe while those on Alumina are polycrystalline SnSe with SnSe2 impurity phase. The optical properties of the films grown onto glass substrate were studied by UV-vis spectroscopy. The optical band gap calculated is 1 to 1.3 eV for indirect and direct transition in film deposited on glass substrates. The Arrhenius plots of the two films show very different thermal activations i.e. 0.088 eV for tin vacancy acceptor level close to valance band maxima in pure SnSe and 0.44 eV for mid gap selenium vacancies of SnSe2. Photoresponse was observed by illuminating the sample (Glass and alumina Substrate) using white and UV light (400 nm) for a fixed time pulses. The deposited onto Alumina substrate were found to show better photoresponse due to SnSe/SnSe2 p-n heterojunctions. Two-dimensional (2D) layered chalcogenide materials (LCMs), especially the IVA-VIA group, have attracted tremendous attention to the demands for next generation electronics and optoelectronics. Bulk SnSe is a p-type semiconductor with *email: kbvinayak@iisertvm.ac.in an indirect band gap of ∼ 0.9 eV and a direct band gap of ∼ 1.3 eV Recently, several research groups have reported that pure phase 2D SnSe and SnSe 2 can be synthesized by methods such as micromechanical exfoliation, solution based methods, vapor deposition, plasma-assisted method etc He et al. Tin (II) chloride dihydrate (SnCl 2 .2H 2 O, 98%, MERCK), selenium powder (Se, 99.99%, Sigma-Aldrich), Potassium Hydroxide pellets (KOH, 84%, MERCK) and sodium hydroxide (NaOH, 98%, Sigma Aldrich) were used for the synthesis without any further purification. SnSe nanoplates were successfully synthesized using simple hydrothermal method route As prepared SnSe (nanoplates) powder was used as a precursor for SnSe growth by Chemical vapour deposition method A. structural studies X-Ray diffraction patterns were obtained and analyzed to find the phase structure of SnSe thin films (FIG The Scanning Electron Microscopy images of SnSe thin films on glass as well as alumina substrates are shown in FIG The Energy Dispersive Spectroscopy (EDS) spectra of the films on glass is shown in From the EDS spectra quantification, it is apparent that film deposited on glass has lower Sn content while that of alumina substrate films has it in excess. It may be noted that these numbers cannot be taken sacrosanct and are just indicative of relative composition. A complete mapping of EDS or XPS could provide more accurate quantifications. The optical absorption was studied by UV-Visible absorbance spectrum ranging from 350 -800 nm. The absorbance spectrum is shown in FIG where, α is the absorption coefficient, A is the proportionality constant, hν is incident photon energy and E g is the band gap of the material. For direct band gap, value of n is taken to be and for indirect n is 2. So, E g was determined via extrapolating the linear region of the curve of (αhν) 1/n versus hν cuts the abscissa. For the indirect transition, the range of data measured was insufficient and hence extrapolated as shown. In FIG 5(b) it may be noticed that the value of band gaps for SnSe thin film deposited is found to be about ∼1 eV and 1.3 eV for indirect and direct transitions respectively. These are good agreements as reported in the literature CVD grown SnSe thin films conduction mechanism was identified using temperature dependent current voltage characteristics. I-V characteristics were taken for glass and alumina substrate samples. SnSe is reported to show anomalous semiconductor to metal like and again semiconducting trend in resistivity due to bipolar effect and structural transition at 550 K and 800 K respectively where, R 0 is resistance at reference temperature (T=0) and k B is Boltzmann constant. E is the energy of thermal activation. SnSe shows p-type conductivity due to presence of tin vacancies (V 2- Sn ) which gives rise to an acceptor level just above the valence band Here we observed the dark and photocurrent at a fixed voltage under the illuminating UV light (320 nm) and green (532 nm) for SnSe deposition alumina substrate This difference in response could be due to the effect of pn junction hetero-interface which formed due to the impurity phase of SnSe 2 (n-type) in the matrix of SnSe (p-type) IV. CONCLUSION Tin selenide (SnSe) powder was prepared by using a hydrothermal method. This was used as a precursor for thin film deposition by CVD method. Here, we deposited SnSe on glass and Alumina substrates. It was found that different type of substrates influence on SnSe thin films crystallinity and phase purity. XRD, Raman and SEM confirm the orthorhombic structure of preferred orientation with layered structure of the SnSe thin films on glass. On the other hand Alumina substrate films show no preferred orientation and impurity phase SnSe 2 phase. The optical band gap varies nearly 1 eV to 1.17 eV. The R-T measurements show that the glass substrate films have very low thermal activation energy with high conductivity, while that of alumina substrate films show almost half the bandgap energy as activation energy and possible bipolar effect. Photoresponse was observed in SnSe thin deposition onto alumina as well as glass substrate using white light and UV light. Here SnSe deposited onto Alumina substrate showed better photosensing properties due to SnSe/SnSe 2 heterojunction inhomogeneities. Thus, a facile synthesis method is reported for fabrication of SnSe thin films and potential photosensing studies have been explored. Further studies quantifying the photoresponse are ongoing.