Pairing of fermions lies at the heart of superconductivity, the hierarchy of nuclear binding energies and superfluidity of neutron stars. The Hubbard model of attractively interacting fermions provides a paradigmatic setting for fermion pairing, featuring a crossover between Bose-Einstein condensation (BEC) of tightly bound pairs and Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) superfluidity of long-range Cooper pairs, and a "pseudo-gap" region where pairs form already above the superfluid critical temperature. We here directly observe the non-local nature of fermion pairing in a Hubbard lattice gas, employing spin-and density-resolved imaging of ∼1000 fermionic 40 K atoms under a bilayer microscope. Complete fermion pairing is revealed by the vanishing of global spin fluctuations with increasing attraction. In the strongly correlated regime, the fermion pair size is found to be on the order of the average interparticle spacing. We resolve polaronic correlations around individual spins, resulting from the interplay of non-local pair fluctuations and charge-density-wave order. Our techniques open the door toward in-situ observation of fermionic superfluids in a Hubbard lattice gas. Long-range Cooper pairs form in a Fermi gas for even the weakest attraction between fermions. With increasing interaction, fermion pairs become more tightly bound, as the system undergoes a smooth crossover from BCS superfluidity towards a BEC of molecular pairs In this work we observe the formation and spatial ordering of non-local fermion pairs in the pseudo-gap regime of an attractive Hubbard gas confined to two dimensions. We employ bilayer quantum gas microscopy to detect the in-situ location and spin of each fermion in every experimental shot (c) Snapshot of full spin-and-density readout of a stronglycorrelated gas at U/t=8.4(4) and T /t=0.36 of non-local pairs, the development of long-range spatial correlations between pairs, and the interplay of pair fluctuations with this density-wave order. The phase diagram of the attractive Fermi-Hubbard model is shown in Fig. As a first measure of strong pairing in the attractive Hubbard gas, we measure the doublon density d for increasing interaction strength U/t across the phase diagram in Fig. Multiple neighboring sites containing a single spin up and spin down are present among doublons in Fig. A true signature of pairing that accounts for these non-local pairs is the vanishing of total spin fluctuations. Indeed, a system in contact with a surrounding particle bath will generally display fluctuations of the total magnetization M = i mi , where the magnetization m=n ↑ -n ↓ . However, pair formation suppresses spin fluctuations, as pairs do not contribute to M , and thus in a fully paired system the variance σ 2 M vanishes. This variance is measured locally in our quan- which exponentially suppresses excess spins and thus δ mi mi+δ c , also exponentially suppresses χ m The suppression of fluctuations in Fig. Within this regime of full pairing, a metric for the non-locality of pairs is the singlon density s. The nonlocal fraction of a pair is s/n (shown in Fig. The development and destruction of CDW order across the phase diagram of Fig. Highlighting the power of quantum gas microscopy, this thermodynamic property can be measured in equilibrium using the fluctuation-dissipation theorem for density perturbations, and the measured uniform density compressibility χ n ( k=(0, 0))=∂n/∂μ (Fig. Given simultaneous charge and spin measurements, we finally explore the interplay of non-local pair fluctuations and the charge-density-wave order of other pairs, revealing the existence of polaronic correlations in the CDW order of the attractive Hubbard model. Polaronic correlations occur in the regime of highly non-local pairs, where further tunneling of a separated pair can dislocate the charge-density-wave checkerboard or flip the sign of superfluid correlations (Fig. In Fig. Our real-space observation of non-local fermion pairing and its interplay with charge-density-wave order illustrates the richness of the pseudo-gap regime of the attractive Hubbard model. Similar competing or intertwined orders are predicted for the repulsive Hubbard model. The methods can be extended further to study polaronic physics and superfluidity The attractive Fermi-Hubbard model is realized from a degenerate gas comprised of the two lowest hyperfine states of 40 K: |F =9/2, m F =-9/2 and |F =9/2, m F =-7/2 . The atoms occupy a single twodimensional plane of a three-dimensional optical lattice, with in-plane spacings a x ≈a y ≈541 nm and outof-plane spacing a z ≈3 μm, as described in previous work x,y ) = h×4260 Hz, with h the Planck constant), with a tunneling energy t=h×340(20) Hz. The out-of-plane z harmonic frequency is ω z =2π×4.5(1) kHz. The envelope of the lattice beams provides an in-plane x-y harmonic confinement potential (1/2)m40 K ω 2 x,y a 2 x,y r 2 , with r the radius in lattice sites and ω x,y =2π×26.0(9) Hz the mean trapping frequency ω 2 x,y =(ω 2 x +ω 2 y )/2. The atoms interact via Û = (4π 2 a 3D /m)δ (3) (r 1 -r 2 ) with a scattering length a 3D calibrated vs. magnetic field in Ref. The central density of the atomic cloud, the density profiles n(r) in the harmonic trap, and the doublon density d(r) are shown in Fig. The spin balanced Hubbard model possesses a symmetry between spin ↑ and spin ↓, which implies intra- The properties of the Fermi-Hubbard model depend significantly on the density of atoms, with a competition of charge-density-wave and superfluid correlations at n=1, and reduced CDW correlations away from n = 1 In contrast, Fig. The Fermi-Hubbard Hamiltonian is with tunneling amplitude t, attractive onsite interaction U , and spin σ = ↑ or σ = ↓. We work in the grandcanonical description, and include a chemical potential μ and magnetic field h coupled to the density n and magnetization m. A mapping exists between attractive and repulsive systems, ĉixiy↓ ↔ (-1) ix+iy ĉ † ixiy↓ , which leaves the Hamiltonian in Eqn. (S1) unchanged in form, flips the sign of interactions U ↔ -U , and interchanges μ ↔ h+U/2, h ↔ μ+U/2, and n -1 ↔ m In the limit of strong attraction, the Fermi-Hubbard model is well described by treating pairs as hard core bosons with density nb,i = b † i bi and bosonic creation operators b † i . A Fermi-Hubbard double well system can be used to derive the terms of this effective Hamiltonian. By combining double well terms for each lattice bond, we obtain, aside from a constant and an effective chemical potential, the Hamiltonian on a lattice This Hamiltonian features nearest neighbor repulsion between pairs. Experimental evidence for this repulsion is shown in Fig. In addition, measuring the total excess opposite spin surrounding an atom in Fig. The many-body pairing energy scales can be compared to the two-body bound state energy E b in a lattice (Fig. Here Ω is the area of the system, k = 4t -2t cos(k x ) -2t cos(k y ), and E b is by convention positive. The energy Uniform magnetic susceptibility χm=∂m/∂h vs. U/t, obtained via the magnetization fluctuationdissipation theorem from the total magnetization and density fluctuations, and the density susceptibility χn=∂n/∂μ. Shading shows simulations at n=0.85 and T /t=0.3 to 0.4 is linear in U/t for large interactions, E b → U -8t. An exact solution for E b is given by the implicit equation where The mean field pairing gap ∆ 0 is strongly enhanced in two dimensions compared to E b , and in the bulk is given by ∆ 0 = √ 2E b E F The grand canonical partition function Z at temperature T is Z = Tr[e -β Ĥ ], where β = 1/T . The density n and magnetization m can be written as first derivatives of the grand potential The susceptibilities ∂n/∂μ and ∂m/∂h are given by second derivatives of F , in terms of connected correlators ni ni+δ c = ni ni+δ -ni ni+δ , The susceptibility to a spatially-varying perturbation is also provided by correlations. Allowing the chemical potential in Eqn. (S1) to vary as μ j = μ 0 +∆μ cos( k • x j ), and taking the ratio δn i /δμ i at x i = 0 gives the static susceptibility at finite wavelength, denoted as χ n ( k), These relations do not depend on the specific form of Ĥ beyond the coupling to μ and h. Fig. Simultaneous imaging of spin and charge is performed by Raman sideband cooling After preparing a system, we first ramp the lattices in 250 μs to a depth of 30 E R , and then to 100 E R in an additional 2.5 ms, preventing tunneling. Each site may contain no atoms, a single atom of one spin type, or two atoms of different spin type. The magnetic field is typically near 203 G, above the Feshbach resonance of the two hyperfine states of 40 K at 202.1 G. We next use a Stern-Gerlach procedure to map the spin information to the bilayer location before imaging. In order maximize the fidelity of this mapping, we first transfer one of the spins to a state with large, opposing magnetic moment compared to the other spin. Specifically, state |1 ≡ |F =9/2, m F =-9/2 is converted to state |18 ≡ |F =7/2, m F =-7/2 using an RF Landau Zener sweep, while state |2 ≡ |F =9/2, m F =-7/2 is unaltered. However, for doubly-occupied lattice sites, transferring one of the atoms in a pair to the upper hyperfine manifold F =7/2 results in rapid spin-changing collisions and loss of that pair. Therefore, this transfer from |1 to |18 is performed only on isolated atoms by first ramping the magnetic field from ∼203 G to 195 G, where atom pairs form tightly-bound molecules with a large binding energy that are not resonantly coupled by the RF pulse. After transferring the isolated atoms in state |1 to state |18 , the magnetic field is ramped to ∼250 G where the atom pairs (in state |1 and |2 ) now experience the background repulsive interaction of 40 K, which produces an energy shift of approximately 6 kHz at 100 E R lattice depth. A magnetic field gradient of ∼100 G/cm is applied in the out-of-plane direction, corresponding to a spindependent energy offset of magnitude ∼6 kHz between the two wells for each spin state. This energy offset has the same sign for state |1 and state |2 , and opposite sign for state |18 . Isolated atoms in state |2 or |18 are therefore forced in opposite directions. In contrast, atom pairs on a lattice site are subject to a force to the same direction, though this force is ultimately overwhelmed by repulsive interactions. Each lattice site is then adiabatically separated outof-plane into a bilayer lattice in 100 ms Subsequent to the bilayer Stern-Gerlach mapping, no lattice site is occupied by more than one atom, and therefore no atom can be lost due to light-assisted collisions in fluorescence imaging. Raman sideband cooling light is then applied to cause layer-selective atomic fluorescence Differential imaging of the two layers is achieved by manipulating the geometry of the two Raman beams (propagating along the x-axis and y-axis, respectively) and the repumping F =9/2 light (co-propagating through the same fiber with the Raman light along the y-axis) to place one layer simultaneously at an interference node of all three of these light sources. Each of the two Raman beams is directly counter-propagating to the incoming path of one of the optical lattice beams, and has identical polarization (in the x-y plane), and therefore forms a high contrast interference lattice upon reflection from the microscope substrate. This interference lattice is precisely referenced to the position of the bilayer optical lattice, since both are set by the reflection from the microscope substrate. However, the interference node position of each Raman beam can be tuned by changing its angle of incidence on the microscope using a motorized glassplate in a Fourier plane. To selectively image one layer of the bilayer system, we set the node of the Raman beams (and thus also the repumping F =9/2 light) to be located at the other layer. The layer located at a node is then only subject to the circularly polarized F =7/2 pumping light, which illuminates both layers. Atoms in this layer are quickly pumped to a dark state of the F =7/2 pumping light, where they remain without further scattering. In an experiment, we first image the upper layer (denoted as spin ↑, atoms in state |F =9/2, m F =-7/2 ) by placing the lower layer (denoted as spin ↓, atoms currently in state |F =7/2, m F =-7/2 , originally in state |F =9/2, m F =-9/2 ) at a node of the imaging light. Illumination is paused after ∼2 s, and the node is moved to the upper layer in ∼0.5 s, before a second image of the lower layer is collected for ∼2 s. The background fluorescence of the layer placed at the node is not detectable in a given image. Typical loss rates during an image are 7(2)% (8(2)%) while fluorescing, and 7(2)% (6(2)%) when placed at the imaging node, for the upper (lower) layer. Typical hopping rates (<1%) and misidentification rates (∼2(1)%) are small, and are neglected in imaging loss corrections. Comparable loss rates are observed in clouds with large or small doublon number, indicating a lack of inter-layer correlated loss. Multiple sequential images of the same cloud are taken during each experimental run to directly measure all loss and hopping rates in various configurations. Finally, we note that the microscope position is not adjusted during imaging because the two layers of the bilayer system are separated by 532 nm along the imaging axis, less than the optical wavelength 767 nm of the light emitted by each atom. Therefore atoms in both layers of the bilayer lattice remain within the diffractionlimited focus of the microscope objective For clarity, we here summarize a few aspects of data processing: • Data and error bars at each U/t are obtained from bootstrapping greater than 50 images of atomic cloud, using the central region of radius 10 sites. • Images are post-selected for globally spin balanced systems (typically within ±4% total imbalance (N ↑ -N ↓ )/(N ↑ +N ↓ ) in the entire atomic cloud). • Loss of atoms during imaging is accounted for in reported densities and correlations (see below). • A calibrated uniform offset is applied to two-point correlations to account for global density fluctuations and the spatial variation of density within the sample area (for details see below). • Magnetization fluctuation sums include correlations out to | δ|=4±0.5, with randomization during bootstrapping to reduce sensitivity to the cutoff. Density correlation sums δ ni ni+δ c cos( k • δ) are obtained from density correlations after smoothing data beyond 2.5 sites via an exponential fit to the rectified density correlations δ ni ni+δ c (-1) δx+δy vs. | δ|, which we find to be a good description in all data. The same procedure is used for inter-spin correlation sums. A fraction of atoms are lost during the process of scattering light for atomic detection, necessitating loss correction to report estimates of true values. We use the variable ñiσ to denote the observed density of spin σ on site i. With a total loss rate l σ of spin σ before imaging is complete, the inferred true density is niσ = ñiσ /(1 -l σ ). Connected correlations between separated lattice sites i and j with i = j are corrected as When measuring the same species on the same lattice site, a correction by only one factor of (1-l σ ) is required, i.e. niσ niσ = ñiσ /(1 -l σ ). This correction is easily generalized to apply to three-point correlations, as in Fig. Corrections for atom number variation Most cold atom experiments possess inherent atom number fluctuations which produce offsets to measured correlations regardless of underlying physics. Generally, given two variables which possess no physical correlations, such as ni↑ and ni+δ↑ with | δ| 1 (so that distance implies a lack of correlation), the measured connected correlator ni↑ ni+δ↑ c = (n i↑ -ni↑ )(n i+δ↑ -ni+δ↑ ) will still be nonzero due to experimental fluctuations in the average density of ↑ atoms within a large region. Denote the density of spin ↑ atoms in a large box within a single experiment as n↑ . One can show that ni↑ ni+δ↑ c will equal the variance of n↑ over many repeated experiments, σ 2 ↑ = (n ↑ -n↑ )(n ↑ -n↑ ) . Likewise, correlations between fluctuations of spin ↑ and spin ↓ will cause a uniform offset to ni↑ ni+δ↓ c equal to the cross correlation σ 2 ↑,↓ = (n ↑ -n↑ )(n ↓ -n↓ ) . Such error is typically irrelevant in experiments, but is magnified by summing long range two-dimensional correlations maps, as in Fig. Typical resulting corrections to each measured correlator are of order 6(2)×10 -4 , with similar effects from spatial variation and total number fluctuations. Data are corrected throughout the paper, excluding the data in Fig. Numerical simulations of the magnetic fluctuations are performed using the Quantum Electron Simulation Toolbox (QUEST) Fortran package 