Andreev bound states are fermionic states localized in weak links between superconductors which can be occupied with spinful quasiparticles. Microwave experiments using superconducting circuits with InAs/Al nanowire Josephson junctions have recently enabled probing and coherent manipulation of Andreev states but have remained limited to zero or small fields. Here we use a fluxtunable superconducting circuit in external magnetic fields up to 1 T to perform spectroscopy of spin-polarized Andreev states up to ∼ 250 mT, beyond which the spectrum becomes gapless. We identify singlet and triplet states of two quasiparticles occupying different Andreev states through their dispersion in magnetic field. These states are split by exchange interaction and couple via spinorbit coupling, analogously to two-electron states in quantum dots. We also show that the magnetic field allows to drive a direct spin-flip transition of a single quasiparticle trapped in the junction. Finally, we measure a gate-and field-dependent anomalous phase shift of the Andreev spectrum, of magnitude up to approximately 0.7π. Our observations demonstrate new ways to manipulate Andreev states in a magnetic field and reveal spin-polarized triplet states that carry supercurrent. Experimental results in recent years have advanced our understanding of the Josephson effect in terms of Andreev bound states (ABS) In s-wave superconductors, which preserve timereversal symmetry, Cooper pairs are formed with opposite spins in singlet states with zero total spin. On the other hand, in semiconductors with strong spin-orbit coupling that are proximitized by an s-wave superconductor The consequences of triplet pairing on the Josephson effect have been widely investigated theoretically and include the occurrence of the anomalous Josephson effect and of spin-polarized supercurrents Embedding nanowire Josephson junctions in microwave superconducting circuits allows for probing of individual Andreev states with a remarkable energy resolution of ∼ 100 MHz (i.e., ∼ 0.5 μeV) In this work, we demonstrate measurements of the Andreev spectra of an InAs/Al nanowire Josephson junction embedded in a superconducting circuit with magnetic fields up to ∼ 250 mT. The magnetic field dependence of the microwave absorption spectrum shows clear signatures of excited Andreev levels in a triplet state. The spectrum can be well understood based on a minimal model which includes spin-orbit coupling, the Zeeman effect, and ferromagnetic exchange interaction between Andreev bound states, originating from electron-electron interactions in the junction. A particularly interesting feature of the data is the presence of a singlet-triplet avoided crossing. Due to quasiparticle poisoning Previous microwave experiments probing Andreev states with superconducting circuits have traditionally used thick (150 nm) coplanar-waveguides We fabricate multiple resonators on a chip, one of which is shown in Fig. tex traps with a diameter of 80 nm within a 8 μm radius in the capacitor and surrounding ground planes with a 200 nm gap to prevent flux jumps due to moving vortices The specific gradiometric loop design [Fig. We operate the devices by sending a near resonant probe tone at frequency f r through the feedline and monitoring the transmitted complex scattering parameter S 21 using a vector network analyser. Out of the four resonators we focus on the only one in which the junction showed considerable gate response (f 0 = 4.823 GHz). At f r = f 0 there is a dip in the magnitude |S 21 | and a ∼ 60 • shift in the phase ∠S 21 [Fig. s . Thus, by monitoring changes in f 0 we get access to L J , which is related to the Andreev bound state energies and their occupation In a nanowire Josephson junction, Andreev states arise due to constructive interference after consecutive Andreev reflections from the hybrid superconducting leads Recent works have highlighted the importance of both spin-orbit interaction We now present a minimal model that captures the combined effect of spin-orbit interaction, exchange energy and the Zeeman effect of an external magnetic field on the two manifolds, restricting our attention to the case φ = π. To do so it is convenient to consider the Andreev states {|↓ a , |↑ a , |↓ b , |↑ b } belonging to the a or b manifold and with spin up or down with respect to the z-axis, running parallel to the nanowire. Denoting with γ † iσ the operator which creates a quasiparticle with spin σ in the i = a, b manifold, the model Hamiltonian is: Here, E i is the energy of the Andreev manifold in the absence of spin-orbit interaction; B z is the parallel magnetic field and g * i is a effective g-factor which can depend on the manifold; S = 1 2 i,σ,σ γ † iσ ( σ) σ,σ γ iσ is the total spin, where σ is the vector of Pauli matrices; and finally, iα || and iα ⊥ are the matrix elements of the spin-orbit interaction described with a 2D Rashba model, respectively in the direction parallel and perpendicular to the nanowire. More details about each term are given in Ref. Note that without exchange interaction, a more natural basis of mixed states would be {|T -, |↑ a ↓ b , |↓ a ↑ b , |T + }. Also, note that spin-orbit interaction breaks spin-rotation symmetry by hybridizing spin and spatial degrees of freedom. Therefore, in its presence, spin is in general not a good quantum number, and the singlet and triplet states hybridize. Nevertheless, for many parameter regimes the eigenstates of Eq. ( In microwave spectroscopy, we only have access to transitions between many-body states of the same fermion parity. In Fig. In the odd parity sector, we denote the lowest doublet intra-manifold transitions as D a : |↑ a ↔ |↓ a . This is a direct spin-flip of a quasiparticle occupying the lowest Andreev manifold [left yellow arrow in Fig. In Fig. With the theory developed, we now continue with the measurement results. We first measure the junction spectrum at zero magnetic field versus applied flux Φ [Fig. We first establish that we detect the same types of transitions as in recent experimental works Furthermore, we see a second even-parity transition dispersing in a similar way as the first, but at higher frequency, with a minimum around 30 GHz. The identification of the final states in the even transitions visible at zero field is resolved later in this Section on the basis of the magnetic field dependence. The horizontal bands visible in Fig. Next, we measure a parallel field dependence of the Andreev spectrum, while keeping the gate fixed [Fig. We start by describing the even-parity spectrum observed in Fig. In order to label these transitions correctly, we first attempt to fit the main features of the spectrum to our model of Eq. ( Having thus disfavored a scenario based on the absence of interactions between Andreev states, we proceed by analyzing the consequence of setting J = 0 in Eq. ( At higher fields we observe a strong downward trend of the transition frequencies. We suspect that this is dominated by the orbital effect of the magnetic field in the nanowire, since the 6 nm aluminum shell has a much higher critical field exceeding 1 T So far we have mostly considered the even-parity part of the spectrum of Fig. From the slope of D a we can extract an effective g-factor g * a = 5.3 of the lowest manifold. The triplet transitions T + and T -should disperse in field with the half sum of the effective g-factors of the two manifolds: g * = ±1/2(g * a + g * b ) = 7.8. Thus, we infer that the higher doublet has a higher effective g-factor of g * b = 10.2. These values are used for the fit to the theory model presented in [Fig. J and quadratic in B z when B z J. Thus for large fields their dispersion converges to that of the non-interacting states |↑ a ↓ b , |↓ a ↑ b . A possible cause of the large difference in the g-factors of the Andreev manifolds is that, the Fermi velocity of the first sub-band is higher than that of the second subband, due to the larger distance from the band bottom. Therefore the effective spin-orbit strength is higher for the first sub-band, reducing g a more than g b . We note that we do not observe the intra-doublet transition D b of the higher doublet, which would have a larger slope due to the higher g-factor. This can be explained by the fact that the initial state of this transition is too short-lived: any quasiparticle occupying the higher manifold quickly decays into the lowest manifold. A comparison of the measured parity lifetimes ∼ 0.5 ms that we recently reported for this device So far, we have exclusively inferred the observation of a direct Andreev spin-flip transition D a from data at Φ ≈ Φ 0 /2. In order to provide additional evidence supporting this observation, we now explore the phase dispersion of D a [Fig. The lack of D a at zero field can be explained by two possible causes. At B z = 0, the steady state population of |↑ a and |↓ a could be nearly equal due to the near-degeneracy in energy, reducing signal when driving D a . Additionally, the matrix element to drive D a is expected to vanish at zero field A finite magnetic field in combination with spin-orbit coupling increases the matrix element, thus facilitating direct driving of this transition at B > 0 [thicker yellow line in Fig. Although S a has a large dispersion, D a only has a small phase dispersion of (≈ 2 GHz). This is consistent with expectations, since the dispersion is only caused by the effective spin-orbit splitting of the Andreev levels. Finally, note that the minimum of D a is not aligned with S a . Using tight-binding simulations of a similar scenario (see Supplement In Fig. In Fig. In essence, the AJE occurs because coupling between different Andreev levels pushes their minima away from φ = 0 For the AJE to occur, breaking of time-reversal symmetry is a necessary but not sufficient condition. Additional spatial or spin-rotation symmetries need to be broken depending on the setup In our system we are clearly in a regime with multiple occupied sub-bands [Fig. To compare with supercurrent measurements, we also measure the SQUID oscillations in the resonator in the same gate-regime [Fig. A gate-induced phase shift can have other explanations different than the AJE, and we now discuss measures we took to rule those out. When sweeping the large vector magnet, flux can be trapped or de-trapped on-chip or drift over time, which can cause unwanted phase shifts. To rule out flux drift, we measured the 3D map in the spectra of Fig. In this work, we have performed microwave spectroscopy of Andreev bound states in a nanowire Josephson junction in a magnetic field, using a field-compatible superconducting resonator. By aligning the magnetic field parallel to the nanowire, we have investigated the field dependence of the many-body spectrum at fixed phase difference over the junction (φ = π), for both even and odd fermion parity. In the even parity sector, we distinguished singlet and triplet-like Andreev states, hybridized by spin-orbit interaction and split by exchange interaction. In the odd parity, at finite field, we observed the direct doublet spin-flip transition in the lowest Andreev manifold. At fields larger than B z =170 mT, we found a strong gate-tunable anomalous Josephson effect in the many-body spectrum, currently of interest due to its envisioned application in spintronics The observed hybridization of triplet and singlet Andreev transitions is consistent with predictions that in a finite magnetic field, the induced superconducting pairing in the semiconducting nanowire is a mixture of singlet and triplet components An open question remains to explore the density dependence of the proximitized leads and that of the Andreev spectrum. Signatures of topological phase diagrams could be observable in microwave spectroscopy Spectroscopy of Andreev states using superconducting circuitry allow the combination of spectroscopic measurements with high time-resolution, allowing e.g. parityselective spectroscopy as we have shown recently at zero field Additionally, the observation of the spin-flip transition as well as a singlet-triplet avoided crossing can provide new ways to manipulate Andreev (spin) qubits AV contributed to the data acquisition and analysis with input from GdL, BvH, AB, MPV, LG. JJW, TL, BvH contributed to the tight-binding simulations without interactions and FMC, ALY to the minimal model with in-teractions. JJW, FMC, AV, BvH wrote the manuscript with comments and input from all other co-authors. Nanowires were grown by PK. Project was supervised by GdL, BvH. The sample is fabricated using the methods described in We targeted the resonator frequencies using simulations in AWR Microwave office, that uses the method of moments to solve quasi-3D geometries. The simulation consists of a stack of materials infinite in the z-plane and finite in the x-y plane. The stack consisted of 500 μm silicon with a dielectric constant of r = 11.7 0 , where 0 is the vacuum permittivity, followed by a metal with the circuit design, and finally a layer of vacuum. To emulate the kinetic inductance of the metal, we simulated kinetic inductance as a fixed inductance per square in the thin-film approximation. The kinetic inductance per square was estimated from normal state resistance measurements of the feedline using a dirty superconductor approximation To verify that we can measure the un-distorted phase dispersion of ABS, we model the phase difference over the junction φ as a function of the externally applied magnetic flux Φ. The relation should be linear and limits the maximum allowed shunt-inductance in the SQUID loop design. We use a procedure that calculates φ(Φ) assuming a sinusoidal current phase relation (CPR) with typical critical current strength as this remains approximately valid in the case of a few channel-wire with a modified CPR. The first step is to quantize the flux in the loops. See e.g. Ref Here, φ 0 is the flux quantum, φ r , φ l the externally applied flux in each of the sub-loops. L r , L l correspond to the total inductance, kinetic and geometric, in the right loop and left loop respectively and I r , I l are the currents inside each of the loops. M is the mutual inductance between the loops. Adding Eq. ( the total flux coming from the current in the big loop. Taking the difference of the loop equations results in an expression for the JJ phase difference φ as a function of external fluxes Replacing the current in the big loop I using the sum of the flux quantization equations and combining that into the difference of the flux quantization equations results in an expression for φ which only depends on itself, the CPR I m (φ) and known factors We can solve this equation numerically assuming a sinusoidal CPR I m (φ) = sin φ and get the phase drop over the junction as a function of applied external field as a result. Using the above model, for a critical current I c = 10 nA and the inductances specified in the circuit, we have investigated the relation and remain well in the linear regime. Non-linearities start appearing at I c ∼ 100 nA, much bigger than what we estimate the nanowire to have based on the change in f 0 of the resonator (see discussion in main text near Fig. Here we explain the alignment of the magnetic field with the nanowire coordinate system. We denote the raw field vector as B and the aligned coordinate vector as B. Figure We transform from B to B as follows or in matrix form: Due to increase of Cooper-pair breaking rate Likewise, for β To determine γ we align the field vector B with the chip plane first: Then, the last rotation is simply given by R y (γ) Since the last Euler angle γ determines the rotation of the nanowire in the plane of the superconducting circuit, we can no longer use the previous strategy to determine the orientation. Instead, we make use of the SQUID-loop, by measuring two-tone spectroscopy data and keeping track of the even ABS minima, as we increase B z . Due to the pre-alignment step in Eq. ( where c is a constant. To first order, γ can be expressed as which is found by extracting the slope of a linear fit through the ABS minima. With all the angles known, we can calculate the raw magnetic field vector B necessary to create the desired field B in the rotated coordinate system via the inverse of the rotation matrix in Eq. ( We show the spectrum at 619.95 mV where the ABS have low transparency, both as a function of flux at zero field, and as a function of parallel field at Φ = 0.5Φ 0 . Here, the slope of the linearly increasing odd transition corresponds to an effective g-factor of 3.7. This dataset was used to calculate the alignment angle γ in Section I C. Figure . Flux dependence of hybridized singlet and triplet transitions at the same gate used in Fig. 1. Parity selective-spectroscopy at Bz = 100 mT In the main text, the junction parity was implied from the sign of the dispersive shift. The presence of crossings between the ABS and the resonator mode can result in sign-changes of the shift To obtain the minima and maxima in Fig. 1. Make an initial guess of the coordinates (Φ, f d ) of the minima and maxima. Then, construct a guess parabola p: a parabola of which the maximum is located at (Φ max , f d,max ). In this region, we save the phase points exceeding a threshold as raw datapoints. We set the threshold to the 95th percentile of the selected region's phase data. For each flux point Φ, at most one datapoint is extracted by taking the median of the raw datapoints. The standard deviation σ is calculated for each flux value as well. 3. Fit a second order polynomial through the extracted datapoints, weighted by the inverse variance 1/σ 2 . 4. Subsequently, we identify the coordinates of the maximum of the fit as an estimate of the transition line maximum. To extract the anomalous phase φ 0 from the two tone spectra in Fig. A. Non-interacting tight-binding simulations Tight-binding simulations of the Josephson junction were performed using the Kwant package From numerically solving the tight-binding Hamiltonian we obtain the BdG eigenenergies which give all required information as we assume no exchange interaction is present. We first take only the positive eigenvalues, due to the degeneracy induced by PH symmetry, {E i,σ }, where i stands for the manifold index and σ the pseudo-spin direction. The low-energy Hamiltonian then is a sum over the Andreev levels We simulate the junction using a 2D-grid with lattice constant of 5 nm. The grid consists of a 100 nm wide and 3000 nm long superconducting lead, where ∆ = 0 on each side of a 500 nm long junction, where ∆ = 0, and the rest of the parameters are kept equal in both sections. To approach the data qualitatively, we add two three side wide barriers at the left and right edge of the Josephson junction to emulate the effect of a reduction in the maxima of the ABS due to confinement We follow Ref. where j n,Pm is defined as Ψ n |I A |PΨ m and the Fermi-Dirac function at finite temperature T is defined as where we take μ = 0 In Fig. To explore this further, we investigate the current operator matrix elements. The odd transition matrix element is shown in Fig. We now shift towards a chemical potential where the lowest ABS manifold is more transparant, to qualitatively match the situation in Fig. Here, we supply additional information about the minimal model including interaction presented in Eq.( To describe the spin-orbit coupling, we project it on the bare ABSs, writing the spin-orbit Hamiltonian as: where γ † iσ creates a quasiparticle with spin σ in manifold i, and H SO = α/ (p z σ xp x σ z ) is described with a 2D Rashba model, z being the direction parallel to the nanowire. Imposing time reversal symmetry on HSO , we get the relations iσ| H SO |i σ = iσ| H SO |i σ * and iσ| H SO |i σ = -iσ| H SO |i σ * , where it has been used T cγ i,σ T -1 = c * σγ i,σ . Thus, we can write: HSO = iα γ † a↑ γ b↓ + γ † a↓ γ b↑iα ⊥ γ † a↑ γ b↑γ † a↓ γ b↓ + H.c. , where α ⊥( ) ∈ R are treated as fitting parameters but can be related with the spatial profile of the basis wavefunctions iα ⊥( ) = ∓(α/ ) a| p x(z) |b . A more general spin-orbit Hamiltonian can be devised just imposing time reversal symmetry, resulting in the non-diagonal terms α s γ † a↑ γ b↑ + α * s γ † a↓ γ b↓ + α d γ † a↑ γ b↓α * d γ † a↓ γ b↑ + H.c., with α s,d ∈ C. We checked that this coupling provides qualitatively similar results. Assuming that these basis wavefunctions are separable in |i = |φ iz |φ ix , we expect the transverse part iα ⊥ = -(α/ ) φ az |φ bz φ ax | p x |φ bx to be negligible in situations with almost spatially symmetric transverse confining potentials (V (x) ≈ V (-x)) where both manifolds share the same channel. This would happen because both |φ ax and |φ bx would have approximately the same spatial parity around x = 0, and thus φ ax | p x |φ bx ≈ 0. However, our case likely corresponds to a multichannel situation, given the moderate length of the junction and the existence of multiple intermanifold single QP transitions visible in the spectroscopy over φ. Thus, each ABSs manifold would arise from a different transverse channel, enabling a finite α ⊥ . Still, this separation is not complete because of the anticrossings, which are a consequence of a non-zero α ∝ φ ax |φ bx . Nevertheless, for simplicity, in order to estimate a lower bound for the spin-orbit strength we use the case where the manifolds 1, 2 strictly correspond to different channels. This yields | φ ax | p x |φ bx | ≤ C/W , with W the width of the nanowire and C a factor of order ∼1 that depends on the confinement potential. Then, using the fitted parameter α ⊥ ≈5GHz and | φ az |φ bz | ≤ 1, we get α = α ⊥ /( φ az |φ bz φ ax | p x |φ bx ) ≥ 0.02W meVnm (W in nm). This provides a lower bound of ∼2 meVnm for W ∼100nm. It must be highlighted that even if the actual specific microscopic origin of the spin orbit effective parameters is arguable, their presence is necessary in order to reproduce the structure of the even transitions and their anticrossings. Note that the spin-orbit interaction must be taken into account even though we are considering the case φ = π, where it does not affect the single-particle Andreev levels degeneracy due to Kramers' theorem The behaviour of ABSs energies with small Zeeman fields depends on the interplay between the spin orbit, the transmission of the junction and the chemical potential Finally, to describe the Coulomb interaction we use a ferromagnetic effective exchange. The Coulomb interaction in the nanowire is strongly screened by the environment and its free charges, rendering the interaction approximately local. However, the form of the interaction in the subspace of the ABSs is more convoluted because of their spatial overlap. In the states with 2 QPs, due to this overlap, the interaction leads to an effective ferromagnetic coupling between the quasiparticle spins, as in the case of Hund's rule in atomic physics. The full Hamiltonian is projected over the states with 1 and 2 quasiparticles, resulting in the matrices in the basis B 1QP = {|1 ↑ , |1 ↓ , |2 ↑ , |2 ↓ }, where the constant term -3J 8 has been neglected, and In order to visualize the effect of each ingredient, we plot in Fig. 