Study of the plastic flow and strain-induced phase transformations (PTs) under high pressure with diamond anvils is important for material and geophysics. We introduce rough diamond anvils and apply them to Zr, which drastically change the plastic flow, microstructure, and PTs. Multiple steady microstructures independent of pressure, plastic strain, and strain path are reached. Maximum friction equal to the yield strength in shear is achieved. This allows determination of the pressure-dependence of the yield strength and proves that ω-Zr behaves like perfectly plastic, isotropic, and strain path-independent immediately after PT. Record minimum pressure for α-ω PT was identified. Kinetics of strain-induced PT depends on plastic strain and time. Crystallite size and dislocation density in ω-Zr during PT depend solely on the volume fraction of ω-Zr. One-Sentence Summary: Cell with rough diamond anvils allowed us to determine laws of plastic flow, microstructure, and phase transformations under pressure. Processes that involve large plastic deformation and PTs under high pressure are common in various manufacturing applications, materials synthesis technologies, and geophysics-related problems. Plastic strain may drastically reduce the PT pressure by one , assuming the contact friction stress τ f between anvil and sample reaches its maximum value τ y To resolve the above problems, we introduce rough diamond anvils (rough-DA), whose culet is roughly polished to increase friction (Fig. It was hypothesized in GPa are described by single function σ y = 1.24 + 0.0965p (GPa). This is possible only if the material behaves like perfectly plastic, isotropic, and independent of ε p and ε p path . The perfectly plastic state is related here to reaching a steady microstructure, determined here by in situ synchrotron X-ray diffraction in terms of crystallite (grain) size d and dislocation density ρ, which do not change under successive plastic straining. For rough-DA at the beginning of α-ω PT, d α is smaller and ρ α is larger than those from smooth anvils, i.e., rough-DA produces different, more refined steady microstructure. This is also confirmed by the fact that the minimum pressure for plastic strain-induced α-ω PT, p ε d , was reduced from 1.36 GPa in smooth DAC to 0.67 GPa with rough DAC, which is the record low PT pressure for Zr. For both smooth and rough anvils, the p ε d , d ω , and ρ ω in ω-Zr are shown to be independent of ε p and ε p path . Surprisingly, d ω and ρ ω evolution in ω-Zr during α-ω PT depends solely on the volume fraction c of ω-Zr and is independent of ε p , ε p path , p, initial dα, and anvil asperities. Similarly, there are unique functions dα(c) and ρα(c) for rough-DA (with some scatter for 0.38<c<0.52, which is discussed in supplementary materials), independent of ε p , ε p path , and p. Thus, for strongly predeformed material, ε p and ε p path are excluded from the governing parameters; this is the main completely unexpected rule for plastic flow, microstructure evolution, and PT under pressure. The rough-DA also qualitatively changes the PT kinetics for c: (a) dc/dq~(1-c) (first-order reaction) with smooth anvils, while dc/dq is independent of c (zero-order reaction) with rough-DA; (b) In contrast to instantaneous process from conventional view on the strain-induced PTs, c here varies not only with growing plastic strain q, but also with time t. Pressure dependence of the yield strength. Radial pressure distributions in each phase in five successive compression steps, marked by the peak pressure at the culet center, are shown in Fig. where P 0 is the pressure at the point r 0 . Fig. Minimum pressure for initiation of strain-induced PT p ε d . ω-Zr diffraction peaks started being observed at p ε d =0.67 GPa at the sample center (Figs. At the initiation of PT with rough-DA, dα ≈46 nm (Fig. PT and microstructure evolution kinetics. Distributions of pressure in phases and volume fraction c of ω-Zr at 2 and 3 GPa steps are presented in Fig. Here p α (q) is the pressure in α-Zr -q loading path; B = ( ; k and l are material parameters. For smooth anvils, a=1, k=11.65, and B=1.35 (Fig. dq, where q 0 is the accumulated plastic strain at p ε d . In addition to steadystate data (after long relaxation time), data instantly after compression and transient data between instant and steady states are shown in Fig. Value a=1 corresponds to multiple nucleation within the parent phase, while a=0 is typical for propagation from a limited number of nuclei without their interaction, like for thickening of PT band. Eq. ( ) with a characteristic time of 43.13 min. Here, c(q) t=0 and c(q) t=∞ are the volume fractions after instant compression and in the steady state. The surprising rule is found in Figs. Reinhard Boehler for preparing the surface of rough-DA. The help of Prof. Ashraf Bastawros and Dr. Bishoy Dawood in measuring the asperity profile of the culets is greatly appreciated. The material studied here is the same as was used in All the in-situ axial XRD experiments were performed at 16-BM-D beamline at HPCAT (Sector 16) at Advanced Photon Source employing focused monochromatic x-rays of wavelength 0.3100 Å and size of 6μm x 5μm (full width at half maximum (FWHM)) and recorded with Perkin Elmer detector. For the smooth anvil experiment, the sample was scanned along one culet diameter (500 μm) in 10 μm step size at each load. For rough-DA experiment, the sample was scanned along two perpendicular culet diameters (230 μm ) in 10 μm step size. The sample thickness was measured through x-ray intensity absorption using the linear attenuation equation with density corrected to the corresponding pressure, similar to The crystallite sizes and microstrains extracted from the refinement using MAUD were used to estimate the dislocation density as well, which helps in situ tracking the microstructure change during deformation. Dislocation density can be expressed as Where ρ c and ρ ms are the contribution to overall dislocation density from crystallite size and microstrain, respectively. Contribution from crystallite size is: ) is a material constant; E and G are Young's modulus and shear modulus, respectively; A is a constant that lies between 2 and π/2 based on the distribution of strain; r is the radius of crystallite with dislocation; r 0 is a chosen integration limit for dislocation core. In this study, A = π/2 as the gaussian distribution of strain. Moduli E, G and their pressure dependence for α and ω-Zr are taken from ( Evaluation of the yield strength under high pressure Pressure dependence of the yield strength is of great interest to many disciplines for various reasons. It determines: (a) strength of structural elements working under extreme loads, in particular, different high-pressure apparatuses, including DAC, rotational DAC, and apparatuses with metallic or ceramic dies for the high-pressure torsion; (b) maximum pressure that can be achieved in materials compressed in DAC (see Eq. ( There are two approaches to estimate yield strength under pressure in a DAC-like device, which exploit x-ray diffraction in either radial or axial diffraction geometry. With radial diffraction geometry, the yield strength in compression can be estimated from the lattice strains (distortion of crystal lattice planes) measured by synchrotron x-ray diffraction. Since the compression direction is perpendicular to the x-ray beam, lattice strains are detectable because axial compression symmetry and diffraction symmetry do not coincide. With this method, all the components of the elastic strain tensor in single crystals comprising polycrystalline sample can be determined. Combined with high-pressure single crystal elastic constants, lattice strains can be used to estimate the yield strength with proper mechanical assumptions (b) When estimating yield strength from the lattice strains, different chosen mechanical assumptions to determine effective elastic properties of the polycrystalline aggregate (Reuss, Voigt, Hill, self-consistent, etc.) leads to different results. (c) For multiphase materials, lattice strains give an estimation of stress in a single phase only. The mixture theory for the yield strength of multiphase material is not well developed, especially for large difference in the yield strength of phases (d) Yield strength depends on the pressure, plastic strain, and grain size that evolve during deformation. By presenting the yield strength versus pressure, all these effects are prescribed to the pressure only, which introduces large errors. With axial diffraction geometry, yield strength is estimated using radial pressure gradient and sample thickness based on the simplified mechanical equilibrium equation in radial direction r (10-12), combined with the assumption that the friction stress reaches the yield strength in shear τ y : where p̅ is the pressure, averaged over the sample thickness. Previously, the pressure was measured at the surface using the ruby fluorescence method and thickness was measured on recovered samples after unloading. Currently, pressure p̅ can be measured using x-ray diffraction and thickness using x-ray absorption. The advantage of Eq. ( (b) Stress σ and strain ε p tensor fields are strongly heterogeneous along the radius, and material undergoes very different plastic straining path ε p path at different positions. Since the yield strength depends on pressure, ε p , and ε p path , but is presented as a function of a pressure only, this also introduces large errors. (c) Eq. (S4) neglects heterogeneity along the thickness and difference between pressure and normal stresses. We eliminate all the above drawbacks and advance mechanical equilibrium Eq. (S4) to the form of Eq. ( All stresses and pressure are functions of r and 2z/h in a cylinder coordinate system with the origin at the center of the sample cylinder, where h is the sample thickness; in particular, p(0) corresponds to the symmetry plane z = 0 and p(1) corresponds to the contact surface 2z/h = 1. Pressure (or any stress), averaged over the sample thickness, is defined as: p̅ = For maximum possible friction provided by the rough-DA we have: With expression in Eq. (S10), the equilibrium Eq. (S7) specifies as: Since we assume that in XRD experiments, the distribution of pressure p̅ (r) averaged over the thickness is measured, we need to express σ ̅ 11 and p(1) in Eq. (S11) in terms of p̅ (r). Traditionally, this difference is neglected, i.e., it is assumed σ ̅ 11 = p(1) = p̅ (r), which introduces errors. Analytical evaluation of the stress and pressure fields. We assume that material behaves as perfectly plastic and isotropic macroscopically, with the surface of perfect plasticity φ(s) = σ y (p) in the 5D deviatoric stress tensor s space. This surface is independent of the plastic strain tensor ε p and its path ε p path . Such behavior can be achieved after large enough preliminary plastic deformation leading to saturation of hardness For plane strain, when the term τ 13 r in Eq. ( We aim to find the relationship between σ ̅ 11 , σ 11 (0), and σ 11 Where w is treated as the weight factor. Utilizing Eq. (S19) and Eq. (S22), we obtain: Small crystallite size in ω-Zr at the beginning of PT is caused by small transformed regions. The growth of the crystallite size in ω-Zr is related to the growth of these regions in the course of PT. Also, as it follows from As it follows from Fig. A similar statistical effect can explain outliers in the dislocation density in α-Zr for 0.38<c<0.52 obtained at 2 GPa step. Formally, it is caused by the inverse proportion between the dislocation density and the crystallite size that follows from Eq. (S1) and Eq. (S2). Physically, PT starts and occurs first in the grains with the largest dislocation density, where the probability of strong stress concentrators is higher. Transformation of these grains of α-Zr to ω-Zr decreases the averaged dislocation density in the remaining α-Zr crystallites. It is almost non-detectable at large volume fractions of α-Zr but essential at decreasing volume fractions. Also, constant dislocation density is observed for r>60 μm, where plastic deformation is much larger than at the central part. This large plastic strain restores the same steady averaged dislocation density in the large grains. At the center, plastic strain is much smaller and insufficient for restoring the steady dislocation density. At the 3 GPa step, with further reduction in the volume fraction of α-Zr and an increase in plastic strain, these outliers disappear, and all points belong to the single red curve in Fig. While the crystallite size and the dislocation density in ω-Zr after completing the phase transformation are independent of the radius (Fig. The effects of severe plastic deformations under high pressure on phase transformations and microstructure evolution are mostly studied with high-pressure torsion (HPT) with metallic or ceramic anvils, see reviews Moreover, during machining, polishing, and electropolishing of the recovered sample, with or without acids, direct or reverse PT may occur as well, in particular, for Zr Because of the above problems, the time-dependence of plastic strain-induced PT kinetics was not reported previously and could be reliably determined only in in-situ experiments. The same is true for the minimum pressure for the direct strain-induced PT and, consequently, for the findings that it is independent of the preliminary plastic straining (above some critical magnitude), pressure-accumulated plastic strain, and entire plastic strain path. The existence of the unique curves for the dislocation density and crystallite size for both α-Zr and ω-Zr during αω PT, independent of pressure, ε p and ε p path has not been reported in the previous studies. Our results about the existence of multiple steady states are consistent with known results that different ways to produce severe plastic deformation (e.g., HPT, equal channel extrusion, ball milling, etc.) lead to different steady grain sizes Our result in Fig. Similarly, the existence of (a) the steady crystallite/grain size and dislocation density determined in situ under high pressure and independent of pressure, ε p , and ε p path , and (b) its connection to the surface of perfect plasticity and the minimum pressure for the direct straininduced PT, both independent of ε p and ε p path , is well beyond of the known postmortem finding of the steady grain size and (in few cases) the dislocation density, the same for different processing techniques and initial states. Note that the steady state in the yield strength does not correspond to the steady state in torque in high-pressure torsion Rationales for the reduction in the minimum pressure for the strain-induced PT with decreasing crystallite size and increasing dislocation density As suggested in our analytical model ( It was generally accepted that during shear under high pressure, PT stops when shear stops 