Interfacial Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction (DMI) has long been observed in normal metal/ferromagnetic multilayers, enabling the formation of chiral domain walls, skyrmions and other 2D antisymmetric spin textures confined within a single ferromagnetic layer, while more recent works on interlayer DMI reveal new pathways in realizing novel chiral 3D spin textures between two separate layers. Here, we report on interlayer DMI between two orthogonally magnetized ferromagnetic layers (CoFeB/Co) mediated by a Pt layer, and confirm the chiral nature of the observed effective field of up to 37 Oe through asymmetric hysteresis loops under in-plane field. We highlight the importance of growth-induced in-plane symmetry breaking, resulting in a sizable interlayer DMI and a universal characteristic vector through wedge deposition of the samples. We further perform deterministic current-driven magnetization switching in the perpendicularly magnetized Co layer utilizing solely the effective field from the interlayer DMI. These results demonstrate interlayer DMI's potential to facilitate deterministic field-free switching in spin memory applications. In the field of spintronics, much endeavor has been put into engineering the various couplings between separate magnetic bilayers, which are often the results of either symmetric or anti-symmetric exchange interactions. Symmetric exchange interactions are relatively well researched and documented, directly leading to the existence of ferromagnetic (FM) and antiferromagnetic (AFM) couplings, and important interlayer coupling effects such as the Ruderman-Kittel-Kasuya-Yosida (RKKY) Research on the DMI was originally focused on 2D configurations, that is, the two FM atoms described by the three-site Lévy-Fert model In this work, we demonstrate experimentally the existence of a sizable interlayer DMI coupling between two widely used ferromagnetic layers, Co with PMA and CoFeB with IMA, mediated by a Pt spacer. Pioneering work by Avci et al. Moreover, we show that current-induced field-free magnetization switching of a PMA layer is achievable through the DMI effective field even with minimal spin torque acting upon the PMA layer, and the switching polarity can be well controlled by manipulating interlayer DMI's characteristic direction. The main samples used in this work are CoFeB(2)/Pt(2.5)/Co(0.6)/Pt(2.5) (numbers in parentheses are in nanometers) multilayers deposited by high-vacuum confocal magnetron sputtering (base pressure ∼10 -8 Torr and Ar working pressure of 3×10 -3 Torr) onto Si/SiO2 substrate. Nominal composition of the CoFeB was 40% Co, 40% Fe and 20% B (atomic percentage). Throughout deposition, rotary of the substrates was disabled, with the CoFeB atom flow direction striking substrate normal at α = 25 ° to produce a wedged multilayer and thus introduce in-plane symmetry breaking (Fig. We now investigate the interlayer DMI's effect on a magnetic bilayer system with orthogonal magnetizations. The overall Hamiltonian first being the conventional symmetric (Heisenberg) exchange term, and the second being the antisymmetric (DMI) term Following the established protocol, we separately fabricated the second batch of samples with identical layer structure but alternatively has Hall bar devices which sequentially rotates 30 ° in the xy plane to test the universality of the wedge-induced in-plane symmetry breaking. Devices with varying orientations are grown simultaneously onto a 1 cm × 1 cm substrate with serial number A to F (Fig. The six data sets are presented in Fig. with device-to-device variations Here we try to shed light on how a wedge-deposited structure can give rise to in-plane symmetry breaking effects. Dong-Soo et al. After observing a universal behavior of the interlayer DMI on the same substrate, we propose a scenario utilizing interlayer DMI as a viable approach in achieving field-free current-driven magnetization switching. The symmetry of a PMA magnetization is normally preserved under current-induced SOT if the spin polarization direction is constrained in-plane without the usage of unconventional spin polarizations Furthermore, the switching polarity of the PMA layer could be controlled by the relative orientation between M IMA and D, since the cross product of the two vectors dictates the orientation and strength of the DMI effective field. Assuming the D vector points toward the -x direction, the landscape of HDMI acting on M PMA is plotted in Fig. The above model is confirmed by performing current-induced magnetization switching measurements on a magnet-free probe station, with current pulses of various amplitudes and pulse width of 50 ms. For both 45 ° and 135 ° devices, their perpendicular magnetization's deterministic reversal processes are shown in Fig. We hereby comment that our devices can achieve deterministic and full switching. We highlight the switching process to be independent of magnetic history since both magnetizations are reinitialized simultaneously under applied current and thus always retain the exact polarity, unlike other field-free approaches that rely on exchange bias, orange peel effect All the characteristics of interlayer DMI coupling, from sizable HDMI, universal D vector to field-free switching are retained (See Supplemental Material S5). In conclusion, we demonstrated a sizable interlayer DMI within a magnetic multilayer system with orthogonal magnetic orientations. The existence of such an interlayer DMI is experimentally verified through an intricately calibrated field sweep procedure, revealing the chiral nature of the DMI with out-of-plane effective field strength HDMI = 37 Oe. Comparisons with control samples pinpoint interlayer DMI's origin to the oblique deposition induced in-plane symmetry breaking and thus extends the influence of DMI from 2D to 3D magnetic textures. Characterizations of devices with multiple orientations on the same substrate showcase the universal strength and direction of such interaction, beneficial to wafer-scale integration. Furthermore, all-electric (current-driven) 3D magnetic texture harnessing is demonstrated in the deterministic field-free magnetization switching experiment. These results unequivocally prove the potential of strong interlayer DMI to be employed when designing inter-connected 3D magnetic structures for field-free approaches within future spintronic devices. 