Photonic integrated circuits are indispensible for data transmission within modern datacenters and pervade into multiple application spheres traditionally limited for bulk optics, such as LiDAR and biosensing Photonic integrated circuits based on silicon (Si) have transitioned from academic research to use in data centers over the past two decades Fabrication process with DLC hard mask: Figure To demonstrate the utility of the platform, we demonstrate a ultrafast tunable low noise laser, based on hybrid integration of a hybrid integrated III-V/LNOI laser. We exploit the laser self-injection locking effect by directly edgecoupling an InP distributed-feedback (DFB) laser with a LiNbO 3 racetrack resonator. The racetrack resonator used in this experiment features the free-spectral range (FSR) of 81 GHz, a waveguide width of 2 μm, and a waveguide height of 0.7 μm. The minimum bending radius in the 180 • bends is 100 μm and the straight sections are 400 μm long. We couple light into and out of the racetrack resonator using a 5 • Pulley coupler . The FWHM linewidth is 907 kHz at 1 ms integration time, 2.9 MHz at 10 ms, and 3.5 MHz at 100 ms. demonstrate the ability of ultra-fast frequency actuation of the laser using the Pockels effect of the LiNbO 3 microresonator. The frequency spectrum of the electro-optical response of the LiNbO 3 microresonators is measured using a vector network analyzer (see Fig. We have presented a novel platform for lithium niobate on insulator integrated photonics based on a deeply etched strip waveguide with tight optical confinement based on a novel microstructuring process featuring amorphous carbon films as etch mask. Our process is readily applied for a wide variety of photonic materials that are resistant to oxygen plasma etching, which includes all silicon, its nitrides and oxides, and notably also ferroelectric oxides beyond LiNbO 3 that have attained large interest recently. At similar loss levels compared to LiNbO 3 -based ridge waveguides, our fully etched geometry affords a 4 times smaller minimum bend radius, which corresponds to a potential increase of photonic component density by a factor of 16 without sacrificing significant electro-optical modulation efficiency. Second, ridge waveguides are less suited for precise group velocity dispersion (GVD) engineering due to the sidewall angle and geometry variation, and the presence of the ridge limits the range of anomalous dispersion attainable. Hence, the use of high-confinement and fully etched strip waveguides unlocks not only the wafer scale high yield manufacturing of efficient optical modulators Methods: DLC hard mask deposition and characterization: Ion beam etching requires mask materials with high hardness and resistance to ion bombardment. We deposit DLC film in a plasma etcher (OXFORD). The chemical properties of PECVD DLC were characterized by Raman spectroscopy with 532 nm excitation (RENISHAW inVia Raman Microscope). Two Raman-active C-C stretch vibration modes are observed, the D-mode (disorder), which corresponds to sp 2 -hybridized C-atoms organized in linear chains and broken rings, and the G-mode (graphene), which corresponds to the stretch vibration of C6 rings. The C-C stretch vibration of sp 3 -hybridized atoms is not observed because it is at least 50 times less Raman active than the sp 2hybridized modes for visible wavelength excitation and does overlap with the D-mode. We analyze the Raman spectrum by fitting the sum of a Lorentzian and a skewed Lorentzian to the D-and G-mode, respectively 