Respecting deformational constraints and predeformations poses a substantial challenge in the description of nonlinear elasticity. We here outline how group theory can play a beneficial role to overcome this challenge. Specifically, group theory guides us to generalized definitions of nonlinear shear deformation gradients and expressions of generalized elastic moduli in the nonlinear regime. Particularly, such achievements become important in the context of larger deformations under constraints and additional deformations on top of predeformations. Finite deformations of solid materials require quantification in terms of nonlinear elasticity To characterize the stress-strain relation for small superimposed deviations in strain from the current state of the material, it is imperative to determine corresponding elastic moduli. In a quantitative description, one is then tempted to simply superimpose linearized forms of strain or deformation tensors This conception naturally takes us to group theory. At its core, we find the linking of infinitesimal and finite elements. More precisely, finite elements are constructed ("generated") from infinitesimal elements ("generators") We start with an intuitive illustration in two dimensions. For simplicity, we confine ourselves to spatially homogeneous deformations. So-called hyperelastic materials are addressed, the stress-strain relation of which derives from a strain energy density function W (F) 0 < a < ∞. Maintaining this predeformed state can be regarded as a constraint. We refer to the neo-Hookean energy density where J = det(F T • F), μ and λ are the elastic Lamé coefficients, while T and • indicate transpose and matrix multiplication, respectively. If we now wish to superimpose to this predeformation a rotation by a small rotation angle , one is tempted to use the linearized form However, we recognize that this form is insufficient under predeformation. Particularly, it leads for a = 1 to an This contradicts the actual ∆W = 0, which is expected for pure rigid rotations in isotropic space. We note that the problem is solved by using instead the actual rotation matrix to nonlinear order in , Then correctly ∆W ( Here, rectification was straightforward, because the nonlinear expression of the rotation matrix is widely known. Yet, in general, how can we find the correct nonlinear expression for the deformation gradient tensors? Obviously, this is necessary to obtain the correct result in nonlinear elasticity theory under predeformation or other external constraints. We find that group theory provides an answer. In two dimensions, deformation gradients are represented as 2×2 invertible matrices. Their determinants are all equal to unity, if we keep the above constraint of preserved volume while the predeformation F 0 is maintained. The deformation gradient tensors of strain and rotation are elements of the special linear group SL(2, R), with regular matrix multiplication and matrix inversion as group operations. The corresponding infinitesimal generators are written as We notice that the rotation matrix F rot in Eq. ( which indeed is useful in the absence of predeformations. However, if this deformation is superimposed to the predeformation F 0 , the energy difference ∆W ( This expression can even become negative for a = 1, which would indicate energetically unstable situations, together with negative shear moduli. To find the correct nonlinear expression F shear , in analogy to F rot = exp( κ 1 ), we generate it from κ 2 as Indeed, we then obtain ∆W ( The associated shear deformation is depicted in Fig. Importantly, because of the constraints, the space of deformation gradient tensors F is not Euclidean but a manifold. More precisely, elasticity theory becomes based on manifolds of the general linear group GL(d, R), i.e., F ∈ GL(d, R), where d denotes the dimension. Our approach is based on Lie algebra. We now extend the above considerations to three dimensions. The Lie algebra gl(3, R) of the group GL(3, R) is the set of all 3×3 matrices, together with a Lie bracket operation, here the commutation relation [λ i , λ j ] ≡ λ i • λ j -λ j • λ i . By the set {λ i } we denote the three-dimensional generators, here selected as which generates compressions or dilations, and The latter eight traceless matrices form a basis for the special linear Lie algebra sl(3, R) Using the exponential map if the matrix logarithm of F exists. This is the case around F = I, i.e., for a set { i } of finite but small coefficients. Otherwise, we may obtain the deformation gradients from matrix multiplications of exponential maps For instance, based on Lie algebra, one can consider F = exp ( 0 λ 0 + 3 λ 3 + 6 λ 6 ) as a superposition of a dilation (or compression) with the strength of 0 , and a rotation and a shear deformation in the xy plane with strengths 3 and 6 , respectively, which is distinguished from conventional decompositions in terms of deformation gradient tensors. Indeed, direct decompositions of deformation gradient tensors in the form of F = F 1 • F 2 , see, e.g., Ref. Using the generators, our next step is to derive appropriate expressions for the elastic moduli and rotation coefficients for a system in a constrained or predeformed state. We introduce a vector notation ≡ ( 0 , . . . , 8 ) T and under a finite predeformation F 0 expand W in terms of { i } as where W 0 = W (F 0 ) and for i, j ∈ {0, . . . , 8} we have The vector s, conjugate to , quantifies the stress under a constraint or predeformation. Generally, a carefully selected basis may support the description of the problem. For instance, fixing the volume in the predeformed state can simply be achieved by omitting the component 0 . Linear algebra allows to adjust the basis to the problem at hand. Specifically, unitary operators U that connect two different bases via ̃ = U • imply where In what follows, we investigate the roles that s and C play in the context of appropriate elastic moduli for nonlinear elasticity theory. We use Einstein's summation convention and denote as σ the Cauchy stress tensor, which is given by for hyperelastic materials. From Eq. ( Since we are working with matrix Lie groups, we may insert the expression where Λ = i i λ i , Ad e X (Y) = e ad X (Y), and ad X (Y) = [X, Y]. Particularly, Eq. ( For example, we obtain because [λ 0 , Λ] = 0 and consequently ∂F /∂ 0 = F • λ 0 , while p denotes the generalized pressure. Analogously, we obtain for the second-order coefficients, which we now call generalized elastic moduli, Here, A represents the fourth-rank tensor of classic elastic moduli with components They completely determine C in the absence of any predeformation, i.e., for σ = 0. In this case, the form of A, and subsequently of C is fully determined by irreducible representations in linear elasticity, see, e.g., Ref. Otherwise, the second-order derivatives are calculated via [27, 28] We note that our expression for C ij in Eq. ( For simplicity, we henceforth confine ourselves to infinitesimal volume-preserving deformations with J = 1. Then, from Eqs. ( For unconstrained systems, the Cauchy stress tensor σ un can be decomposed into the one for incompressible systems σ and an s 0 -term as σ un = σ + s 0 I/ √ 6 = σ -pI, see Eq. ( In this expression, {λ i , λ j } = λ i • λ j + λ j • λ i denote the anticommutation relations. It is straightforward to calculate them from Eqs. ( The first contribution, in terms of the matrix components for i, j = 1, . . . , 8, related to both prestressed and nonprestressed systems, takes the form s 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 s 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 -s 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 -s 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 -s 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 s 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 s 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 s 0 The square root appears because of the definition of λ 0 in Eq. ( Together, Eqs. ( For a brief illustration of our formalism, we return to Eq. ( The last term includes the orientation of an internal axis ns that is reoriented by F and coupled to an external field H nH . Together with the predeformation in Eq. ( A second set of generators is used besides Eq. ( connects the two sets of generators and resulting quantities to each other, as detailed around Eq. Together with C = Λ 2 11 + Λ 12 Λ 21 , this allows to evaluate Eq. ( and ) On the one hand, comparison with Eqs. ( and In this way, the linear transformation rules below Eq. ( For this purpose, we additionally need to calculate s 0 . As a two-dimensional analog of Eq. ( Thus, we find in two dimensions The newly defined rotation coefficient B 1212 is linked to rotations generated from κ 1 , see Fig. To summarize our results and illustration, group theory has guided us to an appropriate formulation of nonlinear elasticity under imposed constraints and finite predeformations. Our deformation gradient tensors are constructed consistently from generators, which identifies appropriate expressions. Additional distortions superimposed to finite predeformations, even regarding certain constraints, are in this way described consistently, with consequences even in the infinitesimal limit. Using unitary transformations, the framework is adjusted to the type of deformation at hand. In the limit of infinitesimal superimposed distortions, our theory provides appropriate expressions of generalized elastic moduli and rotation coefficients. In addition to our theoretical advance, it is important to discuss possible applications of the formulation to real systems. Obviously, our approach should prove (techni-cally) useful in any situation where materials under predeformation or constraints are exposed to external or internal stimuli. It will also be illuminating to extend our description to corresponding dynamic scenarios as well as to nonaffine deformations in combination with computational evaluations. Moreover, in addition to conventional solids, various soft and living matters Beyond the technical advance, our approach may open a new avenue to investigate nontypical solids. Since the stress vector has been defined as a conjugate to deformation, our group theoretical approach should be useful to characterize active systems 