Semiconductor InSb nanosheet/hexagonal boron nitride (hBN)/graphite trilayers are fabricated, and single-and double-gate devices made from the trilayers are realized and characterized. The InSb nanosheets employed in the trilayer devices are epitaxially grown, free-standing, zincblende crystals and are in micrometer lateral sizes. The hBN and graphite flakes are obtained by exfoliation. Each trilayer is made by successively stacking an InSb nanosheet on an hBN flake and on a graphite flake using a home-made alignment stacking/transfer setup. The fabricated single-and double-gate devices are characterized by electrical and/or magnetotransport measurements. In all these devices, the graphite and hBN flakes are employed as the bottom gates and the gate dielectrics. The measurements of a fabricated single bottom-gate field-effect device show that the InSb nanosheet in the device has an electron field-effect mobility of ~ 7300 cm 2 V -1 s -1 and a low gate hysteresis of ~ 0.05 V at 1.9 K. The measurements of a double-gate Hall-bar device show that both the top and the bottom gate exhibit strong capacitive couplings to the InSb nanosheet channel and can thus tune the nanosheet channel conduction effectively. The electron Hall mobility in the InSb nanosheet of the Hall-bar device is extracted to be larger than 1.1 × 10 4 cm 2 V -1 s -1 at a sheet electron density of ~ 6.1 × 10 11 cm -2 and 1.9 K and, thus, the device exhibits well-defined Shubnikov-de Haas oscillations. Because of their small electron effective mass, strong spin-orbit interaction (SOI), and large Landé g-factor, low-dimensional InSb nanostructures are attractive candidates for applications in high-speed electronics One possible solution to the above problem is to adopt a new layered, charge-trap free material with an atomically flat surface as a dielectric and a thin graphite as a gate electrode In this article, a method of fabrication of free-standing micrometer-sized InSb nanosheet/hBN/graphite trilayers is described, and realization of single-and double-gate devices from the trilayers on SiO2/Si substrates is demonstrated. As a key step of the method, the positions of almost optically invisible InSb nanosheets are determined with use of duplicated patterns on the transparent stacking/transfer stamps and thus tiny InSb nanosheets can be optically aligned to and stacked on exfoliated hBN flakes and then on exfoliated graphite flakes. In the fabricated single-and double-gate devices, the graphite and hBN flakes are used as the bottom gates and the gate dielectrics. The devices are characterized by electrical and/or magnetotransport measurements. In this work, typical results obtained only from the gate-transfer characteristic measurements of a single-gate field-effect device [as shown in Figs. The InSb nanosheet/hBN/graphite trilayer heterostructures used in the single-gate field-effect InSb nanosheet device and the double-gate InSb nanosheet Hall-bar devices studied in this work are obtained by mechanical alignment/transfer technique. The details about the trilayer heterostructure fabrication is given in Supplementary Information. Here, taken as an example, only a brief description about the fabrication of an InSb nanosheet/hBN/graphite trilayer heterostructure shown in Fig. Here, it is important to note that to align the almost optically invisible, micrometer-sized InSb nanosheet with the hBN flake, a pattern of the optically visible metal markers on substrate A was duplicated on the PPC film during the nanosheet capture and was used for the material alignment. It should also be noted that before the stamp was lifted, the stamp was pressed hard against substrate B, in order for the InSb nanosheet and the hBN flake to form a tightly attached bilayer on the PPC film of the stamp. Figure Figure where VV th is the threshold voltage at which the channel current is cut off, and CC g is the gate-to-channel capacitance which can be estimated from CC g = εε 0 εε r LLLL tt with εε 0 being the permittivity of vacuum, εε r = 2.9 the relative dielectric constant of hBN, and tt = 30 nm the thickness of hBN. The measured resistance GG -1 is composed of two terms, the channel resistance GG S -1 and the contact resistance RR c The field-effect carrier mobility μμ, contact resistance RR c , and threshold voltage VV th of the device at T = 1.9 K can be extracted by fit of the measured on-state transfer characteristic curve shown in Fig. , where ħ is the reduced Planck constant. At VV BG = 4 V, LL e ~ 152 nm is obtained, which is several times smaller than the channel length (L~600 nm) and thus the carrier transport in the InSb nanosheet is in the diffusive regime. The inset of Fig. Figure Figure . ( Here, term 1/μμ imp describes contributions from all scattering events due to imperfections, such as impurities, defects, charge traps, surface/interface roughness etc., in the nanosheet, its surface native oxides and the dielectrics Using LL 23 ~850 nm, WW~ 900 nm, the zero-field value of RR xx ~850 Ω, and the sheet electron density nn sheet ~ 6.1 × 10 11 cm -2 , a Hall mobility value of μμ Hall ~ 1.1×10 4 cm 2 V -1 s -1 is obtained. Note that if WW 35 ~500 nm is used instead of WW~ 900 nm in the calculation, a higher value of μμ Hall ~ 2.0×10 4 cm 2 V -1 s -1 would be obtained. The actual sheet Hall mobility at VV BG =0.5 V and VV TG =0.5 V would be a value in between the two above values. The measured Hall resistance RR yx at high fields displays step-like structures, indicating appearance of the quantum Hall effect as a result of the formation of the Landau levels (LLs). In the same time, the longitudinal resistance RR xx at high fields displays several pronounced peaks and valleys, i.e., well-defined Shubnikov-de Haas oscillations. The Shubnikov-de Haas oscillation peaks appear at the magnetic fields where the LLs coincide with the Fermi energy. Because each spin-split LL is highly degenerate with a unit area degeneracy of (where h is the Planck constant), the filling factor (FF), i.e., the number of spin-split LLs filled by electrons at each oscillation valley is given by νν = nn ddheeeett h/eeBB. The black arrows in Fig. In device has an electron field-effect mobility of ~7300 cm 2 V -1 s -1 and a low gate hysteresis of ~0.05 V at 1.9 K, demonstrating an effective screening of charge traps in the SiO2 dielectrics by the graphite gate. The double-gate Hall-bar device exhibits strong capacitive couplings of the two gates to the InSb nanosheet channel, and a Hall mobility of larger than 1.1 × 10 4 cm 2 V -1 s -1 as well as well-defined Shubnikov-de Haas oscillations at the sheet electron density of 6.1 × 10 11 cm -2 and 1.9 K. The fabrication method established in this work should have the potential to be widely used in assembling heterostructures from many tiny sized planar materials for applications in nanoelectronics, spintronics, and quantum electronics. were mechanically picked up using a dry clean-room paper and were then randomly distributed on the surface of a SiO2/Si substrate with prefabricated, optically visible Ti/Au markers on top (sample substrate A). The hBN and graphite flakes were obtained by mechanical exfoliation from commercially available bulk hBN (from HQ Graphene) and graphite (from Graphene Supermarket) materials using Scotch tapes and were transferred on other two marker-prefabricated SiO2/Si substrates (sample substrates B and C). Here, we note that before attaching the hBN-or graphite-loaded tapes to substrates B and C, the surfaces of the substrates were cleaned by oxygen plasma. While after the tapes were attached, the samples B and C were heated at 100 °C on a hot plate for a few minutes before tape separation in order to obtain flakes with large lateral sizes After tape separation, the entire samples B and C were dipped in acetone to remove the residues of the adhesive substances and organic contamination on the material surfaces. In order to assemble prepared micrometer-sized InSb nanosheet on hBN flakes and then on graphite flakes to form InSb nanosheet/hBN/graphite trilayer heterostructures, transparent stamps were also needed. In the work presented in the main article, the transparent stamps were made first by spin coating of polypropylene carbonate (PPC) (from Sigma Aldrich, 20% concentration dissolved in tetrahydrofuran) onto a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) sheet The fabrication of InSb nanosheet/hBN/graphite trilayer heterostructures was carried out using a home-made alignment stacking/transfer system equipped with an optical microscope, a micro-positioner, a sample stage (from Instec) with a vacuum chuck and a temperature controller. Then, the substrate A was heated up through heating the sample stage to a temperature of 35-40 °C, a temperature at which the PPC film had transformed from a rigid glassy state to a soft rubberlike state 