This paper examines a system of partial differential equations describing dislocation dynamics in a crystalline solid. In particular we consider dynamics linearized about a state of zero stress and use linear semigroup theory to establish existence, uniqueness, and time asymptotic behavior of the linear system. Dislocations are topological defects in elasticity and their dynamics and interaction are of significant scientific and technological interest. They were introduced in the theory of elasticity by Volterra in 1907 and continue to be vigorously studied to this day, with a complete dynamical theory within continuum mechanics of unrestricted material and geometric nonlinearity taking shape in recent years (see, e.g., [Ach22, AKS19, ZAWB15, AA20, AA19, AA19] with detailed bibliographic threads to earlier works in the overall subject). Here, we give a mathematical analysis of the governing nonlinear pde system of dislocation mechanics, linearized about a state of vanishing stress. This paper has two additional sections after this Introduction. Section 2 presents the 'small deformation' model of nonlinear dislocation mechanics, see e.g. We consider the following 'small deformation' model of nonlinear dislocation mechanics: where v is the material particle velocity, u = ε + ω is the elastic distortion, is the elastic rotation, J is the dislocation flux or plastic strain rate, ρ is the mass density, T is the stress, C is the tensor of elastic moduli with major and minor symmetries, α is the dislocation density tensor, and V is the dislocation velocity vector. For any α field that is the curl of a skew symmetric tensor field, and with 0-traction boundary conditions (i.e., T ij n j = 0, where n j is the outward unit normal field on the body), the unique solution (in a simply connected body) for stress is T = 0 with ε = 0. Thus, for the entire class of such dislocation density distributions, J = 0, V = 0, and the class , skew constitutes steady state solutions of (1). Motivated by the above, we linearize (1) about any state (v i , u ij ) with (v i = 0, ε ij = 0), with the field α defined from (1) 5 , regardless of the topology of the body. Such 0-stress steady state solutions represent (within the confines of the 'small deformation' theory (1) being considered) non-trivial elastic distortion and dislocation density fields (e.g. arbitrarily fine distributions of dislocation walls) -unlike in classical linear elasticity. Henceforth, we will assume T = 0, J = 0, and V = 0. We denote the dependent fields of the linearized system with overhead dots ' ( )' to obtain the system (2) We then have the following energy equality for the linearized system: (2) becomes with 'nonnegative dissipation' (4) in force. For the analysis of system (2) it is useful to decompose it into symmetric and skew parts as follows Here, and in the following, we use the index notation We note from (5) that B ijkl = B ij(kl) , a property inherited from the minor symmetries of the elastic moduli C, and Jij = B ij(kl) εkl . Let Ω be an open, bounded, connected set in R 3 . By ∂Ω we denote the boundary of Ω which is C 1 -smooth and by n j , j = 1, 2, 3 the unit normal on ∂Ω pointing towards the exterior. We denote by ∂Ω 1 , ∂Ω 2 fixed subsets of ∂Ω, and and we insist on so that (2) is written as We wish to establish that A is the infinitesimal generator of a C 0 semi-group of contractions S(t) on the Hilbert space with inner product , H defined as By the Lumer-Phillips Theorem [Yos71, p. 250] A will then be the infinitesimal generator of a C 0 semigroup of contractions on H if the range condition range(λI -A) = H, for some λ ∈ R, i.e., we need solvability of the system for given (f, g) ∈ H. We ensure this by writing for λ sufficiently large where G ijkl is the inverse of (λδ ik δ jl + B (ij)(kl) ), or more succintly, with The usual expansion of the resolvent (see, e.g., [Yos71, p. 211]) gives Hence for r = D λ < 1, where D denotes the operator norm of B, the series converges and we define Now substitute ( Write (13) in weak form The left hand side of ( for λ sufficiently large by (11) (coercivity). Here we have assumed that C ijkl , α ij are continuous on Ω and used Korn's inequality (see, e.g, Ciarlet As the right hand side of (14) defines a bounded linear functional on H 1 (Ω), the Lax-Milgram Theorem [Yos71, p. 92] yields a unique solution vi ∈ H 1 (Ω) to the weak form (14). Substituting this vi into (12) we have defined εij where the pair ( εij , vi ) ∈ H 0 (Ω) × H 1 (Ω) solves (10). From (10) we see that ∂ j (C ijkl εkl ) ∈ L 2 (Ω). Furthermore, retracing our steps from (14) back to (10) tells us that and hence ( εij , vi ) ∈ D(A). Thus, the range condition of the Lumer-Phillips theorem is satisfied and we we have Theorem 3.1. A is the infinitesimal generator of a C 0 semi-group of contractions S(t) on Hand for U 0 ∈ H, S(t)U 0 provides the unique weak solution to (7) 1,2 . Corollary 3.1.1. (S(t)U 0 , ωij ) yields the unique weak solution of (7), where ωij is defined via the definite integral in t of the right hand side of (7) 3 with initial condition ωij (0) ∈ H 0 (Ω) at t = 0. Proof. Substitute S(t)U 0 = ( ωij (t), vi (t)) into the well-defined right hand side of (7) 3 yielding a continuous in time right hand side. Since our system (7) 1,2 is linear, we are able to exploit the special properties of linear contraction semigroup on Hilbert space. As it is not obvious that (λI -A) -1 : H → H is compact, we cannot immediately apply the results of Dafermos and Slemrod Then H u is a closed invariant subspace and S(t) forms a C 0 semi-group of unitary operators on H u , and for W 0 orthogonal to H u as t → ∞, where ⇀ denotes weak convergence in H. Recall from the dissipation inequality (4) and (9) that Now decompose the initial data U 0 ∈ H as Hence time-asymptotic behavior of S(t)U 0 is determined by time-asymptotic behavior of S(t)U 1 . Furthermore, since H u is invariant under S(t) and We know from Foguel's theorem that On the other hand, the dissipation inequality (16) gives us where Vs = e smn α pn C pmkl εkl =: i.e., Comparison of ( But if DS(t)U 1 = 0 for t ≥ 0 then A 2 S(t)U 1 = 0 for t ≥ 0 and our system reduces to But A 1 generates the unitary semigroup S 1 (t), i.e., S 1 (t)U 1 is the unique weak solution to the system of linear elasticity where vi now plays the role of the displacement. Hence and from ( By density of H u ∩ D(A) in H u (23) and ( and in the sense of distributions, where ǫ ij , v i satisfies (25). Proof. We know from Theorem 3.3 that That is in the sense of distributions. By Corollary 3.1.1, (7) 3 is satisfied in the sense of distributions for ω(0) ∈ H 0 (Ω). Hence for (7) 3 we have in the sense of distributions, where (ε ij , v i ) satisfy (25). We now provide an analysis of the limit system (25) following the argument of Dafermos with v i = 0 on ∂Ω 1 , (C ijkl ∂ l v k )n j = 0 on ∂Ω 2 (the restriction on the data is only for temporary convenience since our results for the general data in H follow by density of D(A 2 1 ) in H). Express solutions of (26) as Then, (26) implies (27) yields a solution of (25) 1,2 . The eigenfunctions exist and are orthogonal in H 0 (Ω). Furthermore, we may assume they are normalized so that φ H 0 (Ω) = 1. Thus, c (p) may be determined by initial data H 0 (Ω) . Note that since (25) 3 holds for all t ∈ R, we may differentiate w.r.t t to obtain e smn α pn C pmkl ∂ t ε kl = 0 for all t ∈ R, and hence by (25) Substitute ( We assume there are no repeated eigenvalues for our domain Ω. Then the lhs of (30) defines an almost periodic function and we must have Thus there are two cases to consider: Case 1: e smn α pn C pmkl ∂ l φ (q) k = 0 for some q. In this case c q = 0 for this choice of q and the limit solution (25) may contain non-trivial oscillations. Case 2: e smn α pn C pmkl ∂ l φ (q) k = 0 for all q. In this case c q = 0 for all q and we have v i = 0 in Ω for all t and hence by (25) ∂ t ε ij = 0 in Ω for all t i.e. ε ij is a time-independent equilibrium solution of (25) with in Ω. We provide two explicit examples corresponding to Cases 1 and 2. Examples Recall that we need the base α ij state to be the curl of a skew-symmetric tensor field to have T ij = 0, i.e. a stress-free base state. Thus, α ij must be of the form We choose the vector field ψ of the form This distribution corresponds to a 'crossed-grid' of screw dislocations parallel to the coordinate axes superposed on an edge dislocation distribution with line direction along x 1 and Burgers vector in the x 2x 3 plane. Furthermore, choose the ansatz of uniaxial stress fields to note that the r.h.s. of (25) 3 becomes Thus, by our chosen ansatz for α ij and the (time-dependent, for now) limit stress field T ij , (25) 3 is satisfied. Physically, the screw dislocation distributions along x 2 and x 3 directions (i.e., α 22 , α 23 ) do not have a Burgers vector favorably aligned to the uniaxial stress field along the x 1 direction to produce a non-trivial Peach-Koehler driving force. The edge and screw distributions with line direction in the x 1 direction do not lie parallel to a plane on which the uniaxial stress field ansatz σδ p1 δ m1 = T pm can produce a traction, and hence these see no driving force for motions as well (the edge distributions with Burgers vector in the x 2x 3 plane share both of these 'null' driving force attributes). Consider an isotropic elastic material with C ijkl = λδ ij δ kl + μ(δ ik δ jl + δ il δ jk ), where λ, μ are the Lamé parameters. Consider a time-independent, uniaxial stress field of the form (33) with σ(x 1 ). Now define ε ij through (which can also be expressed as S ijkl (σ(x 1 )δ k1 δ l1 ), where S ijkl = 1 4μ (δ ik δ jl + δ il δ jk ) -λ 2μ(3λ+2μ) δ ij δ kl is the elastic compliance tensor, the inverse of the elastic stiffness, C ijkl , on the space of symmetric second-order tensors). Hence, C ijkl ε kl (x 1 , x 2 , x 3 , t) = σ(x 1 )δ i1 δ j1 in this case. Making the choice σ(x 1 ) = σ 0 , where σ 0 ∈ R is an arbitrary constant, and setting we have a non-trivial static solution to the limit system (25) with ∂Ω 2 = φ. We consider a time-dependent, uniaxial stress field ansatz corresponding to isotropic linear elasticity with shear modulus μ and the other Lamé parameter set to 0 in terms of the function U (x 1 , t) given by T ij (x 1 , t) = μ(∂ j U (x 1 , t)δ i1 + ∂ i U (x 1 , t)δ j1 ). Comparison with (33) yields the definition σ(x 1 , t) := 2μ ∂ 1 U (x 1 , t). We consider a cylinder with a uniform rectangular cross-section normal to the x 1 direction as the body Ω, with free (i.e.traction-free) bounding surfaces perpendicular to x 2 and x 3 . The lateral surfaces of the cylinder correspond to ∂Ω 2 , and ∂Ω 1 comprises the boundaries of the cylinder perpendicular to its axis, x 1 . Let the x 1 -coordinate of the planar surfaces comprising ∂Ω 1 be x l and x r . We now set v i (x 1 , x 2 , x 3 , t) = ∂ t U (x 1 , t)δ 1i and require that Non-trivial solutions to this wave equation exist and define oscillating solutions to the limit system (25) through the definitions (34) (with C ijkl ε kl = T ij (x 1 , t)). In summary, our limit system analysis yields the following consequence of Theorem 3.3: Corollary 3.3.2. Assume (28) has no repeated eigenvalues. For initial data U 0 ∈ H the limit system solution S(t)U 1 must lie in either Case 1: non-trivial oscillations or Case 2: a non-trivial solution ε to (32) representing a static solution.