We report the high temperature dielectric and ac impedance spectroscopy investigation of Nb substituted LaCo0.7Nb0.3O3 polycrystalline sample. The maximum dielectric constant value was observed ≈1400 at around 400 K where the peak value shows a decreasing trend at higher temperatures and frequency. Similar variation was reflected in the dielectric loss (tanδ) behavior with temperature, which shows the thermal activation of the charge carriers in the material. The analysis of high temperature impedance spectroscopy data shows the grain and grain boundary contributions by fitting the Nyquist plots to the equivalent circuit. From the analysis of the impedance and modulus spectra, it was possible to discern between the effects of overlapping grains, grain boundaries, and electrode interfaces. The relaxation time decreases with an increase in the temperature and the activation energy changes from 0.44 eV to 0.56 eV at around 400 K, which is due to involvement of thermal activation in the conduction of charge carriers. The conductivity is found to be increased with temperature for a given frequency, which again shows the semiconducting behavior. Whereas the conductivity increases with increase in frequency at lower temperatures. Also, the conductivity almost saturates with frequency at high temperatures. I. The perovskite oxides, which have the general formula ABO 3 , are therefore particularly desirable for technical devices such as solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs), oxygen sensors, thermoelectric power generators, and other electrochemical devices More interestingly, the high dielectric constant materials have gain renewed attention in the past several decades due to their extensive use in the various areas and devices like microwave filter, voltage control oscillator, dynamic access memory and telecommunication devices that is, Co is totally reduced to Co 2+ for x = 0.33 sample Therefore, in this article we investigate the di-arXiv:2208.07538v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 16 Aug 2022 electric properties and impedance spectroscopy of LaCo 0.7 Nb 0.3 O 3 at high temperatures as Nb doping at the Co-site is expected to increase the material's resistance and dielectric constant. The contributions of grain and grain boundary conductivity to overall conductivity can be distinguished using the well-established technique of impedance spectroscopy. The electric response is collected using the impedance method across a wide frequency range. The electric response may result from movements of the charge carriers in an electric field such as charge displacement, dipole reorientation, space charge generation, etc. The LaCo 0.7 Nb 0.3 O 3 was prepared by conventional ceramic method, as explained in earlier reported work In Fig. The temperature dependent complex impedance (Z) and phase angle (θ) are measured in the temperature range of 298-588 K using LCR meter under vacuum condition. The Z and θ values are used to calculate complex dielectric constant ( r ), tangent loss (tanδ), complex electric modulus (M ), and ac conductivity using the following formulas given below: where, the Z =|Z|cosθ and Z =|Z|sinθ are real and imaginary part of complex impedance, and the M and M are real and imaginary part of complex electric modulus, respectively. The ω is angular frequency, and the capacitance in the vacuum is defined as C 0 =A 0 /d, where A is the area of electrode and d is the separation between the electrodes. From the equations ( where r and r are real and imaginary parts of r , respectivley. Using the equations ( Now we present the calculated real part of dielectric constant and dielectric loss in Figs. f r e q u e n c y ( H z ) f r e q u e n c y ( H z ) causes the dielectric polarization to grow, increasing the r with temperature up to a certain limit that is called the phase transition temperature where the polarization drops down to zero, therefore r starts decreasing with temperature. Similarly, the tanδ peaks, which are reflected from r , are moving towards higher temperatures, as shown by the arrow in Fig. The sample's impedance and modulus spectra have been investigated in order to gain a better knowledge of the dielectric relaxation processes. Fig. (1) frequency independent and (2) frequency dependent, which give rise to dc and ac conductivity of the material, respectively. The movement of charge carriers across extended distances, is possible by their successful hopping in which their neighboring charge carriers relax to their location, produces the dc conductivity. The limited or localized movement of charge carriers and their failed hopping in which they relax to their own places are indicators of dispersive ac conductivity. The relaxation maxima in the Z spectra shown in Fig. Figures The CP E impedance is represented by the expression 1/A 0 (iω) n , where A 0 and n are temperature-dependent factors only, A 0 limits the dispersion's magnitude, and 0 < n < 1. For an ideal resistor and capacitor, the parameter of n is equal to 0 and 1, respectively As we can see that the grain boundary contribution increases gradually with increase in the temperature, and it emerges at 343 K to 383 K in exactly the same amounts for both the grain and the grain boundary. Above 383 K, the lower frequency zone predicts an increase in the conduction process at the electrode interface, whereas the high-frequency region suggests that the behavior of grains and grain boundaries should become more uniform. The fitted values of n of CP E are in the range of 0.44-0.65 and initially declines, then increases at higher temperatures, as plotted in the Fig. f r e q u e n c y ( H z ) f r e q u e n c y ( H z ) to around 470 K. This is possibly due to the interference between grain boundary effect and electrode contact conduction in the material It is important to note here that in contrast to the grain boundaries and the electrode effect, the fictitious impedance loss spectra show a weak grain impact that can be challenging to analyze. To magnify and manifest the grain impacts, the electric modulus spectra emphasize and accentuate lower capacitance values. Therefore, in Figs. The polycrystalline LaCo 0.7 Nb 0.3 O 3 sample was prepared using solid state reaction method and its characterization was performed using XRD, Raman spectroscopy, and HR-TEM. The peak value of the dielectric constant decreases with a monotonic shift towards higher temperature from 298 K to 583 K. Similarly, the dielectric loss increases at higher temperatures rapidly because its dielectric constant is very low and hence becomes more conducting. This is consistent as the conductivity of the material increases with temperature. The impedance spectroscopy study suggests a decrease in magnitude of impedance with temperature, which represents the semiconducting nature of the material. The peaks shift towards higher frequency in the imaginary part and decreases with temperature, which explain the relaxation behavior of charge carriers. The same behavior is also observed in relaxation time variation with temperature. The ac conductivity increases with frequency at lower temperatures but, it saturates at higher temperatures, which again shows the threshold of the conductance in the material. Similarly, the dc conductivity increases with temperature, which represents the semiconducting nature of the sample.