A tunneling transistor without heterojunction as a theoretical design, or more precisely controlled electron current transmission by barrier potential, is under consideration. The electrons from the conduction band of the source tunnel through the forbidden gap Eg of the channel to the conduction band of the drain. The tunneling current J calculations made at helium temperature for the example InAs-InAs-InAs, Au-GaSe-Au and Al-AlN-Al structures show that for a constant sourcedrain voltage, VC , of several mV, changes in the gate voltage, VG, applied to the channel within the voltage range of 0 -Eg/2e change J by even 10 orders of magnitude. Unlike the existing solutions such as tunnel field-effect-transistor (TFET), the proposed device uses the change of VG (gate voltage), i.e. the change of the electrostatic potential in the channel, to modify the imaginary wave vector kz of tunnel current electrons. Consequently, the gate voltage controls the damping force of the electrons wave functions and thus the magnitude of the tunneling current, J. The effect of increasing temperature, T, on J(VG) relation was also tested. It was found that only in structures with a wide forbidden channel gap this effect is insignificant (at least up to T=300 K). I. The tunnel current in the Metal-Insulator-Metal (M-I-M) structure has been theoretically described and experimentally tested for many years, starting in 1930 Ref. Here we consider details of the general formula for the dependence of the current J on the applied voltage, V C , in the M-I-M structure (see Ref. In order to determine the formula for |k z (z)| we proceed as follows: the energy of electron in the insulator, E(k), counted from the bottom of the forbidden gap, in The theoretical energy dispersion E(k 2 z ) in the forbidden gap of InAs for k ⊥ = 0 calculated in the two level model for Eg = 0.417 eV and m * 0 /m0 = 0.026. the two band model, is: where E g is the forbidden gap of the insulator, , and wave vectors k ⊥ and k i z have real and imaginary value in E g , respectively. E a is the energy of the electron in the metal A, m * 0 is the effective electron mass m c at the conduction-band edge or m v at the valence-band edge, corresponding to the sign in front of the square root in Eq.( V L b and V R b are metal-insulator barrier energies and E F is the Fermi energy. Hence, (3) or The next step is a general expression for the elastic tunneling current J(V) from the metal A to the metal B (see e. g. Ref where k M ⊥ = k F ⊥ for E F and k z =0 in the M-I-M system. Further, d is the insulator thickness and S is the area of the interface between the metal and the insulator. f A (E a ) and f B (E a ) are F-D distribution functions for the metal A and the metal B, For very low temperature one has One can notice that the formula for J(V ) is dominated by the element with the exponential decay which is a result of the imaginary value of k z in the electron wave function for the insulator forbidden gap. It is also seen that all electrons in the metal A with energy in the range E F -(E F -eV C ) form the tunneling current from the metal A to the metal B. Furthermore, the tunneling current of the electron is the bigger the smaller |k z | it has. Henceforth, the term Metal-Insulator-Metal is replaced by the term Source-Channel-Drain, source and drain are metals or n type semiconductors and channel is a wide, medium or narrow gap semiconductor. The comparison of experimental data with theoretical calculations of J(V ) in the structure under consideration shows that to describe the dispersion E(k 2 z ) of electronic states in the forbidden gap of a channel, for example InAs, GaSe or AlN, the two-band model is sufficient, see Refs. If the effective masses of electrons m c and holes m v are not equal the use of the two band Franz model for band-to-band tunneling, see Refs where The basis of the proposed transistor is the observation that the current that flows through the Source-Channel-Drain structure biased with the constant voltage V C can be changed depending on the magnitude of the gate voltage V G applied to the channel by an electrode separated from the channel by the oxide layer, see e. g. Ref. energy of the channel in relation to the source, we can control k 2 z of the current electrons, and thus the magnitude of the tunneling current, see Figs. The dependences J(V G ) for the InAs-InAs-InAs, Au-GaSe-Au and Al-AlN-Al structures calculated using Eqs. 7 and 9 i.e. at helium temperature are presented in Figs. The conclusion that can be drawn from the J(V G ) curves in Figures FIG. trons of the same energy E. In this case, it is convenient to calculate the transmission coefficient, T C, of electrons tunneling through the forbidden gap of the channel vs. V G , (the procedure is included e.g. in Ref. -1 , 5 0 -1 , 2 5 -1 , 0 0 -0 , 7 5 -0 , 5 0 -0 , 2 5 0 , 0 0 0 , 2 5 0 , 5 0 FIG. With increasing temperature, according to the Fermi-Dirac distribution function f F -D , the number of electrons with the energy greater than E F increases. This means that the increasing number of electrons passes the channel of the studied structure not through its band gap but through the conduction band. This in turn means that the contribution of tunneling electrons to the total current, J, decreases the more the narrower the forbidden gap of the channel is. As a result, the characteristic J(V G ) calculated using Eqs. The presented theoretical project of controlled transmission of electron current through the barrier potential can be treated as a new type of tunnel transistor without a heterojunction unlike classic TFET. It is a simple extension of the experimentally proven structure for studying the dependence of tunnel current on applied voltage (e.g. Refs. 2-7). Its mechanism of operation (see Refs. Changes in the J(V G ) characteristic with increasing temperature depend on the width of the band gap of the channel and are the smaller, the wider band gap is. A channel band gap of the order of 3 eV or more means that the relationship J(V G ) in the 4 K -300 K range is almost unchanged, because even at the temperature T = 300 K there are practically no electrons with the energy about E F + E G /2, i.e. almost all electrons tunnel. The basis of this project is the unchangeable dependence of the electron wave vector k z on its energy in the band gap of the channel in the considered structure. This means that a possible slight deviation of the actual shape of the barrier potential or the values of structure parameters from those adapted for calculations may cause minor quantitative changes in the relation J(V G ), but not qualitative ones.