The deposition of a monolayer by direct self-assembly from solution of an active spincrossover (SCO) complex via chemisorption has been achieved starting from the perchlorate salt of Co(II) bis(4 ́-(4-carboxyphenyl)-2,2':6',2''-terpyridine). MALDI-TOF MS, Raman spectroscopy and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) confirm the presence of an intact monolayer of SCO molecules grafted through carboxylate groups to the Ag surface. Three different spectroscopic techniques (Raman, XPS and X-ray Absorption spectroscopy, XAS) evidence a thermal spin transition of such monolayer of molecules. To our knowledge, this is the first example of an active SCO assembly in direct contact with a surface obtained by wet chemistry. Being able to control bistable nanostructures at the molecular level assures a breakthrough in memory and data storage devices. Over the past ten years, the preferred method for depositing this type of systems has been sublimation in ultrahigh vacuum of neutral complexes. In this work, we have prepared the complex of the protonated ligand in order to optimize its processability for deposition on surfaces. Thus, we prepared the [Co(LH)2]•(ClO4)2•4DMA (1) compound, which has been structurally and magnetically characterized in the solid state, and we studied its behavior upon surface deposition. The morphology, stability, and composition of deposited monolayers of 1 on top of Ag (1•SAM) were studied by atomic force microscopy (AFM), matrix assisted laser desorption ionization -time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), and Raman spectroscopy. SCO properties were further investigated by means of X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS). XPS, Raman and XAS confirm that the spin state of the Co(II) complexes on top of Ag displayed gradual and reversible changes with temperature. Therefore, it represents, as far as we are aware, the first example of an active SCO SAM from solution in direct contact with the surface. 1 was obtained by slow diffusion of diethyl ether into solutions of Co(ClO4)2•xH2O and HL in a 1:2 molar ratio in dimethylacetamide (DMA). After a few weeks, big prismatic dark-orange crystals suitable for single crystal diffraction were obtained. Purity and stability of the complex was checked with elemental analysis and powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD, Figure S.1 and associated text in the Supporting Information). The crystal structure of 1 was solved by single-crystal X-ray diffraction at 120 K, 300 K and 340 K in the non-centrosymmetric P-1 space group. The asymmetric units is composed of one [Co(LH)2] 2+ cation, two ClO4 -anions and four DMA solvent molecules (Figure The temperature dependence of χMT for 1 in contact with mother liquors presents a gradual increase from typical LS values below 150 K (0.48 cm 3 •K•mol -1 ) to 1.85 cm 1•SAMs were prepared by immersing evaporated silver substrates, after hydrogen flame clean-annealing (see Supporting Information for further details), for 6 h in a 1 mM anhydrous DMA solution of 1. After that, they were washed and rinsed throroughly with clean DMA to remove any physiosorbed material and dried under N2 stream. Silver was chosen due to the possibility to form SAMs through the carboxylate moiety Topographic images of 1•SAM confirmed the absence of aggregates or multilayers (see 4 in the Supporting Information). This result was expected considering that the carboxylate group bonds selectively the first layer of molecules to the silver surface and additional physisorbed layers can be removed with the washing steps. Integrity of the molecules in 1•SAM was checked with MALDI-TOF MS. A comparative analysis between bulk and SAM is shown in This result has also been observed previously in other systems assembled on Au, It was possible to study the deposits with Raman spectroscopy on top of a mechanically roughened silver substrate. The nature of the imposed silver defects and their small separation leads to a plasmon absorbance, which is resonant with the 532 nm light used to excite the samples. Additionally temperature dependent Raman spectroscopy experiments have been used to monitor the spin state variation of the Co(II). In the bulk sample, changes in intensity ratios and Raman shifts are observed at the same temperature range of the spin transition, especially in the coordinative terpy modes (1200-1700 cm -1 , Figure S.6a). Nevertheless, the most notably feature is the increase of intensity of the peak located at 1020 cm -1 observed when increasing temperature. This peak is assigned to the pyridine ring breathing mode, The fraction of HS molecules seems to be higher in 1•SAM. These results are confirmed by XPS and XAS measurements, which enables a more accurate estimation of the LS/HS fraction (see below). To prove stability and reproducibility of the spin transition, after the first set of measurements, the sample was stored in air for one week and two more cooling and warming cycles were performed (see Figure text) suggesting that the irreversibility of the spin transition at temperatures above 360 K is related to structural changes of the SAMs. The red-shifted peak is consistent with the presence of carboxylate species in the deposited molecules and is also present in L•SAM (see Table XPS was also used to get an insight on the electron level population and thus of the spin state. On one hand, experimental results XAS spectra were recorded at Co the L3-edge of 1 and 1•SAM at different temperatures. For the bulk, the spectrum measured at 100K (Figure S.12a) which, according to magnetic properties, is consistent with all Co(II) centers in the LS state, is in agreement with the spectra calculated in the Ligand Field Multiplet (LFM) approach for two references of LS-Co(II) in distorted octahedral environment (¡Error! No se encuentra el origen de la referencia.), namely C o(II)-imide Herein, we report the synthesis and characterization of a new Co(II) SCO complex based on 4 ́-(4-carboxyphenyl)-2,2':6',2''-terpyridine ligand. The chemical functionalization of the system provided by the versatile anchoring point and the processability enabled by the higher solubility of the salt, allowed us to prepare SAMs of intact molecules from a diluted solution within a short period of time. AFM, MALDI-TOF MS, Raman spectroscopy and XPS evidences the formation of the deprotonated specie upon surface deposition and confirms the absence of physiosorbed material. Thermal SCO properties of the monolayer have been confirmed with a total of three different techniques: Raman spectroscopy, XPS and XAS pointing to a gradual SCO behavior similar to that observed in the solid state for the protonated complex, which suggests the absence of a cooperative spin transition on the surface as observed previously for monolayers of evaporated SCO complexes. This represents, as far as we are aware, the first example of a SAM of active SCO complexes anchored to a metallic substrate. Finally, our contribution paves the way to the realization of SCO nanostructure-based devices through soft methodologies compared to the high-cost conventional ultra-high vacuum techniques largely employed for this purpose up to now. Further improvements such as a more abrupt SCO and higher stability could be achieved by expanding the aromaticity of the ligand to enhance the intermolecular interactions between the deposited molecules. Supporting Information is available from the author. [CCDC 2191823-2191825 contains the supplementary crystallographic data for this paper. These data can be obtained free of charge from The Cambridge Crystallographic Data Centre via www.ccdc.cam.ac.uk/data_request/cif.] A single crystal of 1 was mounted on a glass fiber loop using a viscous hydrocarbon oil to coat the crystal and then transferred to the cold nitrogen stream for data collection. X-ray data were collected at 120, 300 and 340 K. Higher temperatures leaded to the quick loss of crystallinity of 1. Measurements were performed on a Supernova diffractometer equipped with a graphite-monochromated Enhance (Mo) X-ray Source (λ = 0.710 73 Å). The program CrysAlisPro, Oxford Diffraction Ltd., was used for unit cell determinations and data reduction. Empirical absorption correction was performed using spherical harmonics, implemented in the SCALE3 ABSPACK scaling algorithm. The structures were solved with the ShelXT structure solution program Instruments Veeco Nanoscope IVa AFM microscope in tapping mode, using silicon tips with a natural resonance frequency of 300 kHz and with an equivalent constant force of 40 N/m. The samples were analyzed in a 5800 MALDI TOF/TOF (ABSciex) in positive reflection mode (3000 shots every position; LASER INTENSITY 4200) in a mass range of 200-1500 m/z. Previously, the sample and the acquisition method were externally calibrated with a Bruker PSCII solution. In order to do so, 0.5 μL of Bruker PSCII dissolution was spotted on a corner of the sample and allowed to air-dry at room temperature. After this, 0.5 μL of matrix (10mg/mL CHCA (Bruker) in 70% MeCN, 0.1% TFA) was spotted on the previous drop and allowed to airdry at room temperature. On the diagonal opposite corner 0.5 μL of matrix solution was spotted and allowed to air-dry at room temperature. Raman Spectroscopy/Surface-Enhance Raman Spectroscopy: Spectroscopical characterization was carried out on a LabRAM HR Evolution confocal Raman microscope (Horiba). The measurements were conducted with an excitation wavelength of 532 nm from a Helium Neon Laser source. The laser was focused using a 50× objective (0.8 NA), thus leading to a laser spot with a diameter of ca. 300 μm. An exposure time of 3s with 6 accumulations was employed. A CCD camera was used to collect the backscattered light that was dispersed by a 600 grooves per mm grating providing a spectral resolution of ~ 1 cm -1 . The corresponding Raman spectra were then constructed by processing the data using Lab Spec 5 software. For temperature dependent Raman spectroscopy, a Linkam Scientific THMS600 temperature stage controlled with liquid nitrogen was employed. The measurements were performed after first cooling the sample to the lowest available temperature and then warming it up to the selected temperatures. After reaching the desired temperature, the sample was thermalized for 5 minutes before each measurement. Then, after the first temperature-dependent experiment, the same sample was stored for one week in air and two more cooling and warming cycles were performed. The second cycle was done from the lowest temperature available to 300 K, and the third one until 360 K. Background correction was applied after averaging several scans across the substrate. Then, the intensities were normalized against a temperature-independent feature at 1365 cm -1 . apparatus with a base pressure in the 10 -10 mbar range. Non-monochromatized Al Kα radiation was used for XPS measurements (1486.6 eV, 100 W). The detector was an VSW hemispherical analyzer mounting a 16-channel detector, the angle between the analyzer axis and the X-ray source was 54.44° and the semicone angle of acceptance of the analyzer was 4°. The XPS spectra were measured with a fixed pass energy of 44 eV. The binding energy (BE) scale was calibrated setting the C1s signal of the sample at 285 eV. Stoichiometry was calculated by peak integration, using a theoretically estimated cross-section for each transition. The experiments were performed at the BL29-BOREAS beamline of the Alba Synchrotron Light Facility (Barcelona, Spain). Co L2,3-edge spectra were recorded at different temperatures in HECTOR cryomagnet endstation in the 125 -370 K range, the chamber pressure being lower than 1 × 10 -10 mbar, and photon flux ∼5 × 10 11 s -1 in total electron yield (TEY) method with an energy resolution of ∼70 meV. The spectra were recorded using alternatively left and right circularly polarized X-rays produced by an APPLE II undulator and a superconducting split coil setup generating a magnetic field up to 6 T in the direction of propagation of the incident photons. In order to identify and quantify the spin and valence states of Co in the T-dependent Co L3-edge XAS spectra, reference spectra for Co(II)-HS, Co(III)-LS and Co(II)-LS were calculated in the LFM using the Quanty code Temperature dependence of χMT of [Co(L)2]•5H2O shows values close to 0.5 cm 3 •K•mol -1 from 5 to 250 K typical of LS Co(II). At higher temperature there is a gradual increase to reach a maximum at 360 K of 1.21 cm 3 •K•mol -1 . Interestingly, at higher temperatures there is a decrease of χMT to reach a minimum at 374 K (0.75 cm 3 •K•mol -1 ). This is a clear indication that a reverse spin transition takes place in this temperature range. At higher temperatures there is an abrupt increase of χMT to reach values close to 2.2 at 388 K. On lowering the temperature, the abrupt spin transition is shifted to lower temperatures with a thermal hysteresis of 30 K. Again, there is a partial reverse spin transition from 340 to 300 K. Reverse spin transition in Co(II) complexes have been reported and have been related to structural phase transitions. Irreversible changes may be related to desorption and/or reorganization of the SAM leading to new conformations on the surface, as it has been observed with this type of molecules. a) CHCA is abbreviation for α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid and is present in the matrix used for MALDI-TOF MS measurements (see Experimental Section). peak position and estimated and theoretical percentages (relative error about 5%) of C1s and N1s elements for compound 1 Table S.6. Theoretical and XPS estimated atomic semiquantitative analysis and ratios for bulk and monolayer of 1. a a. The temperature 370K was not consider due to the blocking of the spin state.