We present an integrated THz spectroscopy and sensing platform featuring low loss, vacuum-like dispersion, and strong field confinement in the fundamental mode. Its performance was characterized experimentally for frequencies between 0.1 THz and 1.5 THz. While linear THz spectroscopy and sensing gain mostly from low loss and an extended interaction length, nonlinear THz spectroscopy would also profit from the field enhancement associated to strong mode confinement. Moreover, the vacuum-like dispersion allows for a reshaping-free propagation of broadband single-to few-cycle pulses in gas-phase samples or velocity matching between THz pump and visible to infrared probe pulses. Our platform is based on a metallic structure and falls in the category of double ridged waveguides. We characterize essential waveguide properties, for instance, propagation and bending losses, but also demonstrate junctions and interferometers, essentially because those elements are prerequisites for integrated THz waveform synthesis, and hence, for coherently controlled linear and nonlinear interactions. A variety of THz applications, for instance, communication Here, we demonstrate a compact and robust yet flexible platform essentially using a slit waveguide as the central motif. It features low propagation and bending losses and allows for active THz pulse shaping, and hence for fully integrated, coherently controlled spectroscopy. In order to guarantee efficient coupling of free space single-cycle THz pulses, we present a judiciously designed horn antenna. Figure Here, we used numerical simulations to identify a geometry that features close to zero dispersion and low propagation and bending losses combined with strong mode confinement over the frequency range of interest of 0.1 THz to 1 THz, keeping in mind that the aspect ratio b/s is limited by the manufacturing technique. For mode confinement, both g and s should in general be similar or smaller than the corresponding THz free space wavelength. The optimized parameters were found to b = 1 mm, s = 0.2 mm, and a = 5 mm. Note, that the gap size g is given by the thickness of the spacer foils and was varied between g = 30 μm and 200 μm. The inset in Fig. The experimental setup to characterize different waveguides is similar to the one reported in reference Since the transverse mode profile of the fundamental is smaller than the diffraction limited free space focus for a THz pulse with the same spectral content, an appreciable electric and magnetic field enhancement results. Here, we define the field enhancement factor shown in Fig. The strong confinement of the fundamental THz mode is especially beneficial for waveguide bends of small radii, on the order of millimeters, leading to low bending loss. Hence, our platform is suitable for developing highly sophisticated THz integrated circuits over a small footprint, for instance, power splitters or micro-ring based filters. In order to characterize the bending loss we use structures as the one shown in Fig. A photograph of the THz interferometer structure is shown in Fig. We have demonstrated a versatile integrated THz platform based on waveguides featuring low bending and propagation losses of a few dB/cm, vacuumlike dispersion, and field enhancement factors of up to 5. Above 0.1 THz its performance is essentially frequency independent such that single-or few-cycle THz pulses, like those produced by optical rectification, propagate along the waveguide without reshaping. The low losses combined with the long interaction length and the field enhancement boost any nonlinear THz light matter interaction by orders of magnitudes. Moreover, the close to one effective refractive index of the fundamental mode allows for velocity matching between a THz pump and a visible to infrared probe pulse and hence for THz-pump optical-probe spectroscopy over the entire waveguide length. In addition, we have demonstrated a power-splitter and based on that an interferometer for THz waveform synthesis. Hence, this platform can be used as a fully integrated spectroscopy system for coherently controlled linear or nonlinear spectroscopy. All waveguide structures except for the THz interferometer were fabricated from aluminium using standard CNC-machining and subsequent lapping. For the Ysplitter, the minimum inner radius at the splitting region was set to 0.6 mm. To further improve the performance we use electrical discharge machining for the THz interferometer where the inner curvature radius reaches 0.2 mm. For this manufacturing technique we used steel 1.4034 instead of aluminium. We consider the transmitted THz field through straight waveguides with different lengths L of 20 mm, 40 mm and 80 mm. Similar as in where ω/(2π) is the frequency, T (ω) is the total transmission coefficient taking into account reflections, C(ω) is the amplitude coefficient which is assumed to be the same at the entrance and the exit, α is the amplitude attenuation coefficient, k z is the z-component of the wavevector and k 0 . . = ω/c. By measuring the transmission through two waveguides of different lengths we can extract the propagation coefficient α and the wavevector k z . the bias voltage of the emitter PCA is modulated at 2 kHz. The THz pulse is transported to the detector PCA by four aspheric THz lenses. The focal length of L1 and L4 is 100 mm while the focal length of L2 and L3 is 50 mm. To adjust for the different waveguide lengths, the third THz lens L3 was moved in ±z-direction. Figure Figure Figure We measured the influence of slightly misalignment to the coupling efficiency using a 80 mm long waveguide with a fixed gap size of 200 μm. Figure Three-dimensional time-domain simulations of a focused THz pulse propagating through different waveguide geometries were performed in CST Microwave Studio. The simulation effort was reduced by applying symmetry conditions for the xz-and yz-plane. The boundary perpendicular to the y-direction was set as perfect electrical conductor, while in all other directions open boundary conditions were applied to eliminate artificial reflections. For the aluminium waveguide simulations we assumed a conductivity of 12 MS m -1 based on fitting to the experimental results. The focused linearly polarized THz pulse was modelled with a transverse Maxwell-Gaussian beam profile 