The heavy-fermion superconductor CeCu 2 Si 2 exhibits two-band, d-wave superconductivity with a finite energy gap over the whole Fermi surface around the magnetic instability where 4 f antiferrerromagnetic order is suppressed. In contrast, in YbRh 2 Si 2 heavy-fermion superconductivity appears only when 4 f -electronic antiferromagnetic order is replaced at ultra-low temperatures by a combined nuclear and 4 f -spin order. Whereas both compounds exhibit different variants of antiferromagnetic instabilities, i.e., a spin-density-wave quantum critical point in CeCu 2 Si 2 and one of "partial-Mott" type in YbRh 2 Si 2 , in both cases the Cooper pairing, as well as the pronounced "strange-metal" behavior in YbRh 2 Si 2 , appear to be driven by large-to-small Fermi surface fluctuations. The transport properties and scanning tunneling spectroscopy (STS) for these materials are dominated by single-ion Kondo scatterings down to very low temperatures. Further open problems of the Kondo lattice include both the interplay between superconductivity and antiferromagnetic order as well as the onset of lattice coherence. While microscopic coexistence of superconductivity and antiferromagnetism seems to require a sufficiently large staggered moment, the onset of lattice coherence in transport measurements and STS is associated solely with the crystal-field-doublet ground state, while it involves the fully degenerate Hund's rule multiplet in ARPES. Though in the focus of condensed-matter physicists for several decades As displayed in Fig. For YbRh 2 Si 2 , no low-T peak is resolved in ρ(T ) because of a substantial broadening of the CF states; however, this peak can be made visible by weakening the strength of the Kondo effect, i.e., by partially substituting Lu for Yb 3b Recent ARPES measurements on CeCoIn 5 have highlighted an interesting new meaning of the energy scale k B T high K : They revealed "hybridized 4 f -bands" up to T = 120 K which cannot be resolved at higher temperatures Like for other unconventional superconductors, e.g., cuprates, organic transfer salts and Fepnictides, SC in HF metals is frequently found in close proximity to magnetic order, often near an AF quantum critical point (QCP) Owing to the strong pair-breaking effect of dilute localized spins in BCS superconductors Results of neutron-diffraction experiments on A-type CeCu 2 Si 2 have supported For many years, CeCu 2 Si 2 had been considered to be a (one-band) d-wave superconductor, in particular because of (i) a T 3 power-law dependence of the spin-lattice relaxation rate and (ii) the absence of a Hebel-Slichter coherence peak at T c , owing to Cu-NQR experiments performed down to about 0.1 K Although the peak in the spin-excitation spectrum below T c should not be confused with the "spin resonance" detected for the cuprate high-T c superconductors To search for further evidence for the presence of a line of field-induced QCPs in the zero-temperature p-B plane, we analyzed C el ðTÞ in the normal state. In the proximity of a QCP, strong deviations from Landau-Fermi-liquid (LFL) behavior are expected. Figure The d+d pairing state mentioned before consists of a dominant intra-band d x 2 -y 2 and an inter-band d xy component Turning to the interplay of quantum criticality and SC, one notices that in A/S -type CeCu 2 Si 2 the magnetic phase transition at T N is continuous, whereas the subsequent superconducting transition at lower temperature T c is of 1 st order, and AF order does not exist as T → 0 The fact that no SC was detected Using a nuclear demagnetization cryostat with a base temperature of 0.8 mK, Schuberth et al. As displayed in Fig. The existence of two subsequent AF phase transitions at T N and T A was treated by R. Yu and Q. Si in the framework of a three-component Landau theory The T -B (B ⊥ c) phase diagram of YbRh 2 Si 2 is shown in Fig. As discussed by Schuberth et al. The isostructural HF metals CeCu 2 Si 2 and YbRh 2 Si 2 are prototypical Kondo-lattice systems which illustrate the so-called Quantum Critical Paradigm; namely that HF AF QCPs, of either SDWtype like for CeCu 2 Si 2 or Kondo-destroying-type like for YbRh 2 Si 2 , give rise to unconventional SC. The ultra-low temperature results obtained for YbRh 2 Si 2 confirm theoretical predictions The interplay between HF SC and antiferromagnetism should be scrutinized in more detail, so as to determine why these symmetry-broken phases can coexist if the staggered moment is sufficiently large, whereas SC appears to suppress the AF ordering between small 4 f -moments. Future work is also necessary in order to explore the apparent dichotomy between different measurements of spatial coherence in the Kondo lattice. Owing to transport properties and STS, coherence sets in (Figs. coh ≈ 30 K. Adapted from Seiro et al., Nat. Commun. 9, 3324 (2018) [Ref.