Due to their unmatched entropy, complexity, and security level, optical Physical Unclonable Functions (PUFs) currently receive a lot of interest in the literature. Despite the large body of existing works, however, one of their core features has never been quantified in detail, namely their physical unclonability. This paper tackles this fundamental and yet largely unaddressed issue. In simulations and/or experiments, the sensitivity of diffraction-based optical responses is investigated with respect to various small alterations such as variation in the position, size, and number of the scatterers, as well as perturbations in the spatial alignment between the physical unclonable function (PUF) and the measurement apparatus. Our analysis focuses on 2D optical PUFs because of their relevance in integrated applications and the need to reply to security concerns that can be raised when the physical structure of the geometry is accessible. Among the results of this study, the sensitivity analysis shows that a positional perturbation of scatterers on the order of 30 nm, i.e., far below the wavelength of the probing laser light of 632 nm wavelength, is sufficient to invalidate the PUF response and thus detect a forgery attempt. These results support and quantify the high adversarial efforts required to clone optical PUFs, even for 2D layouts. According to recent estimates 1 , the looming internet of things and worldwide information exchange by the year 2018-2023 will produce a global data stream of around tens zettabytes per annum. This requires secure and reliable authentication methods in order to protect private information and to safeguard access to personal devices and services. The currently widespread techniques to this end rely on the permanent storage of digital secret keys in electronic devices, for example in smartphones, car keys, bank cards, passports, or computers. Unfortunately, the last decades have seen an explosion of attacks that can extract such keys unnoticedly, including sophisticated malware and physical methods The use of non-digital primitives such as Physical Un-clonable Functions (PUFs) constitutes a promising new avenue in this context Within the ample research landscape of magnetic The typical use case for so-called optical Strong PUFs 36 consists of a remote identification protocol, in which a PUF (or a user holding it) identifies remotely via a digital communication channel to a central authority. The protocol employs a large number of input-output pairs or challenge-response pairs (CRPs) of the PUF as a unique identifier or "fingerprint", and is sketched in Figure To experimentally address these cases, we built an optical setup able to generate the CRPs and authenticate each entity, following the scheme sketched in Figure In parallel, the experimental configuration is replicated numerically using an implementation of the Rayleigh-Sommerfeld (RS) method To quantify the randomness (entropy or information content), and the stability of the PUF responses against environmental variations, we follow the typical approach used for their application This can be performed using standard image transformation and binarization algorithms. Here, the wavelength of a wavelet-based Gabor filter is tuned to extract the features of the speckle images while ensuring the repeatability of the responses under the same challenge interrogation. The pairwise distance between each binary keys K 1 , . . . , K i is then measured with the Hamming distance metric This analysis has been carried out experimentally and verified by numerical calculation. As a first test, we study the sensitivity of the optical PUF response to perturbations of the challenge (random macro-pixel flips). We generate a set of 2000 challenges, and then perturbed versions of these challenges with one or more random macro-pixels flipped to its opposite value. An ideal PUF is expected to provide a completely independent response as soon as the challenge is modified, meaning that this test can be used to evaluate the optical PUF sensitivity. Figure The second test that can be addressed numerically, concerns the robustness of the PUF to cloning attempts. In this scenario, an attacker trying to clone the physical device aims at replicating the shape, size and position of all scattering elements. To simulate different degrees of cloning imperfections, we perturb the PUF by adding some Gaussian noise (σ ≈ n R /r 0 , where n R is the relocation) on the position of each scatterer. The results are summarized in Figure C. Sensitivity to Misalignment within Measurement Setup Figure In this section, we study how the responses are affected by a misalignment of the illuminated region on the optical-PUF. This analysis has been carried out experimentally and verified by numerical calculation. The addressed case is of practical relevance assuming that the physical token must be manually inserted by a user in a slot for its optical readout. Numerically, we model the displacement by performing a translation of the geometry along the x axis, which is modeled with periodic boundary conditions for convenience (Figure As a final test, we numerically study how the PUF sensitivity changes when the scatterer radius is either increased or decreased. Compared to the original hole radius of r 0 =∼ 200 nm, we test a reduced (subwavelength) value of r -= 150 nm, and r + = 400 nm (hole diameter ¿ λ). The effect of this change is evaluated over the previous scenarios, including the challenge sensitivity, positional perturbation and rigid displacement tests. The results are summarized in Figure This paper quantified the sensitivity and unclonability of scattering-based optical physical unclonable functions in simulations and, for a few scenarios, also in experiments. We focused our study on 2D structures as they are very attractive for integrated devices in the visible and telecommunication range also for cryptographic applications. We analyzed several relevant scenarios, including cloning attempts, challenge sensitivity, and the tolerance to device misalignment during optical readout. Fabrication imperfections of few nm, or even the mismatch of one challenge pixel between the interrogation and the enrolled ones are sufficient to deny the authentication. Evaluating the sensitivity of a PUF to small changes in the challenge pattern is also relevant to estimate the maximum CRP space that can be reasonably accessed using a PUF. Finally, the misalignment test, relevant in a scenario where the PUF must be aligned into an optical readout device, shows that the tolerable misalignment is smaller than 10 μm, for a realistic detector distance of 5 mm. These parameters, properly scaled for the PUF and readout system specs, should be taken into account when designing a readout device. At the same time, our results provide guidance on how to tune these values as needed towards either more robust or tolerant authentication devices, e.g., by acting on the radius of the holes in the structure. Notably, our proposed numerical approach to test diffraction-based 2D optical PUFs is computationally efficient and flexible, allowing to investigate also other physical effects such as thermal expansion, mechanical stress, tampering attempts and readout noise or aberrations in future works. As a final remark, our results outline a general strategy to evaluate the sensitivity of optical physical unclonable functions under different scenarios, and provide a more quantitative ground to the general assumptions regarding their resilience against adversarial attacks. Regardless of the specific 2D geometry considered here, these results are relevant also for more complex architectures with three-dimensional disorder, since the security level of 2D devices can be reasonably taken as a lower bound to the expected security of 3D PUFs. Given the fast progress of advanced rigorous numerical methods, we envision that performing a similar analysis on a representative 3D arrangement of scatterers will soon be possible to test directly this assumption and quantify the security gain provided by multiple scattering also in other disordered 3D structures. Sample fabrication: The 2D optical-PUFs were experimentally fabricated by exploiting the irreproducible self-assembly of dielectric nanospheres (polystyrene) on glass substrates. The nanospheres were deposited via spin coating, in the regime of high spinning speeds (6000 rpm) where they form a monolayer with random arrangement (see Figure 