Two-dimensional magnetic materials provide an ideal platform to explore collective many-body excitations associated with spin fluctuations. In particular, it should be feasible to explore, manipulate and ultimately design magnonic excitations in two-dimensional van der Waals magnets in a controllable way. Here we demonstrate the emergence of moiré magnon excitations, stemming from the interplay of spin-excitations in monolayer CrBr3 and the moiré pattern arising from the lattice mismatch with the underlying substrate. The existence of moiré magnons is further confirmed via inelastic quasiparticle interference, showing the appearance of a dispersion pattern correlated with the moiré length scale. Our results provide a direct visualization in real-space of the dispersion of moiré magnons, demonstrating the versatility of moiré patterns in creating emerging many-body excitations. The recent discovery of two dimensional van der Waals (vdW) monolayer magnetic materials has opened new avenues for scalable, defect-free samples for spintronic applications and artificial designer materials Chromium trihalides (CrX 3 , X= Cl, Br and I, Fig. We have carried out experiments on CrBr 3 monolayers on a highly-oriented pyrolytic graphite (HOPG) substrate at a T = 350 mK (see Methods section for more experimental details). Typical STM topography image (Fig. The physics behind the moiré magnons can be understood starting from the anistropic Heisenberg Hamiltonian with γ ij ∼ J ij controlling the spin stiffness and ∆ n determines the magnon gap, and a † n , a n are the creation and annhilation magnon operators. For CrBr 3 , first principles calculations In the absence of the moiré pattern, the magnon dispersion features two magnon bands stemming from the two Cr atoms in the unit cell. The magnon dispersion shows Dirac points when neglecting small contributions coming from H V , and a low energy quadratic dispersion with a gap controlled by K. In the presence of the moiré pattern, the real-space modulation of γ ij leads to the appearance of magnon mini-bands in the moiré supercell, as shown in Fig. We have carried out inelastic tunneling spectroscopy experiments (parameters mentioned in the Methods section) over a range of CrBr 3 islands with different moiré periodicities allowing us to address the impact of the underlying moiré pattern on the magnetic excitations. Figs. The dependence of low energy inelastic magnon peaks with the moiré wavelengths can be rationalized from the reconstruction of the magnon bands triggered by the moiré pattern. The momentum folding of the magnon structure depends on the length of the moiré pattern, leading to magnon van Hove singularities whose energy location depends on the specific moiré. In particular, longer moiré lengths give rise to magnon van Hove singularities with a smaller energy spacing, as observed experimentally. This phenomenology is captured with the moiré Heisenberg model, as shown in Fig. While our experiments are consistent with the expectation that the observed inelastic features correspond to magnetic excitations, they could also correspond to inelastic excitations of phonons. However, earlier experiments on tunneling devices have shown that the modes with sufficient electron-phonon coupling are at higher energies (above 25 meV) The presence of moiré magnons can be demonstrated even more convincingly through inelastic quasiparticle interference spectroscopy that allows a direct visualization of the length scale of the moiré magnons. We note that this technique has been used to demonstrate the emergence of quantum spin liquid signatures in monolayer 1T-TaSe 2 While this kind of QPI features could also arise from elastic scattering between electronic states, it is very unlikely in the present case. First of all, CrBr 3 is an insulator and has no electronic states close to the Fermi level. We could of course still in principle observe QPI from the electronic states of the HOPG substrate; however, in that case one would expect QPI signal over a large bias range since HOPG has states at all energies. This is in contrast to our experimental results and hence, the QPI features most likely correspond to the magnon excitations. To explore the dispersion of the magnonic bands, we performed constant current dI/dV maps at various energies (parameters mentioned in the Methods section). The typical FFT of the dI/dV maps has strong peaks at characteristic reciprocal space points, indicating different topographic periodicities present. The green, magenta, red and yellow dotted circles in Fig. These theoretical moiré QPI predictions can be directly compared with our experimental data (Fig. To summarize, we have demonstrated the emergence of moiré magnon excitations in 2D monolayer ferromagnet. By using inelastic spectroscopy, we showed that the existence of moiré patterns with different moiré lengths leads to different reconstructions of the moiré spectra. The existence of moiré magnons is further confirmed via inelastic quasiparticle interference, showing the appearance of a dispersion pattern correlated with the moiré length scale. Our results provide a direct visualization in real space of the dispersion of moiré magnons, demonstrating the versatility of moiré patterns in creating emergent many-body excitations. The CrBr 3 thin film was grown on freshly cleaved HOPG substrates by compound source molecular beam epitaxy. The anhydrous CrBr 3 flakes of 99 % purity was evaporated by Knudsen cell. Before growth, the cells were degassed up to the growth temperature 350 • C until the vacuum was better than 1 × 10 -8 mbar. The growth rate was determined by checking the coverage of the as-grown samples by STM. STM measurements: Subsequent to the growth, the sample was transferred to a low-temperature STM (Unisoku USM-1300) housed in the same UHV system. STM imaging and STS experiments were performed at T = 350 mK. STM imaging was performed in constant current mode. Differential conductance (dI/dV ) spectra were measured using standard lock-in techniques sweeping the sample bias in an open feedback loop with a.c bias modulation at a frequency of 873.7 Hz. For the dI/dV maps in Fig. ) where J ij are the isotropic exchange coupling, K the anisotropic exchange, D the single ion anisotropic. From the fundamental point of view, the terms K and D give rise to a small gap in the magnon gap, whereas J ij gives rise to the magnon moiré bands. The term H HO includes additional terms to the Hamiltonian including Kitaev exchange 3 , biquadratic exchange 4 , Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction 5 , and dipolar coupling 6 . For the sake of concreteness, we will focus our discussion on the modulation of the exchange coupling J ij = J((r i + r j )/2), which is expected to be the strongest modulation 7-10 . We take as starting point the ferromagnetic state of the Hamiltonian Eq. 1. We derive the magnonic Hamiltonian using a Holstein-Primakoff transformation 11 in the low temperature regime as S z n = Sa † n a n , S - n ≈ √ 2Sa † n and S + n ≈ √ 2Sa n , with a † n a n creation and annihilation magnon operators in site n. The bosonic magnonic Hamiltonian takes the form where γ ij ∼ J ij and ∆ controls the magnon gap, leading to a gapless spectra for D = K = 0. As a reference, the full magnon spectra of CrBr 3 is approximately 25 meV 12 , consistent with first principles calculations results 13 . The existence of a moiré pattern leads to a modulation of the exchange constants J ij , in turn leading to a modulation of the magnon hoppings γ ij . From the structural point of view, the spatially dependent stacking leads to a modulation of the super-exchange interaction mediated by the substrate. We show in Fig. where G are the reciprocal lattice vectors of the triangular lattice moire unit cell. We take by definition J = J(r) , and δJ = max[J(r)]min[J(r)], and we consider the two distributions shown in Fig. The appearance of moiré magnons can also be observed in the unfolded magnon structure, as shown in Fig. The signal to noise ratio of the raw QPI images are enhanced in two steps. At first, the raw constant current topography and dI/dV maps are corrected for both piezoelectric mechanical creep and thermal drift by alogorithm developed by Lawler-Fujita 14 . Finally the drift corrected fourier transform is symmetrized due to the present C 6 symmetry of the crystal lattice. The raw, drift corrected and symmetrized images are shown in (Fig. 