Kagome superconductors AV3Sb5 (A = K, Rb, Cs) provide a fertile playground for studying intriguing phenomena, including non-trivial band topology, superconductivity, giant anomalous Hall effect and charge density wave (CDW). Recently, a C2 symmetric nematic phase prior to the superconducting state in AV3Sb5 drew enormous attention due to its potential inheritance of the symmetry of the unusual superconductivity. However, direct evidence on the rotation symmetry breaking of the electronic structure in the CDW state from the reciprocal space is still rare, and the underlying mechanism remains ambiguous. The observation shows unconventional unidirectionality, indicative of rotation symmetry breaking from six-fold to two-fold. The interlayer coupling between adjacent planes with π-phase offset in the 2×2×2 CDW phase leads to the preferred two-fold symmetric electronic structure. These rarely observed unidirectional back-folded bands in KV3Sb5 may provide important insights into its peculiar charge order and superconductivity. )) V V e e (( × symmetry. Our findings shed light on the subtle connections and interplay between the electronic structure, nematicity, charge order in this class of complex kagome metals, which may help to further understand the mechanism of CDW and superconductivity therein. (Figure It is worthwhile to point out that the rotation symmetry in KV3Sb5 reduces from C6 to C2 upon the CDW transition accompanied by the emergence of back-folded bands. Given the kagome lattice, the electronic structure of KV3Sb5 naturally inherits the C6 rotational symmetry. However, the additional back-folded bands just appear along one (Q1) rather than the other two reciprocal-vector directions (Figures (Figure Prior researches regarded the 2×2 ISD structure to be the most stable in-plane CDW reconstruction in AV3Sb5. schematics of the back-folded bands induced by different stacking structures (Figures Figure and mobilities (μe) extracted from the ordinary Hall effect also show kinks at ∼ 50 K. These results imply that there may exist additional phase transition at lower temperatures, which further break the time-reversal symmetry within the nematic CDW phase, which proposed to exhibit counter-propagating current loops as suggested by μSR measurements We have directly observed the rotation symmetry breaking of the electronic structure upon the CDW transition of KV3Sb5 in its reciprocal space. The symmetry broken phase indicates the existence of electronic nematic ordering which onsets at TCDW. It is driven by the three-dimensional CDW transition with π phase shift rather than in-plane anisotropic instability of electrons below TCDW. This finding is consistent with several recent reports. On the other hand, the CDW state in KV3Sb5 is much more homogeneous. Our XRD results have revealed a single 2×2×2 phase transition in KV3Sb5. However, in CsV3Sb5, it undergoes an additional quadrupling structural modulation along the c-axis, In conclusion, we have characterized the electronic structure with unique three-dimensional Angle-resolved photoemission (ARPES) measurements were performed at the BL03U Σ beamline of Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility (SSRF), First-principles calculations based on density functional theory (DFT) are performed using the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) which adopts the projector-augmented wave method. where Enk is the band energy, η = 0.01 eV is a small smearing factor, and Wnk is the unfolded spectral weight which are obtained by projecting the Bloch functions in the CDW phase onto those of a 1×1×2 structure, which has a π shift between the two adjacent kagome layers. Except the anisotropioc band sturcture along Γ-M1 and Γ-M2,3, moreover, such a distinction in the CDW introduced band folding also exists between photoemission spectra collected along the K1-K2 and K1-K3 cuts, which are parallel to Γ-M1 and Γ-M3, respectively (Fig- ). Figure The photoemission spectroscopy intensity can be described by: The φ k term describes the initial state related to orbit geometry, the φ k term describes the the folding bands around the 1st BZ center Γ1 can be seen, forming a ' * '-like bands at Γ1, while at 2nd BZ center Γ2 only one mirror plane preserved, resulting in the 'X'-like shape back-folding bands. However, the Fermi surface of the back-folded band at the both BZs is 'X'-like shape that enables the C6 rotational symmetry breaking as we mentioned in the main text. The observation of the back-folded band attributable to the ARPES spectra at the both BZ is not related to the matrix element effect about the ARPES measurements. Additionly, we can still unambiguously exclude the influence of matrix element effects through changing the measurement geometry. As shown in Figure Furthermore, we also performed systematic ARPES measurements on more KV3Sb5 sam- In our experimental configuration, beam size is about 15 × 15 μm, so we can scan the sample surface to find domains. We integrated the intensity plot with a ∼1 eV energy window near the Fermi surface and show the spatial maps in Figure We then scanned the typical KV3Sb5 cleavage surface on a 1200 × 1200 μm 2 area by 40 μm/step (totally 31 × 31 sampling points), as illustrated in Figure while spectra taken on domains 3 and 4 do not show any sign of folding bands [Figures This spatially inhomogeneous surface of KV3Sb5 is unlikely to be introduced by gluing a sample to the holder. For the typical layered structured compound KV3Sb5, if the strain of silver epoxy (the glue we usually used for the sample preparation) indeed existed, it would be expected to just affect the adjacent bottom layers close to the top of sample holder. Therefore, the unidirectional strain effect would be rather negligible to top layers of the cleaved sample, from which the photoemission signal is sent out. Consequently, the symmetry breaking on photoemission spectroscopy origins from intrinsic CDW transition rather than the uniaxial strains. We also present the reproducibility of the C2 symmetric band structure for different In this part, we discuss the CDW gap along different directions. First, we discuss the CDW gap open at saddle point near M point at EF . As shown in Figure Additionally, we indeed found those CDW gaps ∆1 induced by the anisotropic folding bands show clear anisotropic feature. The C2 symmetric band features exist not only near the Fermi level, but also close to the CDW gap ∆1. Here, we extracted those ARPES intensity cuts along three nonequivalent M -K-Γ-K-M directions taken on the domain with C2 symmetric folding bands, denoted by cuts 1, 2, and 3 in Figure 3D electronic instability might play an essential role in driving the CDW transition, Here we construct a continuum model for the electronic nematic state in the 2 × 2 × 2 charge density wave (CDW) phase of KV3Sb5. To capture the essence of the electronic nematicity and the unidirectional band folding effects, here we only consider the hole pockets centered at the ±Mi (i = 1, 2, 3) points and the electron pocket at Γ point of the pristine Brillouin zone (BZ). There are two kagome layers in each primitive cell of the 2 × 2 × 2 CDW phase, and the two layers are mutually shifted by one of the primitive lattice vectors of the pristine structure (half of the CDW lattice vectors), denoted as ai (i = 1, 2, 3). Then, we construct the continuum model in the basis of the Bloch functions contributed by the two layers, and centered at the valleys Γ, and ±Mi (i = 1, 2, 3) of the pristine BZ, which are denoted as ψ (l) (r). Here n is the valley index (pocket index), k is the wavevector around each valley, and l = 1, 2 is the layer index. Consider that layer 2 is shifted with respect to layer 1 by a pristine lattice vector a, then Bloch function of the second layer is related to that of the first layer via: (2) (r) = ψ Again, Q is the reciprocal vector of the 2 × 2 × 2 superlattice, and The single crystal was cut into long strips along the ab plane. The magneto-transport measurements were carried out by using a standard six-wire method in a physical property measurement system (PPMS, Quantum Design). During measurements, the magnetic field B was perpendicular to the ab plane and the electrical current I was along the ab plane. 