We extend the highly-parallelizable open-source electronic transport code TRANSEC [1, 2] to perform real-space atomic-scale electronic transport calculations with periodic boundary conditions in the lateral dimensions. We demonstrate the use of TRANSEC in periodic Cu and Rh bulk structures and in large periodic Rh point contacts, in preparation to perform calculations of reflection probability across Rh grain boundaries. In order for semiconductor technology to continue scaling, the most local level of metal interconnects must scale with minimum feature size (5-7 nm in current technology nodes) to form logical circuits among the billions of individual transistor devices in an integrated circuit. However, in metal wires with ∼10 nm line width, conductivity can degrade by as much as 90% compared to the bulk metal Key causes of this conductivity degradation, also known as the size effect, include scattering from grain boundaries, surface roughness, and wire-liner interfaces The product ρ 0 λ has therefore been used to indicate which materials are promising candidates to replace copper in future nanoscale interconnects. Previously, rhodium was identified as one of the most promising such materials TRANSEC and PARSEC use a real-space grid to represent the Kohn-Sham (KS) DFT orbitals. The advantages of real-space calculations include an extremely sparse Hamiltonian, leading the computation to parallelize very efficiently. As described previously TRANSEC uses absorbing boundary conditions (ABCs; also referred to as complex absorbing potentials, or CAPs) to represent semi-infinite electrodes at the two edges of the transport simulation cell. The use of ABCs in the "wide-band limit approximation" avoids the computational burden of independent self-energy calculations for each energy E, making it possible to compute a dense transmission curve T (E) in constant time Let the Kohn-Sham effective potential, V KS (x, y, z), be periodic in the xy-plane with lattice vectors a and b, and let z be the transport direction. In this section, we describe the formalism for two-dimensional periodicity, or "slab" geometry, but the extension to the case of one-dimensional periodicity is straightforward. Note that since a and b span the xy-plane, V KS (x, y, z) is also at least approximately periodic in the x and y directions. Then Bloch's theorem tells us that the KS eigenstates φ can be chosen to have the Bloch form As always in TRANSEC [1], we seek to evaluate the transmission function with Γ L and Γ R the ABCs in the left and right electrodes, respectively, which we take to have Gaussian form: Here Γ 0 and σ are the CAP strength and standard deviation, respectively, Γ is the retarded Green's function, G * = G † is the advanced Green's function, and H KS is the KS Hamiltonian. Following Ref. [1], we wish to carry out the trace in the diagonal basis of G -1 , i.e. the basis of right eigenvectors U of (H KS -iΓ). The eigenvectors U can be chosen with the Bloch form (1), and therefore each individual eigenvector U n, k can be identified by a band index n and Bloch wavevector k. Accordingly, the formula for transmission becomes: where and n, k is an eigenvalue of (H KS -iΓ). Note that (H KS -iΓ) is complex symmetric, so U is complex orthogonal, U -1 = U T , and the individual vectors The CAPs (2) decay and are therefore clearly nonperiodic in the z-direction, but they are in fact constant in the xy-plane. Therefore, the transformed CAPs Γ will be diagonal in the subspaces of U with constant k, while G remains fully diagonal as in Eq. ( [1] can be adapted directly to the case with PBCs. Evidently, the main adaptation required to introduce PBCs is carrying out the basis change (4) of the CAPs with an eigenbasis U having Bloch form (1). Formally, this transformation can be expressed as: where A is the Born-von Karman cross-sectional area and ū is the restriction of u to the periodic cell, The key observation is that we can transform Γ L,R using only the periodic portions ū of the eigenbasis restricted to the periodic cell, and in fact do not need to keep track of the k-dependent complex exponentials. As in Ref. [1], after basis change, the CAPs ( We therefore express the Bloch state (1) as a tensor product Here the tensor product is understood as connecting two disjoint parts of Hilbert space, in the sense that | k has k lying within the first Brillouin Zone (1BZ), whereas the periodic function u n k can be Fourier expanded into reciprocal lattice vectors outside the 1BZ where within the periodic cell We wish to substitute Eq. ( [1], our main computational problem is partial diagonalization of G -1 in the neighborhood of the Fermi energy, E F . In the present work, this problem is modified by restricting H KS to each respective sampled k-point, as in (9) and the discussion above. However, note that the transmission formulas of Ref. [1], and its orthonormalization convention for the eigenvectors U , assume G -1 to be complex symmetric. By contrast, Eq. ( Here the integration domain is half the 1BZ: but we have suppressed special treatment of points like k = 0 for simplicity of presentation. Therefore, we consider which acts on both |u ± k for each sampled value of k in the integration domain of Note that |v nk -is undefined for the Γ point, k = 0, since here k = -k. To validate the form of ( ± k and eigenvalues 0 k of H ± k without iΓ. These are, of course, the KS-DFT eigenpairs of the oneor two-dimensional periodic DFT calculation without CAPs. Because H k is Hermitian and H -k = H * k in the real-space basis employed by TRANSEC, time-reversal symmetry or complex conjugation of the eigenvalue equation show that |u 0 The time-reversal symmetry we have used to relate |u 0 -k to |u 0 * k is present in equilibrium KS-DFT, but broken in the electronic transport problem. However, although the addition of the CAPs iΓ breaks time-reversal symmetry of the Hamiltonian, ± k remain equal. This is manifestly true when V KS respects C 2 symmetry about the transport axis, i.e. when V KS is symmetric under rotation by π about z, or equivalently 2-D inversion in the xy-plane, which maps between ± k. For clarity, we will refer to this as the R z,π symmetry operation, rather than by the usual point-group symbol C 2 . With R z,π symmetry, |u + k and |u -k ∝ R z,π |u + k are both eigenvectors of H ± k + iΓ with the same eigenvalue k , so |v k ± continue to be eigenvectors of Eq. Here we have reduced each Γ L,R expression to a single term by making use of |u -k ∝ R z,π |u + k , which is valid only when R z,π symmetry is present, and of [R z,π , Γ L,R ] = 0, which is always true. Substituting these expressions into (3), and following Ref. [1], we see that In practice, the summation can be restricted to a small fraction p of the total of N bands, having mk and nk in the neighborhood of E F [1]. D. Lacking Rz,π symmetry R z,π symmetry is absent from many important atomic systems, for example most non-twin grain boundaries we wish to study, and even some bulk orientations. Without R z,π symmetry, we have no definite relationship between |u ± k , and consequently, our method must expend additional computing time to solve for both |u ± k , as described in the Appendix. Still, the form (12) of the biorthogonal eigenvectors of G -1 k remains valid, as we now show by treating the decaying CAPs iΓ as a small perturbation [1] in Eq. We argue schematically that the eigenvalue corrections M ± k are equal to all orders M in perturbation theory (PT) in iΓ, and explicitly confirm this for the first-and secondorder corrections. All perturbative corrections to both the eigenvalues and vectors are proportional to products and powers of since Γ is uniform in the xy-plane, as shown in Eq. ( as can also be seen explicitly from complex conjugation of Eq. ( In particular, the M th-order PT eigenvalue correction M n, k depends on a sum of fractions like where there are M brackets in the numerator and (M -1) factors in the denominator. Eq. ( We also note that the un-perturbed states |u 0 n,±k are complex conjugates of each other, but have the same real eigenvalue 0 n k due to time-reversal symmetry. However, the perturbed states are not complex conjugates since the iΓ term in When R z,π symmetry is absent, the trace formula ( ΓL,mks,nkt ΓR,nkt,mks In TRANSEC, we explicitly compute Γmn for m ≤ n, and then require Γnm ≡ Γ * mn . We remark that the summand of ( To validate the method of Sec. II, we also make use of a mode-counting method to compute the ballistic conductance of bulk materials. The ballistic conductance G B of a bulk sample of cross-section A is proportional to the number of current-carrying modes in the sample where G B is ballistic conductance, T B (E) is ballistic transmission at energy E, n⊥ ∝ ∇ k E is a unit vector normal to the Fermi surface, ẑ is a unit vector conjugate to the transmission direction, M (E) is the number of forward-moving modes with energy E, and the integration domain is the set of points on the Fermi surface with n⊥ • ẑ > 0. Note our convention that T B (E) and M (E) are per-spin quantities, hence the factor of 2 in the denominator of the LHS. Our mode-counting method computes a discrete approximation to Eq. ( Our calculation of electronic structure is performed with the Vienna Ab-initio Simulation Package (VASP) We used VASP to compute the KS energy levels on the Monkhorst-Pack grid in the Irreducible Brillouin Zone (BZ). We considered tetrahedra formed from sets of four neighboring k-points covering the Irreducible BZ, and built the full 1BZ by applying symmetry operations on the Irreducible BZ. To find the Fermi surface within each tetrahedron, we interpolated the energy E n of each band n linearly between the four vertices. The Fermi surface is then the surface of constant energy {E n (k) ≡ E F , ∀n} within the tetrahedron, iterating over bands n. The resulting Fermi surface projections for Rh in the (110) and (111) planes are shown in Figure The Fermi velocity for band n is given by We set n⊥ = v F,n /| v F,n | for the normal direction of the Fermi surface. This method is described in greater detail in Ref. We now turn to demonstrating the methods of Sec. II with bulk transmission calculations in transition metals, along the (100) and (111) transmission directions of the face-centered cubic (FCC) lattice. In this Section we address Cu, and in Sec. V, Rh. Note that the PARSEC and TRANSEC source codes implementing our methods, and example input and output from the simulations we performed, are available online The (100) bulk calculations presented in Sections IV A, and V A possess R z,π symmetry, whereas the (111) bulk, disorder, and point contact calculations presented in Sections IV B, V A, and V B do not. We also performed other validation tests with R z,π symmetry intentionally broken, and make extensive use of Sec. II D in our forthcoming work on Rh grain boundaries. To validate the PBC method described in Sec. II, we first computed ballistic conductance in bulk FCC Cu in the (100) orientation. For the (100) calculations here and in Sec. V A below, we used a tetragonal periodic simulation cell. Specifically, the lattice vectors for the lateral PBCs are the primitive cell for the two-dimensional lattice of a (100) monolayer, pointing from the vertices of the cubic lattice to the face-centers of two adjacent cubic cells. Thus, the two lateral cell axes are rotated so the basic repeating unit contains only two atoms, compared to four in the cubic unit cell. Meanwhile, the transmission dimension aligns with the (001) direction of the usual FCC unit cell. We chose this geometry because it is analytically simpler than the 3D primitive cell, having orthogonal lattice vectors, but has a smaller cross-section than the cubic unit cell so as to reduce the computational burden. Of course, this choice of simulation cell orientation is not expected to affect any physical results of the calculation. The Cu lattice constant was chosen as a Cu = 6.77 a 0 , the result of a lattice constant optimization of the bulk primitive cell. Thus, the tetragonal simulation cell used 2-D PBCs with orthogonal lattice vectors towards two adjacent face centers, of length a Cu / √ 2 = 4.79 a 0 . The calculation used 18 monolayers along the transport dimension, for a total length of 17 a Cu /2 = 57.5 a 0 between the first and last layer. In the transport dimension, we padded the cell length with an additional 8.8 a 0 of vacuum on each end to allow the outermost orbitals to decay, resulting in a total cell length of 75 0 . Our DFT calculation in PARSEC used LDA and 11 × 11 k-point sampling. We used a norm-conserving Troullier-Martins pseudopotential for Cu with electronic configuration of 3d 10 4s 1 4p 0 and s/p/d cutoff radii of 2.05 / 2.30 / 2.05 a 0 . We used a grid spacing of h = 0.37 a 0 , after checking for convergence in the bulk primitive cell, so the simulation cell contained a total of N = 29,100 grid points. For the transmission calculation, the results presented here used Gaussian CAPs, as in Eq. (2), centered on the outermost Cu monolayers, with strength Γ 0 = 100 mRy and standard deviation σ = 8.5 a 0 , providing contact regions of approximately 57.5 a 0 /(2 • 8.5 a 0 ) = 3.4 standard deviations for each CAP to decay before the central region. We also tested for convergence of the contact length. In addition, we performed calculations using Γ 0 = 77 mRy, σ = 7.6 a 0 and Γ 0 = 120 mRy, σ = 9.2 a 0 , and found the T (E) results were very insensitive to these different choices, an indication the CAP parameters are valid Fig. OpenMX implements a mode-counting method similar to the one described in Sec. III for ballistic calculations. Therefore, none of these calculations used CAPs, so all used shorter simulation cells in the transmission dimension than our TRANSEC calculations. As shown, these calculations agree with the TRANSEC calculation. We find a ballistic conductance per unit cross-sectional area of T B /A = T (E F )/A = 0.93 / (4.79 a 0 ) 2 = 0.041 a -2 0 . This finding is also in agreement with a simple Sommerfeld model We have also repeated transmission calculations in bulk (100) Cu structures with disordered layers or vacancies, using the same scattering region geometries as used previously in Ref. We found reflection probabilities R = T (E F )/M (E F ) = 7% for 3 disordered layers and R = 13% for 6 disordered layers, in fair agreement with Ref. We consider these successful ballistic and scattering results in Cu to be a validation of the PBC method described in Sec. II. In the remainder of this article, we determine and validate ABCs for use with bulk Rh electrodes. In our forthcoming work, we will use these validated ABCs to calculate reflection probability across Rh grain boundaries. Next, we performed simulations of ballistic conductance in bulk FCC Rh in the (100) and (111) orientations. For the Rh electrodes in (100) orientation, we used the same geometry as in the Cu bulk calculations of Sec. IV A, but scaled the lattice constant to a Rh = 7.26 a 0 as optimized in a bulk primitive cell, and scaled all lengths and atomic coordinates accordingly. Thus, the cell dimensions became 5.13 a 0 × 5.13 a 0 cross-section and 61.7 a 0 length from the first to the last monolayer, with a total cell length of 87 a 0 including vacuum. We continued to use 0.37 a 0 grid spacing and 11 × 11 k-point sampling, resulting in N = 33,700 grid points. For DFT, we used the local density approximation (LDA). We used a norm-conserving Troullier-Martins pseudopotential for Rh with electronic configuration of 4d 8 5s 1 5p 0 and s/p/d cutoff radii of 2.38 / 2.57 / 2.38 a 0 . For transmission, we used CAPs centered on the outermost monolayers, with strength Γ 0 in the range of 90 to 100 mRy and standard deviation σ of 6.3 to 8.5 a 0 , providing contact regions of at least 3.6 standard deviations for each CAP to decay before the central region. To explore the stability of our chosen CAP parameters, we also present T (E) results using strength Γ 0 in the range of 50 to 120 mRy and standard deviation σ of 4.8 to 12.0 a 0 . We computed a fraction p = 2% of total complex eigenpairs, and tested this for convergence. Fig. Fig. [1], here T (E) displays insensitivity to Γ 0 , yet scales monotonically over a range of σ values. For example, the curves with Γ 0 = 0.064 Ry, σ = 7 a 0 and Γ 0 = 0.12 Ry, σ = 6.3 a 0 are more similar to each other than to the curve with Γ 0 = 0.12 Ry, σ = 12 a 0 . A second way we validate our choice of CAPs is by comparing T (E) to accepted values and to calculations we performed using the mode counting method, as described in Sec. III above. Fig. We also obtained T (E) for the (111) orientation using TRANSEC, as well as TranSiesta, and our modecounting method based on electronic structure from VASP. The TRANSEC calculation used an orthogonal 9.7 a 0 × 8.4 a 0 unit cell, with a total of 134,000 grid points, and used the same CAP parameters as for the (100) orientation, Γ 0 = 90 mRy and σ = 6.3 a 0 . We performed the TranSiesta calculation with triple-zeta polarized (TZP) orbitals. As shown in Fig. We find a ballistic conductance per unit cross-sectional area of T (E F )/A = 0.087 a -2 0 , over twice that of Cu. While this result agrees with our independent calculations presented in Figs. 4(a) and 5, note that it disagrees with results by Lanzillo, who found that Rh nanowires have only 14% more ballistic conductance per unit cross-sectional area than Cu ones, even in a bulklike regime where conductance scales linearly with wire cross-sectional area Finally, in view of the disagreement with results in Ref. As further validation of the ABC parameters we identified for Rh (100) bulk electrodes, we computed T (E) in a periodic Rh point contact having Rh (100) electrodes and H as a central "device" atom. This calculation also serves as a demonstration of the real-space PBC method in a large, periodic transition metal nanostructure without R z,π symmetry. As in Ref. [1], we rely on analytical understanding of the point contact transmission to validate results from TRANSEC. In particular, we choose H for the central atom since it has only a single electron, and so must have unit transmission at the Fermi level, provided it is isolated from the two electrodes and from its own periodic image. In choosing a central H atom, we thus circumvent any uncertainty in the value of M (E F ) of the Rh electrodes. The geometry of this system is shown in Fig. Despite using bulk electrodes, in the limit of large lateral cross-section, we expect the transmission peak not to be modified by among the device atom and its periodic images -a point we now address in greater depth. We find that when performing this calculation with a smaller cross-section of 10.26 a 0 × 10.26 a 0 , the k-point-averaged peak T (E ≈ E F ) is about 20% lower than expected, even though each individual k-point resolved transmission curve T k (E) correctly displays a peak of unit height and approximately Lorentzian shape. Since the individual peaks do have height of 1, the low average is attributed to poor peak location alignment. We attribute this misalignment, in turn, to communication between the central H atom and its periodic images. In the limit of large cross-section, we anticipate that any electronic-structure band formed from different k-points should flatten and the individual T k (E) curves become identical, resulting in an averaged peak height of 1. Therefore, we present a calculation of the point contact structure shown in Fig. The results of this calculation are shown in Fig. We also performed an even larger point contact calculation using a rectangular cross-section of 3 × 2 cubic cells, for a total cross-sectional area of 316.2 a 2 0 , and a total of 500,000 grid points. This structure contained 84 Rh atoms in each electrode, and used a 2 × 3 Monkhorst-Pack grid. This calculation also displayed good alignment of the k-point resolved peaks T k (E), an averaged T (E) peak of approximately 1, and a peak width depending on the electrode-central atom gap, as expected analytically. We have described and validated a method to include periodic boundary conditions in real-space calculations of electronic conductance. We demonstrated this method in bulk Cu and Rh as well as large Rh point contacts with H as the central atom. We developed CAP parameters for bulk Rh electrodes, to be used for Rh grain boundary simulations in subsequent work. Although the resulting bulk Rh T (E) disagrees with results in Ref. We are grateful for the use of computing resources at the TIAL group in the UW Electrical & Computer Engineering Department. BF would like to thank Oded Hod, Amir Natan, and Leeor Kronik for helpful discussions. We have implemented the PBC methods of Sec. II in TRANSEC by performing each k-point calculation in-dependently. In addition, we have implemented collinear spin polarization, which performs the calculation for each spin σ independently (but in this work we present only unpolarized calculations of non-magnetic materials). Because the k-points and spins are independent, the individual T k,σ (E) calculations for spin σ and lateral Bloch vector k can be performed on separate computing nodes with distributed memory. Hence, the T k,σ (E) calculations can be naturally parallelized over k and σ, or can be performed in serial on the same nodes. However, a drawback to parallelization is that each T k,σ (E) calculation requires its own independent memory, driving up the total memory requirement. The number of parallelization groups should therefore be chosen to balance the available memory and computing time resources. Alternatively, the total memory and/or computing time requirements can be reduced by partitioning the eigenspectrum of individual T k,σ (E) calculations, as described in Ref. For the case with R z,π symmetry, the eigenvectors for + k and -k points are closely related, so our calculations are restricted to those k-points with non-negative k a , reducing the computational burden by about half. For the case without R z,π symmetry, separate eigensolutions must be performed for both + k and -k points. But as Eqs. ( The computed eigenpairs for + k are then matched to those for -k by determining the best agreement between respective eigenvalues in these two sets, while discarding or otherwise resolving spurious or missing eigenpairs that have no sufficiently close match. We find the matching eigenvalues generally agree to about 10 -5 of the nextbest match. For the Γ-point, i.e. k = 0, even without R z,π symmetry it is only necessary to perform eigensolution once, since k = -k, so if practical we balance the computing load by assigning a greater share of k-points to the group with the Γ-point. [1] B. https://gitlab.com/computational-physics2/transec/. Input and output of most calculations presented in this article, including those performed with other codes, are also posted.