Twin boundaries (TBs) are assumed to be obstacles to dislocation motion and increase the strength of metals. Here, we report the abnormal phenomenon that TBs reduce the strength of body-centered cubic (BCC) tungsten (W). [1-11]-oriented W nanowires with (121) twin planes and free of dislocations were fabricated by chemical vapor deposition. In situ tensile tests within the transmission electron microscope were performed on single-crystal and twinned W nanowires. The fracture strength of the twinned W nanowire was 13.7 GPa, 16% lower than that of the singlecrystal W nanowire (16.3 GPa). The weakening mechanism of the TB was revealed by a combination of atomic-resolution characterizations and atomistic simulations. Twinned W nanowires failed by the early nucleation of a crack at the intersection of the TB with the surface. The standard strengthening mechanism by dislocation/TB interaction was not operative in W because the high Peierls barrier and stacking fault energy in W hinder dislocation nucleation and glide. These findings provide a new insight into the influence of TBs on the mechanical properties of BCC metals. Grain boundaries (GBs) are interfaces between grains with different orientations, and their effect on the mechanical properties of polycrystalline metals has been investigated for over half a century GBs can improve the strength of metals by obstructing dislocation motion Tungsten (W) is a refractory BCC metal, which exhibits excellent mechanical properties and outstanding thermal stability, and is mainly used in high temperature structural applications in aerospace, rocket propulsion and nuclear engineering Atomic-resolution characterization of nanomaterials during deformation can be achieved by means of in situ mechanical tests within a transmission electron microsope (TEM) Nevertheless, the cross-section of the samples is uncertain in standard in situ TEM tests and the stress could not be determined It was found that the fracture strength of the twinned W NW was lower than that of the singlecrystal W NW, and atomic-resolution characterizations as well as molecular dynamics (MD) simulations were used to explore the effect of TBs on the mechanical properties of the W NWs. W NWs were synthesized on a silicon (Si) substrate by chemical vapour deposition (CVD). WO3 powders were heated at 900 oC in an atmosphere containing water vapour and H2 gas and W NWs were grown on the Si substrate. More details about the fabrication of W NWs are available in the literature Individual W NWs were transfered and fixed with glue on push-to-pull (PTP) devices from the Si substrate in air using methodology previously developed Firstly, a human eyebrow hair tip was fixed on the end of a manipulator with silver paint. The Si substrate with the W NWs was put on the platform of an optical microscopy (Leica DM2500 M, Germany), and an individual W NW was picked up using the eyebrow hair tip. Then, the Si substrate was replaced by a PTP device and the NW on the eyebrow hair tip was put on it. Finally, a drop of glue was taken using the eyebrow hair tip and transferred on two ends of the NW on the PTP device under the optical microscope. Afert curing for 24 h at room temperature, the NW was strongly attached to the PTP device. In situ tensile tests within the TEM (Talos F200X, Themo Fisher Scientific, USA) were performed using a Hysitron PI-95 PicIndenter (PI-95 TEM PicoIndenter, Bruker, Germany) under displacement control 5 nm/s. MD simulations of the tensile deformation of twinned and single-crystal W NWs were carried out using the Large-scale Atomic/Molecular Massively Parallel Simulator (LAMMPS). Periodic boundary condition were imposed on the axial direction of the NWs (X direction), while the NWs had free surfaces in Y and Z directions. The embedded atom method (EAM) potential developed by Marinica et al. Scanning electron microscope (SEM) images of the W NWs are depicted in Fig. high-angle annular dark-field scanning TEM (HAADF-STEM) characterization were carried out on the twinned structure to clarify the stable TB structure in the W NW. The HRTEM image (Fig. In order to investigate the influence of TBs on mechanical properties of W, in situ TEM tensile tests were performed on single-crystal and twinned W NWs. Using a home-made setup, individual W NWs were transferred and fixed with glue on a PTP device (Fig. The engineering stress-strain curves of the single-crystal and twinned W NWs are plotted in Fig. The fracture process -according to the MD simulations -of the twinned W NW is shown in Figs. 8a and 8b along the [10-1] and [1-11] directions, respectively. It should be noted that the atoms in the perfect BCC lattice are removed for clarity in Fig. The formation and evolution of dislocations during crack nucleation and propagation in the twinned W NW viewed along the [10-1] direction is depicted in Fig. The results of the MD simulations support the experimental observations, which show many dislocations in the single-crystal W NW, but not in the twinned W NW (Fig. TBs are traditionally introduced into metals to enhance the strength. However, it is hard to introduce TBs into BCC W due to its high stacking fault energy. As a result, the effect of TBs on mechanical properties of W is largely unknown. Deformation twinning has been verified in nanoscale W by in situ TEM observations, but detwinning occurs after unloading It should be noted that dislocation motion is very difficult in W because of the high Peierls barrier and stacking fault energy In-depth understanding on the weakening effect of TBs on other metals requires further experimental results and atomistic simulations. In summary, [1-11]-oriented W NWs with and without stable (121) twin planes were synthetized by CVD. Individual NWs were transferred and fixed on PTP devices without contamination and damage. Twinned and single-crystal W NWs were stretched along the [1-11] direction within the TEM. The fracture strength of the NW containing TBs was lower than that of single-crystal W NW. HRTEM showed the presence of dislocations and slip bands near the fracture surface of singlecrystal W, which were not found in the twinned W NW. MD simulations revealed that twinned W NW failed by the early nucleation and growth of a dominant crack at the surface/TB intersection. Few dislocations were nucleated during crack propagation, which left the NW through fracture surfaces. Thus, dislocations were not able to interact with the TB during deformation and the typical TBs strengthening observed in FCC metals was not operative. Our results provide a new insight into the effect of TBs on mechanical properties of W, which may be important in other BCC metals and alloys with high Peierls barriers and stacking fault energies. (e and f) Snapshots of fracture processes of the single-crystal (e) and twinned (f) W NWs. 