Gallium nitride (GaN) is a typical wide-bandgap semiconductor with a critical role in a wide range of electronic applications. Ballistic thermal transport at nanoscale hotspots will greatly reduce the performance of a device when its characteristic length reaches the nanometer scale, due to heat dissipation. In this work, we developed a tipenhanced Raman thermometry approach to study ballistic thermal transport within the range of 10 nm in GaN, simultaneously achieving laser heating and measuring the local temperature. The Raman results showed that the temperature increase from an Aucoated tip-focused hotspot was up to two times higher (40 K) than that in a bare tipfocused region (20 K). To further investigate the possible mechanisms behind this temperature difference, we performed electromagnetic simulations to generate a highly focused heating field, and observed a highly localized optical penetration, within a range of 10 nm. The phonon mean free path (MFP) of the GaN substrate could thus be determined by comparing the numerical simulation results with the experimentally measured temperature increase which was in good agreement with the average MFP weighted by the mode-specific thermal conductivity, as calculated from first-principles simulations. Our results demonstrate that the phonon MFP of a material can be rapidly predicted through a combination of experiments and simulations, which can find wide application in the thermal management of GaN-based electronics. Gallium nitride (GaN) is a third-generation wide-bandgap semiconductor, with a promising potential in optoelectronics However, the design of high-power GaN devices is strongly affected by the selfheating Various experiments have been carried out to study quasi-ballistic transport phenomena. Goodson et al. In recent years, theoretical studies Raman thermometry is a technique Our results can have important implications for overcoming issues associated with local hotspots, in order to improve the thermal performance of devices based on GaN. In the present tip-enhanced Raman thermometry experiments, a Raman laser was employed as a heating source and focused on the gold-coated nanotip of an atomic force microscopy (AFM) instrument. The focused laser beam will generate a highly localized heated region under the gold-coated nanotip. A silicon AFM tip (ScanSens, CSG01 series model) was coated with a 20 nm-thick gold layer with a ~ 35 nm curvature radius. A bulk α-GaN sample with 4.23 × 2.19 × 0.64 cm 3 size was grown by the ammonothermal method based on simple chemical reactions A micro-Raman spectrometer was used to determine local temperature increases, based on the linear relationship between the temperature and the Raman peak frequency of the material. The detailed setup of the optical alignment for thermal sensing using tip-enhanced Raman thermometry is presented in Figure Detailed calibration analysis of the GaN substrate was carried out to analyze the relationship between temperature and Raman shifts. The sample was placed on a heating stage to heat it at different temperatures and measure the corresponding Raman spectra. Figure The temperature increase in the GaN heating spot is directly related to the thermal conductivity of the material; as the size of the tip is only 10 μm in diameter in the apex region, the localized electromagnetic field increase induced by surface plasmon resonance will create a hotspot enhancing the Raman signals, as shown in Figure The results reported in the following can be explained in terms of ballistic thermal transport phenomena; this is because the size of the heated region induced in the GaN substrate is close to the size of the tip, and its characteristic length is much shorter than the typical phonon MFP of GaN. In the bulk GaN system, most heat is transported via phonons with MFPs of 100-1000 nm at room temperature; thus, a ballistic behavior obeying Landauer's formulation for quantum thermal conduction is expected. After the laser beam is focused on the GaN substrate, heat will be generated on both the uncoated and gold-coated silicon tip systems. However, the gold film covering the tip can enhance light absorption and thus promote ballistic thermal transport. The dependence of the GaN peak frequency on the laser power in the linear region can be described as ω = χ $ (P % -P & ) = χ $ ∆P, where χ $ is the slope of the Raman shift vs. laser power plot and ∆P is the laser power difference. The fitted coefficients χ $ for the bare and gold-coated silicon tips are -0.0445 and -0.0309 cm -1 mW -1 , respectively. The decreasing linear power dependence indicates that, for the same laser power, the phonon and thermal energy can be absorbed more efficiently, leading to a higher local temperature. This underlying trend can be extracted using the previous temperature-Raman shift calibration. Figure The observed temperature increase in the sub-10 nm region motivated us to simulate the distribution of the electric field and the temperature rise at the tip-enhanced nanoscale heating spot. Figure Maxwell's equations were solved by the finite difference time domain (FDTD) method across a rectangular computational domain with 600 × 600 × 800 nm 3 dimensions, containing the tip, substrate, and a vacuum region around the tip/substrate system. To prevent reflections at outer boundaries, the perfectly matched layer (PML) technique was applied to the domain. A polarized plane wave was irradiated along the x direction on the tip at an angle θ with respect to the tip axis. The incident electric vector E0 had an amplitude of 1 V/m. At 532 nm (wavelength of the laser used in the experiment), the dielectric functions of gold and silicon are 37 εAu = -4.2854 + 2.3292i and εGaN = 5.8254 -0.4070i, respectively. When a polarized laser illuminates the tip, the z-component of the polarized electric field drives the free electrons in the nearsurface region of gold and confines them to the end of the tip apex. As a result, a strong electric field is generated under the tip apex. Cross-section views of the electric field distributions in the bare tip-substrate and coated tip-substrate systems are shown in Figures The distributions of the absorbed light and converted thermal energy were calculated with an incident intensity I0 of 4.9 × 10 6 W/m 2 , corresponding to that of the laser available in our lab. In the following, the heat generated in the silicon surface was calculated at this moderate intensity, which is equivalent to E0 = 6.1 × 10 4 V/m. The relation between intensity and normalized electric field In order to calculate the temperature increase in the heating region of the GaN substrate, the heat transfer process can be described by the traditional heat conduction model for a small particle embedded in a medium. The thermal resistance of the GaN substrate, calculated as 1/(2πrkeff), where r is the radius of the heated spot (5 nm) and keff is the local thermal conductivity, is 1.77 × 10 5 K/W. Moreover, the thermal contact resistance between tip and substrate, calculated through molecular dynamics simulations (see supplemental material for more information), is 7.04 × 10 8 K/W; although this allows very little heat flow from the substrate to the tip, a large amount of heat flows from the heating region to other regions of the GaN substrate. As shown in Figures As shown in Figure A mode specific MFP spectrum is calculated, and the MFP weighted by mode specific thermal conductivity is then averaged as 768.6 nm at 300K for the bulk GaN. This is in good agreement with our tip-enhanced Raman thermometry and FEM approach, indicating that this novel method can successfully capture the nature of ballistic transport. Finally, Figure In summary, we used the novel tip-enhanced Raman thermometry to observe the quasi-ballistic thermal transport phenomena in GaN. The experimental results are consistent with ballistic thermal transport when the characteristic thermal transport length is shorter than the phonon mean free path. To further investigate the thermal transport mechanism at the nanoscale, we conducted optical electromagnetic 