The extended quasiparticle picture is adapted to non-Fermi systems by suggesting a Padé approximation which interpolates between the known small scattering-rate expansion and the deviation from the Fermi energy. The first two energy-weighted sum rules are shown to be fulfilled independent of the interpolating function for any selfenergy. For various models of one-dimensional Fermions scattering with impurities the quality of the Padé approximation for the spectral function is demonstrated and the reduced density matrix or momentum distribution is reproduced not possessing a jump at the Fermi energy. Though the two-fold expansion is necessary to realize the spectral function and reduced density, the extended quasiparticle approximation itself is sufficient for the description of transport properties due to cancellation of divergent terms under integration. The T-matrix approximation leads to the delay time as the time two particles spend in a correlated state. This contributes to the reduced density matrix and to an additional part in the conductivity which is presented at zero and finite temperatures. Besides a localization at certain impurity concentrations, the conductivity shows a maximum at small temperatures interpreted as onset of superconducting behaviour triggered by impurities. The Tan contact reveals the same universal behaviour as known from electron-electron scattering. One-dimensional interacting Fermions have been investigated intensively due to their unusual properties. Examples of interacting one-dimensional systems range from large-scale structures like crystalline ion beams observed in high-energy storage rings Due to these versatile applications it is important to understand the ground state and transport properties of quantum wires. Frequently bosonization techniques in Green functions allow to describe interacting models beyond exactly solvable cases and in various approximations Especially the transition between Tomonaga-Luttinger and Fermi liquids can be investigated For transport properties as integrals over the reduced density we will see that contribution of the Padé approximations related to the interpolating function are negligible and the results of the extended quasiparticle picture remains. In this way the validity of the extended quasiparticle picture is extended beyond the originally derived perturbation of small scattering rates. As illustration of this suggested Padé regularization, we consider only scattering of electrons on impurities and assume that any electron-electron interaction is screened off. Similar models have been investigated in second Born approximation in The exact Bethe ansatz solution shows that an impurity is dressed up by surrounding particles and in the strongly attractive limit, it forms a dimer with inner Fermions in the Fermi sea 62 similar to the highly imbalanced 1D Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin-Ovchinnikov (FFLO) state The outline is as follows. In the next chapter we briefly give the many-body scheme with the focus on the extended quasiparticle picture and discuss its failure due to the behaviour at the Fermi energy. This leads to the suggestion of a twofold expansion interpolated by a Padé formula. In chapter III this twofold expansion is derived and the two first energy-weighted sum rules are proven to be completed independent on the interpolating function. In chapter IV the Padé expression is applied successively to higher-order approximations starting first with a model of constant damping proceeding to a model of impurity scattering with contact interaction in Born and T-matrix approximation. The influence of the boundstate poles are illustrated in the latter approximation. Two necessary amendments are found, the correction of energy argument of the selfenergy in order to reproduce the Fermi energy and the correlated density besides the free density. The reason of the latter is the delay time appearing in approximations with a dynamical vertex as two-particle correlation which is explained in chapter V. The Tan contact is given and compared to other approaches showing a universal behaviour. In chapter VI we discuss the effect of the delay time to the conductivity and give the finite temperature expression. It shows a localization at certain impurity densities and an enhancement at small temperatures as a possible onset of superconducting behaviour. Chapter VII summarizes and the appendix gives the Euler expansion of the arctan function and the proof of cancellation of interpolationfunction related terms for transport. This concludes the reasoning why the extended quasi-particle picture works also for correlated one-dimensional systems. The Dyson equation for the causal propagator G(1, 2) = -i T a + 1 a 2 with time ordering T reads in terms of the Hartree-Fock propagator with the time-diagonal Hartree-Fock self energy and the correlation selfenergy Σ(1, 2). It is integrated about double occurring indices, 1 = ( x 1 , t 1 ). The interaction potential is V and 2 + signs an infinitesimal later time than t 2 . Since we concentrate on equilibrium, all quantities are only dependent on the difference of coordinates. One Fourier transforms these difference coordinates into frequency/momentum. We will denote these transformed quantities by small letters. Nonequilibrium expressions can be found in The real part of the selfenergy is the Hilbert transform of the selfenergy spectral function Both specifying the retarded selfenergy The retarded propagator we obtain from (1) by Langreth/Wilkins 70 rules leading to the same form of equation which are easily solved in equilibrium as where we abbreviate in the following The spectral function follows for Bose/Fermi particles. The poles of (9) at describe the quasiparticle excitations by the selfconsistent energy ε k and γ represents the quasiparticle damping. For question concerning the convergence of different many body expansions see Within the extended quasiparticle picture we expand the spectral and correlation functions with respect to the order of damping and correspondingly with the derived principal value ℘ ′ ω = -∂ ω ℘ ω and the equilibrium distribution function n ω , i.e. the Fermi-or Bosefunction respectively. The form (12) was presented with respect to small damping (scattering rate) expansion and with quasiparticle energies under the name of extended quasiparticle approximation in nonequilibrium If we integrate (12) over the energy ω we get the connection between the reduced density matrix ρ (momentum distribution) and the free (quasiparticle) distribution n ε k as The quasiparticle distribution n ε k is to be taken at the pole ω = ε k of the spectral function (10) and the second line of ( For Fermions in the ground state, n ǫ = Θ(ǫ F -ǫ), observing that we can further rewrite (13) into This shows that if we approach the Fermi energy from above ε k = ǫ F + 0 we have the value of the second term in ( and approaching from below ε k = ǫ F -0 the step function is reduced by a factor given by the third term in ( Together one sees a jump at the Fermi energy of i.e. just the wave-function renormalization as the factor of the pole in (11). This typical Fermi-liquid behaviour is present as long as the imaginary part of selfenergy, the damping γ of the quasiparticles, vanishes at the Fermi surface in order to render ( B. Problems with the extended quasiparticle approximation for non-Fermi liquids The problem of the perturbation expansion and resulting extended quasiparticle picture is best understood by a model of constant quasiparticle damping γ(ω, k) = γ and consequently σ = 0 and ε k = ǫ k due to (4). The exact reduced density matrix reads The extended quasiparticle approximation as the expansion with respect to γ of ( and shows a divergence at the Fermi energy. This puzzling failure can be seen from the exact expression (20). The arctan has a cut such that the expansion near the Fermi energy, which means at small values of ǫ F -ǫ, is different from the expansion of small damping γ, which explains why the expansion diverges at x = 2(ǫ Fε k )/γ → 0, seen in figure A somewhat better expansion which does not diverge at the Fermi energy was found by Euler in 1755, see appendix A, which does not diverge at x = 0 but remains discontinuous as seen in figure with x = 2(ǫ F -ǫ k )/γ. The obviously working idea of Padé approximation of the last chapter we derive now by a systematic expansion of the spectral function. For this purpose we observe that the Euler formula ( In the spectral function (9) we have now two expansions, one with respect to small γ and one with respect to deviations from the Fermi level ε k -ǫ F with ε k the quasiparticle energy as solution of (10). Both expansions have to be interpolated according to (24) due to the cut. We translate now this expansion for (20) into an expansion for the spectral function in such a way to reproduce (24). Applying the rule (26) for both expansions, γ and The small scattering-rate expansion of the standard extended quasiparticle approximation ( Here we have extended the last term by the damping according to (26). The additional part in ( describes now the expansion with respect to the deviation from the Fermi energy. The subtle difference has to be noted in the pre-factor of the second term being the deviation of the Hartree-Fock energy ǫ k -ǫ F from the Fermi energy and not the quasiparticle energy ε k -ǫ F . This is not visible from the constant model so far where both expressions are identical. That this extension is correct we will convince ourselves now by various sum rules and the comparison with the reduced density (25) for successively more complicated models in chapter IV. First it is instructive to see how the reduced density matrix (13) appears from the Padé approximation (27). One has as exact spectral expression The integral over the δ-function as first part in (28) reads where we used (4). The approximation includes the expansion of the denominator in accordance with first-order damping and the subsequent extension of the principal value by the damping according to (26). This combines now with the second part of (28) to yield where the last line can be rewritten with the help of ( with the abbreviation For the additional part (29) we can perform the frequency integral to get where the above and below integration limits have to be inserted depending on the damping which might be zero. As an intermediate check, adding both terms (32) and (35) yields exactly (25) with the Padé approximation (24) observing that here in this model we have γ(ω, k) = const and σ = 0 and consequently ε k = ǫ k . The form of Padé approximation suggested in ( We check the frequency sum rule valid for any model of the selfenergy. We can perform the trivial frequency integrals directly analogously to (32) and ( which means is completed independent of the interpolation function f (x) where we abbreviated Even the first energy-weighted sum rule is also fulfilled which already the extended quasiparticle approximation does The integral over (29) reads Adding both parts we obtain the correct first energyweighted sum rule It is remarkable that both sum rules are fulfilled for any interpolating function f [2(ǫ F -ε k )/γ(ǫ F , k)] and any model for the selfenergy. This suggests already that for transport, i.e. integrated forms of the reduced density, the extended quasiparticle term ρ 1-f might be sufficient which we will proof indeed in appendix B which is valid for any approximation of self energy. Therefore the Padé approximation presented here is also valid for electronelectron scattering though only impurity scattering examples are chose in the following for illustration. Here we will compare the reduced density matrix from the integral over the spectral function (30) with the analytical Padé approximations ( A. Impurity scattering in Born approximation We will now test the Padé interpolation ( with the interaction constants In the following we understand all energies, ω, γ, σ etc, in units of Fermi energy and the momenta k in units of Fermi momentum given by the free-particle density n F as k F = n F π/s where we denote the spin-degeneracy by s. The interaction strength we express in terms of a Bohrradius-equivalent V 0 = 2 /ma B which allows to discuss charged and neutral impurities on the same footing. The Bruckner parameter r s is the ratio of inter-particle distance d = 1/ns to this Bohr radius r s = d/a B . In Born approximation we have only a dependence on the single parameter g. In T-matrix approximation presented in the next chapter we will see the dependence on both parameters g and b independently, i.e. the interaction strength and the impurity density. The corresponding real part of self energy reads according to (4) as it was used in Eq. 30 of 58 with Fermi liquid parameters. The spectral function (9) for this Born approximation can then be written with (41) and (43) introducing in ( where q 0 is the real solution of and describes a sharp bound-state pole at negative energies due to vanishing damping. The selfenergy (43) results into the quasiparticle energy and are the maxima of the spectral function as seen in figure The maxima at the quasiparticle energy (46) are indicated in the ωk area as green line. The sharp bound states at negative energy are artificially broadened to make them visible. with a finite damping. In contrast, the negative boundstate poles at ω = -q 2 0 are sharp. The sum rules (37) and ( The Padé approximation (32) reads now for the impurity model ( with an elementary integral. The second part (35) becomes where we had to break the integration over frequency into parts larger and smaller zero whereby the latter one leads to the bound-state pole contribution. In figure Next we sum the ladder diagrams which means to solve the equation for the retarded T -matrix 61 with b of (42). The correlation part of the selfenergy simplifies from two-particle scattering towards impurity scattering used here and σ > is obtained by interchanging n ↔ 1 -n. The resulting imaginary (5) and real (4) parts of the selfenergy read and compared to the Born approximation ( For ω < 0 we have the bound-state pole ε = -q 2 0 as solution of It is easy to see that possible extreme points of this polynomial are always at negative q 0 . Since the polynomial increases with increasing q 0 we have only a real positive solution as a crossing of the polynomial with the q 0 -axes if the value of the polynomial at q 0 = 0 is negative which translates into which determines the critical k 0 above which the boundstate pole vanishes and resolves into the positive dispersion. This value coincides with the value where the quasiparticle energy ε of ( The quasiparticle dispersion (53) has only real solu-tions as long as One sees in figure which case is plotted in the bottom panel of figure It is quite remarkable that this limit does not depend on the density of electrons but only on the strength of interaction. As long as we have an impurity concentration higher than (57) the appearance of quasiparticle poles only above a finite momentum (energy) describes an energy gap. The same behaviour has been found as localized states in a pseudogap The Padé approximation (32) reads now for the impurity model in T-matrix approximation ( with an elementary integral due to (51). The second part (35) becomes where γ = γ(ǫ F ) and all energies are in terms of ǫ F . We had to break the integration over frequency again into parts larger and smaller zero where the latter leads to the bound-state pole contribution as the first part in ρ f . If we compare this Padé approximation with the reduced density matrix from the spectral function (30) in figure a. Selfconsistent quasiparticles First we have used the quasiparticle energy at values of the free energy ε k = ε(k 2 ). A selfconsistent solution of the quasiparticle dispersion (10) would require a successive iteration which means ε k = ε(k 2 + δ). We can determine this required shift δ by demanding that the Fermi energy should be reproduced ǫ F = ε(k 2 F +δ). For the quasiparticle approximation (53) one finds explicitly δ = -σ(ǫ F ). Including this shift leads to a smoothing of the curve parallel to the spectral expression (30) as seen in the middle panel of figure b. Correlated density Second, we recognize a parallel shift between the spectral result (30) and the Padé approximation in the middle panel of figure As soon as the vertex, the T-matrix T = |T | exp iΦ, has a frequency-dependent phase φ(ω) there appears a finite duration of the collision process. The first-order effect can be expressed (see Eq. 68 in 47 ) as a time delay ∆ t = ∂ ω Φ correction to the selfenergy (50) We express now and use the impurity limit 1 -n p ≈ 1, n p-q ≈ n p to find the additional contribution to the collision integral This means that in the balance equation for the density we obtain with (62) an additional correlated density contribution For Born approximation b → 0 we do not have a phase and the collision delay ∼ √ b is zero. Therefore the integral (64) should vanish. This is the case if we expand the integrand into a Taylor series and get Unfortunately the integral does not smoothly converge which means the integration and expansion cannot be interchanged. In fact one gets formally which compared to (64) shows that the term π/2b appears to be wrong in the sense of perturbation expansion of the integrand which we demand as limit of T-matrix towards Born approximation. Therefore we subtract this term which means we first expand and then integrate and then resume again to get finally This correlated density adds to the free density for total density n = n F + n c and accordingly changes the Fermi momentum since the latter one is determined with respect to the free density (60). In figure The expansion at large momentum in the Padé approximation only the term ρ 1-f contributes as it is in the extended quasiparticle approximation. From ( with the Tan contact independent of the pole correction δ. The values for the e-e model of contact interaction is compared in and compared to (69) we see that we have to replace in our result the impurity density simply by n i = 1/8a B to reproduce the result of For any transport property we have to consider momentum integrals over the reduced density abbreviating which presents the difference to the extended quasiparticle part ρ EQP = ρ 1-f . In appendix B we show that the additional part is negligible under integration for most regular cases of selfenergy. This means though we have to use two-term Padé approximation to reproduce the spectral function and the reduced density matrix at the Fermi energy correctly, only the part of the extended quasiparticle part matters under integrations. In other words the divergence of the extended quasiparticle distribution function at the Fermi energy cancels under integration. The impurity scattering including averaged T-matrix approximation contains the average about impurity configurations and therefore reinforce spatial invariance. We write the kinetic equation for homogeneous systems in an electric field with the nonlocal corrections (63). When linearized with respect to the electric field one obtains the relaxation time The energy dependence of this relaxation rate starts at zero showing a maximum and vanishes for large energies. Coulomb interactions between the electrons just lead to the opposite behaviour and leads besides the standard current density also to a current density due to two-particle correlations The corresponding conductivities are where we used (42). The results for the density (67) and total conductivity λ = λ 0 + λ c with (78) can be seen in figure easily seen from ( Since the expressions for the conductivity are linear in the distribution functions we can calculate the finite temperature T expressions observing the relation 80 to be applied to the zero-temperature expressions ( where the last term is the correlated conductivity. The integral about the normal conductivity can be done analytically to yield . It is remarkable that this expression becomes independent on the impurity density and is only determined by the interaction strength coded in the equivalent Bohr radius a B according to V 0 = 2 /ma B and by the density of electrons. The effect of temperature is basically to diminish the area of localization seen as shrinking hysteresis in figure In the next figure A two-fold expansion of the spectral function in interacting quantum systems is presented. One expansion with respect to small scattering rates is the known ex-tended quasiparticle picture. This expansion fails in non-Fermi systems like one-dimensional Fermi gases since it diverges at the Fermi energy. Therefore a second expansion is suggested around the Fermi energy. Both expansions can be interpolated by a Padé expression. The advantage is that independent on the interpolating function the first two energy-weighted sum rules are completed as it is the case in the extended quasiparticle picture. The validity of the approach is the same as the perturbation theory where the extended quasiparticle picture is based on. With the help of the presented Padé regularization the divergence of the reduced density in perturbation theory is cured at the Fermi energy independent on the used selfenergy approximation. For models of electron-impurity scattering the quality of this Padé approximation is demonstrated to reproduce the spectral function and reduced density. In this way the divergence of the reduced density in extended quasiparticle approximation at the Fermi energy is corrected to a finite value. It is shown that the divergence of the extended quasiparticle approximation at the Fermi energy cancels under integration. Consequently, in order to describe the reduced density and spectral function a two-term Padé interpolation is necessary while for transport processes the extended quasiparticle approximation alone is sufficient. This extends the validity of extended quasiparticle approximation beyond the Fermi-liquids. For the T-matrix approximation one obtains delay times resulting into a correlated density which describes how much particles remain in a correlated state. Further consequences are an additional contribution to the conductivity which results into two effects. At certain impurity densities localization appears and a minimum of conductivity develops for small temperatures dependent on the impurity concentration which is interpreted as a possible onset of superconductivity. The Tan contact shows the same universal behaviour as found in e-e scattering when we replace the impurity concentration by the value where the gap in the spectral function vanishes. The Padé expansion of the spectral function is derived. Here it is illustrate on a simple exploratory example on electron-impurity scattering. In a forthcoming paper it will be demonstrated that it works equally well for electron-electron correlations. The expectation is that it might be fruitfully applicable also for other non-Fermi systems.