The understanding of the material properties of the layered transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) is critical for their applications in structural composites. The data-driven machine learning (ML) based approaches are being developed in contrast to traditional experimental or computational approach to predict and understand materials properties under varied operating conditions. In this study, we used two ML algorithms such as Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) and Feed Forward Neural Network (FFNN) combined with molecular dynamics (MD) simulations to predict the mechanical properties of MX2 (M=Mo, W, and X=S, Se) TMDs. The LSTM model is found to be capable of predicting the entire stress-strain response whereas the FFNN is used to predict the material properties such as fracture stress, fracture strain, and Young's modulus. The effects of operating temperature, chiral orientation, and pre-existing crack size on the mechanical properties are thoroughly investigated. We carried out 1440 MD simulations to produce the input dataset for the neural network models. Our results indicate that both LSTM and FFNN are capable of predicting the mechanical response of monolayer TMDs under different conditions with more than 95% accuracy. The FFNN model exhibits lower computational cost than LSTM; however, the capability of LSTM model to predict the entire stress-strain curve is advantageous to assess material properties. The study paves the pathway toward extending this approach to predict other important properties, such as optical, electrical, and magnetic properties of TMDs. Two-dimensional (2D) transition-metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) have opened new possibilities to realize extraordinary functionalities for next-generation electronic, optoelectronic, and quantum devices Monolayer TMDs such as MoS2, MoSe2, WS2 and WSe2 have emerged as potential candidates for flexible electronic/optoelectronic applications and nanoelectromechanical systems (NEMS) devices All of these studies were carried out in a controlled environment. On the contrary, the prospect of repeated exposure to extreme temperatures and severe chemical environments during synthesis and practical applications makes monolayer TMDs vulnerable to the evolution and growth of imperfections. Imperfections such as cracks and defects significantly influence the mechanical ML approaches are gaining popularity in the age of big data, especially in materials science Researchers used ML models in various aspects of material science including material properties prediction Previously, ML algorithms such as Support Vector Machine (SVM), and Feed Forward Neural Network (FFNN) have been used to predict mechanical properties of 2D materials Kastuar et al. proposed a ML based toolkit (ElasTool toolkit) for studying the temperature-dependent mechanical properties of 2D MoS2-WS2 heterostructures In this work, we propose a unique Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) model Here, we first obtained the strain-stress relationship for all these TMDs under varied conditions using MD simulations. MD simulations are a well-known computational method for obtaining material characteristics and researchers have previously utilized this technique to generate dataset for ML models. [65], We also extracted mechanical properties (fracture stress, fracture strain, and Young's modulus) from the MD simulations, and fit them using a FFNN. The FFNN model is found to predict the mechanical parameters for validation set with 99% accuracy. We compare the predictions of FFNN and LSTM. The results indicate that the LSTM approach has very similar accuracy level as FFNN and is sufficiently capable of predicting the stress-strain behavior of TMD monolayers. Using LSTM model, we can predict the stressstrain profile and other important mechanical properties without conducting time-consuming MD simulations. In this work, MD simulations are used to conduct uniaxial tensile testing of 2D monolayer TMDs (h-MoS2, h-MoSe2, h-WS2, h-WSe2) in a variety of conditions. The Large-scale Atomic/Molecular Massively Parallel Simulator (LAMMPS) Where φ 2 & φ 3 represent the bond stretch (two-body) and bond bending (three-body) interactions, respectively. To eliminate the effect of free edges, the simulation boundary conditions are specified as periodic in the in-plane (x and y) directions, and the simulation box is assumed to be an exact multiple of the unit cell in these directions. The free boundary condition is applied in the out-of-plane direction to avoid cross-layer interactions. The system is initially minimized using the Polak-Ribiere conjugate gradient approach The temporal connections of hidden layers between the LSTM units differentiate the LSTM neural network from other neural networks. Typically, a conventional LSTM unit consists of an input gate, an output gate, a forget gate, a unit input, a cell state, and peepholes. These gates act in coordination to direct units to retain or forget particular information derived from temporal input. Figure Where W, b, and R denote the weights of input data, biases, and common recurrent weights, respectively. By contrast, the subscripts z, i, o, and f signify the input units, input gate, output gate, and The three-dimensional network is displayed in Figure Stress-strain data from MD simulations are used as input to train the LSTM model, which then incorporates the TMD's constitutive law into the weight of all connections. For LSTM models, the choice of the appropriate descriptors is essential. The stress-strain relationships of the studied TMDs are examined by varying the chiral orientation, temperature, and pre-crack lengths. In order to describe the TMDs, we employ the metal and chalcogen atomic masses as descriptors. We summarized our input features in Table Where, x ′ and x represent the scaled and unscaled values. A system may fail to generate correct results when the input data is not mapped one-to-one, which is a crucial condition for the LSTM technique or any other neural network to perform properly. Our data is organized in a manner that meets the criteria. The LSTM recurrent NN (RNN) was determined empirically in this research. The number of LSTM layers, the number of fully-connected hidden layers, and the number of nodes in each layer describe the LSTM network's architecture. Stress-strain behavior of TMDs can be predicted using time-distributed 5 fully connected hidden layers with varied numbers of nodes in each layer and two LSTM layers for recognizing temporal data. Time-distributed fully connected layers (FCL) are very useful in time-series data. It allows a layer for each input in LSTM/RNN models. Table The first step in developing any ANN model is to create a dataset. We used data from the tensile test simulations of monolayer TMDs carried out on four distinct TMDs in varying chiral directions, six operating temperatures, and six different crack lengths, as well as on their pristine structures. We conducted 5 separate simulations for each case with different random initial velocity distribution that resulting in a total of 1440 simulations. We used the median values for each set of output data. We have five input and three output parameters in our dataset. The input parameters include atomic masses of metals and chalcogens, chiral direction, temperature, and the initial crack length. Table To develop the NN model, we need to select hyper-parameters, the number of hidden layers, the number of neurons in each layer, and the initial values of connection weights and activation functions. To determine the optimal structure of the hidden layer, a numerical optimization technique based on a global search across the whole accessible space is applied. The accessible space is defined in this research as any NNs with 3 to 5 hidden layers each comprising of 50 to 65 neurons. This search space was found to be sufficiently big to discover the optimum NN for this application. The hyper-parameters of this design are listed consecutively in Table We utilized a typical loss function for the LSTM and FFNN deep learning methods. The loss function was made up of the MSE function and the L 2 regularisation term, which is specified as follows: To assess the performance of different models, the coefficient of determination (R 2 ) was utilized. A larger coefficient of determination signifies a more accurate prediction. The following definition applies to the variable R 2 : Here, the targeted data for each set of samples is represented by y i , the output by y pi , and the average by y ̅ . N is the number of total sample points. The L 2 regularization parameter λ prevents overfitting by penalising the weights (W). The adjusting of hyper-parameters affects the accuracy of any deep learning model. It is evident from Figure Next, we use the FFNN model to predict the fracture properties of the four TMDs. We assess the accuracy of the FFNN model by comparing the results obtained in MD simulations to the FFNN predictions for the training, validation, and testing samples, as shown in Figure We further compared the prediction of LSTM and FFNN models to the MD simulations data as presented in Figures As the number of hidden layers and nodes in the models increases, the number of trainable weights in NNs Where Num FF & Num LSTM denote the total number of trainable weights in the FFNN and LSTM neural networks, respectively. N i denotes the number of nodes in the ith layer, N aheadLSTM is the number of nodes in the layer before the LSTM layer, Num LSTM denotes the number of nodes in the LSTM layer, and Others denote the number of nodes in all other levels in the LSTM model except the LSTM layer. In our FFNN and LSTM NNs, there were a total of 5553 and 16015 trainable weights, respectively. Due to the presence of four recurrent gate units in the LSTM units, the trainable weights in the LSTM model are much larger than those in conventional NNs. Each iteration of the LSTM model incurs a higher compute cost due to the higher number of trainable weights and error backpropagation along the expanded time dimension. Because of a large number of trainable weights and its complicated architecture compared to the FFNN model, the LSTM model needs a larger amount of computational resource. However, by leveraging a graphics processing unit (GPU), the computational complexity of the LSTM model can be further lowered, allowing the LSTM to be used for big-data analysis. When compared to traditional NNs, the enhanced accuracy and convergence rate of the LSTM model justifies the higher processing costs. In this work, we developed two ML models: LSTM and FFNN to predict the mechanical behaviour of 2D TMDs. LSTM predicts the entire stress-strain response with an accuracy close to 1 for training and validation samples and 0.95 for unknown test samples. FFNN predicts the fracture stress, fracture strain, and Young's modulus of the materials with a similar level of accuracy. We also found the LSTM approach to be slightly more computationally costly than the FFNN due to its added complexity arising from a large number of trainable weights. However, the ability of LSTM to predict the entire stress-strain response 