Autonomous materials research systems allow scientists to fail smarter, learn faster, and spend less resources in their studies. As these systems grow in number, capability, and complexity, a new challenge ariseshow will they work together across large facilities? We explore one solutiona multi-agent laboratory-control framework. The framework is demonstrated with autonomous material science labs in mind, where information from diverse research campaigns can be combined to address scientific questions. The framework can: 1) account for realistic resource limits, e.g., equipment use, 2) allow for research-campaign-running machine-learning agents with diverse learning capabilities and goals, 3) facilitate multi-agent collaborations and teams. The MULTIagent auTonomous fAcilities Scalable frameworK (MULTI-TASK) makes possible facility-wide simulations, including agent-instrument and agent-agent interactions. Through modularity, real-world facilities can come on-line in phases, with simulated instruments gradually replaced by real-world instruments. We hope MULTITASK opens new areas of study in large-scale-autonomous and semi-autonomous research campaigns and facilities. Autonomous research systems 1 are a paradigm shifting method for performing systematic scientific research. For these systems, a machine learning agent is placed in control of automated equipment to control experiment design, execution, and analysis, with the system learning and evolving with each new datum in an evolving environment. A machine learning function is often used as a surrogate for the unknown relationship between experiment inputs and outputs, mapping the complex and vast search space. Data collected from experiments are preprocessed and then used to improve the surrogate function's predictive power. Experiment design and selection is guided by active learning 2the machine learning field of optimal experiment design. Subsequent experiments are selected to provide maximal knowledge to the users. With such machine learning pipelines, order-of-magnitude improvements in research efficiencies are possible As autonomous systems grow in number, capability, and complexity, a new challenge ariseshow will these systems work together? Autonomous control can be extended throughout labs, research and development facilities, and warehouses to achieve many orders-of-magnitude improvements in efficiencies. The benefits may be significant. For example, greater facility efficiencies may be gained by addressing multiple correlated challenges in concert, with each challenge benefiting from knowledge gained for the others. Such autonomous systems would free technical experts to focus on posing questions and gaining insight from results. As the scale of these systems grows, so too does the scope of the questions that can be addressed. Within a facility-scale architecture, there are different ways to organize the interactions of these autonomous systems, in particular their machine learning agentseach with its own goals. The simplest option for the agent architecture is perhaps autonomous control by a central machine learning agent that collects all data and makes all decisions. This architecture has its benefits, including reducing the need for redundancies in data storage and computational resources by centralizing both. Another architecture is one with a central decision-making agent combined with distributed learning-only agents, exemplified by federated learning How the goals of each agent relates to those of the others and to the overall facility goal can be informative of the optimal architecture. For example, consider the collaboration between two agents working on disparate tasks. Collaboration between the agents may provide research acceleration when the data from one task is informative of the other (e.g., phase maps and material properties 11 ). Thus, improving overall facility performance. However, if data sharing is extraneous, it may serve only to increase the computational cost for data analysis tasks. In the latter case, sharing only the learning from each agent (and not the data) may be preferable. Similarly, distributing decision making may be computationally preferable for agents with disparate goals. The laboratory framework presented herein is flexible enough to allow for different agent-control architectures including centralized agent, federated learning agents, and multiple independent agentsi.e., different modalities for a laboratory management system. Dynamic architectures are also possible, optimizing to match time-varying challenges. The framework is dubbed the MULTI-agent auTonomous fAcilities -a Scalable frameworK aka MULTITASK. This framework can demonstrate clear technical benefits. For example, facilities may have systems from which collected data is large (volume, velocity, etc.), resulting in network bandwidth issues when centralizing data. Distributed agents can take advantage of edge computing and data storage to overcome this challenge by performing local experiment design, data collection and reduction, and data analysis MULTITASK also offers the flexibility of modularity, allowing real-world autonomous spaces to come on-line in stages, with simulated instruments gradually replaced by real-world instruments. As facilities change in size and scope, and even grow to contain distributed instruments (e.g., across states or countries), a networked, multi-agent framework can scale to demand, varying the number and type of agents. If two disparate facilities overlap in some instruments, successful agents from one facility can be copied to the other. Additionally, local agents can focus on local challenges and collaborate with agents working on larger scale challenges, such as agents working to optimize both local and shared resources. Such lab modularity formalizes the collaborative interactions which can be especially important when dealing with data privacy and proprietary information. For example, a localized agent could serve as a gatekeeper, providing information of internal signal trends while maintaining intellectual property protections through data privacy, federated learning, and other techniques. We demonstrate MULTITASK in the context of an autonomous experimental material science laboratory. While the framework is general and can be easily extended to other fields or applications, experimental material science is a particularly informative example since many of the research efforts require input from multiple instruments. For example, to explore a class of materials for a particular application 1) a sample or set of samples must first be synthesized, 2) the structure and microstructure of those samples must be characterized by a suite of instruments, and 3) the relevant properties of the samples must be measured by a different suite of instruments before 4) the sample performance can be evaluated and understood. MULTITASK's integrated multi-agent system The research lab provides further unique challenges for a multi-agent system. Agents follow the experimental process of sample synthesis, characterization, and analysis. Agents may face hysteretic or quantum mechanical challenges, e.g., the act of sensing may alter the target domain. Research campaigns are exploratory (heavily unsupervised) without clear end states. As a result, active learning methods are preferable over the more common use of multi-agent reinforcement learning. Furthermore, consensus between agents is achieved through multi-modal hypothesis testingi.e., agents collaborate by playing each other's devil's advocate (which differs from typical game-type multi-agent collaborations). Additionally, competing agents may avoid each other in the target domain, seeking orthogonal paths toward the same goal (which differs from typical game-type multiagent competitions). Through these interactions, hypotheses evolve from surrogate models to heuristics to potential physical models. In this work, MULTITASK manages a simulated materials research lab with the goal of autonomous materials optimization. Past work into agent-based machine learning for the materials sciences includes three studies. The first study utilizes data processing agents and learning agents for identifying the composition-phase map from previously performed X-ray diffraction experiments The contributions of this work are: • A unifying framework for an autonomous research lab, and a basis for similar facilities. The framework allows for real-world modules to come online unit by unit, replacing simulations and digital twins. • A visual language for describing autonomous laboratory architecture. This combines visualization of multi-agent networks The discovery of novel solid-state materials is key to the success of numerous next-generation technologies such as quantum computing, carbon capture, and low-cost medical imaging. These materials must possess advanced properties selected for their technology applications. To find these advanced materials, researchers utilize a fundamental relationship between how a material is made and its resulting structure and properties -the synthesis-structure-property relationship A useful tool in the search for advanced materials is the 'composition-phase map' which maps unique elemental compositions (and potentially other properties such as the temperature at which the material was synthesized) to the material's phase A selection of 'objects' (for background on object-oriented programming, see: To instantiate an agent, synthesis instrument, measurement instrument, or other object just requires calling the class, i.e,. agent(), instr_synthesis(), instr_measure(). In Python, list comprehension can be used to instantiate a list of these objects with a call such as: agents = [ agent(index, *properties) for index, properties in agent_descriptions ]. These objects can be combined into facility units with multiple agents, shared instruments, and shared sample and data repositories. Agents consist of four basic properties. Internal representation (IR): An internal representation of the world. This includes a perception of the materials search space, the tools and samples available, past collected data, and the other agents. Goals: Each agent has a set of goals with an associated set of active learning acquisition functions, which quantify the utility of future experiments. Agents can work together in a group by combining their acquisition functions (i.e., goals), to identify the next set of experiments that benefit the group as a whole. Machine learning (ML): They have machine learning capabilities for data analysis, prediction, and decision making (i.e., active learning). Each agent can have its own unique ML capabilities. In principle these capabilities can be any sort of algorithm for data analysis and prediction, be that deep learning models, Bayesian inference models, physics-based analytical models, etc. In the present work, agents employ Bayesian models as they are particularly well suited for active learning. When sharing data between agents, agents employ a coregionalization learning algorithm to exploit shared trends across the data sources (See Methods Section). Communication: Agents use functions for requesting, sending, and receiving data to share knowledge between individual agents, groups of agents, or with the full agent community through a central data repository. The four basic capabilities of IR, ML, goals, and communication are demonstrated through agent-agent collaboration for accelerated research campaigns. Instruments can perform certain operations with associated capacity and delays. An example set of instruments for materials or device research would consist of sample synthesis, processing, property simulation, and characterization instruments. For instance, a synthesis instrument can be defined so that it makes 2 material samples at a time, with a synthesis time of 10 minutes. Agents place requests to instruments to perform desired operations (e.g., a synthesis instrument to make a sample, a measurement instrument to measure a sample) and these requests are put into operation queues for the instrument. In performing their operations, instruments can draw on or create limited, consumable resources. For example, a sample synthesis instrument may consume 1 silicon wafer to produce one material sample. Two types of repositories existones that store physical samples and ones that store data. Each type has a dedicated management system for agent interaction. Sample repository: Once a sample is synthesized, it is transferred to a sample repository to await a request to the repository management system for the sample to be processed or measured. When the sample is unused, it is returned to the sample repository. The sample-repository relationship is analogous to that of a book and library. The management system allows agents to identify which samples are in the repository and which are being lent out. Data repositories: These serve as central data storage facilities, where agents can share collected data including measurement data as well as data analysis, prediction, and decision-making acquisition function data. Management provides agent read and write access to databases. A diagrammatic language can facilitate network description and comparisons through displaying the lab network infrastructure. Here we use shaped icons to indicate the physical and computing instruments (rectangle), repositories (hexagon), agents (oval), and humans (cut-off oval). Different forms of agent-agent and agent-instrument interactions can be indicated through the graph connections. Here data sharing is shown with a graph edge (connection between objects, i.e., nodes). The additional icon ► indicates that this data sharing path also permits sharing data on acquisition function which impacts decision making. The direction of the icon indicates the hierarchy of decision making with { Leader ► Follower}. If both directions are shown, both agents share their acquisition functions and impact the other's decision making. Edges marked with ∎ indicate physical sample sharing between objects. An example is shown in Figure The coupled challenges of materials exploration and optimization present an excellent opportunity to demonstrate the multi-agent approach. More particularly, the fundamental dual challenge of exploring the synthesis-structure part of the SSPR through phase mapping, and the challenge of identifying materials with optimal functional property from the synthesis-property part of the SSRP ('synthesis' here includes composition). Through shared trends, knowledge of one can provide knowledge of the other, as demonstrated by recent autonomous materials discovery informed by the SSRP For this work, individual agents either seek to maximize knowledge of the synthesis-structure relationship or seek the synthesis composition that maximizes the target property. The former agents are labeled 'PM' for phase map and the latter are labeled 'FP' for functional property. In collaboration, the agents combine data of composition, structure, and property to learn the SSPR relationship and thus improve analysis and prediction of their individual target objectives. By further combining their acquisition functions, agents can balance their goals with that of the community, selecting subsequent investigations that benefit overall community knowledge. The materials data challenge is drawn from the perovskite oxide material system as characterized by An agent requests a composition to investigate, the sample is synthesized if needed, and the agent then requests for the sample to be characterized for either d33 or Raman spectra based on their agent type (PM or FP). Synthesis, characterization, and sample requests from the sample repository have associated delays and queues. Agents, instruments, and data repositories are instantiated with facility units composed of the simulated physical portion diagramed in Figure Figure This preliminary work demonstrates the different performance achievable using diverse autonomous laboratory architectures. For these simple challenges, agent-agent data sharing and joint decision making performed better than only data sharing, which itself performed better than independent agents. The presented framework can be extended for diverse research possibilities. For example, one can investigate: the impact of agent heterogeneity in learning and decision-making capabilities; the relationship between agent-facility architecture and challenge type and difficulty; as well as agent-agent interactions. This latter possibility includes investigating agents with internal representations of other agents (e.g., expected beliefs and actions), adversarial agents capable of introducing poisoned data or models to throw off their competitors, and collaborative agents working together to improve the certainty of their individual results (i.e., cooperative validation). Furthermore, just as multi-agent frameworks have been used to study markets Resource Availability Lead Contact: A. Gilad Kusne, aaron.kusne@nist.gov Materials Availability: No materials were produced in this work. Code and Data Availability: Both code and data are available on Github (https://github.com/KusneNIST/MULTI-TASK_Matter) and are part of the upcoming NIST Hermes library to be found at https://pages.nist.gov/remi/ Agents: Independent Learning Independent phase mapping is performed by first clustering the materials x s with collected Raman data using Spectral Clustering with a cosine measure applied to the Raman data (here intensities measured at different Raman shift values form individual vectors. The cosine measure is applied between vectors to define dissimilarity). The result is an approximate phase region labels y s for each sample. A full Bayesian extrapolation of phase region knowledge is then performed using Bayesian inference. For Bayesian inference step i two change points values c i = {c i,1 , c i,2 } are sampled uniformly over the composition domain. These change points are then used to define a categorical distribution M s for the structure measured materials x s with the boundary between categories defined by the change points, using one-hot encoding. The sum log likelihood L s of the observed phase region labels, given the categorical distribution is then computed. The set of Bayesian inference samples C = {c i } approximate the posterior probability for c. The samples are then averaged to form a posterior probability for class membership over the full range X. This ian inference operation is performed using the Pyro* 26 package and allows for probabilistic structure labels as inputs. P M the posterior for membership probability will tend to have greater uncertainty at the unknown changepoints. Independent functional property regression is performed using the Matern52 kernel over the composition domain with the standard Gaussian process regression function using the GPFlow package A custom Bayesian inference-based, full Bayesian coregionalization function is used to combine the tasks of phase mapping and materials property regression. First samples with Raman are clustered as with the independent phase mapping. The cluster labels define potential phase regions. Within a Bayesian inference model, change points are sampled and converted to a categorical distribution to compute the likelihood of the observations given the samples, as in the independent phase mapping. The previous model is extended by using each defined categorical region (bounded by either a change point or the edge of the search space) to define a phase region r. The functional property in each phase region is represented by an independent radial basis function kernel Gaussian process, with Bayesian inference sampled set of parameters σ i,r : l i,r kernel length scale, s i,r kernel standard deviation, s i noise standard deviationhere it is assumed the measured noise is the same across all phase regions. Together, GP i,r the phase-region-bound GPs form GP i a piecewise GP. The likelihood is then computed for the observed functional property data. Bayesian inference sampling is guided by the sum of likelihoods from functional property regression and phase mapping. P y the Bayesian posterior for the functional property is approximated from the Bayesian inference samples by drawing a set of subsamples y GP from each GP i and computing a mean and standard deviation over the subsamples. The mean and standard deviation are then employed in a multivariate normal distribution (MVN). PM agents, which are focused on learning the composition-structure relationship, select subsequent compositions based on entropy over P M . FP agents, which are focused on learning composition-property relationship use Gaussian Process Upper Confidence Bounds 29 (GP-UCB) given by argmax x [μ + σ√ln(Dn 2 π 2 )/3λ]. Here, μ and σ are the GP mean and standard deviation, respectively; n is the current iteration number; at each iteration a grid of D compositions is selected to search over; λ is a predefined constant, here set to 0.1. 