Interfaces between heavy metals (HMs) and antiferromagnetic insulators (AFIs) have recently become highly investigated and debated systems in the effort to create spintronic devices able to function at terahertz frequencies. Such heterostructures have great technological potential because AFIs can generate sub-picosecond spin currents which the HMs can convert into charge signals. In this work we demonstrate an optically induced picosecond spin transfer at the interface between AFIs and Pt using time-resolved THz emission spectroscopy. We select two antiferromagnets in the same family of fluoride cubic perovskites, KCoF3 and KNiF3, whose magnon frequencies at the centre of the Brillouin zone differ by an order of magnitude. By studying their behaviour with temperature we correlate changes in the spin transfer efficiency across the interface to the opening of a gap in the magnon density of states below the Néel temperature. Our observations are reproduced in a model based on the spin exchange between the localized electrons in the antiferromagnet and the free electrons in Pt. These results constitute an important step in the rigorous investigation and understanding of the physics of AFIs/HMs interfaces on the ultrafast timescale. Antiferromagnetic spintronics aims to harness the advantages of THz-frequency magnetic dynamics and low magnetic field sensitivity to develop new types of memory and logic devices While the spin transport properties of antiferromagnets have been extensively investigated with electrical methods Here we focus on a yet-unexplored route to transfer spin angular momentum from an AFI to a HM on the ultrashort timescale: the picosecond spin Seebeck effect (SSE). The quasi-static SSE has been measured in different AFIs Our study here addresses exclusively the role of the interface and characterises the spin transfer efficiency between an AFI and a HM as a function of temperature and applied magnetic field. We focus on the two interfaces in KNiF3/Pt and KCoF3/Pt. Both AFIs have a simple cubic perovskite-type structure and their spin structures have the same magnetic space group. However, KNiF3 has a lower magnetic anisotropy, resulting in a magnon gap that is about an order of magnitude lower with respect to KCoF3. In our study, we use an optical pump-THz emission layout illustrated in Fig. The onset of long-range magnetic ordering affects the nature of spin transport across a magnetic insulator (MI)-HM interface. Phenomenologically, interfacial spin transport can be understood in terms of incoherent spin pumping. The photo-induced thermal fluctuations of itinerant electron spins in the HM generate torques on the adjacent localised spin moments of the MI and affect the magnon population in the vicinity of the interface. Vice versa, the scattering of magnons at the interface leads to spin accumulation in the HM. The coupling strength between the itinerant spins in the HM and the localised spins of d-electrons in the MI is often parameterized by an sd-exchange Hamiltonian with constant J !" . In thermal equilibrium, scattering processes from both sides of the interface are equal in magnitude, resulting in a vanishing spin current. An imbalance between the magnon and the electron distributions is therefore required to break the equilibrium and to yield a net spin flow. In ferrimagnetic insulators, the magnon modes of opposite polarization are separated due to the inter-sublattice exchange field Breaking the degeneracy via Zeeman splitting is therefore necessary to cause an unequal population of the two magnon branches and lead to a net spin flow. As well as the mode degeneracy, AFIs can have a large zero-field magnon gap in the THz range due to the 'exchange enhancement' of the anisotropy. This is significantly larger than the GHz gap of ferromagnets and can be expected to affect spin transfer across AFI-HM interfaces. To understand how the relevant material parameters modify the optically-induced, incoherent spin pumping at picosecond timescales, we combine a Heisenberg model for the AFI, a Hubbard model for the HM and an sd-Hamiltonian coupling them at the interface, H = H #$% + H &' + H () . This follows a similar approach used to study picosecond demagnetisation dynamics in bulk metallic ferromagnets Here we outline the basic equations. In this model, the external magnetic field is assumed to be aligned with the Néel vector and below the spin flop critical value. Diagonalising the Hamiltonian and applying Fermi's Golden rule we find the spin current per unit area across the AFI-HM interface to be where S is the absolute value of the AFI spins in units of ħ. α and β denote the two AFI magnon modes (degenerate in zero field) with dispersion ε , -,3 . ε When the femtosecond laser pulse hits the sample, the electronic temperature in the HM increases rapidly, however the magnon population in the AFI is initially still at the ambient temperature. This temperature bias, or more generally, the difference between the distributions n 9 ;ε , -,0 ± μ ( < and n -;ε , -,0 < gives rise to a spin current across the interface. The magnon thermal distribution n 5,0 (ε) evolves in time due to the spin current We can assume that magnon-magnon scattering within and between magnon branches is negligible on the short timescales studied here. The contribution to the spin current from the α and β modes differs in sign since the both modes pump spins with the opposite signs due to their opposite magnon polarization. The spin current flow induces a spin accumulation μ ! in the HM according to an equation where τ ! is the relaxation time of s-electron spins in the HM and ρ = -1/D with D = . This spin accumulation further influences the spin current (Eq. ( The net spin current is transient. As the magnon distribution in the AFI equilibrates towards the thermal distribution of the electron-hole pairs in the HM, the spin accumulation decays to zero and the net spin current once again vanishes. There are competing processes taking place at different timescales that define the temporal evolution of both the effective electronic temperature and the spin accumulation. This is mostly determined by the strength of the interface coupling through J () , τ ( and ρ parameters. When the sd coupling is stronger, the magnon distribution follows the electron-hole distribution more closely, but rapidly creates a significant spin accumulation which feeds back into enhancing the spin current. When the sd coupling is weak, the electron temperature reaches a maximum value and then decreases before the magnon distribution has changed significantly. Hence less spin accumulation is created, resulting in the reduction of the spin current that can be generated. The magnon dispersion also affects the magnitude of the spin current generated by the laserpulse heating. The enhancement of the magnetic anisotropy in antiferromagnets results in significant increase of the magnon gap at low wavevectors in comparison to ferromagnets. In Fig. After optical pumping, the hot electrons in the Pt layer thermalize with its phonon bath in Pt with a time constant of τ :;OP ≈ 260 fs Although the hot electrons in the Pt layer are initially not spin-polarized, the incoherent magnons excited via inelastic spin-flip scattering lead to a non-equilibrium net spin accumulation in the AFI provided the degeneracy between the two opposite chirality bands is lifted by an external magnetic field. This results in spin pumping through the interface to the Pt layer where spin-to-charge conversion occurs via the inverse spin-Hall effect and results in broadband THz electro-dipole emission 37 where Z(ω) is the impedance of the AFI-Pt bilayer, λ ( and Θ Q& are respectively the spin diffusion length and the spin-Hall angle of the Pt layer, while -e is the electron charge. The amplitude of the THz emission is directly proportional to the spin current I sd through the AFI-Pt interface and therefore gives us a direct measurement of the optically-induced incoherent spin pumping. The emitted THz radiation is consistent with the symmetry of the inverse spin-Hall effect in Pt for a spin current polarized along the direction of the external magnetic field, which in our set-up is applied within the plane of the AFI-HM structure, as shown in Fig. In KNiF3 the temperature dependence of the THz emission is different, increasing rather than decreasing towards lower temperatures (Fig. Finally, we briefly comment on the spin pumping in the paramagnetic state at T > T L . In this temperature region there is no long-range magnetic order, but short-range spin correlations still exist and have been shown to lead to a non-zero SSE in both paramagnets 39 and antiferromagnets with a = 0.3 nm and ν = 0.64 we cutoff the spectrum for wave vectors below q ^= 1/ξ. As shown in the Supplementary Information, the THz emission in the paramagnetic phase still reflects the symmetry of the inverse spin Hall effect in Pt and its amplitude scales linearly with the value of the external magnetic field. By applying time-resolved THz emission spectroscopy for the study of an AFI-Pt interface in the cubic KCoF3 and KNiF3 antiferromagnets, we show that the optically induced spin transfer is characterized by significantly different temperature dependences. In KCoF3 the experimental results are fully reproduced by a theoretical model that considers the spin exchange induced by electronmagnon scattering between the free electrons in Pt and the localized electrons in the AFI in the presence of a temperature gradient. We observe that the opening of a gap in the magnon DOS below T L leads to the suppression of scattering events that involve lower energy particles and results in the quenching of the spin pumping. The key importance of the gap in the magnon DOS in determining the spin transfer efficiency between the AFI and the Pt is confirmed by the measurement on KNiF3, as its gap is one order of magnitude smaller than in KCoF3. Consistent with expectations, in KNiF3 we do not observe a quenching of the spin pumping at low temperatures. Instead, an increase is observed that we correlate with the exchange strength between Pt and the magnetic insulator. Through this comparative study of selected materials, we are able to shine light on the microscopy of spin transfer at picosecond timescales between antiferromagnets and heavy metals and identify a key figure of merit for its efficiency: the magnon gap. Our results set a landmark in the fundamental understanding of the highly discussed physics of the HM/AFI interfaces, which is the necessary cornerstone for the designing of femtosecond antiferromagnetic spintronics devices with optimized characteristics. anisotropy, where the Néel vector can point along one of the three [100], [010] and [001] 41,42 crystal axes. Below T S KCoF3 undergoes a tetragonal deformation (~0.2% with c/a<1), which results in a small uniaxial anisotropy with the easy axis along the [001] direction. Using the SQUID magnetometry, we measured the Néel temperature of T L = 117 K for KCoF3 and of T L = 245 K for KNiF3. The low anisotropy results in large magnetic domain sizes in the range of hundreds of μm 800 nm femtosecond laser pulses with pulse width of 50 fs are generated from an amplified Ti:sapphire laser system with a repetition rate of 5 kHz. The laser spot on the sample surface is 2.5 mm in diameter. The nominal fluence of the incident pulse is varied from 0.04 to 3 mJ/cm 2 , corresponding to an absorbed fluence by the Pt layer of 0.026 to 1.7 mJ/cm 2 . Due to a low absorption of KCoF3 at 800 nm (α = 10 cm -1 ) only ≲ 5% of the total fluence is absorbed throughout entire thickness. On the other hand, a high absorbance in KNiF3 of α = 70 cm -1 strongly reduces the laser fluence at the KNiF3/Pt when incident from KNiF3, and that is why we prefer to pump from the Pt side. Constructive interferences in the thin Pt layer result in a high absorbance A ≈ where is the raw signal representing the change of the probe ellipticity, ω = 7.5π × 10 <` s -1 is the central frequency of the probe pulse, n = 2.85 is the refractive index of the ZnTe detector at 800 nm, r <`= 3.9 pm/V is the electro-optic constant of ZnTe, L= 1 mm is the ZnTe thickness, c = 3 × 10 b m/s is the speed of light, S is the THz electric field magnitude convoluted with the response function of our spectrometer To model KCoF3 we used the parameters μ 4 H :8J = 0.85 T , J #$% = 0.9 meV, K = 0.4 meV, z = 6, S = 3/2, τ ! (T) = 0.018 -1.3 × 10 ;c T ps 45 , τ R = 2.0 ps, D + ! = 0.015 meV -1 nm -1 , J !" = 5.0 meV. forbidden energy range within which there are no magnon states for electrons to scatter into, hence the magnitude of the spin current at low temperatures is limited by this gap. The additional heating of electrons by the laser-pulse has a diminishing effect when approaching the Néel temperature (TN) because of the absence of any magnon modes beyond the magnon Debye temperature. The spin current amplitude therefore saturates when approaching TN.