Nanocone Array Solar Cell based on its Photovoltaic Properties Sambuddha Majumder, Sooraj Ravindran Abstract-In this paper, we have designed and investigated the performance of radial GaAs/AlGaAs pin junction nanocone array solar cells by performing coupled optoelectronic simulations to obtain the most optimal design configuration based on its photovoltaic properties. Each model has been compared with its GaAs shell counterparts for different levels of surface passivations. It has been observed that the nanocones with the AlGaAs shell has a much better performance compared to those having GaAs shell. AlGaAs shell acts as a strong barrier restricting most of the photogeneration to the inner GaAs regions and it also acts as a strong passivation layer, reducing the recombination losses due to surface effects. Further, it is observed that the nanocones achieve their highest photoconversion efficiency when they are sparsely packed, with a constant i-shell thickness of 7-9 nm and have an angle of tilt of 5 • . This enhanced performance is attributed to a more effective and extended photogeneration throughout the nanowire length, a strong overlapping built-in electric field, and lower recombination losses. Index Terms-Nanowires (NWs), Nancones (NCs), Nanocone solar cell (NCSC), Radial solar cells, Photovoltaics, GaAs/AlGaAs nanowire, Device simulation. S EMICONDUCTOR nanowires (NWs) have become a vast frontier of extensive research in the nanowire industry with their use in LED Recently, a new design methodology has taken over the nanowire solar cell concept, and that is the nanocone solar cells In this dissertation, coupled three-dimensional (3D) optical and electrical simulations is done to observe the effect of different nanocone angles on the optical and photovoltaic properties of radial pin junction GaAs and GaAs/AlGaAs nanocones. Four design configurations are chosen for this study, emphasizing the thickness and position of the i-GaAs shell; the best design is then selected and optimized. Finally, a period study is done to observe the effect of dense and sparse packing of the nanocones on their performance. In Section II, the various electronic and optical properties of the materials and the different design models and methods are discussed. Section III-A examines the effect of the nanocone angle on different nanocone properties. Section III-B compares the different nanocone design models, and the best model is then decided and optimized. Finally, in Section III-C a study of the nanocone period is done. In this dissertation, we have modeled a pin GaAs/AlGaAs heterojunction nanocone solar cell (NCSC) array. For this purpose, a unit cell of the structure is first designed, and then periodic boundary conditions are used to simulate the entire square lattice The thickness of the GaAs substrate was made semi-infinite with appropriate PML boundary conditions For our work, four different models have been simulated; d1: Intrinsic region width = 10 nm, here the core and the shell have same radial thickness (t c = t s , t i = 10 nm); d2: Intrinsic region, the shell and the core have the same thickness (t c = t s = t i ); d3: The thickness of the intrinsic region is double to that of the and shell (2t c = 2t s = t i ); d4: The thickness of the intrinsic region is triple to that of the core and shell (3t c = 3t s = t i ). For these designs, as we go from design 'd1' to design 'd4', the volume of AlGaAs decreases and volume of GaAs increases, also the width of the i-GaAs shell increases, which will result in more absorption; however, if the photogenerated carriers can be efficiently extracted or not, is what we wish to observe. For each, we have changed the angle from 0 to 9 • by varying the top and bottom radius ( R M IN and R M AX ), respectively keeping the mean nanowire radius (R M N W ) constant. For optical simulations, 'Lumerical FDTD' software package is used. The absorption per unit volume is calculated using the Poynting vector P as: Which can be written in a more numerically stable form : Where, ε is the imaginary part of permittivity, ω is the angular frequency of the incident light, and E is the electric field intensity. Assuming that each photon absorbed generates an equal number of electron-hole pairs, we can write the photogeneration rate as: Where h is the reduced Plank's constant, G ph is weighed by the AM 1.5G solar spectrum and integrated over the entire simulation spectrum. The complex refractive index of GaAs and AlGaAs has been taken from the Sopra database. The reflectance and transmittance spectra normalized to the source power are measured using the 'Frequency-Domain Field and Power' monitors at the top and bottom of the simulation region respectively. For electrical simulations, the software package 'Lumerical CHARGE' is used. The simulated photogeneration profile is incorporated into a finite-element mesh of the nanocones, which self-consistently solves the carrier continuity equations coupled with the nonlinear Poisson's equations in 3D. The details and working of the FDTD and CHARGE solver can be found here Fig. For this study, the design model 'd1' is chosen. In this design, the intrinsic region has a constant thickness of 10 nm, the thickness of core and shell is the same throughout the nanocone's height. The nanocone angle is varied from 0 to 9 degrees by varying the top and bottom radius, keeping the mean radius constant at 180 nm with a D/P (duty cycle) = 0.5 1) Optical Properties: Fig 2) Electrical Properties: In Fig As the nanocone angle increases, the photogeneration is more evenly spread out throughout the length of the structure and therefore it overlaps with the radial intrinsic region, thereby allowing efficient carrier extraction. As a result, the J sc increases with the increase in angle from 0 -5 degrees (Fig Since the overlap of the optical absorption with the i-GaAs region is the key to the nanocone's performance, four designs have been tested to find the optimal thickness profile of the i-GaAs shell. In design 1, we have a constant intrinsic region. From designs 2 -4, the intrinsic GaAs region thickness increases across the nanocone's height. This is done to obtain the profile of the intrinsic region that provides a more efficient overlap of the photogeneration with the intrinsic region and better optical and electrical properties. 1) Optical Properties: On Fig 2) Electrical Properties: Fig One reason for such a contrasting behavior is the presence of the built-in electric field. We can see it from x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 (b) x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 (c) between the (n-core) -(i-shell) interface but as the thickness of the i-GaAs region increases from design 'd1' -'d4' (for nanocone angles: 3 • , 5 • , 7 • ), the magnitude of the electric field continually decreases and has a maximum value for the case of 'd1' (constant intrinsic region). As a result, when we go from 'd1' to 'd4', the extraction of the photogenerated carriers decreases, and the recombination rate rises. Further, the built-in electric field generated in the 1st case ('d1') may overlap with the maximal photogeneration region. Compared to the other designs, a large shell allows the photogeneration x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 x 107 to happen dominantly in the inner GaAs regions close to the interface where the electric field exists and it also pushes the surface away thus reducing recombination. Both these factors lead to improved performance of 'd1', and thus having a constant i-shell thickness can give substantially better results than a tapered radially varying i-shell. 3) Design Optimization: Now that we have decided on the optimal design configuration, we now look forward to optimizing it. Since the key to this design is the constant thickness of the intrinsic shell, we need to find the most optimal thickness which can give us the best performance. For that, we have done a parametric sweep of the thickness of the i-shell (t i ) from 5 nm to 20 nm and observed its effect on the solar cell efficiency. From Fig In this section, we observe the effect of dense and sparse packing of the nanocone array on its optical and electrical properties. Fig From this observation alone, one can easily expect the nanowires having smaller periods to perform better. In order to verify that, we need to analyze the structure's photovoltaic properties as well. Fig These coupled effects lead to an improvement in the short circuit current (J sc ) of the solar cell, which is reflected in its efficiency. An extensive study of the optical and photovoltaic properties of pin junction GaAs/AlGaAs nanocone array solar cells has been done. It is observed that with the increase in the nanocone angle, the photogeneration, which is generally confined to the top for cylindrical NWs, spreads out along the length of the structure. This happens because the top of the cell becomes too thin to support many long-wavelength modes, which get absorbed towards the bottom, increasing the absorption length. However, having a very large angle is also detrimental to the cause; as for angles ≥ 5 -7 degrees, the loss of light absorption at the top becomes greater than the light absorbed at the bottom. Four different designs have been studied to observe the effect of the variation of the intrinsic shell position and thickness on the nanowire performance. The efficiency curves for all the structures follow a similar trend, i.e. they increase for small angles, then saturate and decrease for larger angles. It is observed that the design with a constant i-region delivers the best electrical results because of its strong builtin electric field throughout the structure and its overlap with the photogeneration. For all the cases, the NCs with AlGaAs shells have better overall performance than NCs with GaAs shells, highlighting the importance of AlGaAs passivation and confinement. The thickness of the i-region is further optimized to find the configuration for best solar cell performance, and it is seen that a thickness of 8 -9 nm provides the best efficiency. A period study is done to see the effect of dense and sparse packing of NCs in the array, and it has been observed that sparse NCs with larger periods had much larger efficiency than the densely packed ones because of more effective filling of AlGaAs, large effective photogeneration throughout the structure (it behaves similar to the cells having large nanocone angles w/o the loss incurred due to the thin top region) and the decreased net recombination of the photogenerated carriers.