Controlled integration of metallic nanoparticles (NPs) onto photonic nanostructures enables realization of complex devices for extreme light confinement and enhanced light-matter interaction. This can be achieved combining Nanoparticleon-Mirror (NPoM) nanocavities with the light manipulation capabilities of micron-scale metallic antennas and/or photonic integrated waveguides. However, metallic nanoparticles are usually deposited via drop-casting, which prevents their accurate positioning. Here we present a methodology for precise transfer and positioning of individual NPs onto different photonic nanostructures. The method is based on soft lithography printing that employs elastomeric stamp-assisted transfer of individual NPs onto a single nanostructure. It can also parallel imprint many individual NPs with high throughput and accuracy in a single step. Raman spectroscopy confirms enhanced lightmatter interactions in the resulting NPoM-based devices. Our method mixes top-down and bottom-up nanofabrication techniques and shows the potential of building complex photonic nanodevices for applications ranging from enhanced sensing and spectroscopy to signal processing. Nanoparticle-on-a-mirror (NPoM) cavities offer extreme light confinement within nmscale gaps. Current NPs printing techniques developed for the controlled imprint of NPs on surfaces are based on colloidal self-assembly methods or utilising capillary forces within polymeric templates. In this work, we introduce a large-scale method for the accurate delivery of single NPs on complex photonic nanostructures (such as μm-scale metallic antennas antennas or integrated waveguides) based on a stamp-assisted soft lithography method. The main advantage of soft lithography is that it is a parallel nanoprinting technique that provides high-throughput and high simplicity together with the possibility of the precise transfer of multiple individual NPs onto different planar and non-planar nanostructures. A key point is that it can be used for both single-step positioning of multiple individual NPs onto an array of antennas as well as for the positioning of a single NP onto an individual photonic nanostructure. Our approach is cost-effective and a robust nanolithography methodology that does not require complex (and expensive) instrumentation. We validate our method by performing transfer of NPs onto different kinds of photonic structures, such as μm-scale plasmonic antennas and integrated Si3N4 waveguides. In addition, we show enhanced light-matter interaction in representative resulting devices using surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS) measurements. Our method (Figure One of the crucial parameters required for the deposition of single NPs onto specific locations onto the antennas array is the precise alignment between the stamp and the array substrate. To provide this, a μ-printing device comprising pressure monitoring is constructed to deliver sub-micrometric accuracy and high reproducibility with precise control at every step of the stamping method. Here, an optical microscope (O1) is mounted on a XYZ translational stage allowing coarse alignment and focusing on the z-axis (Figure To prove that this yields a single-step large-scale nanopositioning method for the parallel transfer of individual gold NPs on multiple photonic structures in one single step, we use three samples (Disk 1, Disk 2 and Disk 3). The samples consist of 4 x 4 arrays of gold resonators disks on a silicon substrate. Each array was formed by 24 x 24 Au disk antennas (sample Disk1 = 2304 disks) and 25 x 25 disks (samples Disk 2 and Disk 3 = 2400 disks) of diameter ΦD = 6 μm, with 1 μm separation (P = 8 μm pitch) and 120 nm height (Figure To better quantify our single-step printing, we show large-scale printing of single NPs onto disk antenna arrays (Figure Using the same transfer strategy, we deliver single NPs onto Au disks at the waveguide end, for several disk diameters: i) 6 μm , ii) 5 μm, and iii) 4 μm (Figure We developed a reproducible, single-step, and cost-effective method for the controlled nanopositioning of single NPs for both parallel printing and single positioning of individual NPs onto standard lithographically fabricated photonic nanostructures with sub-micron accuracy in a single step. Taking advantage of the capillary forces in elastomeric stamps and utilising a custom-built μ-positioning device, we achieve a single-step NP transfer yield of up to 28%. In addition, the methodology is utilised to transfer NPs to more complex photonic structure geometries such as metallic disk antennae and integrated waveguides improving not only the drop-casting yield but also gaining in the control of the NP positioning over the micro-nanostructures. This largescale approach opens the path towards deterministic NPoM fabricated cavities on nanophotonic structures for advanced spectroscopic architectures on-a-chip. Manual micropositioners have a maximum travel of 13 mm at XY along each XY axis, 10 mm along Z axis with sub-micron resolution, the goniometer (Θ) is used for sample rotation. FSR: Force Sensitive Resistor. Squared sensing area of 5 x 5 mm (Thickness of 0.45 mm), actuation force 0.1N and sensitivity range to 10N. For the electronic design, a Nano Arduino based on the ATmega328P microcontroller is used. PMDS stamps were prepared by replica molding of the fabricated master. The PDMS stamps fabrication was done employing the kit named: "Kit SiliconElastomer Sylgard 18". Sylgard 184 is a bicomponent system for the fabrication of silicone stamps that is formed by a base and a curling agent. Once the proper mixture was prepared, the PDMS stamps were cured at 90°C for 45 minutes and peeled off the master. The silicon master, consisting of a periodic array of squared wells, was fabricated using a standard direct writing process based on electron beam lithography. The fabrication was carried out on standard silicon samples (resistivity ρ ~1-10 W.cm -1 , with a lightly pdoping of ~10 15 cm -3 ). The fabrication process is based on an electron beam direct writing process performed on a coated 100 nm Poly(methyl 2-methylpropenoate) (PMMA) resist film. The mentioned electron beam exposure, performed with a Raith150 tool, was optimized in order to reach the required dimensions employing an acceleration voltage of 10 KeV and an aperture size of 30 μm. After developing the PMMA resist, the resist patterns were transferred into the Silicon samples employing an optimized Inductively Coupled Plasma-Reactive Ion Etching (ICP-RIE) process with fluoride gases (SF6 and CF4). Finally, the master was Al-coated to facilitate the peel off the PDMS stamp from the master. Otherwise, the PDMS polymer can break in the peel off step due to adhesion to the micrometric lithographed motifs. Once fabricated, the master can be reused multiple times as well as the stamps. Biphenyl-4-Thiol (BPT, 97%) molecule was purchased from Merck-Sigma Aldrich. First, piranha solution (H2SO4/H2O2, 1:1) was used for glass cleaning. BPT SAMs were prepared by dipping the substrates in 1 mM BPT in ethanol (absolute, reagent grade) for 14h. Finally, the sample was sonicated in ethanol for 3 minutes, rinsed with ethanol, and dried under N2 stream. The quality of the SAMs was evaluated by Advancing-Receding Contact Angle measurements in a Ramé-hart automatized goniometer and by AFM imaging. The drop casting was performed delivering a 10 μl drop of 60 nm Au-NP solution onto the Disk3 sample, left for 5 minutes and then rinsed with Mili-Q water. Finally, the substrate was dried under N2 stream. Citrate-capped 60 nm Au NPs were purchased from NanopartzTM. 3 -aminopropyl triethoxysilane (APTES, 99%) molecules and solvents were purchased from Merck-Sigma Aldrich and used without previous purification. APTES SAMs were prepared by dipping the substrates in 1 mM APTES in ethanol (absolute, reagent grade) for 45 minutes, then rinsed with ethanol and finally dried under N2 stream. Alpha300 RA (Raman-AFM) from WITec was employed for the AFM sample characterization. All measurements were performed in AC mode. Sharp silicon probes without coating (K ~42 N/m, f0 ~320kHz) were purchased from PPP-NCH (Nanosensors). All AFM images were processed with WSxM software from Nanotec Electrónica S.L. 