Detection of vector magnetic fields at nanoscale dimensions is critical in applications ranging from basic material science, to medical diagnostic. Meanwhile, an all-electric operation is of great significance for achieving a simple and compact sensing system. Here, we propose and experimentally demonstrate a simple approach to sensing a vector magnetic field at nanoscale dimensions, by monitoring a probabilistic nanomagnet's transition probability from a metastable state, excited by a driving current due to SOT, to a settled state. We achieve sensitivities for Hx, Hy, and Hz of 1.02%/Oe, 1.09%/Oe and 3.43%/Oe, respectively, with a 200×200 nm 2 nanomagnet. The minimum detectable field is dependent on the driving pulse events N, and is expected to be as low as 1 μT if N = 3 × 10 6 . Main Text: Sensitive physical measurements have played a pivotal role in the development of modern science and technology. In particular, detection of vectorial magnetic fields with high sensitivity and nanoscale spatial resolution is critical important in fundamental studies ranging from physics and material sciences to biology, as well as in the development of new applications in spintronics and quantum technology Unfortunately, such technologies can solely measure the magnitude of the component of magnetic field that lies along its sensitive axis. One conventional method for measuring a vector field is to use three magnetic sensors (or NV ensembles) with their sensing directions along the three coordinate axes (x, y, and z), which degrades the spatial resolution Recently, single NV have been proposed as a magnetic vectorial detecting system to provide the nanoscale spatial resolution, but such a system requires precisely fabricating a single crystal diamond with an NV center as well as additional lasers and microwave excitation, which limit the practical applications and scalability of the approach Meanwhile, if a nanomagnet, composed of heavy metal (HM)/ferromagnet (FM) heterostructure such as Ta/CoFeB/MgO, has perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (PMA), SOT induced by an inplane (IP) current flowing in the HM (Ta) layer can drive the magnetization of nanomagnet to probabilistically switch, and the switching probability is dependent on the applied IP magnetic fields The IP (x or y) components of the magnetic field together with the collinear current can generate and modulate the z-direction effective field due to SOT, and the sign of this field depends on the current polarity A single domain nanomagnet with PMA sitting immediately on a Ta layer is the basic field probing element of the proposed sensor, as illustrated in Fig. Additionally, after relax, from a macrospin perspective, the magnetization state will be found in the lower energy state with higher probability, where the probability of being in a state with energy E is proportional to exp(-E/kBT) with kB the Boltzmann constant and T the temperature, as given by Boltzmann statistics (F) Diagram of the approach for sensing an OOP field. Under a certain OOP magnetic field, a batch of current pulses are applied to the device along the x-direction to count the state numbers and thus calculate the corresponding probability (Pup). During each current pulse event, a high driving current is followed by a small reading current to drive the magnet to the metastable state and detect the relaxed magnetization state. However, the energy landscape would be modified by an magnetic field (H) through the Zeeman energy splitting of the two stable ground states, which is expressed as -μ0VMs(M•H), where μ0 is the permeability of free space, V is the volume of an individual magnetic entity, Ms is the saturation magnetization, and M is the unit vector of the magnetization Therefore, upon removal of the driving current, the magnetization relaxes to Mz = +1 with a probability of Pup ∝ exp(-Ez/kBT), while the probability of orienting in the down state Pdn is proportional to exp(+Ez/kBT), under the +Hz. . Note that, once the exponent |2Ez/kBT| < 1, according to the piecewise linear approximation which is a linear function of Hz. This linear relationship between Pup and Hz enables the detection of Hz by monitoring the probability of a relaxed state. Simply, according to equation This stochastic switching feature has been confirmed and used for nanomagnetic logic and true random number generators in previous work Besides Hz, a z-component effective field Hz,eff generated by the IP current with a collinear magnetic field through SOT can also determine Pup, making it feasible to detect an IP field with the proposed sensor. Hz,eff is written as a function of the current density along the x-(or y-) direction Jx(y) and the normalized magnetization mx(y) caused by its corresponding collinear magnetic field H x(y) where ħ is the reduced Planck constant, e is the electron charge, t is the thickness of the CoFeB layer and θSH is the spin Hall angle of the Ta layer. The IP field Hx (Hy) is utilized to orient the magnetization to achieve an IP component mx(y) and then generate Hz,eff, as depicted in Fig. We carried out the proof-of-principle experiments with a nanomagnet comprised of Ta (10 nm)/CoFeB (1 nm)/MgO (2 nm)/Ta (2 nm) (from the bottom) heterostructure, to describe the feasibility of vector magnetic field sensing based on probabilistic nanomagnet and evaluate the performance (detectable field and resolution limit) of such a sensor. The detailed magnetic and transport properties of the device are shown in Supplementary Section 2. The CoFeB with PMA can be driven to Mz = 0 state if an IP current flowing through a resistive bar made of tantalum that can exert strong SOT. The measurement sequence is illustrated in Fig. The state probability is collected by repeating this measurement. For example, if we count the number of up states as Nup in N pulse event cycles, then Pup is equal to Nup/N. Therefore, our method can detect not only DC fields but also AC fields. The maximum frequency of a detectable AC field is expected to be inversely proportional to the total measurement time and could reach over 1 kHz (Supplementary Section 3). For experimental implementation of vector magnetic field sensing, we start from the detection of a one-dimensional magnetic field. Here, we apply a driving current pulse 500 times to count the up-state probability (Pup) at a given magnetic field. When the current pulse is applied along the xdirection (Jx), whether positive or negative, as discussed above, Pup linearly increases with increasing Hz from -19 to 8 Oe (or from -8 to 19 Oe), and the two cases have almost the same slope for the Pup-Hz curves (Fig. Moreover, Pup remains constant with Hy varying from -20 to 20 Oe under Jx, regardless of the polarity, as no Hz,eff is induced by Hy, which cannot tilt the magnetization towards the x-direction (Fig. Such nonequality and asymmetry could be improved or corrected in real applications by optimizing film deposition and device fabrication, or introducing a magnetic field to balance the bias field, or calibrating the sensor system. Overall, Pup is found to be sensitive to Hx and Hz, but insensitive to Hy when Jx is applied. Similarly, Pup is sensitive to Hy and Hz, but insensitive to Hx when Jy is applied (Figs. These experimental results not only show the operation principle of one-dimensional magnetic field sensing, but also further verify the theoretical expectations described in the previous section that there are different relations between the variation tendency of the relaxed state probability and the current polarity. Next, we will investigate whether these differences enable distinction of the contributions of the IP and OOP fields. In other words, we aim to determine whether three components (Hx, Hy and Hz) of the magnetic field can be detected by characterizing the relaxed state probability variation, for reconstructing vector magnetic field with one single nanomagnet. Next, based on the results shown in Fig. Generally, for all trials, the distribution of the actual Pup after N pulsing events, at a given field . for a fixed N, but decreases with the increase of N. Fig. ΔPmax is closed to 1 N , though the former is less than the latter when N is greater than 800. Consequently, the minimum detectable magnetic field δHmin would be max 1 P S = S N . Accordingly, δHmin is expected to be as low as 1 μT, which is the magnitude of the magnetic field produced by the spin of a single electron at a distance of 10 nm, when N = 7.5 × 10 7 , 5.6 × 10 7 , and 0.3 × 10 7 for the x-, y-, and z-directions, respectively. Especially, the N for the z-direction is on the same order as the number of pulse events used in NV measurements Additionally, we expect that the spatial resolution can be developed by further scaling down the nanomagnet size. Although a smaller magnetic body volume V will decrease the energy barrier, it has been demonstrated to tune the switching probability of low-barrier nanomagnets, such as Δ = KuV/kBT ≈ 9, where Ku is magnetic anisotropy constant, by both OOP magnetic fields and IP fields Although individual MTJs are separated from each other, it would be possible to obtain continuous spatial field imaging with two layers of interleaved sensors, by making use of the advanced technique of 3D stacking of MTJs (Supplementary Section 5). The field resolution and spatial resolution of our sensor are comparable to the quantum vector magnetometers such as single NV based sensors These properties will allow us to develop a simple and compact sensor system for detecting vector magnetic fields at nanoscale dimension. It is expected that the driving and reading of our proposed sensor device could be carried out in the same way as already used in SOT-magnetoresistive random-access memory technology Moreover, nanomagnet chips can be integrated with not only electronics but also microfluidics for biomedical engineering applications Tables S1 to S2 References We consider a binary nanodevice comprising of heavy metal/ferromagnet (HM/FM) bilayer with perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (PMA). As shown in Fig. The energy profile would be modified by an out-of-plane (OOP) magnetic field Hz due to the Zeeman energy Ez = -μ0VMsHz, where μ0 is the permeability of free space, Ms the saturation magnetization and V the volume of individual magnetic entity and τ up = τ 0 e E b -E zz k B T . The probability of being in up state Pup can be described as ( which is the same form as the equation deduced in the main text. According to Neel-Brown model , and ,where Eb = μ 0 VM s H k /2, and Hk is the effective magnetic anisotropy field. Then, Pup is expressed as , the same form as the equation (S1). Here, we discuss the possibility for detecting of AC vector fields by the sensor. Considering a cosine magnetic field applied on the device, we can measure the AC field using the piecewise approximation method. As illustrated in Fig. Fig. For the two curves shown in Fig. The driving control circuits and read circuits, along with the pulse sequence of the controlled signals, are illustrated in Fig.  The control signals consist of a clock signal for driving (CLKD) and a reading CLKR, where the falling of CLKD is followed by the rising of CLKR during each cycle. In order to change the current direction after every 512 pulses of CLKD are applied, we add a 11-bit counter, of which the input is the CLKD and the output signals of Q10-Q8 are also acting as control signals parameterized as A-C, respectively, along with a driving control circuits, as illustrated in the left panel of Fig.  According to the driving control circuits, the driving current direction is determined by the levels of both A and B, as summarized in Table  After each driving pulse is applied, a reading current pulse is enabled by the signal CLKR. The MTJ state is detected by a comparator with a reference voltage, and then the number of high-resistance states NH is counted by a counter. After applying N = 512 cycles of pulses to the single device, NH will be transformed to Nx+ (Nx-, Ny+, or Ny-) if the driving current flows along +X (-X, +Y, or -Y) direction, which is used to be calculated to get the 3D magnetic field vector. However, this array has many spaces between each two adjacent magnets which cause a missing signal of the detected spatial magnetic fields. We further develop the array by the 3D stacking technology, as illustrated in Fig. Sensor array along with CMOS transistors. The magnet (red cube) adjacent to the heavy metal layer act as sensing units to detect the magnetic field and also constitute the free layer in the MTJ. The right panel shows the driving and reading circuits configuration for a single cell in the array. Each sensor is selected by a transistor with a bit line BL and a word line WL. The state of sensing magnet is detected by the resistance of the MTJ due to TMR effect. After applying N (512, for example) cycles of pulses to the single device, the number of high-resistance states NH, which is used to be calculated to get the 3D magnetic field vector, is counted by a counter along with a comparator. (B) Schematic of the sensor array along with the detailed driving control circuits and read circuits. **: The sizes of our nanomagnet as expected could be promoted to 9 nm × 9 nm (Supplementary Text 2). Table 