We show that the classical (mean-field) description of far from equilibrium superconductivity is exact in the thermodynamic limit for local observables but breaks down for global quantities, such as the entanglement entropy or Loschmidt echo. We do this by solving for and comparing exact quantum and exact classical longtime dynamics of a BCS superconductor with interaction strength inversely proportional to time and evaluating local observables explicitly. Mean field is exact for both normal and anomalous averages (superconducting order) in the thermodynamic limit. However, for anomalous expectation values, this limit does not commute with adiabatic and strong coupling limits and, as a consequence, their quantum fluctuations can be unusually strong. The long-time steady state of the system is a gapless superconductor whose superfluid properties are only accessible through energy resolved measurements. This state is nonthermal but conforms to an emergent generalized Gibbs ensemble. Our study clarifies the nature of symmetry-broken many-body states in and out of equilibrium and fills a crucial gap in the theory of time-dependent quantum integrability. I. Introduction 1 II. Summary of the paper 3 III. Quantum and classical BCS Models 4 IV. Formal solution for quantum dynamics 7 V. Exact late-time quantum BCS dynamics 8 VI. Exact classical BCS dynamics 10 VII. Thermodynamic limit of quantum dynamics 11 VIII. Steady State Properties 15 IX. Order of limits 16 X. Quantum evolution from BCS ground state 17 XI. Approach to the steady state 19 XII. Early-time quantum dynamics 20 XIII. Conclusion 22 Acknowledgments 23 A. Solution of the classical equations of motion 23 B. Rényi entanglement entropy 26 Superconductivity is one of the best-known examples of quantum phenomena on the macroscopic scale that is conventionally understood in terms of a many-body wave function with a well-defined relative phase. But to what extent is quantum mechanics necessary to describe superconductivity? After all, the celebrated Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) theory In the past two decades, there has been considerable theoretical and experimental interest in coherent far from equilibrium superconductivity . A natural question to ask therefore is, do superconductors exhibit any purely quantum, beyond mean-field effects in their far from equilibrium dynamics? This is the question we address in this paper. Nearly all studies of the BCS dynamics employ the mean-field approach, i.e., exclude quantum fluctuations from the beginning and investigate classical Hamiltonian spin dynamics. However, there is a priori no guarantee that mean field is accurate far from equilibrium because highly excited states contribute to the dynamics and their effect can accumulate in time. Numerical studies of the quantum BCS dynamics indeed suggest that there are deviations from mean field at long times In this paper, we determine the exact quantum and exact classical long-time dynamics of the BCS Hamiltonian with interaction strength inversely proportional to time and compare them in the thermodynamic limit. We focus on superconductors smaller than the coherence length that are effectively zero-dimensional and whose dynamics is therefore spatially uniform For averages of local operators that commute with the total fermion number operator Nf , the mean field is exact regardless of whether the initial state is the true quantum ground state, which is an eigenstate of Nf , or the BCS (mean-field) ground state, which is not. The situation with observables that change the fermion number, such as the BCS order parameter and other anomalous averages, is more subtle and sensitive to the way in which the thermodynamic limit is taken. The BCS wave function is a sum over states with all possible N f , which makes the anomalous expectation values nonzero. For initial states of this type, we find that while quantum and classical dynamics of anomalous averages coincide when we take the thermodynamic limit first, if we instead take either the t 0 → 0 + or η → +∞ (adiabatic) limit first, the anomalous averages do not agree (i.e., these limits do not commute). This is an inherently quantum mechanical effect (dephasing of sectors with different N f ) that is noticeable in the far from equilibrium dynamics already for relatively large superconductors for a suitable choice of the parameters as we will see. We believe our predictions can be tested in several experimental setups. Ultracold atoms or ions interacting via an optical cavity or lattice vibrational (phonon) mode seem particularly promising. Several studies explained how to simulate far from equilibrium quantum BCS dynamics similar to ours in these systems Anomalous averages are matrix elements of operators that contain unequal numbers of fermion creation and annihilation operators. Consider, for example, the equal time anomalous Green's function ĉ↓ ĉ↑ , where ĉ↓ and ĉ↑ are two fermion annihilation operators. The expectation value of ĉ↓ ĉ↑ is zero in any state with definite fermion number N f , such as the solution of the nonstationary Schrödinger equation that starts in the exact ground state at t = 0 + . In this case, we interpret ĉ↓ ĉ↑ at time t as the matrix element Ψ 2 (t)|ĉ ↓ ĉ↑ |Ψ 1 (t) between two solutions Ψ 1 (t) and Ψ 2 (t), where Ψ 1 (t = 0 + ) is the ground state with N f fermions and Ψ 2 (t = 0 + ) with N f -2. Throughout this paper we retain the standard notion of the "expectation value", while using "average" in a more general sense as explained above. We show that averages of local operators obtained from the exact solutions for the quantum and mean-field (classical) dynamics coincide in the thermodynamic limit. The above adjustment of the initial condition is redundant when the initial state of the quantum dynamics is the BCS ground state. In this case, ĉ↓ ĉ↑ = Φ(t)|ĉ ↓ ĉ↑ |Φ(t) , where Φ(t = 0 + ) is the t = 0 + BCS ground state, i.e., averages are the same as expectation values. It is these anomalous expectation values that dephase and disagree with mean field for the "wrong" order of limits. Our conclusions about the domain of applicability of the mean-field treatment have important implications for the nature of symmetry-broken many-body states. They hold in and out of equilibrium and we expect them to apply much more generally then to superconductivity alone. While mean-field wave functions are often able to capture the order parameter and other local observables, the entanglement properties and many-particle structure are out of reach. The success of meanfield theories to date has thus secretly relied on the symmetry breaking order parameter being a "classical" object and not caring about the nature of the entanglement of the state. We will see that at long times our system enters a state where the BCS order parameter and superfluid density vanish due to dephasing, but energy-resolved anomalous correlation functions are nonzero for any finite η -in the adiabatic limit (η → +∞) the system evolves to the zero temperature Fermi gas. More generally, the asymptotic state is a non-Fermi-liquid and best described as a gapless superconductor whose superfluid features can only be observed through energy resolved quantities such as the spectral supercurrent density Solving for the far from equilibrium dynamics of a macroscopically large number of interacting quantum particles is normally an unrealistic task, both with numerical and analytical methods. Moreover, methods based on conventional integrability The remaining content is organized as follows. Section II is a brief summary of the entire paper. In Sec. III we introduce the quantum and mean-field BCS models, equations of motion, and initial conditions. In Sec. IV we review the integral representation of solutions of the nonstationary Schrödinger equation for the BCS Hamiltonian with coupling g(t) ∝ η t . In Sec. V we obtain our first key result -exact late time wave function for the quantum BCS dynamics launched from the exact ground state at t = 0 + . Section VI presents the exact late-time solution for the corresponding mean-field dynamics -our second key result. We demonstrate in Sec. VII that exact quantum and mean-field averages of arbitrary local operators coincide in the thermodynamic limit -the third key result. In Sec. VIII we discuss the physical properties of the steady state our system enters at long times and show that it conforms to an emergent generalized Gibbs ensemble. We establish in Sec. IX that various limits commute for dynamics with definite fermion number. However, they do not commute for anomalous expectation values when the initial state is not a fermion number eigenstate, such as the BCS (mean-field) ground state, as we show in Sec. X. In Sec. XI we analyze numerically the approach to the steady state and find that it is accessible in finite time in the thermodynamic limit. We study the early-time dynamics and the growth of the entanglement entropy in Sec. XII. We conclude and outline possible directions for future research in Sec. XIII. This section is a condensed version of the present paper. We first summarize our key results and then separately list several notable complementary findings. We obtain four key results in this paper. (1) The exact long-time solution of the nonstationary Schrödinger equation for the BCS Hamiltonian, see Eq. (2) Exact long-time solution of the mean-field equations of motion for the same time-dependence of the interaction. (3) We show that the far from equilibrium superconductivity is semiclassical for local observables. We prove this for g(t) = 1 νt but expect it to be valid much more generally. The semiclassical picture (mean field) breaks down for global measures, such as the entanglement entropy and Loschmidt echo. (4) We provide two crucial ingredients for the emergent theory of time-dependent quantum integrability. First, we show that the off-shell Bethe Ansatz where C is a normalization constant, N f is the number of fermions, {α} is the set of doubly occupied single-fermion levels ε α (remaining levels are empty), the summation is over all such states with given N f , and Summation over j is over all levels except ε α ; Λ {α} is a double sum over all α and β from the set {α} such that α = β. The initial condition is the exact ground state at t = 0 + . The second key result is an exact solution of the late-time mean-field dynamics [mean-field equations of motion Here ĉ † kσ (ĉ kσ ) are the fermionic creation (annihilation) operators for spin projection σ and single-particle level ε k , N is the number of ε k , are the Bogoliubov amplitudes, and is the chemical potential. The third key result is that the mean field is exact for local observables in the thermodynamic limit. Consider a product of n operators where k 1 , . . . , k n are any n distinct single-particle labels and each ôk is either of the following three operators: fermion pair creation (ĉ † k↑ ĉ † k↓ ), annihilation (ĉ k↓ ĉk↑ ), or level occupancy (n k = ĉ † k↑ ĉk↑ + ĉ † k↓ ĉk↓ ). We say that Ô is local if n N → 0 in the thermodynamic limit -the limit N → ∞ keeping the fermion number density fixed Suppose Ô changes the fermion number by 2l, e.g., ĉ † k↑ ĉ † k↓ changes it by +2. We claim that the average of Ô in the exact asymptotic state (1) coincides with its expectation value in the mean-field wave function (3) in the thermodynamic limit, i.e., where . . . mf ≡ Ψ mf | . . . |Ψ mf . The expectation value of a product in Ψ mf is a product of the expectation values, since it is a product state. ôk mf , in turn, are straightforward to evaluate: Therefore, not only do we show that the time-dependent BCS mean field is exact in the thermodynamic limit, but also evaluate quantum averages of arbitrary local operators in this limit. In addition to the above key results, we obtain a number of other interesting results. (a) The steady state of the exact time evolution of the BCS Hamiltonian with coupling g(t) = 1 νt is a gapless superconductor similar to Phase I in interaction quenched superconductors (b) This steady state is nonthermal, but is described by an emergent generalized Gibbs ensemble (GGE) in the thermodynamic limit with level occupation numbers nk emerging as the integrals of motion at t → +∞. This is a nontrivial property of the steady state as it means that expectation values of local operators can be expressed in terms of only N GGE parameters as opposed to 2 N for a generic state. (c) We find through numerical analysis that a suitably defined distance to the steady state tends to zero as R t 3 , where R is finite in the thermodynamic limit. Therefore, even in this limit the system is able to approach the steady state arbitrarily closely in finite time. (d) Consider the time evolution with the nonautonomous quantum BCS Hamiltonian launched from an initial state that is not an an eigenstate of the total fermion number operator Nf at t = t 0 and a local operator Ô that does not commute with Nf . We find that the parameter that controls the ratio of the exact and mean-field expectation values of Ô at t → +∞ is as opposed to 1 N , which controls other quantum fluctuations (finite size corrections) in and out of equilibrium. Here η = N ν is the dimensionless coupling constant that remains finite in the thermodynamic limit, t * ∼ 1 W , and W is the bandwidth of ε k . Eq. where τ = η ln t t0 . This result is for the quantum evolution launched from the BCS product state at t = t 0 . The entropy grows monotonically from S ent = 0 at t = t 0 . It remains finite in the thermodynamic limit emphasizing once more the failure of mean field for global quantities such as S ent (within mean-field approach S ent = 0 at all times). Interestingly, the entire growth of S ent is due to the interaction part of the BCS Hamiltonian. For finite N , the monotonous growth stops at τ ∼ √ N . After this the entropy shows recurrences with a maximum value S ent ∼ 1 2 ln N . We study two related models in this paper. One is the quantum BCS Hamiltonian with interaction strength inversely proportional to time and the other is its classical (mean-field) counterpart. We start with the quantum model, introduce Anderson pseudospin- 1 2 operators, and review how the classical Hamiltonian arises in the → 0 limit and, independently, in the mean-field approach. The quantum BCS model describes pairing interactions between fermions moving in a given single-particle potential where ĉ † jσ (ĉ jσ ) creates (annihilates) a fermion with spin projection σ on the single-particle level ε j . The superconducting coupling g = g(t) has dimensions of energy and is usually a constant but will depend on time in the present paper. The pairing is between the states |j ↑ and |j ↓ = T R |j ↑ of the same energy ε j , where T R is the time reversal operation. When the single-particle potential is zero, the momentum p is a good quantum number and therefore |j ↑ → |p ↑ and |j ↓ → |-p ↓ . With these replacements the more general Eq. ( We consider a nonautonomous (driven) BCS model where the coupling is inversely proportional to time, Here = 1 making both ν and η = N ν dimensionless. The "rate" ν must be proportional to the number N of singleparticle levels ε j , so that the kinetic and interaction terms in Eq. ( The time dependence Consider a quantum spin Hamiltonian When the magnitude of spins is s = 1 2 this is the BCS Hamiltonian Pseudospin operators satisfy the usual SU(2) commutation relations. On the subspace of unoccupied and doubly occupied (unblocked) levels ε j , the magnitude of spins s = 1 2 . Singly occupied (blocked) levels decouple and do not participate in the dynamics and we exclude them from Eq. We obtain the classical counterpart of the quantum Hamiltonian (13) by replacing quantum spins ŝj with classical angular momentum variables (classical spins) S j of length S where S ± j = S x j ±iS y j . The variables S j are equipped with the standard angular momentum Poisson brackets S a j , S b k = δ j,k abc S c j . By the quantum-to-classical correspondence principle, the classical BCS Hamiltonian There is an alternative route leading from the quantum where ∆ = ∆x x + ∆y y, and x, y, and z are unit vectors along the coordinate axes. Since ∆ is a sum of a large number of spin-1 2 operators, it is natural to expect it to behave classically Making this replacement and then taking the quantum average with respect to the time-dependent state of the system, we obtain equations of motion for ŝj identical to Hamilton's equations of motion with the Hamiltonian (15) when we set ŝj = S j , where ∆ = ∆ = ∆ x x + ∆ y y, and the usual BCS order parameter reads The length S of ŝj = S j is conserved by the mean-field time evolution. Suppose we start the mean-field time evolution in a BCSlike product state Then, the wave function will remain a product state of this form at all times and In Eq. ( We will also need the projection of the BCS wave function onto a fixed fermion number N f = 2N ↑ subspace, where N ↑ is the number of up spins [see Eq. (14a)]. It is convenient to write Ψ PBCS as Using Ψ PBCS instead of Ψ BCS produces corrections of order N -1 ↑ for large N ↑ to the low energy equilibrium properties We discussed above two ways to obtain the classical BCS Hamiltonian Both quantum and classical BCS Hamiltonians conserve the z-component of their total spins Eq. (14a) implies that the total fermion number operator Nf = 2 N↑ , where N↑ counts the number of up pseudospins. In terms of Nf and N↑ , the z-components of total quantum and classical spins read We initiate the quantum evolution with fixed fermion number (fixed  z ) in the ground state of the Hamiltonian where ( + 1) is the eigenvalue of  2 . The ground state of Ĥint with  z = N ↑ -N 2 is a symmetric combination of all states with N ↑ up and N -N ↑ down spins where |{α} is a state with spins at positions {α} = {α 1 , α 2 , . . . , α N ↑ } up and the remaining spins down. The summation is over all such states, i.e., over all sets {α}. The ground state maximizes the magnitude  of the total spin, The classical Hamiltonian (15) at t = 0 + is In the minimum energy spin configuration, all spins are aligned in the same direction and |J | = N 2 . Up to a nonessential rotation around the z-axis, this spin configuration is where Eq. ( Consider, in particular, the classical ground state (31) for J z = 0. In this state, all spins are along the x-axis, ŝj = S j = x 2 . The corresponding BCS wave function is where → indicates spin- 1 2 pointing along the positive x-axis. This is the ground state predicted by the BCS theory at infinite coupling for Nf = N (number of fermion pairs is half the number of available single-particle states). We note that this value of Nf is most relevant and most frequently studied for s-wave superconductors, where the pairing interaction is between fermions in a narrow window around the Fermi level. Since the density of states is approximately constant and the window is centered at the Fermi energy, the number of fermion pairs is half the number of levels involved in superconductivity. The BCS state (32) corresponds to u j = v j = 1 in Eq. ( Throughout this paper we support the analytic calculations against exact numerical simulations of the classical and quantum models. The classical dynamics is obtained by directly solving Eq. ( In this section, we review the "formal" exact solution Amazingly, there are three different kinds of integrability of the BCS model: quantum, classical, and time-dependent. The first one is the regular Bethe Ansatz integrability that implicitly provides the exact many-body eigenstates and energies of the quantum BCS Hamiltonian at fixed value of the interaction constant g The general solution Ψ(t) where The quantity S(λ, ε, t) is known as the Yang-Yang action, where we dropped the terms that contribute only to the timeindependent overall (global) phase of Ψ(t). The choice of the contour γ in Eq. ( Here we use the formal solution from the previous section to evaluate the late-time wave function Ψ ∞ (N ↑ ) and observables ŝ+ k ŝj and ŝz j for the quantum BCS dynamics with the time-dependent Hamiltonian At large t the integrand in Eq. ( These are the well-known Richardson equations that determine the exact spectrum of the BCS Hamiltonian It now follows from Eq. ( up to an overall constant. Here |{α} is the state obtained from the vacuum by flipping N ↑ spins at positions {α}, i.e., the same state as in Eq. ( where we also dropped a constant that is the same for all {α} and therefore only contributes to the global phase of the wave function, which we do not seek to determine. Greek indices α and β here and below are from the set {α} and j takes all values from 1 to N . We rewrite the first term on the right hand side as Here we used ln(-1) = ln e -iπ = -iπ. This choice of the branch of the logarithm is dictated by the physical requirement that in the adiabatic limit ν → 0 + the system stays in the ground state at t → +∞. The -iπα in the above equation arises from counting the number of ε j smaller than ε α . Each such term contributes ln(-1). There are α -1 terms and replacing α -1 → α here only changes the norm of the wave function. Therefore, A compact and useful way to write this expression is This S {α} is equivalent to Eq. ( The asymptotic wave function is a sum over all stationary points Using Eq. ( where The Hessian arising from integrating over the vicinity of stationary points goes into this constant as well. Note that Λ {α} is a double sum over all α and β from the set {α} such that α = β. This phase is one of the two sources of quantumness in the late-time dynamics, the other source being the difference between the BCS and projected BCS wave functions, Eq. ( We first use the late-time wave function Easiest to write is the probability distribution P ({s z }) of finding the configuration |{s z } = |s z 1 s z 2 . . . . This distribution does not depend on the phases θ α and Λ {α} and therefore is independent of ε j and insensitive to the entanglement due to Λ {α} . In fact, P ({s z }) has already been found in Ref. 36 via a different approach . Equivalently, we can say that the probabilities of s z α = ± 1 2 are proportional to e -2παs z α ν and therefore where  z is the z-component of the total spin as before, δ[a, b] ≡ δ ab is the Kronecker delta, and Z -1 is the normalization constant. The independence of P ({s z }) from the distribution of the single-particle energies ε j is a distinguishing characteristic of time-dependent integrability N and ε (1) j = 0.49 + 0.002j for all j = 1 and ε = 0.1. The case a = 1 is integrable and we see that ŝz j does not depend on the level distribution (unlike for a = 0.9), which is characteristic of time-dependent integrability. does for a = 0.9. The expectation value of the z-component of a spin in the state Ψ ∞ is where the indicator function I {α} (j) is 1 if j belongs to the set {α} and zero otherwise, and C ∞ is the inverse norm of the late-time wave function squared, Similarly, we evaluate the correlation function Here, the set {β} corresponds to all configurations with N ↑ -1 up spins. Importantly, the correlation function ŝ+ k ŝj depends on ε j , unlike ŝz j and P ({s z }). In Figs. We saw above that in the BCS mean-field approximation the averages S k = ŝk evolve according to Hamilton's equations of motion for the classical counterpart of the BCS Hamiltonian, with standard angular momentum Poisson brackets for components of S j . Launched from a BCS product state, the meanfield time evolution keeps the system in a product state at all times, the length of vectors S j is S = 1 2 , and knowing ŝj at time t, we also know the corresponding BCS product wave function up to a global phase. Here we present the exact solution for the long time dynamics of the classical Hamiltonian We relegate the details of the derivation to Appendix A and just state the answer here: the t → +∞ asymptote of classical spins S j for N → ∞ is where μ is a Lagrange multiplier (chemical potential) given by Eq. ( In the thermodynamic limit N → ∞, the sum turns into an integral. Integrating and solving for μ, we find We kept the subleading correction (N +1 instead of simply N in the first term on the r.h.s.) because it reproduces μ = N +1 2 for J z = 0 which is exact for any even N and significantly improves the agreement with finite N numerics. Within the mean-field treatment, each quantum spin ŝj evolves individually in an effective magnetic field 2(ε j z-∆). FIG. The wave function of the system is thus of the BCS product form at all times provided it was of this form at t = 0. Normalization requires |u k | 2 +|v k | 2 = 1 and Eqs. ( The subscript "mf" indicates the expectation values in the late-time mean-field wave function up to a common phase which only affects the global phase of Ψ mf . Equations ( Due to the product form of the mean-field wave function, it is simple to determine the expectation value of an arbitrary product of spin operators where the upper indices r m take values +, -, or z and individual spin averages ŝrm jm mf are given by Eq. ( , etc. Otherwise, Eq. ( In this section, we show how a BCS product state emerges in the thermodynamic limit from the entangled finite N wave function Ψ ∞ -the late-time asymptotic solution (42) of the nonstationary Schrödinger equation for the quantum BCS Hamiltonian However, Ψ ∞ = Ψ mf even in the thermodynamic limit. This manifests itself in non-local quantities involving an infinite number of points in the thermodynamic limit, such as, e.g., ŝ- , where N ↑ is the number of up spins, or the von Neumann entanglement entropy. The values of quantities of this type are generally different for Ψ ∞ and Ψ mf . This is not specific to the nonautonomous setup as these quantities similarly disagree between the exact and BCS ground states for the time-independent BCS Hamiltonian. An even more interesting example of the breakdown of the classical picture for global observables is the Loschmidt echo The crucial step in deriving the thermodynamic limit of the late-time quantum dynamics is to notice by inspecting Eqs. ( where P N ↑ is the projector onto the subspace with N ↑ up spins and It is understood that when the product ( First, we study local operators in the thermodynamic limit. As usual in the theory of superconductivity, we understand the thermodynamic limit as N → ∞ so that the single-particle levels ε j fill a finite energy interval with a piecewise continuous density of states and the number of fermions per level N stays finite. The latter condition is equivalent to a finite density of fermions. We start with ŝ+ k ŝj Ψ∞ for j = k and then generalize to arbitrary products. It is helpful to rewrite Eq. ( Consider Ψ ∞ |Ψ ∞ . This is a double integral over φ and φ . The integrand depends only on ξ = φ -φ , so one integration simply gives 2π. Taking this overlap converts ŝz j → ŝz j Ψ∞ because e cŝz is linear in ŝz for spin-1 2 and ŝz j mutually commute. We find where and Similarly, we can evaluate various matrix elements. Take, for example, Here it is important to realize that operators ŝ+ k and ŝj commute with Ûl and Vl up to terms of order 1 N . Keeping this in mind, we go through the same steps as for Ψ ∞ |Ψ ∞ and obtain The additional factors in this equation as compared to Eq. ( where μ = -iνξ0 π and C n is a normalization constant. The subscript "thd" stands for "thermodynamic" indicating that this wave function is exact for evaluating certain correlation functions in the thermodynamic limit. Evaluating C n and recalling that ν = η N [see Eq. ( where u k and v k are given by Eq. ( There is nothing special about ŝ+ k ŝj . The same logic applies to general products of ŝ+ , ŝ-, and ŝz , where r m = +, -, or z and as before there is no more than one spin operator for each j m . The number of operators n must be such that n N → 0 when N → ∞, i.e. Ô must be local. Otherwise, terms of the order N -1 of the type we neglected in deriving Eq. ( Here and N ↑ = N ↑ + ∆N ↑ . Note also that the matrix elements of arbitrary products of fermionic creation ĉ † jσ and annihilation ĉkσ operators are either zero or reduce to matrix elements of the form The quantity μ in Eq. ( ŝz k mf , which is a consequence of the conservation of the z-projection of the total spin . Simultaneously it is the equation for the stationary point ξ 0 of G(ξ) defined in Eq. ( Equations As a check on our results, we also derived the thermodynamic limit of ŝz k Ψ∞ and ŝ+ k ŝj Ψ∞ directly from Eqs. ( We see this in the same way as we showed the equivalence of Ψ mf and Ψ ∞ only without the complication of Ûk and Vk being operators, see also Refs. 71 and 72. We conclude that the thermodynamic limits of averages of local operators Ô in the late-time asymptotic state of the exact quantum BCS dynamics and in the late-time asymptotic state of mean-field (classical) BCS dynamics coincide exactly . Let us emphasize once more that when Ô does not conserve the total fermion number, we define its average in the asymptotic solution of quantum dynamics with definite fermion number as the nonzero matrix element between solutions with different fermion numbers. Its expectation value in the state Ψ ∞ is zero and not useful for comparison to mean field. When Ô commutes with N f , its average and expectation value in any state are the same. Note that local correlators are the ones most readily accessible in experiment. In this sense, BCS mean field is exact far from equilibrium for the evolution launched from the exact quantum ground state with a definitive number of fermions. This is true despite the fact that the BCS order parameter vanishes at late times, see the discussion below Eq. ( Even though matrix elements of local operators in the exact late-time state Ψ ∞ of quantum time evolution from the exact ground state and in the BCS product state Ψ mf of the meanfield (classical) evolution as well as in the projected BCS state Ψ pmf are identical in the thermodynamic limit, Ψ ∞ = Ψ mf and Ψ ∞ = Ψ pmf . We see this by comparing coefficients at basis states in Eqs. It is not difficult to write an operator whose quantum average is different in Ψ ∞ and in Ψ mf or Ψ pmf . The number of spins involved in such an operator is necessarily proportional to N in the thermodynamic limit. Consider, for example, operators |e 2 e 1 | that convert a basis state |e 1 into a basis state |e 2 . One of these operators is Evaluating its expectation value in the state Ψ ∞ using Eq. ( A popular example of a non-local quantity is the bipartite von Neumann entanglement entropy where ρ A = Tr Ā ρ is the reduced density matrix of the subsystem A: the trace of the system density matrix over the complement of A. Suppose N is even and consider the most interesting case N ↑ = N 2 . Our choice of A is the spins ŝj corresponding to the bottom half of the energies ε j . We find that the entanglement entropy for the nonautonomous quantum BCS dynamics plateaus at late times and for large N at where c(η) is a function of η of order one. This formula holds for both initial conditions we analyzed: the exact and the BCS ground states at t = 0 + . We consider the latter initial condition in Sec. XII A. The asymptotic state of the quantum dynamics launched from the exact ground state at t = 0 + is Ψ ∞ . We plot S ent versus ln N for Ψ ∞ for a range of N and η = 1 in Fig. We have where N m = N ↑ -min( N 2 , N ↑ ) and |N A ↑ A is the state of the subsystem A with a definite number N A ↑ of up spins and symmetric with respect to an arbitrary permutation of spins. In other words, the subsystem A has the maximum total spin Inset: Sent for the same two states as functions of η; the two curves are indistinguishable on this scale. Sent(Ψ pmf ) and Sent(Ψ∞) agree well already for small N and are approximately linear in ln N with slopes 0.438 and 0.441, respectively. Note also that Sent rapidly decreases with η consistent with Sent → 0 in the adiabatic limit η → +∞. total spin and N Ā ↑ up spins. In our case N ↑ = N 2 , but we wrote Eq. ( Reading off w i from this equation and substituting them into Eq. ( N 4 dominate the summation. Now using the following precise asymptotic expression 1 ): and converting the summation in Eq. ( Therefore, lim η→0 c(η) = 1 2 . In the opposite (adiabatic) limit η → +∞, the late-time asymptotic state is the ground state of a noninteracting Fermi gas with no entanglement, i.e., lim η→+∞ c(η) = 0. Generally, we expect c(η) in Eq. ( Entanglement entropy that scales as ln N (see also the end of Sec. XII A) is a purely quantum phenomenon that survives the thermodynamic limit. Indeed, the asymptotic state of the mean-field (classical) dynamics is the product state Ψ mf with zero entanglement, S ent = 0. However, the projected meanfield state Ψ pmf appears to match S ent of the exact t → +∞ asymptotic state Ψ ∞ . Note also that N ∝ V and N ∝ N f , where V is the system volume and N f is the fermion number. Therefore, we can equally well say that S ent scales as ln V or ln N f in the thermodynamic limit. We see again that the mean-field approximation breaks down for non-local measures, even though it is exact for local observables in the thermodynamic limit even for far from equilibrium dynamics that involves highly excited states. Note that the many-body wave function of the system is itself nonlocal and therefore cannot be reproduced by mean field precisely. It is important to emphasize that this obvious breakdown of the BCS mean-field theory for global quantities is not in any way specific to the nonautonomous BCS Hamiltonian. For example, we similarly expect the entanglement entropy of the exact ground state of the quantum BCS Hamiltonian Before comparing quantum and mean-field dynamics for initial states that are not particle number eigenstates, let us discuss several physical properties of the steady state. Two main results of this section are: (1) the late-time steady state is a gapless superconductor whose superconducting properties can only be revealed through energy resolved measurements and (2) it conforms to the generalized Gibbs ensemble. The first result holds for a general protocol of turning off the superconducting coupling g(t). The second one is similarly general as long as the mean field remains exact in the thermodynamic limit (we established this above for dynamics with g(t) ∝ η t starting in the t = 0 + ground state, but it is reasonable to assume the scope of validity of mean field is much broader). Suppose the interaction vanishes at t → +∞, such as our g(t) ∝ η t . Then, at long times the system evolves with the noninteracting part of the Hamiltonian, Regardless of the history, expectation values of spin components at late times are of the form For Ψ mf , we have where k and φ k are given by Eqs. (53c) and (49b), respectively. In the thermodynamic limit, k and B kj for Ψ ∞ are the same as for Ψ mf but b k = 0 , since Ψ ∞ is an eigenstate of the total fermion number operator. However, the average of ŝk in the state Ψ ∞ [the l.h.s. of Eq. (68d)] is the same as its expectation value in Ψ mf . The conventionally defined superconducting order parameter is zero in the steady state because it is proportional to the coupling g = g(t), which vanishes as t → +∞. Consider instead The first of these quantities is the usual BCS order parameter We can learn more about the properties of asymptotic states Ψ ∞ and Ψ mf from the mean-field dynamics of BCS superconductors quenched via a sudden change of the coupling g i → g f . For sufficiently small but generally nonzero g f Nevertheless, exact asymptotic states Ψ ∞ and Ψ mf we derived above for quantum and mean-field dynamics for g(t) ∝ η t do exhibit superconducting correlations, e.g., the equal time anomalous Green's functions ŝk for Ψ mf and ŝ+ k s - j for Ψ ∞ are nonzero. However, to reveal these correlations, we need energy resolved measures, such as the spectral supercurrent density Since at t → +∞ the system evolves with Ĥ0 , its wave function is of the form [78] where {s z } = {s z 1 , . . . , s z N } is a set of eigenvalues of ŝz k , the sum is over all such sets, and |{s z } are simultaneous eigenstates of all ŝz k . The eigenergies E ({s z }) of Ĥ0 are generally nondegenerate and as a result the time averaged expectation values of observables are given by the diagonal ensemble In the present case, i.e., the diagonal ensemble C {s z } 2 is the same as the distribution P ({s z }) of s z k -the probability of finding the system in the state |{s z } . Therefore, to demonstrate that GGE describes our asymptotic states, it is enough to prove that it is equivalent to P ({s z }). No constants of motion are known for the Hamiltonian (13) with g(t) ∝ η t at finite t. However, a set of local integrals of motion obviously emerges at t → +∞, namely, ŝz k that commute with Ĥ0 and among themselves. GGE by definition is the density matrix ρGGE = e -k θ k ŝz k . In the |{s z } basis ρGGE is diagonal with diagonal matrix elements, i.e., Tr (ρ GGE Ô) is given by Eq. ( where μ is the chemical potential that determines z as we already discussed in the previous two sections. Comparing Eqs. ( is an exact description of the steady states of quantum and classical dynamics of the BCS model with interaction inversely proportional to time. Usually, we determine the parameters θ k in ρ GGE from the expectation values of the integrals of motion in the initial state Let us also comment on the relevance of the thermal distribution ρT = e -β T ( Ĥ0-μ Nf ) = e -k 2β T (ε k -μ)ŝ z k for our steady states. We observe with the help of Eq. ( We expect the GGE description to be valid for nonautonomous BCS Hamiltonians more generally, including for nonintegrable time dependence and a broad class of initial conditions. Note that GGE is valid whenever the mean field is, since the mean-field wave function is a product state. Then, P ({s z }) is a product of individual spin distributions and the distribution for an unentangled spin- 1 2 can always be written as e -θŝ z . Nevertheless, it is interesting to investigate the relationship between the emergent GGE and time-dependent integrability as well as the scope of the validity of GGE for nonautonomous BCS dynamics more thoroughly. Let us discuss various limits of the quantum BCS dynamics with time-dependent coupling g(t) = η N t . Above we worked out the late-time asymptotic behavior followed by the large N behavior at fixed fermion density. We launched the time evolution from the exact t = 0 + ground state with definite fermion number N f . Since the interaction diverges at t = 0, we interpreted this as starting in the ground state at t = t 0 and then taking the limit t 0 → 0 + . In this section, we show that the three limits: t → +∞, thermodynamic, and t 0 → 0 + mutually commute as long as our time evolving state is a particle (fermion) number eigenstate. Of interest is also the adiabatic limit η → +∞ and we show that it commutes with the thermodynamic and t 0 → 0 + limits. In stark contrast, we will see in Sec. X that several of these commutativity properties do not hold for observables that do not conserve the total fermion number, such as the Cooper pair annihilation operator ŝk , when the time-dependent wave function is not a particle number eigenstate. The time enters the Hamiltonian (13) in the combination t η . The limit η → 0 + (taken after t 0 → 0 + ) is the diabatic (quantum quench) limit. In this limit, the Hamiltonian changes instantaneously from with infinite coupling to the noninteracting Hamiltonian Ĥ0 . The opposite limit η → +∞ is the adiabatic limit where the Hamiltonian changes infinitely slowly. First, let us take this limit before the thermodynamic one. The ground state of the BCS Hamiltonian is nondegenerate, therefore the system stays in it at all times in the adiabatic limit for any finite N by the adiabatic theorem. The late-time wave function Ψ ∞ we derived above confirms this. Recall that the fermion number is , twice the number of up pseudospins. The Hamiltonian at t → +∞ is Ĥ0 : the Hamiltonian of noninteracting fermions. In its ground state, the first N ↑ spins are up and the rest are down (ε j are arranged in ascending order). Eq. The dependence of the wave function on t 0 (at any t) follows from elementary quantum mechanics. At early times the system evolves adiabatically with Ĥint because there is a diverging gap between the ground state and the first excited state Solving the nonstationary Schrödinger equation for Ĥint at small t (see also Sec. XII), we determine the t 0 -dependence of the solution Ψ(t) of the nonstationary Schrödinger equation for the BCS Hamiltonian where F (t) is independent of t 0 , E 0 (N ↑ ) is the rescaled ground state energy at t = 0 + , and t * is a function of η, N , and N ↑ only (see below). In Sec. V we worked out the exact late-time asymptotic solution Ψ ∞ (N ↑ ) for the quantum BCS time evolution up to a global phase. Eq. ( is the late-time asymptotic solution including the full overall phase. Ψ ∞ (N ↑ ) captures the time dependence of the global phase at large t as it solves the nonstationary Schrödinger equation in this limit Physically, t * is the time until which Ĥ0 is negligible and the system evolves adiabatically with Ĥint . It separates the strong coupling (early-time) regime where the dimensionless BCS coupling g(t) δ1 1 from the weak coupling (late-time) regime where g(t) δ1 1. Here δ 1 ≈ W N is the mean spacing between single-particle energy levels ε j and W is the bandwidth. The dimensionless coupling is equal to 1 at t = η W . Therefore, we expect t * ∼ η W . In Sec. XII we estimate t * for equally spaced ε j more accurately as Note that t ∼ t * is also the time when the global phase stops accumulating. The precise form of t * is unimportant for our purposes. The only assumption we will be making is that the variation in t * due to changing N ↑ by a finite integer is negligible in the thermodynamic limit. Consider the expectation value in the state Ψ ∞ (N ↑ ) of a product Ô of spin operators that commutes with the total fermion number operator. First, we see from Eq. ( Ψ∞ , the answer is an N -dependent number of order one, which has a definite N → ∞ value, times a set of exponents e ±2iε k t . It is clear from the derivation of Sec. V that we obtain the same value regardless of whether we take the thermodynamic limit before or after the stationary point calculation. We see that t → +∞ and thermodynamic limits also commute. To summarize the results of this section, t → +∞ (late-time), N → ∞ (thermodynamic), η → +∞ (adiabatic), and t 0 → 0 + limits mutually commute when we launch the evolution from a state with a definite total fermion number N f , with the exception of the late-time and adiabatic limits which of course do not commute. Above we examined the time evolution with the quantum BCS Hamiltonian For simplicity, we focus on the most interesting case when the average z-component of the total spin z = 0. This corresponds to half of the spins being up on average, N↑ = N 2 , and average fermion number Nf = N . The BCS ground state in this case is [see Eq. ( As discussed in Sec. III C, in mean-field approach this state corresponds to the lowest energy classical spin configuration for J z = 0 where all classical spin vectors are along the xaxis. To obtain the quantum evolution launched from Ψ BCS , we decompose this state into exact t = 0 + ground states In Sec. V, we derived the t → +∞ asymptotic solution Ψ ∞ (N ↑ ) [Eq. ( where |N ↑ ∞ is the normalized version of Ψ ∞ (N ↑ ) defined in Eq. This summation localizes at N ↑ ≈ N 2 for large N . We see this with the help of Eq. ( where N ↑ = xN + N 2 . In the limit N → ∞, the weight function tends to the Dirac delta function, 2N π e -2N x 2 → δ(x), and we have (95) Therefore, expectation values of observables conserving the total fermion number for the evolution from the BCS ground state with average fermion number Nf and from the exact ground state with definite N f coincide when The behavior of observables Ônc that do not commute with Nf is different. Consider, for example, ŝk = ĉk↑ ĉk↓ . Note that the expectation value of ŝk in the state Φ ∞ is the equal time anomalous Green's function at t → +∞. Going through the same steps as for Ôcon , we find where we used Eqs. (68d) and (53b). Applying the steepest descent method or simply completing the square in the exponent, we obtain (97) Recall that τ * = η ln t * t0 and ŝk mf is the expectation of ŝk in the late-time asymptotic wave function The non-commutation of the thermodynamic with adiabatic and t 0 → 0 + limits is a purely quantum effect because in classical (mean-field) dynamics with the same initial condition [Eqs. Notice that the drastic difference in the late-time values of the anomalous average ŝk = ĉk↑ ĉk↓ for quantum and mean-field time evolution is also a dynamical effect but is unrelated to the time dependence of the BCS coupling constant. It only requires an initial state that is a superposition of a large number of the eigenstates of the Hamiltonian. In the present case, the magnitude of this quantum dynamical effect (dephasing) is controlled by the parameter in contrast to the parameter 1 N that controls other quantum fluctuations (finite size corrections) of local observables For example, for η = 20, t * t0 = 10 3 , and N = 10 4 usual finite size corrections are of order 0.01% and are negligible compared to dephasing, which is no longer a small correction as Q ≈ 1. So far we focused on the t → +∞ asymptotic state. It is also important to understand how quickly the system reaches this state. Here we analyze this issue numerically for the classical time evolution, i.e., for the dynamics generated by the mean-field BCS Hamiltonian In Fig. for a range of N at fixed large t = T = 1.57N (lower panel). Units of time in our simulation are set by our choice of singleparticle energies ε k = k N with k = 1, . . . , N . Therefore, the bandwidth W ≈ 1 and the units of time are approximately W -1 . Analysis of results of simulations presented in Fig. where R(η) is a positive function of η that is independent of N for large N as is evident from the lower panel of Fig. Most importantly, we see that the system can get arbitrarily close to the late-time asymptotic state in finite time in the thermodynamic limit, i.e., the properties of Ψ ∞ in this limit that we established above are accessible. Note that because the interaction vanishes at t → +∞, the system goes into an asymptotic state with S z k = const for any N . Moreover, the thermodynamic and t → +∞ limits commute We mentioned above that the deviation saturates at t ∝ N at which point Dev ∝ N -3.0 . This along with Eq. (99) implies that corrections to our N → ∞ analytic results in Sec. VI for S z k and other spin components are of order N -3 2 . It is interesting to understand this scaling with N as naively we would expect N -1 scaling. These corrections to the N → ∞ limit within mean field are not to be confused with the corrections to mean field due to quantum fluctuations. The latter corrections to S z k are indeed of order N -1 , see Sec. VII. Now let us investigate quantum effects at early times where the interaction part of the Hamiltonian dominates the dynamics being proportional to 1 t and the kinetic term Ĥ0 = j 2 j ŝz j is negligible. Of special interest is the evolution starting from the BCS ground state at t = 0 + and observables that do not commute with the total fermion number operator, e.g., ŝk . We already saw in Sec. X, that such observables dephase with time. The magnitude of this quantum effect is controlled by a parameter distinct from the one that controls quantum fluctuations (corrections to mean field) in equilibrium. In this section, we illustrate this in a much simpler setting of the early-time dynamics. Then, we derive the von Neumann entanglement entropy S ent at early times and show that it monotonically increases with time and is N -independent in the thermodynamic limit. On the other hand, at finite but large N we argue that S ent saturates at S ent = c(η) ln N , where c(η) is a function of η of order one. Dephasing and the growth of entanglement are two sides of the same coin. With time the phases of components of the many-body wave function with different particle numbers randomize, so that they no longer combine into a BCS product state and eventually saturate the entanglement entropy. The Hamiltonian at early times approximately is where  = N k=1 ŝk is the total spin, see the forth paragraph in Sec. IX for a brief discussion of the validity of this approximation. We rewrite the Schrödinger equation for Ĥint as The initial condition is Φ(t0) = Ψ(t0) = ΨBCS, where ΨBCS is the infinite coupling mean-field ground state and t0 = 10 -10 . The doted vertical line marks t = 0.1 below which the overlap is close to 1. This plot supports our estimate that the early-time approximation is valid for t < t * ≈ 0.1η W , where W is the bandwidth of ε k . Eigenvalues of + are (+1)- 2 z + z . The ground state of Ĥint with  z = N ↑ -N 2 and  = N 2 is Ψ 0 (N ↑ ) in Eq. We compare this early-time wave function, which we derived by neglecting the kinetic term Ĥ0 , with the direct numerical solution of the nonstationary Schrödinger equation for the full quantum Hamiltonian Ĥ = Ĥ0 + Ĥint , same initial condition, for several N in Fig. for the expectation value of the spin lowering operator ŝk (equal time anomalous Green's function) in the state Φ(t) in the thermodynamic limit. The corresponding early-time classical motion is trivial. In the strong coupling limit t → 0 + , we neglect ε j in Eq. We found in Sec. VII B that ln N scaling of the von Neumann entanglement entropy S ent for large N is generic for the quantum BCS model. In particular, it holds for the latetime asymptotic state Ψ ∞ , projected BCS states, and exact infinite coupling ground state. We considered the case when the ratio of the number of fermion pairs N ↑ (equivalently, the number of up pseudospins) to the number N of single-particle energy levels 2 , but we expect the ln N scaling to be valid in the thermodynamic limit for other finite ratios as well. Next, we the early-time S ent for the quantum BCS time evolution with coupling g(t) ∝ η t starting from the BCS ground state at t = 0 + . We will find that S ent grows monotonically from zero with S ent ≈ ln τ at large τ . For finite N , the growth saturates at S ent ∝ ln N as before. We postpone derivations to Appendix B and present only the main results and conclusions here. Let N be even. Our first step is to calculate the reduced density matrix ρ A for the subsystem A consisting of N 2 spins for the early-time manybody wave function (103), where Entanglement entropy Sent at short times for the quantum BCS dynamics with time-dependent interaction strength g(t) ∝ η t . The initial state is the infinite coupling BCS ground state at t = t0. System parameters are the same as in Fig. Now consider the Rényi entanglement entropies for integer n defined as Treating n as a replica index that can be analytically continued We see that S ent is intensive in the thermodynamic limit. It monotonically grows from zero at τ = 0 (t = t 0 ) behaving as S ent ≈ ln τ at large τ . There is a simple picture of the early-time dynamics that explains Eq. ( A useful general result where nex = b †b is the number of excitations -the number of Holstein-Primakoff bosons for the collective spin  bosonized via a Holstein-Primakoff transformation around the direction of (τ ) . To gain further insight into various features of S ent , consider the semiclassical motion of this bosonic mode. This motion is one-dimensional and Hamiltonian. Nearby trajectories separate linearly in time, i.e., the growth of the momentum and position with τ is linear. Since nex is quadratic in the momentum and position, we expect nex ∼ τ 2 . Indeed, comparing Eqs. ( where c E is a coefficient of order one. Recall that the entanglement entropy in the thermodynamic limit (110) grows as ln τ for large τ . This growth stops and finite size effects kick in at the Ehrenfest time scale as at this point the number of bosonic excitations reaches its maximum possible value. Note also that t E is the time when the argument of the exponential function in Eq. ( In this paper, we demonstrated that the far from equilibrium dynamics of BCS superconductors is classical in the thermodynamic limit under certain conditions. Specifically, we obtained exact solutions for the quantum and classical (mean-field) dynamics of the BCS Hamiltonian with timedependent coupling, g(t) = 1 νt launched from the ground state at t = t 0 → 0 + . We explicitly determined exact quantum and mean-field wave functions at long times, evaluated quantum averages of a generic local observable in them, and proved that they coincide in the thermodynamic limit. It is clear that this must remain true for a broad class of g(t) and initial conditions. Nevertheless, it is worthwhile to verify that the mean field is similarly exact when g(t) does not vanish at t → +∞. This can be done, for example, by solving for the backward time evolution from t = +∞ to t = 0 + of our model using the method we developed in this paper. On the other hand, the classical picture breaks down dramatically for global quantities, such as the bipartite von Neumann entanglement entropy as we saw above and the Loschmidt echo as shown in Ref. These results provide a deeper understanding of the reasons behind the success of mean-field theories in general, beyond our focus on far from equilibrium superconductivity. In situations where they are believed to be accurate (e.g., above a certain dimension), we expect the mean-field wave function to capture the order parameter and other local observables, but not the entanglement and other global properties of the true many-particle state. A fascinating project is to investigate the interplay between quantumness and nonlocality in other "mean-field" models, such as topological p-wave superconductors We saw that the unitary time evolution brings our system into a steady state similar to one of the nonequilibrium phases in interaction quenched BCS superfluids We determined the dynamics of the von Neumann entanglement entropy S ent starting from the unentangled BCS (meanfield) ground state. Interestingly, the growth of the entanglement is entirely due to the interaction part of the quantum BCS Hamiltonian. The entanglement entropy is finite in the thermodynamic limit and grows monotonically as a function of time. Note that within the mean-field treatment S ent = 0 at all times. In a finite system, S ent saturates at a value that scales as ln V with the system volume V . This paper paves the way to a comprehensive theory of integrability of nonautonomous quantum Hamiltonians. We demonstrated that the off-shell Bethe Ansatz which provides an integral representation of solutions of the nonstationary Schrödinger equation, is a key ingredient of this theory. Another key ingredient is the systematic method we developed here to obtain explicit physical results, such as the ones listed above in this section, from the integral representation. Our method should work equally well for other models that go through the off-shell Bethe Ansatz, e.g., the problem of molecular production in an atomic Fermi gas swept through a Feshbach resonance and Demkov-Osherov, bow-tie, and generalized bow-tie multi-level Landau-Zener models Having determined ρ A (t), we now turn to calculating the Rényi entanglement entropy defined by Eq. (109). When taking the trace of powers of ρ A the phases cancel so that x n exp -τ 2 4N (x 1 -x 2 ) 2 + . . . + (x n -x 1 ) 2 . (B4) As before, in the large N limit we replace the sums with integrals and evaluate them using the multi-dimensional saddle point method. The stationary point occurs at x 1 = x 2 = . . . = x n = 1 2 and the matrix elements of the Hessian matrix are with eigenvalues given by where ω = e 2πi n is a primitive n th root of unity. Substituting j κ j for the determinant into the saddle point formula and simplifying we have An immediate observation is that S ent (τ ) is finite in the thermodynamic limit. In the main text we provide a thorough qualitative explanation of Eq. (B11) and use it together with other considerations to understand the behavior of S ent (τ ) for finite N as well, namely, its saturation at S ent ∼ 1 2 ln N at τ ∼ √ N and subsequent oscillations as a function of τ . is a reasonable estimate, see Figs. 9 and 10. Note that in these figures η = 1 and W = 1 -1 N , so t *