The recent discovery of magnetic Weyl semimetal Co3Sn2S2 opens up new avenues for research into the interactions between topological orders, magnetism, and electronic correlations. Motivated by the observations of large anomalous Hall effect because of large Berry curvature, we investigate another Berry curvature-induced phenomenon, the anomalous thermal Hall effect in Co3Sn2S2. We study it with and without strain, using a Wannier tight-binding Hamiltonian derived from first principles density functional theory calculations. We first identify this material as a tilted type-I Weyl semimetal based on the band structure calculation. Within the quasi-classical framework of Boltzmann transport theory, a giant anomalous thermal Hall signal appears due to the presence of large Berry curvature. Surprisingly, the thermal Hall current changes and even undergoes a sign-reversal upon varying the chemical potential. Furthermore, applying about 13 GPa stress, an enhancement as large as 33% in the conductivity is observed; however, the tilt vanishes along the path connecting the Weyl nodes. In addition, we have confirmed the validity of the Wiedemann-Franz law in this system for anomalous transports. We propose specific observable signatures that can be directly tested in experiments. Topologically protected gapped and gapless materials have attracted immense attention lately due to their unique properties In the case of a WSM, the Weyl nodes, which are earmarked by their locations in momentum and energy space where the non-degenerate bands linearly touch each other, always appear in pairs with well-defined but opposite chiralities Ever since their discovery, Weyl semimetals have been surprising us with their unique and fascinating transport properties, such as nontrivial Berry curvature induced anomalous Hall effect (AHE) and anomalous Nernst effect (ANE) These topological transport properties in WSM have been studied extensively both theoretically and experimentally. However, in the context of real materials, most of these studies are based on the IS-broken but TR-symmetric WSMs. After the first experimental discovery of WSM in TaAs in 2015 In this paper, we investigate the anomalous thermal Hall effect of the magnetic WSM Co 3 Sn 2 S 2 in detail. We start by studying the electronic structure of this material and obtain a Wannier tight-binding model from the first principles calculation. We identify this material as a type-I Weyl semimetal with tilted cones for the first time using DFT calculations which agrees with very recent experimental findings The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: in Sec. II we discuss the crystal structure, underlying symmetries and magnetic moments of Co 3 Sn 2 S 2 . Then we elaborate the computational methods employed throughout the work. After that we study its electronic band structure, density of states, as well as Fermi surface in Sec. III. In Sec. IV we investigate ATHE and study its behavior with chemical potential and temperature. Then in Sec. V we discuss the effect of stress on the system and show how it can be used to enhance the ATHC. And finally, we summarize our work, the results obtained and possible future directions in Sec. VI. The shandite material Co 3 Sn 2 S 2 crystallizes in a rhombohedral structure with a layer of quasi-2D Co 3 Sn sandwiched between S and Sn atoms We have performed first principles density functional theory (DFT) calculations using Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) In this section, we investigate the electronic band structure of Co 3 Sn 2 S 2 in detail, both in the absence and in the presence of spin-orbit coupling (SOC). In the absence of SOC, the calculated electronic band structure, along the path W-T-U-L-Γ, is shown in Fig. As the compound consists of elements with relatively large atomic numbers, it is desirable to incorporate spin-orbit interactions (which, typically, vary as the fourth power of the effective nuclear charge Z). The mirror-symmetry of the Hamiltonian gets broken with the introduction of SOC and hence the nodal ring, that was present earlier, collapses into a pair of Weyl points with opposite chiralities. The elec-tronic band structure, including SOC, is shown with the dotted green curves in Fig. We have plotted the first two Weyl nodes of Tab. I in Fig. where k is the momentum relative to the Weyl node. v, t, and 0 being the Fermi velocity, tilt parameter, and Weyl node energy respectively. The cones shown in Fig. In this section, we will investigate the anomalous thermal Hall effect using the structural and electronic properties of Co 3 Sn 2 S 2 . The ATHE refers to the appearance of a transverse heat current as a first-order response to an applied longitudinal thermal gradient. In linear response regime, the equation for the heat current in the presence of applied thermal gradient (∇T ) and electric field (E) is given by, where α and κ in Eq. 2 are the Peltier and thermal conductivity tensors corresponding to Nernst-Ettinghausen and Leduc-Righi effects respectively. The transverse component of these tensors can be expressed as ∂ kn with Ω kn , kn , μ and f eq being the Berry curvature, energy eigenvalue of the n-th band, chemical potential and the equilibrium Fermi distribution function respectively. β is written in place of 1/(k B T ), where k B and T are the Boltzmann constant and temperature respectively. Upon simplifying the above equation, we can write the expression for anomalous thermal Hall coefficient as where Li 2 (z) is the polylogarithm function of order 2. It is important to note that we are considering only the transverse response to the applied thermal gradient ∇T in presence of nontrivial Berry curvature without any external magnetic field. In order to calculate ATHE, we must discuss first the Berry curvature profile of the system as we are considering only the Berry curvature-induced contribution. Since the TRS is broken in Co 3 Sn 2 S 2 due to its inherent ferromagnetism, it possesses finite values of Berry curvature throughout the Brillouin zone and sharp peaks at the locations of the Weyl nodes The plane plot, however, could capture the exact locations of the nodes as shown in Table To understand the main source of this large effect we analyze all the terms in Eq. 4. As the system possesses inversion symmetry, the full integration of the Berry curvature over the Brillouin zone is zero. Hence, the first constant term of the kernel written inside the square bracket has no contribution. At low temperatures, the integration of second and third terms inside the square bracket turns out to be exactly equal and opposite. We would like to point out that these terms give a very large contribution at the high temperature limit. Hence, the only contribution to ATHC comes from the polylogarithm function multiplying with Berry curvature at T → 0. It is important to note that the x and y components of the Berry curvature lead to a very small Hall conductivity (less than 5% of that due to the z-component) and hence only the xy-component of ATHC has been shown. At low temperature, Eq. 4 is reduced to where L 0 is known as the Lorenz number and has a value of The band dispersion around two of the Weyl nodes along their connecting line in the Brillouin zone. The nodes move towards the Fermi level with increasing stress and finally at 12.9 GPa they fall directly on the Fermi level. The tilting of the cones decreases with stress and almost vanish at 12.9 GPa. The red line in the inset indicates tilting with respect to the vertical. 2.44 × 10 -8 W ΩK -2 . The Eq. 5 satisfies the Wiedemann-Franz law which states that the ratio of the thermal conductivity and the electrical conductivity of the material is directly proportional to temperature. To validate this from our calculation, we have computed the anomalous Hall conductivity (σ xy ) at low temperature and computed the ratio of σ xy and κ xy . The proportionality constant comes out to be very close to L 0 over the range of chemical potential (μ) at 50 K. However, as T is increased, Eq. 5 no longer remains valid. We plot κ xy over a large range of temperature T in Fig. In this section we shall investigate the effect of strain on the anomalous transport properties in Co 3 Sn 2 S 2 . Here we restrict ourselves to only uniaxial compressive stress which is achieved by introducing strain in the lattice vector. For this purpose, we reduce the unit cell length along z-direction gradually by up to 5% which is equivalent to a stress of around 13 GPa along the z-axis. At every step of increasing stress, the structure has been geometry optimized by keeping the cell volume fixed while relaxing the atomic positions. And it is important to note that no structural transition has taken place during the process. To investigate what happens to the electronic properties, we plot the SOC-included band structure in Fig. To summarize, we have investigated the Berry curvatureinduced anomalous thermal Hall effect in magnetic Weyl semimetal Co 3 Sn 2 S 2 using a combination of the first principles DFT calculation and quasi-classical Boltzmann transport theory. From DFT calculation, we first obtain the electronic band structure of the material and observe that the system transits from a nodal-line semimetal to a Weyl semimetal by turning on the spin-orbit coupling. We show that the first Brillouin zone contains three pairs of Weyl nodes in total, created by the C 3z rotational symmetry and they are located at the same energy due to the presence of inversion symmetry. We have shown from DFT calculations that the Weyl cones are tilted and also calculated the tilt parameter which indicates that the system is a type-I WSM. From a tight-binding Hamiltonian, derived from Wannier functions, we have calculated the Berry curvature which shows large enhancement especially at the positions of the Weyl nodes. Next, using the semiclassical Boltzmann transport theory, we have computed the Berry curvature-induced anomalous thermal Hall conductivity of Co 3 Sn 2 S 2 which came out to be very large. By varying the chemical potential the thermal Hall current can be tuned and even the direction can be reversed for some particular values. We have also checked the Wiedemann-Franz law and found that this law is well satisfied at low temperatures. In addition, to further enhance the thermal conductivity in Co 3 Sn 2 S 2 , we apply uniaxial compressive stress. This essentially moves the Weyl nodes towards the Fermi level which in turn enhances ATHC as the anomalous transport properties are directly related to the Weyl nodes. To be quantitative, the conductivity increased by about 33% for a compressive strain of just 5% along the z-axis of the unit cell. It is worthwhile to mention that the tilt of the Weyl cones vanishes along the connecting line on application of stress. We would like to point out that since the d-orbitals of Co atom contribute the most to the bands near Fermi level which create the Weyl nodes and these orbitals are partially filled, one can expect a non-trivial role of electronic correlation in this material. However, the incorporation of Coulomb interaction in DFT (i.e., DFT+U) gaps out the Weyl node crossing which is unphysical and, therefore, one has to go beyond the single-electron Hartree-Fock picture to fully understand the effects of correlation in this material. The locations (fractional coordinates) of the Weyl nodes in the Brillouin zone. Their energies above Fermi level and the chiralities are also shown in last two columns.