Temperature and field dependence of collective spin excitations or magnon in monolayer honeycomb spin lattices is investigated using an anisotropic exchange XZ-Heisenberg model in an external field. Magnetic phase transition in the presence of the transverse field is the spin reorientation (SR) transition with magnon intensity existing above the SR temperature. The transverse field either decreases or sustains the spin-wave intensity in the temperature region below or above the SR temperature, respectively. The gap of the zero-momentum low-energy magnon branch closes at the SR transverse field, which is the critical quantum phase transition field at zero temperature. The application of the model to a two-dimensional CrI 3 explains the existence of the zero-momentum magnon mode above the Curie temperature and shows the suitable values of the exchange parameters compared with the DFT calculations. The estimated magnon velocity near the Dirac point in this material is about 1.74 km/s. magnon band structure, Heisenberg model, Vander Waals crystals Dirac materials having elementary excitation spectra similar to the Dirac electronic quasiparticle in graphene are intensively investigated for the last decade Based on graphene-like two-dimensional (2D) materials, Van der Waals crystal chromium triiodide CrI 3 , one of the typical 2D magnets, exhibits ferromagnetic order when the size of the crystal is down to a single layer Acoustical and optical magnon branches are recognized in the mono-layer CrI 3 using magneto-Raman spectroscopy The longitudinal magnetic-field-induced quantum phase transition was experimentally explored in the CrI 3 bulk with honeycomb spin structure, where antiferromagnetic surface layers transformed to a ferromagnetic (FM) state at the critical field of about 2 T For this reason, we aim to deeply understand the temperature and the TF behavior of the monolayer honeycomb spin-lattice magnons, including the QPT case. Our results bring specific features of magnon energy in the CrI 3 and other 2D systems observed in experiments. The paper is organized as follows: the next part describes the model and the calculation method. In Section III, we analyze the FM magnon spectra in the monolayer honeycomb spin-lattice and compare our model parameters with experimental calculations. We will summarize our results in the conclusion part. We consider a monolayer honeycomb spin-lattice consisting of 2N spins residing in two triangular a and b spin sub-lattices shown in Fig. ) with the length of the hexagonal edge a 0 . Similarly, three NN of a b-spin at site g are a-spins positioned by vectors -∆. The six next-nearest-neighbors (NNN) of the a(b)-sub-lattice are the same spin types defined by vectors The Hamiltonian of the XZ-Heisenberg model for the honeycomb monolayer spin-lattice in the external fields is written by Here h 0 , Ω 0 are the external longitudinal and transverse field intensity given in the energy unit. The components of sub-lattice spin operators in the crystallographic xyz frame, where the z-axis is perpendicular to the honeycomb spin-lattice plane, are denoted by s z aj , s x aj , s z bg , s x bg . J and L are NN exchange parameters between spin-pair components along the out-of-plane z and inplane x directions, respectively. Since long-range order generally does not exist in a 2D isotropic exchange Heisenberg model Using the mean-field approximation (MFA), we rewrite the Hamiltonian (1) in terms of spin fluctuation operators δs z a(b)j = s z a(b)j -m az(bz) , where g∆ (Jδs z ag δs z b,g-∆ + Lδs x ag δs x b,g-∆ ) - jρ J ′ (δs z aj δs z b,j+ρ + δs x aj δs x b,j+ρ ) and Here m νx =< s x ν >, m νz =< s z ν > with ν = a, b are thermodynamic average of the spin-moment components per site and m ν = m 2 νx + m 2 νz , and < ... >= Tr(e -βH ...)/Tr(e -βH ). The formula (5) produces the longitudinal and transverse components, h ν and Ω ν , of the net field acting on the ν-sub-lattice. The Hamiltonian H 0 is diagonalized using the transformation, During the transformation, spin fluctuation operators δs α νj (α = x, z) are transformed to new operators δS α νj = S α νj -< S α ν >, (α = X, Z). Performing Fourier transformation δS α νj = N -1/2 k δS α ν (k)e ikj with two-dimensional wave vector k defined in the first Brillouin zone (shown in Fig. and where λ and λ ′ run from 1 to 4 meaning 1 ≡ aX, 2 ≡ aZ, 3 ≡ bX, 4 ≡ bZ. The anisotropic exchange interaction is a Hermitian matrix defined by where and The temperature and field dependence of the magnon spectra is obtained from the poles of the imaginary time Green's function (GF) as carried out in Ref. given in the crystallographic spin-lattice coordinates and in the Heisenberg picture is written as where Taking Fourier transformation of the GF, we have where ω = 2πn/β; n = 0, ±1, ±2, .... Denoting (k, ω) as the three-component wave vector q and putting R = jj ′ , the Fourier image of the GF writes where The unitary transformation The Fourier transform of Green's function in the local XZ coordinate presented in Eqs. ( The GF in Eq. ( where < ... > 0 = Tr(e -βH 0 ...)/Tr(e -βH 0 ) implies the thermodynamic average with the mean-field Hamiltonian in Eq. ( dτ ] is the scattering matrix. The Green's function matrix Γ(q) is presented by, Γ(q) =   Γaa (q) Γab (q) Γba (q) Γbb (q) In Ref. Here I -1 λλ ′ (k) denotes the inverse matrix elements of Î(k) indicated in Eq. ( Here ψ c λ (q) and ψ s λ (q) are the real and imaginary parts of ψ λ (q), respectively and ψ c λ (-q) = ψ c λ (q), ψ s λ (-q) = -ψ s λ (q). In the Gaussian approximation, Green's function Γ(q) satisfies the matrix equation: where and Here, the Brillouin function b s (y ν ) and its derivative b ′ s (y ν ) are given in Ref. with the k-dependent poles ǫ ± k of the GF known as elementary excitation energies or magnons, We note that the formula (34) better describes the temperature and field dependence of the magnon band structure compared with that obtained by Ref. We can also obtain various elementary excitations (ferromagnetic, antiferromagnetic, ferromagnetic magnon) in the honeycomb spin-lattice using Eq. (34). In the following parts, we concentrate only on ferromagnetic magnon which has been experimentally observed in the typical monolayer CrI 3 and the Van der Waals structures and C = (JΩ 2 + Lh 2 )/γ 2 . Thus, the FM magnon spectrum is given by, with β -1 = τ, y = γ/τ . Similarly, the Curie temperature is extracted from Eq. (37) in the limit of zero TF, In the presence of TF, the magnetic moment and the spin-wave energy follow different relations in certain temperature regions. Instead of Eq. (36), the energy spectrum of the FM magnon is explicitly expressed in different ranges of temperature which are i/ Below the SR temperature (0 < τ < τ R (Ω 0 )) From that, the spin reorients from the out-of-plane to the in-plane direction at the SR field which is The magnon spectrum is then described by where the zero-momentum magnon mode simplifies to, At finite temperatures, the gap of the low-energy magnon branch at the center of the BZ closes, ǫ - 0 = 0, when the transverse field reaches the SR field value in Eq. (40). In this case, the low-energy magnon branch is purely acoustic, which implies ǫ - k → 0 when k → 0. Near the Dirac point K' 2π 3a 0 , -2π 3 √ 3a 0 , the magnon energy has a linear wave-vector dependence, The magnon speed v m is a function of transverse field and temperature, ii/ Above the SR temperature (τ ≥ τ R ), The magnetization and the dispersion relation of magnon are correspondingly given by where the magnon speed is non-explicitly temperature and field dependent, iii/ At zero temperature The spin reorientation is then interpreted as the quantum phase transition due to the TF. At zero temperature, the SR field equals the critical field Ω 0R (0) = Ω 0C . In this case, the Brillouin function reaches a saturated value, b s (y) = s with the spin moment per site s. Consequently, the critical transverse field causing QPT is (see Eq. ( The spin wave energy behaves differently depending on the transverse field, which is and the FM magnon follows a dispersion relation which is where the zero-momentum magnon gaps at Brillouin zone center for two branches are It is obviously seen from Eq. ( The magnetization is simplified to m z = 0, m x = s and the magnon spectrum linearly varies on the TF, which is For numerical calculations, energy-dependent quantities such as FM-magnon energy ǫ ± (k), temperature τ ; parameters L, J'; field strength γ, h, Ω are measured in terms of NN exchange J and lengths are expressed in terms of a 0 . x ,m m z (Ω 0 =0.8, τ) (a) Here s=3/2, L=0.4, J'=0.1. Two magnon branches ǫ ± (k) are displayed in Fig. The difference between the magnon branches along the ΓMKΓ line outside the Dirac K-point increases when the transverse field Ω 0 increases with J ′ = 0.1 and 0.5 in the temperature region below τ R (see Fig. The temperature dependence of the zero-momentum FM-magnon spectra ǫ k (k = 0) in Fig. The influence of temperature on the behavior of the magnon energy is unveiled in Fig. At a certain transverse field, the difference between the two magnon branches depends on the intrinsic parameters L, J ′ , s, and the wave vector. For the same set of parameters, Ω 0 = 0.8, L = 0.4, J ′ = 0.1, s = 3/2, this difference is more pronounced for the wave vector at or near the center of the Brillouin zone (k x = k y = 0.5 in Fig. At zero temperature τ = 0 where the SR transition is considered as the QPT with the tuning parameter Ω 0 , we are interested in the energy variation of several magnon modes with various transverse field Ω 0 . The gap between two branches of the zero-momentum FM-magnon energy shown in Fig. A ferromagnetic order with an out-of-plane spin orientation was experimentally observed in the CrI 3 monolayer. The temperature dependence of the integrated intensity of the M 1 and M 2 magnon modes performed in Ref. The presence of the magnon mode intensity above SR temperature is an evidence of the transverse field. τ R = 45 K, we obtain J = 0.869 meV, the in-plane NN exchange constant L = 0.739 meV, the isotropic NNN exchange constant J ′ = 0.087 meV and the transverse field Ω 0 = 0.083 meV. We also make a comparison of these exchange parameters obtained from the DFT calculations for the CrI 3 monolayer We can see that the NN exchange parameter J of our work is in good agreement with the DFT derivations in Ref. and for the bulk (∼ 2 T) Table Parameter (meV) Present work Ref. The temperature and the field dependence of the ferromagnetic magnon spectra in the honeycomb single-layer spin film are calculated using the anisotropic exchange XZ-Heisenberg model with the transverse field. The field and temperature dependence of the magnetization are examined within the mean-field approximation while the magnon energy is calculated by using the Gaussian approximation. The finite-temperature phase transition due to the TF is the spin reorientation transition in the monolayer honeycomb spinlattice with the initial out-of-plane magnetization. The collective excitation follows the different dispersion relations below or above the SR temperature. The transverse-field dependence of the magnon spectrum at zero temperature corresponding to QPT is also illustrated and the gap of the zero-momentum low-energy magnon branch disappears at the critical QPT field. The model application for the magnon modes in the 2D-CrI 3 ferromagnet reveals a suitable agreement.