To understand and harness the physical mechanisms of ferroelectric Hafnium Zirconium Oxide (HZO)-based devices, there is a need for clear understanding of domain interactions, their dynamics, negative capacitance effects, and other multi-domain characteristics. These crucial attributes depend on the coupling between neighboring domains quantified by the gradient energy coefficient (g). Furthermore, HZO has unique orientation-dependent lateral multidomain configurations. To develop an in-depth understanding of multi-domain effects, there is a need for thorough analysis of g. In this work, the energetics of multidomain configurations and domain growth mechanism corresponding to lateral domain walls of HZO are analyzed and gradient energy coefficients are quantified using first-principles Density Functional Theory calculations. These results indicate that one lateral direction exhibits the following characteristics: i) DW is ultra-sharp and domain growth occurs unit-cell-by-unitcell, ii) the value of g is negative and in the order of 10 -12 Vm 3 C -1 , and iii) g reduces (increases) with compressive (tensile) strain. In contrast, in the other lateral direction, the following attributes are observed: i) DW is gradual and domain growth occurs in quanta of half-unit-cell, ii) g is positive and in the order of 10 -10 Vm 3 C -1 , and iii) g increases (reduces) with compressive (tensile) strain. Ferroelectric (FE)-based devices such as FE Tunnel Junction (FTJ), FE Field Effect Transistor (FEFET), and FE heterojunctions have shown immense promise for various applications, including non-volatile memory, logic, and neural networks, with new applications being continually explored. Here, P z is the polarization along the z -axis (assumed to coincide with the polar c-axis of the Pca21 unit cell without any loss of generality), f free is the local free energy density, f grad is the gradient energy density, and f dep is the depolarization energy density which results from bound polarization charges near surface/interface, α, β and γ are Landau's free energy coefficients, E z is the electric field in FE along z, and g x , g y and g z are gradient energy coefficients along x, y, and z axes, respectively. Gradient energy is related to the formation of domain wall (DW) and is defined as the associated energy cost owing to the polarization gradient near the DW region. Mathematically, g x , g y , and g z are proportionality constants that determine the magnitude of gradient energy contribution to the total energy. In the absence of bound charge compensation at the interface, depolarization fields emerge inside the FE leading to an increase in fdep (see Equation Being crucial for FE device phenomena, the efforts to quantify g in traditional perovskite-based FEs are many. For example, by combining first-principle calculations and hyperbolic function fitting, g x , g y , and g z in PbTiO3 are reported as 0.12×10 -10 , 0.12×10 -10 , and 0.21×10 -10 Vm 3 C -1 respectively. Being hitherto less explored, it is crucial to quantify g associated with 180 ̊ lateral DWs in HZO. This is because FE MD configurations in HZO are primarily 180° lateral domains where the DW plane is parallel to the polarization axis of the unit cell. In this work, we comprehensively quantify the g parameter in FE HZO considering its directiondependent material physics using first-principles Density Functional Theory (DFT) calculations. Specific contributions are as follows: ➢ We find atomic-scale strain-free (lattice matched) bulk MD configurations in both the lateral directions (i.e., x and y directions which are perpendicular to the polarization direction). ➢ We calculate g x and g y for the most energetically stable lateral DWs assuming constant g along a particular direction. ➢ We present a detailed quantitative comparison of the direction dependence of g. ➢ We explore the microscopic switching mechanism in both lateral directions to understand their domain kinetics. ➢ We analyze the strain dependence of g to predict its characteristics in the cases when HZO is integrated into a device and is subjected to strain due to electrodes/substrates. To obtain the MD configurations of HZO, we perform extensive first-principles calculations based on DFT. The details of the computational procedure are described in the Computational Section. Here, let us first introduce the unit cell of HZO. Both experimental and theoretical works have proved that the orthorhombic Pca21 phase is the source of ferroelectricity in HfO2-based FE materials. The calculated relaxed lattice parameters of the HZO unit cell (5.05, 5.28, and 5.08 A° along the three orthogonal directions) match with previous theoretical calculations and experiments. Once the SD and MD configurations are optimized, we obtain the DW energy of MD configurations. DW energy is widely used to compare the favorability of MD configurations over SD, as well as among several MD configurations. It is defined as the energy difference Here, factor 2 in the denominator indicates that there are two DWs in each periodic supercell and A is the cross-sectional area of each DW. For a particular type of lateral DW, we obtain the configuration with the lowest DW energy and calculate the gradient energy coefficient for that configuration. As described by Equation (1), gradient energy density depends on the polarization profile. Bulk structures are infinitely periodic, and no surface/interface or polarization-bound charges exist. Hence, depolarization energy does not take part in the total energy. Thus, in the SD supercell, total energy (E SD ) contains only the free energy component. On the contrary, for the MD supercell, both local free energy and gradient energy contribute to the total energy (E MD ). The energy barrier profile from the NEB method along with the modern theory of polarization provides the functional dependence of local free energy on polarization. Thus, the calculated polarization profile yields the local free energy of each dipole in MD (E local,MD ) and SD (E local,SD ) supercells. We use these values in Equation (3) to calculate the gradient energy density (fgrad). Total energy difference per unit volume, Then, the local polarization profile quantifies the corresponding gradient energy coefficient (g) as described in Equation (4). Here, ∆l is the distance between two consecutive dipoles and ∆p is the difference in polarization between the dipoles. The method followed here to calculate the gradient energy coefficient is like the method followed previously for perovskites, except the fact that we extract all values from first principles calculations. The orthorhombic unit cells of HZO shown in Figure Unlike [100], along [010] direction each layer is polarized as can be seen from Supplementary Figure Similarly, for CPL DW, combinations of U with D a , D b , and D c generate MD configurations MD y,a , MD y,b , and MD y,c respectively (y denotes CPL direction) as shown in Figure The atomic configurations near all the DWs are included in Supplementary Figure A representative relaxed MD supercell in the APSL configuration consisting of domains of equal widths (6 upward and 6 downward polarized unit cells) is shown in Figure With this DW energy, the calculated gradient energy coefficient in APSL (g x ) is shown in Figure These attributes can be explained as follows. The local free energy of the unit cells within the domains of MD are equal to those of SD because of their identical polarizations and atomic configurations. Moreover, since the DW energy is negligible, Equation (3) suggests that gradient energy is almost fully determined by local free energy contribution of the unit cells surrounding the DWs. Near the DW, the unit cells of MD supercell are slightly deviated from the minimum energy point of energy barrier profile as described in the first paragraph of this section. So, E local,MD is always slightly > Elocal,SD. Thus, g x becomes negative according to the equation shown in Figure To use the extracted parameters in phase field models of HZO, one needs to account for the polarization bump at the two lattice points near the DW in addition to the negative value of g x . Previous theoretical analysis has shown that higher order polarization gradient can have significant contribution to the total energy in addition to the contribution of g in ultra-sharp 180° DWs. A representative relaxed MD supercell with equally wide domains for CPL is shown in Figure For gradient energy coefficient calculation along CPL (g y ), half-unit-cell based polarization is used as shown in the equation in Figure So far, we have analyzed the minimum energy static configurations of APSL and CPL DWs. Let us now look at the dynamics (nucleation of domains and DW motion) of both types of DW. For the APSL configuration, nucleation of oppositely polarized domains and the growth of new domains correspond to the reversal of the polar layer. As the spacer layer always exists with the polar layer, each reversal step corresponds to one unit cell reversal. Figure Two paths of unit cell polarization reversal are possible from upward polarized unit cell, U to downward polarized unit cell D b as discussed in Supplementary Figure Now let us look at the domain growth mechanism in the CPL configuration. Here, stable domains with odd number of half-unit cells can exist. So, half-unit-cellwise DW movement must be considered as shown in Figure Here, due to the half-unit-cell-wise polarization reversal, the energy barrier depends on the relative location of Hf/Zr atoms in the corresponding lattice sites (corresponding to the three types of unit cell configurations in Figure where E a is the activation field corresponding to barrier height and E is the applied electric field. As a result, domain growth is expected to be much faster in CPL compared to APSL. The stability of the orthorhombic phase in HZO is largely dependent on the strain. It has been shown in experiments that strain provided by electrodes and substrate helps stabilize the orthorhombic phases. As tensile strain is applied (Figure To explain the trend in g x variation with strain, we calculate the DW energy for different strain conditions. Recall from section 2.2.1 that the APSL MD system feels slight compressive strain during the SD to MD transition. So, with applied compressive strain, the MD system energy initially reduces. However, after a certain critical compressive strain, it drifts away from the minimum energy. On the other hand, the SD system does not show such a non-monotonic behavior and exhibits an increase in energy with the increase in any compressive strain. So, DW energy decreases with compressive strain. For applied tensile strain, constrained MD moves further away from its minimum energy monotonically. Although SD also moves away from its minimum energy, the deviation of MD is always larger than the deviation of SD from their respective minimum energy configurations at a particular tensile strain. As a result, with increasing tensile strain, DW energy increases. This dependence of DW energy on strain is shown in Figure In the case of CPL DW, tensile strain reduces g y while compressive strain enhances its value. This is shown in Figure Figure As discussed in Section 2.2.2, for the CPL configuration, the MD system feels slight tensile strain during the SD to MD transition. So, the application of tensile strain lowers the MD system energy, and then raises it after a certain tensile strain. But, SD system energy exhibits a monotonic increase in energy with an increase in tensile strain. Thus, tensile strain reduces DW energy. On the contrary, compressive strain deviates MD from its minimum energy configuration more than it deviates SD. Thus, compressive strain increases DW energy. This variation of DW energy is depicted in Figure In summary, in this work, we analyzed the orientation-dependence of lateral DWs in HZO and their gradient energy coefficients using first-principles calculations based on Density Functional Theory (DFT). Due to the unique alternate polar-spacer layer (APSL) configuration in one lateral direction, the corresponding polarization profile is atomically sharp near the domain wall. In the other lateral direction, continuous polar layer (CPL) configuration is observed, and polarization shows gradual variation near the DW. Along this direction, half-unit-cell polarization should be considered instead of unit-cell polarization. This is because domains can form with an odd number of halfunit cells and DW motion occurs in quanta of half-unitcells. The energy barrier profile indicates that domain growth occurs faster along this direction compared to the former. We emphasize that due to this orientationdependent DW characteristics, the gradient energy coefficient in HZO has a significant directional property. g x quantifies gradient energy between two consecutive oppositely polarized dipoles (unit cells) along the APSL direction. The magnitude of g x is small, negative, and in the order of 10 -12 V m 3 C -1 . g y quantifies gradient energy between dipoles (half unit cells) along the CPL direction and is in the order of 10 -10 V m 3 C -1 . g x and g y correspond to the most energetically stable systems of the two types of DWs and the order is valid over a wide range of domain widths. Compressive strain reduces g x , but increases g y . Similarly, tensile strain increases g x , but reduces g y . Both g x and g y affect the overall energetics of HZO samples. The results obtained in this work will give a comprehensive understanding of the gradient energy coefficient associated with lateral domain walls, which would be a crucial step for analyzing the multi-domain nature of HZO-based devices and their circuit applications. For DFT calculation, Projector-Augmented Wave (PAW) pseudopotentials with non-linear core correction and Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof generalized gradient approximation (GGA-PBE) as exchangecorrelation functional are applied in Quantum Espresso software package. Tanmoy Kumar Paul*, Atanu Kumar Saha, Sumeet Kumar Gupta Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, 47907, USA Email: paul115@purdue.edu