We report on experimentally measured drag force experienced by a solid cylinder penetrating a granular bed of glass beads including, specifically, a highly polydisperse sample with grain sizes in the range 1-100 μm. We consider both cases of lateral and axial intrusion in which the long axis of the cylinder is held horizontally and vertically, respectively. We explore different regimes of behavior for the drag force as a function of the penetration depth. In lateral intrusion, where the motion is effectively quasi-two-dimensional, we establish quantitative comparisons with existing theoretical predictions across the whole range of depths. In axial intrusion, we observe peculiar undulations in the force-depth profiles in a wide range of intrusion speeds and for different cylinder diameters. We argue that these undulations reflect general shear failure in the highly polydisperse sample and can be understood based on the ultimate bearing capacity theory on a semiquantitative level. Granular materials are collections of macroscopic solid particles or 'grains' (such as sand, glass beads, etc.) in substantial interparticle contacts in a way that no individual grain can move independently of its neighbors While the force experienced by solid objects moving in viscous fluids at low Reynolds numbers is well established For quasistatic penetration (low velocities), the frictional drag is responsible for the total drag which thus behaves independently of penetration velocity. This is because the contribution from inertial drag turns out to be zero for penetration velocities lower than a critical value V c = √ 2gd. The latter corresponds to the velocity of a grain falling down a distance equal to its diameter d under the gravitational force Frictional drag has also been studied in relation to criteria on infinite falling motion of spherical objects in long columns of polydisperse beads In this work, we experimentally investigate the drag force on a solid cylindrical intruder with the purpose of elucidating some of the less explored aspects of the problem. In our experiments, we use a custom-made automatic device consisting of a motorized linear stage that can vertically push the intruder at constant speed into a container filled with glass beads. We consider both lateral and axial intrusions where the cylinder is held horizontally and vertically as it penetrates the granular bed, respectively. The former case can be viewed as a quasi-two-dimensional setting. In this case, we limit our study to the quasistatic regime (V < V c ) and arrange the experimental setting according to Ref. In axial intrusion (vertically oriented cylinder), we focus on shallow penetration depths and study two relatively monodisperse granular samples as well as a highly polydisperse sample. The former samples are primarily included for validation purposes (successful comparisons between theory and experiments in such cases have previously been reported To study the importance of different factors contributing to the drag force experienced by an intruder moving in a granular bed, an automatic setup was designed and built as schematically pictured in Fig. The vertical translation is enabled by the motorized linear stage consisting of three stainless steel bars. The two side bars (in light blue) are fixed and held together with top and bottom end-clamps. These make a rail of length 50 cm that maintains and stabilizes movement of the granular box holder. The middle bar (in orange) is a lead screw of pitch 1 cm, converting the rotary motion of the stepper motor into translational motion of the linear stage. The positioning and speed control of the container are achieved using a stepper motor (Leadshine 86HS45 2-Phase NEMA 34) installed at the end of the linear motion rail. The stepper motor is connected to the lead screw by an aluminum star coupling and is capable of producing torques up to 4.5 N•m. The stepper motor and the designed lead screw enable linear speeds V up to 50 mm/s. The motion parameters (speed, acceleration, pauses, penetration depth, etc.) are tuned using Leadshine MA860H Microstepping Driver that sends programmable control pulses to the stepper motor. We use an IMADA ZTA 100 N force gauge with both push and pull measuring capability. The force experienced by the intruder is thus monitored while the speed of penetration is tuned by the designed control system. Upon connection to a computer or a flash memory, the force gauge is capable of processing and storing data with a sampling rate of 2 kHz at a precision of ±0.1 N. The experiments were conducted while the ambient temperature and humidity were kept at (30±1) respectively. Three different samples of glass beads were used in the experiments; see Table We conducted two different sets of experiments with the cylindrical intruder being kept at fixed horizontal orientation (lateral intrusion, Fig. In lateral intrusion, we use a rectangular glass container of inner side lengths L × W = 50 mm × 100 mm filled with glass beads of size d = 2 mm (sample 1 in Table In axial intrusion, we use a cylindrical glass container of diameter L = 140 mm. In this case, we use three different cylindrical intruders with equal length 50 mm and diameters D = 10, 20 and 30 mm. For symmetry reasons, the cylindrical intruder is held coaxially with the container. In this case, we use all three samples from Table In this regime, Brzinski et. al where μ = tan θ is the relevant friction coefficient, dA is the area element for the surface of the intruder, ρgZ is the hydrostatic pressure at depth Z due to the gravitational acceleration g, ρ is the apparent density of the granular bed as noted before, and α is a prefactor which appears to be independent of intruder shape For the case under study in this section, Eq. ( The solid red and the dashed back lines in Fig. The hydrostatic-like behavior is followed by a saturation regime at a depth of around Z 135 mm where the force levels off at a value of F 37 N. The saturation is a manifestation of the Janssen effect; i.e., the random force chains within the medium become relevant and partially transmit the apparent weight of the granular column above the intruder to the side walls of the container Here, ∆F = F -F bulk is the difference between the measured drag force, F , and the corresponding force measured in a bulk system F bulk (i.e., in a sufficiently large container such that the bottom wall produces no discernible effects on the intruder). Also, H is the granular column height and λ is the characteristic distance over which the effects from the bottom wall come into play. To assess the applicability of this relation in our case, we find F bulk by extrapolating the hydrostatic-like line, Eq. (2b), to the the given depth Z in the presumed exponential regime. Equation ( Although the foregoing regimes of hydrostatic-like behavior, force saturation and exponential growth have each been reported separately in other intrusion settings in the past We now turn to the case of an axially intruding cylinder as described in Section II B (Fig. The experimental validity of this relation has been discussed in Refs. Figure III B shows the measured drag for sample 3 with the same parameter values as in Fig. The correction proposed in Ref. We investigated the drag force exerted on a cylindrical object intruding a granular bed of glass beads through a custom-made setup that allows for force measurement at constant penetration speed. In a horizontal quasi-2D setting, where the cylinder laterally penetrates the granular bed, we explored the regimes of hydrostatic-like behavior, force saturation and exponential growths (at shallow, intermediate and large depths close to the container bottom, respectively). We made quantitative comparisons with theoretical predictions that, to our knowledge, had remained unaddressed in the literature. By focusing on the shallow-depth regime, we studied the effects of high grain polydispersity on the drag force also in a case where the cylinder axially penetrates the granular bed. In this case, we unveiled distinct qualitative differences in the force-depth profiles between the drag force in a highly polydisperse sample and two other relatively monodisperse samples. In the highly polydisperse sample, our data for the averaged drag force in the quasistatic regime agree well with the modified frictional drag model proposed in Ref. V. AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS Salar Abbasi Aghda: Conceptualization, Methodology, Validation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Writing -Original draft, Visualization. Ali Naji: Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing -Original draft, Supervision, Project administration. We acknowledge useful communications with T. A. Brzinski and A. Seguin and also discussions with S. M. Taheri and M. Pakpour at initial stages of this work. This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.