Multiferroic (MF) devices based on simultaneous ferroelectric and ferromagnetic phenomena are considered to be promising candidates for future bi-functional micro/nano-electronics. The multiferroic phenomena in two-dimensional materials is rarely reported in literature. We reported a simple approach to reveal frequency-dependent ferroelectricity and mutiferroicity in Ti 3 C 2 T x MXene film at room-temperature. To study the frequency and poling effect on ferroelectricity as well as multiferroicity, we performed electric polarization vs. electric field measurement at different external frequencies measured under zero and non-zero static magnetic fields. In order to further investigate this effect, the magneto-electric (ME) coupling was also performed to confirm the multiferroic nature of our synthesized Ti 3 C 2 T x MXene film. The ferroelectric hysteresis effect was attributed to the switching of electric domain walls under low frequencies that continue to respond to at much extent to the higher frequencies. The coupling between disordered electric dipoles with local spin moments could cause presence of strong magneto-electric coupling. Moreover, the bipolar resistive switching in trilayer memory devices also supports the ferroelectric behavior of HT-Ti 3 C 2 T x MXene film and showed uniform repeatability in switching behavior due to minimum dielectric loss inside ferroelectric HT-Ti 3 C 2 T x MXene along with improved on/off ratio in comparison to non-ferroelectric Ti 3 C 2 T x MXene. The unique multiferroic behavior along with ferroelectric-tuned memristor devices reported here at room temperature will help understand the intrinsic nature of 2D materials and will establish novel data storage devices. Materials that primarily exhibit more than one ferroic orders (ferroelectric, ferromagnetic, etc) simultaneously are referred to as mutiferroics (MF) offering massive technological benefits Hence, the data can be stored in both electric and magnetic states and the ferroelectric polarization can be used to write data with the help of electric field and can be read using a magnetic field An additional degree of freedom is provided by MF systems in the designing of novel devices such as energy storage, actuators and transducers Here in this work, we have reported a detailed study on dependence of newly discovered ferroelectricity and multiferroicity in 2D Ti 3 C 2 T x MXene on factors such as frequency, electricpoling, effect of static magnetic field on ferroelectric curves, etc at room temperature Firstly, the Ti 3 C 2 T x MXene was prepared by selective etching of Al from Ti 3 AlC 2 MAX phase. The process of etching was started by slowly adding 1g of Ti 3 AlC 2 MAX powder in Teflon-lined vessel containing 1:3:5 volume ratio of 48 wt % of hydrofluoric acid (HF, 1ml), de-ionized water (DI H 2 O, 3ml) and 37 wt % of hydrochloric acid (HCl, 2ml) under constant stirring at 450 rpm and 35 ̊C. After 24 hours, the obtained solution was washed with DI H 2 O until pH>7 is obtained. After every washing, the supernatant was discarded in order to get rid of any impure ion. The obtained Ti 3 C 2 T x MXene was then filtered and dried overnight in vacuum oven at room temperature. Second, for the delamination, Ti 3 C 2 T x MXene was dispersed in lithium chloride (LiCl, 99%) and DI H 2 O (20ml) and continuously shaken for about 10 min. Then the solution was left for 24 hours under constant stirring of 300 rpm. After this process, the intercalated disperse solution was dispersed in DI H 2 O and centrifuged for 5 min at 3500 rpm. A stable colloidal MXene solution was obtained after the repeated process of centrifuge and complete removal of supernatant. This process is repeated until clay like sediment is obtained. Then, sediment was diluted with DI H 2 O and centrifuge for 30 min at 3500 rpm. Once done, the obtained supernatant was vacuum filtered with the help of Celguard membrane in order to form free standing film. The obtained Ti 3 C 2 T x MXene free standing film was heated at 100 ̊C under ambient environment in order to get optimum oxidation of our sample For fabrication of the memory device, palladium (Pd) metal was deposited over the SiO 2 /Si substrate as bottom electrode. Further, the air exposed non-ferroelectric MXene (Ti 3 C 2 T x ) and heat-treated ferroelectric MXene (HT-Ti 3 C 2 T x ) were implemented as middle insulated layers followed by spin-coated rGO employed as top metal electrode to complete the trilayer rGO/MXene/Pd memory scheme. Figure The good quality ferroelectric behavior can be concluded from symmetric and well-shaped P-E hysteresis loops. The area of P-E loops is found to decrease with increase in frequency of the applied electric field. The reason of this effect might be the presence of free mobile charges and parasitic charges that create high concentration of charge traps Figure In Figure Furthermore, the increase in the P r value might be resulted from the poling field which favored the domain orientations by inducing the strain domain structure Figure The Ti 3 C 2 T x MXene free-standing film was synthesized and heat-treated at optimized temperature in order to explore hidden multiferroic nature. To investigate the ferroelectricity at room temperature, the polarization vs. electric field (P-E) loops were measured at different frequencies that showed typical ferroelectric behavior at all frequencies. Furthermore, the magneto-electric coupling was confirmed by asymmetric P-E loops measured under static magnetic field which was further confirmed by performing ME coupling measurement. The reason that polarization values are strongly dependent on frequency is essentially because of switching of the domain walls under different frequencies. Furthermore, it is possible to tune and switch the ferroelectric domains in the presence of static magnetic field. While either an external electric field can tune or switch the magnetic spins and/or an external magnetic field can polarize the electric domains. As a consequence of the coupling between different ferric orders ME coefficient is originated. Therefore, the MF nature of Ti 3 C 2 T x MXene free standing film at room temperature, opens the new gate for researcher to further investigate and utilization of multifunctional properties of prepared sample in future micro-electronic devices. The memristive device testing also showed a clear switching behavior in the presence of ferroelectric MXene that provided improved switching behavior with minimized dielectric loss inside the rGO/HT-Ti 3 C 2 T x /Pd device. Rabia Tahir performed testing, analysis and write-up of results, Sabeen Fatima helped in device fabrication, memory testing & analyzing, Syedah Afsheen Zahra helped in materials synthesis, Deji Akinwande helped understand the memory phenomena and Syed Rizwan conceived the idea and supervised the project.