We report on electrical gating of the charge-density-wave phases and current in h-BN capped three-terminal 1T-TaS2 heterostructure devices. It is demonstrated that the application of a gate bias can shift the source-drain current-voltage hysteresis associated with the transition between the nearly commensurate and incommensurate charge-density wave phases. The evolution of the hysteresis and the presence of abrupt spikes in the current while sweeping the gate voltage suggest that the effect is electrical rather than self-heating. We attribute the gating to an electric-field effect on the commensurate charge-density-wave domains in the atomic planes near the gate dielectric. The transition between the nearly commensurate and incommensurate charge-density-wave phases can be induced by both the source-drain current and the electrostatic gate. Since the chargedensity-wave phases are persistent in 1T-TaS2 at room temperature, one can envision memory applications of such devices when scaled down to the dimensions of individual commensurate domains and few-atomic plane thicknesses. CDW phases, particularly near RT, would substantially enhance the functionality of the CDW devices and open novel application domains, e.g. in non-volatile memory. Electrical gating is also important for answering a fundamental science question: "Can one achieve an electrical switching of CDW phase via the pure field effect, without any local Joule heating involved?" The main difficulty of electrical gating of the CDW phases and currents in 2D van der Waals materials is associated with the fact that different phases still have a rather high concentration of charge carriers. Below 550 K, 1T-TaS2 is in the metallic-like incommensurate CDW (IC-CDW) phase. The nearly commensurate phase (NC-CDW) appears below 350 K and persists approximately until 180 K. Below this temperature, 1T-TaS2 enters the commensurate CDW (C-CDW) phase. In the NC-CDW phase, the hexagonal-shaped C-CDW clusters are separated by the incommensurate regions. As the temperature increases to 350 K, the domains melt, and the material falls into the IC-CDW state. The transition from the NC-CDW phase to the IC-CDW phase reveals itself as a change in the resistivity of the device channel accompanied by hysteresis. The carrier concentrations in these two CDW states are high: 10 21 cm -3 and 10 22 cm -3 for the higher resistive NC-CDW and lower resistive IC-CDW phases, respectively In this Communication, we report the first successful demonstration of the electrostatic gating of the current in the NC-CDW phase near RT, and the electric field switching of the CDW phases in quasi-2D CDW van der Waals materials. It is demonstrated that the hysteresis in the sourcedrain current-voltage (I-V) characteristics that accompany the transition between the NC-CDW and IC-CDW phases can be shifted by applying a gate bias. The effect is electrical rather than self-heating. We also show that the transition between the NC-CDW and IC-CDW can be induced both by the source-drain current and the electrostatic gate. Device fabrication and testing. The bulk 1T-TaS2 crystals for this study were grown by the chemical vapor transport (CVT) method We have also experimented with a more sophisticated design where two layers of h-BN were used so that the 1T-TaS2 channel is completely encapsulated with h-BN. Figure Measured as a function of temperature at small electric biases, i.e., near-equilibrium conditions, this transition occurs at 350 K. In our measurements, the ambient temperature was kept constant, and the transition was triggered by applying the source-drain voltage and passing a current through the channel. Our prior studies for 1T-TaS2 devices on Si/SiO2 substrates, without h-BN capping, indicated that the local Joule heating produced by the current is essential for inducing the phase transition A possibility of affecting the hysteresis with the electrostatic gate or changing the electrical current with the gate voltage in the linear part of the I-Vs would substantially increase the functionality of CDW devices. Electrical gating of CDW phases and current. First, we attempted to change the I-Vs by applying the gate bias, Vg, in the range from -20 V to 40 V. The values of the gate bias are rather large due to the back-gate design and thick layers of SiO2 dielectric. As mentioned above, it is unlikely that one can change the total current substantially, owing to the high carrier concentration and the large thickness of the samples. The collective CDW current in 2D materials is also small The hysteresis changes due to local heating are accompanied by the decreasing hysteresis size The hysteresis is large at low temperatures, and it collapses at T ~ 350 K, which is the NC-CDW -IC-CDW phase transition temperature near equilibrium, i.e., measured at small biases. To better understand the mechanism of gating the CDW phases and currents, we measured the current while sweeping the gate voltage, Id(Vg), at T = 240 K. The temperature was intentionally selected in the middle of the NC-CDW phase. For these measurements, we fixed the source-drain voltage, Vd, and swept the gate voltage with the constant speed of 500 mV/s. We waited for a sufficient time between the voltage sweeps to avoid charge or heat accumulation. To analyze the data, we divided the I-V characteristics into three distinctive regions (see Figure In this transport regime, the application of the gate bias does not produce much change (Figure Figure We now consider in more detail the possibility of switching the system between the NC-CDW and IC-CDW phases, illustrated in Figure As the Vg switches from 20 V to 35 V, the hysteresis threshold voltage, VH, shifts to a higher value. For a selected Vd near 1.8 V (Vd = 1.83 V in Figure CDW de-pinning in quasi-1D and quasi-2D systems. In the above description of the results, we use the terminology of "de-pinning" of the C-CDW domains to describe the effect of the electric gate on the CDW channel conductance. One should be careful here to understand the difference between the domain de-pinning in quasi-2D materials such as 1T-TaS2 and CDW de-pinning and sliding in "traditional" bulk CDW materials with quasi-1D crystal structures such as NbS3 From the fluctuations, i.e., spikes in the current under the actions of the electric gate we can roughly estimate the physical size of the fluctuator. We assume that the observed changes in the current are associated with some changes in the C-CDW domains that make up the NC-CDW phase 23, 52 . In this case, the change in current, I, is related to the change in the conducting volume, V., i.e., I/I = V/V. The volume is defined as V = A×t×N, where A is the channel area, t is the thickness of one atomic plane, and N is the number of the atomic planes in the channel. Taking the smallest and largest normalized change in the current, (I/I) to be ~ 8.9×10 -5 -4.14×10 -3 , assuming N to be 25, we obtain the upper and lower bounds of the fluctuator size to be (A) 1/2 = (ANI/I) CDW device fabrication and testing: High-quality crystals of 1T-TaS2 have been mechanically exfoliated on top of polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) layers in a dry environment (with relative humidity of < 19%). Thin films of 1T-TaS2 were then transferred onto pre-selected h-BN layers on Si/SiO2 substrate through the all-dry transfer method. This step is immediately followed by capping the 1T-TaS2 with another few-layer aligned h-BN film. The devices being capped/encapsulated with h-BN will preserve the CDW state longer and give better protection from oxidation and environmental degradation. The patterning of electrodes was performed through electron-beam lithography. The h-BN layers covering the electrode contacts were removed with high precision using the atomic layer etching technique. For contact metal deposition, we used electron-beam evaporation and deposited 10/100 nm of Ti/Au metals. The fabricated devices had dimensions of 1 to 3 μm channel length and 1 to 3.5 μm channel width. The gate measurements at various temperatures were conducted in the Lakeshore cryogenic probe station TTPX and further analyzed with a semiconductor analyzer Agilent B1500.