We demonstrate in this paper that the recently discovered infinite-layer (IL) nickelates have much in common with a class of materials known as electrides. Oxide based electrides are compounds in which topotactic removal of loosely bound oxygens leaves behind voids with a landscape of attractive potentials for electrons. We show that this is also what happens in the IL nickelates, where one of the two electrons (per formula unit) freed during the topotactic synthesis is to a large degree located in the oxygen vacancy position, occupying partially a local s-symmetry interstitial orbital, rather than taking part alongside the other electon in converting Ni from 3+ to a full 1+ oxidation state. On the other hand, the involvement of the rare-earth 5d states is found to be rather indirect. Our study offers a new and detailed perspective on the mechanisms through which the presence of the interstitial charge can determine the superconducting and other properties of the IL nickelates. To this end, we demonstrate that the interstitial orbital in question, referred to by us as the zeronium s or Z s orbital, forms strong covalent bonds with neighboring Ni 3d 3z 2 -r 2 orbitals, which in turn facilitates the one-dimensional-like dispersion of the Ni 3d 3z 2 -r 2 band along the c-axis direction, leading also to a possible large out-of-plane coupling between Ni magnetic moments. This finding, reinforced by our electron localization function analysis, points to a fundamental distinction between the nickelates and the structurally analogous cuprates, may explain the absence of superconductivity in hydrogenpoor samples, and is certainly in agreement with the observed large z-polarized component in the Ni L3-edge x-ray absorption spectra. In addition, by using DFT+U calculations as an illustration, we show that the electride-like nature of the IL nickelates is one of the main reasons for the theoretical difficulty in determining the much debated elusive Fermi surface of these novel superconductors and aslo in exploring the possibility of them becoming excitonic insulators at low temperatures. The study of the recently discovered Ni-based high transition temperature (T c ) superconductors with an infinite-layer (IL) crystal structure These observations are in line with the conclusion from an early theoretical study of the nickelates' elec-tronic structure Given therefore that the IL nickelates seem to transcend the standard ZSA paradigm and also motivated by the recently suggested critical and intimately intertwined roles of the hydrogen and the interstitial charge for the nickelates' superconductivity, in this paper we take an alternative look at their electronic structure by considering the electride concept frequently encountered in oxides prepared by a topotactic removal of selected oxygen ions In this paper, we use density functional theory (DFT) calculations to study the possibility of this actually occurring in NdNiO 2 , a representative parent IL nickelate, by explicitly introducing a fictitious atom without a nucleus at the oxygen vacancy site, which is represented by a large white sphere in Fig. The structure of the paper is as follows. In Section II, we will describe our computational methods and provide details of our electronic structure calculations. In Section III, we will present our computational results, first demonstrating the importance of the hybridization between the zeronium s orbital and its two neighboring Ni 3d 3z 2 -r 2 orbitals along the c axis. The relatively secondary roles of the Nd 5d and O 2p π /2p z states will be illustrated by means of a computational experiment involving elimination of the Z s states from the vicinity of the Fermi level. We will then use the electron localization function (ELF) to show the real space localization of the electride (i.e., zeronium s) electron and compare NdNiO 2 with the iso-strictural CaCuO 2 , finding the two of them to approach qualitatively very different electronic ground states in the limit of an exactexchange (i. e., Hartee-Fock) treatment. Further, we will show that the popular DFT+U method is seriously challenged in the presence of the strong covalent bonding between the zeronium s orbital and the Ni 3d 3z 2 -r 2 orbital, by highlighting qualitative inconsistencies between the results of DFT+U calculations obtained from different DFT codes. It will be emphasized that, since there is no doubt that these materials are strongly correlated, in the end it will be model Hamiltonians with methods like dynamical mean-field theory (DMFT) or exact diagonalization or impurity like approximations that are needed to describe the experimental data. In Section IV, drawing support from our computational results and from the recent impurity calculations by Jiang et al. x 2 -y 2 , z 2 s and d 9 z 2 L x 2 -y 2 s, where s denotes an electron in Z s and L a hole in O 2p. This will be followed by a short discussion of the possibility for the nickelates to transition into an excitonic insulating state at low temperatures. Conclusions will be offered in Section V. We consider primitive unit cells of NdNiO 2 , with the lattice constants a = 3.91 Å and c = 3.37 Å, and of CaCuO 2 , with the lattice constants a = 3.86 Å and c = 3.20 Å. When not specified otherwise, our DFT calculations are performed using the augmented plane wave all-electron package WIEN2k 32 and choosing the gradient-corrected local density approximation (GGA) In addition to WIEN2k, two pseudo-potential codes, VASP The Wannier functions based analysis of the bandstructure of NdNiO 2 is performed by using the maximally localized Wannier functions (MLWF) method In Figs. 1 (b) and (c) we present a typical result of a non-spin-polarized GGA calculation on NdNiO 2 , in a form of atomic orbital projected band dispersion diagrams. This should give us information about the directional dependence of the dispersion of the various atomic like states, which is the first step in the evolution of a model Hamiltonian approach to the problem. As already mentioned, two electron pocket bands cross the Fermi level beside the cuprate-like 3d x 2 -y 2 band, one with a strong Nd 5d 3z 2 -r 2 character at Γ and one with mixed Nd 5d xy and Ni 3d 3z 2 -r 2 characters at A. Most interesting, though, is the fact that the Ni 3d 3z 2 -r 2 states are found to behave in a rather non-trivial way The near flat band behaviour in the variation of the inplane k for k z = 0 or k z = π suggests that the band has a strong one-dimensional (1D) character. Remarkably, it becomes clear from inspecting the zeronium local orbital projections in Fig. We also perform an MLWF analysis of the NdNiO 2 bandstructure using the five Nd 5d orbitals, the five Ni 3d orbitals, the three 2p orbitals of each one of the two oxygens in the primitive unit cell, and the Z s orbital as a basis of the corresponding effective tight-binding (TB) model. We note that several other studies have been reported that also consider an empty s-symmetry interstitial orbital centered at the O vacancy sites It is important to discuss the large nearest-neighbor Z s Ni 3d 3z 2 -r 2 hopping in the light of the recent hydrogen experiments In contrast with the emphasis on the Nd 5d states that prevails in the literature, our results from Table To better illustrate this important observation, we consider here results from a computational experiment where the Z s orbital is intentionally removed from playing any role in the low-energy electronic properties. This can be achieved via a charge self-consistent calculation where electrons are made to pay a high energy cost for occupying this orbital. The resulting bandstructure shown in Figs. We find a total of 0.36 electride electrons inside a sphere of radius 0.85 Å around the vacancy site, out of which 0.24 occupy the local s orbital. This is large enough to support the electride scenario, but (as it is often the case in studies on electrides There is also a clear minimum in the ELF of NdNiO 2 at a distance of about 1 Å going from the Ni site towards the Z site. This further indicates that the electron density in that region cannot be derived solely from the Ni 3d wave function but rather from a combination of the Ni 3d and Z s wave functions, because a pure atomic 3d wave function does not have a radial node. An alternative interpretation would be to say that this minimum is a result of an effective mixing of the Ni 3d states with the 4d states, a point of view adopted, for instance, by Katukuri et al. in Ref. 50. The 4d wave function of an isolated Ni + ion has its node indeed close to 1 Å from the Ni nucleus. This observation is of great importance in the development of model Hamiltonians to describe these correlated electron systems and, as we will argue below, might also help us understand better the results of DFT+U calculations. It is interesting to compare the ELF of NdNiO 2 with that of the iso-structural cuprate system CaCuO 2 . The two top panels of Fig. Moreover, this difference becomes more and more pronounced as one switches to using a hybrid functional with some amount of an exact [i. e., Hartee-Fock (HF)] exchange in it, a strategy known to help improve the description of electronic correlations and electron localization, particularly, in the case of electride electrons (see Ref. 28, page 9373). We consider the PBE0 hybrid functional method in which a quarter of the exchange term of the original GGA functional is proportionally replaced by an HF contribution. As one can see in the two middle panels of Fig. Fermi surface of the IL nickelates? We now explore further how magnetism and electronic correlations might affect the behavior of the electride electrons in the parent IL nickelates. Our hybrid functional calculations already indicate that correlations can strongly enhance their electride-like properties, but a detailed study would require us to use a more computationally flexible method. Therefore, we will consider here the popular DFT+U approximation Figure We order the Ni spin magnetic moments antiferromagnetically with a Q = (π, π, π) (i. e., G-type) ordering vector, which causes doubling of the unit cell and, consequently, of the number of bands compared with Figs. Several comments are to be made regarding the antiferromagnetic GGA results presented in the left-most column of Fig. This picture, however, changes into a qualitatively very different one as the value of U starts to increase. First, the Ni 3d 3z 2 -r 2 electrons become spin-polarized too and get coupled ferromagnetically with the Ni 3d x 2 -y 2 electrons. Second, only one electron pocket survives. Also, instead of the spin majority Ni 3d x 2 -y 2 hole pocket between M and Γ, we have now for U > 4 eV a shallow hole pocket at X (and, equivalently, R) with a spin minority Ni 3d 3z 2 -r 2 orbital character. In this situation, the chemically doped holes and the stoichiometric holes would be found forming local triplets rather than singlets, which could possibly lead to a superconducting state with a completely different symmetry and perhaps even of a fundamentally different nature. Interestingly, the Z s orbital will play an important role in this scenario as at large U it acquires a substantial weight in the hole pocket band at X resulting from its strong hybridization with the Ni 3d 3z 2 -r 2 orbital. We have noticed that some of the published DFT+U based studies We stress that within each code we have intentionally chosen to use nominally the same rotationally invariant formulation of the DFT+U method by Liechtenstein et al. It is also worth mentioning that in WIEN2k projections onto local states of a certain symmetry are done without considering the radial dependence, i. e., with-out differentiating between principal quantum numbers, while in VASP and Quantum Espresso this is not the case, which, in the light of our earlier argument about the possible mixing of Ni 3d and 4d states, can be another important factor contributing to the discrepancy. Summarizing this section, Fig. It is important to keep in mind that in order to fully reveal the true ground state configuration of Ni, including the local spin and multiplet structure, one needs to go beyond DFT and use advanced many-body techniques. In this regard, recent configuration interaction based impurity calculations by Jiang et al. x 2 -y 2 , d 8, S=1 x 2 -y 2 , z 2 s, d 9 z 2 L x 2 -y 2 s, and d 10 L x 2 -y 2 configurations, all having a net spin of 1/2. This is very different from the cuprates where the ground state electronic structure is dominated by d 9 x 2 -y 2 and d 10 L x 2 -y 2 . Our findings complement the ideas from Ref. 17 about the possibility of the interstitial charge suppressing superconductivity in hydrogen-poor samples. We emphasize, however, that it is the nearest-neighbor Z s Ni 3d 3z 2 -r 2 hybridization that is primarily responsible for turning the stoichiometric nickelates into effectively three-dimensional systems and thus driving them away from the two-dimensional regime that is known to favor superconductivity in cuprates. This is supported by the calculations for the 20 percent hole doped LaNiO 2 system presented in Supplementary Material 41 , in which the electride-like nature and the associated strong out-ofplane electronic coupling are found to be well preserved. Important implications regarding magnetism are also in place. The on-site Hund's rule coupling dictates that the Ni 3d 3z 2 -r 2 holes have the same spin as the d x 2 -y 2 holes, again pointing to a strong admixture of the d 8 (S = 1) state in the net ground state configuration of Ni. This is indeed what our DFT+U calculations in Fig. Keeping in mind that, strictly speaking, the standard DFT+U approach is not applicable to the IL nickelates, let us nevertheless note that all the three DFT codes are consistent in that they find a strongly dispersive electron pocket band and a much flatter hole pocket band at physically reasonable U values around 6 eV. Furthermore, the number of charge carriers occupying these electron and hole pockets is extremely small. In the specific case of the WIEN2k solution with U = 6 eV (Fig. In conclusion, the present study elucidates the electride-like nature of the IL nickelates and reestablishes that in these materials "Ni + is not Cu 2+ " but rather in a state closer to Ni 2+ with substantial d 8, S=1 x 2 -y 2 , z 2 s and d 9 z 2 L x 2 -y 2 s contributions, in addition to the cuprate-like d 9 x 2 -y 2 and d 10 L x 2 -y 2 ones. This results from the strong attractive potential for electrons left behind by the missing O in the NdO layer leading to a considerable charge density attracted to that region in the ground state of the undoped material. We label this region of the attractive potential with a fictitious atom with zero nuclear charge (Z) and find in DFT that its lowest-energy orbital is an s symmetry orbital. In the language of tight-binding modeling, such peculiar charge density redistribution can be described in terms of the strong hybridization of the Ni 3d 3z 2 -r 2 orbital with the Z s orbital and their resulting bonding/anti-bonding like splitting that pulls some of the Ni 3d 3z 2 -r 2 electron density into the vacancy region in the ground state. Our TB analysis indicates also that there is a strong involvement of the Nd 5d xy and O 2p z orbitals, which, however, have only an indirect effect on the Ni 3d electronic structure. We also pointed out that all the theoretical methods considered so far, like DFT, the impurity calculations, and DMFT, lead to the conclusion that the d 8 states involved in the ground state are in a triplet configuration and the total configuration has spin 1/2 per formula unit. However, the propagation of this spin 1/2 composite object is much more complicated than that presented by the corresponding spin 1/2 composite object in the cuprates, which only involves the x 2 -y 2 holes of Cu 3d and a linear combination of O 2p orbitals of the same symmetry. Such distinct difference in the electronic behaviors of the nickelates and the cuprates is further emphasized in our calculations of their electron localization functions, which is a well documented measure of the electride characteristics. Our study strongly suggests that the Z s Ni 3d 3z 2 -r 2 covalent bonding is a necessary component to be explicitly considered in both electronic structure and model calculations that might eventually help us unravel the nickelates' elusive Fermi surface as well as understand the striking sensitivity of their superconducting properties to hydrogen content. In the latter regard, we argued that if the O vacancy orbital is compensated by H -as recently suggested Going back to the undoped parent compound though, we also argued that because of the condition of charge neutrality of the unit cell and the material as a whole in the ground state the much discussed electron pocket is perfectly compensated by a hole pocket of equal size but occurring in the bands of mainly Ni 3d x 2 -y 2 or 3d 3z 2 -r 2 character. This, in addition to the missing d electron charge in the Ni + formal configuration, means that we must have a finite density of Ni d 8 states, be it with two holes in the x 2 -y 2 orbital, which would have to form a singlet as in the Zhang-Rice scenario, or with one hole in the x 2 -y 2 and one hole in the 3z 2 -r 2 orbital, which locally would form an energetically favourable triplet state but for charge neutrality reasons there must also be another electron around, i. e., Z s, which we find has spin opposite to the d 8 triplet so the net spin is again 1/2. Concerning the relative likelihoods of the singlet versus triplet scenarios, a Lifschitz like transition from a Fermi surface hole pocket of the x 2 -y 2 symmetry into that of the 3z 2 -r 2 symmetry is found to occur as a function of U for U values larger than 4 eV in the DFT+U method and using Wien2k. This is, however, where we also observed significant qualitative inconsistencies between different DFT codes, such as Wien2k, VASP, and Quantum Espresso, which can be traced down to the complications that the DFT+U method faces in the presence of a strong hybridization of correlated orbitals with their uncorrelated surroundings, which in the present case is exactly the hybridization between the interstitial Z s and Ni 3d 3z 2 -r 2 orbitals. We also pointed out that the increased charge density at the oxygen vacancy position relative to the usually found rather uniform electron density in the interstitial region can be described in a DFT calculation in several different ways depending on the basis set of wave functions used. In the end, as density functional theory dictates it is only the electron density that matters. So, the extra density in the Z region can also be obtained by introducing for example 4d orbitals in the Ni atomic basis, which have a radial node and have their maximum amplitude in the vicinity of the O vacancy. It is the choice of the basis set and the nature of the projections in determining the state that one wants to apply U to that causes the difference in the Fermi surface for the various codes when applying U . Although beyond the scope of this work, these observations hopefully will stimulate a more careful look at what causes this strong code dependent Fermi surface in the DFT+U methods. From the experimental point of view, it would be of great interest to have a detailed study of the magnetic field and temperature dependent magnetic susceptibility done using either x-ray magnetic circular dichroism spectroscopy or neutron scattering in order to gain insight into the magnetic properties of the IL nickelates. With regard to the Fermi surface, an angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy study on high-quality stoichiometric crystals would be essential and could in principle at least distinguish between the x 2 -y 2 and 3z 2 -r 2 character at the Fermi level in the doped materials. between our TB model's and the GGA energy bands is very good, as one can see in Fig. 2 -r 2 O 2pz -0.32