High-throughput electronic structure calculations (often performed using density functional theory (DFT)) play a central role in screening existing and novel materials, sampling potential energy surfaces, and generating data for machine learning applications. By including a fraction of exact exchange (EXX), hybrid functionals reduce the self-interaction error in semi-local DFT and furnish a more accurate description of the underlying electronic structure, albeit at a computational cost that often prohibits such high-throughput applications. To address this challenge, we have constructed a robust, accurate, and computationally efficient framework for high-throughput condensed-phase hybrid DFT and implemented this approach in the PWSCF module of Quantum ESPRESSO (QE). The resulting SeA approach (SeA = SCDM+exx+ACE) combines and seamlessly integrates: (i) the selected columns of the density matrix method (SCDM, a robust non-iterative orbital localization scheme that sidesteps system-dependent optimization protocols), (ii) a recently extended version of exx (a black-box linear-scaling EXX algorithm that exploits sparsity between localized orbitals in real space when evaluating the action of the standard/full-rank Vxx operator), and (iii) adaptively compressed exchange (ACE, a low-rank Vxx approximation). In doing so, SeA harnesses three levels of computational savings: pair selection and domain truncation from SCDM+exx (which only considers spatially overlapping orbitals on orbital-pair-specific and systemsize-independent domains) and low-rank Vxx approximation from ACE (which reduces the number of calls to SCDM+exx during the self-consistent field (SCF) procedure). Across a diverse set of 200 non-equilibrium (H2O)64 configurations (with densities spanning 0.4 g/cm 3 -1.7 g/cm 3 ), SeA provides a one-two order-of-magnitude speedup in the overall time-to-solution, i.e., ≈ 8×-26× compared to the convolution-based PWSCF(ACE) implementation in QE and ≈ 78×-247× compared to the conventional PWSCF(Full) approach, and yields energies, ionic forces, and other properties with high fidelity. As a proof-of-principle high-throughput application, we trained a deep neural network (DNN) potential for ambient liquid water at the hybrid DFT level using SeA via an actively learned data set with ≈ 8,700 (H2O)64 configurations. Using an out-of-sample set of (H2O)512 configurations (at non-ambient conditions), we confirmed the accuracy of this SeA-trained potential and showcased the capabilities of SeA by computing the ground-truth ionic forces in this challenging system containing > 1,500 atoms. High-throughput ab initio electronic structure calculations play a key role in the computational screening and design of novel materials, Since the cost of performing condensed-phase hybrid DFT calculations using the conventional convolutionbased EXX algorithm be harnessed to increase the efficiency of high-throughput SCF calculations at the hybrid DFT level. As pointed out by Lin, In this work, we directly address these issues by combining and seamlessly integrating three theoretical and algorithmic advances into a robust, accurate, and computationally efficient framework for performing highthroughput condensed-phase hybrid DFT calculations on large-scale finite-gap systems. As depicted in Fig. The remainder of this manuscript is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we provide a brief review of the SCDM, exx, and ACE approaches as well as their seamless combination/integration into the SeA framework implemented in the PWSCF module of QE. In Sec. III, we assess the accuracy and performance of SeA on a diverse set of 200 non-equilibrium (H 2 O) 64 configurations (which include both intact and auto-ionized water molecules, with system densities spanning 0.4 g/cm 3 -1.7 g/cm 3 ), and demonstrate that SeA yields a one-two order-ofmagnitude (≈ 11×-116×) speedup in the computational bottleneck in the convolution-based PWSCF(ACE) implementation in QE, while providing energies, ionic forces, and other properties with high fidelity. In doing so, SeA enables the routine use of hybrid DFT in highthroughput applications for systems with sizes similar to (and beyond) (H 2 O) 64 , and delivers single-point energy and ionic force evaluations for such systems with an ≈ 8×-26× speedup in the overall time-to-solution compared to PWSCF(ACE) and an ≈ 78×-247× speedup compared to the conventional (non-ACE) PWSCF(Full) EXX implementation in QE. As a proof-of-principle highthroughput application, we used SeA in Sec. IV to train a deep neural network (DNN) potential for ambient (T = 300 K, p = 1 Bar) liquid water at the PBE0 In this section, we begin with a brief review of the non-iterative SCDM orbital localization scheme, To generate the localized orbitals needed for exx, SeA employs the selected columns of the density matrix (SCDM) approach, In the SCDM approach, this set of columns is obtained from a column-pivoted QR factorization of the N occ ×N grid Φ T matrix (instead of the significantly larger P matrix), as this alternative formulation yields equivalent column selection at significantly lower computational cost. in which Π is the N grid × N grid permutation matrix (i.e., a dense representation of the selected column indices), Q is an N occ × N occ orthogonal matrix, and R is an N occ × N grid upper triangular matrix. The proto-SCDM orbitals (i.e., a well-conditioned set of localized but nonorthogonal orbitals that spans the occupied space) are then given by the following N grid × N occ matrix: in which ":" denotes all row indices, C is the set of indices corresponding to the N occ selected columns, and (Φ T ) :,C is an N occ ×N occ matrix containing the first N occ columns of Φ T Π. The final SCDM orbitals are then obtained via symmetric orthogonalization of the proto-SCDM orbitals, namely, in which P C,C = X T X is the N occ × N occ overlap matrix in the proto-SCDM basis (which is also equivalent to the density matrix in the basis selected by C). In this expression, we follow the convention used during the development of exx: in which is an N occ ×N occ unitary matrix that allows one to transform between these orbital representations via a single matrix multiplication. Hence, the non-iterative SCDM orbital localization scheme is able to furnish U without the need for system-dependent optimization protocols (e.g., initial guesses, convergence criteria, choice of optimization algorithm), which makes it well-suited to provide the localized orbitals required by exx in the highthroughput SeA framework. B. exx: A Black-Box Linear-Scaling Exact-Exchange Algorithm for Finite-Gap Systems With the completion of the non-iterative SCDM localization procedure, one can now perform the following unitary transformation (using U from Eq. ( to obtain a set of localized orbitals that spans the occupied space and forms a basis for a computationally efficient linear-scaling evaluation of all EXX-related quantities needed during hybrid DFT calculations on large-scale finite-gap systems at the Γ-point. This is most easily illustrated by considering the canonical expression for E xx (shown here for a closed-shell system for simplicity), in which the sum includes all pairs of occupied orbitals, the integral is over the entire real-space domain (Ω) in the periodic unit cell, ρ ij (r) ≡ φ i (r)φ j (r) is the orbital-product density, and v ij (r) is the corresponding orbital-product potential (i.e., the solution to Poisson's equation, ∇ 2 v ij (r) = -4πρ ij (r)). In typical planewave/pseudopotential codes, this expression is evaluated with cubic-scaling cost using the conventional convolution-based EXX algorithm. • Pair selection: only spatially overlapping orbitals ⟨ij⟩ need to be included when evaluating Eq. ( • Domain truncation: for each overlapping ⟨ij⟩ pair, the spatial integral in Eq. ( By harnessing these two levels of computational savings, exx enables an efficient linear-scaling evaluation of Eq. (7), which can now be rewritten in the following working form: in which ρ ij (r) and v ij (r) are the orbital-product density and corresponding orbital-product potential in the localized representation. After determining the set of overlapping pairs, exx computes v ij (r) for a given ⟨ij⟩ pair via the iterative (conjugate gradient) solution to Poisson's equation (PE), in the near-field region (i.e., for r ∈ Ω ij ), in conjunction with boundary conditions provided by a sufficiently converged multipole expansion (ME): In this expression, Y lm (θ, φ) are the spherical harmonics and Q lm are the multipole moments associated with ρ ij (r), i.e., In addition to the EXX contribution to the energy, hybrid DFT calculations also require evaluation of: a quantity that is often referred to as the EXX contribution to the wavefunction forces in the AIMD community, as it is needed to propagate the CPMD equations of motion. Of particular relevance to this work is the fact that D i xx (r) is also equivalent (to within a sign) to the action of the EXX operator ( Vxx ) on the (proto-)KS orbitals, a quantity that is needed to construct the xc potential during SCF calculations at the hybrid DFT level. While the evaluation of the canonical expression for D i xx (r) (shown here for a closed-shell system, cf. Eq. ( is typically the computational bottleneck during the iterative SCF procedure, this quantity can also be efficiently computed in exx by exploiting the two levels of sparsity inherent to a localized basis (i.e., pair selection and domain truncation). Since each localized orbital has compact support in real space, the sum over all orbitals in Eq. ( in which v ij (r) in the near-field region (for r ∈ Ω ij ) is provided by the solution to the PE in Eq. ( in conjunction with the U provided by the orbital localization scheme (MLWFs in previous work and SCDM in the current work, see Eq. ( With a massively parallel hybrid MPI/OpenMP implementation In other words, ε specifies the level of (numerical) compliance in the orbital normalization condition (i.e., an upper bound in the fractional particle loss) when determining the domain Ω ii that encompasses each φ i (r). In practice, ε is a small (ε ≪ 1) dimensionless parameter, which is systematically improvable, i.e., as ε → 0, Ω ii → Ω ∀ φ i and the error due to domain truncation vanishes. As such, ε provides an a priori estimation In this recently extended version of exx, In this expression, δ = δ(ε) > 0 is automatically determined in exx to maximize transferability across systems with varying degrees of heterogeneity. As described in Ref. 62, this is accomplished by ensuring that the pair selection error (governed by δ in Eq. ( Following the detailed derivation provided in Ref. 62, Ω D ij was set to scale 2× Ω ii (for j = i) and Ω jj (for j ̸ = i) when computing { D i xx (r)} via Eq. ( While the combined use of SCDM and this recently extended version of exx already provides a robust, accurate, and efficient core EXX engine for high-throughput hybrid DFT calculations of large-scale finite-gap systems, there is a third level of computational savings (independent from the two levels provided by SCDM+exx) that could be harnessed to further increase the efficiency of the SCF procedure for hybrid functionals. As pointed out by Lin, 36 the most computationally demanding steps during the iterative solution to the KS-DFT equations at the hybrid level-the repeated evaluation of the action using the standard/full-rank EXX operator (e.g., { Vxx φ i } in Eqs. ( During each outer-loop iteration in the EXX-SCF procedure with ACE (see Algorithm 1), the ACE_Construction step (the bottleneck for large-scale hybrid DFT calculations) takes the current set of proto-KS orbitals {|φ i ⟩} as input, and performs a full-rank evaluation of the action to obtain { Vxx |φ i ⟩}. Since D i xx = -Vxx |φ i ⟩ via Eq. ( The output of ACE_Construction is the ACE operator: a low-rank approximation of Vxx that is obtained via a Cholesky decomposition of the The ACE-based EXX-SCF procedure in Algorithm 1 is completed once the proto-KS orbitals in the outer loop reach self-consistency, which is equivalent to a fully selfconsistent hybrid DFT calculation. At this point, V ACE xx reproduces the action of Vxx on the occupied KS orbitals, and the EXX energy can be conveniently evaluated via (shown here for a closed-shell system at the Γ-point for consistency with Eqs. ( in which each sum is over the converged occupied KS orbitals. By replacing the more costly evaluations of the action using Vxx with V ACE xx , the ACE approach offers an additional level of computational savings (on top of the two provided by SCDM+exx) that can be harnessed to attack the most computationally demanding steps during the iterative solution to the KS equations at the hybrid DFT level, thereby making it well-suited to further improve the efficiency and throughput of the SeA framework. D. SeA (SCDM+exx+ACE): High-Throughput Hybrid DFT for Large-Scale Finite-Gap Systems In this section, we describe how SeA combines and seamlessly integrates SCDM, exx, and ACE into a robust, accurate, and computationally efficient framework (which has been implemented in PWSCF) for performing high-throughput condensed-phase hybrid DFT calculations on large-scale finite-gap systems. For a robust, accurate, and efficient evaluation of the action using the standard/full-rank EXX operator ({ Vxx |φ i ⟩})-the typical bottleneck during SCF calculations at the hybrid DFT level-SeA employs the non-iterative SCDM procedure for localized orbital generation described in Sec. II A in conjunction with the recently extended black-box version More specifically, SeA involves a key modification to the ACE-based EXX-SCF procedure, which already offers tremendous speedups during hybrid DFT calculations by replacing the repeated evaluation of { Vxx |φ i ⟩} in the conventional EXX-SCF procedure with a significantly more efficient evaluation of this term using V ACE xx . In the ACE-based EXX-SCF procedure depicted in Algorithm 1, the construction of V ACE xx is the computational bottleneck (particularly for large-scale systems) and is accomplished via calls to the ACE_Construction step during each outer-loop iteration. To eliminate this step )) number of FFT calls. Each fwdFFT/invFFT call was performed at the appropriate planewave resolution for each method-the density/potential FFT grid for vexx in PWSCF(ACE) (NFFT points; yellow boxes) and the wavefunction FFT grid for SeA (N wf FFT < NFFT points; green boxes). For more details, a pedagogical walk-through of the ACE_Construction step is provided in Sec. II D. as the bottleneck during such large-scale hybrid DFT calculations, SeA directly attacks the cost of executing the ACE_Construction step by using SCDM+exx to compute { Vxx |φ i ⟩} (or { D i xx }). To illustrate the combination and seamless integration of these methods in more detail, we will focus the remainder of this discussion on a Γ-point specific algorithm (i.e., as the target applications of SeA are high-throughput hybrid DFT calculations on large-scale systems); a more general extension of SeA based on Brillouin zone sampling will be discussed in future work. Since D i xx is equivalent to Vxx |φ i ⟩ (to within a sign, cf. eq 12 and section IIB) and is naturally aligned with the exx framework, To start, we first consider the ACE_Construction step in the convolution-based ACE algorithm in the PWSCF module of QE, which will be referred to as PWSCF(ACE) throughout the remainder of this work. In PWSCF(ACE), the ACE_Construction step (as illustrated in Fig. followed by a low-rank decomposition to obtain V ACE xx (via the decomp function, Fig. as described in Eq. ( To greatly improve the computational efficiency of hybrid DFT calculations (particularly for large-scale systems), SeA directly attacks this computational bottleneck by replacing vexx with a procedure based on the combination of SCDM and exx. As depicted in Fig. , namely, the wavefunction FFT grid with N wf FFT < N FFT points. As discussed in more detail below, this is the appropriate planewave resolution for the exx function in Fig. With {φ i (r)} on the wavefunction FFT grid, SeA applies the non-iterative SCDM algorithm (i.e., by calling the SCDM function) to obtain the localized orbitals in real space { φ i (r)} and the corresponding unitary matrix U that allows one to transform between the local and canonical orbital representations (see Sec. II A); with the use of the appropriate planewave resolution in SeA, execution of SCDM has a reduced cubic-scaling cost of O(N wf FFT N 2 occ + N 3 occ ). With the localized SCDM orbitals in hand, SeA then calls the linear-scaling exx routine, which harnesses two levels of computational savings during the real-space evaluation of { D i xx (r)} via Eq. ( with a cubic-scaling associated cost of O(N pw N 2 occ ). Here, we emphasize that the availability of the U matrix in SeA (provided by the earlier call to SCDM) facilitates this transformation, leveraging a strategy previously pointed out by Nair and co-workers. As such, the rot_D routine leverages the fact that N wf FFT > N pw for lossless fwdFFT and invFFT to further improve the efficiency of SeA. After obtaining the targeted {D i xx (G)}, SeA merges with PWSCF(ACE) by calling the common decomp function described above (Fig. By constructing V ACE xx in the canonical orbital representation (via {φ i (G)} and {D i xx (G)} in decomp), the current version of SeA sidesteps the need to work with localized orbitals during the inner-loop iterations in Algorithm 1. While the use of localized orbitals could provide additional computational savings during the innerloop iterations, such savings would need to be balanced against the cost associated with multiple calls to SCDM; hence, this potential future research direction is beyond the scope of this work. Since V ACE xx is independent of the underlying representation, it would also be possible to construct a fully real-space version of SeA (i.e., by eliminating the fwdFFT in rot_D and using {φ i (r)} and {D i xx (r)} to perform the low-rank decomposition in decomp). While a naïve implementation of such an approach in a planewave code would be subject to aliasing errors (which can impede very tight SCF convergence, e.g., as needed for numerical phonon calculations), the incorporation of SeA into a real-space electronic structure code like PARSEC 69 has the potential to enable hybrid DFT calculations across significantly larger lengthand time-scales, and may therefore be a promising future research direction. In this section, we assess the accuracy (Sec. III A) and performance (Sec. III B) of SeA by comparing this approach against the convolution-based ACE implementation in PWSCF (cf. the SeA and PWSCF(ACE) algorithms in Fig. We begin by discussing the accuracy of SeA when computing E xx for these 200 non-equilibrium (H 2 O) 64 configurations using typical settings for ε in exx (i.e., the system-independent orbital coverage threshold xx , for larger ε values (ε = 10 -3.0 ). Here, we would argue that the remaining (albeit small) systematic difference is largely due to pair selection (i.e., the exclusion of non-self pairs with small but finite S |i,j| values, cf. Eq. ( As an additional assessment, we also considered the accuracy of the ionic forces (which are of central importance to MD simulations and ML data generation) obtained using SeA for this set of non-equilibrium aqueous configurations. As depicted in Fig. In Table (⟨ij⟩) contributions to E xx with tighter ε values. Tighter ε values also correspond to less aggressive pair selection; hence, the number of ⟨ij⟩ pairs will also be larger (see Eq. ( In general, the speedups observed in Fig. Having assessed the accuracy and preliminary performance of SeA against PWSCF(ACE) on the 200 nonequilibrium aqueous configurations in Fig. Overall time-to-solution for SCF calculations at the PBE and PBE0 levels for three selected (H2O)64 configurations (with system densities ranging from most dense to least dense) taken from the set of 200 non-equilibrium aqueous configurations considered in Fig. System Density → Most Dense Ambient Density Least Dense (d = 1.66 g/cm 3 ) (d = 0.99 g/cm 3 ) (d = 0.42 g/cm the vexx function (Fig. As mentioned above, SeA harnesses computational savings from domain truncation and pair selection to provide a one-two order-of-magnitude speedup (11.3×-116.0×) in the bottleneck ACE_Construction step for these three (H 2 O) 64 configurations (see Fig. This can be seen by considering the ACE_Construction : SCF_Iteration relative cost ratio (obtained from the data in Table Within the ACE_Construction step in SeA, the SCDM and exx functions account for most of the cost: 9.7% + 62.3% = 72.0% (out of 73.0%) for the most dense case, 17.4% + 32.7% = 50.1% (out of 51.9%) for the ambient case, and 19.2% + 7.6% = 26.8% (out of 28.6%) for the least dense case. From this data, one can see that the wall times associated with these two functions have an opposite dependence on the system density, which leads to non-monotonic changes in the ACE_Construction wall time: 20.2 s/call for the most dense case, 13.2 s/call for the ambient case, and 15.5 s/call for the least dense case. On the one hand, the wall time spent in exx decreases monotonically with decreasing density from 17.2 s/call (most dense case) to 8.3 s/call (ambient density) to 4.1 s/call (least dense case), due to the increasing degree of sparsity as d decreases (see Sec. III B 1). To showcase the throughput of SeA, we now compare the overall time-to-solution when performing EXX-SCF calculations at the PBE0 level using SeA, PWSCF(ACE), and PWSCF(Full) (i.e., the conventional convolutionbased (non-ACE) EXX approach) on the three (H 2 O) 64 configurations of varying system densities discussed above in Sec. III B 2. Each of these PBE0 calculations was started from converged PBE orbitals stored on disk; the wall times associated with generating these initial orbitals are reported in Table We also compared the performance of the SeA implementation in the PWSCF module of QE against the original exx implementation As a proof-of-principle high-throughput application, we now demonstrate how SeA can be used to efficiently train a converged deep neural network (DNN) potential for ambient (T = 300 K, p = 1 Bar) liquid water at the PBE0 Having assessed the accuracy and performance of SeA on a diverse set of 200 non-equilibrium (H 2 O) 64 configurations (which include both intact and auto-ionized water molecules, and densities spanning 0.4 g/cm 3 -1.7 g/cm 3 ) collected during the active learning of a DNN potential for water at the meta-GGA (SCAN) level, in which the max function was taken over all ions I, and the averages (denoted by ⟨• • •⟩) were evaluated over an ensemble of four independently trained DNN models (i.e., trained using the same data but different initial random seeds) for each snapshot in a given trajectory. From this expression, one can see that E is a precision-based criterion that is measured among equivalently trained DNN models; an accuracy-based assessment, in which the ionic forces from the final DNN model(s) are directly compared to the ground-truth PBE0 ionic forces, will be provided in Sec. IV B. For the trajectory needed in Eq. ( uncorrelated snapshots, we again found that the ionic forces provided by the DNN model(s) were able to reproduce the ground-truth ionic forces with very high fidelity (Fig. Correlation plot between DNN ionic force components (training set: 8,705 (H2O)64 configurations actively learned at T = 300 K and p = 1 Bar) and ground-truth PBE0 ionic force components (computed using SeA (ε = 10 -3.5 )) for an out-of-sample test set containing two uncorrelated snapshots from a DPMD simulation of (H2O)512 at T = 330 K and p = 1 Bar. DNN ionic force components are plotted as blue dots (with error bars based on the mean and standard deviation among the four independently trained DNN models); the red line indicates perfect correlation with the ground-truth PBE0 ionic force components. more thorough investigation of such issues, which will be addressed in future work. Besides validating the accuracy of our SeA-trained DNN model, direct calculations of the ionic forces in these two (H 2 O) 512 snapshots (each containing > 1,500 atoms) using SeA also highlight the capabilities of this approach when performing hybrid DFT calculations on large-scale condensed-phase systems. For such challenging systems (which are currently beyond the reach of PWSCF(ACE)), SeA has enabled fully self-consistent calculations of their energies and ionic forces at the hybrid DFT level in ≈ 1.2 hours using 25 Cori-Haswell nodes (with a total of 100 MPI processes and 16 OpenMP threads per MPI process). By performing such calculations with SeA, the overall cost is now dominated by the inner-loop SCF_Iteration step instead of the outerloop ACE_Construction step-the typical bottleneck in PWSCF(ACE) for large-scale systems. By harnessing three levels of computational savings, SeA has effectively removed the computational bottleneck that typically prohibits the routine use of hybrid DFT in high-throughput applications for systems like (H 2 O) 64 (cf. Tables II and III) and beyond, e.g., (H 2 O) 512 . This observation again reiterates the need for scalable and efficient GGAbased KS-DFT algorithms (e.g., linear-scaling and/or real-space approaches) which could reduce the cost of the inner-loop SCF_Iteration step in SeA and thereby enable hybrid DFT calculations for significantly larger sys-tems. In this work, we have developed SeA (SeA = SCDM+exx+ACE)-a robust, accurate, and computationally efficient framework for performing highthroughput hybrid DFT calculations on large-scale finitegap systems. Implemented in the PWSCF module of Quantum ESPRESSO (QE), SeA combines and seamlessly integrates: (i ) the selected columns of the density matrix (SCDM) approach As a proof-of-principle high-throughput application, we used SeA to train a deep neural network (DNN) potential for ambient (T = 300 K, p = 1 Bar) liquid water at the PBE0 level, based on an actively learned data set containing ≈ 8,700 (H 2 O) 64 configurations. The convergence/precision of this SeA-trained DNN model was demonstrated by small model deviations in the ionic forces for liquid water under ambient (T = 300 K, p = 1 Bar) and non-ambient/out-of-sample (T ∈ {270 K, 330 K, 360 K}, p = 1 Bar) thermodynamic conditions. By comparing the DNN ionic force predictions to the ground truth (direct PBE0 calculations using SeA) for a challenging out-of-sample test set ((H 2 O) 512 at T = 330 K, p = 1 Bar), we also found that the SeAtrained DNN model was highly accurate with an RMSE of 0.90 mHa/Bohr in the ionic force components. This ground-truth comparison not only validated the accuracy of the DNN model, but also showcased the capabilities of SeA to perform hybrid DFT calculations for condensedphase systems containing > 1,500 atoms. While SeA in its current form already provides a robust, accurate, and computationally efficient framework for performing high-throughput condensed-phase hybrid DFT calculations on large-scale finite-gap systems, there still remains room for further improvement. In particular, we are actively working on the following research thrusts to enhance the features and capabilities of SeA: (i ) support for general Monkhorst-Pack (i.e., beyond Γ-point) Brillouin zone sampling, (ii ) an extension to range-separated hybrid (RSH) functionals, Here, we would also emphasize that the applicability of SeA extends beyond high-throughput EXX-SCF calculations (i.e., single-point energy and ionic force evaluations) at the hybrid DFT level. For instance, SeA (in its current form) can be used to accelerate Born-Oppenheimer AIMD (BOMD) simulations (to a significantly larger degree than the original implementation of exx specified, default settings (e.g., Davidson diagonalization, convergence thresholds, and density mixing parameters) were used throughout. For all PWSCF(ACE) calculations, the integrable divergence at G = 0 during vexx evaluations was treated using the Gygi-Baldereschi approach 20 in conjunction with the finite-size correction proposed by Nguyen and de Gironcoli (i.e., x_gamma_extrapolation). c ≤ 28.4 [17.2 ± 3.3] -6.2 ≤ λHOMO ≤ -1.1 [-4.2 ± 0.6] Scientific Computing Center, which is supported by the Office of Science of the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231.