Trends of miniaturized devices and quantum interference electronics lead to the long desire of Fano interference in single-molecule junctions, here, which is successfully demonstrated using the 2,7-di(4-pyridyl)-9,9'-spirobifluorene molecule with a long backbone group and a short side group. Experimentally, the two electrically coupled groups are found to contribute to two blurred degenerate points in the differential conductance mapping. This forms a characteristic non-centrosymmetric double-crossing feature, with distinct temperature response for each crossing. Theoretically, we describe the practical in-junction electron transmission using a new two-tunnelling-channel coupling model and obtain a working formula with a Fano term and a Breit-Wigner term. The formula is shown to provide a good fit for all the mapping data and their temperature dependence in three dimensions, identifying the Fano component. Our work thus forms a complete set of evidence of the Fano interference in a single-molecule junction induced by two-tunnelling-channel coupling transport. Density functional theory calculations are used to corroborate this new physics. The question of quantum interference (QI) in single-molecule junctions (SMJs) has attracted considerable attention in terms of the theoretical values of the interference physics at the smallest scale, and its practical utility in microelectronics. The electrode contact configuration influences the phase difference among electron paths, which is crucial for the effect of QI. The electrical field introduced by a gate can be used to tune the energy levels of molecular states, bringing with it the possibility of changing the status of QI. Fano interference is a specific and essential type of QI that occurs between a discrete state and a continuous state Having been realized in many mesoscopic electronics devices However, systematic evidence of Fano interference in SMJs is still rare due to both experimental and theoretical challenges. Experimentally, the molecule is difficult to be designed, and be placed perfectly in a practical junction with a complicated environment We tackle the problems in both experimental and theoretical aspects. We use a 2,7di(4-pyridyl)-9,9'-spirobifluorene (DPSBF) molecule consisting of a long backbone group and a short side group, where the nitrogen anchoring sites help control the injunction configuration. We constructed a two-tunnelling-channel coupling model to describe the electronic transmission in practical. We fabricated the field effect transistor devices based on the DPSBF molecule, obtain a characteristic noncentrosymmetrical double-crossing feature (NCDCF) in the differential conductance mapping, and fit the data with their temperature dependence in three dimensions, thus giving a complete set of evidence for the onset of the Fano interference in the SMJ. From density functional theory (DFT), we confirm information about interfered continuous-discrete states from the backbone and the side groups, corroborating the two-tunnelling-channel coupling physics. The identification of Fano interference relies on a practical model. In a proposed ideal model However, in a real SMJ where the nanogap is rather small, the tunnelling channels through other groups should also exist even in the simplest structure. Therefore, we propose a more practical two-tunnelling-channel coupling model as shown in Fig. 1(b). In this case, the tunnelling channels through the backbone and the side groups coexist, and the side-backbone coupling u leads to the interference between the two channels. The side group has much weaker couplings to the electrodes (t'L and t'R) than the backbone group (tL and tR), leading to a discrete tunnelling state to join the Fano interference with a much more continuous backbone tunnelling state. We describe the electron transmission as a linear superposition of an asymmetrical Fano resonant term, a symmetrical BW resonant term, and an off-resonant term: where q is the asymmetry factor of the Fano resonance; AF, ABW, and Aoff are the amplitudes of the three terms; the Fano and BW resonant levels are respectively equal to the effective energy level of the side and backbone groups, i.e., εF = εp and εBW = εb; the Fano and BW resonant widths are equal to the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the density of states (DOS) of the side and backbone groups, i.e., ΓF = Γp , ΓBW = Γb. This form is temperature-independent (when kBT ≪ Γp, Γb, where kB is the Boltzmann constant and T is the temperature). Details are given in Supplementary Information S1. This model considers more factors than the ideal one, describing the inevitable side channel and the interference between channels, but its transmission form is born to distinguish the Fano interference from other types of QI. The Fano and BW resonant terms contribute to a noncentrosymmetrical and a centrosymmetrical crossing patterns in the differential conductance results respectively. This noncentrosymmetrical double-crossing feature (NCDCF) is the characteristic fingerprint for identifying the twotunnelling-channel coupling induced signal. Moreover, the temperature response of the differential conductance should follow a square law (when kBT ≪ ΓF, ΓBW). Details are found in Supplementary Information S2. A NCDCF and its temperature dependence provide direct evidence of two- We According to our model, εF and εBW are related to the energy levels of the molecular groups and can be tuned by Vg. The parameters q, ΓF, ΓBW, AF, ABW, and Aoff are energyindependent and hence they can be obtained via fitting. Hence we apply our model to fit the data (see Eq. (S24) in Supplementary Information) near the degenerate points. As shown in Fig. and the Fano (dip) regions. In these two regions, for illustrative purposes we defined two obvious points on the curve as point J at Vg = 2.85 V and point X at Vg = 2.00 V. Point J is near the peak position of the curve, while X is near the dip position on the right side of J. 2,7-dibromo-9,9'-spiro-bifluorene (474 mg, 1.0 mmol), Pd(dppf) Cl2(67 mg, 0.10 mmol), 4-pyridinylboronic acid (368 mg, 3.0 mmol) and K2CO3 (690 mg, 5.0 mmol) in the mixture of tetrahydrofuran (10 mL) and water (2 mL) was stirred in Argon atmosphere at 75 °C for 36 h. After cooling it to room temperature, the reaction mixture was concentrated under a reduced pressure and purified using silica gel column chromatography with petroleum ether/ethyl acetate (v/v, 3:1) as the eluent to afford DPSBF (249 mg, 53%) as a white solid. We performed the nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) measurements for molecular characterization, and all details are shown in Supplementary information S3. The gold nanowires (about 50-nm-width) were deposited via electron beam evaporation on top of a silicon gate electrode that has previously been added a SiO2 gate dielectric layer (about 30-nm-thick) via atomic layer deposition. The external circuits and SiO2 layer were patterned using an ultra-violet lithography procedure, but the nanowire was defined by electron-beam lithography. The array were cleaned further using oxygen plasma after the gold nanowires were prepared. Then the device containing DPSBF molecules was cooled to 1.6 K, and a nanogap was produced using the FCEBJ method The cycle is repeated until the conductance was < 0.025 e 2 /h for the voltage of 20 mV. Our DFT calculations were performed using the generalized gradient approximation and the projector augmented wave method The Γ point was used to sample the first Brillouin zone in all calculations. All atoms of the molecule were allowed to relax until the residual force on each atom was less than 0.01 eV Å -1 . The Grimme's D3 form van der Waals (vdW) correction was considered with the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) exchange functional (PBE-D3). While p has indirect tunneling coefficients t L ′, t R ′ , describing the second-order hopping process. It is natural to assume t ′ ≪ t. The intramolecular coupling between b and p is described as a direct coupling constant u. The Hamiltonian of the entire molecular junction is given by: Where H 0 describes the molecule itself, and H c describes its couplings to L and R. Where the spin degrees of freedom are implicit. Making expansion of the two correlation functions to the leading order of t, t′, we obtain Hence Eq. (S5) leads to Where ζ(E) = Im[t L 2 g b a + (t L ug b a + t L ′ ) 2 G p a ]. We consider the couplings to the left and right electrodes are approximately to energy, and Eq. ( To adopt Landauer's formula 1 The transmission is given by It could be written as the form mentioned in the manuscript: Where the amplitudes of three terms are: Now we have revealed the physics of this two-tunneling-channel coupling model containing a Fano term, a BW term and an off-resonance term in the transmission. In We design the 2,7-di(4-pyridyl)-9,9'-spirobifluorene (DPSBF) molecule to achieve the configuration in this model: firstly, it consists of a long 2,7-di(pyrldin-4-yl)-9Hfluoren backbone group, connected with a 9H-fluoren side group via a single carbon atom, it is reasonable to regard the backbone and side groups as two semi-independent subparts secondly, the backbone group is longer than side one, and possessing nitrogen anchor on each end, ensuring a mighty enough t while keeping the side group an appropriate distance from the electrodes so that t′ is small. In the field-effect transistor devices based on the SMJ, there are three electrodes, the source (s), the drain (s). and the gate (g). We define the source as the left electrode, and the grounded drain as the right electrode, hence We consider the whole molecule have common capacitances between three electrodes, therefore the molecular levels are shifted by voltages with the same factor: Where ε p0 and ε b0 are the levels when V sd = 0 , V g = 0 . The factors η = are related to capacitances between the molecule and electrodes. We then derive the characteristic noncentrosymmetrical double-crossing feature (NCDCF) originating from the superposition of Fano and BW components in our twotunneling-channel coupling model. The current given by Landauer's formula is written as If the temperature is 0 K, differential conductance Similar to the form of the transmission, it is the superposition of a Fano term, a BW term and an off-resonant term. For zero bias condition, Compare Eq. (S24) with Eq. (S18), it can be seen that as the function of αeV g has the same line shape with τ(E) , Therefore changing the gate voltage is a direct method to extract the feature of Fano interference in the transmission. In our model, is the sum of three terms and only the Fano term contributes to the noncentrosymmetrical ingredient (the off-resonant term only produces an invariable background). Therefore, the total signal exhibit a pattern with characteristic NCDCF. dI sd dV sd result (see Fig. Indeed, we construct our experiments at a nonzero temperature of 3 K, this low enough temperature only would cause a tiny deviation from the zero-Kelvin results, does not influence the identification by the NCDCF. Therefore, we directly fit the data at 3 K with Eq. (S24) via the Curve Fitting tool in MATLAB 2021a.We obtain all the fitted parameters: A off = -0.0057, A BW = 0.2997, A F = 0.0934, η = 0.5846, α = 0.0103 Γ BW = 11.91 meV, Γ F = 6.79 meV, ε F -ε BW = 8.04 meV, q = 0.374 The analysis of fitted results are described in the manuscript text and Figs. 3, in which the components of Fano and BW are both identified. The fitted results in 3 K give Γ BW = 11.91 meV, Γ F = 6.79 meV , and consider Γ F = Γ p and Γ BW = Γ b , hence condition of the temperature-independence of the transmission: k B T ≪ Γ p , Γ b is satisfied. Therefore the theoretical dI sd dV sd at higher temperatures is obtained by numerical integration of Eq. (S22), in which the parameters are the same as that obtained in 3 K fitting. The linear relation between variation and T 2 is derived from the Sommerfeld expansion when k B T → 0: Neglect the higher orders and substitute τ(E) in Eq. (S18) into H(E), the current in a finite temperature T is obtained as: is the Fermi distribution function in 0 K, therefore the deviation of ). This deviation is proportional to T 2 when T < is temperature-independent. The temperature response reflects the blunting and widening of peak and dip due to the change of Fermi distribution function while transmission spectrum remains unchanged. This square law are only in the condition that T ≪ ΓF / kB ≈ 50 K, the signal would not maintain increasing or decreasing if T is too higher. To investigate the temperature-dependent behaviors, we measure to TMS (0.00 ppm, 1H). Silica gel (300-400 mesh) was used for column chromatography. All chemicals and solvents were purchased from commercial sources were used without further purification. NMR spectra of 2,7-di(4-pyridyl)-9,9'-spirobifluorene molecule is shown in Figs. We fabricate some more SMT devices based on 2,7-di(4-pyridyl)-9,9'spirobifluorene molecules, and obtained another experimental data that agree with our model. Figure 2 