Metallic systems exhibit plasmons as elementary charge excitations. This fundamental concept was reinforced also in high-temperature cuprate superconductors recently, although cuprates are not only layered systems but also strongly correlated electron systems. Here, we study how such ubiquitous plasmons leave their marks on the electron dispersion in cuprates. In contrast to phonons and magnetic fluctuations, plasmons do not yield a kink in the electron dispersion. Instead, we find that the optical plasmon accounts for an emergent band-plasmarons-in the one-particle excitation spectrum; acoustic-like plasmons typical to a layered system are far less effective. Because of strong electron correlations, the plasmarons are generated by bosonic fluctuations associated with the local constraint, not by the usual charge-density fluctuations. Apart from this physical mechanism, the plasmarons are similar to those discussed in alkali metals, Bi, graphene, monolayer transition-metal dichalcogenides, semiconductors, diamond, two-dimensional electron systems, and SrIrO 3 films, establishing a concept of plasmarons in metallic systems in general. Plasmarons are realized below (above) the quasiparticle band in electron-doped (holedoped) cuprates, including a region around (π, 0) and (0, π) where the superconducting gap and the pseudogap are most enhanced. Superconductivity is driven by forming Cooper pairs of electrons A well-known interaction is electron-phonon coupling, which renormalizes the electron band to yield a kink at the corresponding phonon energy Given that the electron-phonon coupling is the conventional mechanism of superconductivity How about charge fluctuations, which are also bosonic ones? While the understanding of the charge fluctuations is crucial to the high-T c mechanism in cuprates, it is only recently when the charge dynamics was revealed in momentum-energy space by an advanced technique of resonance inelastic x-ray scattering (RIXS). In particular, low-energy collective charge excitations were revealed in electron-doped The characteristic in-plane and out-of-plane dependence allowed to identify these excitations as low-energy plasmons Electron-plasmon coupling was studied mainly for weakly correlated materials: alkali metals such as Na and Al Can we expect plasmarons in high-temperature cuprate superconductors? This is a far from obvious issue. First of all, cuprates are strongly correlated electron systems and thus it is reasonable to distinguish cuprates from weakly correlated systems as the ones discussed in the previous paragraph-a direct analogy between them is not trivial. Second, cuprates are layered systems, where not only the conventional optical plasmon, but also many acousticlike plasmons are present In this paper, we show that instead of yielding a kink, plasmons in cuprates lead to plasmarons-similar to weakly correlated systems. A common feature lies in the singularity of the long-range Coulomb interaction in the limit of long wavelength. However, the underlying physics is different. Instead of usual charge density-density correlations, fluctuations associated with the local constraint-non-double occupancy of electrons at any site-are responsible for the emergence of plasmarons. We find that cuprates can host plasmarons near the optical plasmon energy below (above) the quasiparticle band in electron-doped (hole-doped) cuprates. Cuprate superconductors are doped Mott insulators-strong correlations of electrons are believed to be crucial where c † iσ (c iσ ) are the creation (annihilation) operators of electrons with spin σ(=↑, ↓) in the Fock space without double occupancy at any site-strong correlation effects, n i = σ c † iσ ciσ is the electron density operator, and S i is the spin operator. While cuprates are frequently modeled on a square lattice, we take the layered structure of cuprates into account and consider a three-dimensional lattice to describe plasmons correctly. The sites i and j run over such a three-dimensional lattice. The hopping t ij takes the value t (t ′ ) between the first (second) nearest-neighbor sites in the plane and is scaled by t z between the planes. The exchange interaction J ij = J is considered only for the nearest-neighbor sites inside the plane as denoted by i, j -the exchange term between the planes is much smaller than J (Thio et al. It is highly nontrivial to analyze the strong correlation effects systematically. While a variational approach is powerful Because of the local constraint that double occupancy of electrons is prohibited at any lattice site, the charge fluctuations are described by a 2×2 matrix D ab (q, iν n ) with a, b = 1, 2; q is the momentum of the charge fluctuations and ν n a bosonic Matsubara frequency. While In the large-N theory, D ab (q, iν n ) is renormalized already at leading order. After the analytical continuation iν n → ν + iΓ ch , where Γ ch (> 0) is infinitesimally small, the full charge excitation spectrum is described by ImD ab (q, ν) -Bejas et al. Charge fluctuations renormalize the one-particle property of electrons, which can be analyzed by computing the electron self-energy. This requires involved calculations in the large-N theory because one needs to go beyond leading order theory. At order of 1/N, the imaginary part of the self-energy is obtained as where Here ν = ω -ε k-q , ε k is the electron dispersion obtained at leading order, h a (k, q, ν) a vertex describing the coupling between electrons and charge excitations, n F and n B the Fermi and Bose distribution functions, respectively, N s the total number of lattice sites in each layer, and N z the number of layers; see Methods for the explicit forms of D ab (q, ν), ε k , and h a (k, q, ν). The real part of Σ(k, ω) is computed by the Kramers-Kronig relations. Since the electron Green's function G(k, ω) is written as we obtain the one-particle spectral function where Γ sf (> 0) originates from the analytical continuation in the electron Green's function. The quasiparticle dispersion appears as poles of A(k, ω), i.e., a sharp peak structure of A(k, ω), and crosses the Fermi energy. On top of that, A(k, ω) can exhibit other sharp features. If plasmons themselves are responsible for yielding additional poles of A(k, ω), namely fulfilling the condition of ω -ε k -ReΣ(k, ω) = 0 with a relatively small value of |ImΣ(k, ω)|, A(k, ω) exhibits a peak describing electrons coupling to plasmons, namely plasmarons While the t-J model in Eq. ( A choice of model parameters is not crucial to our major conclusions. Here we present results which can be applied directly to electron-doped cuprates, especially La 1.825 Ce 0.175 CuO 4 (LCCO); details of model parameters are given in Methods and Supplementary Note 3. Since the low-energy incoherent band disappears when the long-range Coulomb interaction is replaced by a short-range Coulomb interaction-the high-energy one still remains As seen in Eq. ( where the arguments on the right hand side are omitted for simplicity and the fact that ImΣ 12 is equal to ImΣ 21 was used. The case of r = 1 corresponds to the physical situation seen in Eq. ( the energy of ImD ab is given by ν = ω -ε k-q , the optical plasmon is realized at q = 0, ImD ab is odd with respect to ν, and thus the peak of ImΣ(k, ω) is shifted by ε k-q with q = 0. The crucial role of the optical plasmon is also confirmed numerically. In Fig. -5 It might be puzzling-on one hand, the optical plasmon is responsible for the formation of the plasmarons (Fig. do not generate them (Fig. Here D is the determinant of the matrix [D ab (q, ν)] -1 , δ the doping rate, J q the superexchange interaction in momentum space, Π ab a bubble describing particle-hole excitations with appropriate vertex functions h a (k, q, ν), and N the number of spin components (N = 2 corresponds to the physical situations); a complete expression of each quantity is given in Methods. In the limit of q → 0, we can obtain by virtue of V q ∼ q -2 The other components of ImD 11 and ImD 12 become smaller by order of V -2 q and V -1 q , respectively. Hence, ImD 22 becomes dominant over the other components in the limit of q → 0 and thus ImΣ 22 has a sizable contribution compared with the other components. This explains the reason why ImΣ 22 is responsible for the plasmarons, although all components of ImD ab equally describe the same plasmons. From Eqs. ( where ImD RPA (q, ν) = V 2 q ImΠ RPA (q, ν) is the imaginary part of the screened Coulomb interaction computed in the random phase approximation (RPA); ν = ω -ε RPA k-q . Therefore weakly correlated electron systems in general can also host plasmarons in principle However, plasmarons are overdamped in many cases and leave faint spectral weight In the present t-J model, the band width is very small at order of tδ/2 and δ ≈ 0.1-0.2. Furthermore, the magnitude of all the components of ImΣ ab is comparable to each other, but the sign of ImΣ 12 is the opposite to those of ImΣ 11 and ImΣ 22 in ω < 0 (see Supplementary Note 2). Hence after the summation in Eq. ( The dispersion of plasmarons exhibits a dispersive feature similar to the quasiparticle dispersion as shown in Fig. Figures The energy of plasmarons is controlled by the optical plasmon energy, which can be determined precisely by electron energy-loss spectroscopy and optical spectroscopy. Given that the typical energy scale of the optical plasmon in cuprates is around 1 eV, the plasmarons can be tested by angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) by searching the energy region typically around 1 eV below the electron dispersion especially along the direction (0, 0)-(π, 0) [see the inset of Fig. In experiments What happens for hole-doped cuprates, where the optical plasmon For cuprates, it has been discussed that coupling to bosonic fluctuations yields a kink in the electron dispersion. While plasmons are also bosonic fluctuations, their role in cuprates should be sharply distinguished from phonons A replica band is also discussed in the polar electron-phonon coupling mechanism in TiO 2 The present large-N theory captures the plasmon excitations observed in both electronand hole-doped high-temperature cuprate superconductors with a good accuracy so that detailed comparisons with experimental data were made Our major point lies in the indication that cuprates can host plasmarons-quasiparticles coupling to plasmons-near the optical plasmon energy below (above) the quasiparticle dispersion in electron-doped (hole-doped) cuprates; plasmons do not yield a kink in the quasiparticle dispersion, in stark contrast to phonons and magnetic fluctuations. Since plasmarons are found clearly close to momentum (π, 0), where the superconducting gap as well as the pseudogap is enhanced, it is very interesting to explore further the role of plasmarons in the formation of the superconducting gap and the pseudogap in cuprate superconductors. Our second major point lies in elucidating the mechanism of plasmarons: they are driven by the strong correlation effect-fluctuations associated with the local constraint that imposes no double occupancy of electrons at any site. The underlying physics to generate plasmarons in cuprates is thus different from that in weakly correlated electron systems We present a minimal description of the large-N theory of the layered t-J model with the long-range Coulomb interaction-a complete formalism is given in Yamase et al. The electron dispersion ε k consists of the in-plane dispersion ε k and the out-of-plane At leading order they are calculated as where ∆ is the mean value of the bond field, δ the doping rate, and μ the chemical potential. For a given δ, ∆ and μ are determined self-consistently by solving the following coupled equations: (1 As already mentioned in the Analytical Scheme subsection, charge fluctuations in the t-J model are composed of on-site charge and bond-charge fluctuations. They are however essentially decoupled to each other where Here J q = J 2 (cos q x + cos q y ) is the superexchange interaction in momentum space and V q is the long-range Coulomb interaction for a layered system where V c = e 2 d(2ǫ ⊥ a 2 ) -1 and A(q x , q y ) = α(2 -cos q x -cos q y ) + 1; e is the electric charge of electrons, a the unit length of the square lattice, d the distance between the layers, α describes the anisotropy between the in-plane and out-of-plane interaction and is given by α = ǫ (a/d) 2 with ǫ = ǫ /ǫ ⊥ , where ǫ and ǫ ⊥ are the dielectric constants parallel and perpendicular to the planes, respectively. The 2 × 2 matrix Π ab is the bosonic self-energy at leading order and the 2-component vertex is given by We then compute the electron self-energy from charge fluctuations described by Eq. ( Fixing temperature to zero, we choose parameters J/t = 0.3, t ′ /t = 0.3, t z /t = 0.03, α = 2.9, V c /t = 18, δ = 0.175, N z = 10, Γ ch /t = 0.03, Γ sf /t = 0.03, and t/2 = 0.5 eV, which reproduce semiquantitatively the plasmon excitations observed in RIXS for one of the typical electron-doped cuprates LCCO plasmaron dispersion may also change. suggests that plasmarons can be detected more easily in a narrow band system for weakly correlated materials where the RPA is expected to be reliable. In fact, the importance of the narrow band width to plasmarons was discussed in SrIrO 3 The optical plasmon energy is obtained as 2.52t and 1.34t in the present parameters for Eq. (S1) and Eq. (S3), respectively. While the plasmaron energy in Fig. 