The transport response of dipole skyrmions in amorphous centrosymmetric Fe/Gd multilayer is investigated by temperature and field-dependent resistivity measurements collected in three current and magnetic field configurations. It is shown that a dipole skyrmion lattice phase may form at certain temperatures leading to a unique signature of the polar longitudinal resistivity. This signature differs from the conventional field-varying parabolic response associated with stripe phases, which transition to a disordered skyrmion phase under applied fields. Transport measurements under different field history protocols reveal that the anomaly in the polar longitudinal resistivity appears under specific field history reversal processes. Our experimental results are reproduced using micromagnetic simulations that show the anomaly in the polar longitudinal resistivity is related to a domain wall reconfiguration that occurs as the domain morphology transitions from disordered stripes to a skyrmion lattice under applied perpendicular fields. Skyrmions, particle-like chiral magnetic spin textures, exhibit unique electric and magnetic properties given they carry quantized topological charge Here, we present a transport study of an amorphous Fe/Gd multilayer that exhibits magnetic phases ranging from stripe, coexisting stripe-skyrmion, close-packed skyrmion lattice, and disordered skyrmion Overall, our results demonstrate the mechanism by which dipole-stabilized skyrmions form under applied fields in centrosymmetric magnets, as well as show how dipole-stabilized magnetic stripes and skyrmions provide a platform to investigate the interplay between local and global chirality effects. The Fe/Gd films were prepared by DC magnetron sputtering by alternatively depositing Fe and Gd thin layers Transport measurements were performed using the standard 4-point probe AC (~10 Hz) bridge technique with an applied current of I = 1 μA. The patterned wires have a length of 3.5 mm and width of 10 μm. Field-dependent longitudinal resistivity (ρ !! ) and Hall resistivity (ρ !" ) measurements were collected as the magnetic field was swept from positive to negative saturation and conversely, at discrete temperatures from T = 300 K to T = 20 K in 20 K steps; meanwhile, temperature-dependent ρ !! measurements were collected at discrete temperatures from T = 300 K to T = 10 K in 2 K steps. We measure the ρ !! in three different magnetic field configurations: (i) in-plane and parallel to the length of the wire (parallel, ρ !! || ), (ii) in-plane and perpendicular to the length of the wire (transverse, ρ !! $ ), and (iii) perpendicular to the film (polar, ρ !! • ). In our ρ !! and ρ !" measurements, the magnetic field is swept from H = +10 kOe to H = -10 kOe, and conversely. Figure • loop, we can clearly observe signatures the Fe/Gd patterned wire exhibits a stripe phase at zero-field: net zero ρ !" • is analogous to net zero magnetic moment which indicates an equal population of opposite perpendicular magnetic domains exists at remanence. The monotonic and nonlinear increase in ρ !" • with applied perpendicular fields, from zero up to the saturated ρ !" • , exhibits a characteristic response commonly seen in magnetic materials hosting stripe phases (i.e., identifying the presence of skyrmion lattice or disordered skyrmion phases is not directly possible from field-dependent magnetometry nor ρ !" • loops). were collected after applying a perpendicular field up to positive saturation and then reducing the field to zero-field. At T = 300 K, the average polar longitudinal resistivity is relatively high (ρ !! • ~ 260μΩ-cm) in comparison to ferromagnetic alloys Ref. Figure Because the current is fixed along the length of the wire, different field orientations allow us to probe the behavior of different magnetic spin arrangements more favorably. Considering we know the Fe/Gd film possesses perpendicular magnetic spin textures with hybrid Néel-Bloch-Néel domain walls By surveying the temperature dependence of the zero-field parallel (ρ !! || ), transverse (ρ !! $ ), and polar (ρ !! • ) longitudinal resistivity for the Fe/Gd patterned wire, shown in Fig. , which is lower than the zero-field polar longitudinal resistivity, ). Since we know the Fe/Gd multilayer exhibits perpendicular stripe domains with Néel caps and a Bloch-line • amplitude at magnetic fields preceding the anomaly. These differences suggest that the underlying magnetic spin textures and their ordering differ. Subsequentially increasing the field from zerofield to positive saturation, we observe ρ !! • smoothly decays with a parabolic-trend and there is no emergence of the ρ !! • anomaly. Lastly, sweeping the field from positive saturation to zero-field results in a field-dependent ρ !! • response which mimics the prior sweep, thus the field-dependent evolution between magnetic phases is continuous. The transport responses under both field history protocols show that a discontinuous microstructure reconfiguration occurs when transitioning between magnetic close-packed skyrmion lattice phases is stabilized under opposite polarity fields. To aid unraveling the source of the anomaly in the field-dependent ρ !! • , we performed micromagnetic simulations by solving the Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert (LLG) equation using the FastMag micromagnetic simulator erg/cm. The equilibrium states on the slab were recorded as the magnetic field was swept from H . = -5000 Oe to H . = + 5000 Oe in H . = 50 Oe field steps with 10 ns rise and 20 ns relaxation time, in the high damping regime (α = 1). Since the anisotropic magnetoresistance (AMR) ratio is relatively low for these films (~ 0.3%), we assume that scattering is uniform across the slab when computing the resistivity at each field step. The resistivity was calculated via: , where φ is the angle between the magnetization and current direction. For our simulations, we set Δρ = 200μΩ -cm based on results in Fig. Recently, we experimentally demonstrated the topological robustness of skyrmions versus bubbles in a similar Fe/Gd multilayer that can be tailored to favor either chiral or achiral phases under different field history protocols To further elucidate competing local and global chirality effects observed in dipole-stabilized magnetic phases, we explore the anticipated perpendicular field transitions of global chiral and achiral magnetic phases. Figures We have measured the transport properties of dipole skyrmions that form in Fe/Gd multilayer patterned wires through temperature-and field-dependent resistivity studies. By experimentally studying an Fe/Gd pattened wire with composition that primarily favors stripes at room temperature and a close-packed skyrmion lattice at low temperatures, we profiled the evolution of the transport signatures as a function of temperature and applied fields for three current-field geometries (parallel, transverse, and polar), which provided valuable insights about the dipolestabilized magnetic spin textures and their 3-dimensional arrangement. First, we confirmed stripe phases undergo continuos morphological transformations under applied fields, which are characterized by a representative parabolic-like resistivity response under perpendicular fields, while skyrmion lattice exhibit a parabolic-like resistivity response with a nontrivial anomaly. Field history studies revealed that the presence of a close-packed skyrmion lattice results in discontinuos microstructural changes in the domain morphology when transitioning between magnetic phases stabilized under opposite magnetic fields. Through micromagnetic simulations, we reproduced our experimental observations of an anomaly in the field-dependent polar longitudinal resistivity, and obtained detailed insights on the field-dependent evolution of complex 3-dimensional magnetic spin textures. Micromagnetic simulations showed that the stripe phase undergoes a Bloch-line reorientation as the magnetic field is swept from one polarity to another, which enables the formation of an equal population of two helicity dipole skyrmions under negative and positive magnetic fields. Our results provide a strategy to aid the identification of materials capable of hosting dipole-stabilized skyrmion lattice phases, elucidate the mechanism by which dipolestabilized skyrmions form in centrosymmetric magnets under applied perpendicular fields, and demonstrate how dipole-stabilized magnetic phases provide a distinctive testbed for studying interactions between local and global chirality effects. 