Optomechanical accelerometers promise quantum-limited readout, high detection bandwidth, selfcalibration, and radiation pressure stabilization. We present a simple, scalable platform that enables these benefits with nano-g sensitivity at acoustic frequencies, based on a pair of vertically integrated Si3N4 membranes with different stiffnesses, forming an optical cavity. As a demonstration, we integrate an ultrahigh-Q (> 10 7 ), millimeter-scale Si3N4 trampoline membrane above an unpatterned membrane on the same Si chip, forming a finesse F ≈ 2 cavity. Using direct photodetection in transmission, we resolve the relative displacement of the membranes with a shot-noise-limited imprecision of 7 fm/ √ Hz, yielding a thermal-noise-limited acceleration sensitivity of 562 ng/ √ Hz over a 1 kHz bandwidth centered on the fundamental trampoline resonance (40 kHz). To illustrate the advantage of radiation pressure stabilization, we cold damp the trampoline to an effective temperature of 4 mK and leverage the reduced energy variance to resolve an applied stochastic acceleration of 50 ng/ √ Hz in an integration time of minutes. In the future, we envision a small-scale array of these devices operating in a cryostat to search for fundamental weak forces such as dark matter. Cavity optomechanical (COMS) accelerometers employ a micromechanical oscillator as a test mass and an optical microcavity for displacement-based readout. Key advantages over micro-electromechanical (MEMS) accelerometers-stemming from the small wavelength of optical fields-include quantum-limited readout, ultrahigh bandwidth; and absolute, traceable calibration First generation COMS accelerometers used delicate nanofabrication and micro-assembly techniques to monolithically integrate a relatively large, acoustic frequency test mass with an optical microcavity. Krause et. al. Here we explore a new platform for COMS accelerometery based on a pair of vertically integrated, unloaded Si 3 N 4 membranes with different stiffnesses, forming an optical cavity. Devices based on this platform are exceptionally easy to fabricate and give access to a panoply of tools developed for Si 3 N 4 membranes over the last decade, including frequency tuning Device concept-The concept behind our approach is illustrated in Fig. where is the susceptibility of membrane i, x i is the displacement of membrane i relative to the substrate, ω i and Q i are the resonance frequency and Q factor of membrane i, and β i ∼ 1 is a unitless factor that depends on the shape of the membrane mode (for a square and a trampoline membrane, β ≈ (4/π) 2 and 1 respectively [12]). When the membrane frequencies are different ω 1 = ω 2 , it is straightforward to show that χ(ω) ≈ χ i (ω) for frequencies sufficiently close to resonance ω ≈ ω i . The dualmembrane system can then be modeled as a canonical spring-mass accelerometer; with the measured displacement yielding an apparent acceleration spectral density where S imp x is the displacement readout imprecision and is the apparent acceleration of the substrate due to thermal motion of membrane i, with effective mass m i . Trampoline-on-membrane (TOM) accelerometer-To explore the double-membrane accelerometer concept, we fabricated the device shown in Fig. We first studied the performance of the TOM device as an optical cavity, by recording its transmission T versus laser wavelength λ as shown in Fig. In Fig. 1 ) (photothermal heating was not observed at our operating powers At low powers, P out 1 mW, the noise floor agrees well with the quantum noise model with an efficiency η ≈ 33%. At high powers, P out > 1 mW, the noise floor saturates to an extraneous level of S imp x ≈ 7 × 10 -15 / √ Hz, consistent with the noise floor of our laser intensity servo. Chip acceleration spectra inferred from the displacement measurements in Fig. displacement spectrum by the model transfer function The observed inverted lineshape has two components: thermal motion of the trampoline, which masquerades as a frequency-independent chip acceleration (solid gray line), and imprecision noise, which has the shape of the inverse susceptibility (dashed gray line). The intersection of these components defines the bandwidth over which the measurement is thermal noise-limited (gray shaded region), and is approximately the product of the mechanical damping rate γ = ω 1 /Q and the peak thermal-to-imprecision-noise ratio As shown in Fig. x (ω 1 ) = 4kBT Q mω 3 1 = (0.98 nm √ Hz ) 2 implies that thermal noise limited measurements ∆ω > γ are possible with as little as femtowatts of optical power in the current Fresnel reflection (F ∼ 1) arrangement. Radiation-pressure-enhanced accelerometry-The preceding results show that a pair of high Q Si 3 N 4 membranes can be used realize an optomechanical accelerometer with sub-μg sensitivity over a bandwidth of kilo-hertz, using milliwatts of optical power. We now turn our attention to a unique opportunity afforded by the simultaneous high force sensitivity of the membranes, which enables their intrinsic mechanical susceptibility to be overwhelmed by radiation pressure back-action, leading to optical stiffening and damping The TOM device was designed with radiation pressure in mind as a tool for incoherent acceleration sensing, inspired by recent proposals to search for a weak inertial force produced by ultralight dark matter where τ is the measurement time, and γ eff and T eff are the effective damping rate and temperature of the mechanical mode, respectively, satisfying γ eff T eff = γT for cold damping where x (ω0) is the effective measurement temperature Finally, as a demonstration, we used a piezo to apply a ∼ 180 ng/ √ Hz incoherent acceleration to the chip, smaller than the thermal acceleration by a factor of ∼ 3. As shown in Figs. We have presented a platform for optomechanical accelerometry based on a pair of vertically integrated Si 3 N 4 membranes with different stiffnesses, forming an optical cavity. Devices based on this platform are simple to fabricate, can achieve sub-μg sensitivity over a bandwdith of kilohertz, and can actively controlled used radiation pressure feedback. As a proofof-principle, we studied a "trampoline-on-membrane" device in which a 40 kHz nanotrampoline with a Q-m product of 100 mg was integrated opposite a 150 kHz square membrane on a common 200 μm Si chip, forming a finesse F ≈ 2 cavity. Despite its low finesse, the high ideality of the cavity enabled shot-noise-limited readout of the membrane separation at the level of fm/ √ Hz, yielding sensitivity to sub-μg/ √ Hz chip accelerations over a bandwidth of 1 kHz centered at the trampoline resonance, limited by thermal noise. Radiation pressure feedback was then used to cool the trampoline's fundamental vibration to an effective temperature of 4 mK. While not affecting the acceleration sensitivity, we confirmed that cold-damping enables emulation of an optimal filter, allowing us to resolve externally applied chip acceleratios at the level of 50 ng/ √ Hz in a integration time of 200 sec. In the future, we envision integrating PtC mirrors Starting with a double-side polished Si wafer, Si 3 N 4 is deposited on both sides using laser plasma chemical vapor deposition, the trampoline is patterned on one side using photolithography, and the double-membrane structure is released with a single KOH wet-etch step, the square membrane serving as both an etch stop and a turbulence shield (removing the need for critical point drying). Similar structures have been fabricated with embedded PtC mirrors The sensitivity of the optical displacement readout depends on the transduction factor ∂i/∂x from a small change x in relative displacement between the cavity's mirrors to a corresponding change in the detection photocurrent i, which is proportional to the optical power on the detector. In the ideal case, the photocurrent is free of technical noise and limited only by optical shot noise ("quantum noise"). In this section, we derive the expected theoretical limits to shot-noise-limited displacement sensitivity for a direct transmission measurement, illustrated in Figure Consider a direct detection measurement with input power P in , such that the transmitted power incident on the detector is where ζ is an overall loss factor due to systematic losses and T is the transmission of the dual membrane etalon. Modeling the etalon as a Fabry-Pérot cavity gives where F is the coefficient of cavity finesse, δ ≡ 2π(L + x)/λ is the round trip intracavity phase shift, L is the nominal membrane separation (including the optical path length of the membranes), x is the relative membrane displacement, and λ is the wavelength of the optical field. Fluctuations of P out could be either due to displacement fluctuations or intensity shot-noise. The latter is given by the single-sided power spectral density (PSD) In the adiabatic limit, the apparent displacement ("displacement imprecision") due to shot noise is therefore where For a given input power, the shot noise equivalent displacement is minimized when the derivative of the transmission fringe is maximum, that is, on the side of the fringe. Accordingly, we choose a wavelength such that | ∂T ∂λ | and thus, also, To simplify, Eq. 5 can be re-expressed in terms of the output power For F 1 and δ 1 (near-resonance), the transduction factor The resulting expression for the displacement imprecision is where we have substituted F with the finesse F = π 2 √ F . (We note that Eq. 7 is valid to within 10% for F > 2.) Finally, we note that P out must account for detection inefficiency; this may be incorporated explicitly by letting P out → ηP out , with 0 ≤ η ≤ 1. For measurements shown in Fig. Following Eq. 1-3 of the main text, we first define the noise-equivalent chip acceleration as arXiv:2208.14984v1 [cond-mat.mes-hall] 31 Aug 2022 where β is a modal participation factor described in the main text and defined below. On resonance, the total acceleration noise is minimized, attaining a value The sensitivity bandwidth ∆ω is defined such that Combining Eq. 8 and 10 and assuming ∆ω ω 0 gives yielding The final approximation assumes the resonant thermal noise is much larger than the imprecision noise, which is valid for our high-Q, room-temperature nanomembrane. We note that Eq. 12c implies that the sensitivitybandwidth product S imp x ∆ω is power-independent, as observed in Figs. For accelerometers utilizing a rigid-body test mass (a 1D mass on a spring), base acceleration a(t) leads to a spring compression x following the equation of motion. By contrast, deformation of a membrane in response to base acceleration depends on its mode-shape. To see this, consider a membrane in the y-z plane subject to an acceleration field a(y, z, t) in the x direction. This is equivalent to driving each differential mass element in the membrane with a force dF = adm = a(x, y)ρhdxdy, where ρ is the mass density and h is the membrane thickness. Neglecting dissipation, the membrane displacement profile u(x, y, t) then obeys the equation of motion where σ is the biaxial stress. Eq. 14 can be solved by first considering homogeneous (a = 0) solutions of the form u(x, y, t) = φ(x, y)η(t) (15a) These are vibrational modes with shapes φ(x, y) and frequencies ω. For a square membrane of width L, e.g. Now assume a general solution to ( Invoking orthoganility of the mode shapes gives where is the generalized acceleration of mode ij. For an acceleration field with a constant shape a(x, y, t) = φ a (x, y)a(t), Eq. 19 simplifies to where is the modal "participation" factor. Base acceleration corresponds to a uniform (φ a = 1) acceleration field. In this case, for a square membrane For the fundamental mode of trampoline with vanishingly narrow tethers and a pad width much smaller than the tether length (approximating our device, shown in Fig. Thermal motion can be modeled by adding ad-hoc damping and Langevin terms to where Here γ ij is a phenomenological damping rate and m ij is an effective mass defined such that η ij (t For a square membrane, for example, where m phys is the physical mass. For the fundamental mode of trampoline with vanishingly narrow tethers and a pad width much smaller than the tether length (approximating our device, shown in Fig. In practice we measure an effective displacement x(t) = φ x (x, y)u(x, y, t)dxdy (27 where φ x (x, y) is the point-spread function of the measurement apparatus. Modal decomposition gives with x ij representing the effective displacement of each mode. The equation of motion for which includes an extra overlap factor α ij . For a homogeneous square membrane probed at its midpoint φ x (x, y) = δ(x -L/2)δ(y -L/2), e.g. For the fundamental mode of trampoline with vanishingly narrow tethers and a pad width much smaller than the tether length (approximating our device, shown in Fig. In this section, we derive susceptibility of the dualmembrane system to chip acceleration. Following Sec. III and Fig. leading to the transfer function where a(ω) = -ω 2 y(ω) is the base (chip) acceleration and χ i (ω) is the acceleration susceptibility of each membrane. The relative susceptibility determines the differential displacement of the dualmembrane system when the base is accelerated. The various acceleration susceptibilities for our "trampoline on membrane" (TOM) device are plotted in Figures 1 and 2. Note that, since the square membrane (i = 2) is stiffer than the trampoline (i = 1), then χ(ω ω 2 ) ≈ χ 1 (ω). As shown in Fig. can be used to infer |χ(ω)|, as shown in Figure In this section, we derive the uncertainty involved in estimating accelerations by resonant detection. In essence, the "resolution" of the measurement is determined by the variance in the energy estimate obtained by integrating the area under the resonance peak In thermally limited displacement-based accelerometers, the smallest resolvable acceleration is set by the imprecision in estimating the thermal noise. The thermal energy U = x 2 can be estimated from the oscillator's (double-sided) power spectral density (PSD), from the area under the thermally driven resonance peak gives the average potential energy imparted by the thermal process The final equality derives from the equipartition of energy in thermal equilibrium. Note that x is a zero-mean Gaussian with variance x 2 , which makes U a χ 2 distribution. The variance of U , ∆U , is the 4th central moment of x, which may be calculated using the standard method for Gaussian probability densities. Alternately, using thermodynamic identities, where kBT . The goal is to reduce this variance by increasing the sample-size of the energy estimatethe PSD-area. In practice, the PSD is approximated by a periodogram estimate, obtained by averaging the displacement read-out signal x(t) over a finite integration time, τ . The resulting energy estimate is, Note that the estimator U (τ ) is unbiased, since (40) where we have used ergodicity to exchange the ensemble and time-averages (second equality) and to assert that the variance of x(t) is independent of t in thermal equilibrium (final step). Finally, the imprecision in thermal energy estimation is simply the variance in the estimator, σ 2 U (τ ) ≡ ∆U 2 (τ ) . We find that: using the ergodic assumption in the last step. Correlations in energy would decay at the damping rate γ, given by which ensures that, at any t = t, ∆U (t)∆U (t ) = ∆U 2 = 2 U 2 which is the variance in the potential energy for Gaussian thermal noise (Eq. 38), as expected. The exponentially decaying autocorrelation (Eq. 42) in conjunction with Eq. 41, yields the energy imprecision: (43) As a sanity check, consider the limit τ → 0: the bracked term [. . .] → 1 on the RHS of Eq. 43, yielding ∆U 2 (τ ) → 2 U 2 . This is consistent with the expected energy variance (Eq. 38), when variancereduction by averaging is not available (sample size is unity). Finally, we note that Eq. 43 is consistent with the estimation uncertainty reported by Gavartin et. al. In this work, we have focused on the τ 1/γ regime, where σ 2 U (τ ) ∝ (γτ ) -1/2 . While time averaging improves the estimate of incoherent accelerations, long-term instabilities or drifts in the physical experimental parameters and controls limit the time over which averaging is beneficial. To explore the duration over which averaging leads to a reduction in the estimation uncertainty, we consider, as a function of averaging time, the Allan deviation (AD) of the thermal acceleration -a commonly used technique in the field of frequency metrology. AD obeys the same scaling as standard deviation, until the onset of long-term drift in the parameter of interest. As plotted in Figure [1] E. Gavartin, P. Verlot, and T. J. Kippenberg, A hybrid on-chip optomechanical transducer for ultrasensitive force measurements, Nature Nanotechnology 7, 509 (2012).