In this work we investigated adequacy of the Heisenberg model application to novel twodimensional magnetic materials, on an example of monolayer CrI3. We introduced the concept of the mean tensor invariant under symmetry operations of the magnetic structure, which allows the number of parameters of the anisotropic tensor Heisenberg model to be significantly reduced, while maintaining the compliance with the results of ab-initio calculations. We derived the expressions for fourth-order corrections to Heisenberg Hamiltonian and to Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction in the form of quartic symmetry invariants with minimal number of parameters. We tested the physical adequacy of such approach in the case of monolayer CrI3, utilizing an alternative to four-states energy mapping -the all-parameters least square fit. Discovery of ferromagnetism in a single monolayer of CrI 3 in 2017 Magnetic anisotropy in single layers of ferromagnetic materials usually favors the out-of-plane orientation of magnetic moments, such as in CrI 3 . The Hamiltonian describing single layers of CrI 3 and other 2D ferromagnetic systems should contain terms describing exchange coupling and magnetic anisotropy. In materials having the inversion center between nearest-neighbors spin sites (e.g. Cr ions in CrI 3 layers) anisotropy could not connected with the Dzyaloshinski-Moriya interaction (DMI), but may be related with anisotropic symmetric superexchange, and in CrI 3 results mainly from the spin-orbit coupling on iodine atoms Some of the 2D magnets were also analyzed in the first approximation using the Ising model of magnetism. However, this model is strictly correct only within the limit of the infinite single-ion anisotropy and provides only an upper bound for the critical temperature. Due to the fact that the local magnetic moments on Cr ions in CrI 3 do not exhibit strong single ion anisotropy, a simple application of Ising model overestimates the Curie temperature for this material by a factor of three There is some controversy, which terms of magnetic interactions are most important in 2D materials. According to To understand the mechanism of the exchange interaction and the sources of the magnetic anisotropy in 2D materials it is desirable to develop reliable effective models, and to provide methods for the determination of parameters of their respective Hamitonians. The parameters of these models can be determined from ab-initio calculations performed for different magnetic configurations of 2D crystals with a few magnetic moments in the unit cell, then mapping ab-initio energies to a specific effective Heisenberg Hamiltonian. Such effective models would enable subsequent studies for larger systems and for finite temperatures, which are prohibitive by ab-initio calculations alone. In the present paper, the number of the parameters in the effective Heisenberg Hamiltonian has been significantly decreased by analyzing the symmetry properties of the crystallographic spin structure described by the hexagonal lattice (such as in CrI 3 ). For the 4th-order tensor in the Hamiltonian the number of parameters could be limited to 5 for both the symmetric and antisymmetric parts, and assuming more strict SO(2) invariance condition, the number of parameters is reduced to only 3. The values of parameters occurring in the symmetric part of Hamiltonian are determined for the single CrI 3 monolayer by least-squares linear fit taking as input the results of 148 converged ab-initio calculations. The numerical procedure we applied yield low energy errors, therefore it can be used to reliably determine magnetic properties of 2D materials. A recent alternative approach for construction of effective spin Hamiltonian models was proposed in In sections II-V of this paper, the effective Heisenberg Hamiltonian for two-dimensional crystals with hexagonal lattices is analyzed. By applying the symmetry properties of the system, formulas were derived connecting elements of 2nd and 4th order tensors related to the effective Hamiltonian with several parameters. In section VI the results of ab-initio calculations performed for CrI 3 monolayers are presented. Section VII presents the mapping of the results of these calculation on the effective Hamiltonian together with the obtained estimation of its parameters for CrI 3 . The conclusions are set out in section VIII. Classical Heisenberg model from the phenomenological point of view corresponds to the lowest non-zero quadratic term of the formal series expansion of a general magnetic Hamiltonian for a system composed of n classical magnetic moments: where is a dimensionless vector of magnetic moment reduced to unit length 1 , which we will call "spin vector". Ĵ(ij) are 3 × 3 matrices of coefficients of interaction between spin vectors S i and S j . Due to the action of time-reversal operator T : condition of time-reversal invariance requires that only even power terms should appear in the series depends on a single 3 × 3 general matrix Ĵ, which can always be decomposed into symmetric and antisymmetric parts: where 1 Some authors prefer to multiply S by a numerical factor, e.g. when μ = 3 Bohr magnetons they multiply S by 3 2 , in analogy to quantum spin- 3 2 . This leads to trivial scaling of Ĵ matrix by The symmetric part has 6 independent parameters, and the antisymmetric part has 3 independent parameters and the resulting Hamiltonian is usually written in vectorial form of Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction (DMI): where D = (D 1 , D 2 , D 3 ) is a pseudo-vector, i.e. it should change sign when two spins are exchanged in order to yield the Hamiltonian invariant under the permutation of spin vectors. We consider two-dimensional magnetic crystals with atoms ordered in the hexagonal lattice. Hamiltonian of the interaction of a given spin S 1 with its three nearest neighbors S 2 , S 3 and S 4 (see Fig. where R = R z (2π/3) is the rotation around z-axis by 2π/3, and R3 = 1. If we place the axis of rotation at atom with spin vector S 1 , rotation R not only act on spin vectors by also permutes spin-vectors at three neighboring atoms. R is the generator of the group C 3 = { 1, R, R2 }, which is the lowest symmetry group for a two-dimensional crystal based on hexagonal lattice. Assuming that each of the two-spin interactions is described by Eq. ( Eq. ( Therefore, interaction of each pair of spin vectors is described by matrices of coefficients Ĵ′ and Ĵ′′ which are related to matrix Ĵ by similarity transformation (rotation): For an example of application of this method to magnetic CrI 3 monolayer see In the phenomenological approach these parameters are not determined from first-principles, they merely serve as arbitrary degrees of freedom for fitting a given Hamiltonian model to the results of ab-initio calculations of magnetic energy E( S 1 , . . . , S n ). Therefore, for a trustworthy and physically meaningful phenomenological model the less the number of independent parameters is the better. The number of independent parameters can be significantly lowered by assuming more strict invariance condition than This condition of invariance of two spin interaction formally follows from then from Eq. ( where The mean tensor Ĵm is invariant under rotations The condition Symmetric tensor J ij = J ji invariant under R z (2π/3) has only two independent components. Hamiltonian built from this tensor describes the well-known anisotropic exchange interaction, where in the following we will utilize simplified single index notation for independent components, in this case Validity of Eq. ( Antisymmetric tensor J ij = -J ji invariant under R z (2π/3) has only one independent component. Hamiltonian built from this tensor: describes the DMI interaction (9) with single non-zero out-of plane component of interaction vector D = (0, 0, J 1 ). DMI interaction may exist only when the inversion symmetry is broken, e.g. for magnetic CrI 3 monolayer with applied external electric field can be reduced to simpler form using the condition and setting A = A 2 -A 1 for a single anisotropy constant: Fourth-order Hamiltonian for interaction of two spins S 1 and S 2 built from 4th-order general tensor K ijkl , has the following form If we assume that magnetic interaction is invariant under permutation of spin vectors: and noting that permutation of individual components of spin S 1 or S 2 does not change the sum in equation ( where (ijkl) is any permutation of four Cartesian indices. Full-permutational invariant 4th-order tensor has 15 independent components. We can further reduce the number of independent components (parameters of the Hamiltonian) by applying condition which, valid for any spin vectors S 1 and S 2 , leads to the invariance condition for the K ijkl tensor itself where R ij is an orthogonal 3 × 3 matrix representing the action of symmetry operator R in three-dimensional space. Application of C 3 symmetry, i.e. the lowest symmetry for a hexagonal lattice, results in Hamiltonian ( Each of the five terms of this Hamiltonian is invariant under action of symmetry operator R z (2π/3), and does not change under the permutation of spin vectors S 1 ↔ S 2 . We can further reduce number of parameters of 4th-order Hamiltonian (25) by assuming more strict invariance under group SO(2) of all rotations around z-axis by any angle α. Discrete group C 3 describes the lowest symmetry of an atomic hexagonal lattice. The continuous symmetry of a two-dimensional plane perpendicular to the z-axis neglects the details of any atomic structure of the magnetic crystal. This assumption is analogous to that of the SO(3) group invariance of Heisenberg Hamiltonian for bulk crystals, from which follows that the magnetic interaction of two spins S 1 and S 2 should be proportional to even powers of the scalar product S 1 • S 2 , which is invariant under any rotations in three-dimensional space Application of SO(2)-invariance to 2nd-order Hamiltonians ( Let us consider now the extension of Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction to 4th-order terms based on general expression However, now we assume that it is antisymmetric under permutation of spin vectors S 1 ↔ S 2 . Tensor K ijkl fulfilling conditions (32) and (33) has 15 independent components. If we add invariance condition Each term of this Hamiltonian is invariant under rotation by 2π/3 around z-axis and changes sign under permutation of spin vectors. More strict condition of SO(2)-invariance reduces the number of independent parameters of 4th-order DMI Hamiltonian to only three. The resulting Hamiltonian which consists of a linear combination of three quartic terms has the following form: and may be obtained from (34) by setting K 3 = K 4 = 0 and renaming K 5 to K 3 . Hamiltonian (35) may be written in the coordinate-independent vectorial form: by introduction of in-plane || and out-of plane ⊥ parts of scalar and vector products: and by redefinition of Hamiltonian parameters: K 2 → -2K 3 , K 3 → -4K 3 . Eq. ( The 4th-order correction to magnetocrystalline anisotropy can be built from fully symmetric 4th-order tensor B ijkl = B (ijkl) in an analogy to Eq. ( , where R = R z (2π/3) leads to the following Hamiltonian with five independent parameters: Utilizing the condition where B = B 1 -6B 4 + B 5 . SO(2)-invariant 4th-order magnetocrystalline anisotropy after the same manipulations could be reduced to much simpler form containing only one quartic term BS 4 z . Recently, CrI 3 has become a canonical system for exploring magnetism in 2D, since it was one of the very first 2D magnets discovered, with a decent Curie temperature equal to 45 K Magnetic anisotropy energy (MAE) is defined as the difference between the total energies corresponding to the magnetization in the off-plane and in-plane directions According to To test the versatility of our model, we conducted a series of ab-initio calculations for the CrI 3 monolayer. We used the Density Functional Theory (DFT), as implemented in the VASP code The magnetic ground state of CrI 3 is the ferromagnetic (FM) one, while the antiferromagnetic (AFM) configuration exhibits energy higher by 42.32 meV (for U = 0 eV). The MAE was determined as equal to -1.48 meV for U = 0 eV and -1.70 meV for U = 3.5 eV. This is in agreement with Applicability of the Heisenberg model is based on energy dependence on angles between spins in the form of a continuous (θ, φ) dependence, so to fit the model, one needs a dense grid of data. We prepared 250 starting configurations, with the direction of magnetic moments on Cr atoms distributed randomly on the unit sphere. For U = 0 eV, we obtained 245 converged cases, while for U = 3.5 eV we got 148 cases. Despite setting the initial values of magnetic moments on I atoms as zero, non-zero values of these moments are obtained in the final converged magnetic configurations. Magnetic moments on iodine are always directed anti-parallel to the magnetic moments on the Cr atoms. The total magnetic moment on iodine atoms per unit cell vs the total moment on chromium atoms is presented in Fig. which is the sum of H MCA quadratic (24) magnetocrystalline anisotropy with single parameter A two magnetic moments in the unit cell, quadratic anisotropic exchange H (2) given by Eq. ( (2) quartic deliver enough free parameters to obtain a good fit. We apply the linear least-squares method to fit all nine parameters at once to the results of 148 converged ab-initio calculations with U = 3.5 eV. We believe that this procedure is superior to that of the four-states energy mapping method In case of four-states energy mapping approach: 1) one only takes a few selected configurations, usually only inplane or out-of plane, to determined value of each single exchange parameter, assuming without proof that Heisenberg model works for any angle between spin vectors. 2) Because one solves N = 4 equations with N = 4 parameters the solution is exact, however there is no indication of uncertainty of obtained numerical values. Least-squares method yields the values of C 3 -invariant Hamiltonian parameters Our results indicate that fourth-order corrections to anisotropic Heisenberg Hamiltonian are important to precisely describe the energy of magnetic configurations of two-dimensional magnetic We believe that the SO(2) symmetry generates the correct phenomenological description of magnetic structures suitable for application to diverse two-dimensional materials. In conjunction with the idea of mean invariant tensor it allows to reduce the number of parameters of the model to the minimum. The method of global least-squares fit to determine values offers an advantage over four-state energy mapping, supplying the estimate of systematic energy errors, and allowing for verification of adequacy of Heisenberg model for arbitrary spin configurations. The results of our work could be extended and applied to two-dimensional Janus magnetic materials We use the Einstein summation convention for Cartesian indices We omit non-magnetic energy E 0 .