Microstrip patch antennas are low-profile and robust when mounted on rigid surfaces of the devices making them suitable for communication and millimeter-wave applications. In this paper, an antenna is designed for the resonant frequency of 170 GHz using microstrip technology concerning its miniaturization and cost-effectiveness. The designed antenna is a part of a stray radiation detection system for ECE diagnostic to be installed on fusion research machine ITER. It offers low-directivity to receive radiation from all directions, high bandwidth, low side-lobe-level and return loss of -50 dB, leading to its remarkable utilization in the detection system being designed to protect millimeter wave components of ITER ECE Diagnostic. Power-handling and power-capturing capability of the designed antenna have also been discussed in the paper. Far-field simulations have been performed using CST Microwave Studio software to study the radiation characteristics of the designed antenna. Microstrip antennas have various advantages over other conventional antenna techniques due to their simple configuration. They are low-profile (i.e. small height and width), compatible with MMIC designs, quite simple and cheap to manufacture via printed-circuit technology and mechanically robust when placed on rigid surfaces The Electron Cyclotron Emission (ECE) diagnostic system on ITER will provide plasma electron temperature profile and electron temperature fluctuations with high spatial and temporal resolution These stray radiations are generated due to Electron Cyclotron Resonance Heating (ECRH) wave frequency of 170 GHz utilized for plasma heating and current drive inside the vacuum vessel Section II describes the analytical expressions and selection criteria for the characteristic design parameters of the microstrip antenna. These formulas will provide a good estimate of the antenna dimensions intended for millimeter wavelength. The final design of an antenna array is described in Section III. Comparative calculations for the power handling capacity of the individual and array antenna are presented in Section IV. In Section V, simulation results of the antenna are discussed. Our conclusions are reported in Section VI, highlighting the importance of the designed antenna and scope of future work. The microstrip patch antenna is a single-layer design consisting of four main parts: (i) Patch; (ii) Substrate; (iii) ground plane; (iv) feeding part. Interestingly, one can design microstrip antennas for specific resonant frequency, impedance and radiation patterns merely by modifying their dimensions. This feature makes it the best fit for our required application. However, each of these components need to be designed carefully as discussed below: A patch can be of any shape, but the rectangular shape is usually preferred due to its easy fabrication and simple analyses, avoiding complex numerical computations. Considering λ 0 = 1.76mm as the free-space incident wavelength, the patch length (L p ) and its thickness (t) should be in the range and t ≪ λ 0 , respectively, for better antenna performance. In patch antenna design, the substrate is primarily required to offer mechanical support and spacing between the ground plane and patch. The dielectric constant of the substrate material can alter the electrical performance of the antenna and impedance of transmission line. Therefore, it should be chosen in the range 12 > ε > 2.2. For efficient radiation generation, low ε material is preferred as it enhances the fringe fields that account for the radiation. Furthermore, several quantities must be parameterized for a specific design, such as loss tangent, temperature effects, surface wave excitation, dielectric dispersion, weight, elasticity and cost. Substrates with a higher thickness (h) and a high dielectric constant result in smaller bandwidths and lower efficiencies due to the possibility of surface-wave excitation. Hence, it is convenient to keep the height of the substrate in the range of 0.01λ 0 ≤ h ≤ 0.05λ 0 for the significant elimination of multiple surface waves. To overcome some of the problems of thin antenna elements (such as low power handling capability) without unduly sacrificing their principal advantages, they can be built on thick substrates. In this paper, Rogers RO3003 having dielectric constant 3.0, loss factor tanδ = 0.001 (on 10GHz) and h = 0.254mm is chosen as the substrate material to meet our requirements. The patch material used in CST MWS Studio is Copper. The considered Rogers RO3003 high frequency laminates are ceramic-filled PTFE composites for use in printed circuit boards in commercial microwave and RF applications. Its operating frequency range is 30-190GHz. As we are interested in measuring the radiated power, all the results for antenna parameters are evaluated in the far-field region determined by the inner boundary distance s ≥ 2D 2 λ 0 where, D = 0.6239 mm is the largest antenna dimension. It gives the far-field distance as ~ 0.44 mm, which is exactly the distance used in simulation. For the analysis of the microstrip antenna, the transmission line method is used for better physical understanding. In this method, the antenna structure is treated as two slots separated by a transmission line. For clarity, the rectangular patch parameters are represented in Fig. Once these parameters are fixed, the practical width and length of the patch W p and L p are determined by using the following expressions: where ∆L p is the extended length, originated due to fringing effect (i.e., the field lines at the edges of patch undergo fringing) and having dependence on the resonant frequency, as and, ε eff is the effective dielectric constant, which accounts for fringing and wave propagation in the feedline defined as Most of the fringing field lines reside in the substrate such that ε eff ≈ ε . The length and width of the ground plane is determined by using the relation L g = 6h + L p and W g = 6h + W p , respectively. While designing an antenna, it is necessary to carefully configure the feeding lines in order to prevent impedance mismatching. In other words, antenna parameters need to be optimized by selecting the proper feeding technique and their feed location. The microstrip-line feed technique offers better reliability, ease of fabrication and good polarization purity over other techniques such as coaxial, aperture-coupled, proximity-coupled feed etc. It is etched on the same substrate as that of the patch, providing a planar structure. The width of this microstrip feedline (W f ) is related to its characteristic impedance such that Microstrip feedline acts as a dispersive transmission line above a critical frequency f c ≥ 0.3√ ), where h is in cm. The dispersion in the dielectric constant is given by ε e (f) = For our antenna design, inset-fed microstrip feed is opted, which has advantages of overcoming narrow-bandwidth constraints and capturing more signals with improved accuracy. In the inset feeding technique, it is preferred to have the feeding location at a certain distance x 0 from the edge of the patch towards the center, in order to overcome resonant input resistance. The feeding point can be calculated using the relation where G r is the conductance given as Using above Eqs. (1) -( Design parameters evaluated for a single patch element. Operating frequency (f ) 170 GHz Thickness (h) 0.254 mm Length of Patch (L P ) 0.3 mm Width of Patch (W p ) 0.6239 mm Cut Width (g) 0.1 mm Cut Depth (x 0 ) 0.101 mm Feed Length (L f ) 0.355 mm Feed Width (W f ) 0.063 mm The main characteristics required for our system are wide-angle reception and better power handling capability. Conventional methods used for large apertures are bulky and complicate the design unnecessarily. Antenna array technology entails N number of small-aperture identical antenna elements, exclusively positioned according to their functionality. Therefore, the array provides a large aperture, which makes it proficient to detect extremely weak signals from distant sources with improved gain and radiation pattern compared to a single antenna patch, as shown in Fig. The maximum effective aperture of an antenna is defined as G 0r where, G 0r is the receiving antenna gain. Using the Friis-Transmission equation, the power collected by the receiving antenna is calculated using the following expression where P t is the input power of the source and R is the distance between source and antenna. For isotropic sources, G 0t = 1. And ( λ 0 ) 2 is a free-space loss factor that considers the losses due to the spherical spreading of the energy by the antenna. Equation ( The rise in temperature, (i.e., the difference between the maximum operating temperature for substrate (T max ) and ambient temperature (T amb )) may determine the average power handling capability (APHC) of a system as Here, temperature gradient (∆T) is the total density of heat flow, having units C/W 0 , associated with conductor (α c ) and dielectric (α d ) losses, which are defined as follows α d = 27. The conductivity of the strip conductor is taken as σ = 5.8 × 10 4 S/mm whereas the thermal conductivity (K) of dielectric RO3003 is 0.5W/K/m. W e (0) and W ′ are static and effective width and can be evaluated using W e (0) = W p + t π (1 + ln ( Impedance matching always ensures the maximum power transfer between the source and the load. Hence, a noble matching circuit is required for a specific design ensuring its better performance. The corporate feed network can use either a quarter-wave transformer or a stub to match patch element impedance to standard 50-ohm input impedance. The preferences mentioned above for our design are configured in Fig. The performance of an antenna is usually measured in terms of gain and its relative 3D radiation pattern. The radiation pattern is represented by polar plots as shown in Fig. The major difference in both the configuration, i.e., stub and quarter-wave transformer, can be noted in Fig. The power supplied to the system generally dispenses into surface-wave excitation, radiation emission and conductor and dielectric dissipation. Radiation efficiency is defined as the ratio of power radiated to the power inserted into the antenna system which is plotted in Fig. Comparison between individual antenna patch and antenna array with two configurations. A 2 × 2 microstrip antenna array has been designed and simulated successfully for the resonant frequency of 170 GHz using CST Microwave Studio software. The dominance of the antenna array over the individual patch has been proved while investigating their properties and power handling capabilities. However, continuous increment in the number of patches of an antenna array enhances its directivity further and decreases its angular width. Hence, the 2 × 2 antenna geometry reasonably satisfies our desired requirements. Significant properties of the designed system such as S-parameter, VSWR, gain, beamwidth, side-lobe level, efficiency have been estimated and discussed. A comparative study of the two matching circuits, i.e., stub and quarterwave transformer, have also been performed. The designed system's power-handling capability is also evaluated to check its reliability. At resonant frequency 170 GHz, the return loss is -50 dB, angular width is 70.5 0 and the gain is 8.6dBi for the designed antenna. The simulation results show that the designed system fulfills required characteristics and is recommended for high-frequency detector applications. The future work is to design a detector system for application in ECE diagnostic components protection, utilizing this designed antenna.