Topological Dirac semimetals (TDSM), such as Cd 3 As 2 and Na 3 Bi, exhibits strong optical dichroism with contrasting dielectric permittivity along different crystal axes. However, such optical dichroism is often overlooked in the study of TDSM-based optoelectronic devices, and whether such optical dichroism can lead to unique functionalities not found under the isotropic approximation remain an open question thus far. Here we show that the optical dischroism in TDSM lead to starkly different terahertz (THz) responses and device performance as compared to the isotropic case. Using finite-difference time-domain simulations of a Cd 3 As 2 -based metasurface, we demonstrate that such optical dichroism can lead to an unexpected THz wave polarization conversion even if the metasurface structure remains C 4 four-fold rotationally symmetric, a practically useful feature not achievable under the isotropic model of TDSM. Our findings concretely reveal the contrasting spectral response between isotropic and anisotropic media, and shed important light on the capability of anisotropic TDSM in THz applications, leading not just to the more accurate device modelling, but also a new route in realizing THz waves polarization conversion without the need of complex device morphology commonly employed in conventional polarization converters. Three-dimensional (3D) topological Dirac semimetals (TDSM) represents peculiar 3D analogs of graphene whose electronic band structure around the Fermi level disperses linearly in all three orthogonal crystal directions. Being a 3D bulk material with an additional spatial degree of freedom, TDSM is expected to offer greater device design flexibility not found in the atomically-thin graphene sheet while retaining the exotic physical properties of Dirac material systems. 3D TDSMs, such as Cd 3 As 2 and Na 3 Bi, has been demonstrated to exhibit myriads of unusual transport and optical properties, such as giant magnetoresistance TDSM is particularly attractive for nanophotonics applications In this work, we address the above questions by performing a proof-of-concept device simulations of Cd 3 As 2based TDSM metasurface by explicitly taking into account the optical anisotropy of Cd 3 As 2 crystal. We demonstrate that the far-field transmission spectra and the near-field electric field distributions (EFDs) are drastically different between the isotropic and the anisotropic TDSM model. Intriguingly, under the more realistic anisotropic TDSM model, a highly-symmetric C 4 patterns can readily generate THz wave polarization conversion -a peculiar behavior not achievable under the simplistic isotropic materials. These findings reveal a viable route to achieve efficient polarization conversion of THz waves with simple symmetric structures by harnessing the inherent optical dichroism of TDSM, thus circumventing the need of fabricating complex chiral sturctures We consider square arrays of Cd 3 As 2 with a relative permittivity ε, thickness of 0.5 μm [see Fig. The optical anisotropy of Cd 3 As 2 is modelled based on a previously developed optical conductivity model obtained from Kubo formula where g = 4 is the degeneracy factor, i = x, y, z denotes the three orthogonal lattice directions, is the inverse thermal energy, and T = 300 K at room temperature and the scattering time constant is assumed to be τ ≈ 450 fs. The permittivity can be calculated as ε ii (ω) = 1+iσ tot ii (ω)/ω p,i 0 , where 0 is the permittivity of free space, and σ tot ii (ω) ≡ σ intra ii (ω)+ σ inter ii (ω). For Cd 3 As 2 , the Fermi velocity parameter is highly anisotropic (v x , v y , v z ) = (1.28, 1.30, 0.33) × 10 6 m/s. In this case, the permittivity exhibits a strong directional dependence with ε xx = ε yy = ε zz in general. To highlight the significance of optical anisotropy of TDSM, we also perform benchmark studies using the isotropic optical model of TDSM In symmetric structure with isotropic materials, superradiant or bright modes couple strongly to the incident field, producing broad and lossy resonances. In the presence of geometrical asymmetry, sub-radiant or dark modes can be excited. These dark mode resonances couple weakly to the free space and lead to high values of quality factor (Q-factor). Fano-type resonance caused by symmetry breaking can result in an asymmetric spectral profile. In relevance to this, we first focus on the optical response of Cd 3 As 2 metasurface outlined in Fig. the device performance characteristics outlined in Table To gain an understanding on how different polarization angles can influence the transmission intensity and spectra position, the optical response at varying φ is calculated. We calculate the transmission spectra of the system at several polarization angles ranging from φ = 0 • to φ = 90 • with 10 • steps. Two different processes are responsible for the observed variation in transmission spectra shown in Fig. The φ-tunable symmetric-to-antisymmetric mode transition reveals an intriguing behavior of optically anisotropic TDSM metasurface. The transmitted electromagnetic waves can be dramatically modulated by changing the polarization angle of a linearly polarized incident wave even though the metausrface is composed of highly symmetric square lattices. This behavior is a direct consequence of the optical dichoism of Cd 3 As 2 and is completely missed out in the simplistic isotropic optical conductivity model of TDSM. The occurrence of highly asymmetric spectra response from a highly symmetric structure reveals the potential of Cd 3 As 2 -an optically anisotropic TDSM -in achieving efficient polarization conversion without involving complex chiral or supercell structures that are challenging to fabricate experimentally. At normal incidence, the incident electric field can be represented by -→ E in = (E x x + E y ŷ)e i(ωz/c) , where E x and E y are the electric field components along the x and y directions, respectively. After traversing a high-symmetry structure and isotropic system, the transmitted electric field becomes -→ E t iso = t(E x x + E y ŷ)e i(ωz/c+ωt) , where t is the transmission coefficient, and the transmitted electric field is insensitive to the relative contributions between E x and E y for a given incident wave. In contrast, for an anisotropic system with ε xx = ε yy = ε zz , the transmission coefficients are different for incident waves polarized along the x and y directions. The transmitted electric field becomes -→ E t aniso = (t x E x x + t y E y ŷ)e i(ωz/c+ωt) with directional-dependent transmission coefficients, t x and t y . As t x = t y in general, the relative composition of E x and E y of the incident wave can dramatically modulates the transmitted wave. As demonstrated below, the optical anisotropy of TDSM can be readily harnessed to achieve linear-to-circular polarization conversion of an incident THz wave -a behavior not achievable under the isotropic model of TDSM. The phase and amplitude play a crucial role in determining the polarization state of the transmitted wave. To characterize the polarization conversion operation of TDSM, we calculate the phase and amplitude of the transmission spectra in Fig. Apart from linear-to-circular polarization conversion, linear-to-elliptical polarization conversion can also be achieved under the conditions of ∆φ = nπ/2 but with T xx = T yy . Multiple of such operating frequencies are identified as labelled by the red circles in Figs. In conclusion, we reported the optical response and polarization conversion operation of a C 4 symmetric metasurface composed of Cd 3 As 2 square lattices. By explicitly taking into account the optical dichroism of Cd 3 As 2 using an optical conductivity model obtained from the Kubo formula request.