In solid state physics, any symmetry breaking is known to be associated with emergence of an order parameter. However, the order parameter for molecular and crystal chirality, which is a consequence of parity and mirror symmetry breaking, has not been known since its discovery. In this article, the authors show that the order parameter for chirality can be defined by electric toroidal monopole GG 0 . By this definition, one becomes able to discuss external filed that can distinguish two different enantiomers only by physical fields. In addition, dynamics and fluctuations of the order parameter GG 0 can be discussed, with which one can obtain fruitful insights on a spin filtering effect called CISS (Chirality Induced Spin Selectivity). Emergence of time-reversal-odd dipole MM zz by time propagation of GG 0 quantities is discussed to explain the enantioselective effect (chiral resolution) at a ferromagnetic surface. CISS (Chirality Induced Spin Selectivity), an electron's spin-filtering effect by a chiral molecule Historically, in early 19th century, Arago and then Biot discovered the phenomena of natural optical activity (NOA). Later, in 1848, Pasteur ascertained that the NOA is a direct consequence of molecular or crystal asymmetry. In 1894, Lord Kelvin, in his Boyle Lecture In this short review, we try to describe the details of chiral symmetry breaking in terms of quantum mechanics with a knowledge of solid state physics, because the symmetry breaking is one of the central concepts for this field so that the methodology is well established. Through this method, we redefine the chirality in terms of the rank-zero multipole (monopole) basis. This new definition leads to unambiguous notion of structural chirality as well as enantioselective fields. Following this argument, we also discuss recent proposals on the microscopic mechanism of the CISS phenomena. As has been introduced in the previous section, chirality refers to an existence of two objects, called enantiomers, which are interconnected by mirror operation but cannot overlap one another. This definition of chirality is empirically natural, but it is ambiguous for chiral objects in discrete point groups at quantum mechanical level (here, we use the term "chiral objects" to refer to molecules and crystals possessing chirality). In order to establish a concrete description for such microscopic chiral objects, we then develop a proper representation scheme based on the concept of electronic multipoles. The concrete description of chirality in an appropriate basis will also lead to the discussion of physical fields in the next section that can recognize the handedness of chiral objects, which should be called "enantioselective fields". In the continuous SO(3) rotational group with inversion operation, parity (inversion) symmetry breaking is identical to mirror symmetry breaking. The situation becomes complicated when point groups, or subgroups of SO(3), are considered in order to express chirality of fixed molecules and crystals. In such a case, the inversion and mirror symmetries are independent, and even NOA can no more be as unique signature of chirality. It is important, however, to point out that none of the inversion or mirror symmetries exist for chiral point groups. Namely, the chiral point groups consist of purely rotational symmetry operations. At the same time, the difference between polar, weak and strong gyrotropic (WG and SG), and chiral point groups appear within non-centrosymmetric point groups having no inversion symmetry operation (Table The difference between chiral and other point groups must reflect in the character of their wave function and associated electronic degrees of freedom. To extract the specific character of the wave function, it is useful to express any electronic degrees of freedom in terms of the complete symmetry-adapted (multipole) basis set. For instance, the presence of the electric dipole moment discriminates a polar wave function from non-polar ones. Such a description can be generalized to any point groups, in which a proper multipole moment can distinguish different symmetry of wave functions as shown in Fig. In this way, any wave functions under particular point group with or without TRS breaking are represented by the active moment of four type of electronic multipoles, i.e., electric (QQ), magnetic (MM), electric toroidal (GG), and magnetic toroidal (TT) multipoles, whose properties are summarized in Table Now the difference between chiral and other point groups is evident. For example, the NOA active objects are characterized either by the electric toroidal quadrupole or monopole as shown in the column SG (strong-gyrotropic) in Table Although the explicit treatment of GG 0 associated with specific wave functions of chiral objects depends on the molecules and crystals in question, a systematic prescription to compute the active multipole moments have been developed recently and is straightforwardly applied to any molecules and crystals. A typical example of the elemental Tellurium is found in ref. It should be also pointed out that although the electric toroidal monopole, GG 0 , seems to be featureless, it has indeed an internal structure. This observation makes us extend the concept of chirality to various states of matters. For example, the helicity kk • σσ has propagating momentum k and its spin angular momentum σ along k. Since k is TTodd polar vector, and σ is TT-odd axial vector, their scalar product is regarded as GG 0 . Another example is the monoaxial chiral helimagnetic order along z axis. The energy gain of the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya (DM) interaction due to this ordering is given by DD • (SS × ∇ zz SS). Since DD is TT-even axial DM vector, and (SS × ∇ zz SS) is TT-even polar vector, their product is also regarded as GG 0 . In general, GG 0 can be decomposed into QQ aa • (QQ bb × QQ cc ), QQ • (MM aa × MM bb ), and so on where QQ aa,bb,cc and MM aa,bb are the electric and magnetic dipoles, respectively. It is interesting to see, in a physical point of view, that such a structure indeed appears both in the Hamiltonian of Tellurium as a latticespin coupling, RR • (ll × σσ) Once the order parameter of chiral objects is identified, one can discuss its response to the external fields through the invariant coupling of the electric toroidal monopoles between objects and fields. Namely, there is an invariant coupling in the Hamiltonian with the form of where GG 0 (object) and GG 0 (field) represent the chiral order parameter of the object and its conjugate external field with the coupling strength, gg , respectively. From the energetics point of view, the external field ggGG 0 (field) with negative sign favors the positive sign of GG 0 (object), i.e., one handedness, while the opposite external field favors another handedness. Thus, the external field, ggGG 0 (field) is regarded as enantioselective field. It is important to note that the enantioselective fields can be made up from plural external sources as long as the symmetry of the combined fields coincides with that of the electric toroidal monopole, i.e., the TT-even pseudoscalar in the relevant point group as was discussed in the last part of the previous section. We will discuss several examples below. Note that any external fields without GG 0 (field) are orthogonal to GG 0 (object), so that no interaction is expected. One example of ggGG 0 (field) is electromagnetic field called Lipkin's Zilch ρχ, which is a signature of circularly polarized light. It is defined as where E and B are electric and magnetic fields of electromagnetic wave. Tang and Cohen have clearly shown that Zilch is proportional to the circular dichroism Using this table, one can confirm that the combinations of EE • (∇∇ × EE) and BB • (∇∇ × BB) have the same symmetry of GG 0 . Electrical magneto-chiral anisotropy (EMChA) is also understood as a conjugate GG 0 field. In other words, the scalar product of the electric current J and magnetic field B represents ggGG 0 (field) where HH PV ∝ {σσ • pp, δδ(rr)} is the parity-violated interaction Hamiltonian and HH SO ∝ σσ • ll is an electron spin-orbit coupling Hamiltonian. In this case, the quark-electron interaction plays a role of ggGG 0 (field) for the electron subsystem. It is important to notice that multipoles are mutually interchangeable, namely, the rotation operation (∇∇ ×) converts their parity, while the time integral/derivative alters their time-reversal property. For example, the electric current J is TT-odd, while accumulated charge as a result of current generates electric field E (TT-even). In this case, the time integral plays a role in converting magnetic toroidal dipole, TT, into electric one, Q according to Table Barron has discussed the connectivity between chirality and enantioselective field by proposing "true chirality" as TTeven PP-odd pseudoscalar He stressed an importance of this discrimination because absolute asymmetric synthesis is impossible with "falsely chiral" field at equilibrium of liquids (which corresponds to SO(3) in which any proper rotation is allowed). This is because the falsely chiral field cannot recognize, or cannot lift the degeneracy of, any chiral enantiomers in it. This is consistent with our understanding because MM 0 (field) cannot have any coupling with GG 0 (object) because of different symmetry in time domain. But at the same time, he discussed a possibility of absolute asymmetric synthesis from falsely chiral field with kinetic condition or inhomogeneous media. This possibility of absolute asymmetric synthesis by external field can be understood, in our point of view, by creating truly chiral field GG 0 (field) by applying time differential or time integration to a given falsely chiral field MM 0 (field). In real systems, sometimes TTeven and TT-odd components are mixed when the objects and/or fields are moving. Therefore, one needs to decompose the total response into GG 0 (object) and/or GG 0 (field) and other species to understand the essential role of chirality in a given phenomenon. Let us now discuss chirality recognition by CISS effect, which is an important extension of CISS to chemical application. Recently, Naaman and coworkers have reported separation of chiral molecules by magnetic substrate which is magnetized perpendicular to the surface In order to recognize chirality of the system at finite temperature, or in order to differentiate one enantiomer from the other, one needs to identify GG 0 (object) both in ground and excited states (including those materials such as selfassembled monolayer and solid state in case of CISS). In addition, the time integral or time derivative should be applied to the quantity of interest, if one thinks about dynamics (excited state or non-equilibrium state) of a given chiral system. In this particular case, it seems that GG 0 term in spin current (helicity of electron) can be transformed into metastable MM zz when spin reservoirs at molecular edges are assumed. Naaman has proposed antiparallel spin pair accumulated at two opposite ends of chiral molecule as shown in Fig Here, the authors point out that this antiparallel spin pair is composed of two magnetic dipoles MM zz and -MM zz which constitutes TT-odd monopole, MM 0 as a whole. Therefore, the connection between molecular chirality GG 0 and the TTodd monopole, MM 0 should be clarified. In this discussion, the authors recall attention to the relationship between TTodd and TT-even quantities. For example, according to Table Therefore, given that CISS effect exists in chiral molecules and that the molecule is moving around the surface of an ferromagnet, where E perpendicular to the surface exists because of contact potential (work function difference), the internal displacement current due to dielectric response will accumulate antiparallel spin polarization at two opposite ends of the molecule. Most importantly, inward/outward arrangement of this spin accumulation is governed by the handedness of the molecule because of the spin-momentum locking in chiral system. Therefore, either parallel (repulsive J) or anti-parallel (attractive -J) interaction is applied between chiral molecule and the substrate, depending on the handedness of the molecule as well as the magnetization direction of the substrate. In reality, all of E, B, dE/dt, and dB/dt exist in the present situation and any combination of those fields may come into play. But one is able to extract the interaction associated only to the chirality in the form of either ggGG 0 (field) • GG 0 (object) or JJMM zz (field) • MM zz (object) forms based on the discussion above. In the former case, the chiral molecule's GG 0 interacts with a chiral field (TT-even GG 0 (field)) that is generated by the combination of ferromagnetic spins (TT-odd ±MM zz ) and dEz/dt (TT-odd). In the latter case of interaction, magnetic exchange between the magnetic moment MM zz of ferromagnetic substrate interacts with accumulated spin MM zz at the edge of the chiral molecule. As a result, in both types of interpretations, this chirality-specific interaction will result in a chirality recognition and thus the enantio-separations reported in recent papers become possible. Fig. In this section, the authors discuss dynamics of GG 0 . The aim of this discussion is to identify the influence of chirality fluctuations. Another objective is to recall an attention to the stability of chiral and "enantiopure" states in terms of symmetry breaking. Both topics are coming from the tendency of nature to restore the original higher symmetry even after the symmetry breaking. Because the discovery of chirality was made with stable chemical species such as quartz and tartrate, it tends to be considered as a firm entity once the structure of enantiomer is established. However, if the energy barrier that separates the two enantiomers is comparable to or smaller than the environmental thermal energy, the enantiomers start to interconvert one another, which is called racemization. In this regard, an emergence of chirality, or GG 0 , is similar to phase transition where lowering the temperature results in symmetry breaking, although it is not a collective phenomenon. It is important to point out that GG 0 of chiral molecules and crystals is protected by double-well potential after symmetry breaking. In this sense, chirality can be redefined as GG 0 protected by energy barrier. Despite this protection, the tendency to the enantiomeric interconversion remains still active even with higher energy barrier when quantum tunneling and/or thermal excitation are considered. In the physics of phase transition, such a tendency is known to work as a fluctuation that try to recover higher symmetry even after the symmetry breaking. Such thermal/quantum fluctuations are sometimes a source of enhanced interactions and may create emergent properties such as superconductivity In a quantum mechanical point of view, a tunneling effect can also take place in the racemization process. Let us consider chiral ammonia NH(D)(T) molecule that can flip between R (right) and L (left) forms. Even at zero temperature, the quantum levels for R and L enantiomers can have resonant tunneling because their energy levels are always identical due to the symmetry of Schrödinger equation. Neither R form nor L form can be an eigen state of the system alone because of symmetry consideration where φφ 0 (+) and φφ 0 (-) , are wave functions with even and odd parities, which are the eigen states of the Hamiltonian. ħω is the energy difference of these two states, while W(+) is the energy for even parity state If a group of chiral molecules which are oscillating between two enantiomers is allowed to propagate in time, there are some limited periods of time when all the handedness of molecules is the same (Fig . This is what we call enantio pure state, although this period can be as long as a life of universe in case the energy barrier is sufficiently high. This is quite analogical to the phase transition of ferromagnetism. In a ferromagnet, a phase transition at Curie temperature makes the spins within a domain aligned in the same direction. After poling process by external magnetic field (MM zz ), a single-domain magnet with parallel magnetization can be created. This is a time-reversal-symmetry (TRS)-broken state because one can flip the spin moment by time reversal operation TT. On the other hand, a molecule can exhibit stable chiral structure, when the system temperature becomes well below the energy barrier separating two enantiomers, to yield a racemate. After an enantio-separation process for this racemate by external operation such as chiral chromatography ( GG 0 ), an enantio-pure state can be obtained. Note that enantio-pure state is TT -even while ferromagnetic single-domain state is TT-odd. The difference between these two examples is originating in the nature of order parameters (MM zz and GG 0 ; Fig Let us now discuss the effect of the chirality dynamics. Here we define 'dynamic' as a time-dependent variance of materials and fields within the enantiopure time domain described above. In this definition, the chirality should be retained the same throughout the dynamics while its magnitude (order parameter) is changing. This chirality fluctuation may have other types of effect than the static chirality. Such a fluctuation should be visible when a chiral molecule is vibrating, for example. Diagonalization of this GG 0 term leads to four eigenstates labeled with an injected electron momentum direction (P) and total spin (J). The total spin J consists of electron spin and nuclear vibrational orbital angular momentum originating from discrete rotational symmetry. This result was actually demonstrated by fully diagonalizing the nuclear vibration. The splitting δδ -λλ , where δδ is an energy difference between orbital angular momenta j = 0 and 1 states, directly corresponds to ggGG 0 (field), and gives spin dependent barrier potential. This energy split dominates the total energy scale and spin orbit-coupling λλ plays only a minor role in separating two Kramer's paired states in momentum space (both of which possess the same helicity). Thus, the spin barrier is proportional to ggGG 0 (field) (Fig. In the theoretical investigation of CISS effect, one needs to explain the fact that the magnitude of spin polarization is much larger than one can expect from simple spin-orbit Hamiltonian. In addition, Bardarson theorem prohibits any spin polarization as far as a scattering process by two-level two-terminal system is considered In summary, we have demonstrated that electric toroidal monopole GG 0 is the order parameter for chiral symmetry breaking. Because the chiral structure is strongly connected with chemical bonding, the interplay between physics (symmetry breaking) and chemistry (bonding) appears in an entangled manner in real systems. Even in such a case, factor decomposition by multipole concept should be a firm guideline to find out the essential role of chirality in a given situation. At present, methodology to analyze non-equilibrium and/or excited states is still quite limited, but development of thermodynamics to describe those states is needed to understand the recent experiments. For example, it has been experimentally shown that a combination of gravity and rotation can generate chiral aggregation from achiral molecules, in which the handedness can be reversed by rotation reversal 