Microwave-optics entanglement is a vital component for building hybrid quantum networks. Here, a new mechanism for preparing stationary entanglement between microwave and optical cavity fields in a cavity optomagnomechanical system is proposed. It consists of a magnon mode in a ferrimagnetic crystal that couples directly to a microwave cavity mode via the magnetic dipole interaction, and indirectly to an optical cavity through the deformation displacement of the crystal. The mechanical displacement is induced by the magnetostrictive force and coupled to the optical cavity via radiation pressure. Both the opto-and magnomechanical couplings are dispersive. Magnon-phonon entanglement is created via magnomechanical parametric down-conversion, which is further distributed to optical and microwave photons via simultaneous optomechanical beamsplitter interaction and electromagnonic state-swap interaction, yielding stationary microwave-optics entanglement. The microwave-optics entanglement is robust against thermal noise, which will find broad potential applications in quantum networks and quantum information processing with hybrid quantum systems. Optical entanglement is a crucial resource and finds a wide range of applications in quantum information science, such as quantum teleportation, We consider a cavity-OMM system, as depicted in Figure The Hamiltonian of such a hybrid microwave cavity-OMM system reads where j = a, m, c ( j † ) are the annihilation (creation) operators of the microwave cavity mode, the magnon mode, and the optical cavity mode, respectively, satisfying the canonical commutation relation [ j, j † ] = 1. q and p ([q, p] = i) denote the dimensionless position and momentum of the mechanical vibration mode, and ) are the resonant frequencies of the four modes. g a is the electromagnonic coupling strength, responsible for the microwave-magnon state swapping, and g m (g c ) is the vacuum magnomechanical (optomechanical) coupling strength, which can be significantly enhanced by driving the magnon mode (optical cavity) with a strong field. The driving Hamiltonian H dri /ħ = iΩ m † e -iω 0 t -H.c. + iE c † e -iω L t -H.c. , where the Rabi frequency Ω = √ 5 4 γ √ NH d Including the dissipation and input noise of each mode and working in the interaction picture with respect to ħω 0 (a † a + m † m) + ħω L c † c, we obtain the quantum Langevin equations (QLEs) of the system, given by ȧ = -i∆ a a -κ a aig a m + 2κ a a in , where ∆ a(m) = ω a(m) -ω 0 , ∆ c = ω c -ω L , and γ b and κ j ( j = a, m, c) are the dissipation rates of the mechanical, microwave cavity, magnon, and optical cavity modes, respectively. j in are the corresponding input noise operators, which are zero-mean and obey the following correlation functions: is a Brownian stochastic force acting on the mechanical oscillator, which is non-Markovian by nature, but can be assumed Markovian for a large mechanical quality factor Q b = ω b /γ b ≫ 1. ), with T being the environmental temperature. The creation of microwave-optics entanglement requires sufficiently strong magno-and optomechanical coupling strengths. To this end, we apply strong drive fields onto the magnon and optical cavity modes, respectively, which lead to large coherent amplitudes |⟨m⟩| , |⟨c⟩| ≫ 1 at the steady state. This enables us to linearize the system dynamics around the large average values by neglecting small second-order fluctuation terms. where u(t) = δX a (t), δY a (t), δX m (t), δY m (t), δq(t), δp(t), δX c (t), δY c (t) T is the vector of the quadrature fluctuations of the system, T is the vector of the input noises, where the quadratures are defined as X j (t) = 1 √ 2 ( j + j † ) and Y j (t) = i √ 2 ( j †j), and δX j (t) and δY j (t) (X in j (t) and Y in j (t)) represent the corresponding fluctuations (input noises), and the drift matrix A is given by We define the effective magno-and optomechanical coupling strengths as G m = -i √ 2g m ⟨m⟩ and G c = i √ 2g c ⟨c⟩, where the steady-state amplitudes are ⟨m⟩ = Ω(κ a + i∆ a ) and the effective detunings ∆m = ∆ m + g m ⟨q⟩ and ∆c = ∆ cg c ⟨q⟩, including the frequency shifts due to the mechanical displacement, which is jointly induced by the magnetostriction and radiation pressure interactions. The steady-state displacement ⟨q⟩ = g c |⟨c⟩| 2g m |⟨m⟩| 2 /ω b . Note that the above drift matrix A is derived under the optimal conditions for the microwave-optics entanglement, i.e., |∆ a | , ∆m , ∆c ≃ ω b ≫ κ j (see Figure We aim to prepare stationary entanglement between microwave and optical cavity fields. The steady state of the system is a four-mode Gaussian state, because of the linearized dynamics and the Gaussian input noises. A Gaussian state is fully characterized by the first and second moments of the quadrature operators. The first moments can be adjusted by local displacement operations in phase space and such operations do not change quantum correlations like entanglement. The state of interest is therefore characterized by an 8 × 8 covariance matrix (CM) V, of which the entries are defined as V i j = ⟨u i (t)u j (t ′ ) + u j (t ′ )u i (t)⟩/2 (i, j = 1, 2, ..., 8). The CM in the steady state can be obtained by solving the Lyapunov equation where ] is the diffusion matrix and defined by D i j δ(tt ′ ) = ⟨n i (t)n j (t ′ ) + n j (t ′ )n i (t)⟩/2. We adopt the logarithmic negativity where η -≡ 2 -1/2 Σ -Σ 2 -4 detV 4 1/2 1/2 , and V 4 is the 4 × 4 CM associated with the microwave and optical modes. V 4 = V a , V ac ; V T ac , V c , with V a , V c , and V ac being the 2 × 2 blocks of V 4 , and Σ ≡ detV a + detV c -2detV ac . Similarly, we can calculate the magnon-optics entanglement (E cm ) and the microwave-mechanics entanglement (E ab ). The mechanism of producing microwave-optics entanglement is as follows. Firstly, the highly thermally populated mechanical mode should be cooled (close) to its quantum ground state in order to generate entanglement in the system. This can be achieved by driving the optical cavity with a red-detuned laser field ( ∆c ≃ ω b ) to activate the optomechanical anti-Stokes scattering, optimally in the resolved sideband limit ω b ≫ κ c (Figure The optimal detunings ∆c ≃ -∆m ≃ ω b adopted in the tripartite OMM system are analogous to those used to produce optical entanglement in a tripartite optomechanical system, where two cavity fields, either optical or microwave, couple to a common mechanical resonator. Figure Having determined the optimal working conditions of the OMM system for the entanglement (i.e., ∆c ≃ -∆m ≃ ω b , and ω b ≫ κ m,c for resolved sidebands), we optimize the entanglement over two parameters of the microwave cavity, i.e., the cavity-magnon detuning ∆ am ≡ ∆ a -∆m and the cavity decay rate κ a , as shown in Figure We have presented a feasible and efficient approach to generate stationary microwave-optics entanglement in a microwave cavity-OMM system. The entanglement is achieved by exploiting dispersive magnetostriction and radiation pressure interactions. Specifically, by realizing the effective magnomechanical parametric down-conversion and optomechanical beamsplitter interactions, magnon-phonon entanglement is created and the entanglement is further distributed to optical and microwave cavity photons via the optomechanical and electromagnonic stateswap interactions, yielding stationary microwave-optics entanglement. Optimal working conditions are analyzed and the entanglement is robust against temperature even for significantly large mechanical damping. Such microwave-optics entanglement will find many distinctive applications in quantum networks and quantum information processing with hybrid quantum systems. 