Hybrid density functional (HDF) approximations usually deliver higher accuracy than local and semilocal approximations to the exchange-correlation functional, but this comes with drastically increased computational cost. Practical implementations of HDFs inevitably involve numerical approximations -even more so than their local and semilocal counterparts due to the additional numerical complexity arising from treating the exact-exchange component. This raises the question regarding the reproducibility of the HDF results yielded by different implementations. In this work, we benchmark the numerical precision of four independent implementations of the popular Heyd-Scuseria-Ernzerhof (HSE) range-separated HDF on describing key materials' properties, including both properties derived from equations of states (EOS) and band gaps of 20 crystalline solids. We find that the energy band gaps obtained by the four codes agree with each other rather satisfactorily. However, for lattice constants and 1 The reproducibility of the results, both experimental and computational ones, is essential for scientific researches. In computational materials science which heavily relies on computer simulations, this is particularly a concern. Ideally, one would like to see that the same results be obtained regardless which computer code is used. As one of the most widely used first-principles approaches for simulating materials' properties, the generalized gradient approximations (GGAs) in density functional theory (DFT), such as the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) In recent years, the hybrid density functionals (HDFs) are getting more and more popular in computational materials science. By incorporating a fraction of Hartree-Fock exchange (HFX), HDFs successfully addressed one big issue of local-density approximation (LDA) and GGA-type functionals -the severe underestimation of the band gaps of semiconductors and insulators. Popular HDFs include B3LYP, 3,4 PBE0 5 and HSE. In particular, using the localized variant of the RI approximation, one can achieve a linear scaling of the computational cost for building the HFX matrix with respect to the system size N . In this section, we recapitulate the essentials of the numerical frameworks and computational setups employed in the four codes considered in this work. First of all, different strategies are used to treat the effects arising from the nuclei and core electrons: The VASP code employs the PAW method whereas QE and ABACUS make use of the SG15 optimized normconserving Vanderbilt-type (ONCV) pseudopotentials. Regarding the basis sets, VASP and QE both use PWs to expand the Bloch wavefunctions, whereas numerical atomic orbital (NAO) basis sets are used in the FHI-aims and ABACUS codes, although different NAO construction strategies are adopted in these two codes, in order to best represent their respective all-electron (AE) or pseudo-wavefunctions. Moreover, kinetic energy cutoffs of 550 eV and 100 Rydberg (Ry) are used for the PW expansion of wavefunctions in VASP and QE calculations, respectively. For FHI-aims, the default "tight" NAO basis sets 26 are adopted, whereas the so-called "DZP-DPSI" 49 basis sets are employed in ABACUS. Additionally, 100 Ry energy cutoff is used in ABACUS for the Hartree potential calculation and for determining the uniform quadrature grid. In Table As mentioned above, additional complexity is involved in the evaluation of the HFX component of the HDFs. For VASP, the standard HSE implementation as available in VASP 5.4.1 is used. As for QE calculations, we use its PWSCF module v.6.5 where the ACE technique The equilibrium volume V 0 and bulk modulus B 0 of each solid are determined via the Birch-Murnaghan EOS. Finally, the band gaps are estimated on a discrete 8×8×8 k-point mesh, and the experimental lattice parameters are used for all the band structure calculations. Table Basis We start by examining the pairwise ∆ values evaluated in between the four codes, given by an average of the individual ∆ values for the 20 materials. Namely, where measures the root-mean-square difference between the energy-volume (E-V ) curves (with aligned energy minima) generated by two codes i and j for a material α in the test set. In Eq. 2, V 0,α is the averaged equilibrium volume of the α-th material, as predicted by the two codes. A change of the volume within a range of -6% to 6% around the equilibrium point is included in the evaluation of the ∆ value. The thus determined 4 × 4 ∆ matrix is shown in Figure Next we check how the lattice constants determined by the four HSE implementations agree with one another. In this case, the experimental values are also included for comparison. In Figure where a 0,i (α) is the equilibrium lattice constant for the α-th material as determined by experiment (i = 1) or by one of the four HSE implementations (2 ≤ i ≤ 5). Here, the computational lattice constants are corrected for the ZPM effect. For simplicity, we have assumed that the ZPM corrections are not sensitive to the HSE implementations, and the same ZPM correction values for the HSE lattice constants, as reported in from Ref. 44 (obtained using FHI-aims), are used here for all the computed results. As such, the MADs between the computational results are not affected by the ZPM corrections, and only those between experimental and computational ones are. From Figure However, this does not hold any more when all four sets of computational results are taken into account. Finally, one can see that VASP and FHI-aims results show larger deviations from the experimental results than the ABACUS and QE results do. This probably comes from fortuitous error cancellations. To We then perform a similar analysis of the bulk moduli for the same set of compounds, based on the EOS curves generated by the four codes. In Figure 44. From Figure In Figure Despite these discrepancy, some general features can be drawn from this benchmark study. For example, all four codes predict that the HSE bulk moduli of C and BN are appreciably larger than the experimental value, pointing to an intrinsic accuracy limitation of HSE for these hard materials. One important success of the HSE functional is that it significantly improves over local and semi-local functionals for describing the band gaps of semiconductors and insulators, thanks to the HFX component and the generalized KS framework. Thus, the reproducibility of the calculated HSE band gaps is also an important aspect to check, in addition to the EOSbased properties. In Figure In this work, we examined the reproducibility of HSE calculations based on four different implementations in the VASP, FHI-aims, QE, and ABACUS codes, in terms of a test set comprising 20 semiconductors and insulators. These implementations are representative ones as different procedures for treating the core-valence interactions (all-electron, PAW, and NCPP schemes) and different basis sets (PWs and atomic orbitals), with their different combinations, are used. The quantities that we have checked include the ∆ metric as introduced in Ref. 40, as well as the lattice constants, bulk moduli, and the band gaps. We found that, for band gaps, the deviations between the four different sets of computational results are nearly one order of magnitude smaller than the difference between the computational and experimental results. For the EOS-derived properties, e.g., the lattice constants and bulk moduli, the differences between computational and experimental results and those between the computational results themselves, are at the same order of magnitude. On the one hand, this shows the rather good performance of the HSE functional for describing the EOS-derived properties; on the other hand, this also means that the numerical precision of HSE implementation still needs to be improved to unambiguously assess its intrinsic accuracy with respect to experimental reference data. Among the computational results, it seems that the prescription for describing the ion-cores plays a significant role in determining the numerical precision of the HSE implementations. Specifically, the all-electron (FHI-aims) and PAWbased (VASP) implementations show better agreement with each other, and so does the NCPP-based implementations (QE and ABACUS), whereas the deviations between these two sets of results are noticeably larger. Nowadays, most NCPP-based HSE calculations are performed using the PBE pseudopotentials. Our work indicates that it is not ideal if high-precision results are aimed for. In principle, one can reduce the core radius and increase the energy cutoffs for NCPP-based calculations to approach the precision of all-electron calculations. However, the computational cost will get exceedingly high to do so. Designing improved NCPPs for HSE and other types of HDF calculations would be a better strategy for improving the quality of NCPP-based HDF calculations. Yang et al. have shown that using the PBE0 pseudopotentials in PBE0 calculations improves the agreement with all-electron calculations for structural parameters and band gaps of some small molecules and simple solids. As HDF calculations get increasingly popular in computational materials sciences, the reproducibility of this type of calculations becomes a prominent issue. Our benchmark calculations in this work only cover a limited set of codes and materials, yet interesting features and trends have been revealed. We hope that this work will stimulate more comprehensive investigations along this line. • Description of the computational parameters used in ABACUS calculations, and tables containing the computational and experimental values of lattice constants, bulk moduli, and band gaps for 20 solids.