To establish the doping-dependent phase diagram in alkali-metal doped C60, we synthesize Rbdoped C60 samples with different stoichiometries by using the improved wet-chemistry technique. The doping levels determined from the Raman scattering spectra often show the appearance of three electrons corresponding to the band filling of three for the synthesized compounds no matter matter what dopants are used. The multiple phase coexistence with the unique Rb3C60 is identified from the refined x-ray diffraction patterns. The phase fraction of Rb3C60 is found to behave with the doping in a similar manor as the superconducting shielding fraction. These rigorously established correlations among the superconducting transition temperature along with the structural and phonon vibrational properties allow us to single out Rb3C60 as the only superconducting phase with the nearly constant transition temperature regardless the doping level. These findings provide an experimental constraint on the theory developments for the superconductivity in fullerides. The discovery of superconductivity in alkali-metal doped C 60 has stimulated great interest in exploring the chemical and physical properties of these amazing molecular superconductors. Within one year, the critical temperature (T c ) of fulleride superconductors has been raised from 18 to 33 K Experimentally, the controversies remain regarding whether A 3 C 60 (A=K, Rb, Cs) is the single superconducting phase in alkali-metal doped fullerides The high-quality of our synthesized samples of Rbdoped C 60 is demonstrated by the successful realization of both the Meissner effect and zero-resistance state from the dc [Figs. 2(a)-2(g)] and ac [Fig. Holding the two essential characters of superconductivity for Rb-doped C 60 make this study confident in examining the doping effect on superconductivity compared to the early studies Our central results for Rb x C 60 with different stoichiometries are summarized in Fig. The shown T c and superconducting shielding fraction for each Rb x C 60 in Figs. The shown phase fraction of Rb 3 C 60 [right axis of Fig. The gradually narrowed H g (1) and H g (2) modes have the strong salient features, which is reminiscent of the spectra for Rb 4 C 60 Experimental details: Pristine C 60 (> 99.5%) were purchased from Tokyo Chemical Industry (Shanghai) and used without further purification. The rubidium metal with purity no less than 99.75% was purchased from Alfa Aesar. We adopted a similar wet-chemical method to synthesize Rb-doped C 60 samples with different compositions as that in our previous work For samples with nominal stoichiometry in the range of 1.0-2.0, due to the high solubility of the synthesized samples, no precipitation could be obtained by the standing process. N-hexane, as a precipitation agent, was added to accelerate the precipitation and to acquire a highly crystallized sample. Annealing process was conducted at 220 • C for 48 hours in an inert atmosphere followed by a natural cooling process. All the manipulations mentioned above were carried out in a glovebox filled with argon (99.999%) and with the content of H 2 O and O 2 less than 0.1 ppm. After obtaining the final products, they were sealed in non-magnetic capsules and glass capillary tubes for magnetization, Raman spectroscopy, and Synchrotron x-ray diffraction measurements, respectively. The magnetization measurements were performed in a SQUID magnetometer (Quantum Design) with a given magnetic field of 10 Oe. Both dc and ac magnetic susceptibility were collected to give an overall magnetic behavior. In dc magnetic susceptibility measurements, the sample was first cooled down to 2 K, and then a magnetic field of 10 Oe was applied, zero-field-cooling data were recorded while warming to 40 or 50 K. The field-cooling run was collected at the same magnetic field when the sample was cooled down to 2 K again. For the dc magnetic susceptibility measurements, the probe magnetic amplitude and frequency are 1 Oe and 234 Hz, respectively. The resistivity for nominal Rb 3 C 60 was also obtained by applying a dc four-probe method in Van Der Pauw configuration 