Bloch electrons in multiorbital systems carry quantum geometric information characteristic of their wavevector-dependent interorbital mixing. The geometric nature impacts electromagnetic responses, and this effect carries over to the superconducting state, which receives a geometric contribution to the superfluid weight. In this paper, we show that this contribution could become negative under certain appropriate circumstances. This may facilitate the stabilization of Cooper pairings with real space phase modulation, i.e. the pair density wave order, as we demonstrate through two-orbital model Bogoliubov de-Gennes mean-field calculations. The quantum geometric effect therefore constitutes an intrinsic mechanism for the formation of such a novel phase of matter in the absence of external magnetic field. Introduction.-In systems with multiple orbital degrees of freedom, electrons on the individual Bloch bands are not featureless independent particles. Instead, the motion of a Bloch electron on one band is inherently connected to that of other Bloch bands at the same wavevector, despite them being distinct energy eigenstates. More specifically, expressed in the band basis under which the kinetic part of the Hamiltonian is diagonalized, the velocity operator possesses finite off-diagonal terms, i.e. the interband velocity, where ǫ mk is the energy dispersion of the m-th band with eigenvector |ψ mk . The object i ψ mk |k∂ kμ ψ nk depicts a non-Abelian Berry connection between the Bloch states and therefore characterizes their unique quantum geometric properties. Some aspects of the geometric effect on quantum transport have been known for long. The most classic example is the quantum Hall or Chern insulator, in which the quantized Hall conductance is intimately tied to the Berry curvature of the Bloch bands The geometric nature carries over to the superconducting state. Hence its footprint must also be found in the superconducting electromagnetic responses. The past several years have witnessed considerable attention on the geometry-induced finite superfluid weight in flat band superconductors In this paper, we demonstrate that the Bloch quantum geometry could also facilitate the formation of novel phases of matter in multiorbital superconductors. Our discussion is motivated by the observation that the geometry-related contribution to the superfluid weight is not necessarily positive definite. To be more concrete, we show that this contribution contains a part that relates to an effective interband Josephson coupling between the bands. This coupling could become negative if the superconducting order parameters on the multiple bands condense into an appropriate configuration, resulting in a suppressed phase stiffness. More strikingly, in the narrow-or flat-band limit where the pairing gap could become as large as a significant fraction of the bandwidth, the geometric contribution could increase significantly, even to the point of returning an overall negative superfluid weight. Since the superfluid weight characterizes the realspace superconducting phase stiffness, an intriguing question then arises: does the geometry-induced suppression of superfluid weight provide a natural mechanism for the formation of superconducting states with real-space phase mudulation, such as the Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin-Ovchinnikov (FFLO) Negative interband Josephson coupling.-We set the stage of our discussions by first deriving the superfluid weight of a weak-coupling two-dimensional two-orbital model with uniform intraorbital spin-singlet Cooper pairing and without spin-orbit coupling. The BdG Hamiltonian matrix of the model, expressed in appropriate orbital basis, can be written as, Here, k = -k, Ĥ0k and ∆k respectively describe the kinetic and pairing parts of the Hamiltonian. Following the standard linear response theory, the superfluid weight tensor can be expressed as where μ, ν = x, y, ω n = (2n+1)π/β denotes the fermionic Matsubara frequency, and Ĝk (iω n ) = (iω n -ĤBdG k ) -1 is the Gor'kov Green's function. The velocity operator Vμk takes the following form, where τ z is the third component of the Pauli matrix operating in the particle-hole space of the BdG Hamiltonian (2). The second term in (3) represents the paramagnetic contribution, which vanishes in single-orbital models at zero temperature. The first term, T μν , is the diamagnetic contribution in which the inverse mass tensor is given by, Utilizing In the second line of the above equation, we have taken the approximation, Vμk , which is valid in the weak-coupling limit as terms with ∂ kμ ∆k are expected to be much smaller. To facilitate our subsequent derivations, we turn to the band basis representation, using a unitary transformation that diagonalizes the kinetic part of (2), i.e. Here, ǫ mk and ∆ mk give, respectively, the normal state dispersion and the intraband pairing function of band-m, where m = 1, 2 label the band indices. For future reference, we write down the resultant Bogoliubov dispersion , where N mk is a normalization factor. The velocity operator in the same basis can be obtained following the same unitary transformation, where the diagonal elements are simply the band group velocities while the off-diagonal elements, i.e. the interband velocities, as given in (1) The procedure is equivalent to inserting identity operators Î = Û -1 k Ûk into (3) and then dropping the interband pairings. Taking the xx-component as an explicit example, the zero-temperature superfluid weight reads as follows, As is shown in more detail in the Supplementary, there are multiple terms from the diamagnetic and paramagnetic responses that exactly cancel each other. Hence the two terms on the rhs of this equation are not in one to one correspondence with the two respective responses. Nonetheless, the first term, generated by the virtual intraband transitions | mk ↔ |mk , originates solely from the diamagnetic contribution. In the weak-coupling and isolated-band limit, it returns the conventional expression for the zero-temperature superfluid weight. On the other hand, the second term receives equal contributions from the diamagnetic and paramagnetic responses. Absent in traditional theories, this term is purely of quantum geometric origin. In particular, it is associated exclusively with virtual interband transitions such as | 2k ↔ |1k , thereby acquiring an explicit dependence on the interband velocity. Note that, in this approximation the geometric term is finite only when both bands develop Cooper pairing. In fact, it can be cast in a more suggestive form , where • • • denotes the expectation value of the ground state. It is thus indicative of an effective interband Josephson coupling, where the interband velocity serves to 'tunnel' Cooper pairs from one band to another. Written more explicitly, this term reads, An interesting observation is that, unlike the first term in (3) which is positive definite, this term could become negative in certain scenarios. In a later illustrative lattice model, V 12 μk is odd in k, and it could be real under a proper gauge choice. Taking a simple example where ∆ mk ≡ ∆ m , the geometric correction . In this case, the total superfluid weight is reduced from the approximation based on conventional isolated-band considerations. Conversely, the superfluid weight is enhanced if the two gaps are of the same sign. Note that the sign of the geometric term must be analyzed on a case by case basis, because V 12 xk could be even in k and ∆ mk may acquire wavevector dependence in different models. The nontrivial geometric contribution to the superfluid weight has been discussed in quite a number of previous studies Strong geometry-induced suppression of D.-The possibility of negative superfluid weight has in fact been noted in a previous study on twisted bilayer graphene where ξ ak = -2t a (cos k x + cos k y )μ a (a = s, d) represent the intraorbital dispersion and λ k = 4t ′ sin k x sin k y denotes the interorbital mixing. In practice, we keep a balance between t ′ and t st d , μ sμ d , so as to ensure a sizable interband velocity. At this stage, we assume |∆ s | = |∆ d | = ∆ which, when transformed into the band happens to determine the intraband pairing order parameter configuration on the two bands (see the Supplementary). Specifically, the ++ configuration with ∆++ = (∆ s , ∆ d ) = (∆, ∆) leads to ∆ 1k = ∆ 2k , while the +-configuration with ∆+-= (∆, -∆) gives rise to ∆ 1k = -∆ 2k . Hence, according to The superfluid weight obtained from (3) for a representative given band structure is shown in Fig. The superfluid weight D xx and D yy defined for π-PDW as a function of ∆ are also plotted in Fig. Stabilization of PDW phase.-The above analyses is based on the assumption that the PDW pairing potential develops the same magnitude as the uniform phase. It is so far unclear whether the PDW could become more favorable under a given set of pairing interactions. In the following, we self-consistently determine the relative stability between the uniform and π-PDW phases. Note that the actual ground state could well be a more complex form of PDW with a different modulation wavevector. However, finding the ground state is not our primary objective here. It suffices to demonstrate the preference of at least one certain PDW order over the uniform phase. We consider onsite pairing interactions H int = i H int,i , where on each site i, Here, U ss , U dd , U sd > 0 designate the strength of the intraorbital (ss and dd) interactions and the interorbital (sd) pair hopping. Among them, U ss and U dd promote onsite intraorbital spin-singlet pairings ∆ s and ∆ d within the two respective orbital manifolds. A sizable interorbital repulsion U sd is chosen to ensure that ∆ s and ∆ d condense into the ∆+configuration. The order parameters ∆ s and ∆ d are obtained by self-consistently solving the gap equations at zero-temperature. The calculations are performed using the same tight-binding model as in Fig. Conclusions.-PDW states have received much interest in connection to the pesudogap phase in cuprate superconductors Note added. In the process of completing this manuscript, we became aware of a study which discusses the impact of quantum geometry on the FFLO states in the presence of external magnetic field The kinetic part of the Hamiltonian of our two-orbital model in the basis (c sk , c dk ) T is given by Ĥ0 This Hamiltonian can be diagonalized by the following unitary matrix, where ) is a normalization factor. The pairing matrix can then be transformed into the band basis in the following manner, In the above, we have used the fact that the orbital hybridization in our model with s and d xy orbitals satisfies the relation λ k = λ * k. It is easy to see that, if ∆ s = ±∆ d , then ∆ 1k = ±∆ 2k . To a good approximation, the interband pairing term ∆ 12k is ignored in our weak-coupling analysis. (S7) Here k x ranges from -π/2 to π/2 due to the doubling of lattice constant in this direction, and the spin indices have been suppressed. Note that in the above construction, we have chosen the gauge under which the relative position between the sublattice sites are manifested. Such a gauge is important to obtaining the correct forms of the velocity operators, as electron hoppings on all of the bonds must be accounted for on equal footing. In this gauge, the (normal state) velocity operator is straightforwardly obtained by taking the derivative of (S7), i. Note that the summation over k x ranges from -π/2 to π/2 as mentioned above. * huangw3@sustech.edu.cn [1] D. J. Thouless, M. Kohmoto, M. P. Nightingale, and M. den Nijs, Phys. Rev. Lett. 49, 405 (1982).