Vortices in chiral topological superconductors are known for trapping Majorana zero modes as a signature response to their bulk-state topologies. In this work, we establish a similar bulk-vortex correspondence for two-dimensional Cn-protected class D higher-order topological superconductors, in which a quantum vortex will universally trap a pair of Cn-protected Majorana bound states with ẑ-directional angular momenta Jz = 0 and Jz = n/2, respectively. This intriguing one-to-one mapping between anomalous vortex modes and higher-order topology can be systematically derived through a model-independent patch construction approach. As a proof of concept, we present an exactly solvable model to confirm the proposed vortex Majorana modes. Our theory establishes vortices as an unprecedented experimental measure of higher-order topology in superconductors. Introduction -The adventure of topological superconductors (TSCs) started from a remarkable theoretical prediction, that edges and vortices of a two-dimensional (2D) chiral superconductor can harbor 1D chiral Majorana modes and 0D Majorana zero modes (MZMs), respectively Since then, enormous research effort has been devoted to exploring other topological possibilities of superconductivity, which has led to a plethora of exciting ideas such as time-reversal-invariant TSCs Our main finding in this work is that a similar BVC generally exists for 2D class D higher-order topological superconductors (HOTSCs). These HOTSCs are essen- * ruixing@utk.edu tially C n -protected crystalline TSCs that feature a 2ndorder BBC HOTSC n & Z m Vortex -The defining boundary signature for C n -protected HOTSC (dubbed HOTSC n ) is a set of n MZMs that are C n -related. In a finite-size regular polygon geometry, the boundary MZMs are likely to reside around the polygon corners and are known as corner MZMs. The corner MZMs cannot be removed without either (i) breaking C n symmetry; or (ii) closing the bulk-state energy gap. Notably, HOTSC n generally admits a Z 2 topological classification and the topological phase hosts an odd number of MZMs at each geometric corner. Schematics of C 2,4,6 -invariant HOTSCs are shown in Fig. Formally, an HOTSC n can be described by a Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian, where the pairing function follows ∆ T (k) = -∆(-k). A superconducting vortex can be introduced by updating ∆(k) → ∆(r, θ)e iθ , where (r, θ) denote the in-plane polar coordinates. Without loss of generality, one can deform such a continous U (1) vortex pattern into a "Z m vortex" to be congruent with the discrete lattice symmetry of HOTSCs. As shown in Fig. From Corner to Vortex -We now introduce a patch construction approach for HOTSC n that maps corneroriginated Majorana degrees of freedom to those trapped by a vortex. Take n = 4 as an example. We start with four identical patches S i (i = 1, 2, 3, 4) of HOTSC 4 , each of which features a square geometry with four corner MZMs. When we glue the four patches following Fig. Vortices in HOTSC 2 and HOTSC 6 can be understood in a similar fashion. For HOTSC 2 , we again consider four patches S 1,2,3,4 , with S 1,3 and S 2,4 carrying HOTSC 2 and trivial SC phases, respectively. Introducing a Z 4 vortex following Fig. Bulk-Vortex Correspondence -We are now ready to study these n-Majorana rings to reveal the nature of the corresponding vortex bound states. Following Fig. . Then the n-Majorana ring at each vortex is formed by γ (Sj ) j with j = 1, 2, ..., n, as schematically shown in Fig. when the SC vortex is present. In particular, we have (C n ) n = -(-1) v with v being the vorticity of the SC vortex. The matrix representation of C n symmetry is The most general single-particle Hamiltonian for the n-Majorana ring is H n = i j<k t j,k γ j γ k , which contains n 2 Majorana pairing terms. Since C n symmetry requires t j,j+m = t j ,j +m ≡ t n m , H n can thus be reduced to Notice that h n,m couples two MZMs that are (C n ) m related, which leads to an interesting identity that Given that C 2 = C -1 2 , we immediately arrive at h n, n 2 = 0. Therefore, we have where H n is the matrix representation of H n under Γ n . Eq. 2 further implies that the n-Majorana ring forms a regular representation of C n group, so that the MZMs can be further superposed to form a complete set of C n eigenstates {|J z } that covers all 1D irreps of this n-fold cyclic group, where J z ∈ {0, 1, ..., n -1} is the ẑ-component angular momentum. The energy eigen-equation now becomes leading to two zero-energy Majorana solutions: |J z = 0 and |J z = n 2 . From a symmetry perspective, |J z = 0, n 2 belong to the only two PHS-invariant C n irreps • A 2D C n -protected class D HOTSC hosts a pair of vortex MZMs with J z = 0 and J z = n 2 , respectively. Minimal Model -As a proof of concept, we now provide a minimal model of HOTSC n that yields analytical solutions to demonstrate its BVC. The k-space BdG Hamiltonian of this four-band model is where x +k 2 y )-μ and μ is the chemical potential. Therefore, H BL (k) manifests as a "bilayer" superconductor with a layer-dependent BdG Chern number C ± = ∓sgn(m) when mμ > 0 The "interlayer" coupling h c (k) explicitly depends on the Nambu basis Ψ ± for h ± . We express Ψ ± in the angular momentum basis |J z and find that C n requires Ψ ± = (|J z , |J z -1 ) T with J z being half-integer valued. In addition, Ψ ± should be PHS-invariant and this leads to -J z ≡ J z -1 (mod n). It is easy to show that there exist two inequivalent basis solutions for Ψ ± , Therefore, Ψ BL = (Ψ ν , Ψ ν ) T with ν, ν ∈ {0, n 2 } features four basis choices that are compactible with both PHS and C n . In the Supplemental Material, we analytically solve the edge theory in the polar coordinates and find that an HOTSC n phase only shows up when ν + ν = n 2 . In particular, for (ν, ν ) = (0, n 2 ), we find the coupling matrix h c (k) to be where k ± = k x ± ik y . In the polar coordinates (r, θ), h c (r, θ) is found to generate an edge mass term proportional to sin nθ/2 (for n = 2, 6) or cos nθ/2 (for n = 4). As a result, the edge gap closes whenever the polar angle θ = 2πl/n (for n = 2, 6) or θ = (2l + 1)π/n (for n = 4), with l = 0, 1, 2, ..., n -1. This corresponds to n corner MZMs, a defining boundary characteristics of HOTSC n . The vortex bound state of H BL can be similarly solved by treating h c (k) perturbatively. In the decoupling limit with h c (k) = 0, the BVC of chiral TSCs dictates the appearance of two vortex MZMs contributed by h ± , respectively Therefore, γ ± are isolated from each other, thanks to their distinct C n indices, and this symmetry protection persists even in the presence of h c . This exactly agrees with our prediction of BVC for HOTSC n . Discussions -To summarize, we derive a general bulkvortex correspondence for 2D C n -protected HOTSCs in symmetry class D through a patch construction approach. In particular, the BVC concretely predicts both the number and the angular momentum information of MZMs trapped by a superconducting vortex, which is analytically confirmed by solving a minimal HOTSC n model. We highlight that our derivation of BVC does not depend on any model details, and should hold for general higher-order topological systems that fall into our target symmetry classes. In practice, experimental detection of crystalline topological phases is generally challenging, since their gapless boundary modes are usually sensitive to the local boundary conditions. For example, the topological robustness of corner MZMs in an HOTSC n is only well-defined when the sample geometry delicately preserves C n . Real-world crystals, however, are often irregularly shaped, and such asymmetric boundaries could possibly spoil the expected corner MZMs. On the contrary, a superconducting vortex is usually circularly shaped and generally respects the desired crystalline symmetry. Namely, detection of vortex MZMs in an HOTSC could be much more feasible than the corner ones, with the help of state-of-the-art scanning tunneling microscopy technique. Therefore, the BVC proposed in this work paves the way for locally probing superconducting higher-order topology with vortices, even for irregular crystal samples whose corner signatures are ambiguous. Finally, our BVC serves as a good starting point to explore vortex physics of crystalline topological superconductors in other symmetry classes and/or in other spatial dimensions. For example, stacking 2D HOTSC n could lead to a plethora of 3D topological phases. These include weak HOTSC n with flat-band Majorana hinge modes, higher-order Weyl/Dirac superconductors 