Exotic state of matter could coexist with conventional orders such that the gauge fields and fractionalized excitations could prevail in a seemingly ordered state. We explore the Coulombic antiferromagnet in the spin-1/2 pyrochlores with dipole-octupole doublets. This fractionalized antiferromagnetic state carries both antiferromagnetic order and emergent quantum electrodynamics with the gapless gauge photon and fractionalized quasiparticles. We explain the characteristic physical properties including the thermodynamics and the dynamics of this exotic state. This includes for example the anomalously large T 3 specific heat and the broad spinon continuum in the inelastic neutron scattering. We discuss the experimental and material's relevance and expect this work to inspire interests in the search of exotic physics among the ordered magnets. Exotic quantum states of matter with long-range quantum entanglement such as fractional quantum Hall effects and quantum spin liquids are characterized by emergent gauge fields and fractionalized excitations Despite the possibility of exoticity in the long-range ordered systems, the popular search of exotic physics is to examine spin liquid candidates among disordered magnets with frustration such that the frustration enhances the quantum fluctuations and suppresses the magnetic orders down to zero temperature where the spin S i is defined on the DO doublet and ⟨ij⟩ (⟨⟨ij⟩⟩) refers to the nearest (second) neighbors. The terms inside "[ ]" are the symmetry-allowed interactions between the nearest neighbors, while "• • • " refers to other interactions such as the dipole-dipole interaction between the S zcomponent and the superexchange beyond the nearest neighbors. For the unfrustrated regime of the nearest-neighbor model, the ground state can be well-understood, and no fractionalized antiferromagnet (AF * ) phase was found Microscopically where Sx i = cos θS x i + sin θS z i , Sz i = cos θS z i -sin θS x i , Jx and Jz are the rotated couplings and are related to the old ones Since other interactions in "• • • " necessarily renormalize the J 2 interactions, to capture the qualitative physics, we here consider an alternative model with the renormalized coupings, To avoid further complication, we have set Jz = J y = -J⊥ . H a is our minimal model to reveal the pyrochlore AF * state. We start from the large antiferromagnetic Jx regime and consider the instability to the nearby phases. With the large antiferromagnetic Jx , the system prefers the "two-plus twominus" ice configuration for Sx and realizes a pyrochlore U(1) spin liquid with the perturbed quantum fluctuations. This is a reasonable starting point because both the pyrochlore U(1) spin liquid and the AF * state share the same gauge structure. In this limit, the system is characterized by the emergent U(1) gauge field and the fractionalized excitations. To reveal it, we implement the spinon-gauge construction and express the spin operators as where the pyrochlore spin is now interpreted as sitting on the link connecting the centers r and r + e μ of the neighboring tetrahedra. The tetrahedral centers form a diamond lattice, and e μ refers to the four nearest-neigbor vectors that connect the I sublattice sites to the II sublattice sites. Here sr,r+eμ is a spin-1/2 variable that corresponds to the emergent U(1) gauge field. The spinons carry the emergent gauge charge, and Φ † r (Φ r ) creates (annihilates) a spinon at the diamond site r such that the spinon particle number Q r satisfies As the Hilbert space is enlarged by the spinon-gauge construction, the constraint Q r = η r μ sx r,r+ηr eμ is imposed. The spinon-gauge construction captures the nature of the pyrochlore U(1) spin liquid as a string-net condensed phase ) where [r, r + e μ ] 2 refers to the set of the second neighbors from this site at r + e μ /2. To solve H a , we decouple it into the spinon sector and the gauge field sector with where we have set and These parameters are solved self-consistently 36 . Due to the spatial uniformity of the model, these parameters are uniform throughout the system. The gauge mean-field phase diagram is depicted in Fig. The "fragmented AFM" is used to capture this moment fragmentation where the ordered momentum is fragmented into the gauge link piece and the spinon condensate piece. Although the S x moment also develops order, it is invisible or hidden due to its magnetic multipolar nature. Moreover, the S z moment, despite being ordered, could simultaneously function as a disordering operator to flip the S x order and generate the magnetic excitations. From Eq. ( Despite the presence of the all-in all-out order, the quantum fluctuations of the pyrochlore AF * state are still governed by the fractionalized spinons and the emergent U(1) gauge fluctuations. Thus, the gapless U(1) gauge photon is responsible for the T 3 specific heat at low temperatures. Due to the low energy scale of the exchange coupling, the coefficient of the T 3 specific heat should be quite large and visible experimentally. We further explore the spectroscopic consequences of the pyrochlore AF * state. Due to the fractionalized nature of this state, the excitation spectrum should be quite different from the spin-wave excitation for the conventional ordered antiferromagnet. This can be analyzed from a more phenomenological treatment that introduces the all-in all-out order on top of the fractionalized spin liquid state. The resulting spinon Hamiltonian will be of an identical structure as Eq. ( where the inter-sublattice hopping t 2 ̸ = 0 when the magnetic order is present. This is a bit different from the case without the sublattice mixing where the spinon number is separately conserved on each diamond sublattice and the two spinon bands are degenerate where {a n } refers to the twelve second-neighbor vectors on the diamond lattice, and λ is the Lagrangian multiplier used to fix the constraint |Φ 2 r | = 1 and determined self-consistently. Since the S z moment in Eq. ( where μ, ν = ± refer to the spinon branches. Due to the freedom of the spinon momentum k 1 , the above excitation corresponds to a continuum in both energy and momentum domains. In Fig. Apart from the gapped spinon continuum and the gapless gauge photon in the dynamics, there also exists the electric monopole continuum in the Sx -Sx correlation for the pyrochlore AF * state. For the pyrochlore U(1) spin liquid, the electric monopole experiences a background dual U(1) gauge flux that is a π flux in the unit cell, and the spectrum has an enlarged spectral period in the reciprocal space. In the pyrochlore AF * state, because ⟨ Sx ⟩ ̸ = 0, the background dual U(1) gauge flux is deviated from the π flux, and the electric monopole will have a Hofstadter band structure that can be manifested in the monopole continuum Discussion.-As the pyrochlore AF * state carries an antiferromagnetic order, there should exist a finite-temperature phase transition. The antiferromagnetic order occurs in the particle-hole channel of the spinons and does not carry any emergent gauge charge. Thus, the Ginzburg-Landau theory for such a transition is absent of the gauge degrees of freedom, and we expect this transition to be a 3D Ising transition. As for the material relevance, we propose Nd 2 Sn 2 O 7 as a candidate for the pyrochlore AF * state. The magnetic transition Below the ordering transition, Nd 2 Sn 2 O 7 shows an anomalously large T 3 specific heat, and Ref. 40 expected a linearly dispersive mode with an excitation velocity v ex = 55m/s. There are two reasons against the Goldstone magnon mode interpretation for this mode. First, the Nd 3+ ground state doublet is a DO doublet In contrast to Nd 2 Sn 2 O 7 , Nd 2 Zr 2 O 7 and Nd 2 Hf 2 O 7 are deep in the "fragmented AFM" state with an all-in all-out order in the S z component and the well-defined spin-wave modes Here R i is the coordinate of the site i, i belongs to the μ-th sublattice, N is the total number of unit cell. The exchange matrix is given as where T μν (k) is the 3 × 3 exchange matrix between the μ-th and the ν-th sublattices. As there does not exist the coupling from the same sublattice, the diagonal matrices are all 0 with For the off-diagonal ones with μ ̸ = ν, the contribution from the nearest-neighbor interaction is simply given as The contribution from the second neighbor interaction is more complex. There exist 12 second neighbors for each site and they belong to different sublattices. After a careful listing, one obtains for the interaction ⟨⟨ij⟩⟩ -J 2xz ( Sx the contribution to T 12 (k) is the contribution to T 13 (k) is and the contribution to By setting Jz = J y = -J⊥ , we solve for the ground state of H a in Eq. 3 of the main text with the Weiss mean-field theory. The phase diagram is depicted in Fig. In the fragmented AFM, both Sx and Sz components develop uniform magnetic orders. The visible part of the order is the S z component that is a linear combination of Sx and Sz . As the z axis is defined locally on each sublattice, although the ⟨S z ⟩ is uniform, the overall state is an antiferromagnetic state. Moreover, as some portion of the ordered moment remains in the hidden octupolar part In this fragmented AFM, the reason for the presence of nonvanishing Sx and Sz order is due to the crossing coupling J 2xz . The Sz order, works as an effective and uniform Zeeman coupling to the Sx moment through the crossing coupling J 2xz . Once Sz develops an uniform order (for example from the J ⊥ coupling), it immediately polarizes Sx and generates a Sx order even when there exists a nearest-neighbor antiferromagnetic Sx -Sx interaction. consider the gauge field sector because it is much simpler than the spinon sector. The gauge field mean-field Hamiltonian is given as It is clear from the spinon mean-field Hamiltonian H spinon , both I 1 and I 2 are positive. Thus, this ferromagnetic like interaction in Eq. ( where φ should be determined. The energy of H gauge is optimized by φ that satisfies The gauge mean-field parameters, χ 1 and χ 2 , are then obtained as Due to the ferromagnetic interaction in H gauge , the mean-field parameters, χ 1 and χ 2 , are uniform throughout the lattice. Equipped with the above results, one can proceed to solve for the spinon sector. The spinon sector Hamiltonian is given as It was found to be more convenient to use a rotor representation for the spinon operator such that Φ r = e -iφr and |Φ r | = 1. This approximation neglects the amplitude fluctuation of the spinon fields and should be reasonable in the regimes where the spinon matter drives the physics. To implement the constraint, we introduce a Lagrangian multiplier λ such that where λ r should be determined self-consistently from the modified spinon Hamiltonian and satisfy on every site. It is now more convenient to use path integral formulation to solve the spinon sector. In a coherent state path integral, we integrate out the "momentum-like" field Q r and establish the partition function as Here the effective action S has the form as In a saddle point approximation, we have λ r = λ. This is also demanded by the uniform state requirement. The spinon dispersion can be immediately read off from Eq. (C11) and Eq. (C10), and are given as where {e μ } ({a n }) refers to the set of 4 first-neighbor (12 second-neighbor) vectors on the diamond lattice. In both the pyrochlore U(1) spin liquid and the pyrochlore AF * state, the spinons are fully gapped. Once it becomes gapless, the spinons will be condensed and generate magnetism of some sorts. The mean-field parameters, I 1 and I 2 , as well as the spinon amplitude, are the spinon bilinears. It is quite convenient to evaluate from the path integral approach. We find that, and this quantity should be equal to 1. Here N u.c. refers to the total number of unit cell. Moreover, for the second-neighbor sites ⟨⟨rr ′ ⟩⟩, we have the Ce-based pyrochlore Ce 2 Sn 2 O 7 and Ce 2 Zr 2 O 7 where the candidate spin liquid was expected to U(1) π spin liquid of the octupolar type For the U(1) π spin liquid, the spinon realizes the lattice translation symmetry in a projective fashion Appendix H: Spin-wave theory for "fragmented AFM" It seems that the other Nd-based dipole-octupole pyrochlore magnets including Nd 2 GaSbO 7 , Nd 2 Zr 2 O 7 and Nd 2 Hf 2 O 7 all develop the all-in all-out magnetic order. Nd 2 Zr 2 O 7 and Nd 2 Hf 2 O 7 are well-interpreted from the picture of moment fragmentation As we have remarked, the fragmented AFM develops an experimentally visible order in the S z component, and an invisible order in the S x component. What is more, S z could also function as a disordering operator to quantum mechanically flip the S x order and generate the magnetic excitation. That is precisely the reason why one can observe the magnetic excitation with the inelastic neutron scattering measurement. To compute the magnetic excitation, we stay on the horizontal axis of Fig. and the Hamiltonian in the linear spin wave theory becomes where the 'const' is related to the classical energy and does not influence the magnetic excitation. The magnetic excitations are depicted in Fig. In the inelastic neutron scattering measurement, only the S z -S z correlation is directly visible. The S z operator, under the spin wave expansion, is given as where the ordered piece simply contributes to the magnetic Bragg peak, and the second term in Eq. (H6) generates the magnetic excitations with single magnons. Moreover, the a † i a i in Eq. (H6) would generate a two-magnon continuum that should appear at high energies that the ones in Fig. . Description of each phase within gauge mean-field theory.