Motivated by observations of extreme magnetoresistance (XMR) in bulk crystals of rare-earth monopnictide (RE-V) compounds and emerging applications in novel spintronic and plasmonic devices based on thin-film semimetals, we have investigated the electronic band structure and transport behavior of epitaxial GdSb thin films grown on III-V semiconductor surfaces. The Gd 3+ ion in GdSb has a high spin S=7/2 and no orbital angular momentum, serving as a model system for studying the effects of antiferromagnetic order and strong exchange coupling on the resulting Fermi surface and magnetotransport properties of RE-Vs. We present a surface and structural characterization study mapping the optimal synthesis window of thin epitaxial GdSb films grown on III-V lattice-matched buffer layers via molecular beam epitaxy. To determine the factors limiting XMR in RE-V thin films and provide a benchmark for band structure predictions of topological phases of RE-Vs, the electronic band structure of GdSb thin films is studied, comparing carrier densities extracted from magnetotransport, angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES), and density functional theory (DFT) calculations. ARPES shows hole-carrier rich topologically-trivial semi-metallic band structure close to complete electron-hole compensation, with quantum confinement effects in the thin films observed through the presence of quantum well states. DFT-predicted Fermi wavevectors are in excellent agreement with values obtained from quantum oscillations observed in magnetic field-dependent resistivity measurements. An electron-rich Hall coefficient is measured despite the higher hole carrier density, attributed to the higher electron Hall mobility. The carrier mobilities are limited by surface and interface scattering, resulting in lower magnetoresistance than that measured for bulk crystals. In recent years, topological and trivial semimetals have received renewed interest due to observations of extremely large magnetoresistance (XMR) Rare-earth monopnictides (RE-Vs) are a class of semimetals that can be easily integrated with III-V semiconductors Many RE-Vs possess large non-saturating magnetoresistance, attributed to charge carrier compensation and the nearly-equal electron and hole high mobilities leading to a parabolic rise in magnetoresistance based on a classical two-band model Apart from magnetoresistive devices, synthesizing RE-Vs as thin films subject to biaxial strain and confinement effects also presents an opportunity to tune their band structure topology. While only RE-V bulk crystals with high spin-orbit coupling and large lattice parameters (XBi, X=La-Gd) were found to host topological semimetal states Here, we report the growth, ARPES, and magnetotransport of epitaxial lattice-matched GdSb films grown on III-V buffer layers via molecular beam epitaxy (MBE). To our knowledge, this is the first report on the synthesis conditions and electronic properties of epitaxial GdSb thin films. As a member of the RE-V family, GdSb shares the common features of antiferromagnetic ordering The GdSb films were grown in a modified VG V80H III-V MBE growth chamber with a base pressure <5x10 -11 Torr. For magnetotransport measurements, epiready semi-insulating GaSb (001) wafers were used, with significant charge carrier freeze out expected below 80 K. For photoemission and scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) studies, conductive p-type Zn:GaSb (001) wafers were used, followed by p-type Be-doped III-V buffer layers. Surface reconstructions were monitored in situ with reflection high-energy electron diffraction (RHEED, Figure Coherent growth of lattice-matched films was studied in situ with RHEED and confirmed ex situ with x-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements. Streaky RHEED patterns were seen for all layers, suggesting smooth and epitaxial films. Surface cleanliness, stoichiometry, and Gd speciation were monitored with in situ X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). XPS analysis of the Gd 4d, 3d, and Sb 3d core levels in Figure Following growth and before removal from vacuum, the GdSb films were protected from degradation in the air by capping in another interconnected vacuum system with an amorphous AlOx layer deposited by e-beam evaporation of Al2O3 at room temperature. A schematic of a typical heterostructure grown for magnetotransport measurements is shown in Figure Vacuum ultraviolet (VUV) light ARPES measurements in the 20-100 eV range were performed on 4 nm and 20 nm thick-(A) in vacuo transferred GdSb films; and (B) Sb capped, air-exposed, and Sb decapped GdSb films. A custom-built vacuum suitcase with a base pressure <1x10 -10 Torr was used for transferring films from the growth chamber at UC, Santa Barbara, to beamline 10.0.1.2 at the Advanced Light Source (ALS) in Berkeley. At the SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, Sb capped films were studied at beamline 5-2 at the Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource (SSRL). Ultraviolet photoemission spectra of the Gd 4f and Sb 4d core levels were collected for the in vacuo ALS transferred GdSb films and the SLAC We investigated the electronic structure of GdSb theoretically using density functional theory (DFT) and the screened hybrid functional of Heyd, Scuseria, and Ernzerhof (HSE06) ARPES measurements performed for a 20 nm thick GdSb film are presented in Figure The ARPES Fermi wavevectors are closer to the AFM phase DFT predictions than the non-magnetic phase. Based on the estimated Fermi volumes from the ARPES data, the 20 nm thick GdSb film shows similar hole and electron carrier densities, with an electron/hole ratio of ne/nh=0.84. The 4 nm thick GdSb films studied with ARPES showed a similar semimetallic band structure. The 20 nm thick GdSb film displays multiple quantum well states in the hole bands (in Figure Measurements of the electron pocket (Figure In Figure As a type-II AFM, the electron pockets in GdSb are not expected to show any exchange splitting because of the {111} orientation of the ferromagnetic planes. From the spectral weight for the AFM unfolded bands in Figure of (e-f), respectively, enhancing the dispersive features of the raw data. Finally, DFT calculations of a forced ferromagnetic phase in GdSb (Figure The temperature dependence of the electrical resistivity for a 10 nm thick GdSb (001) film is shown in Figure The small Hall resistivity in Figure The magnetoresistance at 14 T reaches a maximum value of 110% for a 10 nm thick film at 1.8 K (Figure Carrier concentrations derived from SdH oscillations are provided in Table In Figure High magnetic fields are expected to lead to strong exchange splitting at the electron pocket below TN (see Figure From the temperature-dependent resistivity measurements plotted in Figure In summary, we have grown epitaxial GdSb films by MBE and studied their band structure and magnetic properties with ARPES, DFT, and magnetotransport. The growth window of high-quality single-crystal GdSb films on a lattice-matched III-V structure has been established, resulting in record magnetoresistance values for the given film thicknesses among RE-V. Our comprehensive study of GdSb films paves the way to understand the relationship between the electronic and transport properties of RE-Vs films vs. their bulk crystals and other films in semimetallic systems with similar chemistry, such as the Heusler compounds: GdXV (X=Pt, Pd, V=Sb, Bi). We have identified magnetic and interface scattering mechanisms in GdSb, limiting the mobilities of thin RE-V films and ultimately resulting in lower magnetoresistance values than bulk single crystals and reduced magnetoresistance in thinner films. ARPES experiments of the GdSb layer showed quantization effects of energy levels in the electron and hole pockets. We did not detect these features in magnetotransport quantum oscillations due to the higher surface scattering and larger effective mass of the higher energy quantum well subband levels. Tuning the quantum level subband energy position by varying the film thickness could serve as a potential route for engineering carrier compensation and mobilities for improved magnetoresistive behavior. While we do not see evidence of a p-d band inversion in ARPES measurements performed for the antiferromagnetic state, our DFT calculations show the near onset of band overlap for strong exchange splitting at low temperatures and high magnetic fields in the forced ferromagnetic phase. DFT calculations treating the 4f electrons as core levels in a non-magnetic phase describe well the band structure of GdSb below the Néel temperature. By introducing 4f electron AFM ordering into the valence band structure in our DFT calculations, we have obtained a more accurate description of the split-off band position and total carrier density of the electron and hole bands. The experimental Fermi surface volumes in Table 