Integrated electro-optic (EO) frequency combs are essential components for future applications in optical communications, light detection and ranging, optical computation, sensing and spectroscopy. To date, broadband on-chip EO combs are typically generated in high-quality-factor micro-resonators, while the more straightforward and flexible non-resonant method, usually using single or cascaded EO phase modulators, often requires high driving power to realize a reasonably strong modulation index. Here, we show that the phase modulation efficiency of an integrated lithium niobate modulator could be dramatically enhanced by passing optical signals through the modulation electrodes for a total of 4 round trips, via multiple low-loss TE0/TE1 mode multiplexers and waveguide crossings, reducing electrical power consumption by more than one order of magnitude. Using devices fabricated from a wafer-scale stepper lithography process, we demonstrate a broadband optical frequency comb featuring 47 comb lines at a 25-GHz repetition rate, using a moderate RF driving power of 28 dBm (0.63 W). Leveraging the excellent tunability in repetition rate and operation wavelength, our power-efficient EO comb generator could serve as a compact low-cost solution for future high-speed data transmission, sensing and spectroscopy, as well as classical and quantum optical computation systems. Optical frequency combs (OFCs), featuring discrete, equally spaced optical frequency components The recent technological advances in the LN-on-insulator (LNOI) photonic platform have inspired a renaissance for EO combs to be achieved in chip-scale systems that are more efficient, more compact and lower cost In this article, we demonstrate a power-efficient LNOI-based EO comb generator, where the phase modulation efficiency is increased by a factor of 4 using a multi-loop design, leading to a subsequent reduction of electrical power consumption by 16 times. This powerefficient characteristic benefits from passing optical signals through the modulation electrodes for a total of 4 round trips with the assistance of multiple low-loss TE0/TE1 mode conversion processes. We show the generation of broadband optical frequency combs with 47 comb lines at a 25-GHz repetition rate using a relatively low RF driving power of 28 dBm, while maintaining excellent tunability in both the repetition rate and operation wavelength. Overall design Fig. A key enabling component for our multi-loop EO comb generator is an efficient, low-crosstalk and lowloss TE0/TE1 mode multiplexer. This is achieved using a broadband and robust adiabatic coupler design as shown in Fig. To evaluate the performance of our adiabatic mode multiplexer, we design and fabricate a 2 × 2 cascaded structure using the same fabrication method as the actual comb generator, as shown in the inset of Fig. We demonstrate broadband EO comb generation at low RF drive power using our multi-loop onchip EO comb generator. The corresponding experimental setup is shown in Fig. RF and optical tuning range Thanks to the non-resonant configuration of our design, our power-efficient EO comb generator could efficiently operate within a broad range of RF and optical frequencies. To further characterize the frequency response of our EO comb generator at different RF frequencies, we specially design and fabricate a Mach-Zehnder interferometer (MZI) [Fig. Our power-efficient broadband integrated EO comb generator is enabled by a combination of the multi-pass phase modulator design that increases the modulation efficiency by 4 folds, low-loss and low-crosstalk TE0/TE1 mode multiplexers and waveguide crossing that allow for coherent phase accumulation between loops, as well as a reliable wafer-scale device fabrication platform that yields photonic devices and circuits with high uniformity, repeatability and low loss. The low RF Vπ of 1.90 V at 24.95 GHz in our current device could potentially be further reduced using even longer electrodes Note added: During the preparation of this manuscript, we note a pre-print manuscript Wafer-scale LNOI device fabrication Our devices are fabricated from a commercially available x-cut LNOI wafer (NANOLN), which consists of a 500-nm LN thin film, a 2-μm buried SiO2 layer, and a 500-μm silicon substrate. SiO2 is first deposited on the surface of 4-inch LNOI wafter using plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD). Micro/nano-structures are then directly patterned on the entire wafer using a ASML UV Stepper lithography system (NFF, HKUST) die by die (1.5 cm x 1.5 cm) with a resolution of 500 nm. Next, a reactive ion etching (RIE) system is used to transfer patterns from photoresist layer to SiO2 layer and subsequently to LN wafer, leading to a 250 nm rib waveguide and a 250 nm LN slab. 1-cm-long metal electrodes are fabricated using a sequence of photolithography, thermal evaporation, and lift-off process, resulting in a 520-nm-thick metal layer with an electrode gap of 5.5 μm and a signal electrode width of 43 μm. SiO2 is deposited by PECVD as cladding layer of the device. Finally, chips are cleaved and the facets are carefully polished for end-fire coupling. EO comb generation CW pump light from a tunable telecom laser (Santec TSL-550) first goes through a fiber polarization controller (FPC) to ensure TE mode excitation. Light is coupled into and out from our chip using lensed fibers. RF signals (Anritsu, MG3697C) are amplified using a medium power GaAs amplifier (Pasternack, PE15A4021), before being delivered to the input port of the traveling-wave electrodes through a high-speed GSG probe. The output port of the electrodes is terminated with a 50-Ω load [Fig. Optical loss here is non-trivial due to our long and complex optical path design. The full device consists of 12-cm-long waveguides (10 cm in TE 0 mode and 2 cm in TE 1 mode), one waveguide crossing, and four mode multiplexers (8 passes in total), all of which contribute to the total on-chip optical loss. Based on the measured Q-factors of micro-resonators on the same chip, the waveguide loss is estimated to be ~ 0.2 dB cm -1 for TE0 mode and 0.4 dB cm -1 for TE1 mode, leading to a total waveguide loss of ~ 2.8 dB at 1550-nm wavelength. The waveguide crossing loss is evaluated by cutback measurements of devices with different numbers of crossings (Supplementary S2), showing an average loss of 0.18 dB in y-crystal direction and 0.10 dB in z-crystal direction, leading to a total of 0.28 dB optical loss in the full device. The mode multiplexers exhibit high conversion efficiencies and low crosstalk [Fig. EO response and RF Vπ characterizations A vector network analyzer (VNA) is used to measure the EO response of the MZI device, as shown in Fig. Fig. 3 Power-efficient broadband on-chip EO comb generation. (a) Experimental setup. (b)