The lifetime of most metals is limited by cyclic loads, ending in fatigue failure. The progressive growth of cracks ends up in catastrophic failure. An advanced method is presented for the determination of cyclic crack growth on the microscale using a nanoindenter, which allows the characterization of > 10,000 loading cycles. It uses focused ion beam fabricated notched microcantilevers. The method has been validated by cyclic bending metallic glass and tungsten microcantilevers. The experiments reveal a stable crack growth during the lifetime of both samples. The metallic glass shows less plasticity due to the absence of dislocations, but shows shearing caused by the deformation. The crack growth rates determined in the tests follow Paris' power law relationship. The results are reliable, reproducible and comparable with macroscopic setups. Due to the flexibility of the method, it is suitable for the characterization of specific microstructural features, like single phases, grain boundaries or different grain orientations. The understanding of the fatigue mechanisms is fundamental for the design of mechanical components in most engineering applications. The prediction of the fatigue lifetime is crucial for scheduling the maintenance of structural, transportation and electrical components. The mechanical damage in those cases can be caused by a multitude of loading scenarios. Alternating start-up and shut-down cycles lead to low cycle fatigue (LCF), small vibrations sum up over long time for high cycle fatigue (HCF), thermal cycling leads to thermo mechanical fatigue, etc. Consequently there is a need for different techniques to characterize fatigue under different loadings, environments and scales The underlying mechanisms for fatigue in crystalline metals are based on the generation, gliding and interaction of dislocations. Even small stresses below the technical yield point can cause dislocation glide. This results in dislocation intersections, source activation and other irreversible mechanisms Several reliable methods for the characterization of fatigue on the microscale were established and can be used for different geometries and sizes. Thin film methods allow the characterization of < 100-nm-thick samples and enable a direct observation of dislocation structures in situ or ex situ via transmission electron microscopy In these studies, the characterization on the microscale evidenced fatigue mechanisms and lifetime predictions similar to macroscopic testing Due to the dimensions of the extrusions and the samples, large fractions of the samples are affected by them. Consequently, the transformation zone to regular crack growth during fatigue is limited. Especially the initial cracks form and grow along the slip planes of the extrusions. As the slip planes are inclined to the loading direction, the fracture mode of the cracks are a mixture of crack mode I, II and III. A full transformation to mode I, as seen on macroscopic fatigue experiments cannot be reached, as the samples fail earlier The quasi-static deformation behavior of the notched microcantilevers was first investigated, to determine the fracture toughness of the materials. Figure Figure The change of the crack length with the number of loading cycles is given in Fig. Using the actual crack length and the force range in each cycle, the stress intensity factor range in each cycle can be calculated by formula 2. The results are shown in Fig. After testing, the fatigued specimens were imaged to observe the fracture surface. Postmortem images corresponding to the different samples are shown in Fig. The tilted fracture surface of a tungsten microcantilever in Fig. The tests show no signs of early stage fatigue mechanism, like extrusion formation and micro cracking The cyclic parameters presented in Sect. 2.2 were used to measure the cyclic crack growth for each tested microcantilever. The results are given in Fig. The initial crack growth rate per cycle in regime I is between 10 -11 and 10 -10 m/cycle in both materials, as shown in Fig. After the crack grows through regime I, it stabilizes. Additionally there is a transition in the type of crack. In the initial state, the crack can be described as a mechanically short crack where da/dN is the crack growth rate, ΔK I is the stress intensity, while C and m are the scaling constants. The Paris' equation exponents were found to be m = 3.8 ± 1.7 and C = 1.5 × 10 -11 ± 0.4 × 10 -11 for the metallic glass. While the ones for the tungsten single crystals are m = 4.3 ± 0.8 and C = 6.7 × 10 -12 ± 3.5 × 10 -12 . The Paris' equation exponents can also be compared to macroscopic results. However, there are no macroscopic fatigue tests for the metallic glass Zr 48 Cu 36 Ag 8 Al 8 . Hence it is compared to other ZrCu based metallic glasses, which have comparable material properties. These studies determined a stress exponent m of 1.7-3 and a ΔK TH of 1.8 -2 MPa √ m The evidenced cyclic crack growth behavior in the Paris' plot is similar to macroscopic literature data Crack growth was observed through the whole microcantilevers. According to Fig. the onset of crack growth and stable crack growth The feedback of the displacement-controlled indenter is too sluggish to cope with the fast increase in cyclic displacement towards the end of the experiments. As a result, the minimal force during a cycle F min drops below its setpoint so that the tip loses contact. A workaround would be to use intrinsically force controlled indenters. Furthermore the influence of the tip's contact area on the cyclic load-displacement behavior needs to be further investigated, as described in chapter 2.2. It is expected to highly depend both on the tip geometry and the tested material. This would give a better control over the stiffness and hence the crack length. The usage of clamped actuators and pure tensile tests, as used by other groups An advantage of the method is that it could be used ex-situ, which allows faster and cheaper testing, as ex-situ nanoindenters are more common. They also allow the characterization of atmospheric influences. The good control over the crack length by fatigue could be used to create fatigued notches for fracture toughness measurements with microcantilevers. This would overcome the issue of blunt notches obtained from FIB milling, which have a radius of ~ 10 nm The results show that the high cycle fatigue testing method of FIB-milled microcantilevers by CSM can be adjusted to measure cyclic crack growth. The method allows to determine the evolution of the crack propagation and the stress intensity range during the experiment. This enables to evaluate the transition from regime I to regime II crack growth, which allows to track the stable crack growth regime described by Paris' law. The notched microcantilever geometry was used to investigate cyclic crack growth in a metallic glass Zr48Cu36Ag8Al8 and tungsten single crystal in the {001} <110> crack orientation. During testing both materials showed the formation of striations on their fracture surfaces. The resting line distance increased with higher cycle numbers and higher stress intensity ranges. The crack growth resistance in monotonic experiments was higher for the metallic glass, due to shear banding as an effective mechanism for crack stopping. Accordingly, the fatigue tests showed a higher cyclic crack growth resistance of the metallic glass samples. The stress exponents in the Paris' law were comparable to literature results of macroscopic tests. Following the present validation of the method, it could be used in the future to characterize the cyclic crack growth resistance of microstructural constituents, such as individual phases and grain boundaries. For the experiments two materials were chosen. One of those materials was the metallic glass Zr 48 Cu 36 Ag 8 Al 8 . The samples were made by centrifugal vacuum casting, in which the 1300 °C hot mold was quenched in a copper mold, as described by Haag et al. Pre-notched microcantilevers were milled on the edges of the samples by FIB milling in a Helios Nanolab 600i (Ther-moFisher Scientific, MA, USA). The first ion beam cuts were made with an acceleration voltage of 30 kV and a current of 9.3 nA. In further steps, the current was progressively reduced to 780 pA. A small notch radius of 10 nm was accomplished by milling the notch with a current of 80 pA, as shown in previous studies The microcantilevers were loaded with a displacement-controlled in situ indenter (NMT 03, FemtoTools, Switzerland) inside a SEM (1540EsB, Carl Zeiss, Germany) at room temperature. The indenter was equipped with a 10-μm-long wedge tip. The cyclic method of Gabel and Merle The test were started by loading the cantilevers to the mean stress intensity (K I,min + K I,max )/2. Then the 10 Hz CSM oscillation was ramped-up within 25 cycles to the initial ΔK I . The first cycle was defined when ΔK I was reached. To track the cantilevers during the experiments, movies were recorded by SEM. To overcome the vibrations from actuation of the cantilevers during the SEM recording, the imaging time was set to a multiple of 100 ms. The difference by non-matching imaging frequencies can be seen in Online Resource 1 and Online Resource 2. Both Online Resources show fatigue tests of (2) , tungsten microcantilevers. The first test has an image recording time of 111 ms, while Online Resource 2 has a recording time of 1000 ms. The second one has a better image quality and the microcantilever image stays nearly constant over a long time period. Tests ended either when the indenter tip lost contact, due to a too large deflection of the microcantilevers, which could be also a result of the feedback loop being too sluggish to stop the cantilever from losing contact, or when the microcantilevers broke off. For each cycle one data point per measured and saved, which was generated by the higher recording rate of the instrument. After the tests the fracture surfaces were inspected via SEM. The experiments used a feedback loop of the indenter for maintaining a constant load range ΔP. This leads to an increase of the cyclic stress intensity, if the initial notch grows. The crack growth Δa can be determined by the change in dynamic cantilever stiffness, from the CSM signal. The CSM stiffness S CSM is calculated as the ratio between the maximal and minimal force and displacement in each loop. The stiffness and Δa are correlated, as shown via Finite Element (FE) modeling For comparison between the cyclic behavior and the monotonic behavior of the materials, additional monotonic loading tests of notched microcantilevers were done. One microsample was measured per material in the in situ indenter. The displacement rate of the tip was set to 20 nm/s. The evaluation methodology for those fracture toughness measurements are described elsewhere © The Author(s) 2022 2065 © The Author(s) 2022 2067 © The Author(s) 2022