Recently a novel two-dimensional (2D) C60 based crystal called quasi-hexagonal-phase fullerene (QHPF) has been fabricated and demonstrated to be a promising candidate for 2D electronic devices [Hou et al. Nature 606, 507-510 (2022)]. We construct an accurate and transferable machine-learned potential to study heat transport and related properties of this material, with a comparison to the face-centered-cubic bulk-phase fullerene (BPF). Using the homogeneous nonequilibrium molecular dynamics and the related spectral decomposition methods, we show that the thermal conductivity in QHPF is anisotropic, which is 137(7) W/mK at 300 K in the direction parallel to the cycloaddition bonds and 102(3) W/mK in the perpendicular in-plane direction. By contrast, the thermal conductivity in BPF is isotropic and is only 0.45(5) W/mK. We show that the inter-molecular covalent bonding in QHPF plays a crucial role in enhancing the thermal conductivity in QHPF as compared to that in BPF. The heat transport properties as characterized in this work will be useful for the application of QHPF as novel 2D electronic devices. Carbon has diverse chemical bonds and can form allotropes from three to zero dimension. A fullerene is a zero-dimensional allotrope consisting of carbon atoms connected by single and double bonds. The most typical fullerene C 60 has been extensively studied since its discovery Despite the crystalline structures, heat transport in C 60 solids exhibit strong amorphous-like behaviors Because the primitive cell of QHPF contains 120 carbon atoms, molecular dynamics (MD) is currently the only feasible computational approach In this paper, we employ the NEP approach as implemented in the gpumd package A. Models The crystal structure of monolayer QHPF is schematically shown in Fig. We will comparably study the BPF structure, which is schematically shown in Fig. The NEP approach for MLP has been recently proposed For a MLP, the descriptor The radial descriptor components are constructed as where the summation runs over all the neighbors of atom i within a certain cutoff distance. For the angular descriptor components, we consider both 3-body ones (0 and 4-body ones (0 Here, and Y lm (θ ij , φ ij ) are the spherical harmonics as a function of the polar angle θ ij and the azimuthal angle φ ij for the position difference r ij ≡ r j -r i from atom i to atom j. The 4-body descriptor components have been inspired by the atomic cluster expansion (ACE) approach Here, T k (x) is the k th order Chebyshev polynomial of the first kind and f c (r ij ) is the cutoff function defined as Here, r R c is the cutoff distance of the radial descriptor components. The trainable expansion coefficients c ij nk depend on n and k and also on the types of atoms i and j. The functions g n (r ij ) in Eq. (2) and Eq. (3) are defined similarly but with a different basis size N A bas and a different cutoff distance r A c . The various descriptor components are grouped into a vector with N des components, {q i ν } N des ν=1 . This vector is then taken as the input layer of a feedforward neuralnetwork with a single hidden layer with N neu neurons. The output of the neural network is taken as the potential energy of atom i. For the activation function in the hidden layer, we used the hyperbolic tangent function. Although the neural network architecture is not different from the one as first proposed by Behler and Parrinello We used the HNEMD method to compute the thermal conductivity in a given system. This method was first formulated in terms of two-body potentials where T is the temperature and V is the volume of the system. The proportionality constant κ αβ is the αβ component of the thermal conductivity tensor. In this paper, we are only interested in diagonal principal components of the thermal conductivity tensor. Then in a given direction α, the thermal conductivity component is written as κ α ≡ κ αα and is computed as The heat current can be resolved in the frequency domain, leading to the spectral thermal conductivity (10) Here, U j is the site energy of atom j, r ji = r i -r j , r i is the position of atom i, and v i is the velocity of atom i. To cross check the HNEMD results, we also calculated the thermal conductivity of the QHPF structure using the Green-Kubo relation in the equilibrium molecular dynamics (EMD) method: where k B is Boltzmann's constant and is the heat current that is applicable to general manybody potentials A NEP model for carbon systems has been recently trained The training and testing structures include QHPF structures, BPF structures, and C 60 chains. For QHPF, we used the NEP-Carbon model For BPF, we started from an ideal FCC unit cell with four C 60 molecules, which contains 240 carbon atoms in total. The centers of two neighboring C 60 molecules are separated by 9 Å For C 60 chains, we considered two C 60 molecules in a box with vacuum in the transverse directions and varied the separation between them from 2 to 10 Å, with an interval of 0.5 Å, obtaining 17 structures in total. All these structures were used for training. In summary, we have 152 and 1034 structures in the training and testing data sets, which contain 20,040 and 244,560 atoms, respectively. We have checked the learning curve to confirm that this training data set is large enough. After obtaining the structures, we used quantummechanical DFT calculations to obtain their reference energy, force, and virial data. To this end, we used the vasp package After calculating the reference values, we used the gpumd package Figures 6(a)-6(c) show the cumulative time-average of the thermal conductivity as computed using Eq. ( The thermal conductivity of BPF at 300 K has been measured to be about 0.4 W/mK We similarly calculated the thermal conductivity of the QHPF structure at 300 K using the three potential models. A rectangular cell with 28,800 atoms was used, which is large enough to eliminate finite-size effects in the HNEMD method. The results are shown in Fig. Different from BPF, which is essentially isotropic regarding heat transport, it turns out that heat transport in QHPF is anisotropic. The thermal conductivity in the y direction (see Fig. C 60 potential gives the most reliable predictions due to its superior accuracy for the C 60 -based structures. Nevertheless, we stress that the thermal conductivity of QHPF has not been experimentally measured so far and out results here should be regarded as theoretical predictions. To gain more insight, we show the spectral thermal conductivity κ(ω) of QHPF in the x and y directions and that of BPF in Fig. Using the methods as developed in Refs. Apart from the frequency and momentum spaces, insight can also be gained by from the real space. Figure In summary, we have constructed an accurate and transferable MLP based on the efficient NEP approach 