We present a microscopic many-body theory of the recently measured two-dimensional coherent spectroscopy (2DCS) of excitons and trions in monolayer MoSe2 materials [K. Hao et al., Nano Lett. 16, 5109 (2016)], where excitons and trions can be well interpreted as repulsive and attractive polarons, respectively, in the dilute limit of exciton density. We derive a simple relation for the 2DCS spectrum in terms of a modified, mixing time-dependent polaron Green function, which is valid in the single exciton limit. Our simulated spectra are in excellent qualitative agreement with experiments without introducing any phenomenological parameters such as decoherence rates. In particular, quantum beats between the off-diagonal crosspeaks in the experimental 2DCS spectra are well reproduced. Our work, therefore, clarifies the microscopic principle that underlies the observed optical signals of exciton-trion coherence. We find that there are two quantitative discrepancies between theory and experiment: the smaller than expected crosspeak strength and the slightly unsynchronized quantum beats at different crosspeaks. Tentatively, we attribute these residual discrepancies to the finite exciton density and the resultant polaron-polaron interaction, which is not taken into account in our theory. Over the last decade, atomically thin transition metal dichalcogenides (TMD) have received increasing attention Here, we are specifically interested in the nonlinear two-dimensional coherent spectroscopy (2DCS) based on the four-wave-mixing In this respect, two pioneering theoretical analyses are worth mentioning In this work, we would like to remove the downsides of these two theoretical analyses by taking an exact polaron model for mobile excitons and trions, with a realistic exciton mass. We present a full microscopic many-body calculation of the 2DCS spectrum of excitons and trions. Intriguingly, as photons in four-wave-mixing pulses have negligible momentum We perform a numerical simulation of the 2DCS spectrum under the experimental conditions without introducing any phenomenological parameters. There are excellent qualitative agreements between our theory and the recent experiment by Hao et al. It is interesting to note that a cold-atom analog of the 2DCS spectroscopy was recently proposed by us (i.e., the 2D Ramsey spectroscopy) The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In the following section (Sec. II), we outline the model Hamiltonian for the exciton-trion-polaron in 2D materials. In Sec. III, we present the many-body theory of the 2DCS spectroscopy and make a brief comparison to the 2D Ramsey spectroscopy with cold-atoms In monolayer MoSe 2 , spin-up (spin-down) electrons and holes near the K (K ) valley can form tightly bound excitons, with binding energy about several hundred meV where the maximum number of exciton is restricted to 1, i.e., k X † k X k ≤ 1, and the density of the electrons (n = k c † k c k ) can be tuned by the Fermi energy ε F through gate voltage. k = k 2 /(2m e ) and X k = k 2 /(2m X ) are the single-particle energy dispersion relation of electrons and excitons, respectively, with electron mass m e and exciton mass m X 2m e in 2D TMD materials 2 . In the dilute limit of electron density (n → 0), the formation of a trion is driven by the interaction Hamiltonian (i.e., the U -term). Hence, the interaction strength U can be determined by reproducing the trion binding energy E T In the 2DCS spectroscopy 9,10 , three pulses are applied to the sample at times τ 1 , τ 2 and τ 3 , respectively, separated by an evolution time delay t 1 = τ 2 -τ 1 and a mixing time delay t 2 = τ 3 -τ 2 , as illustrated in Fig. where φ k is the dipole matrix element. As we mentioned earlier, the proportionality in the above equation (i.e., the introduction of the exciton field operator) is reasonable in the limit of extremely large exciton binding energy. We note that, only the zero-momentum exciton field operators appear in the interaction operator V , due to the negligible photon momentum in the excitation pulses (i.e., k i ∼ k s ∼ 0). After some of the three pulses, different many-body polaron states |e with a single exciton are created. These include the inter-valley trion or attractive polaron, consisting of a K-valley exciton and a K -valley electron, dressed by the multiple-particle-hole excitations of the electron Fermi sea in the K -valley According to the standard nonlinear response theory where the time-dependent interaction operator V (t) ≡ e iHt V e -iHt , and • • • stands for the quantum average over the initial many-body configuration of the system without excitation pulses, which can be either the ground state at zero temperature or a thermal state at nonzero temperature. By expanding the three bosonic commutators, there are a total of four distinct correlation functions and their complex conjugates 11 . For the rephasing scheme (i.e., t 1 > 0) with the phase-match directions, k s = -k 1 + k 2 + k 3 , as adopted in the experiment and the process of ground-state bleaching (GSB) These two processes can be understood by using doublesided Feynman diagrams, as shown in Fig. where for i = 2, 3, Here, ω 1 is the excitation (or absorption) energy and ω 3 is the emission energy. As a response function, we have defined ω + 1 = ω 1 + i0 + and ω + 3 = ω 3 + i0 + , where the infinitesimal 0 + is introduced to regularize the Fourier transformation at t 1 → ∞ and t 3 → ∞. Let us first focus on the ESE process, R 2 (t 1 , t 2 , t 3 ), as described by Fig. where H 0 and H X denote the model Hamiltonian H in the cases of no exciton and of a single exciton, respectively. We also denote the initial configuration of the system (without any excitons and with a background en-ergy E FS of the electron Fermi sea) as |FS , so we can evaluate The configuration |FS could be a thermal mixed state at nonzero temperature. In the above expression of R 2 (t 1 , t 2 , t 3 ), we may insert a complete set of many-body states of the electron Fermi sea, just before or just after e iH0t3 . These many-body states can formally be constructed by creating multipleparticle-hole excitations out of the Fermi sea, in the form, where ν is the number of particle-hole pairs, κ ν ≡ {k h } collectively indexes the ν particle momenta (k where k F is the Fermi wavevector. The corresponding momentum and energy of the manybody state can be denoted as κν and k κν , respectively. In the absence of any particle-hole excitations, we simply have | κ ν=0 = |FS and κν = E FS . By inserting the identity κν | κ ν κ ν | = 1 into Eq. ( where we have defined the correlation function, An immediate observation is that, as a result of the momentum conservation, the many-body states | κ ν must have zero momentum. Thus, no particle-hole excitations are allowed in | κ ν and the only contribution to F κν (t) is provided by the unperturbed Fermi sea, | κ ν=0 = |FS . We now see that the correlation function F κν (t) can be directly expressed in terms of the retarded polaron Green function at zero momentum G k=0 (t) = G(t), i.e., where 25 Therefore, we obtain a remarkably simple expression for the ESE contribution R 2 , It would be useful to write down a formal expression for the retarded polaron Green function at zero momentum. For this purpose, we recall that different zero-momentum polaron states (i.e., the n-th state with polaron energy E (n) ) can be written as where the second term describes the dressing of multiparticle-hole excitations and the first term describes the ability of free propagation of the exciton, as measured by the polaron residue into the expression of the polaron Green function, we find that, where is the polaron energy measured with respect to the Fermi sea energy. Therefore, the ESE contribution R 2 takes the form, The physics behind this expression may easily be understood from the ESE process illustrated in Fig. The factor measures the transfer rates between many-body states induced by the three excitation pulses and the four-wave-mixing signal, while the three dynamical (time-evolution) phase factors simply show the phases accumulated during the time delays t 1 , t 2 and t 3 , respectively. After the double Fourier transformation, we obtain It is convenient to introduce a modified, t 2 -dependent polaron Green function in the frequency domain which reduces to the conventional retarded polaron Green function G R (ω) at zero mixing time delay t 2 = 0. Then, the ESE third-order response function S 2 can be written as, The GSB process R 3 can be analyzed in the exactly same way. We find the expressions, R 3 (t 1 , t 2 , t 3 ) = G * (t 1 )G(t 3 ) and The absence of the mixing time (t 2 ) dependence in the expressions is easy to understand from Fig. By adding the two contributions S 2 and S 3 , S = S 2 + S 3 , we arrive at one of the key results of our work, where (-ω 1 ) -≡ -ω 1 -i0 + . It is readily seen that the 2DCS spectrum satisfies the relation, Therefore, the amplitude and the real part of the 2DCS spectrum are both symmetric, upon the replacements -ω 1 → ω 3 and -ω 3 → ω 1 . We would like to emphasize that the symmetric 2DCS spectrum is rooted in two facts. First, the excitation pulse creates or annihilates electron-hole pairs at essen-tially zero momentum At this point, it is useful to contrast our simple expression of the 2DCS spectrum, Eq. ( where Ψ i is the initial state, Ψ α (Ψ β ) are the excited states with energies E α (E β ), ω αβ ≡ E α -E β are the energy differences, and γ αβ are the associated decoherence rates. Γ(ω) = 1/(iω -σ) is the complex lineshape function with σ as the line-broadening parameter. It is readily seen that the t 2 -independent term (i.e., the R 3 contribution) in our Eq. ( , and finally in the energies Thus, our derivation of the 2DCS spectrum Eq. ( Let us now briefly compare 2DCS with another type of 2D spectroscopy with ultracold atoms, the so-called 2D Ramsey spectroscopy Apart from this difference, there are amazing similarities between the 2DCS and the 2D Ramsey spectroscopy, although in the latter To demonstrate the usefulness of the simple expression Eq. ( where m e ≡ 1/(2t c a 2 ) and m X ≡ 1/(2t d a 2 ) in the dilute limit (n → 0) that of interest. We note that, the momentum k on the lattice takes the values, with the integers n x , n y = -L/2 + 1, We solve the polaron model at zero temperature, by applying the polaron ansatz Eq. ( Here, the Fermi sea at zero temperature |FS is obtained by filling the single-particle energy level k with N electrons from the bottom of the energy band (i.e., -4t c ), up to the energy E F . The hole momentum k h and the particle momentum k p must satisfy the constraints kp E F and k h < E F , respectively. The Fermi energy measured from the band bottom is then It is readily seen the dimension of the Hilbert space is D = 1 + N (L 2 -N ). Under the basis states, the polaron Hamiltonian then is casted into a D by D matrix, with the following matrix elements, and We diagonalize the matrix to obtain the eigenvalues E (n) and eigenstates, from which we extract the polaron energies and the residues Here, due to the use of a square lattice, we also need to subtract the lowest energy of exciton (i.e., -4t d ) in calculating the polaron energies. Excitation Energy, = 132 fs FIG. Let us now fix the parameters t c , t d , and U in the polaron model Hamiltonian, according to the recent experimental data on monolayer MoSe 2 To determine the interaction strength U < 0, we recall that the trion binding energy is about 30 meV As a brief summary of the parameters to be used, throughout the work we will use t c = 10 meV, t d = t c /2 = 5 meV and U = -6t c = -60 meV. The lat-tice size is fixed to L = 16. We tune the Fermi energy ε F 4πN t c /L 2 by changing the number of electrons N . To compare with the experimental 2DCS data In Fig. We find clearly the exciton (X) and trion (T ) peaks along the diagonal direction (see the dashed lines), as in the experiment. Furthermore, two off-diagonal crosspeaks, labelled as HCP and LCP , are fairly evident. Their brightness oscillates with the mixing time delay t 2 as experimentally observed, revealing the coherent coupling between excitons and trions. All those intriguing features can be understood from the simple expression Eq. (24). At zero mixing time t 2 = 0, Eq. ( There is an apparent quantitative discrepancy between theory and experiment on the crosspeak brightness. Our prediction of the crosspeak strength √ Z T Z X means that at the zero mixing time t 2 = 0 the crosspeak brightness should lie between those of the two diagonal peaks, as shown in Fig. Apart from this discrepancy, we find a remarkable agreement between theory and experiment on other details, upon changing the mixing time t 2 . As in the experiment, in each subplot of Fig. In Fig. On the other hand, the real part of the 2D signal in Fig. We finally consider the dependence of the rephasing 2D signal on the electron density or the electron Fermi energy at the mixing time t 2 = 0. As shown in Fig. In summary, we have investigated the 2D coherent spectroscopy of excitons and trions in monolayer transition metal dichalcogenides, by using a many-body Fermi polaron model with mobile exciton. Our investigation complements the previous pioneering studies based on either few-body calculations On the other hand, experimentally, the different implementation of the polarization of the laser pulses (such as the pathway σ + σ -σ + σ -) can be used to create biexcitons 