Layered ferromagnets with high coercivity have special applications in nanoscale memory elements in electronic circuits, such as data storage. Therefore, searching for new hard ferromagnets and effectively tuning or enhancing the coercivity are the hottest topics in layered magnets today. Here, we report a strain tunability of perpendicular magnetic anisotropy in van der Waals (vdW) ferromagnets VI3 using magnetic circular dichroism measurements. For an unstrained flake, the M-H curve shows a rectangular-shaped hysteresis loop with perpendicular magnetic anisotropy and a large coercivity (up to 1.775 T at 10 K). Furthermore, the coercivity can be enhanced to a maximum of 2.6 T at 10 K under a 2.9% in-plane tensile strain. Our DFT calculations show that the magnetic anisotropy energy (MAE) can be dramatically increased after applying an in-plain tensile strain, which contributes to the enhancement of coercivity in the VI3 flake. Meanwhile, the strain tunability on the coercivity of CrI3, with a similar crystal structure, is limited. The main reason is the strong spin-orbital coupling in V 3+ in VI6 octahedra in comparison with that in Cr 3+ . The strain tunability of coercivity in VI3 flakes highlights its potential for integration into vdW heterostructures, paving the way toward nanoscale spintronic devices and applications in the future. The study on layered magnets coupled by vdW force can be traced back to 50 years ago For a ferromagnet, coercivity refers to the opposing magnetic intensity that is applied to a ferromagnetic material to remove the residual magnetism. On the other hand, it reflects the ability of ferromagnetic materials in retaining remanence. Hard ferromagnetic materials, generally having large coercivity, indicate great potential for applications in the manufacture of magnetic storage units. However, for most well-known layered ferromagnets, coercivity is generally less than one tesla (T) [CrI3 (~0.2 T) and Fe3GeTe2 (~0.6 T) VI3 has a layered honeycomb structure coupled with vdW force (Fig. We first characterize the basic magnetic property of exfoliated VI3 flakes on a SiO2/Si substrate using temperature-dependent magnetic circular dichroism (MCD) measurement. Fig. Then, we dynamically apply an in-plane tensile strain in a thin VI3 flake and detect the temperature-dependent ferromagnetic properties using MCD spectroscopy simultaneously. To maximize the tensile strain, we select a relatively thin VI3 (~20 nm) as a candidate. As shown in Fig. It also reflects that the applied tensile strain is nearly uniform within the entire sample. As the strain further increases, the VI3 flake tends to crack, accompanied by a decrease in coercivity because of strain release (Fig. For the V 3+ in VI3, two 3d electrons occupy two of the three degenerate t2g electronic states in its VI6 octahedra with the total spin S=1. Due to partially filled t2g orbitals, it leads to the presence of orbital degrees of freedom in VI3 These are the primary origins of hard ferromagnetism in VI3, namely, high coercivity. However, under tensile strain, how the subtle distortion of VI6 octahedra induces the enhancement of coercivity is still uncertain. Therefore, we employ DFT calculations to study the in-plane tensile strain effect on MAE in monolayer VI3. Fig. In the bulk form, CrI3 also shows a ferromagnetic behavior with the easy axis along the caxis (Fig. In conclusion, the coercivity of VI3 flakes under an in-plane tensile strain has been carefully investigated, based on in-situ MCD measurements. We find that coercivity in VI3 flakes can be enhanced from 1.78 T in the unstrained state to 2.60 T under a 2.9 % strain at 10 K, without the influence on Tc. In addition, the tunability of coercivity in CrI3 flakes under an in-plane tensile strain is limited. This is mainly related to the strong MAE induced by SOC in VI3 in comparison with the quenching orbital moment in CrI3. The findings of this work open up a novel route for effectively tuning the coercivity based on MAE in 2D magnets. VI3 single crystals were synthesized by a chemical vapor transport method. The mixture of vanadium powder and iodine pieces with a molar ratio of 1:3.1 was loaded in a silica tube and sealed under a vacuum. The ampoule was then put into a single-zone horizontal tube furnace, with the hot end held at 823 K and the cold end at ambient temperature. After 3 days of vapor transport, millimeter-sized hexagonal dark brown plates were obtained at the cold end, as shown in Fig. We employed thin polydimethylsiloxanes (PDMS) as a stretcher to apply a tensile strain on the layered materials. First, we cut the PDMS into a long strip, and then attached it to a SiO2/Si substrate. After that, we carefully exfoliated VI3 and CrI3 flakes on the PDMS with blue tape, to keep the sample in an unstrained state. To apply a tensile strain on the samples, we first pulled PDMS/substrate apart at one boundary, stretched PDMS with a micro-manipulator, and then put PDMS back to the substrate again to keep the tensile strain. The strain was estimated by measuring the change of length of the samples along the stretching direction. To exactly evaluate the strain, we checked the length change in different positions of samples. The ferromagnetic behaviors of the VI3 flakes under in-plane tensile strain were measured in an in situ magnetic circular dichroism (MCD) system (Figure All calculations were performed by using the Quantum ESPRESSO package 