We report recent progress towards the realization of a sub-mK, lowvibration environment at the bottom stage of a dry dilution refrigerator for use in mechanical tests of quantum mechanics. Using adiabatic nuclear demagnetization, we have cooled a silicon cantilever force sensor to T ≈ 1 mK. The temperature of the tip-holder of the cantilever chip was determined via a primary magnetic flux noise thermometer. The quality factor of the cantilever continues to increase with decreasing temperature, reaching Q ≈ 4 • 10 4 at 2 mK. To demonstrate that the vibration isolation is not compromised, we report the detection of the thermal motion of the cantilever down to T ≈ 20 mK, only limited by the coupling to the SQUID readout circuit. We discuss feasible improvements that will allow us to probe unexplored regions of the parameter space of continuous spontaneous localization models. The preparation of a mechanical oscillator in a coherent quantum-mechanical state Different approaches to this end, largely stemming from the field of optomechanics One common prerequisite of these experiments is the cooling of the oscillator to minimize thermal fluctuations and its coupling to environmental degrees of freedom. This can be achieved either passively (as e.g. in Refs. The thermodynamic cooling of such systems comes with long-standing challenges. While the ground-state cooling of GHz oscillators can be achieved with a standard dry dilution refrigerator, temperatures below 1 mK are a requirement for observing quantum effects in the motion of oscillators in the MHz In this work, we report progress towards the simultaneous resolution of both challenges in a cryogenic setup dedicated to MRFM. We show that it is possible to lower the temperature achievable in our setup by more than one order of magnitude -from T ≈20 mK to T 1 mK -without compromising the vibration isolation. To achieve this, we combine the use of an adiabatic nuclear demagnetization stage with the mass-spring system for the filtering of mechanical vibration already described in Ref. Our experimental setup is described in Fig. Below the mixing chamber there is a mass-spring system optimized for passive filtering of mechanical vibrations between 100 Hz and 10 kHz. It consists of four copper masses (≈ 2 kg) connected by springs, that can easily be replaced to vary the resonance frequency. It is designed to filter both vertical and lateral vibrations, and it is thermalized to the mixing chamber plate. We refer to Ref. The magnetic resonance force microscope is firmly attached to the lowest mass of the mass-spring system. The force sensor is an IBM-style silicon cantilever with a permanent Nd 2 Fe 14 B magnet attached to its tip. The mass of the magnet is estimated to be m ≈ 1.5 ng, which, together with the measurement of the frequency of the fundamental mode, ω c ≈ 653 Hz, yields a stiffness k ≈ 2.6 • 10 -5 N•m -1 . The tip-holder is connected to a plate that can be tip-tilted and lifted in the z-direction by three piezo knobs. This allows to control the positioning of the cantilever with respect to the sample below it. Oscillations of the cantilever can be electrically driven via a dither piezo. The cantilever, the sample as well as their holders have been described in Ref. A silver wire running down from the PrNi 5 provides the thermal link to cool down the cantilever holder. After passing through the mixing chamber plate, the wire is anchored to the mass-spring system in order not to compromise the vibration isolation. This is achieved by gluing the wire to LEGO ® blocks attached to each mass of the mass-spring system. The extremely low thermal conductivity of LEGO ® blocks in the mK range The temperature of the silver wire is monitored through two different thermometers. The first thermometer is a resistance thermometer developed by one of us (W.B.) and mounted on the silver wire right above the vibration isolation stage. This reference thermometer offers fast, highly-accurate temperature readings between 15 mK and 1 K. The second thermometer is a magnetic flux fluctuation thermometer (MFFT) built in-house, positioned below the massspring system and right above the cantilever holder. The MFFT consists of a superconducting coil gradiometrically wound around the silver wire The three joints connecting the silver wire to the PrNi 5 , the MFFT and the cantilever holder were spot-welded in-situ, silver-to-silver, rather than clamped. This is done in order to maximize the thermal conductivity and avoid bottlenecks in the thermalization of the MFFT and the cantilever to the nuclear demagnetization stage. Finally, the silicon sample below the MRFM sensor contains a pick-up loop for the magnetic readout of the cantilever position via a superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) We begin the discussion of the experimental results from the thermometry, which is essential to establish that our setup is capable to reach temperatures below the typical base temperature, ≈ 20 mK, of a dry dilution refrigerator. In a noise thermometer such as the MFFT, the temperature is extracted from a measurement of the power density spectrum (PSD) of the noise registered by the device: in this case, the noise PSD S Φ of the magnetic flux picked up by the coil of the MFFT. Two typical spectra corresponding to different temperatures are shown in Fig. where σ is the bulk conductivity of the metallic wire which generates the magnetic fluctuations, R its radius, T its temperature, and μ 0 its magnetic permeability. The dimensionless function G depends on the precise geometry of the MFFT (i.e., on the combined system composed of the metallic wire and the pick-up coil). It encodes the frequency dependence of the noise via the skin depth δ(ω) = 2/μ 0 σω and it determines both the cut-off frequency and the roll-off of the spectral density with frequency (possibly together with additional effects contributed by the surrounding readout circuit, e.g. the cutoff introduced by amplifiers at the end of the measurement chain). On top of the behavior predicted by Eq. ( Once the thermal noise signal is isolated, Eq. ( In Fig. Our second set of results concerns the dissipation properties of the cantilever. Besides being a basic characterization of the MRFM system, we are motivated by the fact that applications of our experimental setup to CSL exclusions studies benefit from large quality factors of the cantilever force sensor. The quality factor of the force sensor can be determined by driving it externally via the dither piezo and varying the frequency of the drive around the resonant frequency ω c ≈ 653 Hz. The displacement of the oscillator as a function of frequency can be determined from the voltage measured across the readout SQUID, using the calibration described in App. C. We performed multiple frequency sweeps for different temperatures and fixed driving amplitudes, of which some examples are shown in Fig. The quality factor Q = ω c /Γ can be extracted via a fit of each frequency sweep to a Lorentzian peak. The results are shown in Fig. We note that for these measurements, the cantilever was positioned approximately 100 μm away from the sample in order to minimize the influence of surface two-level systems, presumably dangling bonds that cause surface spins, on the cantilever's properties The energy stored in the oscillator in the absence of any external drive, including that originating from unwanted vibrations of the setup, is subject to thermal fluctuations. Therefore, to demonstrate that the silver wire does not impair the performance of the vibration isolation stage, we set out to measure the thermal motion of the cantilever versus temperature. The fluctuations of the cantilever displacement can be inferred from a measurement of the PSD of the MRFM readout circuit, where the thermal motion appears as a Lorentzian peak centered around ω c . The area under the peak can be converted into an rms displacement of the cantilever, x 2 , where • denotes the time-average of the displacement over the duration of each measurement. Since the measurement time (t meas = 600 s) is much longer than the ring-down time of the cantilever (τ = Q/πω c ≈ 5 s for Q = 10 4 ), the rms displacement can be converted to temperature via the equipartition theorem, k B T cantilever = k x 2 , where k is the stiffness of the cantilever. In order for this measurement to be successful, it is important to have a large sensitivity of the readout circuit to the oscillator displacement. Therefore, to measure the thermal motion, we moved the cantilever to be much closer to the sample with respect to the position used in the previous Section. Due to the influence of two-level systems on the sample surface, the quality factor through this measurement was lower than in the previous one: it did not exceed 2 • 10 4 and decreased with temperature Averaging over measurements of the oscillator temperature obtained at constant bath temperatures yields the bottom plot of Fig. At fixed T sample , subsequent measurements of T cantilever are expected to fluctuate around the average value Tcantilever with a standard deviation δT = τ /t meas Tcantilever . Therefore, for each plateau in T sample in Fig. We demonstrated that it is possible to combine nuclear demagnetization and vibration-isolation techniques to reach a vibrationally quiet 1 mK environment at the bottom of a dry dilution refrigerator. Improvements to the SQUID circuit should allow us to improve the sensitivity of the readout by as much as one order of magnitude. In turn, this may allow us to probe the thermal motion of the cantilever from the 20 mK demonstrated here to the sub-mK regime, far away from the surface with the pick-up coil. Even lower temperatures may be reached by adding a second, copper-based nuclear demagnetization stage thermalized to the silver wire at the bottom of the vibration-isolation stage. Looking ahead, we can discuss the feasibility of our setup for improved tests of CSL models As the figure of merit for CSL measurements is roughly S F /R 2 , the comparison of past and current values of S F and R suggests a possible improvement of two orders of magnitude in the exclusion plot for λ. The observation of the thermal motion of the cantilever down to temperatures T ≈ 20 mK implies that, at least during quiet times, the vibration isolation is good enough to attenuate the cantilever position noise at resonance to a level below 4k B T /k ≈ 0.2 nm. Note that with a quality factor Q ≈ 4 • 10 4 , this requires the cantilever base to vibrate by less than 50 fm in the cantilever bandwidth. The position noise will have to be improved by a factor of approximately five in order to observe thermal motion at 1 mK. In order for a future measurement to put the tightest constraints on CSL parameters, we need to also work on an improved accuracy of the parameter that converts the SQUID voltage to the motion of the resonator, which will require a careful characterisation of the SQUID and the readout circuit itself. The results reported in Fig. As mentioned in the main text, on top of the behavior expected from Eq. ( 1. discard data below 50 Hz, which is affected by 1/f noise as well as noise originating from the pulse tube. 2. divide the remaining data into smaller frequency bins of 50 Hz width. 3. for each bin, determine the frequencies at which interference peaks occur by identifying outliers in the bin. The outliers are identified using the combination of two criteria: a height threshold, and a z-score threshold. If a certain frequency is identified as an outlier in more than 2.5% of the measured PSD, it is discarded from all the spectra for the remaining of the post-processing analysis. Spectra measured at high temperatures are not used in determining this threshold since the interference peaks are drowned out by the signal. In Fig. The calibration procedure of the MMFT is done as follows. First, we numerically integrate the PSD to determine the flux noise power between a lower cutoff ω 0 = 50 Hz and an upper cutoff ω 1 = 3 kHz. Consistent with the expectation that the MFFT should operate as a primary thermometer, the resulting spectral noise power, depends linearly on the temperature T measured by the reference thermometer above 15 mK, as shown in the top right panel of Fig. Appendix C Analysis and calibration of the two-stage cantilever readout circuit Here α denotes the linear coupling between the pick-up loop and the cantilever displacement, while the mutual inductance M 12 = 5 nH. In Fig. This change in flux induced by the cantilever motion is transferred first via a transformer to a secondary loop (with total flux Φ 2 ) which contains the input coil of the readout SQUID. The secondary loop also includes a calibration coil that can be used to externally inject a flux in the circuit. Neglecting the back-action of the SQUID on the readout circuit, the potential energy of the latter of Fig. Here, L 1 and L 2 are the total inductances of the two stages of the circuit, k 0 is the bare spring constant of the oscillator, and Φ cal = M cal I cal is the flux induced by the calibration coil. The stationary condition ∂U/∂Φ 1 = 0 yields the conservation law for the flux Φ 1 : This relation can be inserted back in the potential to eliminate Φ 1 . The result is: with k = k 0 -α 2 /L 1 a modified spring constant due to the presence of the pick-up loop, and In this form, the potential energy can be used to derive the equation of motion for the cantilever displacement x. Neglecting, for the moment, thermal noise as well as additional driving sources such as the piezo, one obtains (in frequency domain, denoted by hats): Here, γ is the damping rate, m is the mass of the cantilever, and ω 0 = k/m the resonant frequency. The flux Φ 2 , in turn, is the sum of the contributions induced by the calibration coil and by the oscillator displacement. From the condition ∂U/∂Φ 1 = 0, we find: Hence, in frequency domain: With some algebra, we can obtain the response of the readout circuit to the calibration signal: where The phase φ of complex-valued transfer function T (ω) is given by: Qualitatively, in the weak-coupling regime δ γ ω 0 valid for our experiment, the phase response shows a peak at ω ≈ ω 0 of amplitude δ 2 /γω 0 and width controlled by γ. It is convenient to introduce the quality factor of the cantilever, Q = ω 0 /γ, as well as a dimensionless parameter, which is a figure of merit of the sensitivity of the readout circuit to the cantilever displacement. Then, the phase response can be written as: This expression can be used to estimate the parameters β, Q, ω 0 for the experimental setup. This is done by applying a calibration signal Φ cal of constant amplitude and varying frequency ω, and then fitting the resulting phase response to Eq. (C13). In Fig. In the top row of Fig. Due to the expected small coupling to the cantilever, the input data for this calibration measurement consists of the average of 24 frequency sweeps. We note that while the absolute value of the response suffers from slow drift of the gain of the amplifiers used, even after the averaging, the phase response only suffers from the noise in the SQUID. A non-linear fit of Eq. (C13) yields β = (3.77 ± 0.02) • 10 -5 , Q = 37000 ± 500 and ω 0 = 653.17 Hz. The uncertainty on fit parameters was determined via a simple bootstrap procedure: the fit was performed 1000 times on resampled data, and the uncertainty obtained from the variance of the resulting distributions of fit parameters. In the bottom row of Fig. When the calibration coil is not used, the flux through the readout SQUID is directly proportional to the cantilever displacement x: Thus, in order to determine the displacement x from a measurement of Φ SQUID , we need to know the spring constant k as well as the circuit parameter ηL 2 . The former can be estimated from the frequency of the cantilever and the mass m of the Nd 2 Fe 1 4B magnet on its tip. From a measurement of the radius of the magnet, R ≈ 3.65 • 10 -6 m, assuming that the sphere outweighs the silicon cantilever and assuming a spherical shape for simplicity, as well as knowing the mass density ρ = 7600 kg•m -3 , the mass of the oscillator turns out to be Hence we obtain: The circuit parameter ηL 2 is estimated as follows. The transformer connecting the two loops has a gradiometric washer design with a total mutual inductance of Additionally, the transformer has an input inductance of ≈ measured the response of the cantilever to a drive applied to the piezo, varying the driving amplitude and sweeping the driving frequency. The cantilever was read out using the two-stage SQUID detection circuit described in Appendix C, with the SQUID signal converted to an estimate of the displacement of the oscillator induced by the piezo drive. We only report results corresponding to the largest drive amplitude, i.e. 10 mV applied to the input of the piezo. The temperature of the Ag wire throughout the demagnetization sweep was monitored using the MFFT, and determined in post-processing using the same calibration described in Appendix B. We assume that the cantilever-piezo system was in thermal equilibrium with the Ag wire throughout the measurements. We assign a temperature to each step of the demagnetization ramp by averaging out the MFFT measurements that occurred during each step; these temperature values are then assigned to each frequency sweep depending on the initial time of the sweep. The frequency sweeps display the typical resonant behavior around a center frequency ω c ≈ 653 Hz. We swept the frequency from a value below ω c to a value above it and back down. Because of the presence of hysteresis between the "up" and "down" portions of each sweep, they were analyzed separately. The slight hysteresis is caused by the slow response of the resonator because of its high Q-factor, From each displacement vs frequency curve, we obtain the quality factor through a fit to a Lorentzian peak function. The uncertainty on the quality factor was determined via a simple bootstrap procedure: we re-sampled the data with replacement 1000 times, performed the non-linear fit on each re-sampled curve, and assigned uncertainty based on the empirical distribution of fit parameters thus obtained. Results from the "up" and "down" sweeps, as well as from different sweeps that occurred at the same temperature, were aggregated using inverse-variance weighting to obtain the quality factor vs temperature data shown in Fig. The measurement run summarized in Figure The average energy stored in the oscillator during the measurement is proportional to the area of this thermal peak in the PSD. To assign a value to the area on the basis of the noisy data, it is important to determine the noise background. This was done separately for each trace, as follows. First, we binned the data in six intervals of width 0.5 Hz, such that the peak was contained in the third bin, while the remaining five bins only contained the noise. We took as the noise power the average integral of these five bins, and subtracted it from the integral of the PSD in the bin containing the peak. The result was first converted to an rms displacement of the oscillator, x 2 , using the calibration procedure outlined in App. C, and then to the temperature of the oscillator via the equipartition theorem: k B T osc = k x 2 .