We report giant anisotropy in thermoelectric power factor (S 2 σ) of marcasite structuretype PtSb 1.4 Sn 0.6 . PtSb 1.4 Sn 0.6 , synthesized using ambient pressure flux growth method upon mixing Sb and Sn on the same atomic site, is a new phase different from both PtSb 2 and PtSn 2 that crystallize in the cubic P a 3 pyrite and F m 3m fluorite unit cell symmetry, respectively. Giant difference in S 2 σ for heat flow applied along different principal directions of the orthorhombic unit cell mostly stems from anisotropic Seebeck coefficients. Anisotropy in functional characteristics is rather important in many diverse scientific disciplines including thermoelectricity. The structure was subsequently solved by direct methods and refined on F 2 with the aid of the SHELXL package. Transport, thermal and thermodynamic properties were measured in a quantum design PPMS-9 system. The crystal was oriented and cut into rectangular bars along principal crystallographic axes for four-probe resistivity and thermal transport measurements. Silver paint and thin Au wires were used for contacts in electrical transport measurement. The drive current and frequency were 1 mA and 17 Hz. Hall resistivity ρ xy was measured with current along the c-axis and magnetic field along the b-axis direction. Thermal transport was measured by using one-heater-two-thermometer setup. Epoxy and Cu leads were used for contacts in thermal transport measurement. Continuous measuring mode was used with maximum heat power and period set at 50 mW and 1430 s along with the maximum temperature rise of 3%. The sample dimensions were measured by an optical microscope Nikon SMZ-800 with 10 μm resolution. PtSb 1.4 Sn 0.6 crystalizes in the FeAs 2 -type structure, space group P nnm [Fig. T (K) The specific heat C p (T) of PtSb In a single-band system, S(T) is given by S Thermoelectric power factor S 2 σ where σ = 1/ρ is plotted in Fig. The absolute values are relatively small for thermoelectric application. The ZT of nominal PtSb 2 reaches a maximum ∼ 0.009 between 220 to 250 K, which can be enhanced to ∼ 0.059 -0.073 around 350 K in samples with 2% Te-doping at Sb sites. In summary, PtSb 1.4 Sn 0.6 single crystals crystallize in orthorhombic marcasite structure even though both PtSb 2 and PtSn 2 are cubic materials at ambient pressure. The alloying in between PtSb 2 and PtSn 2 creates not only simple random distribution of atoms but also significant change in bond energies and ethalpies of formation so that a new phase is stabilized for PtSb 1.4 Sn 0.6 . 