The role of thermal effects in the focused electron beam induced deposition (FEBID) process of Me2Au(tfac) is studied by means of irradiation-driven molecular dynamics simulations. The FEBID of Me2Au(tfac), a commonly used precursor molecule for the fabrication of gold nanostructures, is simulated at different temperatures in the range of 300 -450 K. The deposit's structure, morphology, growth rate, and elemental composition at different temperatures are analyzed. The fragmentation cross section for Me2Au(tfac) is evaluated on the basis of the cross sections for structurally similar molecules. Different fragmentation channels involving the dissociative ionization (DI) and dissociative electron attachment (DEA) mechanisms are considered. The conducted simulations of FEBID confirm experimental observations that deposits consist of small gold clusters embedded into a carbon-rich organic matrix. The simulation results indicate that accounting for both DEAand DI-induced fragmentation of all the covalent bonds in Me2Au(tfac) and increasing the amount of energy transferred to the system upon fragmentation increase the concentration of gold in the deposit. The simulations predict an increase in Au:C ratio in the deposit from 0.18 to 0.25 upon the temperature increase from 300 K to 450 K, being within the range of experimentally reported values. Focused Electron Beam Induced Deposition (FEBID) is a technology for the controllable fabrication of complex nanostructures with nanometer resolution The FEBID process involves a complex interplay of different phenomena taking place on different temporal and spatial scales: (i) adsorption, diffusion and desorption of precursor molecules on/from a substrate; (ii) transport of primary, secondary and backscattered electrons; (iii) electron-induced dissociation of the adsorbed precursor molecules; and (iv) follow-up chemical transformations. The atomistic modeling of the FEBID process has become possible recently by means of Irradiation-Driven Molecular Dynamics (IDMD) Within the IDMD framework, various quantum processes occurring in an irradiated system (e.g. covalent bond breakage induced by ionization or electron attachment) are treated as random, fast and local transformations incorporated into the classical MD framework in a stochastic manner with the probabilities elaborated on the basis of quantum mechanics A detailed overview of the computational workflow for IDMD-based simulations of the FEBID process has been presented in the recent study Investigation of the phenomena that govern the formation and growth of nanostructures in the FEBID process is a complex multi-parameter problem. Indeed, different precursor molecules, substrate types as well as irradiation, replenishment and post-processing conditions can be explored to fabricate deposits with the optimal geometries and compositions. However, due to the complexity of the problem, not all the mentioned aspects of the FEBID process have been explored so far by means of IDMD simulations. One of the parameters influencing the properties of FEBID-grown deposits is the operational temperature of the FEBID process Different types of precursor molecules have been proposed for FEBID applications, see reviews For example, one can mention metal carbonyls (e.g. Fe(CO) 5 , W(CO) 6 or Co 2 (CO) 8 ), phosphines (e.g. Pt(PF 3 ) 4 ), halides (e.g. Pt(NH 3 ) 2 Cl 2 or Pt(CO) 2 Cl 2 ), cyclopentadienyl complexes (e.g. MeCpPtMe 3 ) and β-diketonates (e.g. Cu(hfac) 2 ). Some precursors, such as metal carbonyls considered in the previous IDMD-based studies In Ref. In the present study, the role of thermal effects during the FEBID process is investigated at the atomistic level by means of IDMD simulations. The Me 2 Au(tfac) precursor molecule is considered as an illustrative case study. The FEBID of Me 2 Au(tfac) is simulated at different temperatures in the range of 300 -450 K, and the deposit's structure, morphology, growth rate, and elemental composition at different temperatures are analyzed. The simulations show that the deposit consists of small metal clusters containing several gold atoms embedded into an organic matrix. An increase in Au:C ratio in the deposits from ∼0.18 to ∼0.25 is observed when the temperature increases from 300 to 450 K, which is within the range of experimentally reported data. The absolute cross section of electron-impact induced fragmentation of Me 2 Au(tfac) is evaluated by different methods. Four different approximations for the fragmentation cross section are considered and compared. In the simplest approximation, the total cross section accounts only for the dissociative ionization (DI)-induced cleavage of covalent bonds between the gold atom and the ligands. The most complete approximation for the fragmentation cross section accounts for the contribution of DI and DEA processes in the cleavage of covalent bonds between the gold atom and the ligands, as well as for the bond cleavage within the ligands. The yields of created atomic and molecular fragments are compared for the considered approximations for the fragmentation cross section and for different values of the energy deposited into the system upon a covalent bond breakage, E d . The simulation results and their analysis indicate that accounting for both DEA-and DI-induced fragmentation of all the covalent bonds in Me 2 Au(tfac) and increasing E d result in growing the concentration of metal content in the deposits. The simulated concentration of gold in the deposit and the dependence of the deposit's growth rate on temperature are within the range of experimental values reported for Me 2 Au(tfac) and structurally similar precursor molecules. Computer simulations of the FEBID process of Me 2 Au(tfac) on a fully hydroxylated silica (SiO 2 -H) sub-strate have been performed by means of the MBN Explorer software package Interatomic interactions involving the precursor molecules and their molecular fragments have been described by means of the reactive CHARMM (rCHARMM) force field rCHARMM permits simulations of systems with dynamically changing molecular topologies, which is essential for modeling the precursor fragmentation The radial part of bonded interactions is described in rCHARMM by means of the Morse potential: Here D ij is the dissociation energy of the bond between atoms i and j, r 0 is the equilibrium bond length, and being the bond force constant) determines the steepness of the potential. The bonded interactions are truncated at a user-defined cutoff distance that characterizes the distance beyond which the bond becomes broken and the molecular topology of the system changes. The rupture of covalent bonds in the course of simulation employs the reactive potential for valence angles: where θ 0 is the equilibrium angle, k θ is the angle force constant, and the function σ(r ij ) describes the effect of bond breakage Here r * ij = (R vdW ij + r 0 )/2, with r 0 being the equilibrium distance between two atoms involved in the angular interaction and R vdW ij being the van der Waals radius for those atoms. The initial geometry of a Me 2 Au(tfac) molecule has been determined via density-functional theory (DFT) calculations using the Gaussian software package In the present simulations, we consider the physisorption of precursor molecules on a SiO 2 -H substrate. Therefore, the molecules do not form covalent bonds with atoms of the substrate but interact with them via van der Waals forces described by means of the Lennard-Jones potential: where Parameters of the Lennard-Jones potential for gold atoms have been taken from Ref. In this study, a layer of Me 2 Au(tfac) molecules with the size 20 nm × 20 nm has been created by means of MBN Studio According to the kinetic theory of gases, the uniform molecular flux F p impinging on a surface placed in a chamber with pressure P p is given by where T p is the gas temperature, m p is the mass of the precursor molecule, and k B is the Boltzmann constant. The rate of newly physisorbed precursor molecules φ p is defined as: where s p is the precursor sticking coefficient, commonly set equal to 1, d p is the diameter of a circle circumscribing the molecule, A p = πd 2 p /4 is the surface area covered by one precursor molecule, and n p is the surface density of precursors. The thermal desorption rate k p is calculated according to: where κ p is the desorption attempt frequency, E p is the desorption energy, and T is the substrate temperature. The surface density of precursor molecules is given by the equation with the solution for n p (t): The solution of Eq. ( The values of n p0 calculated using Eq. ( IDMD simulations of the FEBID process use the information on the space resolved fragmentation probability per unit time, P (x, y). The probability is calculated using the spatial distribution of flux density of primary (PE), secondary (SE) and backscattered (BSE) electrons Here σ frag (E) is the energy-dependent precursor fragmentation cross section, E i < E 0 is the electron energy discretized in steps of 1 eV, and J PE/SE/BSE (x, y, E i ) are the flux densities of PE, SE and BSE with energy E i at the point (x,y), respectively. The spatial distribution of the electron flux density employed in the calculation of P (x, y) was obtained previously The main mechanisms of molecular fragmentation are dissociative electron attachment (DEA) at low electron energies below the ionization potential of the molecule (typically below ∼10 eV) and dissociative ionization (DI) at higher electron energies. To the best of our knowledge, there is no data in the literature on the absolute fragmentation cross section of Me 2 Au(tfac). Therefore, the fragmentation cross section σ frag (E) has been evaluated based on the compilation of data available for the fragmentation cross sections of structurally similar molecules and smaller functional groups of Me 2 Au(tfac). The electron-impact induced fragmentation of a Me 2 Au(tfac) molecule is governed by the contributions from various dissociation channels. As such, determination of the fragmentation cross section for Me 2 Au(tfac) is a non-trivial task. In the present study, the cross section σ frag (E) has been evaluated by different methods. Four different approximations for the total fragmentation cross section (denoted hereafter as "sets") accounting for various dissociation channels have been considered for comparison. The first set is based on the simplest approximation accounting for DI-induced cleavage of the bonds between the gold atom and the ligands. The most detailed approximation considered in this study accounts for DEA and DI-induced cleavage of all the bonds in Me 2 Au(tfac) with follow-up chemistry involving the produced fragments. The summary of the considered sets is presented in Fig. Experimental studies of electron-impact ionization and fragmentation of organometallic precursor molecules showed that the partial cross section of ionization without fragmentation is significantly (by 1-2 orders of magnitude) smaller than the sum of partial ionization cross sections leading to the emission of ionic fragments The cross section of DEA has been evaluated in this study as follows. We have utilized the experimental data IDMD-based simulations of the FEBID process require the specification of (i) the fragmentation rates for different covalent bonds in the precursor molecule and (ii) the amount of energy E d deposited into the system during the fragmentation process. This energy is deposited locally into a specific covalent bond of the target and converted into kinetic energy of the two atoms forming the bond As discussed above, the partial cross section of DI, σ DI (E), leading to the breakage of specific bonds in the molecule, has been approximated using the total ionization cross section of the molecule, σ total ion (E). The latter can be presented as a sum: where σ nonfr ion (E) is the cross section of non-dissociative ionization (i.e. ionization without fragmentation), σ fr ion (E) is the cross section of ionization with subsequent dissociation, i.e. the DI cross section, and the coefficient α(E) = σ nonfr ion (E)/σ fr ion (E). Hence, the DI cross section can be written as: In the case of a weak covalent bonding, the partial cross section of ionization without fragmentation is much smaller than the DI cross section, α ≪ 1; hence This approximation has been used in this study to evaluate the partial cross sections of DI, resulting in the cleavage of different covalent bonds in a Me 2 Au(tfac) molecule, see Sections II C 1 and II C 3 below. Set 1 (Fig. Here σ Au ion , σ CH3 ion and σ tfac ion are the ionization cross sections for a gold atom The energy-dependent ionization cross section of tfac, σ tfac ion (E), has been evaluated using the ionization cross section for a structurally similar molecule 2-pentanone (C 5 H 10 O, see Fig. The maximal values of the total ionization cross sections have been evaluated using the functional group and bond additivity model In Set 2 (Fig. A comparison of DEA-induced fragmentation mass spectra for acac and acetone were reported in Ref. The absolute DEA cross sections for the formation of H -and CH - 3 fragments from acetone (corresponding to dissociation of C-H and C-CH 3 bonds, respectively) have been taken from Ref. The study of DI of 2-butanone (CH 3 COCH 2 CH 3 ) [58] demonstrated that the formation of CH 3 CO fragments as a result of the "cental" C-C bond breakage is the most probable fragmentation channel contributing to 64% of the total ionization cross section. We have assumed that the tfac molecule has a similar fragmentation pattern with the release of CH 3 CO and CF 3 CO fragments as the main fragmentation channel. Therefore, the total DI cross section of tfac has been split into the contributions leading to the cleavage of the "central" C-C bonds (σ C-CH DI ) and the "side" C-C bonds (σ C-CH3 DI and σ C-CF3 DI ) in approximately the same ratio 2:1 as determined in Ref. The Set 4 uses the same DEA-and DI-induced fragmentation cross sections for all bonds in the Me 2 Au(tfac) molecule as in Set 3 (see Fig. The calculated fragmentation probability P (x, y), Eq. ( Following the earlier studies According to the experimental study of the FEBID of Me 2 Au(acac) The physical state of the system at the end of the replenishment phase of FEBID and prior to the next irradiation phase has been simulated similarly to our earlier IDMD simulations of FEBID The simulations have been performed using the Verlet integration algorithm with a time step of 0.5 fs and reflective boundary conditions. Interatomic interactions have been computed using the linked cell algorithm The earlier IDMD-based studies of FEBID In order to evaluate and analyze the contribution of various DEA and DI fragmentation channels involving different covalent bonds in Me 2 Au(tfac) to the formation of molecular fragments, four sets of fragmentation cross sections described in Sect. II C have been considered. Figure The simulations carried out using Set 1 (top row in Fig. Figure Temperature at which the FEBID process operates may influence the growth rate and metal content of deposits The largest topologically-connected cluster is shown in Fig. The metal content in deposits is evaluated differently in different FEBID experiments. Some experimental studies reported the Au:C ratio Higher metal content in the deposit grown at 400 K can be explained by a combination of several factors. First, the deposition process at elevated temperatures leads to faster thermal desorption of intact precursor molecules and created volatile fragments. As a result, the electroninduced dissociation process takes place in a less dense environment, which leads to a more efficient release of fragments from the deposit. Second, the rates of chemical reactions involving atomic and molecular fragments of Me 2 Au(tfac) should increase with increasing the temperature at which the FEBID process operates. Third, the operational temperature of FEBID governs the diffusion of precursor molecules and fragments during irradiation. This affects follow-up chemistry and, thus, atomic content, morphology and the growth rate of the deposits. Irradiation-driven molecular dynamics (IDMD) simulations have been performed to explore the role of thermal effects during the FEBID process of Me 2 Au(tfac), a commonly used precursor molecule for the fabrication of gold nanostructures. The absolute cross section of electron-induced fragmentation of Me 2 Au(tfac) required as an input for IDMD has been obtained from the experimentally measured fragmentation mass spectra and fragment ion yields for structurally similar molecules and smaller functional groups of Me 2 Au(tfac). The cross section has been evaluated by different methods accounting for DI-and DEA-induced cleavage of different covalent bonds in the molecule. In the simplest approximation, the calculated total fragmentation cross section accounted only for the DI-induced cleavage of covalent bonds between the gold atom and the ligands. The most complete approximation for the fragmentation cross section accounted for the contribution of DI and DEA processes in the cleavage of covalent bonds between the gold atom and the ligands, as well as for the bond cleavage within the ligands. The explicit simulation of chemical reactions involving the created atomic and molecular fragments has enabled the formation of volatile molecular products H 2 , CH 4 and C 2 H 6 which were observed experimentally during FEBID of Me 2 Au(acac). The FEBID process of Me 2 Au(tfac) precursor molecules has been simulated at different temperatures in the range 300 -450 K. The simulations confirm experimental observations that deposits consist of small gold clusters embedded into a carbon-rich organic matrix. The simulated growth rate of the deposit decreases from 5 × 10 -4 to 0.1 × 10 -4 μm 3 /nC upon the temperature increase from 300 to 450 K. A larger number of Me 2 Au(tfac) fragments created while accounting for the DEA-and DI-induced cleavage of all the bonds in the precursor molecule leads to an increase in the concentration of gold in the deposit. The simulations predict an increase in Au:C ratio in the deposits from ∼0.18 to ∼0.25 upon increasing the temperature from 300 to 450 K. The simulated deposit's characteristics, such as the deposit's structure, morphology, growth rate, and elemental composition at different temperatures, are in agreement with experimental data. TABLE II. Parameters of the Lennard-Jones potential, Eq. (