The second-order magneto-optical effects, represented by Voigt and Schäfer-Hubert effects, are effective methods to detect the spin textures in antiferromagnets, whereas the previous studies are usually limited to collinear antiferromagnets. In noncollinear antiferromagnets, the spin textures characterized by spin chirality have been revealed to play a critical role in many exciting physics. In particular, the first-order topological magneto-optical effects originated from scalar spin chirality have been discovered recently. In this work, using the first-principles calculations and group theory analysis, we generalize the first-order topological magneto-optical effects to the second-order cases, that is, topological Voigt and Schäfer-Hubert effects, by taking the noncoplanar 3Q spin state of γ-FexMn1-x alloy as an example. The conventional Voigt and Schäfer-Hubert effects are comparatively studied in the collinear 1Q and 2Q spin states of γ-FexMn1-x alloy. In addition, the natural linear birefringence due to crystal anisotropy is discussed in the strained 1Q, 2Q, and 3Q states, and a unique fingerprint for experimentally distinguishing the second-order topological magneto-optical effects and natural linear birefringence is identified. Our work brings a topological insight into the second-order magneto-optical effects in noncoplanar antiferromagnets and also provides γ-FexMn1-x as an attractive material platform for future experimental exploration. Antiferromagnets (AFMs) have promising applications in high-density spintronic devices due to their excellent properties, such as the absence of stray fields, robustness to magnetic field perturbation, and ultrafast spin dynamics respectively, where S i , S j , and S k are the spins on neighboring sublattices. Recently, various unexpected physical phenomena were reported in noncollinear chiral AFMs. For example, the magneto-optical Kerr and Faraday effects (MOKE and MOFE), which are usually known to be linear in magnetization M, are believed non-existent in AFMs due to their zero net magnetization. Nevertheless, with the allowance of special magnetic symmetries, MOKE and MOFE have been theoretically predicted or experimentally observed in coplanar noncollinear AFMs Mn 3 X (X = Rh, Ir, Pt) The scalar spin chirality χ is a critical quantity in noncoplanar AFMs, which brings many exciting physics. Considering an electron moves along a close path connected by three noncoplanar spin sublattices (S i , S j , and S k ), the electron shall experience a fictitious magnetic flux that is proportional to the scalar spin chirality, b f ∝ t 3 χ ijk n, where t 3 = t ij t jk t ki is the successive transfer integral along the path (i → j → k → i) and n is a unit vector normal to the plane formed by the three sublattices. This is the so-called real space Berry phase effect, which is responsible for the topological Hall effect In this work, using the first-principles calculations together with magnetic group analysis, we explore the topological MOVE and MOSHE in noncoplanar antiferromagnetic γ-Fe x Mn 1-x alloy. The theory and computational methods for the second-order magneto-optical effects are addressed detailedly in Sec. II. The optical geometries for observing the MOVE and MOSHE are proposed for the collinear 1Q and 2Q spin states as well as the noncoplanar 3Q spin state. The magnetic group theory is then applied to determine the shape of the permittivity tensor, which is a crucial step in calculating the MOVE and MOSHE. In Sec. III A, the conventional MOVE and MOSHE effects are found in collinear 1Q and 2Q states of γ-Fe x Mn 1-x . The calculated Voigt and Schäfer-Hubert angles are comparable or even larger than that of the famous collinear AFM CuMnAs. The natural linear birefringence (NLB) due to crystal anisotropy in the strained 1Q and 2Q states are at least one order of magnitude smaller than the MOVE and MOSHE. In Sec. III B, we reveal the topological MOVE and MOSHE originating from scalar spin chirality in the noncoplanar 3Q state of γ-Fe x Mn 1-x . Since the strain simultaneously induces scalar spin chirality and crystal anisotropy in the strained 3Q state, the topological MOVE/MOSHE and NLB are mixed together. We find that the magnitudes of topological MOVE/MOSHE and NLB are in the same order of magnitude, but their signs are opposite. A unique fingerprint for experimentally distinguishing the topological MOVE/MOSHE and NLB is identified. Finally, a brief summary is given in Sec. IV. Our work suggests that Vo ig t ef fe ct ^ FIG. 1. Schematic illustration of magneto-optical Voigt and Schäfer-Hubert effects. The incident linearly polarized light propagating along the z-axis normally shines on the surface (xy-plane) of an in-plane magnetized material (assuming xaxis). There exists an angle (α) between the electric field of incident light (EI) and the magnetization direction of materials ( N for AFMs or M for FMs). The transmitted and reflected lights become elliptically polarized accompanying by the rotations of polarization planes. The rotation angles, θV and θSH, describe the deflections of ET and ER with respect to EI. The ellipticities, εV and εSH, are the quotient of the short and long axes of the ellipse. the antiferromagnetic γ-Fe x Mn 1-x alloy is an interesting material platform for exploring the novel high-order topological light-matter interactions. For crystallographically-isotropic nonmagnetic materials, the application of an external magnetic field lowers the symmetry of systems, leading to a change in the shape of the permittivity tensor. Specifically, if a linearly polarized light normally shines on the surface of materials and the magnetic field lies on the surface (i.e., normal to the propagating direction of incident light), the light passing through the materials shall have two different indices of refraction, n and n ⊥ , which are parallel to and perpendicular to the external magnetic field, respectively. Once the angle between the electric field of incident light and the external magnetic field does not equal 0 • or 90 • , the transmitted and reflected lights have to become elliptically polarized, accompanying by the rotations of polarization planes. If the external magnetic field is replaced by spontaneous magnetic orders (FMs or AFMs), the resultant magneto-optical phenomena resemble, named Voigt For the MOVE, the rotation angle (θ V ) and ellipticity (ε V ) of elliptically-polarized transmitted light are usually combined into the so-called complex Voigt angle, where α is the angle between the electric field of incident light (E I ) and the magnetization direction ( N for AFMs or M = M/|M| for FMs). It is clear that Φ V (α) reaches its maximum when α = 45 • , which corresponds to the standard Voigt geometry often employed in experiments. And Φ V (α) is certainly zero if α = 0 • or 90 • . Since the evolution of Φ V (α) with α is just a sinusoidal curve with a period of π, hereafter, we shall only discuss the maximal value of Φ V (α), which is expressed as where ω is light frequency, c is the speed of light in vacuum, and d is the thickness of materials. In our actual calculations, the Voigt angles are accounted in the unit of deg/cm, and therefore the thickness d is not specified. Without loss of generality, we assume that N is parallel to the x-axis and the incident light propagates along the z-axis. By solving the Fresnel equation, the refractive indices that are parallel to and perpendicular to N can be written as, where μν with μ, ν ∈ {x, y, z} is the permittivity tensor. We can further obtain where n = 1 2 (n + n ⊥ ) is the average of the refractive indices. For the MOSHE, the rotation angle (θ SH ) and ellipticity (ε SH ) of elliptically-polarized reflected light can be similarly written as the complex Schäfer-Hubert angle, which also displays a period of π with respect to the angle α. The maximal value of Φ SH (α) occurs at α = 45 • , that is One can read from Eqs. ( where μν is the part independent on magnetization, (2) μν are linearly and quadratically dependent on magnetization, respectively. In principle, we can calculate μν for a given magnetic material and calculate (0) μν by artificially removing the magnetic order. Since (0) μν is responsible for the NLB due to crystal anisotropy, subtracting (0) μν from μν is the part purely originating from magnetism, being responsible for the MOVE and MOSHE. According to the Onsager relation, μν ( N) = νμ (-N), we know νμ , and νμ . Omitting the magnetism-independent parts, the diagonal terms of the permittivity tensor are square of N, i.e., ̃ μμ ( N) = (2) μμ N2 , while the off-diagonal terms of the permittivity tensor have first-order antisymmetric and second-order symmetric parts, i.e., ̃ μν ( N) = (1) μν N2 . Since n -n ⊥ and n n ⊥ are linearly (quadratically) dependent on the diagonal (off-diagonal) terms of the permittivity tensor (Eqs. The key ingredient for calculating the MOVE and MOSHE is the permittivity tensor or the optical conductivity in an equivalent way, since μν = δ μν + 4πi ω σ μν , where δ μν equals 1 if μ = ν and 0 otherwise. The optical conductivity can be evaluated using the Kubo formula where f nk , V , N k , υμ(ν) , ω, and η are the Fermi-Dirac distribution function, volume of the unit cell, total number of k-points for sampling the Brillouin zone, velocity operators, photon energy, and energy smearing parameter, respectively. ψ nk and E nk are the Bloch wavefunction and interpolated energy at the band index n and momentum k, respectively. A k-points mesh of 100 × 100 × 100 is enough to converge the optical conductivity, and η is set to be 0.1 eV. Because of the metallic nature of γ-Fe x Mn 1-x , the intraband transitions can not be ignored in the low energy range (e.g., < 1.0 eV), and the Drude term σ D = σ 0 / (1 -iωτ D ) is added into the diagonal terms of optical conductivity. The Drude parameters σ 0 and τ D are obtained by linearly interpolating the experimental data of pure Fe (σ 0 = 6.40 × 10 15 s -1 and τ D = 9.12 × 10 -15 s) The electronic structure calculations of γ-Fe x Mn 1-x alloy are performed using the full-potential linearized augmented-plane-wave code FLEUR By varying the alloying ratio x, γ-Fe x Mn 1-x hosts three different antiferromagnetic orders (Fig. The 1Q state is a collinear AFM with the Néel vector, defined by where m 1-4 are spin magnetic moments on four magnetic atoms, pointing to the x-axis (Fig. One can see that all the off-diagonal terms are zero and there are two independent diagonal terms, which can be simply interpreted below. Since the time-reversal symmetry T is broken in antiferromagnetic 1Q state, only the antisymmetric part of off-diagonal terms ( μν ) is potentially zero, while the symmetric parts are always zero ( (0) μν = (2) μν = 0). In addition, the magnetic point group 4/mmm1 contains the space-time inversion symmetry PT , which forces (1) μν = 0. Hence, all the offdiagonal terms have to be vanished. For the diagonal terms, the magnetism-independent parts equal to each other in the fcc lattice, i.e., (2) zz due to the collinear antiferromagnetic order along the x-axis. Accordingly, two independent diagonal terms, xx = yy = zz , appear in Eq. ( Figure In practice, a small tetragonal distortion along the direction of N possibly occurs in 1Q state according to the previous works zz , which induces the NLB. Figure Next, we turn to the MOVE and MOSHE for 2Q state, which is also a collinear AFM since both the vector and scalar spin chiralities are zero (κ = 0 and χ = 0). The 2Q state has two collinear antiferromagnetic orders along the [0 11] and [011] directions, which are orthogonal to each other. The calculated magnetic space and point groups of 2Q state are P C 4 2 /nnm (BNS setting) and 4/mmm1 , respectively. The shape of the permittivity tensor for 2Q state is identical to 1Q state, as given in Eq. ( FIG. ), plays no role in the firstand second-order magneto-optical effects, while the one along the y-axis, N y = 1 4 (-m 1,y + m 2,y -m 3,y + m 4,y ), activates the second-order MOVE and MOSHE. The angle α between the electric field direction of incident light (E I ) and the "effective" magnetization direction (N y ) is 45 • (Fig. Figure The 3Q state is a fully compensated noncoplanar AFM, in which all spin magnetic moments point to the center of the tetrahedron formed by four magnetic atoms in the fcc lattice (Fig. which forbids both the first-and second-order magnetooptical effects. The scalar spin chirality in 3Q state plays its role once a strain is applied on the fcc lattice. For example, the topological orbital magnetization and topological Hall effect, originating from scalar spin chirality, were reported in strained γ-Fe x Mn 1-x with the 3Q spin texture Due to the unequal diagonal terms ( xx = yy ) and nonzero off-diagonal terms ( yz = 0), the θ V and θ SH are certainly nonvanishing for the strained 3Q state (refer to Eqs. ( If we remove the 3Q magnetic order on top of the strained fcc lattices, the off-diagonal terms of the permittivity tensor should be zero ( yz = zy = 0), while the diagonal terms retain only the magnetism-independent parts ( The NLB generated by the strain along the [111] direction is three to four times larger than that along the [100] direction (comparing Figs. In the above theoretical calculations, total Voigt and Schäfer-Hubert rotation angles (θ Total V and θ Total SH ) contributed from topological origin (θ Topo V and θ Topo SH ) and NLB (θ NLB V and θ NLB SH ) have been explicitly separated. On the other hand, for experiments, the NLB part can also be captured by using, for example, the ultrafast pump-probe technique, which can induce demagnetization in AFMs where W V and W SH approaching to 1 (-1) means that the topological (NLB) component dominates. Figure In summary, the second-order magneto-optical effects have been investigated in the collinear 1Q and 2Q states as well as the noncoplanar 3Q state of antiferromagnetic γ-Fe x Mn 1-x alloy, using the first-principles calculations and group theory analysis. The conventional Voigt and Schäfer-Hubert effects were found in the collinear 1Q and 2Q states, just like other common antiferromagnets. While the Voigt and Schäfer-Hubert rotation angles emerged in the 1Q state reach up to 6.1 × 10 6 deg/cm and 2.6 deg, respectively, which are much larger than that of some famous collinear antiferromagnets, e.g., CuMnAs. On the other hand, the Voigt and Schäfer-Hubert rotation angles emerged in the 2Q state are relatively small since the effective magnetization perpendicular to the incident light is reduced. The natural linear birefringence originating from crystal anisotropy was observed in the strained 1Q and 2Q states, but their magnitudes are notably less than the magnetism-induced Voigt and Schäfer-Hubert effects. In the strained 3Q state, the total Voigt and Schäfer-Hubert angles were contributed from the topological origin and natural linear birefringence because the strain brings scalar spin chirality and crystal anisotropy simultaneously. The topological Voigt and Schäfer-Hubert effects, originating from scalar spin chirality, were successfully identified. A unique fingerprint for experimentally probing the topological Voigt and Schäfer-Hubert effects was also proposed. Our work not only deepens the understanding of second-order magneto-optical effects but also facilitates the applications of antiferromagnets in magneto-optical devices.