Inspired by the high critical temperature in yttrium superhydride and the low stabilized pressure in superconducting cerium superhydride, we carry out four independent runs to synthesize yttrium-cerium alloy hydrides. The phases examined by the Raman scattering and x-ray diffraction measurements. The superconductivity is detected with the zero-resistance state at the critical temperature in the range of 97-140 K at pressures ranging from 114 GPa to 120±4 GPa. The maximum critical temperature of the synthesized hydrides is larger than those reported for cerium hydrides, while the corresponding stabilized pressure is much lower than those for superconducting yttrium hydrides. The structural analysis and theoretical calculations suggest that the phase of Y0.5Ce0.5H9 has the space group P 63/mmc with the calculated critical temperature of 119 K, in fair agreement with the experiments. These results indicate that alloying superhydrides indeed can maintain relatively high critical temperature at modest pressures accessible by many laboratories. Rare earth hydrides have been found to exhibit near room temperature superconductivity benefiting from the chemical pre-compression induced by the interaction between hydrogen and tetragen atoms The exploration of high-T c superconductivity in superhydrides at low pressures or even ambient pressure is highly demanded. Compared with binary hydrides, ternary alloy hydrides possess diverse chemical compositions and thus provide more abundant structures for the operation with the advantages of different elements Samples were prepared using a series of symmetric diamond-anvil cells (DACs). For the resistance measurements, the rhenium gaskets insulated by the mixture of cubic boron nitride (c-BN) and epoxy were used to contain the sample at megabar pressures while isolating the platinum electrical leads. In detail, we employed the ammonia borane (NH 3 BH 3 or AB) as the hydrogen source The structural characterization was carried out at Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility with a wavelength 0.6199 Å and the size of the x-ray focus beam is less than 2 μm. The data was analyzed by using the software of Jana based on the Le Bail method The electronic structures were calculated by using Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) where ω dω, and μ * being the Coulomb pseudopotential. The selected k-point mesh is 12 ×12×12, and the q-point mesh is 3×3×3. For the first run, the pressure in DAC was increased to ∼127 GPa in one day after loading Y 0.5 Ce 0.5 alloy and AB in the sample chamber [Fig. To repeat the experiment, we performed other two experimental runs (#S2 and #S3). The pressure for the third run was increased to 120±3 GPa within two days. After laser heating, the sample expanded obviously, meanwhile the pressure dropped to 114±3 GPa. The lower panel of Fig. In order to understand the superconductivity with high T c in P 6 3 /mmc-Y 0.5 Ce 0.5 H 9 , we calculated the electronic, phononic, and superconducting properties with the density functional theory (Fig. From the phonon frequency dependence of α 2 F (ω) and integrated EPC constant λ(ω), we find that the contributions to α 2 F (ω) and λ(ω) arise from all three phonon modes including the Y-derived acoustic, the Ce-derived acoustic, and the H-derived optical modes. In addition, the wide high-frequency α 2 F (ω) is significantly higher than that on the narrow low-frequency side. Obviously, the high-energy H-derived vibrations dominate the total λ(ω) value. The calculations give a high EPC constant λ of 2.23 at 180 GPa. By numerically solving the Eliashberg equation by choosing the typical values of 0.1-0.15 for μ * In the end, we briefly summarize the maximum T c values of cerium hydrides and yttrium hydrides reported in the literature with the comparison of ours (Fig. In summary, we have successfully synthesized Y 0.5 Ce 0.5 hydrides by laser heating at high pressures in four runs (samples, #S1-S4). The obtained temperature dependence of the resistance provides the evidence for superconductivity in Y 0.5 Ce 0.5 H 9 with the highest T c of 140±2 K at 120±3 GPa. The structural analysis revealed the coexistence of P 6 3 /mmc-Y 0.5 Ce 0.5 H 9 with C2/m-Y 0.5 Ce 0.5 H 7 and I4/mmm-Y 0.5 Ce 0.5 H 4 . The theoretical calculations indicated that P 6 3 /mmc-Y 0.5 Ce 0.5 H 9 is dynamically stable at the studied pressure range and possesses comparable T c values with the experiments. These findings hope to advance the search of alloy hydrides with high-T c at relatively moderate pressure. The 