Many physical quantities in solid-state physics are calculated from k-space summation. For spectral functions, the frequency-dependent factor can be decomposed into the energy-conserving delta function part and the nondissipative principal value part. A very useful scheme for this k-space summation is the tetrahedron method. Tetrahedron methods have been widely used to calculate the summation of the energy-conserving delta function part such as the imaginary part of the dielectric function. On the other hand, the corresponding tetrahedron method for the nondissipative part such as the real part of the dielectric function has not been used much. In this paper, we address the technical difficulties in the tetrahedron method for the nondissipative part and present an easy-to-implement, stable method to overcome those difficulties. We demonstrate our method by calculating the static and dynamical spin Hall conductivity of platinum. Our method can be widely applied to calculate linear static or dynamical conductivity, self-energy of an electron, and electric polarizability, to name a few. In the field of electronic structure calculations, many physical quantities of a periodic system are obtained from a Brillouin zone (BZ) integral of the following form: Here f nk and nk are the Fermi-Dirac occupation factor and energy eigenvalue for an electronic state with band index n and Bloch wavevector k, respectively, F nmk , a complex function of two band indices n and m and Bloch wavevector k, is a product of proper matrix elements, and η = 0 + is an infinitesimal positive number. Physical quantities such as correlation functions from linear response theory (conductivity, susceptibility, dielectric functions, etc .) or any integration of Green's functions in k space (e. g. , self-energy) can be obtained by calculating this integral. The Brillouin-zone integration has been mainly performed from two different schemes: the smearing method and the tetrahedron method. The smearing method assumes that η is small but finite. The integral can be replaced by a sum over a special set of k points. Next, the tetrahedron method is the analytical integration method assuming that F nmk , mk , and nk vary linearly inside a tetrahedron in k space. Six tetrahedra are constructed for each parallelepiped in k space whose vertices belong to the regular k-point grid: described in Appendix A. In a single tetrahedron, the matrix elements and band energies are linearized. The integral gives two terms, the principal value part and the delta function part, thanks to the following decomposition: iπδ ( ω -( mknk )) . ( While being used to calculate the energy-conserving delta function part In this paper, we present an easy-to-implement, numerically stable tetrahedron method for the nondissipative part to overcome these technical difficulties. After a detailed explanation of the method, we compare the convergence and the computational time of the tetrahedron method with those of the adaptive smearing technique Consider the following three types of integrals: where the integration in momentum space is performed over a particular tetrahedron, and ∆ nmk = nkmk . Especially, I 1,nm and I 3,nm is obtained by evaluating the nondissipative parts. The formulas to calculate Green's-function-like or susceptibility-like quantities such as anomalous hall conductivity (3) - where F 0 , • • • , F z , and ∆ 0 , • • • , ∆ z are the parameters reproducing the values at each of the four vertices of a tetrahedron. As a result, and these can be integrated by hand since we know that the integration of rational functions contains other rational functions with logarithms. For example, the onedimensional case for Eq. ( The closed-form expressions for the three-dimensional case are presented in Appendix B. We note that the equivalent results for I 1,nm [Eq. ( A specific component of the intrinsic spin Hall conductivity, for example, is expressed as where Ω is the volume of a unit cell and |u nk is the periodic part of the Bloch state satisfying H k |u nk = nk |u nk where H k = e -ik•r He ik•r , and H is a latticeperiodic Hamiltonian. ĵz xk = 4 {σ z , v xk }, and vyk = 1 ∂ y H k are the spin current and velocity operators, respectively. After dividing the Brillouin zone according to the scheme presented in Appendix A, we can decompose Eq. ( and the static conductivity of the form n,m =n If we perform the integrations in Eqs. (3) and ( where F i and ∆ i (i ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4}) are the values of F nmk and ∆ nmk at the four vertices of a single tetrahedron, respectively. x j and ξ j (j ∈ {1, 2, 3}) are defined as: The expressions for C ij and B i in terms of x i 's are given in Appendix B. However, there remains a numerical problem of calculating a very small number divided by another very small number with floating-point arithmetic, which occurs when the values of ∆ nmk of two or more vertices are very close to each other. According to the definition above, x 1 , x 2 , x 3 , x 1x 2 , x 2x 3 , and x 3x 1 are measures of how close ∆ i and ∆ j are for pairs (i, j) = (1, 4), Let us define as the maximum value which a computer cannot store when it is added to 1 due to rounding of floating-point arithmetic. Roughly speaking, ≈ 10 -8 , 10 -16 , and 10 -32 for single-, double-, and quadrupleprecision data types, respectively. Explicitly, we may write this as 1 . = 1 + O( ), where . = means "equality in machines." For example, if a machine cannot distinguish two real numbers A and B, A . = B. For a real number x, x . = x + O(x ). A round-off error comes from calculating ξ j = log|1 + Since the default computer algorithm to compute log uses the Taylor expansion, log (1 for small |x| ( 1). For a similar reason, log|1 This round-off error can be problematic if x j → 0 or x jx k → 0. In the first case, a term such as should be finite as x j → 0, but is divergent due to O( ). In the last equality, we have used the fact that the coefficients of O(x j ) should vanish in order to have a nondivergent value in the limit x j → 0 if = 0. We can also check this equality using Eqs. (B7) and (B8) in Appendix B. In the second case, should also be finite as x jx k → 0, but is divergent due to O( ). In the last equality, the coefficients of O(x j -x k ) should vanish similarly as Eq. ( Therefore, the numerical problem is not yet in general resolved even with log1P function because of the remaining error term. To avoid this difficulty, we may first consider using the formulas for I 1,nm | X→0 in Ref. By introducing a criterion for determining whether the elements of X are close to zero, we can solve the numerical problem in a simple way, without implementing many cases. Let us redefine x 1 , x 2 , x 3 , x 1x 2 , x 2x 3 , and x 3x 1 symmetrically: If one of x ij gets close to zero, the numerical integration will have the error shown in Eqs. and where the upper signs are selected if ∆ i ≥ ∆ j and the lower signs are selected if ∆ i < ∆ j . Accordingly, the updated |x ij | = tet. , and the round-off error is not amplified by the small denominator [see Eqs. ( The cutoff should make the error term in the denominator O( ) small enough compared to the true value term, O(x 2 j ) in Eq. Therefore, tet. depends on the precision, or, equivalently, the data type. If a higher-precision data type is used, the required tet. is smaller. We adopted tet. = 10 -3 for double precision numbers, and we suggest using this value for other materials. Since the material-dependent variables, F i (velocity and spin-current matrix elements) and x ij (determined by band structure), are not included in the condition above, the same value would work well for other materials. In the ordinary tetrahedron method, the matrix elements and the energy eigenvalues are linearly interpolated using the values at the four vertices. The integrand can thus deviate from the true value due to the neglected curvature in k space of the numerator and the denominator. To correct this error, Blöchl suggested an improved tetrahedron method Kawamura et al. introduced a novel, improved tetrahedron method applicable to response functions The intrinsic contribution to both the static and dynamical SHC of platinum was investigated by the simple summation with the adaptive smearing scheme The norm-conserving pseudopotential and the pbesol exchange-correlation energy functional Regarding the adaptive smearing for the simple summation, we followed the scheme of Ref. The band structure of platinum is shown in Fig. Figure The imaginary part is zero below 0.48 eV, which is the threshold for a direct band-to-band transition. The tetrahedron method is useful to see this feature, since it reproduces the delta function better than the smearing method. This result agrees with previous studies on the original tetrahedron method for the integrals over the Fermi surface, such as in the case of density of states. To quantify convergence, we defined the standard deviation of the dynamical SHC as follows, where ω is the frequency, ω 1 = 0 eV, and ω 2 = 7 eV. For the static SHC, the Fermi-energy shift E F is substituted for ω, where E F1 = -7.1 eV and E F2 = +3 eV. The integrals were evaluated by a summation using ∆ω = 0.1 eV and ∆E F = 0.1 eV. Using the tetrahedron method, the SHC calculated on 140 × 140 × 140 grids for the dynamical and static SHC was considered the converged one (σ z xy,conv. ). To see the cutoff dependence of our tetrahedron method, we obtained d dyn. and d stat. with five different k meshes as a function of tet. values (Fig. We compared the computational time to see which method is the most effective. Figures Standard deviation of the error Standard deviation of the error the cutoff treatment achieves convergence faster than the adaptive smearing method. The higher-order correction proposed in Ref. Let f (x) the formula evaluating the contribution to the integration from a single tetrahedron with a given x. Then the slope of the black curve at small x approaches +1 because f (x)f (0) = f (0)x + O(x 2 ), where f (0) is the limiting formula. Also, f (0) can be found from the explicit formulas of the tetrahedron method, such as Eqs. (B4) and (B6). Thus, the slope of the logarithmic plot is +1 when x is small enough. If we adopt a cutoff, tet. , the error follows the black curve when x < tet. . and the red scattered points when x > tet. . The optimal cutoff is around 2 × 10 -4 from the figure above since the error is minimized both when x < tet. and x > tet. at the same time. Even if we adopt this cutoff, however, the error is comparable to or even larger than the error from our proposed simpler method with tet. = 0.001 (the green curve). The Fermi-Dirac distribution we used is the step function, which cannot describe the smooth Fermi-Dirac distribution for finite temperatures. By scanning multiple Fermi levels and conducting a convolution of the integral of the non-dissipative part and the Fermi-Dirac distribution, we can take finite temperatures into account. This idea has been implemented in the WannierBerri code Our method can be applied to evaluate the integration of much more complicated functions with a different pole structure. From other correlation functions to Green's function or various self-energy, (for example, see Ref. The proposed tetrahedron method for the Kubo formula can also be straightforwardly extended to deal with the nk-dependent, finite imaginary part of the quasiparticle self-energy. The arguments of logarithms in Eqs. ( To summarize, we developed a new tetrahedron method to accurately evaluate the dissipative part of spectral functions. By discovering and solving a numerical problem due to rounding of floating-point arithmetic, we achieved improved convergence than the adaptive smearing method. A higher-order correction was also combined with our method. We demonstrated the advantage of our method by calculating the dynamical and static spin Hall conductivity of platinum. Our method can be applied to a wide range of other physical quantities. We will make the implementation of our proposed method publicly available through wannier90 All the tetrahedra and triangles can be parametrized in new coordinate systems, (s 1 , s 2 , s 3 ) and (u, v), respectively, defined by where t i is the vector from vertex 1 to vertex (i + 1) [Fig. The expressions for Eqs. (3) -( Parametrization, ∂(s1, s2, s3)/∂(u, v) (C1) In the second to last equality in Eq. (C1), we have used the fact that the coefficients of O(x 9 ), O(x 10 ), and O(x 11 ) should vanish in order to have a non-divergent value in the limit x → 0 if = 0. Hence, the round-off error term is The error is proportional to 1/x 3 as shown in Fig. 