The response to compression of the clathrate type-II structure Ge(cF136) is investigated by means of ab initio small-cell metadynamics at different temperatures and pressures. At lower pressure p=2.5 GPa the metastable metallic bct-5 phase competes against β-Sn Ge(tI4), which forms at higher pressures. On lowering temperature, the presence of amorphous intermediates obtained from Ge 136 is more pronounced and is instrumental to the formation of denser structural motifs, from which metallic bct-5 can form. Therein, anisotropic box fluctuations promote phase formation. The metadynamics runs are analysed in depth using a set of topological descriptors, including coordination sequence and ring statistics. Differences in the structural landscape history and amorphous intermediates are critical for the selective formation of particular metastable polymorphs, towards turning crystal structure predictions into actual materials. Group-IVa elements (tetrels) display an extended polymorphism, reflected in a wide range of properties. Due to their technological relevance, semiconducting silicon and germanium have motivated repeated investigations on their polymorphism Metallization occurs in silicon and germanium upon compression Germanium bears similarities with silicon Additional metastable polymorphs can be expected, if high-pressure experiments are designed to influence nucleation, by changed decompression protocols, low temperatures non hydrostaticity Open framework structures like clathrates In a previous work Along the diamond→ β-tin transition, metadynamics visited an intermediate of bct-5 topology (I4/mmm). This hypothetical five-connected structure is metallic, mechanically stable at room conditions, and superconducting at low temperature. In the metadynamics run, only one box parameter was markedly affected, suggesting non-hydrostatic shearing as the protocol of choice towards obtaining bct-5. Despite the noticeable differences in atomic volumes (24.5 and 28.3 Å3 , respectively), the compressibility of Ge(cF136), as revealed by the bulk moduli B 0 = 76±6 GPa The transition pressure between cF136, cI4 and bct-5 were evaluated based on the enthalpy equivalence between phases, E 1 + pV 1 = E 2 + pV 2 . The difficulty in accessing bct-5 from direct, isotropic compression lies in the presence and relative stability of β-tin. A strategy must therefore be designed, that takes into account non-hydrostatic compression (see above and In this work, differently from GPa, above and below the threshold pressure for β-tin (Ge(tI4), Fig. In Fig. The stability of Ge(cF136) is reflected in the large number of metasteps spent lingering in the initial basin. Only after more than 100 ps (about 210 metasteps) a sudden enthalpy drop (Fig. To the ACS peak between metastep 295 and 305 corresponds a marked drop in the coordination sequence. In this region thermal fluctuations bring the system close to β-tin (Fig. Between metasteps 370 and 400 plateaux can be recognised by inspection of the ACS, CS and enthalpy graphs. This region features structures related to α-polonium type (cP1), but distorted (while Ge is on the average sixfold coordinated, the angles of the octahedral coordination polyhedron deviate from 90 • ) and more dense, as displayed by the coordination sequence average 6, 18, 42 against the expected 6, 18, 38 for ideal α-polonium (cP1). A similar occurrence of a denser structural motif is observed between steps 405 and 425, where a simple hexagonal structural pattern is closely matched (Fig. After about 175 metasteps, Ge(cF136) distorts into an intermediate, which can be quenched (Fig. We characterised it with the Pearson symbol Ge(mC68). This clathrate-like structure is higher in energy than Ge(cf136) (∆E = E(cF8)-E(cF136) = 0.03 eV/atom, while ∆E = E(cF8)-E(mC68) = 0.16 eV/atom), and can be relaxed in all parameters at 0K. The chosen projection of Fig. Thereafter, a long segment of the trajectory of about 175 metasteps consists of amorphous structures that occasionally show local order in correspondence to maxima in ACS and in CS, and to enthalpy minima. A representative snapshot is displayed in Fig. Metadynamics from Ge(cF136) was repeated at 5.0 GPa and 77 K, using the same protocol as for the previous runs. Lowering temperature caused the β-tin phase to sharply lock in, with a clear signature on the enthalpy profile, and remained well-defined over many metasteps, as shown in Fig. As the system escapes the Ge(cF136) well, it visits an open framework structure (metasteps 300-310), which is denser than the initial structure and which displays a mini-mum in the ACS and an CS value (Fig. Around metastep 380 the system re-crystallizes into a β-tin like structure (maximum in ACS and minima in CS values and enthalpy). Cell fluctuations bring it back to an amorphous stage, which is the gateway to the exact β-tin basin. Between two 100% β-tin peaks centred at metasteps 416 and 480, other amorphous phases are touched upon. Nonetheless, it can be expected that these effects can be further affected by re-tuning the choice of the Gaussian parameters in the simulation setup. The metadynamics at p=2.5 GPa, T=77K was performed with a slightly modified protocol, which entailed rescaling width and height of the Gaussian bias (see Section Methods for details). The rescaling to lower value would namely allow for a longer persistence in stable basins. A full analysis based on the same descriptors as for the other runs (enthalpy, ACS, CS), augmented by a statistics of 5-rings (green line) is presented in Fig. Five-fold rings introduce an additional means to sharply distinguish between Ge(cF136), Ge(tI4) and bct-5. Their characteristic 5-ring number is 180 and 136 respectively (orange on the opposite Y axis of the main panel graph in Fig. In Ge(cF136) 5-rings occur as so-called K 5 graphs Considering major changes only, three regions can roughly be distinguished by enthalpy in Fig. Ge 136 lasts till metastep 660 (Fig. At metastep 3120 bct-5 locks in, corresponding to full 5-ring depletion and to a plateau of 35 metasteps in the enthalpy, Fig. Similar to what was observed above and in a previous work The modified metadynamics protocol with Gaussian shape rescaling, which results into a longer trajectory, allows for many intermediate configurations, some of which are elusive as they result from box shape fluctuations and depend therefore on the specific metadynamics bias history. The enthalpy of Ge(cF136) is higher in any chosen pressure regime. The formation of Ge(tI4), β-tin succeeded over a direct route for both temperature choices, with normally a sharp lowering of the enthalpy value, a lowering of the ACS, and a persistence of the system in denser configurations, as indicated by the CS (Fig. At lower temperature and pressure, an intermediate enthalpy regime (Fig. The occurrence of particular structural motifs can be the result of how Gaussians are accumulated in a metadynamics run, therefore directly interpreting structural sequences into mechanisms can be flawed. Here we focus just on the last segment of the low-pressure, low-temperature metatrajectory, Fig. The competition between denser motifs characterise therefore this metadynamics megabasin (1580-3260 metasteps). Importantly, motifs present at higher pressure, like Ge(tI4), are still operating here, albeit not as lock-in phases, but as transient motifs, particularly around bct-5, to which it can be mechanistically related in this low-pressure, low-temperature regime. Based on our detailed mechanistic detailed analysis, and previous results on the role of amorphization The compression of Ge 136 (Ge(cF136)) was studied by means of ab initio small-cell metadynamics. At p=5.0 GPa and T =300 K, the preferential product was identified as β-tin (Ge(tI4)). At lower pressure (p=2.5 GPa, T =300 K)), the fivefold coordinated bct-5 appeared following pronouncedly anisotropic cell fluctuation. To shed further light onto the competition between these two structural motifs, metadynamics runs were also performed at lower temperature T = 77 K. β-tin remained accessible through direct compression at higher pressures, while bct-5 appeared exclusively at lower pressure values. Additionally, lower temperature metadynamics discloses a rich landscape of different, transient five-fold coordinates structural motifs, which can in principle crystallise from amorphous precursors, generated by direct compression of Ge 136 . Different from β-tin, bct-5 does not contain any five-ring (see Fig. Metadynamics Each metadynamics metastep consisted of a molecular dynamics run in the N V T ensemble for a total simulation time of 0.5 ps (timestep 2 fs) at either 300 K or at liquid nitrogen temperature, 77 K, depending on the regime studied. All metadynamics runs were performed with 34 atoms in the simulation box which served as a collective Density functional computational layers SIESTA To discriminate between β-tin and bct-5 networks, coordination sequences (CS, up to the 3rd shell) were calculated at each metastep. For β-tin the CS reads (one atom type): 6, 22, 46, for bct-5 it is (one atom type): 5, 16, 33. Coordination sequences were also used to estimate the percentage of a phase (either β-tin or bct-5) along metadynamics run, by looking for atoms with either CS bct-5 5, 16, 33 or CS β-tin 6, 22, 46. In case of new structures ideal space group and asymmetric units were identified with the Gavrog Systre package 