Molecular self-assembly plays a very important role in various aspects of technology as well as in biological systems 1-4 . Governed by the covalent, hydrogen or van der Waals interactionsself-assembly of alike molecules results in a large variety of complex patterns even in two dimensions (2D). Prediction of pattern formation for 2D molecular networks is extremely important, though very challenging, and so far, relied on computationally involved approaches such as density functional theory, classical molecular dynamics, Monte Carlo, or machine learning 5-8 . Such methods, however, do not guarantee that all possible patterns will be considered and often rely on intuition. Here we introduce a much simpler, though rigorous, hierarchical geometric model founded on the mean-field theory of 2D polygonal tessellations 9,10 to predict extended network patterns based on molecular-level information. Based on graph theory, this approach yields pattern classification and pattern prediction within welldefined ranges. When applied to existing experimental data, our model provides an entirely new view of self-assembled molecular patterns, leading to interesting predictions on admissible patterns and potential additional phases. While developed for hydrogen-bonded systems, an extension to covalently bonded graphene-derived materials 11,12 or 3D structures such as fullerenes is possible, significantly opening the range of potential future applications. Two-dimensional natural patterns at all scales, ranging from molecular assemblies Theoretical investigations have shown the architecture and symmetry of the molecular precursor to play an important role in combination with the nature of the intermolecular interactions. In this work, we present an alternative theoretical approach based on the mean-field theory of space-filling polygonal mosaics therefore, if one of the averages can be predicted, the other may be computed using (1). Single-layer materials may be represented by a hierarchical geometric model, consisting of (parts of) polygonal mosaics on multiple scales, which we dub Levels and denote, in hierarchical order, by Li, (i=1,2,3,4), associated with the averages n " % , v̅ % . We note that the concept of levels was first introduced to describe the fractal geometry of 2D foams 28 . Our approach is conceptually similar in the sense that scales of subsequent levels are well separated, however, in our case the subsequent levels do not carry self-similar patterns. Instead of being interpreted as convex mosaics, levels may also be viewed as graph representations of the monolayer. In this context Levels L2 and L4 emerge as the two essential models, being, respectively, the fully expanded and the fully contracted graphs associated with the monolayer. We next illustrate these levels on the example of the α-phase of the Levels L2, L3, and L4 describe supramolecular space-filling tessellations, so formula (1) can be used and in each case the single average n " % characterizes the pattern. As noted, Level L2 is an essential model characterized by the fully expanded graph: here all perimeter atoms appear as nodes and besides the edges of the L1-polygons (molecular perimeter) all intermolecular bonds appear as edges (see Figure These definitions can be used to organize supramolecular patterns using the symbolic plane. Fig. The model can be made predictive by expressing the supramolecular pattern averages n " ! , n " ) , n " * by the molecular pattern average v̅ & and the chemical bonding information carried by the constants b & , b * & and b ! . While the derivation can be found in the SI section S2, we here present the formulae along with some physical interpretation. Formulae (2), (3), and (4) determine higher-level geometric information based on lower-level geometric and chemical information: In addition, the mixed formula (5), expresses mean-field averages using both lower-level and higher-level information: We note that if the level 4 pattern is convex then in formula (5) n " * ≥ 3. The geometric model formed by formulae ( In formula (5) we used the information that the level L4 pattern is convex. This implies that these bounds cannot be improved unless one imposes restrictions on the set of considered materials. One notable feature of the admissible ranges for water and PO shown in Fig. Apart from the PO α-phase, mentioned in deriving the levels, the same molecule may also form a β-phase, which is characterized by a slightly larger n " ! . Neither of the two phases, however, lies on the boundary of the admissible range (shown by the purple arrow), implying that further phases could exist. While no structure outside the range delimited by the α-and β-phase was observed experimentally, a γ-phase falling within this range was observed, which has (n " * , v̅ * ) = (3.600, 4.500). We observe a potentially interesting symmetry at level L4: the α-and β-phases correspond to the symmetrical, dual points (n " * , v̅ * ) at (4.667, 3.500) and (3.500, 4.667) respectively (see SI section S1). The underlying physical meaning of this symmetry uncovered by our mean-field geometric model and its validity for other molecular architectures will be an interesting topic for future research. A further interesting aspect is that the model may be tuned by adding additional data to the chemical bonding information. Temperature influences the bonding constant b * & and, via equation ( In summary, we have applied the theory of space-filling polygonal tessellations to classify 2D molecular monolayers and obtained a predictive understanding of the conceivable geometries. While developed here for hydrogen-bonded molecular networks, there is no fundamental reason restricting our method to this class of materials. Indeed, only the higher upper bound in equation ( Our theory has shown its promise for the classification and separation of 2D molecular networks. Given that our approach yields a set of numbers classifying any given molecule and assembly, it could be of high relevance in machine-learning studies of the temperature-dependent relation between molecular structure and the resulting assembly, serving as a pre-processing step to turn image data into suitable numerical datasets. The planar 1,6,7,12-tetraazaperylene (TAPE) exhibits a D2h symmetry and is characterized by the ability to form multiple intermolecular C-H ... N hydrogen bonds within a 2D arrangement (Figure The planar triimidazo [1,3,5]triazine (TT) exhibits a D3h symmetry and is pre-functionalized to allow multiple C-H ... N hydrogen bonds in an extended 2D arrangement (Figure We examined three variants for single-layer water ice assemblies, see panels (a), (c), (d) in Figure 1. We can count the nodal averages directly on the Level 2 assembly, ignoring the fact that some bonds are not in the plane. Here we get n " ! = " * $%! * &%! * ! '! = 3. 2. Alternatively, we can determine n " ! by using higher and lower-level information, thus combining formulae (3) and ( Based on these considerations we identified the hexagonal 2D ice pattern with the point (n " ! , v̅ ! ) = (3,6) on the symbolic plane. Table to the minimum of the average nodal degree. This yields • Since there is only one molecule in the pattern, all accepted H-bonds must be matched by donated H-bonds. If in one molecule we add up all potential accepting and donating bonds as b ) , b * , the double of the minimum of these two quantities will give an upper bound on the total number of external bonds. To obtain the average we divide by the number of perimeter atoms and add 2 for the connections along the perimeter and we arrive at • We assume that all donating bonding capacities are 1 (all donating bonds made by Hydrogen atoms). Let us replace the capacity of each atom with accepting bonding capacity (those which are not hydrogen atoms) with the maximum b ' . Clearly, if we have x atoms with accepting bonding capacity b ' , and all these bonds are formed, there must be xb ' Hydrogen atoms participating in those bonds. Also considering that each atom has 2 connections along the perimeter, the average capacity for all external bonding can be written as • Our aim is to prove the last part of formula (2): Let us replace all atoms with accepting bonding capacity with the maximum b ' again. If we have x atoms with accepting bonding capacity, and y H atoms, we haveb ) = xb ' and b * = y. Then b 4 ' = min(xb ' ; y) , and v̅ ' = x + y. By definition, n " $ counts the average number of intermolecular bonds per molecule. On average, each such atom has n " ! bonds, out of which 2 do not count because they are not intermolecular bonds (rather, connections along the perimeter of the molecule). So, the average number of intermolecular bonds per atom is (n " ! -2) and we must multiply this by the number v̅ ' of perimeter atoms to obtain the correct result for the molecule. Level 4 and Level 3 differ because in the former case all bonds between any pair of molecules are counted as one. So, if we divide the nodal degree n " $ associated with Level 3 by the average number of bonds between pairs of molecules, we get n " & . However, the average number of bonds between pairs of molecules is given as b ! (as chemical information). Each molecule is bonded with at least n " & other molecules, so Based on these energies, the bond energies per H-bonded O were calculated to be 0.18 eV in the monodentate and 0.21 eV in the bidentate configuration (see Fig. 