Bipolar nanochannels comprising two domains of positively and negatively charged walls along the pore axis are known to rectify current when exposed to an electric potential bias. We find that addition of charged nanoparticles can increase rectification considerably, by approximately one order of magnitude. Two bipolar channel geometries are considered here; their behavior is examined at rest and under the influence of a negative bias and a positive bias, respectively. We do so by relying on a molecularlevel model of the electrolyte solution in the channels. The large increase in current rectification can be explained by the inherent electric field that charged nanoparticles 1 generate within the channel. This effect is found to be largely dependent on the pore's geometry, its charge distribution, and the sign of the nanoparticles' charge, thereby offering new opportunities for design of engineered nanopore membrane-nanoparticle systems for energy storage. Permselective-media-based bipolar diodes consist of pores with at least two regions of opposite charge. These bipolar nanopores are interesting from both a fundamental point of view and from a technological perspective. Bipolar nanopores can exhibit powerful rectification properties due to the asymmetry of a charge pattern along the wall of the pore. In this context, rectification refers to the nanpores' ability to generate a preferred direction in the transport of electric current. For the particular case of bipolar pores having separate positive and negative surface charge domains along the pore axis, rectification is significant if the radius of the nanopore is small compared to the screening length of the electrolyte. This ionic rectification is accompanied by the formation of depletion zones for both cations and anions along the main axis of the pore, whose extent depends on the magnitude and sign of the applied external voltage Janus membranes composed of bipolar nanopores have recently been used to increase the efficiency of reverse electrodialysis (RED). In RED, an electric current is harvested due to the asymmetric concentration of ions that arises in an electrolyte when held in two reservoirs connected by a membrane system While important theoretical and experimental advances have led to a better understanding of the fundamental physics at work in bipolar nanopores, the coupled roles of nanopore geometry and the addition of small concentrations of charged nanoparticles on ion transport and electric current rectification have not been considered before. In previous work Several theoretical studies of the current-voltage relationship have been reported for membranes consisting of two fixed charge regions of opposite sign. That body of work has relied on solution of the underlying diffusion equations in conjunction with the Poisson-Boltzmann equation Analytical expressions for the current-voltage, or I-V response of bipolar nanopores have been derived under a set of ad hoc assumptions. With these expressions Multiscale modeling approaches have also been used before to study charged nanopores The validity of the mean-field approximation in Poisson-Nernst-Planck theory has been established by contrasting its predictions with those of Brownian dynamics simulations in both model cylindrical channels and in a more realistic potassium channel. However, in simple cylindrical channels, considerable differences arise between these two levels of description with regards to the concentration profiles in the channel and the corresponding conductance properties. These differences are more pronounced in narrow channels having a radius smaller than the Debye length, and gradually diminish with increasing radius. Convergence occurs when the channel radius is over two Debye lengths In recent years, the ability to fabricate carefully designed nanopores has renewed interest in such systems. Bipolar nanochannels have been studied using three modeling levels In this work we employ molecular dynamics simulations with implicit ions and an implicit solvent. The parameters for the ion-ion effective potentials are obtained from systematically coarse-graining all-atom interactions. The use of an implicit solvent does not allow to account for electroconvective mechanisms in the ionic transport inside the bipolar nanopores In bipolar nanopores the assumption of Pé ≪ 1 holds in the low-voltage Ohmic region of the I-V curve, at voltages beyond the Ohmic region convection effects can become important. Models of charged nanopores based on the Poisson-Nernst-Planck theory Two bipolar nanopore geometries are examined in what follows, namely a pore in which the two oppositely charged sections have the same length and wall charge density, and another in which the section with positive wall charges is four times shorter and has a wall charge density three times larger than the section with negative wall charges. In the first nanopore, referred to as C1, the section with positively charged walls has a charge density of σ 1 = +0.1 C/m 2 . The section with negatively charged walls has a wall charge density of σ 2 = -0.1 C/m 2 . The wall charge density is σ =1,2 = 0 C/m 2 for the rest of the walls. In the second channel, which is referred to as C2, the region with positively charged walls has a wall charge density of σ 1 = +0.24 C/m 2 , and the section with negatively charged walls has a wall charge density of σ 2 = -0.08 C/m 2 . In C2 the wall charge density is also σ =1,2 = 0 C/m 2 for the rest of the walls. The magnitudes of the surfaces charges adopted here are comparable to those found in experimental studies with Janus membranes Both geometries feature changes in the height as a function of channel length. In both channels, the section with positively charged walls has a height of 17 nm and the section with negatively charged walls has a height of 10 nm. When nanoparticles are added to the nanopores, the ionic strength of the solution (≈ 0.1 M) is kept constant. The Debye length of the electrolytic solution is λ D ≈ 0.95 nm. Which is an order of magnitude smaller than the height in the narrowest section of the nanochannels considered here. Plots of the ionic concentrations as a function of the channel's height in the wide and narrow sections of the nanopore are given in Figure We consider the addition of 10 nanoparticles in both channels. Moreover the effect of changing the surface charge of the nanoparticles from positive to negative is also studied here. Each nanoparticle has a hydrodynamic radius of about 1.14 nm and a surface charge density of about ±0.33 C/m 2 . See the Methods section below for more details on the nanoparticle model used here. The contributions to the ionic strength from the cations, anions and nanoparticles for the different cases considered here are summarized in Table Figure Figures However, in C1 it is more apparent that, similarly to what the ions do, the nanoparticles also stay away from the aforementioned depletion zone. Figures The top row of Figure For the +2 V applied bias no depletion zone is observed for the cations, and the maximum concentration occurs in the transition region between the narrow section and the wide section of the nanopores. As can be seen in Figures As before, nanoparticles make the anion depletion zone significantly longer and deeper, specially in the C1 nanopore. The highest concentrations of anions occur for a +2 V bias ▲▲ ▲▲ ▲▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲▲ ▲ ▲ ▲▲ ▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲ ▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲ ▲▲▲ ▲ ▲▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲▲▲ ▲ ▲ ▲▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲ ▲ ▲ ▲▲ ▲▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲▲ ▲▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲▲▲ ▲▲ ▲▲ ▲ ▲ • C1(+)P:+2V ▲ C1(+)P:-2V ■ C1(+)P:0V From a practical perspective, the purpose of computer simulations is to design bipolar nanopores that can produce a usable current for a given applied voltage bias. Several the- Voltaje bias, V Current, nA Voltaje bias, V Current, nA ▽ C2 Analytic □ C2 with (+)nanoparticles ○ C2 with (-)nanoparticles △ C2 without additives B Figure The bipolar pore model of Green et al. oretical and computational works have proposed current-voltage relationships for bipolar nanopores Figure Table We have also examined the effect of the nanoparticle's friction coefficient on the electric current. This was done by performing additional replicas of the simulations but using a friction coefficient for the nanoparticles about 8 times smaller than the one used for the results shown in Figure In the simulations presented here, the ionic strength of the solutions has been kept constant when adding the nanoparticles. Therefore one can immediately rule out that the observed increases in current rectification are due to an increase or decrease in the concentration of the total charges in the systems. Also, the concentration of particles has been kept very low, at about 0.7 mM, and their mobility is about ten times smaller than the mobility of the ions (see the Methods section below). Therefore the contribution of the nanoparticles to the total electric current flowing through the nanopores is always less than 1% (see Tables S4-S6 in the SI for the individual contributions of each charged species to the total electric currents). Moreover, changing the friction coefficient of the nanoparticles by a factor of 8 does not have a significant effect on the observed rectification ratios. Nevertheless, the nanoparticles can have a significant effect on the charge distribution inside the nanopores and therefore can produce significant changes in the nanopore's electric potential. Several theoretical studies based on the PNP equations ▲▲ ▲▲ ▲▲ ▲▲ ▲▲ ▲▲ ▲▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲▲ ▲▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲▲ ▲▲▲▲▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ • C1(+)P:+2V ▲ C1(+)P:-2V ■ C1(+)P:0V ▲▲▲▲▲▲▲ ▲▲▲▲▲▲▲ ▲▲▲▲ ▲▲▲ ▲▲ ▲▲ ▲▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲▲ ▲▲▲▲▲▲▲ ▲▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ decrease the depth of minimum in the electric potential from -1.5 V to -1.3 V. For this positive bias case, positively charged nanoparticles increase the depth of the minimum from -1.5 V to -2.6 V. In tables S4-S6 of the SI it can be observed that the deeper minimum in the electric potential observed for -2 V bias in the presence of nanoparticles significantly reduces the fluxes of anions and cations in that case. The rectification ratio is increased more by the positively charged nanoparticles because these produce a much deeper minimum in the electric potential for the -2 V bias, thereby causing the current to be diminished for that bias while maintaining the current enhancement for the +2 V bias. In C2, nanoparticles do not have a significant effect on the inherent electric field of the nanopore. Overall, they tend to slightly increase the depth of the minimum in the electric potential. This leads to a slight overall reduction in the electric current that is observed in that pore upon addition of nanoparticles. While recent work has produced significant theoretical and experimental progress in our understanding of the fundamental physics that govern bipolar nanopores, important design challenges still remain with regards to the role of nanopore geometry and the addition of nanoparticles on current rectification. In this paper, we have considered two channel geometries, one in which the two oppositely charged sections have the same length, and one in which the negatively charged section is about twice the length of the negatively charged section. Both of these geometries include changes in the height as a function of channel length. The cation and anion concentration profiles and currentvoltage relationship of dilute electrolytes (0.1 M) were determined for neutral, positive, and negative applied biases, respectively, and we examined the role of nanoparticles on current rectification. Our simulations with explicit ions in an implicit solvent have revealed that the current rectification ratio in the bipolar nanochannel with a longer negatively charged section is 1.82. Negatively charged nanoparticles can raise the rectification to 2.2. In a channel with that geometry, positively charged nanoparticles also increase the rectification to 2.2. In the channel where the negatively and positively charged sections have the same length, the current rectification without nanoparticles is 1.78. However, adding negatively charged nanoparticles increases the rectification to 12.3. In this latter channel, positively charged nanoparticles increase the current rectification to 22.3. These considerable increases in current rectification can be explained by the large effect that positively charged nanoparticles have in the inherent electric field of the nanopore. Moreover, this effect is strongly dependent on the pore geometry, its charge distribution and the sign of the nanoparticles' charge. These findings could have significant implications for design of improved current rectification systems based on nanopore diodes, and we hope that they will stimulate experimental work. is given by, Two types of bipolar nanochannels were simulated. One in which the two oppositely charged sections have the same length and another one in which the positively charged section is about four times shorter than the negatively charged section. The first channel is referred to as C1. In it l = 5 nm in eq. ( and the surface area of the wall in this section is also S 2 = 1000 nm 2 . The wall charge density is σ =1,2 = 0 C/m 2 for the rest of the walls, including the walls between sections of different height and walls that are perpendicular to the x axis. The sections at the end of the channel, where the wall charge is zero, are intended to act as reservoirs. The total volume of C1 is V C1 = 25500 nm The second channel is denoted C2 and in it the negatively charged section is four times longer than the positively charged section. Therefore l = 20 nm in eq. ( The wall charge density is σ =1,2 = 0 C/m 2 for the rest of the walls, including the walls between sections of different height and walls that are perpendicular to the x axis. The sections at the end of the channel, where the wall charge is zero, are intended to act as reservoirs. The total volume of C2 is V C2 = 23400 nm The systems are always globally neutral, i.e., S 1 σ 1 + S 2 σ 2 = z c en c + z a en a + z p en p . Where n a is the total number of anions (chloride) in the simulation box and ez a = -e is the charge of each anion. e ≈ 1.6 × 10 -19 C is the elementary charge. n c is the total number of cations (Sodium) and ez c = +e is the charge of each cation. n p is the total number of nanoparticles in the simulation box and ez p is the charge of each nanoparticle. The Debye length which is used to estimate the size of the electrical double layer is . Where V is the volume of the pore and N is the total number of charged particles in the solution that flows through the pore. In all the simulations presented in this work λ D ≈ 0.95 nm. In our coarse grained MD simulations the channel walls are modeled with a combination of neutral and charged sites that are kept fixed in space at their initial position. The charged wall sites are placed at random positions along the walls. The proportion of charged to neutral sites in a (charged) wall is determined by the wall charge density, the surface area of the wall, and by the charge of the wall charged sites. Each charged wall site is assigned a charge of ±0.25e and interacts with the ions through Coulomb interactions. Additionally, all wall sites, charged and uncharged, interact with the ions in solution through a repulsive Lenard-Jones potential, where ǫ = 1.68 k B T, σ = 0.4 nm. A cutoff of r cut = 2 1/6 σ is applied, and r ij is the distance between the ion and the wall site. To apply the electric potential bias between the two ends of the bipolar nanopores we use a method commonly used in MD simulations for this purpose The voltage bias is defined as ∆V = ψ E (x = 30 nm)ψ E (x = -40 nm). Therefore when E x = -0.0286 V/nm, ∆V = -E x /L = +2 V. And when E x = +0.0286 V/nm, The coarse grained MD simulations were performed using LAMMPS Each nanoparticle is modeled by placing eight charged sites in the corners of a cube with sides of length 0.8 nm. Each site in the nanoparticle is assigned a charge of ±e, therefore the total charge of each nanoparticle is ez p = -8e. In our simulations, the relative distance between these sites is held approximately constant by using stiff harmonic springs. More specifically, adjacent sites are bonded by a spring with an equilibrium length of 0.8 nm and a spring constant of 1.2 × 10 5 k B T/nm 2 . Sites in opposite corners of the cube are bonded by a harmonic potential with equilibrium length of 1.39 nm and an energy barrier of 1.2 × 10 5 k B T/nm 2 . Triplets of adjacent sites in the nanoparticles are also constrained with an angle potential with equilibrium value of 90 The diffusion constant of each ionic species in the bulk can be calculated a priori from the friction coefficients specified above using the Einstein relation, i.e. D = k B T/ζ. The values that result from that calculation are, D bulk Na + ≈ 1.1 × 10 -12 m 2 /s, D bulk Cl -≈ 6.9 × 10 -13 m 2 /s and D bulk p ≈ 1.3 × 10 -14 m 2 /s. However the diffusion coefficients of charged species inside charged nanopores can be significantly different from diffusion coefficients in the bulk Na + ≈ 9.05 × 10 -10 m 2 /s, D eff Cl -≈ 5.85 × 10 -10 m 2 /s and D eff p ≈ 0.24 × 10 -10 m 2 /s. The effective diffusion coefficients inside the nanopores observed in the simulations can be compared with the values obtained from a simple hydrodynamic calculation. The simple hydrodynamic calculation assumes that ions and noanoparticles can be treated as spheres. The diffusion coefficients are calculated from the relation D = k B T/ζ, with ζ = 6πRη where η is the viscosity of the solvent and R is the hydrodynamic radius of each species. For the nanoparticles we consider that the eight sites that compose it are at a distance 0.69 nm from its center. Also since each site interacts with other species through eq. ( The electric current that flows trough the nanopore as a function of time, is calculated using a commonly employed method To calculate the total electric potential of the nanopores as a function of length, ψ(x), To check for reproducibility of the rectification results presented here we have performed additional replicas of the simulations for the system that shows the largest rectification ratio. Moreover we have also performed those replicas using a friction coefficient for the nanoparticles about 8 times smaller than the specified in the Nanoparticel model subsection above. More precisely, a friction coefficient of ζ p = 38.7 × 10 -9 N s/m was used for the nanoparticles in the additional replicas. The friction coefficients of the ions were kept the same as those given in the Dynamics subsection above. Snapshots of the othographic projections of the initial conditions and steady-state configurations of these replicas are shown in Figure 