Non-Hermitian degeneracies, also known as exceptional points (EPs), have been the focus of much attention due to their singular eigenvalue surface structure. Nevertheless, as pertaining to a non-Hermitian metasurface platform, the reduction of an eigenspace dimensionality at the EP has been investigated mostly in a passive repetitive manner. Here, we propose an electrical and spectral way of resolving chiral EPs and clarifying the consequences of chiral mode collapsing of a non-Hermitian gated graphene metasurface. More specifically, the measured non-Hermitian Jones matrix in parameter space enables the quantification of nonorthogonality of polarisation eigenstates and half-integer topological charges associated with a chiral EP. Interestingly, the output polarisation state can be made orthogonal to the coalesced polarisation eigenstate of the metasurface, revealing the missing dimension at the chiral EP. In addition, the maximal nonorthogonality at the chiral EP leads to a blocking of one of the cross-polarised transmission pathways and, consequently, the observation of enhanced asymmetric polarisation conversion. We anticipate that electrically controllable non-Hermitian metasurface platforms can serve as an interesting framework for the investigation of rich non-Hermitian polarisation dynamics around chiral EPs. A physical system describable with a non-Hermitian Hamiltonian may host exceptional points For the exploration of non-Hermitian physics and the application of EP-enabled functionalities, metasurfaces To circumvent the aforementioned problems, we hybridise gated graphene microribbons with non-Hermitian metasurfaces and demonstrate the electrically controlled probing of polarisation eigentransmission surfaces along with the corresponding eigenstates. Notably, this probing methodology utilises time domain spectroscopy that makes use of a broadband pulse, which in combination with a continuous gate tuning capability enables high-resolution access to chiral EPs in two-parameter space. Here, chiral EPs refer specifically to the non-Hermitian degeneracy at which a circularly polarised state becomes the only eigenstate as a result of coalescence. The measured non-Hermitian Jones matrix in the parameter space enables a systematic investigation of nonorthogonality between polarisation eigenstates and atypical linkage between input and output polarisation states at the chiral EP. Specifically, we show that, for a specific incident polarisation, augmenting dimensionality at the chiral EP can be solely revealed at the output. It is also found that the maximal nonorthogonality assured by the defective Jones matrix at the chiral EP leads to the observation of enhanced asymmetric polarisation conversion. Last but not least, the examination of polarisation eigenstates in parameter space reveals a vortex structure, from which half integer topological charges at the chiral EP are clarified. Design of non-Hermitian gated graphene metasurfaces. To map eigentransmission surfaces and investigate their structure near a chiral EP, we designed a non-Hermitian gated graphene metasurface consisting of an array of pairs of coupled split ring resonators (SRRs) with a graphene microribbon bridging the SRRs (Fig. where the dimensionless parameters are introduced for the simplicity of expression (see Methods for details): Ω y = (ω 0 -ω)/γ ey , Ω x = (ω 0 -ω)/γ ex , Γ = (γ iy /γ ey -γ ix /γ ex )/2, and Κ = -κ/ √ γ ex γ ey . An inspection of the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the above matrix shows the presence of a pair of chiral EPs when the following conditions are satisfied: The first equality specifies a one-dimensional subspace satisfying PT symmetry, while the second equalities further identify the two chiral EPs as singularities distinguishing a PT exact phase from a broken one on the subspace. The chirality of a coalesced eigenstate at each EP is determined by the sign in the second equality (i.e., + for RCP and -for LCP). In this work, the system is parameterised by two variables: the angular frequency ω of an input wave and the gate voltage V g (or the Fermi level E F in simulations) that control the optical conductivity of graphene microribbons (Fig. graphene metasurfaces were prepared by standard microfabrication techniques and a CVDgrown graphene transfer method and characterised by terahertz time domain spectroscopy (THz-TDS, see Methods). Here, a charge-neutral point of the graphene is located at a gate voltage of ~ -1.1 V. From the measured co-and cross-polarised complex amplitude transmission through the fabricated metasurface, a set of non-Hermitian Jones matrices T l , each of which is specified on a rectangular grid in the two-parameter space, can be obtained. The eigentransmission of T l clearly reveals self-intersecting Riemann surface structures (Fig. to strong (Γ < -Κ , V g < V g,EP ) coupling between polarisation eigenstates can be seen by sampling eigentransmission surfaces at consecutively decreasing values of V g across the chiral EP (corresponding to three cut lines on the Riemann surfaces shown in Fig. visualise the eigenstate coalescing behaviour, numerically calculated and experimentally extracted polarisation eigenstates are mapped on a Poincaré sphere (see Fig. The asymmetric non-Hermitian Jones matrix of the fabricated graphene metasurface also leads to gate-controlled asymmetric polarisation conversion (Fig. Therefore, the gate-controlled access to the chiral degeneracy enables us to reach the maximal asymmetric polarisation conversion that is hard to achieve in passive non-Hermitian metasurfaces due to the sensitivity of exceptional points to fabrication errors. In this work, we experimentally demonstrated the potential of a non-Hermitian gated graphene metasurface platform for the clarification and characterisation of chiral EPs in parameter space. The proposed platform stands among other recently implemented tunable non-Hermitian photonic systems Numerical simulations To numerically calculate eigentransmission surfaces of the gated graphene metasurfaces, we use a commercial simulation tool that employs the commercial finite-element method solver CST Microwave Studio. In the frequency range of interest, the dielectric constant for gold is tabulated in ref. The gated graphene non-Hermitian metasurfaces are prepared by employing standard microelectromechanical fabrication techniques. All the metallic structures are made of 200-nm-thick gold and attached to the substrate with a 20-nm-thick chrome adhesion layer. To bridge the gap between SRRs with a graphene microribbon, CVD-grown graphene is first transferred to the substrate with previously patterned SRRs. The transfer of graphene is accomplished by using PMMA (C2, Microchem) as a supporting layer. The transferred large-area graphene is then patterned by UV lithography with bilayered photoresists (PMGI and HKT 501). After UV exposure and development, the part of graphene uncovered by photoresists is etched by a plasma asher. As shown in Fig. To retrieve non-Hermitian Jones matrices, a conventional THz timedomain spectroscopy (THz-TDS) system is employed. The main part of the system consists of a Ti:sapphire femtosecond laser (Mai-Tai, Spectra-physics) operating at a repetition rate of 80 MHz with a centre wavelength of 800 nm, a GaAs photoconductive antenna (iPCA, BATOP) for the generation of a THz signal and a 1-mm-thick ZnTe crystal for detection. The generated 