Levitation offers extreme isolation of mechanical systems from their environment, while enabling unconstrained high-precision translation and rotation of objects. Diamagnetic levitation is one of the most attractive levitation schemes, because it allows stable levitation at room temperature without the need for a continuous power supply. However, dissipation by eddy currents in conventional diamagnetic materials significantly limits the application potential of diamagnetically levitating systems. Here, we present a route towards high Q macroscopic levitating resonators by substantially reducing eddy current damping using graphite particle based diamagnetic composites. We demonstrate resonators that feature quality factors Q above 450,000 and vibration lifetimes beyond one hour, while levitating above permanent magnets in high vacuum at room temperature. The composite resonators have a Q that is more than 400 times higher than that of diamagnetic graphite plates. By tuning the composite particle size and density, we investigate the dissipation reduction mechanism and enhance the Q of the levitating resonators. Since their estimated acceleration noise is as low as some of the best superconducting levitating accelerometers at cryogenic temperatures, the high Q and large mass of the presented composite resonators positions them as one of the most promising technologies for next generation ultra-sensitive room temperature accelerometers. The low dissipation and high quality factor (Q) of mechanical resonators makes them the devices of choice in precision time-keeping, frequency filtering, and sensing applications. With the emergence of nano-and microelectromechanical systems, and the drive towards quantum limited mechanical elements, pushing the performance boundaries of resonators has become a matter of high scientific and societal relevance Optically, superconducting, and electrically levitating micro and nanoresonators have been shown to feature high Qs in the range 10 6 -10 7 Here, we demonstrate millimeter scale composite plates comprising graphite microparticles dispersed in epoxy resin that levitate stably above permanent magnets and exhibit Qs above 450,000. The strong diamagnetic susceptibility of the graphite particles allows passive levitation of the composite plates, while the epoxy acts as an insulating material that suppresses eddy currents. To investigate the dependence of Q on composite properties, we perform simulations and experiments on composites with different particle sizes and volume fractions. We confirm that by reducing particle size, damping can be significantly decreased while maintaining the macroscopic size of the levitating object. Finally, we compare the performance of the realized diamagnetic composite resonator to state-of-the-art accelerometers and show that it leads to one of the lowest acceleration noise figures achieved thus far in levitating sensors. To realize diamagnetically levitating resonators with high Qs, we fabricate composite materials with distributed graphite microparticles by dispersing them in epoxy resin through mechanical mixing, and then curing the resin in an oven (see Methods and S1). The fabrication process enables a high degree of freedom in size of graphite particles and selection of resin composition. Due to the strong diamagnetic susceptibility of graphite, the composite levitates stably above permanent Nd 2 Fe 14 B magnets arranged in a checkerboard configuration with alternating magnetization (see Fig. To probe the vibrations of the levitating plates, we use a Polytec MSA400 Laser Doppler Vibrometer (LDV) and measure their out-of-plane velocity in a vacuum chamber at a pressure of 0.1 mbar (see Fig. Since eddy current and air damping To determine the Q more accurately while also minimizing the influence of spectral broadening, we perform ringdown measurements. These are conducted by first electrostatically exciting the composite plate at its resonance frequency, then switching off the excitation voltage and recording the free vibration decay. The amplitude of the underdamped vibration decays proportional to ∝ e -t τ , where τ = Q πfres is the decay constant and f res is the resonance frequency of the plate. In Fig. To ensure that the energy decay constant τ is not limited by air damping, we sweep the pressure from 10 -6 -10 3 mbar and measured Q as a function of air pressure (see Fig. To investigate the effect of the graphite particle size and volume fraction on the levitation forces and the eddy current damping, we fabricate square plates with different graphite volume fractions V f , side length L and particle size d. In Fig. To better understand this observation and gain deeper (b) FIG. insight into the mechanisms accountable for Q enhancement, simulations based on Finite Element Method (FEM) are performed to calculate the levitation height and eddy current damping force using COMSOL multiphysics. These simulations are carried out assuming that the graphite particles have a spherical shape and are distributed inside the matrix (see S3 for details of the numerical modelling and parameter values used in our simulations). We note that graphite is inherently anisotropic In Fig. We also study the influence of volume fraction V f on the measured Q for composite plates with particle sizes d = 8.6 μm and d = 17.6 μm, as shown in Fig. obtained Q of square plates with different side lengths L, that are cut out of the same composite with d = 17.6 μm and V f = 0.21. It is observed from the figure that a reduction in side length does not substantially increase Q. This observation contrasts with Qs estimated from COMSOL simulations for pyrolytic graphite plates, that increase close to an order of magnitude with reducing L The volume fraction and plate size independent Qs obtained from both experiments and simulations in Fig. After having investigated the effect of volume fraction and composite plate size, we now investigate the effect of graphite particle size d on Q. It can be observed from both the experimental and numerical results (see left side of Fig. To understand these findings, and in particular the increase in Q as a function of d, we use Faraday's law and obtain an analytic expression for the Q of a graphite/epoxy composite plate that moves in a magnetic field (see S5 for the detailed derivation): where ρ r is the resistivity, ρ g is the density of graphite, ρ e is the density of epoxy, and C r is the effective particle size factor which we use to account for experimental deviations from the theoretical model due to variations in particle size, composition, morphology and distribution. Moreover, ∇ 2 B represents the Laplacian of the magnetic field, which is To compare our experimental findings in Fig. The combination of high Q and large mass of the levitating composites promises low noise floor levels in accelerometry. In Fig. In conclusion, we demonstrate diamagnetic high Q composite plate resonators consisting of graphite particles dispersed in an epoxy matrix that can be levitated at room temperature above permanent magnets with graphite volume fractions as low as 14%. By insulating the graphite particles, eddy currents are reduced and confined within the particles, allowing us to suppress the associated damping forces. This enables a remarkable enhancement in Q, reaching values as high as nearly 0.5 million at room temperature. Measurements of the dependence of damping to particle volume fraction, plate length, and particle size are compared to FEM models, and show good agreement with an analytical model for eddy current damping forces that predicts Q to be inversely proportional to the squared particle size Q ∝ 1/d 2 . Reduction of the particle size and optimization of particle distribution and orientation, can lead to novel composites that further enhance the per- (a) Q-factor versus mass of different levitating systems (optical formance of future macroscopic levitating devices used as accelerometers Graphite micro powders (purity >99.9%) with mean sizes from 2.7 -22.7 μm are purchased from Nanografi Nano Technology. Particle size distribution measurements are performed using Malvern Mastersizer 3000 on 0.1% weight/volume aqueous solution of the powders using sodium dodecyl sulfate solution as surfactant. The particle size d of each type of powder is represented by the mean value of the distribution. The morphology of these powders is confirmed via Scanning Electron Microscopy (JEOL JSM-7500F). The details of the graphite composite fabrication process are shown in Fig. In our experiments, the excitation voltage is generated by the Polytec MSA400 vibrometer for the resonance frequency measurements, and by a function generator for the ringdown response measurements. The electrostatic force is generated as shown in Fig. The details of graphite composite fabrication process is shown in Fig. Fig. We simulate the magnetic field using COMSOL Multiphysics 5.6. Assuming that the influence of the diamagnetic plate on the field is negligible, the integrated magnetic force on the plate, F B , can be determined using where χ x , χ y , χ z are the magnetic susceptibility of the levitating plate in x, y, z directions, V is the volume of the plate, B is the magnetic field and M is the plate's magnetization. The components of the magnetic field inside the plate are H x,y,z = B x,y,z /μ, where μ ≈ μ 0 is the magnetic permeability of graphite. By calculating the magnetic force in z direction with different levitation gaps between the plate and magnets, the levitation height where the z-component of magnetic force is equal and opposite to the gravitational force is obtained. Using the levitation height, the stiffness of the magnetic force k can then obtained by taking the derivative of F z over z at the equilibrium point. Next, the resonance frequency f res is calculated using , where m is the mass of the plate. Then, we simulate the eddy current damping of the plate. We note that when a conductor moves with velocity vector v through a magnetic flux density field B, the charge carriers inside the conductor feel an electric field v × B due to the Lorentz' force in addition to the field from the electric potential V e , that generates an eddy current density J given by where σ is the electrical conductivity. By combining Eq. ( where integration is done over the graphite plate volume V. Noting that the eddy current damping force F e is proportional and in the opposite direction of the velocity v, we then estimate the damping coefficient c. Finally, Q of the plate can be obtained as All the parameters used in our simulations for pyrolytic graphite plates are listed in Table We note that graphite is inherently anisotropic Fig. In this section we obtain the Q-factor of a diamagnetic particle moving in a magnetic field, analytically. We consider a spherical particle with radius R = d/2 that moves inside a magnetic field #» B as shown in Fig. where ρ r is the electrical resistivity of the sphere. Using Eq. ( from which the total loss inside the sphere will become Finally, the eddy current loss per unit volume of the sphere becomes Considering P unit = F eddy v = c unit v 2 , and using Eq. 11, the damping coefficient c unit can then be expressed as Which results in the following expression for the Q-factor solely due to eddy currents: in which m sphere is the mass of the particle, f res is the resonance frequency, ρ d is the density and V sphere is the volume of the sphere. For a composite plate consisting of spheres of radius R dispersed in an insulating matrix, the Q can be determined similar to Eq.( where ρ p is the density of the composite plate, V plate is the volume of the plate, and V spheres is the volume of the spherical particles. For a graphite/epoxy composite plate with volume fraction of V f , the Q is then where ρ g is the density of graphite, ρ e is the density of epoxy, and C r is the apparent particle size factor that accounts for the uncertainties related to particle size, morphology and distribution. And that can be obtained numerically using Comsol. S6: Q-FACTORS AND ACCELERATION NOISE FLOOR OF STATE-OF-THE-ART LEVITODYNAMIC SYSTEMS In Table where f res is the resonance frequency, m is the mass, Q is the quality factor, T is the temperature and k B is the Boltzmann constant. 