In structured light with controllable degrees of freedom (DoFs), the vortex beams carrying orbital angular momentum (OAM) give access to provide additional degrees of freedom for information transfer, and in classic field, the propagation-invariant space-time electromagnetic pulses are the possible approach to highdimensional states. This paper arose an idea that coupling the space-polarization nonseparable states of vortex beams and space-time nonseparable states of spatiotemporal pulse can generate numerous unique and beneficial effects. Here, we introduce an family of space-time nonseparable electromagnetic vortices (STNEV). The pulses exhibit complex and robust spatiotemporal topological structure of the electromagnetic fields, multiple singularities in the Poynting vector maps and distributions of energy backflow. We apply a quantum-mechanics methodology for quantitatively characterizing space-time nonseparability of the pulse. Our findings facilitate their applications in fields of information transfer, toroidal electrodynamics and inducing transient excitations in matter. Structured light with controllable degrees of freedom has fuelled many applications, from communication, metrology, microscopy, imaging, quantum processing to light-matter interactions In quantum optics, high-dimensional Bell states can be realized In 1989, Ziolkowski discovered a class of space-time nonseparable pulse solutions of Maxwell's equations, named "electromagnetic directed-energy pulse trains" (EDEPTs) In this paper, we theoretically propose a new kind of space-time nonseparable electromagnetic vortices (STNEV). The STNEV with abitrary OAM and multiple singularities displays spiral-like arrangements of the transient electromagnetic fields and the Poynting vector of the pulses indicates energy backflow phenomenon. In particular, we apply quantum measurements to quantitatively characterize the evolution of the pulse's structure upon propagation. Calculated results show that STNEV is space-time nonseparable with much greater entanglement characteristic parameters (fidelity, concurrence, and entanglement of formation) than the LG beam, spatiotemporal Bessel-Gaussian beam, spatiotemporal bessel vortices, and ultrafast X vortices. Following the EDEPTs derivation method, to obtain the electric and magnetic fields for STNEV, we start with an appropriate scalar generating function f(r, t) that satisfies Helmholtz's wave equation 26 , where is the speed of light, and ε0 and μ0 are the permittivity and permeability of the medium, respectively. Next, the exact solution of f(r,t) can be given by the combination of modified power spectrum method and spiral phase factor Where τ=z-ct, σ=z+ct, f0 is a normalizing constant and l is a constant defining the topological number or the order. When compared to a Gaussian beam, the parameters q2 and q1 represent respectively the ''Rayleigh range'' (or depth of the focal region) and effective wavelength . Finally, in a cylindrical coordinate system, the TE field components are given by the expressions: l il l q q ict l q q ict l E if e qi q i q i q i q i q i q i q i q i q i q i l il q q i z q q i z l il il H f e qi q i q i q i q i q i q i q i q i q i q i l q q ict i q q i z q q ict q q i z H f e qi q i q i q i q i q i q i q i 4 where Eρ and Eθ represent the radially and azimuthally directed component of electric field, and Hρ, Hθ and Hz are the radially, azimuthally and longitudinally directed components of magnetic field, respectively. Note that the TE mode field does not possess longitudinally directed components of electric field Ez. The transverse magnetic (TM) mode can be expressed by exchanging the electric and magnetic fields. For l=0, the electromagnetic fields in Equations ( While propagating in free space, the propagation dynamics are revealed by the isosurfaces of the real longitudinal magnetic field at various times. Figure To date, exact closed-form expressions for the STNEV have only been defined in the time domain. Although the time domain expressions allow to describe the STNEV, frequency domain expressions are crucial for understanding the propagation dynamics and examining the specture phase of STNEV. We have derived analytically expressions for the real part of l=0 and 1 TE STNEV. See detailed derivation of Equations in Supplementary Note 2. And based on the derived frequency domain expressions, we can find an intriguing feature of STNEV involving the presence of vortex phases, which can be observed in the intensity and phase distributions of STNEV and typical vortex Laguerre-Gaussian (LG) beams of different orders in Figure Since classical nonseparable pulse states are mathematically analog to quantum entangled states, based on this similarity, it is almost natural to exploit quantum methodology to quantitatively characterize the corresponding properties of classically structured pulse Typically, electromagnetic spatiotemporal pulses can be described by a bipartite state with the space and time DoFs, which can be expressed as a product of a spatial mode and a temporal (spectral) function, corresponding to a general high-dimensional bipartite state . To quantify STNS in pulse, the problem can be viewed as a measurement of an entanglementlike system, i.e., the nonseparability of two classical spatial fields. The classical fields of the spectral state . Based on the definition of the spectral and spatial states adopted here Fidelity. In quantum mechanics, the fidelity is a measure of similarity of two quantum states, defined as , where ρ1 and ρ2 are the density matrices of the two states . The fidelity of a measured state can then be calculated as , where   is the density matrix of the measured state. In our implementation, fidelity can quantitatively measure the degree of similarity to an ideal pulse taking values from 0 to 1, which indicates the degree of similarity to the ideal pulse. Concurrence. In quantum mechanics, the concurrence is a continuous measure of nonseparability of twodimensional entangled states, defined by 2 21  , where ρA is the reduced density matrix ), indicating the absence of entanglement (or pure separability) and strong nonseparability (maximum entanglement), respectively. In our study, we use d=20 corresponding to the 20 spectral and spatial states. The corresponding results for the ideal FD and STNEVshow that both pulses exhibit strong STNS with near-maximum "entanglement". Entanglement of formation. In quantum mechanics, the entanglement of formation (EoF) is also a commonly encountered measure of quantum entanglement and is typically normalized as Ed in the d-dimensional case. The high EoF for the FD and STNEV pulses reveals that they both exhibit a strong STNS. We summarize the results of fidelity, concurrence and entanglement measures in Table The instantaneous electric field for the TE pulse is defined as EE   E ρ θ, which combines both the radial and azimuthal components. Figure For l = 1 case, the electric field possesses four shell-like singular surfaces symmetrically distributed along z and ρ axis. In the transverse plane at the center of the pulse (Figure The magnetic field of STNEV has radial, azimuthal and longitudinal three components, defined as , which leads to presents an even more complex topological behavior than the electric Figure In contrast to l = 1 case, the three singularities away from the z-axis correspond to three rings with vortices rotating counter-clockwise (z = 0) or clockwse (z > 0 and z < 0). The orientation of the magnetic field around the on-axis saddle points is alternating between "longitudinal-radial" and "radial-longitudinal". Moreover. Figure and propagates along the positive z-direction. The topological features of electromagnetic fields in STNEV are linked to anomalous behavior of energy flow as represented by the Poynting vector  S E H . An interesting effect is the presence of energy backflow: the Poynting vector at certain regions is oriented against the prorogation direction. Such energy backflow effects have been predicted and discussed in the context of singular superpositions of waves and plasmonic nanostructures In this work, we show that STNEV exhibits complex and unique topological structure and energy backflow regions, which is related to the distribution of instantaneous electromagnetic and Poynting vector field of multiple saddle and vortex singularities. In addition to this, the space-time nonseparability is measured quantitatively by quantum measurement. Although our analysis focuses on a single ratio TE pulse, the variation of the scale does not affect its main and the findings can be easily extended to TM modes by simply exchanging the electric and magnetic fields. The main challenges for the generation of space-time nonseparable electromagnetic vortices involve its complex toroidal topology, vortex phase and space-time nonseparable structure. We conjecture that the STNEV can be generated similarly to the generation of fundamental FD, by conversion of linearly polarized pulses in several-stage process. This process should include a conversion from linear to radial polarization, followed by a spatial-spectral correction of the pulse, and finally a phase adjustment to vortex phase. In summary, STNEV combine both vortex phase with orbital angular momentum and space-time nonseparablity. We expect that an in-depth study of higher-order pulses will probably be the focus of future research, and it is highly probable that in the near future and with the exploitation of unexplored quantumanalog methods, other kinds of higher-dimensional nonseparable states of pulse with more DoFs will be discovered. Finally, our findings provide strong support for exploring STNEV's potential applications in areas including optical communications, energy transmission and microwave photonics.