Removal or cancellation of noise has wide-spread applications for imaging and acoustics. In every-day-life applications, denoising may even include generative aspects, which are unfaithful to the ground truth. For scientific use, however, denoising must reproduce the ground truth accurately. Here, we show how data can be denoised via a deep convolutional neural network such that weak signals appear with quantitative accuracy. In particular, we study X-ray diffraction on crystalline materials. We demonstrate that weak signals stemming from charge ordering, insignificant in the noisy data, become visible and accurate in the denoised data. This success is enabled by supervised training of a deep neural network with pairs of measured low-and high-noise data. We demonstrate that using artificial noise does not yield such quantitatively accurate results. Our approach thus illustrates a practical strategy for noise filtering that can be applied to challenging acquisition problems. In recent years, significant progress through deep learning techniques has been made in the field of image restoration Many scientific disciplines utilize digital data recording. One, two, or three dimensional data structures, can always be transformed into a pixel-based picture format. Two-dimensional detectors are common across experimental fields such as astronomy, material science and medical imaging. Counting of events with timeindependent probability are expected to follow Poisson statistics. As such, virus-cell infection, radioactivity and particle scattering are events following a Poisson distribution. That is, the signal s j and the noise n j are no longer independent as the standard deviation is given by σ j = √ s j . Poisson noise can generally be reduced by sufficient acquisition time. However, long exposure times are not always possible. For example: for radiation of molecules, proteins, or human tissue, low exposure times are required to avoid beam damage However, removal of noise from experimental data is challenging. This can be attributed to the fact that experimental noise is the sum of multiple noise sources, such as Poisson and read-out noise, with their respective statistical properties. It is therefore difficult -often impossible -to accurately simulate experimental noise. The common approach to analyze artificially added noise n j to a ground-truth signal s j is not directly applicable. Limited experimental training data however prevents further progress on this important problem An example of XRD intensities recorded on the hightemperature superconductor La 1.88 Sr 0.12 CuO 4 is shown in Figure The data set is separated into a training, validation, and test set. All frames containing obvious CDW signals -our main feature-of-interest -are excluded from the training and validation set. These frames are instead moved to the test set, which is used for performance evaluation. Overall, the size of the training set is 3280 pairs while the size of the validation set is 820 pairs. As shown in Figure We implement two neural-network architectures referred to as VDSR Performance evaluation of the trained neural networks -on test data -is illustrated by one-dimensional linecuts (along the reciprocal h, k, and l directions) through the CDW ordering vector -see Figure To illustrate the generality and robustness of this work, we apply the trained network to resonant inelastic X-ray scattering (RIXS) data. XRD and RIXS are fundamentally different experimental techniques -see methods section. In Figure Our results, therefore, encourage the collection of even more diverse training data with different compositions of noise sources from other scattering, spectroscopy, and microscopy techniques. Small-angle neutron and (resonant inelastic) X-ray scattering data The training data was recorded on a La 1.88 Sr 0.12 CuO 4 single crystal Resonant inelastic X-ray scattering: The oxygen Kedge RIXS spectra were recorded at the I21 beamline Convolutional neural networks: Although networks for three-dimensional data structures exist Loss function: During each training epoch, the performance of the neural networks is determined by comparing the denoised output with the high-count frame. The used loss function L is given by a combination of mean absolute error (MAE) and multiscale structural similarity (MSSIM) where the value of α has been chosen empirically. In Figure A commonly used practice to reduce the noise in (2D) data is smoothing. One example is Gaussian smoothing where the noisy data is convoluted with a Gaussian kernel of a certain standard deviation. In Figure During the training process, we evaluate the neuralnetwork performance using a separate validation data set as mentioned in the main text. We keep track of the resulting validation loss to ensure optimal convergence without overfitting, which shows itself in an increase of the validation loss. It implies that the model cannot perform well on unseen data, as it might have overly specialized in learning the features of the training data. In Figure One of the advantages of artificial training data is the fact that one can simulate an arbitrary amount of low-count (LC) frames given a single high-count (HC) frame by drawing random samples from the underlying Poisson distribution with a fixed λ factor as described in the main text. Increasing the amount of training data is a well-known approach to enhance the performance of neural networks. Additionally, the used experimental X-ray diffraction training data consists of LC (HC) pairs with exposure times of 1 (20) seconds for the most part (> 80%). However, there are some cases where the frames have been counted for slightly different times, which effectively changes the λ factor of the Poisson distribution. In those cases where the statistics differ throughout the test data set, one should benefit from a multiscale (MS) training approach where the network is trained on LC data with different counting times (varying λ) Additionally, we have implemented a VDSR network architecture In this study, we assessed the denoising performance of the trained neural networks based on physical signal properties, including the signal-to-residual-background ratio (SRBR) of the CDW peak. Such an evaluation removes potential ambiguities that might emerge when using standard image quality metrics, such as peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR) or structural similiarty (SSIM) A common technique to evaluate the performance of a trained machine-learning model is k-fold crossvalidation In general, the chosen random seed, used for the initialization of the network parameters, can significantly influence the final performance when training deep-learning models Finally, an adaptive momentum estimation (Adam) optimizer A key property of every convolutional neural network (CNN) is its receptive field, which defines the amount of context information available to the neural network for learning. Ideally, the receptive field should be large enough to capture the features of interest. In our case, these are rod-shaped CDW order that have a spatial ex-tension of up to a third of the larger image dimension, roughly 80 pixels. For a simple single-path network such as VDSR, the receptive field using D consecutive convolutional layers with kernel size 3 and unit stride is given as (2D+1)×(2D+1) As described in the main text, a background subtraction has been performed prior to the line-profile analysis of the charge-density-wave signal. This process involves the summation of pixel intensities within a regionof-interest (ROI) around the signal and subtraction of neighbouring background ROIs. The placement of signal and background ROIs for individual h, k, and l scans is illustrated in Figure 