Electronic analog to digital converters (ADCs) are running up against the well-known bit depth vs bandwidth tradeoff. Towards this end, RF photonicenhanced ADCs have been the subject of interest for some time. Optical frequency comb technology has been used as a workhorse underlying many of these architectures. Unfortunately, such designs must generally grapple with SWaP concerns, as well as frequency ambiguity issues which threaten to obscure critical spectral information of detected RF signals. In this work, we address these concerns via an RF photonic downconverter with potential for easy integration and field deployment by leveraging a novel hybrid microcomb / electro-optic comb design. Increasing demand for high-speed data transmission and processing has helped motivate the development of electronic analog to digital converters (ADCs) at impressive speeds. Unfortunately, progress in ADCs seems to be challenged by the well-known bit-depth vs bandwidth tradeoff Demonstrations of RF photonic downconverters illustrate the power of optical frequency combs for sampling broadband electronic signals. However, in order to be deployed in real-world scenarios, optimization of size, weight, and power (SWaP) ought to be considered. Of the typical frequency comb generation methods, mode locked lasers are perhaps the most common, but cascaded electro-optic (EO) modulators are also frequently used. Both approaches can often be rather expensive from a SWaP perspective -commercially available mode locked lasers often have electrical-to-optical power conversion efficiencies of a few percent at most, with average optical powers at or above a few 100 mW Additionally, in many works on photonic downconversion, the photonic component of the system functions as a channelizing front end, splitting a broad input spectrum into slices and sending each slice to a separate electronic detector (see for example In this work, we demonstrate a dual-comb architecture for photonic downconversion of wideband RF signals with potential for eventual on-chip integration. We accomplish this by taking advantage of maturing silicon nitride microcomb technology for one of our two combs. Silicon nitride (SiN) resonators have been used to generate coherent soliton frequency combs on-chip for nearly a decade While the SiN-based microcomb is very attractive from a SWaP perspective, the power per comb mode is limited by characteristically poor pump-to-sideband conversion efficiency The high-level view of our approach is outlined in figure We implement this structure as in figure The LO arm (EO comb) begins similarly, in this case with an EDFA amplifying the ECDL before the optical carrier passes through the EO comb generator. This portion of our system has been explained elsewhere Our system supports input RF signals from ∼3.6 GHz to ∼18 GHz, limited on the low side by our optical pump notch filters and on the high side by the bandwidth of our pre-IM LNA. We test our system performance by using single sinusoidal tones at various frequencies throughout the operating band. A summary of results can be seen in figures 3a and 3b. Figure After testing with single sinusoidal tones, we perform twotone measurements of our pre-IM LNA and the rest of the photonic link separately in order to identify their individual output third-order intercept points (OIP 3 ), a standard metric for quantifying nonlinearity in RF systems As all of the input spectrum's δ f r /2-wide Nyquist zones are folded down into a single common δ f r /2-wide band at the output, one cannot immediately discern a signal's originating Nyquist zone simply by detecting it at the output. This could be overcome by either limiting the allowed RF input frequencies (not desirable, as it would artificially limit the system bandwidth) or by using many parallel photodetector + ADC pairs after the downconverter (eg, This technique is tested separately with signals at twelve different input Nyquist zones -six are "low" Nyquist zones (Nyquist bands immediately at the low-frequency side of their respective LO line), and six are at "high" Nyquist zones (bands at higher frequency than their LO line). Importantly, low and high Nyquist zones are distinguished by the direction of the output signal frequency shift when the EO comb rep rate is changed. This is a key benefit of our system, as this kind of Nyquist zone distinguishing is often accomplished via coherent detection (see for example, Finally, we believe there are substantial improvements that can still be made. One simple tactic would be adding a broader bandwidth, higher-gain LNA before our IM. Our current LNA has a gain of roughly 33 dB which could be dramatically improved with an appropriate replacement. Additionally, upgrading our EO comb generator with higher bandwidth modulators (>40 GHz) could allow for removal of the pulse shaper, reducing optical insertion loss in the system and boosting our SNR. Finally, it has been noted that the conversion efficiency of the soliton microcomb appears to be costing significantly in terms of performance. There has recently been exciting work in a particular brand of microcombs operating in a normal-dispersion regime (different from the anomalous dispersion regime used in this work) that boasts efficiencies one or even two orders of magnitude better than the microcombs here In summary, we have demonstrated a dual comb RF photonic system for downconversion of signals in the 3.6-18 GHz band. It can potentially serve as a front end for low-bandwidth, high-resolution electronics. Additionally, we believe there is substantial potential for moving our system towards a fully onchip downconverter. Recent advances in fully integrated soliton microcombs have already been highlighted here. While our EO comb in this case uses discrete optical components, advances in thin film lithium niobate modulators (e.g., © 2023 Optica Publishing Group. Users may use, reuse, and build upon the article, or use the article for text or data mining, so long as such uses are for non-commercial purposes and appropriate attribution is maintained. All other rights are reserved.