Traditional ferroelectrics undergo thermally-induced phase transitions whereby their structural symmetry increases. The associated higher-symmetry structure is dubbed paraelectric. Ferroelectric transition metal dichalcogenide bilayers have been recently shown to become paraelectric, but not much has been said of the atomistic configuration of such a phase. As discovered through numerical calculations that include molecular dynamics here, their paraelectricity can only be ascribed to a time average of ferroelectric phases with opposing intrinsic polarizations, whose switching requires macroscopically large areas to slip in unison. Ferroelectrics are ubiquitous within capacitors, And thus, the ferroelectic to paraelectric phase transition for a family of ferroelectrics created by the thinning down of their layered bulk and known as group-IV monochalcogenide monolayers (IVMMLs) The discussion includes energy landscapes and a comparison of global and local energy minima. Molecular dynamics (MD) calculations with force fields designed via machine-learning are deployed for four TMDBs at multiple temperatures afterwards. Those calculations reveal that the ferroelectric to paraelectric two-dimensional structural transformation is facilitated by sliding events on the honeycomb lattice, with polarization P changing direction at every discrete step. T C is shown to be proportional to predetermined energy barriers. Conclusions are provided at the end. MoS 2 , WS 2 , MoSe 2 , and WSe 2 bilayers were studied. Pending a detailed description of Methods, this computational study was divided in two subcategories: (i) zero-temperature density functional theory (DFT) calculations that utilize a plane wave set were performed to determine relative structural energies, as well as the vibrational properties of transition metal dichalcogenide bilayers, and (ii) finite temperature MD calculations that relied on a DFT numerical atomic orbital basis set for efficiency, from which machine-learned classical interatomic potentials were obtained. The studied materials were ordered by their mean atomic number Z, defined as 1/3 i Z i , where Z i is the atomic number of any of the three atoms in a given monolayer unit cell. Table When comparing our results against experimental ones, one must remember that the 3R rotated bilayer is buried within a bulk sample in the latter case: a TMD sample is cleaved by a shear strain that induces a relative rotation of the two cleaved parts, which remain bound after the mechanical manipulation. In this study, on the other hand, a bilayer exposed to vacuum on both ends is being considered. We are unaware of the experimental observation of spontaneous rotations of a 3R bilayer system back onto the 2H ground state: the mechanical energy utilized to rotate exceeds any thermally activated barrier to undergo a macroscopic in-sync rotation of half a layered material. Here, periodic boundary conditions preclude the two layers from undergoing relative rotations. There is a tall energy barrier located at about 2/3 of √ 3a 0 on Figure Figure Both local minima A and B on Figure The Berry phase approach for intrinsic polarization 30 was applied on a periodic bulk bilayer configuration, and its value multiplied by the lattice constant along the direction parallel to P to report two-dimensional values. While the contents of Figure Dashed curves on Figure Figure On the other hand, and quite distinctly, the energy landscape on Figure Letter. Indeed, the emerging picture for paraelectric phenomena on TMDBs (Figure The picture presented on Figure The trained MTPs were used to simulate a 3R WSe 2 bilayer for up to one microsecond of MD evolution with a 10 femtosecond time step; a runtime orders of magnitude larger than those reported for other 2D ferroelectrics before. Prior experience indicates a relation among an energy barrier J and T C of the form T C 1.5J, when J is expressed in K/u.c. With increasing temperature (subplots 3(g) to 3(i)), one continues to see sudden jumps that continue to confirm that the bilayer is exploring the infinite number of minima freely, and we posit that T C is 490 K for the 3R WSe 2 bilayer. This value is higher than the experimentally reported one of 351 K, 9 but it is order-of-magnitude correct. The discrepancy can be used to revise and tune the exchange-correlation potential employed for the training of the force field. To the argument that the rare slippage events could occur at even lower temperatures if one continues tracking the temporal evolution for longer times, one must recall that there is an activation barrier J 3R that must be overcome here, and that the relation among T C and J for the 3R WSe 2 bilayer just found is consistent with previous results on other 2D ferroelectrics, which indicate a relation in between 1 and 2 among those two physical variables when J is expressed in K/u.c. We show that every additional sliding event swaps P on the SI. Slippage events turn rarer as the supercell employed increase in size. The shear mode's probability diminishes when more atoms are used in simulations and prohibitive, larger than the microsecond times reported here, are needed to capture those events. The paraelectricity of 3R WSe 2 bilayers occurs at a definite temperature experimentally, This work ends with additional calculations to ascertain T C for WS 2 , MoS 2 , and MoSe 2 3R bilayers following the procedure described on Figure Proceeding by comparison with another family of 2D ferroelectrics, it has been shown that the "paraelectric phase" of 3R transition metal dichalcogenide bilayers is a time average over large times of a sequence of ferroelectric configurations that swap polarization sequentially over a periodic energy landscape. This conclusion is supported by a study of the energy landscape, vibrational modes, and dedicated molecular dynamics calculations. These results invite to rethink the atomistic and temporal nature of ferroelectrics made out of bilayers that slide easily. Zero-temperature calculations: We used the VASP package To calculate energy landscapes, we performed a rigid shift of the top monolayer from r = 0 to r = a 1 + a 2 , with a 1 and a 2 lattice vectors, and the total energy was determined selfconsistently for each structure along this translation. P is calculated following the standard Berry-phase approach. Hartree, and a 4 Å k -point density along both a 1 and a 2 . Exchange-correlation interactions were described with the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) parametrization of the generalized gradient approximation (GGA), We generated MTPs for MoS The authors declare no competing financial interest. Cuts along a horizontal line on the landscapes, in which local and global minima, as well as energy barriers (J 2H and J 3R ) for multiple TMDBs are displayed. Solid lines were obtained with a plane-wave DFT method, dashed lines on plot (d) are obtained with a DFT method using a localized basis set, and dash-dot lines on (d) indicate the energy landscape as obtained from a classical force field relying on machine-learning techniques. Relative energy differences among the 2H ground state and the degenerate 3R minima are consistent with Table (e) and (f): Energy barriers among local minima and the smallest energy barrier, and P for the local minima in the 3R phase. P flips sign in going from one local minima to the nearest one. .59 Å at zero temperature. Sliding events are observed on subplots (f) through (i); the magnitude of those displacements is consistent with the vectors drawn as an inset in subplot (e) which furnish a honeycomb lattice. We assign a critical temperature T C to the temperature for which the first sliding event occurs within the full one microsecond simulation time, understanding that P will become zero as a longtime-average. T C as extracted from these plots has a ± 10 K resolution. The sliding events seen here validate the hypothesis raised on Figure 