Non-reciprocity in the critical current has been observed in a variety of superconducting systems and has been called the superconducting diode effect. The origin underlying the effect depends on the symmetry breaking mechanisms at play. We investigate superconducting micro bridges of NbN and also NbN/magnetic insulator (MI) hybrids. We observe a large diode efficiency of ≈ 30% when an out-of-plane magnetic field as small as 25 mT is applied. In both NbN and NbN/MI hybrid, we find that the diode effect vanishes when the magnetic field is parallel to the sample plane. Our observations are consistent with the critical current being determined by the vortex surface barrier. Unequal barriers on the two edges of the superconductor strip result in the diode effect. Furthermore, the rectification is observed up to a temperature ∼10 K, which makes the device potential for diode based applications over larger temperature range than before. In the presence of symmetry breaking potentials, the magnitudes of critical currents of a superconductor (SC) are unequal for the two bias polarities The field witnessed an upsurge of reports spanning a range of systems such as van der Waals material with noncentrosymmetric crystal potential -MoS 2 While a majority of the theoretical work has focused on the critical depairing mechanism, the critical current in type II superconductors is often determined by the vortex surface barriers In this article, we find SDE in NbN micro-bridges in out-ofplane magnetic field. Furthermore, to investigate the effects of an in-plane exchange field, we study NbN/YIG and find no diode effect with in-plane applied fields. Since our device geometry avoids fringe fields caused by YIG from entering NbN, the absence of diode effect provides a test of the fringefield mechanism of SDE put forth by Hou and coworkers Our experiments use SiO 2 (100 nm) on Si and epitaxial Y 3 Fe 5 O 12 (YIG) (100 nm) on gadolinium gallium garnet as substrates. A positive photo-resist was spun on the substrates, which was then patterned to micro devices via photo-lithography. The patterned sample was cleaned by soft sputtering Ar + ions in an ultra-high vacuum chamber, to eliminate any residual photo-resist and adsorbates. Further, NbN thin film was deposited using reactive DC magnetron sputtering at room temperature, at a base pressure < 10 -8 mbar. The sample was then dipped in acetone to lift off the film, resulting in micro devices. A standard 4-point measurement configuration using a DC current source and a nano-voltmeter was employed for the measurements [inset of fig. We first present the results of experiments on the 20 nm thick NbN device on SiO 2 demonstrating non-reciprocity of the critical current, I c . The device is a micro-bridge of lateral dimensions 1 μm × 4 μm. The resistance versus temperature dependence of the device shows a broad transition to the superconducting state at T c = 7.5 K [refer to fig. The current-voltage (IV ) characteristics of the device as a function of magnetic field in the ẑ direction exhibits a decay of I c with magnetic field up to ≈ 100 mT [fig. The maximum efficiency of our device is ≈ 0.3 at T = 2 K and B ≈ ± 25 mT, illustrating a robust diode effect in the device. To investigate the underlying mechanism causing the diode effect in NbN, we study the variation of Q as a function of angle between the current and magnetic field directions. We find that the diode effect vanishes when the applied magnetic field is in the plane of the sample, irrespective of the in-plane angle (φ ) [fig. We interpret our findings assuming that the critical current is determined by the vortex flow Complementing this qualitative analysis, we now extract the so-called maximum super-heating field of the Meissner state With the aim of examining the helical superconducting state Further, the switching between SC and N states is illuminated by analyzing the horizontal line-cut profiles of the surface plots [fig. We have reported a robust superconducting diode in NbN and NbN/YIG micro devices, with diode efficiency of ≈ 30%. Absence of rectification in the in-plane field with magnetically saturated YIG film provides complimentary evidence to the report of Hou et al., 