We develop a two-orbital Hubbard model of electron correlations in ultrathin (111)-oriented fcc films of late transition metals such as Co and Ni. Our model indicates that the Mott-Hund's interaction results in ferromagnetic nearest-neighbor orbital correlations. Frustration associated with the mismatch between orbital and crystal symmetries prevents orbital ordering, resulting in the orbital liquid state. This state can be manifested in phenomena involving spin-orbit coupling, such as magnetic anisotropy. Magnetism and superconductivity are among the most fascinating collective phenomena in condensed matter physics. These phenomena stem from electron correlations that provide a mechanism for electrons to lower their kinetic and Coulomb interaction energies while satisfying the Pauli exclusion principle In contrast, magnetism is commonly analyzed in single-particle terms. For instance, in the Stoner-Weiss model, ferromagnetic (FM) ordering arises because electrons with the same spin avoid each other due to the Pauli principle, reducing their Coulomb interaction energy A prominent example of a model of magnetism based on such correlations is the Mott theory of antiferromagnetic (AFM) ordering in a single half-filled band In this work, we utilize the Hubbard model to analyze correlations in (111)-oriented ultrathin fcc films of late transition metals such as Co and Ni. Our choice of this system is motivated by the relatively simple electronic structure characterized by the d-level population of about one hole per site, enhanced correlation effects due to hopping suppression in thin films, and practical relevance for magnetic memory and sensor applications Our main finding is illustrated in Fig. We also show that spin-orbit coupling (SOC) breaks the symmetry between the orbital singlet components, resulting in a finite orbital moment that facilitates perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (PMA). This finding sheds new light on the enhanced PMA commonly observed in ultrathin magnetic films The paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we introduce our model. In Section III, we show that the two-site approximation is equivalent to the Kugel-Khomskii model, aside from an inconsequential hopping asymmetry. In Section IV, we utilize a three-site model to elucidate orbital frustration associated with the mismatch between orbital and lattice symmetries, which prevents orbital ordering in this system. In Section V, we extrapolate our analysis to an extended system. In Section VI, we show that orbital correlations can be manifested in phenomena involving SOC, focusing on magnetic anisotropy as a specific example. Finally, in Section VII we summarize our results and discuss their broader implications for other magnetic systems expected to exhibit similar orbital frustration. The magnetic and electronic properties of transition metals are dominated by the states derived from the 4s and 3d atomic orbitals. Strong hybridization between 4s orbitals produces a broad (≈ 10 eV) 4s band To identify the orbitals that dominate valence states in ultrathin (111)-oriented fcc films, we consider the d-level splitting by the effective crystal field The hole representation provides a simple way to identify the orbitals that dominate valence states. In Ni, about half an electron per site resides in the 4s shell, leaving about half a hole in the d-band We describe the system by the Hubbard-Kanamori Hamiltonian in the hole representation, where the summation is over all the dummy indices, ĉ † n,σ,s creates a hole with spin s = ±1/2 ≡↑, ↓ and pseudospin σ = ±1 enumerating the orbitals d x 2 -y 2 , d xy at the position n normalized by the lattice constant, l is a unit vector in the direction of one of the six nearest neighbors, and n n,σ,s = ĉ † n,σ,s ĉ n,σ,s . Note that n is generally not an integer vector for the triangular lattice. The first term in Eq. ( The two terms with coefficients J and J c , commonly referred to as the Kanamori's spin-flip and pair-hopping terms, are required by the symmetry of the Hamiltonian. The last term accounts for SOC, which controls the magnetic anisotropy essential for the magnetic devices based on thin films with PMA The symmetry-constrained relations among the parameters U, U , U , J, and J c in Eq. ( We use the values U 0 = 3.64 eV, J 0 = 0.77 eV based on extensive prior Hubbard modeling of transition metal compounds In this section, we consider a two-site approximation, and show that in the cubic harmonic basis the nearestneighbor orbital correlations are essentially the same as in the Kugel-Khomskii model. In the subsequent sections, we show that the form of correlations becomes different in the spherical harmonic basis, which is more practical for analyzing extended systems and SOC. We choose the x-axis along the direction between the two sites, the y-axis in-plane perpendicular to it, and the zaxis normal to the plane. Intra-orbital hopping between sites is described by the matrix elements t x 2 -y 2 and t xy . Inter-orbital hopping vanishes because the orbital d x 2 -y 2 is symmetric with respect to the inversion of the y-axis, while the orbital d xy is antisymmetric. Using the Koster-Slater parameters, and accounting for the fact that the signs of hopping amplitudes in the hole representation are opposite to those in the electron representation, we calculate t x 2 -y 2 = 0.32 eV, t xy = -0.27 eV for Ni, and t x 2 -y 2 = 0.39 eV, t xy = -0.33 eV for Co with a precision of about 0.01 eV To analyze correlations, we consider the system populated with two holes. In the limit of negligible interaction, the two-particle g.s. is the single-particle g.s. populated with two opposite-spin holes. At finite interaction, this state evolves into a singlet whose energy calculated approximately by neglecting the last two interaction terms in Eq. ( The effects of these interaction terms calculated perturbatively result in energy correction ∆E 0 -2U 0 ), in good agreement with exact numeric diagonalization, Fig. We now show that at sufficiently large interaction the g.s. is a spin triplet. The qualitative picture is the same as in the Kugel-Khomskii model. In the regime dominated by interactions, one can treat hopping as a perturbation on the manifold of degenerate ground states of interaction Hamiltonian with one hole per site. The second-order correction to the energy of this state due to hopping is minimized if the Mott-Hund's interaction energy of two onsite holes produced by virtual hopping is minimized, i.e. they have the same spin and are on the opposite orbitals. Thus, the spins of the holes on the two sites are FM coupled and their orbitals are AFM coupled, consistent with Fig. This picture is confirmed by the exact diagonalization of the Hamiltonian. For simplicity, we consider only two components of spin triplet with spin normal to the film, whose wavefunctions labeled by the spin direction s are with energy Here, we use trigonometric parameterization of the amplitudes to simplify normalization. For the hopping parameters of Ni, E t = -0.2 eV, θ t = 14 • and this state is dominated by the first term. Thus, the holes are almost localized, consistent with the qualitative analysis above. Stoner vs Heisenberg magnetism. We now discuss the contribution of interaction-induced correlations between holes to FM ordering in the considered two-site model. At sufficiently small interaction, the FM (spin triplet) state is approximated as a product of single-particle states with the same spins, which can be viewed as the two-site limit of Stoner (single-particle band) magnetism. In this regime, the energies of both the singlet and the triplet linearly vary with U [see Fig. Instead, in the experimentally relevant regime at U = U 0 , the first two components in Eq. ( In this section, we show that the similarity to the Kugel-Khomsii model does not extend beyond the twosite approximation, due to the orbital frustration associated with the mismatch between orbital and lattice symmetries. For the square lattice, the matrix elements t x 2 -y 2 , t xy would describe orbitally-selective hopping between a given site and all four of its nearest neighbors, due to the matching symmetries of the lattice and the d-orbitals. This would allow for a straightforward extension of the two-site model to an extended system, leading to orbital ordering as in the Kugel-Khomskii model We position sites 1 and 2 on the x-axis, the same way as in the two-site model, and site 3 on the y-axis [Fig. To simplify the problem, we transform to the orbital basis that reflects the symmetry of the three-site model. For site 3, we introduce the spherical harmonics in the usual Condon-Shortley phase convention, Here, m = ±2 denotes the projection of the atomic orbital moment onto the film normal. Hereinafter, we label these orbitals by the pseudospin σ = m/2. For sites 1 and 2, we utilize the same orbitals rotated by the angle 2π/3 clockwise and counterclockwise, respectively [Fig. Single-particle states. The single-particle approximation is a useful starting point for the analysis of the manyparticle state. According to group theory with energy E 0 = -2t +-+ t ++ . The lowest-energy chiral single-particle states are and characterized by l = 1 and -1, respectively, Here, θ 1 = tan -1 (1 + 2t ++ /t +-) ≈ 50 • . These states can be interpreted as Bloch waves propagating clockwise and counterclockwise, respectively, around a closed three-site chain. They are related to each other by time reversal, and have the same energy E ± = -t +--t ++ , where we neglect a correction of order t 2 ++ /t +-. All the singleparticle states are also spin-degenerate. Many-particle state. We expect that many-particle states characterized by populations of 0, 1, and 2 holes per site are relevant to late transition metals due to quantum charge fluctuations. For three sites, the corresponding total populations vary from 0 to 6, with very small amplitudes for large deviations from the average populations dictated by the atomic structure. For Ni, the average d-shell population is somewhat smaller than one hole per site. Thus, the amplitudes of states with one and two holes on three sites are large. However, we do not expect such states to significantly contribute to correlations because hole hopping to the neighboring empty site does not affect interaction energy. Correlations relevant to Ni are expected to stem from the many-hole wavefunction component with one hole per site. This component also has a substantial amplitude in Co populated with somewhat more than one d-hole per site, and is considered throughout the rest of this work. Larger hole populations are also expected to contribute to the correlations identified in our work, as outlined in the Summary. Quantum charge fluctuations reduce these correlations but are not expected to completely suppress them, as suggested by the persistence of Mott correlations in the metallic state of doped Mott insulators We consider for simplicity only the FM state with spin polarization normal to the film plane, so the spins of all three holes are either up or down. In the limit of negligible interaction, this state is reduced to the product of three lowest-energy single-particle states Eqs. ( the approximation sin θ 1 = cos θ 1 = 1/ √ 2 for the angle that parameterizes the single-particle states. We now analyze the interaction-dominated regime using the virtual hopping approximation. The product of three lowest-energy single-particle states Eqs. ( where we use cyclic notations for the site index, i.e. n -1 ≡ 3 for n = 1, and trigonometric parameterization of amplitudes to simplify normalization. Neglecting same-orbital hopping, degenerate second-order perturbation theory gives θ 3 = 30 • and E 3 = -8t 2 +-/U . These analytical approximations are in good agreement with exact numeric diagonalization in the respective limiting regimes, as illustrated in Fig. Two-particle correlations. We now interpret the threeparticle FM state in terms of two-particle correlations. The wavefunction Eq. ( Consider the component of this state with n = 3, normalized here to unity so that it can be viewed as a separate wavefunction. This state is a product of the state d xy on site 3 and an orbitally FM-correlated singlet state on sites 1 and 2, consistent with the two-particle correlations illustrated in Fig. To relate these results to the two-site model of Section III, we first note that the operators in Eq. ( We note that orbital correlations are distinct from orbital ordering. The latter is associated with unquenched orbital moments. However, orbital moments vanish in the state Eq. ( In this section, we extend the few-site models of correlations developed in the last two sections to an extended system. We note that the hexagonal symmetry of the triangular lattice does not quench the moments of the single-particle d ±2 orbitals that dominate the valence states [see Fig. Virtual hopping approximation. For realistic hopping and interaction parameters, both two-and three-site model systems discussed above are well-described by the virtual hopping approximation. For an extended system, this implies either an insulating or a "Hund's metal" state characterized by anomalous transport inconsistent with the properties of transition metals The appropriateness of the quasi-localized approximation for 3d electrons is implied by the Heisenberg exchange model commonly used to describe magnetism in late transition metals Orbital frustration. As was shown in the previous section, the FM-ordered state of three sites is a superposition of products of an orbital singlet of two sites and a quenched orbital state of the third site. The mechanism of quenching is similar to the frustration of three AFM-coupled Ising spins For AFM-coupled spins, frustration on the triangular lattice results in the spin liquid state characterized by singlet nearest-neighbor correlations Basis orbitals and Hamiltonian. Virtual hopping involves hopping of a hole from site n onto the neighboring site n + l, and hopping back of the same hole or the hole initially located on that site. For the states projected on the subspace with a single hole per site, this process involves only two neighboring sites, allowing one to introduce site-specific basis orbitals to simplify the analysis of virtual hopping We align the x-axis of the local coordinate system with the direction l between two neighboring sites. In the spherical harmonic basis, opposite-orbital hopping am-plitude is t +-, while same-orbital hopping amplitude is t ++ . We use the virtual hopping approximation -the second-order degenerate perturbation theory on the subspace of states with a single hole per site -to determine the effective second-order hopping Hamiltonian where we have neglected corrections of the order t 2 ++ /t 2 +-< 0.01. The summation is over all n and l so each second-order hopping process is counted twice, . The operators ĉ n,σ annihilate a hole on the corresponding site in the orbital state σ defined in the local two-site basis. To gain insight into the correlations described by this Hamiltonian, we first consider the subspace of spinordered states with spin normal to the film plane. The first term in Eq. ( The two-orbital flip term prevents orbital ferromagnetism. The g.s. of the Hamiltonian Eq. ( Energy of orbital correlations. To gain further insight into the correlations described by Eq. ( σ,σ ,s,s n n,σ,s n n+ l,σ ,s . The contribution to energy due to virtual hopping between these two sites is ). ( Accounting for the fact that each site has six nearest neighbors, the total energy of the uncorrelated state of an N -site system is 3N E n, n+ l . The FM spin-ordered, orbitally uncorrelated state can be similarly described by the 4 × 4 density matrix accounting for two possible orbital states of each site, ρ n, n+ l = 1 4 σ,σ ,s n n,σ,s n n+ l,σ ,s . The energy of this state for the N -site system determined as in Eq. ( The FM spin-ordered, orbitally correlated state of two neighboring sites described by the wavefunction Eq. ( Orbital moments are quenched in the orbital liquid state, making it more challenging to observe this state than orbital ordering. Nevertheless, orbital correlations may be manifested in phenomena that involve SOC, such as magnetic anisotropy, anomalous and spin Hall effects Thin films of late transition metal ferromagnets commonly exhibit an anomalously large PMA We now analyze such many-particle effects using the Hubbard Hamiltonian Eq. ( The SOC Hamiltonian has a simple form in the basis of spherical harmonics d ±2 because the latter are not mixed by the orbital moment operators, with λ ≈ 40 meV for Ni We use the two-site model as an approximation for the two-site correlations in the extended system, as discussed in the previous section. Including the SOC term in the Hamiltonian, we obtain the two-site FM g.s. wavefunction for spin s normal to the film, At φ = π/4, this wavefunction reduces to the spintriplet state derived in Section III in the limit of negligible SOC, with energy The deviations of φ from π/4 due to SOC break the symmetry between the term with two up orbitals and the term with two down orbitals, the only terms in Eq. ( is the contribution of SOC to the two-particle state energy. Analysis omitted here for brevity shows that the effect of SOC on the in-plane spin-polarized state is two orders of magnitude smaller because the subspace of orbitals d ±2 includes only orbital moments normal to the film. This small energy is associated with the higherorder SOC-induced effects that involve two-hole spinorbit correlations. Neglecting this correction, the energy of the normal-spin triplet components is smaller than that of the in-plane spin-polarized state by -E SOC , which describes the two-site PMA energy. The effect of correlations on magnetic anisotropy is illustrated in Fig. Since the onsite Mott-Hund's interaction is mainly a property of the atomic species, a more experimentally relevant prediction of our model is the increase of magnetic anisotropy with decreasing hopping parameter t +- at fixed interaction [Fig. In this work, we used the two-orbital Hubbard-Kanamori model including spin-orbit coupling to analyze correlations in ultrathin films of late transition metal ferromagnets such as Ni and Co. Our analysis suggests that the wavefunction of d-electrons hosting magnetism is not well-approximated by the Slater determinant of singleparticle states. Instead, it can be well-described by the virtual hopping approximation, tentatively placing these systems in the strongly-correlated regime in the sense that interactions dominate the many-particle wavefunction of d-electrons. Our main result is the prediction that correlations take the form of the orbital liquid state characterized by ferromagnetic orbital correlations between neighboring sites, but vanishing onsite orbital moments in the limit of negligible SOC. We show that in contrast to Kugel-Khomsii materials, orbital ordering is prevented in the considered systems by the mismatch between orbital and crystal symmetries, resulting in orbital frustration. Because of orbital moment quenching, the orbital liquid state is significantly more challenging to observe than the orbitallyordered state. Nevertheless, it is expected to be manifested in phenomena involving spin-orbit coupling such as magnetic anisotropy, spin Hall and anomalous Hall effects Our model focuses on the component of the manyelectron wavefunction characterized by the d-level population of one hole per site, whose amplitude is maximized in the Co 50 Ni 50 alloy. However, orbital correlations identified in our work are expected to persist in thin films with larger d-hole populations. Consider, for instance, a thin-film fcc Co 50 Fe 50 alloy that contains about two 3d holes per site. According to the Hund's rules, their spins are expected to be aligned, in agreement with the Slater-Pauling curve Following the same arguments as for a single hole per site, opposite-orbital hopping stabilizes the orbital singlet state of two sites, while orbital frustration on the fcc lattice stabilizes an orbital liquid state. The same argument extends to states with three holes on two sites, with one hole shared between the sites. It starts to break down for populations exceeding two holes per site, since the same state d 0 must be occupied on both sites, whose energy can be lowered by AFM spin correlations of the two holes, instead of FM correlation. This is consistent with the observation that the largest moment per site achievable in transition metal alloys is about 2.5μ B In bulk Co and Ni, each site has six nearest neighbors in the two (111) planes above and below the plane containing this site and its six neighbors considered in our work. In the spherical harmonic basis, same-orbital hopping is dominant for the out-of-plane neighbors, resulting in AFM two-site orbital correlations. The picture of orbital correlations then becomes significantly more complicated than that in ultrathin films. Nevertheless, since the orbital singlet is characterized by a vanishing onsite orbital moment, FM in-plane orbital correlations are compatible with AFM out-of-plane correlations, allowing for an orbital liquid state in the bulk materials. We leave its detailed analysis for future studies. Our approach can be extended to other magnetic systems, such as small clusters of metals 