Natural materials usually consist of isotopic mixtures, for which different isotopic ratios can lead to distinct material properties such as thermal conductivity and nucleation process 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 . However, the knowledge of isotopic interface remains largely unexplored mainly due to the challenges in isotopic identification and property measurement at an atomic scale 10, Isotopes of an element have the same number of protons, but different in numbers of neutrons and hence atomic mass The commonly-used isotope analysis methods are based on vibration detection, such as Raman Here, we fabricate atomically sharp h-10 BN/h- We grow large h- For the analysis below, we carefully exclude the phonon polariton signals and focus on the h-BN phonons (see details in supplemental figure EELS mappings with different energy windows (marked by the colored stripes in Fig. Two main spectral features, whose energy lies between 95-105 meV and 80-90 meV, originate from different momentum transfer, i.e., q near Γ (BZ center, low q) and q near K (BZ boundary, high q) by comparing the out-of-plane signals of DFPT results (supplemental figure Interestingly, across the interface the transitions of both these ZO phonons are not atomically sharp in Fig. To explore the electron phonon coupling at the interface, we calculated the phononinduced differential charge density at finite temperature. When considering vibration of optical modes in polar material h-BN, the positively charged B and negatively charged N atoms are displaced from the equilibrium position with different amplitudes and opposite directions, thus inducing an additional dipole (vibration dipole) We further explore the changes in phonon energy between atomic layers near the interface. Fig. Specifically, from the "on-column" position to the "off-column" position, the measured phonon frequency is slightly increased. The quantitative analysis shown in Fig. The phonons at the interface (black lines in Fig. For an isotope-purified h-10 BN/h-11 BN interface system, the lattice vibrations near the interface are probed with sub-unit-cell resolution. Meanwhile, the phonon energies of ZOhigh q and ZOlow q are different, allowing us to reveal the momentum transferdependent behavior as well. We find that the ZO phonon modes at the interface are delocalized to a few nanometers, and the BZ center's phonons are more delocalized than those at the BZ boundary. We also find the electron-phonon coupling at the BZ center is stronger than that at BZ boundary. Moreover, the vibration energy of ZO phonons also varies from one atomic column to another, i.e., it reaches the maximum in the middle of them, which can be understood by the varying effective scattering angle during electron beam scattering. Such behavior also depends on the momentum transfer, that is, at the BZ boundary the flatter phonon dispersion makes the vibration energy less sensitive to the change of scattering angle in different positions. Across the interface from the h-10 BN layer to h-11 BN layer, the vibrational energy of two ZO phonons dramatically changes because both of the simultaneous changes in effective scattering angle and mass across the interface. It is generally believed that the isotopes have little influence on electronic structures. A previous study reported that the optical band gap energies of h-BN depend on the isotopic composition 2 , suggesting a strong nuclei effect on the electronic structures. Our study indicate that the electronic structure can be also affected by the isotopes but in a different manner, i.e., isotopes have different vibration amplitude and thus different vibration dipole, leading to the charge accumulation at their interface due to the discontinued van der Waals bonding, which in turn, delocalize the vibration behavior. More interestingly, such behavior is momentum-transfer dependent. Besides the phonon transport, the accumulated charge at the isotope interface likely also influences on the material electron activities. On the other hand, it's well known that the isotope components govern the thermal conductivity of a material, and the well-accepted mechanism is that the mass disorder dampened the phonon transport which subsequently decreases the thermal conductivity 26, 27 . For an ideal interface, a native model would assume an atomically abrupt change of phonon energy which leads to the reduction of phonon transport channels due to reduced overlap of phonon DOS based on the diffuse mismatch model Moreover, considering the phonon group velocity also highly relies on the momentum transfer, the momentum transfer dependent delocalization of phonons at the isotope interface will affect heat transport in an even more complicated manner.These findings provide a new angle rather than a simple mass disorder to understand the isotopic effects on the physical properties in natural materials, and further shed light on tailoring material properties via proper engineering of isotopic interfaces. Crystal growth of isotopically tuned hBN and TEM sample preparation. The enriched h-BN samples were synthesized using Fe flux method The van der Waals heterostructures of h-10 BN/h-11 BN were prepared with polycarbonate (PC) thin film by a pick-up method. The h-BN nanosheets were first exfoliated on silicon substrates with a 300 nm-thick oxide layer. We used PC thin film to pick up the top h-10 BN nanosheet. The PC thin film with the h-10 BN nanosheet was then stamped onto the bottom h- The stacked h-10 BN/h-11 BN nanosheet was then made into a TEM cross-section sample by Focused ion beam (FIB). U-HERMES200 electron microscope with a monochromator that operated at 30 kV and 60 kV to avoid damaging BN materials. For the sub-unit-cell resolution STEM-EELS experiments, we employed a convergence semi-angle α = 35 mrad and a collection semi-angle β = 25 mrad, operated at 60kV. In this setting, the spatial resolution was better than 0.1 nm, while the energy resolution was ~8 meV. The beam current used for EELS was ~10 pA, and the acquisition times were 200-600 ms/pixel. EELS data processing. All the acquired vibrational spectra were processed by using the custom-written MATLAB code and Gatan Microscopy Suite. More specifically, the EEL spectra were firstly aligned and then normalized to the intensity of the ZLP. Subsequently, the block-matching and 3D filtering (BM3D) algorithms were applied for removing the Gaussian noise. The background arising from both the tail of the ZLP and the non-characteristic phonon losses was fitted by employing the modified Pearson-VII function with two fitting windows and then subtracted in order to obtain the vibrational signal Supplementary information is available in the online version of the paper. Reprints and permissions information is available online at www.nature.com/reprints. Publisher's note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to J.C., L.L., E.G.W. or P.G. The bottom shows the fitted ZOhigh q and ZOlow q modes by the multi-gaussian method. (tt) . The charge density of low-q modes and high-q modes are averaged with weight CC λλ,qq respectively, where low-q modes are defined as its distance to Γ point is smaller than the half of the side length of Brillouin zone, and the other modes are defined as high-q modes. The differential charge density is then obtained by the difference between the averaged charge density under phonon perturbation and the charge density of unperturbed structure. For each configuration, the differential charge density of perturbation along the positive and negative, i.e., +z direction and -z direction, is averaged. The interfacial charge is calculated as the integral of the differential charge density over one adjacent unit cell (~0.34 nm) of the interface each side. The line profile of differential charge density is convoluted with a gaussian factor considering the limited beam size. As shown in the Supplemental Figure In fact, in our experiments the sample have always been rotated to make the electron beam incident at the middle angle of two isotope flakes. Under this circumstance, the tilt angle between sample and electron beam is halved. Therefore, the two parts have the same tilt angle thus do not affect the comparison of signals between the two parts. For example, for data presented in the manuscript, the angle between the h-10 BN/h-11 BN isotopes is experimentally measured to be ~10° by rotating the h-10 BN h-11 BN part successively to zone axis with the assistance of convergent-beam electron diffraction. The sample has been rotated to the middle of h-10 BN/h-11 BN layer, i.e., the angles between the electron beam and the h-10 BN /h-11 BN layer are both ~5°. In this case, we estimate the angle deviation between these two flakes should be smaller than ~5°, for which the angle effect can be completely negligible compared the instrumental precision. 