The superiority of many natural surfaces at resisting soft, sticky biofoulants has inspired the integration of dynamic topography with mechanical instability to promote self-cleaning artificial surfaces. The physics behind this novel mechanism is currently limited to elastic biofoulants where surface energy, bending stiffness, and topographical wavelength are key factors. However, the viscoelastic nature of many biofoulants causes a complex interplay between these factors with time-dependent characteristics such as material softening and loading rate. Here, we enrich the current elastic theory of topographic de-adhesion using analytical and finite element models to elucidate the non-linear, time-dependent interaction of three physical, dimensionless parameters: biofoulant's stiffness reduction, product of relaxation time and loading rate, and the critical strain for short-term elastic de-adhesion. Theoretical predictions, in good agreement with numerical simulations, provide insight into tuning these control parameters to optimize surface renewal via topographic de-adhesion in the viscoelastic regime. Topography driven surface renewal is actively being applied to at-risk medical devices such as vascular grafts and catheters. A significant knowledge gap exists in the relevant parameter space controlling fracture at the biofoulantmaterial interface. In particular, the interlay of multiple nonlinearities arising from surface geometry (wrinkling) and material response (viscoelasticity) combined with fracture pose a challenging problem. This paper explores the physics of dynamic surface topography on interfacial stability when multiple sources of energy dissipation co-exists: interfacial fracture and viscoelasticity. Our calculations, validated by numerical simulations, provide the target critical strain for topographic renewal of a viscoelastic foulant. Furthermore, we provide surface design specifications to optimize surface renewal for biofoulants that can immediately be used by biomedical engineers. Many natural surfaces including airways, arteries, and intestines have dynamically actuated geometries Biofoulants, such as platelets, thrombus, biofilms, and bacteria, are complex, dynamic materials. In order to integrate topographic anti-fouling strategies into biomaterials and medical devices with specific engineering design limits with given loads and achievable actuation strains, topography-driven delamination must be understood in the viscoelastic regime that more accurately represents the material properties of biological foulants Figure For optimal design of self-cleaning surfaces in contact with As the cardiac cycle progresses, the arterial pressure drops gradually until the diastolic pressure (bottom) is reached. As the pressure decreases, the artery contracts and the amplitude of the wrinkles grow. The cardiac cycle then repeats when the left ventricle again contracts pumping blood into the arterial system. Current attempts with experiment and computational modeling focus on elastic behaviors of the biofoulant, and show a scaling dependence of the critical surface curvature on the surface energy, bending stiffness, and topographic geometrical wavelength viscoelastic biofoulants, the interaction of the time-dependent characteristics of the viscoelastic foulant layer with the geometry set by the wrinkled topography and the surface energy needs to be understood, especially for dynamic topographydriven anti-fouling strategies in biomaterials and medical devices A viscoelastic foulant layer (adherent biofoulant) of thickness h is attached to the surface of an elastic bilayer designed to mimic the multi-layered structure of the arterial wall where E s and E f are the substrate and the film moduli, respectively. Surface topography is set by its curvature κ = A/λ 2 , which depends on wrinkle wavelength where ε is the applied nominal strain. This wrinkle pattern is not affected by the foulant layer because the foulant layer is significantly softer than the constituents of the bilayer 8 . To reduce the effect of the pre-wrinkled state on the subsequent delamination process, we study the regime where the wrinkle onset strain ε w is small, thereby A ∼ λ √ ε. As a critical curvature κ c ∼ A c /λ 2 ∼ √ ε c /λ is reached, the viscoelastic foulant layer starts to de-adhere from the bilayer surface. In the elastic limit for the foulant layer solved by Pocivavsek et al. , where τ R is the relaxation time and E ∞ ≤ E 0 are the long-term and instantaneous elastic stiffnesses of the foulant layer, respectively. A mechanical analog for this representation is a Maxwell model with two springs of stiffnesses E ∞ and E 0 -E ∞ and a dashpot to dissipate energy (see Supplementary Appendix 1). With this decaying function of the modulus, a simple mathematical extension of the result of Pocivavsek et al. In terms of time scales, this equation is written as: where ε c = εt c and t c are the critical strain and delamination time, respectively; β = (B 0 -B ∞ )/B 0 = (E 0 -E ∞ )/E 0 is the fraction of the stiffness reduction in the foulant layer, with providing bending stiffnesses of the foulant layer at the instantaneous and long-term elastic limits, respectively; and τ de = ε de /ε is the characteristic time for delamination in the instantaneous elastic limit. Three physical dimensionless parameters emerge from these equations: E ∞ /E 0 (magnitude of the foulant layer's relaxation), ετ R (rate of material relaxation relative to loading rate, which is similar to the Weissenberg number used by rheologists to quantify viscoelastic effects Though the above mathematical approach indicates the presence of important dimensionless parameters controlling this complex viscoelastic system and their non-linear coupling, to obtain a physical mechanism driving delamination in this system, we employ an analysis based on energy minimization. In the case of a purely elastic foulant layer with-FIG. Note that for t τ R no viscous dissipation has yet occurred as no viscous strain has had time to develop, thus D = 0, ε v = 0, and U = (E 0 /2) V dV (ε e ) 2 . On the other hand, for t τ R the material has exhausted all possible sources of viscous dissipation, thus the foulant layer's elastic strain ε e = 0 and U = (E ∞ /2) V dV (ε v ) 2 . Since the total strain ε = ε e + ε v , we see in the two limits the available energy is simply that of the purely elastic case with the two moduli E = E 0 and E = E ∞ in the single term Prony series. In other words, a physical interpretation of the stored energy is the elastic energy stored in the two elastic springs of the Maxwell model To drive fracture, a balance between the energy available in the system and the surface energy is required. For a conservative system, dW = dU and a balance between the stored energy and the surface energy d(U + U S ) = d(W + U S ) = 0, where U S = Gl and l is the crack length, is widely used to study fracture Specifically, from the imposed wrinkled topography, the height of the mid-plane of the foulant layer is h m (x,t) = A(t) sin(kx), where t = ε/ε and k = 2π/λ is the wave number. The curvature is computed as κ = ∂ 2 x h m (x,t) = -k 2 A(t) sin(kx) giving the bending strain γ = κy at a point located at 0 ≤ x ≤ L along the length L and at a distance of y to the neutral axis (the mid-plane) of the thin foulant layer. Thus, the strain in the foulant layer is computed as γ = -yk 2 A(t) sin(kx) (see Supplementary Appendix 2). Neglecting the small compressive strain prior to buckling, the viscous strain in the foulant layer becomes dτ and the elastic strain is γ e = γ -γ v . Both approaches lead to non-linear, time-dependent equations whose solutions give the critical time (equivalently critical strain) to trigger delamination: where are obtained using the total work W and stored energy U, respectively, with F(z) = w 0 √ ye -(w-y) dy. Both functions P ± are such that 0 < P ± < 1 and . Thus, the critical strain for delamination is always larger for the stored energy than the total work. This agrees with physical intuition, since in the case of the stored energy, only the elastic energy at any given time is available to drive fracture. However, in the case of total work, some of the dissipated energy may have gone into fracture. As compared to the empirical derivation in Equation 2, the solutions for critical time t c (or equivalently strain ε c ) obtained from the energy balance approach involve more complex non-linear time-convolution functions P ± . Nevertheless, they again reveal the dependence of t c (or ε c ) on three physical dimensionless quantities. This further confirms the important role of these dimensionless parameters in controlling the wrinkle-induced delamination process of the viscoelastic foulant layer. The wrinkling strain ε w is assumed to be small, therefore the energy and relaxation in the foulant layer prior to wrinkling can be neglected in the above analysis. The effect of ε w , however, is taken as a shifting parameter to the solution obtained above as suggested in Pocivavsek et al. To further study the roles of the dimensionless control parameters and their influence on ε c , as well as verify the trends observed from the analytical method, a detailed parametric study is performed using finite element method (FEM) with cohesive zone model (CZM) implemented in Abaqus (Dassault Systèmes, MA) Our analytical method and simulations indicate that the delamination of a viscoelastic foulant layer from a wrinkled surface shows a complex dependence on three control parameters. We therefore investigate the design parameter space by deriving a general fit to collapse the simulation data for a wide range of these parameters. Equation 4 can be rewritten: Equation 5 implies the dimensionless solution: , β . Note that the parameter ετ R /ε de is just the inverse of the parameter τ de /τ R that is shown in Equation 2 to control the instability. Similarly, Equation 5 can be written as: . Thus, now we can replace the general dimensionless solution with: which predicts the collapse of all the data into a region defined by the bounded functions 0 < P ± < 1. With the use of this general solution, all data for the analytical method can be collapsed to two general curves corresponding to either the use of W or U, as shown in Figure solver. We controlled the dynamic effect to be small to represent a quasi-static condition; however, certain amount of dynamic energy due to the solution process and dynamic propagation of the crack tip may still be present in these highly nonlinear simulations, contributing to a difference in the amount of available energy in the simulations as compared to either limits in the analytical approach. Though neither of them exactly overlaps the numerical data from analytical methods, they provide good insight into the controlling factors in this system, and how to use them to control the delamination process. The general collapse obtained in Figure Topography-driven surface renewal is a powerful new mechanism to drive interfacial fracture over large surfaces at risk for fouling. The initial theory was limited to an elastic response regime for the fouling layer Ultimately, topographic surface renewal is based on an energy release mechanism whereby external loading and deformation of an adherent foulant leads to accumulated energy in the foulant, which beyond a critical value is able to drive interfacial crack propagation. In the purely elastic case, as shown in the key result of our prior work (see Equation where f ∈ [0, 1] is the range of the vertical axis in Figure , where τ is the applied actuation time. The first set of parentheses contains parameters under direct control of the graft designer, and the second set of parentheses incorporates intrinsic properties of the foulant. An effective anti-fouling design must enforce the system to work under short time conditions to lower the critical strain to the value ε de which is achieved when f = 0. Physically, this is equivalent to a state where intrinsic viscoelastic dissipation has not had time to take effect and all accumulated strain energy is available to drive interfacial fracture. Following the results in Figure Equation 8 provides the condition for optimal surface renewal for a given viscoelastic foulant. In general, if one moves f up from 0, then the critical strain given by Equation 7 increases. This is important from a design perspective as it provides a design criterion to improve the de-adhesion capability of the system if the optimal surface renewal condition cannot be achieved. For instance, if the system is forced to operate at ετ R ε de 5 then the largest value of f becomes 0.3 and the critical strain needed will be given by Equation In topography-driven surface renewal for viscoelastic foulants, the fouling layer accumulates strain density (ε/λ 2 ) over an applied actuation time (τ). We will take the example of vascular grafts as an illustration, although similar arguments can be constructed for any specific application. The designer has full control over all three parameters independently: ε is the nominal strain in the graft substrate and will be set by E s and the load available in the system (for example, pulse pressure in vascular grafts Consider a viscoelastic Maxwell solid shown in Figure used in the main text. In order to physically understand different energy components in a viscoelastic system, a mass is added to the end of this system to include inertial effects. By applying a force F to the mass, the following equation of motion is obtained: where x is the total displacement of the system and x 1 is the displacement of the spring with stiffness E 0 -E ∞ . The dashpot is always in equilibrium with the contiguous spring and follows the equilibrium equation where x 2 = xx 1 corresponds to the dashpot displacement. It defines the relaxation time τ R = η/(E 0 -E ∞ ) that accounts for different response regimes of the system. For quasi-static motion or zero inertial effects (m ẍ = 0), the applied force is in balance with the springs and dashpot For short times, t τ R , the dashpot does not have sufficient time to react and x 2 ≈ 0. It yields the force-displacement relation F = E 0 x. For large times, t τ R , the dashpot has time to relax and x 2 ≈ x. It means that the spring with stiffness E ∞ takes the total load applied to the system and F = E ∞ x. In general, the force-displacement relation is where The energy balance is obtained by multiplying Equation 9 by ẋ and integrating by parts: Here, we recognize the kinetic energy T , the stored energy U, and the total energy E = T +U, which can be defined as: This leads to from which the rate of dissipation can be recognized as Ḋ = η ẋ2 2 and the external work per unit of time Ẇ = F ẋ. In other words, This states that the total mechanical energy decreases by dissipation and increases by the external work applied to the system The analysis can also be generalized to a continuum system. Consider the case of uniaxial compression, traction, or bending of a filament where we expect the following constitutive relation: Here ε e is not the complete strain ε because part of the strain is taken by a viscous term ε v such that ε = ε e + ε v . In this regard, ε e and ε v are equivalent to x 1 and x 2 , respectively, in the previous model. With no viscous term, the effective stiffness of the system is E 0 , however, the viscous term dissipates the elasticity of the contiguous spring with stiffness E 0 -E ∞ and the effective stiffness for long times is E ∞ . The stress of the spring with stiffness E 0 -E ∞ is in balance with a viscous stress: σ e = σ v . It yields: where we use the constitutive relation σ v = 2η ε to describe the uniaxial deformation of a viscous fluid. Thus, the following representation for the viscous strain in terms of the total strain is obtained: Defining the relaxation time τ R = 2η/(E 0 -E ∞ ), we obtain the equation: that allows us to find the viscous strain: Thus, the stored energy as the elastic energy of the two springs is generalized as: The above relation corresponds to the one presented by Christensen The total energy of the viscoelastic solid corresponds to the total injected work to the system, which is: APPENDIX 3: NUMERICAL MODELING WITH FINITE ELEMENT (FE) AND COHESIVE ZONE METHOD (CZM) Details of the FE model using Abaqus Explicit for the trilayer system (foulant layer, film, and substrate) with the specified boundary conditions in the main manuscript are provided in the previous study Though mixed-mode delamination Figure Utilizing this FE model with the prescribed CZM traction separation laws, we investigate the effect of σ c and G on the onset of delamination. The mesh size is chosen such that at least 3-5 elements are inside the process zone length At the instantaneous and long-term response, the viscoelastic foulant layer can be treated as an elastic foulant layer with modulus E p and the scaling law becomes 8 : ε cε w = aλ 2 G/B p . Using this scaling law, the normalized parameter G = λ 2 G/B p will be utilized to analyze the FEM results. FE simulations of the delamination onset for the two cases, σ c /E p = 0.15 and σ c /E p = 0.25, with E p = 4.8 kPa are shown in Figure These observations are consistent with the capacity of CZM to bridge different failure mechanisms as discussed in Taking into account these considerations for CZM, we conducted FEM simulations with the viscoelastic foulant layer for L pz in the energy dominated region L - pz < L pz < L + pz . This allows a consistent comparison between FEM results and analytical model which focus on fracture driven by an energy release mechanisms. Results are presented in Figure 