Thanks to the modern manufacturing technologies, heterogeneous materials with complex inner structure (e.g., foams) can be easily produced. However, their utilization is not straightforward as the classical constitutive laws are not necessarily valid. According to various experimental observations, the Guyer-Krumhansl equation stands as a promising candidate to model such complex structures. However, the practical applications need a reliable and efficient algorithm that is capable to handle both complex geometries and advanced heat equations. In the present paper, we present the development of a hp-type finite element technique, which can reliably applied. We investigate its convergence properties for various situations, being challenging in relation of stability and the treatment of fast propagation speeds. That algorithm is also proved to be outstandingly efficient, providing solutions four magnitudes faster than the commercial algorithms. The engineering practice utilizes several models to describe the material behaviour, these equations are called constitutive equations. The most frequent are the Navier-Stokes, Fourier and Hooke laws for continuum objects. The common point among them is that all define an equality: q = -λ∂ x T, Π = -ν∂ x v, σ = Eε, However, for advanced transport models, the situation becomes more difficult. The constitutive equation is not an equality but becomes a partial differential equation. Therefore, the conventional initial and BCs do not work without any further conditions in which the partial time derivative of the heat flux ( q) appears with a coefficient τ called relaxation time. Moreover, Eq. ( On that basis, a finite difference approach has been elaborated recently The simplest classical FE techniques use linear piecewise polynomials to approximate the solution and achieve the desired accuracy with mesh refinement. The philosophy of using low-order polynomials over successively finer meshes is called h-type approximation technique However, the conventional h-FEMs can provide slow convergences and low accuracy for specific types of initial and BCs, as well as when certain material and/or geometric parameters of the considered model problem is close to their limit value. In order to overcome these numerical difficulties, the p-version FE technology will be used as alternative, promising strategy, being originally-introduced in The GK equation ( where ρ and c V are the mass density and specific heat; the source terms are neglected. In the following, we present the discretization procedure for that system of equations. For the sake of generality the system of basic differential Eqs. (2)-( as Dirichlet-and Neumann-type BCs at x = 0 and x = l, respectively, as well as the temporal prescriptions T (0, x) = T 0 (x) and q(0, x) = q 0 (x) In this section, new hp-FEMs will be presented for the numerical solution of the MCV-and the GK model which are based on two-field mixed variational formulations, see some similar procedures in In this model problem, after testing Eq. ( satisfying a priori the homogeneous form of the BC (4). Here, H 1 (Ω) stands for the Sobolev space of order 1 In this model problem relaxing again Eq. ( hold true, ensuring a priori the homogeneous form of the BC (4) once again. Notably, again, for both variables (T, q) ∈ H 1 (Ω), which stands as a crucial difference for other FE approaches for heat equations. Let us consider now the hp-FE discretization of the domain Ω. Thenceforward Ω is divided into n physical subdomain. Then the master element The approximation spaces for the trial-and test function group, (T, q) and (u, v) are hp-FE function spaces consisting of piece-wise continuous polynomial functions, being spanned over the i-th element by the external shape functions N 1 and N 2 for p = 1, as well as their supplemented set with the bubble modes where L k (η) are the orthogonal Legendre polynomials, k = 3, 4, . . . , p + 1 Let us represent now the variational equations ( Function T, u q, v the heat flow, respectively. After carrying out the numerical integrations on each element i, on the spatial assembling process we have the following time-dependent matrix equation system which can be written in the simplified form where in which C, T and K denote the consistent matrices of the specific heat, the relaxation term and the heat conductivity, respectively, while Q is the consistent coupling matrix of the system. In this section the newly-developed two-field hp-version FEMs will be tested on a representative initial-boundary value problem, focusing on the transient analyzes. In order to demonstrate the computational performance of the hp-type mixed FEs, first we investigate the point-wise h-and p-convergence of the relative error that are measured, respectively, in the maximum norm of the temperature and the heat flow The related thermodynamic system ( Furthermore, these are subjected to the time-dependent Neumann-type BCs as prescribed heat flows and the initial conditions T 0 (x) = 293 K and q 0 (x) = 0, where c 1 = 1/0.075, c 2 = 6, t p = 0.008 s, namely, these are initially at rest, i.e, in equilibrium state. The c 1 and c 2 coefficients are chosen based on When the computational performance of the p-approximation is analyzed, a 8-, 52-and 20-element uniform mesh kept fixed on the domain Ω for the GK model with the parameter settings κ 2 = 0.8 m 2 , κ 2 = 0.000008 m 2 and the MCV model, respectively, while the polynomial degree p is ranging from 2 to 8 for each element. During the hconvergence studies, the domain Ω is uniformly-refined in 7 steps from the element number n = 8, 52 and 20 to 20, 88 and 44, respectively, for the GK model with κ 2 = 0.8 m 2 , κ 2 = 0.000008 m 2 and the MCV model. In each step the polynomial degree p is set to 2 and kept fixed on each element. At each step, the number of degrees of freedom (DOF) is calculated as the sum of the total unknown coefficients occurring in α. The relative error-convergence curves of the front-and rear side temperature, T (t, 0) and T (t, l), as well as the mid-side heat flow q(t, l/2) obtained for the MCV model and the GK model with relatively large and small value of κ 2 (0.8 m 2 and 0.000008 m 2 ) are plotted against the number of DOF on log-log scales in Figs. Following from the characteristics of the relative error-curves, monotonically high rates are experienced both for h-and for p-convergence. As expected, the p-convergence is much faster than the h-convergence. Namely, the higherorder polynomial approximation helps a lot to increase the convergence rate. Thus, the desired accuracy is achieved with the use of much less number of DOF by the p-approximation. In the asymptotic range, the exponential type of the p-convergence behavior is observed while the h-convergence shows rather an algebraic type of convergence. It can also be experienced that there is no significant influence of the relaxation time τ on the convergence rates. However, the convergence curves are shifted down (without changing their slopes) as τ is decreased achieving a lower relative error value. Besides, it can be seen that the computational limit is reached at a very small error level (at approximately 10 -8 ). Giving now as the illustration of the hp-FE solutions for the MCV model and the GK model with the quite small value of κ 2 (0.000008 m 2 ), the histories of the dimensionless rear-and front side temperatures are depicted, separately for three different relaxation times τ = 0.3 s, τ = 0.15 s and τ = 0.05 s. There is no any computational reason behind the dimensionless rescaling of temperature, this is used only for better overviewing the plots as the model is linear, and solely the characteristics are important. The adiabatic steady-state temperature is set to 1 for these Figures. In Figs. 4-6 and, 8-10, respectively, using a 100-element-mesh with the relatively high polynomial degree p = 10 and comparing all the results to the hp-FE solution of the classical, Fourier model. Figs. 7 and 11 represent the time series of the dimensionless rear-and front side temperature for "over-diffuse" thermodynamic system, i.e., for κ 2 = 0.8 m 2 , zooming the hp-FE solutions in the rapidly change and very small time region [0, 0.02] s. These figures exhibit very well that the τ-value has no significant effect on the solution for "over-diffuse" system. Here we presented a novel numerical approach, specifically developed for the Guyer-Krumhansl equation as that model could have significant practical interest in engineering based on the available experimental data. We successfully demonstrated that the solutions converge, thus are stable and consistent and reproduce the experimentally observed required characteristics, on contrary to COMSOL Moreover, that technique is incredibly more efficient than the one offered by COMSOL, runs about 4 magnitudes faster thanks to the low number of DOFs and elements. That advantage becomes more significant in two and three-dimensional problems, therefore our next aim is to improve and implement the present approach for complex geometries in higher spatial dimensions. Additionally, due to the global energy crisis and chip shortage, the efficiency of algorithms has increasing importance. That huge increase in speed would enable the real-time monitoring of heterogeneous materials with complex inner structure without massive computational capacity.