A variety of tools can be used for spreading metal, ceramic, and polymer feedstocks in powder bed additive manufacturing methods. Rollers are often employed when spreading powders with limited flowability, as arises in powders comprising fine particle sizes or high surface energy materials. Here, we study roller-based powder spreading for powder bed AM using the unique combination of a purpose-built powder spreading testbed with a proven method for X-ray mapping of powder layer depth. We focus on the density and uniformity of nominally 100 μm thick layers of roller-spread Ti-6Al-4V and Al-10Si-Mg powders. Our results indicate that when rotation is too rapid, roller-applied shear force impedes the creation of dense and uniform layers from powders of high innate flowability, or where inertial forces driven by particle density dominate cohesive forces. Roller counter-rotation augments the uniformity of cohesive powder layers, primarily though reducing the influence of particle clusters in the flowing powder, which are otherwise shown to cause deep, trench-like streaks. Companion discrete element method (DEM) simulations further contextualize the experiments through isolation of the effects of cohesion on layer attributes. Results suggest that roller motion parameters could apply a strategic level of additional shear force to the flowing powder, thereby mitigating the clumping behavior characteristic of highly cohesive feedstocks while maintaining high layer uniformity. Roller-based spreading mechanisms are commonly used in powder bed additive manufacturing (AM) processes, particularly when use of fine or highly cohesive powders conveys desirable process attributes and/or component properties However, when fine particles are used in powder bed AM, the low particle mass increases the relative effect of cohesive forces, causing spontaneous clumping in the spreading flow. Therefore, fine powders may also be prone to spreading into sparse and highly variable layers A number of legacy powder characterization techniques exist, and have enjoyed a long history of quantifying the flowability of metal powders in practical contexts. Among the simplest is the static angle of repose, wherein powder is permitted to flow through a standardized funnel and the slope of the resulting conical pile is measured. Higher angles are positively correlated with decreasing powder flowability; a standardized funnel geometry designed by Hall as applied in ASTM standard B213 Accordingly, much experimental work centers on quantification of powder flow under conditions representative of AM. For example, Budding and Vaneker Dispensing of cohesive powders, i.e., metering the amount needed to subsequently spread a layer, is also challenging. Hopper mechanisms are often used to pre-deposit highly cohesive powders onto the build area prior to roller-based leveling Studies incorporating simulations have provided additional insights to the influence of spreading parameters in isolation. For instance, Wang and coworkers, performing simulations based upon spreading of Ni-based alloy powders, conclude that knowledge of the coefficient of sliding friction and Hamaker constant (thus encoding the magnitude of van der Waals forces) are critical to capturing powder spreading kinematics Earlier work by Haeri Finally, we note that existing studies, including studies centered on blade-based spreading techniques, predominantly assess layer non-uniformity at process-relevant resolution (e.g., approximately the laser spot size in laser powder bed AM) via optical measurement of surface topology Therefore, in the case of highly cohesive powders used in AM, there remains a critical need to quantify powder spreadability and layer non-uniformity, and to be able to resolve material deposition at process-relevant scales. To this end, we apply the combination of a mechanized powder spreading testbed and X-ray mapping of powder layer effective depth, shown in Fig. Powder layers are created using the mechanized spreading testbed developed and qualified by Oropeza et al. in To create a powder layer, a volume of powder is first expressed from a supply piston (to the left of the representative build area depicted in Fig. Measurement of powder layer effective depth is performed via X-ray transmission, using a custom-built apparatus described by Penny et al. Transmission of the powder layer is assessed as the ratio of an image with a powder layer present to a previously recorded baseline image of the build platform without powder. As uncertainty on transmission is dominated by shot noise, each image comprises a sum of individual frames to improve the signal-to-noise ratio. Specifically, 52 frames are summed for measurements of Ti-6Al-4V, and 520 frames are summed for Al-10Si-Mg due to its lower X-ray stopping power, hence lower contrast. These values achieve 1 μm uncertainty in the effective depth measured by each detector pixel. To keep the duration of experiments feasible, in view of the stark difference in experiment duration, 5 model layers are studied in experimental combinations including Ti-6Al-4V and one layer is imaged when Al-10Si-Mg powder is used. X-ray measurements are automated to synchronously control the source and detector, average individual frames, and periodically measure and correct for detector dark current. Transmission measurements are interpreted as effective depth using our forward radiation transport model The baseline powder for the experiments conducted herein is a nominally 15 -45 μm Ti-6Al-4V powder that, in view of our prior study with a manual powder spreading approach, features moderate flowability as compared to the range of powders commonly used in metal powder bed AM. We contrast this powder with 20 -63 μm Al-10Si-Mg; despite having a modestly coarser size distribution, it is considerably more cohesive and less flowable as evidenced by its higher angle of repose (AoR) and Hausner ratio. This arises from its lower mass density, and therefore higher relative magnitude of cohesive forces as compared to inertial forces when flowing. Finally, one experimental case is studied using 0 -20 μm Ti-6Al-4V, which is an extremely cohesive powder. In fact, this powder is so cohesive as to preclude angle of repose measurement with a Hall-specified ( Knowledge of the exact powder composition is critical to ensuring the precision of the X-ray measurement technique. Ac-cordingly, the composition reported for the specific powder lots on the material certification certificates is used in modeling powder layer attenuation in the aforementioned radiation transport model, as opposed to the nominal proportion of alloy elements. In addition to the elementary statistical methods applied to effective depth maps of powder layers presented below, we make use of spatial frequency domain techniques to more fully understand the length scales of variance within powder layers. Described in this context in Experimental work is complemented by discrete element method (DEM) powder spreading simulations implemented in the parallel multi-physics research code BACI For discretization of the roller geometry, a tessellated model of a 10 mm diameter roller (idealized, without runout) is represented by 125 linear segments around the theoretical roller perimeter. This size is a trade-off between the size of 20 mm diameter in the experimental setup and computational costs for simulating a realistically sized powder ensemble relative to the roller. A sensitivity study shows no significant impact of this smaller diameter on the spreading results, along with the moderate number of 42, 000 particles in total for the given size distribution. In order to simulate comparable circumferential velocities, the rotational velocity of the roller is scaled with the diameter ratio, i.e., a 20 mm roller at 250 RPM in the experiment is modeled with a 10 mm roller at 500 RPM . As applied in our previous studies A pseudo-material modeling approach is proposed to study the effects of particle surface energy and density. Surface energy, which determines cohesive forces, is systematically varied. Thus, for each parameter set consisting of traverse velocity and rotational velocity, surface energy values ranging from 0.02 to 2.56 mJ/m 2 (non-cohesive to very cohesive) are simulated. We justify this range in view of our prior study, which suggests that a surface energy in the range of 0.04 -0.08 mJ/m 2 best captures the behavior of the 15 -45 μm Ti-6Al-4V powder with good flowability. Conversely, powders with surface energies > 1 mJ/m 2 , at the other end of the chosen range, are extremely cohesive. It is assumed that the same surface energy used to describe particle-particle interactions is also applied to particle-boundary interactions. Additionally, in order to better understand the isolated impact of different material densities, the same pseudo-material approach is applied to the Al-10Si-Mg powder. Here, all parameters, including those defining the surface energy sweep, are are chosen identically to Ti-6Al-4V except for the particle density. We present results for the influence of roller counter-rotation and traverse speed, beginning with the simple layer statistics in Fig. Leveraging Fig. Figure Results from simulations at the counter-rotating roller speed of 500 RPM and traverse speed of 5 mm/s are shown in the right panel of Fig. Roller counter-rotation improves layer uniformity (i.e., lower variance) for powders of surface energy below 0.64 mJ/m 2 . This may be qualitatively understood via the simulation images in Fig. Next, we compare the average and variance of effective depth in simulations predictive of spreading 15 -45 μm Al-10Si-Mg powder, as to decouple the effects of surface energy and density, as presented in Figs. We reinforce this understanding by constructing effective depth cumulative distribution functions (CDFs) from the effective depth maps of experimentally spread powder layers in Figs. Via PSD analysis of the experimental data, we consider layer variance as a function of inverse dimension in Fig. Finally, we note two points concerning these curves in the high inverse dimension (> 20 mm -1 ) extreme, which may be expressed as 50 μm or a few mean particle diameters in conventional units. First, at approximately this point for the layers spread without counter rotation, there lies a broad peak in variance in the transverse direction. This arises from the narrow axis of streak-like defects, or regions of low deposition caused by interactions of the roller with powder clumps. Naturally, these streaks also correspond to comparatively elevated variance in the spreading direction at lower inverse dimensions, thereby capturing the elongated aspect ratio of these defects. This peak, or streaking behavior, is most pronounced in the lowest-shear (0 RPM, 5 mm/s) case. The curves from layers created with roller rotation, and thus under conditions of elevated shear in the powder pile, show no such peak, and instead variance smoothly rolls off at this point. Second, for both low and high traverse speeds, total layer variance with rotation lies below the corresponding curve without rotation above this inverse dimension value. Thus, we conclude that increasing applied shear improves layer uniformity at fine length scales by mitigating spontaneous clumping of particles in the flow, but the additionally turbulent powder flow reduces uniformity when considering larger, millimeter-scale areas. This view is further supported though analysis of Al-10Si-Mg model layers, presented in Fig. Figure Finally, we consider layers fabricated from 0 -20 μm Ti-6Al-4V powder, which is so extremely cohesive as to preclude flowability measurement via standard AoR methods. This poor flowability precludes piston-feeding the powder for subsequent spreading. Practically no deposition results for the range of spreading parameters (traverse and roller speeds) considered herein, and the powder is pushed across the build area in a singular large clump. However, we are able to study layers of this powder by pre-depositing it via hopper mechanism, and locally redistributing the powder using the roller to form a the final layer. Figure By X-ray transmission mapping of powder layers deposited using a mechanized testbed, in combination with DEM simulation, we demonstrates how the effects of roller counter rotation and traverse speed interact with powder cohesion to strongly influence powder layer quality. Roller counter rotation is shown to benefit spreading of cohesive powders, as the increased shear forces are sufficient to break apart powder clusters. This benefit does not extend to all powders, however, as roller rotation is shown to increase layer non-uniformity, including resulting in periodic patterns in effective depth arising from roller runout. Thus, an implement of static geometry (i.e., a blade) may be indicated for powders of high innate flowability, which do not require high applied forces to overcome inter-particle adhesion. DEM simulations further suggest a threshold surface energy, relative to powder material density, beyond which powders become too cohesive to reliably spread. However, this point may be extended to more cohesive powders by adding counter rotation. Finally, roller mechanism runout is demonstrated to be a major determinant of layer uniformity, implying that roller spreading of fine powders in low layer thicknesses demands very high rotational precision of the spreading mechanism. Upon this basis, future work should center on closely matching spreading parameters to the characteristics of specific powders in two directions. First, our experiments and simulations both suggest that spreading parameters may be specifically tailored to achieve high density and low variance when spreading cohesive powders. Thus, more densely sampling the range of powders, traverse speeds, and roller parameters (e.g., speed, diameter, material, and surface finish), is central to developing spreading guidelines for future feedstocks used in powder AM. This is currently being investigated via the DEM simulation described herein, specifically considering forces arising from motion of the spreading and their effects on powder flow stability. Second, we envision additional study of hopper-based powder delivery strategies for highly cohesive powders, in view of the high-quality layers provisionally achieved here. Reliable metering of fine powders followed by spreading enables improved resolution and future use of exotic materials of high surface energy in AM. Two points are associated with this pattern mathematically, as the Fourier transform, and therefore the PSD, of a real-valued function is symmetric about the origin in frequency space. This distinction is omitted here for clarity; however, the integrations described herein necessarily respect the equivalency of positive and negative spatial frequencies in this case. Here, we take the indicated runout of the roller as a 15 μm P-V, or 7.5 μm amplitude sinusoidal error that is transferred to the surface of the powder. Further assuming a packing fraction of 50%, the sinusoidal disturbance in effective depth has an amplitude of A = 3.25 μm. The variance associated with such a pattern is A 2 /2, or ≈ 5 mm 2 .