Halide perovskites have outstanding photovoltaic properties which have been optimized through interfacial engineering. However, as these materials approach the limits imposed by the physics of semiconductor junctions, it is urgent to explore alternatives, such as the bulk photovoltaic effect, whose physical origin is different and not bound by the same limits Generating a photovoltaic effect requires breaking space-inversion symmetry; otherwise photogenerated carriers do not have a preferential direction in which to flow (Neumann principle of symmetry). In conventional solar cells, spatial inversion symmetry is broken at interfaces, and electron-hole pairs generated at or near the interfaces move in opposite directions towards their most charge-affine side of the junction In addition, the symmetry of any crystal, piezoelectric or otherwise, can also be broken by bending. This is the basis of flexoelectricity, a linear coupling between strain gradients and polarization first described in insulating dielectrics The halide-perovskite samples in this study are single crystals made by us (see Methods) and the STO crystals were commercially acquired (TOPVENDOR, Beijing, China). Identical Au electrodes were deposited on opposite sides of the crystals to make symmetric sandwich-capacitor structures, which were illuminated laterally so that the contributions from the two opposite electrode interfaces were of similar magnitude and opposite sign and hence mutually cancelled. Illumination was provided by LED light with 405 nm wavelength for MAPB and 365 nm for STO, which has a larger bandgap. The maximum light intensity was set to 1000 LUX, as calibrated at the sample location using a photometer. The same photometer, in combination with a polarizer placed between light source and sample, was used to verify that the light emitted by the LED was not polarized [see Supplementary video S1]. Rotating the polarizing filter also allowed characterizing the dependence of photovoltaic output on the polarization angle of incident light, which is important to determine the bulk nature of the photovoltaic effect In the absence of bending, the close-circuit photocurrent and open-circuit photovoltage of STO and MAPB are found to be negligible, as expected for cubic centrosymmetric materials, and sizeable photovoltage and photocurrents appear only when the crystals are bent (Figure To explore the generality of the results, we have extended this investigation to another halide perovskite, the archetype methil-ammonium lead iodide (MAPbI3, henceforth MAPI). Compared to MAPB, this material has a smaller bandgap and a crystal structure that might be ferroelectric at room temperature, although there is no unanimity about this aspect To gain further insight into the native bulk photovoltage of MAPI, we measured the open-circuit photovoltage as a function of poling field. The results show a ferroelectric-like hysteretic response (Figures show a hysterestic bulk photovoltaic effect that can be modified both by electric fields and by strain gradients. Contrary to the photovoltage of a semiconductor junction, the open-circuite voltage generated by the bulk photovoltaic effect can be bigger than the bandgap The open-circuit photovoltage was found to increase in direct proportion to the indentation force and therefore the strain gradient, exceeding the 2.3eV bandgap around 1 N and reaching ~4 eV for the applied forces of the order of 10 N (Figures STO (100) single crystals were commercially acquired from TOPVENDOR (www. topvendor.com.cn), with dimensions of 5 mm × 15 mm × 0.1 mm (width × length × thickness). The dimensions of electrodes are 5 mm × 4 mm (width × length). MAPB single crystals for bending were prepared using these raw materials: methylammonium bromide (CH3NH3Br, 99.5%, Advanced Election Technology) or iodide (CH3NH3I, 99.5%, Advanced Election Technology) lead bromide (PbBr2, 99.9%, Advanced Election Technology), N,Ndimethylformamide (DMF, 99%, Energy Chemical). MAPI single crystals for bending were prepared using these raw materials: methylammonium iodine (CH3NH3I, 99.5%, Advanced Election Technology), Lead iodine (PbI2, 99.5%, Advanced Election Technology), γ-butyrolactone (GBL, ≥ 99%, Energy Chemical). MAPB and MAPI single crystals were grown using the inverse temperature crystallization method The photovoltaic response was induced using a non-polarized LED light source (Model: HY-UV0003). The illuminance on the sample was measured using a photometer (Model: DT1330A, LIHUAJIN). The non-polarized nature of the light was verified by measuring the intensity of the incident light as a function of polarizer angle; the intensity variations as a function of polarizer rotation were smaller than 0.6% (see supplementary video S1). The rectangular-beam-shaped crystals were clamped at one end and pushed at the opposite free end to induce single-clamp cantilever bending. The free end was pushed either from above or from below to induce positive or negative strain gradients respectively. In single-clamp cantilever geometry, the strain gradient is calculated from the vertical deflection of the free end using this equation: where w(L) is the vertical deflection delivered by the piezoelectric actuator at the end of the cantilever, L is the length of the cantilever and x is the horizontal position from the center of the electrode to the fixed end, respectively. The electrical-transport characterizations of MAPB single crystal under a tip force was measured using a Cypher ES (Asylum Research) atomic force microscope (AFM) with ORCA mode (conductive AFM). A diamond-coated conductive probe (Model: CDT-NCLR) with a diameter of ~150 nm and force constants of 72 N m -1 was used to apply pressure to the MAPbBr3 single crystal, and the currentvoltage (I-V) curve of the crystal was measured at the same time. An electrical bias was applied through the substrate, which was swiped at a ramping rate ~1 V s -1 . The background noise is lower than  50 pA in the 20 nA measurement range. (1) The AFM tip was placed in contact with the surface of the crystal with a preset force. The applied force was increased by further deflecting the AFM tip cantilever. (2) After the applied force reached a preset value, the compressive force was maintained constant by the feedback amplifier circuit of the controller, and then the electrical measurements were initiated. In this stage, a sweeping bias was applied between the substrate and the tip. (3) After the I-V measurement had been performed, a new compressive force was applied by setting a new target set point value and the corresponding electrical measurement was performed. In addition, we performed measurements of current and voltage vs time for given set-points. The results, shown in the supplementary materials figure The AFM tips are calibrated by the thermal noise method. We can precisely obtain the inverse optical lever sensitivity (InvOLS) and the spring constant of the tips. The precise force is calculated by multiplying the spring constant, InvOLS and cantilever deflection (force = spring constant × InvOLS × (preset deflection -initial deflection)). All measurements were performed in air at room temperature.