Strong structural asymmetry is actively explored in two-dimensional (2D) materials, because it can give rise to many interesting physical properties. Motivated by the recent synthesis of monolayer Si2Te2, we explore a family of 2D materials, termed as the Janus Si dichalcogenides (JSD), which parallel the Janus transition metal dichalcogenides and exhibit even stronger inversion asymmetry. Using first-principles calculations, we demonstrate excellent stability of these materials. We show that their strong structural asymmetry leads to pronounced intrinsic polar field, sizable spin splitting due to spin-orbit coupling, and large piezoelectric response. The spin splitting involves an out-ofplane component, which is beyond the linear Rashba model. The piezoelectric tensor has large value in both in-plane d11 coefficient and out-of-plane d31 coefficient, making the monolayer JSDs distinct among the existing 2D piezoelectrics. In addition, we find interesting strain-induced phase transitions in these materials. Particularly, there are multiple valleys in the conduction band that compete for the conduction band minimum, which will lead to notable changes in optical and transport properties under strain. Our work reveals a new family of Si based 2D materials, which could find promising applications in spintronic and piezoelectric devices. The field of two-dimensional (2D) materials has been rapidly expanding in recent years, driven by the continued realization of new materials and discovery of their novel properties has large piezoelectric response, especially a nonzero outof-plane piezoelectric coefficient d 31 ∼ 0.02 pm/V To incorporate 2D materials into the existing semiconductor technology, Si-based materials are most desired. In a very recent experiment, a Si-based 2D material, the monolayer Si 2 Te 2 , was successfully synthesized on a substrate and shown to be a semiconductor In this work, we explore this idea and perform a systematic study on the monolayer JSDs, using firstprinciples calculations. We show that these materials, namely Si 2 STe, Si 2 SeTe, and Si 2 SSe, are all stable in the Janus monolayer structure. They enjoy good thermal and mechanical stability. Using monolayer Si 2 SeTe as an example, we show that its internal effective electric field along the vertical direction can reach ∼ 1.8 V/ Å, which is about twice of monolayer MoSSe. Importantly, the formation of Janus structure breaks the inversion symmetry of monolayer Si 2 Te 2 , leading to a sizable SOC splitting in the band structure and a large piezoelectric effect. For the SOC splitting, we show that the split bands also possess a sizable spin-z components, which requires higherorder terms beyond the simple linear Rashba model. As for piezoelectricity, we find that the in-plane coefficient d 11 in Si 2 SeTe is larger than most existing 2D materials, and it also allows a sizable out-of-plane coefficient d 31 which is an order of magnitude larger than Janus TMDs. These values are even more enhanced in Si 2 STe due to the larger contrast between the two chalcogen species. In addition, we show that a moderate strain on monolayer JSDs can induce a significant change of the band structure, leading to phase transitions and changes in the conduction band minimum (CBM). Our work reveals a new family of 2D semiconductors, which have great potential for spintronic and piezoelectric device applications. Our first-principles calculations were based on the density functional theory (DFT) The phonon spectra were calculated using the Phonopy code As illustrated in Fig. The formation of Janus structure lowers the symmetry of the crystal to P 3m1 (No. 156). The most important change is that the inversion symmetry P originally preserved in monolayer Si 2 Te 2 is broken in monolayer JSDs, and the system changes from a non-polar crystal to a polar crystal. This underlies the enhanced spin splitting and piezoelectricity to be discussed in a while. To check the stability of these 2D materials, we compute their phonon spectra. Figure To investigate the thermal stability, we conduct the AIMD simulations with temperatures up to 1000 K. Figure We further evaluate the elastic constants of monolayer Si 2 SeTe. Here, the x, y and z axis are chosen to be along the armchair, zigzag, and vertical directions, respectively TABLE I. Structural and elastic parameters of Janus monolayer Si2XY (X, Y=S, Se, Te) materials. These include lattice constant a0 ( Å), Si-X (d1) and Si-Y (d2) bond lengths ( Å), X-Si-X (θ1) and Y-Si-Y (θ2) bond angles ( • ), layer thickness (t) ( Å), elastic constant Cij (Nm -1 ), shear modulus G2D (Nm -1 ), Young's modulus C2D (Nm -1 ), and Poisson's ratio ν2D. (see Fig. Further constrained by the C 3v point group of monolayer JSD, the elastic tensor can be expressed in the form of where where θ is the polar angle measured from x, and A = (C 11 C 22 -C 2 12 )/C 66 -2C 12 . For C 3v systems satisfying relation For monolayer Si 2 SeTe, the obtained C 2D is 60.45 Nm -1 . This value is much smaller than graphene (∼ 340 ± 40 Nm -1 ) and MoS 2 (∼ 126.2 Nm -1 ) which is about 0.45 for monolayer Si 2 SeTe. These material properties and the results for the other two JSD monolayers are listed in Table Like Janus TMDs, monolayer JSDs possess an intrinsic polar electric field along the z direction, due to the broken P symmetry and the different electronegativity of the two chalcogen elements on the two sides. To better understand this field, in Fig. Next, we investigate the electronic band structure of monolayer Si 2 SeTe. Figure The band structure with SOC included is shown in Fig. Let's focus on the lower doublet, which is close to the CBM. An enlarged figure about this doublet is shown in Fig. , which only has in-plane components. Here, α is the coupling strength, k the momentum is in the 2D basal plane, and σ is a vector of Pauli matrices corresponding to electron spin. To capture the emergence of S z component, we construct an effective k • p model expanded at Γ by including higher order terms in the expansion. The doublet at Γ corresponds to the Γ 4 double-valued representation of C 3v . Using the two states as basis, the generators for C 3v can be represented as and the time reversal operator T = -iσ y K with K the complex conjugation. These symmetries constrain the form of the effective Hamiltonian by where the momentum k is measured from Γ. Expanding H(k) to the k 4 order under the above constraints, we obtain the following k • p effective model: where σ 0 is the 2 × 2 identity matrix and c's are the model parameters. One observes that the first term is just the linear Rashba SOC. Up to k 2 order, there is no contribution to the S z polarization. The S z polarization term only appears at the k cubic order, in the fourth term here. The cubic terms are also related to the hexagonal Piezoelectricity results from the linear electromechanical interaction between the mechanical and electrical states. It requires P symmetry breaking. Hence, it does not appear in monolayer Si 2 Te 2 but naturally exists in monolayer JSDs. The piezoelectric response can be described by the piezoelectric stress tensor e ijk or the piezoelectric strain tensor d ijk , which are third rank tensors with i, j, k = 1, 2, 3. They are defined by the relations in which P i is the electric polarization vector, ε jk and σ jk are the strain and stress tensors, respectively. Typically, one combines the latter two indices in e ijk and d ijk by using the Voigt notation and simplify them as e i and d i , where = 1, • • • , 6. In practice, one first calculates e i , then d i can be derived from the relation For 2D systems, as we have mentioned, one usually only considers strain and stress in the basal plane. This eliminates the elements in e i and d i for = 3, 4, 5. (The out-of-plane electric polarization, i.e., i = 3, still needs to be considered.) For monolayer JSDs, the C 3v symmetry requires the piezoelectric tensors taking the following form Here, for simplicity, we dropped the three columns corresponding to = 3, 4, 5. The relation in Here, for monolayer JSDs, the piezoelectric tensor e i or d i has only two independent element. d 11 (e 11 ) represents an in-plane response, i.e., a piezoelectric polarization along x is induced by a stress (strain) along x (see Fig. Our results for monolayer JSDs are listed in Table 2D materials generally can sustain much larger strains than 3D materials. Here, from the calculation of the strain-stress curve [33], we find that the monolayer JSDs have a linear elastic region extended to ∼ 8% strain, and the critical strains can be > 20%. This again demonstrates the flexibility of these materials. Strain engineering has been widely used as an effective way to tailor the properties of 2D materials The case in monolayer Si 2 STe is different from Si 2 SeTe. As shown in Fig. Such transitions in the CBM location could result in notable physical effects. For example, the accompanied change in the band gap type makes a big difference in the optical properties, especially the luminescence properties of a semiconductor. In addition, the different valleys have different effective mass, which directly affects the carrier transport. For instance, for monolayer Si 2 SeTe, the shift of CBM from P valley to Q valley decreases the electron effective mass by almost five times from about 0.7m e to about 0.15m e where m e is the bare electron mass. This change will manifest as a jump in the conductivity under strain. In this work, we have revealed many interesting properties of 2D JSDs. Derived from the Janus structure, the strong spin splitting and the large piezoelectric response make these materials promising for device applications. Besides conventional concepts such as spin transistors/modulators, mechanical sensors, actuators, power transducers, etc., combining the two characters may generate some novel device concepts like some piezoelectric controlled spin devices. Experimentally, monolayer Si 2 Te 2 has been successfully grown on Sb 2 Te 3 substrate In conclusion, we have proposed a family of Si based 2D materials, the 2D JSD materials, which could be realized from monolayer Si 2 Te 2 using similar techniques for the synthesis of Janus TMDs. We demonstrate the good stability of these materials. We show that the their intrinsic polar field can be even stronger than Janus TMDs. Due to this strong inversion symmetry breaking, they manifest sizable SOC splitting and pronounced piezoelectric response. The SOC splitting acquires a large out-of-plane component which is beyond the linear Rashba model. The piezoelectric tensor has large value in both d 11 and d 31 , making these materials distinct among the existing 2D materials. We work reveals a new 2D family of materials that are compatible with Si-based technology and have great potential for spintronic and piezoelectric device applications.