The effect of electron irradiation with the energy of 2.5 MeV on the temperature dependences of the resistivity ρ(T) of an optimally doped YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ single crystal has been studied. The temperature dependences of both fluctuation conductivity σ ́(T) and the pseudogap Δ * (T) on irradiation dose φ have been calculated within the local pair model. Here we show that with an increase in φ, the value of ρ(300 K) increases linearly, while T c decreases linearly. Concurrently, the value of ρ(100 K) increases nonlinearly, demonstrating a feature for φ 3 = 4.3•10 18 e/cm 2 , which is also observed in the number of other dose-dependent parameters. Regardless of the irradiation dose, in the temperature range from T c up to T 01 , σ ́(T) obeys the classical fluctuation theories of Aslamazov-Larkin (3D-AL) and Maki-Thompson (2D-MT), demonstrating 3D-2D crossover with increasing temperature. The crossover temperature Т 0 makes it possible to determine the coherence length along the с axis, ξ с (0), which increases by ~ 3 times under irradiation. Furthermore, the range of superconducting fluctuations above T c also noticeably increases. At φ 1 = 0, the dependence Δ * (T) typical for single crystals containing pronounced twin boundaries is observed with a maximum at T pair ~ 120 K and a distinct minimum at T = T 01 . It was determined for the first time that at φ 3 = 4.3•10 18 e/cm 2 the shape of Δ * (T) changes strongly and becomes the same as in optimally doped YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ single crystals with a very low pseudogap opening temperature T * and noticeably reduced T pair , while at T c (φ) there are no singularities. With an increase in the irradiation dose up to φ 4 = 8.8•10 18 e/cm 2 , the shape of Δ * (T) is restored and becomes the same as in well-structured YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ films and untwined single crystals. Moreover, in this case, T pair and Т * increase noticeably. Elucidation of the conditions for the occurrence of high-temperature superconductivity and the study of the physical properties of high-temperature superconductors (HTSCs) continues to be one of the most important areas of solid-state physics. Despite the fact that more than 35 years have passed since the discovery of HTSCs, its microscopic mechanism is still controversial. According to modern concepts, the key to understanding the nature of the superconducting state and various physical properties of HTSCs materials is the study of unusual phenomena that manifest themselves in these compounds in the normal (i.e., non-superconducting) state. These phenomena, in particular, include the anomalously wide temperature range of the excess conductivity manifestation, the so-called "pseudogap" (PG) A key issue of HTSCs physics is the study of the anomalies of the pseudogap state Despite a very large number of experimental and theoretical works devoted to the study of these phenomena, there is still no consensus regarding the understanding of the mechanisms leading to their occurrence. This is largely due to the fact that a significant part of the experimental data was obtained on ceramic, textured polycrystalline and film samples. In this regard, special relevance is addressed to the study of physical properties of HTSCs on singlecrystal samples with a given topology of the defect structure, as well as using experimental techniques using extreme conditions (low temperatures Various structural defects significantly affect the behavior of HTSCs, increasing the resistivity ρ, but decreasing the superconducting transition temperature T c and increasing its width δT c Of particular interest are the defects that arise when HTSCs are exposed to various irradiation (see In this paper, we report on the study of the 2.5 MeV electron irradiation on the temperature dependences of the resistivity ρ(T), fluctuation conductivity, ( ) , and pseudogap, Δ * (T), of optimally doped single crystal of YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ with an increase in the irradiation dose from φ 1 = 0 up to φ 4 = 8.8•10 18 e/cm 2 . The studies were carried out in a wide range of temperatures, from room temperature down to T c , which may be the key to understanding the HTSCs nature and provide important information on the interaction of charge carriers with the phonon and defect subsystems. It is shown that irradiation monotonously increases ρ and ξ c (0), and also decreases T c and Δ * (Т G ). However, the ( ) T ′ σ and Δ * (T) shape changes non-monotonically, demonstrating a bright feature at φ 3 = 4.3•10 18 e/cm 2 , which is absent in the temperature dependences of a number of other measured parameters. A detailed discussion of the results obtained is given below. YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ single crystals were grown by the solution-melt technology in gold crucibles, as described elsewhere A fully computerized setup utilizing the four-point probe technique with a stabilized measuring current of up to 10 mA was used to measure the ab plane resistivity, ρ ab (T). Silver epoxy contacts were glued to the opposite ends of the crystal in order to produce a uniform current distribution in the central region where voltage probes in the form of parallel stripes were placed with a distance of ~ 1 mm between them. The contact resistances did not exceed 1 Ω. Temperature measurements were performed with a Pt sensor with an accuracy of about 1 mK The irradiations were performed with 2.5 MeV electrons in the low T facility of the Van de Graaff accelerator at the National Science Center "Kharkiv Institute of Physics and Technology" (Kharkiv, Ukraine). The samples were immersed in liquid He and the electron flux was limited to 10 14 (e/cm 2 )/s to avoid heating of the samples Figure According to estimates in previous studies In our experiment, electron irradiation leads to a noticeable increase in ρ and the coherence length along the c axis, ξ c (0), as well as to the expected decrease in Т c (refer to Tables As expected, the dose dependences of both FLC and especially PG show more pronounced features at φ 3 = = 4.3•10 18 e/cm 2 and allow to get much more information, as will be discussed in detail below. Within the Nearly Antiferromagnetic Fermi-Liquid (NAFL) model where ρ N (T) = αT + ρ 0 is the resistivity of the sample in the normal state, extrapolated to the region of low temperatures. As before, α = dρ/dT determines the slope of the linear dependence ρ N (T), and ρ 0 is the residual resistance cut off by this line on the Y axis at T = 0 In accordance with modern concepts and is realized in a relatively narrow interval of SC fluctuations near T c . This interval is ΔT fl = T 01 -T G ≤ 20 K in all HTSCs including even FeSe and, accordingly, on the implementation of various models for describing the FLC above T c has not yet been studied. To estimate the FLC within the framework of the LPs model , which is included in all equations. In HTSCs near T c , the FLC is always described by the Aslamazov-Larkin (AL) To determine mf c T we use an approach proposed by Beasley et al.: from Eq. 2, and is zero when . The result is shown in Fig. , and the 3D-2D crossover temperature T 0 are also shown. Using the same approach, mf c T were obtained for all φ (refer to Table Since ξ c (T) decreases with increasing T, then at T > T 0 , which limits the range of 3D fluctuations from above, ξ c (T) < d, and 3D state is lost. However, as before, ξ c (T) > > d 01 ~ 3.4 Å, which is the distance between the internal conducting CuO 2 planes is the pair-breaking parameter, , where  is the mean free path, corresponds to the case of the clean limit ( > ξ), which is typical for HTSCs Thus, at T = T 0 , the 3D-2D (AL-MT) crossover occurs , which allows the determination of the coherence length along the с axis 0 (0) After acquiring T 0 ≈ 91.8 K (ln ε 0 ≈ -6.9), from the Eq. ( At T 01 , corresponding to ln ε 01 at Fig. All characteristic temperatures are designated by arrows in the figure. The long arrows are labeled for φ 1 = 0 and φ 3 = 4.3•10 18 e/cm 2 , with the exception of the leftmost point for φ 3 , which is ln ε G = -8.17 (see lower X scale). The short arrows for φ 2 = 1.4•10 18 e/cm 2 and φ 4 = = 8.8•10 18 e/cm 2 are not labeled for better readability. In general, Fig. However, some specific features of the FLC behavior in YBCO single crystals under irradiation worth discussing in more detail. As already noted, at φ 1 = 0 the dependence of ln σ′ on ln ε is quite usual with the behavior of 3D-AL near T c and 2D-MT above T 0 (Fig. With a slight increase in dose up to φ 2 = 1.4 10 18 e/cm 2 , the absolute value of σ' also slightly increases in both 3D and 2D states (blue dots in the figure). Accordingly, the range of SC fluctuations, ΔT fl , which is controlled by T 01 (ln ε 01 in the figure), also increases (refer to Table As the dose increases to φ 3 = 4.3•10 18 e/cm 2 , the absolute value of FLC noticeably decreases (yellow dots in Fig. , respectively. At φ 3 , ln ε = -6.9 corresponds to the third point from the left, for which ln 9.25 times. The data obtained indicate that the displacement of atoms and the resulting defects strongly affect ′ σ . Accordingly, the deviation ∆ln σ ́ = 0.40, that is, it decreases by more than 2 times, while ∆T fl (Table To account for this very surprising result, we must remember that our original sample contains a number of twins with pronounced TBs. The TBs create an inhomogeneous charge distribution over the volume of the unirradiated sample. As discussed above, incident 2.5 MeV electrons effectively displace all atoms in YBCO, deeply affecting TBs. Finally, taking into account the results obtained, we can conclude that the irradiation defects completely equalized the distribution of charge, that is, virtually eliminated the effect of twins and twin boundaries in the sample. In fact, the greater the disorder caused by defects, the more isotropic the sample If there was no PG in the HTSCs, the temperature dependence of ρ(T) would remain linear down to T c where ) determines the number of pairs arising at T ≤ T * , and exp (-Δ * /T) gives the number of pairs destroyed by thermal fluctuations below T pair where ( ) σ ε is the experimentally determined excess con- ductivity. In addition to T * , mf c T , ξ c (0), and ε already defined above, both equations contain the theoretical parameter * 0 c ε Now the coefficient A 4 can be determined. For this, using Eq. ( Having determined all the necessary parameters (refer to Tables The result of our PG analysis is shown in Fig. At φ 1 = 0, Δ * (T) has the shape characteristic of optimally doped OD YBCO single crystals with a relatively narrow maximum at Т pair ≈ 120 K and a pronounced minimum at Т ≈ Т 01 = 94.2 K, below which Δ * (Т) is greatly increased. Interestingly, such a sharp increase in PG from Δ * (Т 01 ) ≈ ≈ 161 K up to Δ * (Т G ) = 229 K (Table At φ 2 = 1.4•10 18 e/cm 2 (curve 2), the effect of radiation defects becomes already very noticeable. Accordingly, Δ * (T pair ) decreases markedly, showing a minimum value of 180K (refer to Table However, unlike Thus, we can conclude that the induced defects most likely create an internal pressure P ≈ 0.6 GPa in the YBCO crystal, due to the displacement of individual atoms under irradiation, as noted above It was natural to expect that with a further increase in the irradiation dose, a similar form of the Δ * (T) dependence will be obtained, with parameters even more suppressed by defects. However, surprisingly, this did not happen, but on the contrary: with an increase in φ by a factor of ~2 to φ 4 = 8.8•10 18 e/cm 2 , Δ * (T) unexpectedly takes the shape typical of well-structured YBCO films Figure As can be seen from Fig. The effect of high-energy electrons on the fluctuation conductivity (FLC) and pseudogap (PG) in a YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ (YBCO) single crystal with pronounced tween boundaries (TBs) has been studied for the first time. The FLC and PG were derived from resistivity measurements and analyzed within the local pairs model. Irradiation with 2.5 MeV electrons leads to a noticeable displacement of O, Cu, Y, and Ba in the crystal and to the formation of a large number of defects due to the displacement of all atoms. It was shown that, as in previous studies, T c decreases linearly with irradiation, while the resistivity increases also almost linearly (Figs. Figure Unexpectedly, with a further increase in the dose to φ 3 = 4.3•10 18 e/cm 2 both the absolute value of FLC and the deviation Δln σ ́ = 0.40 sharply decrease. Surprisingly, with a further increase in the dose more than twofold to φ = 8.8•10 18 e/cm 2 , the absolute value of FLC is noticeably restored, and the deviation Δln σ ́ = 0.21 takes the smallest value. In fact, the dependence of ln σ′ on ln ε takes the shape typical of a well-structured YBCO film with a close T c = 87.4 K, denoted in Table The conclusion was completely confirmed by the results of the PG analysis shown in Fig. It should be also emphasized that such an unusual dose dependence is observed only in the FLC (Fig. ним теоріям Асламазова-Ларкіна (3D-АЛ) і Макі-Томпсона (2D-МТ), демонструючи 3D-2D кросовер при підвищенні температури. Температура кросовера Т 0 дає змогу визначити довжину когерентності вздовж осі с ξ c (0), яка під впливом опромінення збільшується в ~ 3 рази. Крім того, помітно збільшується інтервал надпровідних флуктуацій вище T c . При φ 1 = 0 спостерігається залежність ∆ * (T), типова для монокристалів, що містять яскраво виражені границі двійників, з максимумом при T pair ~ 120 К та чітким мінімумом при T = T 01 . Вперше встановлено, що при φ 3 = 4,3•10 18 е/см 2 форма Δ * (T) сильно змінюється та стає такою ж, як і в оптимально допованих монокристалах YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ з дуже низькою температурою відкриття псевдощілини T * й помітно зменшеною T pair , тоді як на залежності T c (φ) не спостерігається жодних особливостей. Зі збільшенням дози опромінення до φ 4 = 8,8•10 18 е/см 2 форма Δ * (T) відновлюється і стає такою ж, як у добре структурованих плівках YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ та бездвійникових монокристалах. В цьому випадку T pair та Т * помітно зростають. Ключові слова: високотемпературна надпровідність, електронне опромінення, флуктуаційна провідність, псевдощілина, надлишкова провідність, монокристали YBCO. Low Temperature Physics/Fizika Nizkikh Temperatur, 2022, Vol. 48, No. 9