Multi-bridge channel field effect transistor (MBCFET) provides several advantages over FinFET technology and is an attractive solution for sub-5 nm technology nodes. MBCFET is a natural choice for devices that use semiconducting layered materials (such as, MoS 2 ) as the channel due to their dangling-bond-free ultra-thin nature and the possibility of layer-by-layer transfer. MoS 2 -based MBCFET is thus an attractive proposition for drive current boost without compromising on the electrostatics and footprint. Here we demonstrate a 3-level MoS 2 MBCFET, where each vertically stacked channel is dual-gated to achieve a saturation current of 174.9 μA (which translates to 90 μA per μm footprint width (@2.7 μm channel length), a near-ideal sub-threshold slope of 63 mV/dec, and an on-off ratio >10 8 . This work sets the benchmark for layer-materialbased MBCFET in terms of the number of parallel channels integrated, simultaneously providing high drive current and excellent electrostatic control. The transistor dimensions have shrunk aggressively over the past few decades, helping to improve performance and pack more functionality per unit area. During the scaling pathway, non-planar FinFET technology replaced the planar technology to overcome short channel effects. However, for beyond-5 nm technology nodes, there are several challenges posed by the FinFET technology. This includes continued fin width scaling to control short channel effects, fin height scaling to enhance drivability, and lack of flexibility in enhancing effective width through a discrete number of fins. MBCFET However, below a certain thickness, the mobility in Si nano-sheets decreases drastically due to surface roughness. Therefore the ultimate utilization of MBCFET architecture would require an atomically thin sheet of semiconductor with excellent electrostatic gate control and clean interfaces. This makes two-dimensional channel materials (such as MX 2 , M = Mo, W; X = S, Se) an exceptional choice Here we demonstrate a van der Waals (vdW) heterostructure arXiv:2209.05750v1 [cond-mat.mes-hall] 13 Sep 2022 based MBCFET, consisting of three vertically stacked 1L-MoS 2 channels, each being dual gated with an hBN/graphene gate stack and contacted by graphene layers. Our best device shows a saturation current of 90 μA per μm footprint width (@ effective channel length of 2.7 μm) while maintaining nearideal subthreshold slope and an on-off ratio >10 8 . The scalability of a transistor to shorter channel lengths is an essential aspect when selecting a suitable device design. To illustrate the electrostatic control at scaled geometry, we perform a 2D simulation of two different MBCFET architectures. In one of the designs, a pair of double-gates control all the three channels of the transistor [see Fig. The simulation is performed by self-consistently solving the 2D Poisson and ballistic transport equations in the device The conduction band profiles along different channels (marked as 1, 2, and 3) in the GAA and DG structures are shown in Figs. The lack of electrostatic control on the central channel in the DG structure is further illustrated by the simulated transfer characteristics in Fig. The step-by-step fabrication process of the MBCFET is schematically illustrated in Fig. Measurements are taken at each of these three stages to obtain the performance of one-, two-, and three-channel device. All the three source electrodes (and similarly, the three drain electrodes and the four gate electrodes) are shorted together in the device. Two such devices (devices A and B) are fabricated and measured. All measurements are performed at 295 K using a Keithley 4200 parametric analyzer, keeping the device in Lakeshore CRX-6.5K probe station under vacuum (pressure < 10 -4 torr). The effective channel length and width for the two fabricated devices are shown in Table The output characteristics of the device are plotted in Fig. The scaling of the on current with an increase in the number of stacked channels is clearly illustrated in Fig. From Fig. Note that all the characteristics in Fig. The transfer and output characteristics of the 3-channel configuration (device A) are shown in Fig. In conclusion, we demonstrated a 3-level MoS 2 -channel MBCFET with a large drive current while maintaining a nearideal sub-threshold slope and a large on-off ratio. The ability to perform a layer-by-layer transfer, coupled with the ultra-thin body of the channel shows a path towards integrating several more channels vertically -a viable option to boost the drive current without increasing the footprint. The demonstrated technique, when combined with a more optimized contact process, can further enhance the drive current. This is a promising solution not only for layered material-based highly scaled CMOS technology, but also for low-cost thin-film transistor (TFT) technologies. 