This paper presents a new technique for evaluating the consistency of the reference impedance in multiline thrureflect-line (TRL) calibration. During the calibration process, it is assumed that all transmission line standards have the same characteristic impedance. However, these assumptions are prone to errors due to imperfections, which can affect the validity of the reference impedance after calibration. Our proposed method involves using multiple stepped impedance lines of different lengths to extract the broadband reflection coefficient of the impedance transition. This reflection coefficient can be used to validate the reference impedance experimentally without requiring fully defined standards. We demonstrate this method using multiline TRL based on microstrip structures on a printed circuit board (PCB) with an on-wafer probing setup. T HE accuracy of S-parameter measurements performed by a vector network analyzer (VNA) heavily depends on the calibration method and standards used. The multiline thrureflect-line (TRL) calibration procedure, first introduced by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) Experimental validation of the calibration is a crucial aspect of any calibration technique. The multiline TRL method is a self-calibration technique, where some of the calibration standards are not fully specified in advance. However, the multiline TRL algorithm requires consistency among the line standards. This means that the line standards should be identical in all aspects except for their length. Inconsistency between line standards can lead to impedance mismatch Traditional calibration validation techniques require complete knowledge of a set of reference standards. These techniques are often used in coaxial or waveguide interfaces where traceable standards are available An illustration of microstrip lines on a PCB based on a mixture of fiberglass and epoxy resin is shown in Fig. A common technique for verifying multiline TRL calibration is to investigate the calibrated reflect standard Another commonly used two-port device for calibration validation is the stepped impedance line (also known as the Beatty line) In this paper, we adapt the method of using the stepped impedance line for validation by increasing the mismatch bandwidth and excluding the parasitic effect of the abrupt impedance change. The bandwidth limitation of the mismatch response due to the length of the line is no different from that of TRL calibration. Hence, we propose using a second multiline TRL calibration using a set of stepped impedance lines of different lengths. By using both calibrations with matched and mismatched lines, we can extract the broadband reflection coefficient of the impedance transition. Additionally, we introduce a modeling approach for the parasitic behavior of the impedance jump to eliminate its impact on the extracted reflection coefficient. The goal of extracting the broadband reflection coefficient of the impedance transition is to use it as a validation metric. This has a couple of advantages. First, the extracted reflection coefficient is due to a finite impedance mismatch (not open or short), meaning that the results of the reflection coefficient depend on the reference impedance of the multiline TRL that we want to validate. Therefore, any variation in the reference impedance of the first multiline TRL should clearly translate to the extracted reflection of the impedance transition. Secondly, since we are extracting a broadband response of the mismatch of the stepped line standards, the frequency response of the reflection coefficient has a near-flat frequency response, even for quasi-TEM (transverse electromagnetic) structures as microstrip lines, as will be demonstrated in Sections III and V. Finally, for PCB applications, the stepped lines are implemented on the same substrate as the matched lines. Hence, we don't require any prior characterization of the standards. We can think of the proposed method as artificially measuring a broadband mismatch load. The validation of the calibration is accomplished by defining validation bounds through uncertainty propagation in the geometrical and material variation of the cross-section of the transmission lines. The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section II discusses the residual error in calibration resulting from impedance variation in the calibration standards. Next, in Section III, we present the mathematical derivation of the proposed validation method. We then introduce the validation bounds in Section IV. Finally, Sections V and VI discuss PCB measurements and provide concluding remarks. CALIBRATION The purpose of this section is to highlight the impact of mismatch on calibration, and to identify the appropriate standards to be used for validation purposes. We begin the analysis by defining the error box model of a two-port VNA, as shown in Fig. where the matrices A and B represent the T-parameters of the individual port error boxes holding the first six error terms, and k represents the 7th error term describing the transmission error between the ports. After performing a multiline TRL calibration, we obtain estimates for the calibration coefficients A, B, and k. However, since measurements are never perfect, the estimates of the calibration coefficients are prone to errors, which can be described by the following notation: Here, the matrices A and B represent the estimated error boxes obtained from the calibration process. On the other hand, the matrices A and B summarize the residual error and are defined as follows: Since the error term k is defined as a common scalar from the error boxes, we can define its residual error as the product of the residual scalars from the error boxes, i.e., the terms k a and k b from (2). This can be expressed as follows: Thus, applying a non-ideal multiline TRL calibration to a DUT can be described as follows: Ideally, the calibrated measurement of the DUT should be equal to the actual DUT. In this paper, we investigate the influence of error in the reference impedance. We assume that any residual errors are caused only by impedance variation in the line standards during multiline TRL calibration where Γ is the residual reflection coefficient, defined by: Here, Z 0 represents the true reference impedance, and Z represents the perturbed reference impedance. In an error-free scenario, Z = Z 0 , and therefore Γ = 0. However, when we assume the presence of random error, we can assign Γ to be a random process described by its probability distribution. In general, the exact probability distribution of Γ may be unknown. In such cases, we can assume a normal distribution, Γ ∼ N 0, Σ Γ , where Σ Γ represents the covariance matrix of Γ. For an arbitrary two-port DUT, its S-parameters after calibration are determined by converting the T-parameters in where the derivatives with respect to Γ and its conjugate, which are computed using the following equations: Accordingly, combining the results of ( For calibration verification, we require a standard that is most sensitive to mismatch error. Such a standard allows us to identify the error in the reference impedance of the calibration. For instance, we can consider a one-port device described by the following expression when setting S 21 = S 12 = 0 in The sensitivity equations of | S 11 | is obtained by plugging ( where l and γ are the length and propagation constant of the stepped line. The term Γ nm is the reflection coefficient of the impedance transition from Z n to Z m , which is given by Similar to the one-port case, we can calculate the sensitivity of the calibrated stepped impedance line by inserting ( The objective of our methodology is to conduct two multiline TRL calibrations using lines with different impedances. This approach enables us to evaluate the error boxes associated with the impedance transition segment between the two calibrations. From the error boxes, we can derive the reflection coefficient of the impedance transition, which serves as our validation metric later on. We begin the derivation with Fig. and the error box model of the second multiline TRL calibration is given by Based on Fig. It is important to note that the second multiline TRL is performed without a previous calibration, similar to the first one, but in reference to the stepped impedance. With the help of these matrices, we can calculate the T-parameters of the left stepped impedance segment as follows: and the T-parameters of the right stepped impedance segment are determined as follows: Note that we have not considered the terms k g and k h in the previous equations. This is because the transition segments are reciprocal devices, i.e., S 12 = S 21 . The terms k g and k h are implicitly contained in g 11 and h 11 through the conversion relationship between S-and T-parameters. Therefore, there is no mathematical benefit in including k g and k h in the derivation. In order to accurately extract the reflection coefficient of the impedance transition, we need a model that accounts for the non-ideal parasitic effects of the structure, which are unrelated to the impedance transformation itself. For simplicity, we will focus only on the left impedance transition in the following derivation. To determine the reflection coefficient of the left impedance transition, we propose three possible models to characterize the parasitics of the transition, as shown in Fig. 1) Initial offset: This offset accounts for the case when the impedance discontinuity occurs at a distance from the primary multiline TRL calibration. Generally, this offset is characterized by the propagation constant γ 1 and the physical length d 1 of the offset. 2) Transition parasitic: The transition between impedances does not occur instantaneously. Instead, it exhibits nonideal parasitic behavior due to the abrupt discontinuity. This can be accounted for by one of the three proposed parasitic models shown in Fig. To solve for the unknowns, we write the cascaded matrices of Fig. where L 1 and L 2 represent the left and right offsets, respectively, as shown in Fig. The T-parameters expressions for P (1) and P (2) were symbolically derived using the SymPy package in Python What sets the proposed parasitic models apart from existing model approaches is their generality; they can be solved independently at each frequency. This is in contrast to the conventional lumped element approach that uses LC elements To solve for the unknowns (Γ and parasitics), we need to construct three equations relating to the elements of G. We can take the inverse of L 1 and L 2 on both sides of (20), as they are assumed to be known from performing both calibrations. Additionally, we can normalize the equation by the fourth element of the matrix, since k g is not needed. The resulting expression is as follows: where p ij are the elements of the parasitic matrix P , and g ij are defined as with g ij being the elements of ( For the first and second models, the unknowns are Γ, y, and z. For the third model, the unknowns are Γ, r, and t 2 . The solution for Γ in the first and second models is given by: where the plus and minus signs are the solutions for the first and second models, respectively. Similarly, the reflection coefficient of the third model is given by: Likewise, we can also derive a solution for the parasitic elements. For the first model, y and z are given as follows: and for the second model, y and z are given as follows: It should be noted that the equations for the parasitic elements of the three models are not used in the following discussion, as we are mainly concerned with Γ. However, these equations could be used as an accurate approach for the general characterization of impedance transitions of various transmission lines. Additionally, all the equations derived for the left side of the stepped impedance transition can be used for the right side by simply substituting g ij with the following relationships: The models presented in Fig. To illustrate this point, we tested the three models to extract Γ using electromagnetic (EM) simulation with the software ANSYS HFSS (high-frequency structure simulator). We used a microstrip line with an average impedance of approximately 53.8 Ω on one side and approximately 32.7 Ω on the other side, which results in a reflection coefficient of -0.244 based on To validate the consistency of the reference impedance of a multiline TRL calibration, we require the extracted reflection coefficient of the impedance transition to fall within a confidence bound. For instance, the confidence bound can be set to 95 % coverage of a Gaussian distribution. The advantage of transmission line standards is that they can be fully characterized by knowing their cross-sectional geometry and material properties. Thus, if we know the geometric and material parameters To determine the confidence interval for the reflection coefficient, we propagate the uncertainties of the characteristic impedance of both transmission lines through expression where θ is the vector that contains all parameters whose mean values μ θi and standard uncertainties σ θi are known. The Jacobian matrix J Zi (θ) is defined as follows: The derivatives in the Jacobian matrix can be determined from analytical models of the transmission line or directly from an EM solver. The standard uncertainty of the absolute value of the reflection coefficient is determined similarly by propagating the covariance matrices of the characteristic impedance of both calibrations from where μ Z1 and μ Z2 represent the expected values of the characteristic impedance of both transmission lines. The Jacobian matrix J |Γ| (Z 1 , Z 2 ) is given by: (33) The partial derivatives in Finally, the multiline TRL calibration is validated if the extracted reflection coefficient meets the following condition: where μ |Γ| represents the expected value of the reflection coefficient, and κ denotes the coverage factor of a Gaussian distribution. For 68 % coverage, κ = 1. For 95 % coverage, κ = 2, and for 99.7 % coverage, κ = 3. If the result exceeds the confidence bounds, other types of errors may exist besides impedance variation, such as noise. The setup comprises of two multiline TRL calibration kits based on microstrip technology. As we are using a probe station with ground-signal-ground (GSG) probes for measurements, the interface pads of the microstrip lines were designed as a tapered grounded coplanar waveguide (GCPW) with optimized low-return loss based on the work in The PCBs were designed using four copper layers and three dielectric substrates, with the top and bottom substrates being prepreg and the middle substrate being a core laminate. The measured structures were fabricated on the top prepreg, while the other layers were used for mechanical support. The design parameters for the microstrip lines are as follows: substrate thickness of 0.05 mm, copper thickness (trace thickness) of 0.02 mm, first trace width (primary multiline TRL) of 0.107 mm, and second trace width of 0.220 mm. From ANSYS HFSS simulation, these dimensions correspond to line standards with an average characteristic impedance across frequency of approximately 53.8 Ω and 32.7 Ω, respectively. To better model the microstrip lines, a cross-sectional inspection was performed, as shown in Fig. The measurements were taken as direct wave parameters, and corresponding S-parameters were computed. To account for noise in our analysis, we recorded 25 frequency sweeps of each measured standard to form an estimate for the covariance of the measurements due to noise from the VNA. The measurement was conducted in the frequency range from 1 GHz to 150 GHz with a power level of -10 dBm and an IF (intermediate frequency) bandwidth of 100 Hz. The data were processed offline in Python using the package scikit-rf The validation bounds were determined by EM simulation using the software ANSYS HFSS, which also provides calculation of derivatives while performing the simulation In Fig. In general, the magnitude response of the extracted reflection coefficient remains within the 95% interval and mostly within the 68% interval. On the other hand, the phase component has an average value of π, but is mostly impacted by noise. In general, the phase of the reflection (or equivalent the imaginary part) is mostly impacted by noise, with the confidence interval due to cross-sectional variation being much smaller than the influence of noise. For the measured magnitude, noise and length uncertainty have a more apparent impact at higher frequencies (> 100 GHz). Therefore, impedance mismatch due to cross-sectional variation has an influence across all frequencies, but starting at higher frequencies, noise becomes prominent as well. While the reflection measurement of the impedance transition and the validation bounds are useful indications of the calibration quality, we can also quantify the amount of error in terms of Ohms by considering the error in the characteristic impedance of the stepped line. First, we rewrite the reflection of the impedance transition in terms of normalized impedance as follows: Then, we define the error in the measured impedance of the stepped line as follows: where Z ′ meas represents the normalized impedance computed from the measurement of Γ, while Z ′ ideal is the expected normalized impedance, which can be determined from simulation. Z ref is the expected characteristic impedance of the matched multiline TRL calibration, and can also be estimated through simulation. In Fig. We have proposed a method to validate the reference impedance accuracy of multiline TRL calibration. To achieve this, we performed an additional multiline TRL calibration using multiple stepped impedance standards of different lengths. We then extracted the reflection coefficient of the impedance transition structure between the two multiline TRL calibrations, while accounting for the parasitic effects of the abrupt impedance change, and used it as a broadband validation The reflection coefficient of the impedance transition generally has a flat frequency response, even for quasi-TEM transmission lines such as microstrip lines, as demonstrated in this paper. As a result, it is an ideal validation metric that is easy to interpret. One disadvantage of our method is that it requires the measurements of another complete set of multiline TRL standards, which can be a laborious task if done manually. The upside is that we do not need to pre-characterize any standards. One way the proposed method could be improved is by using it for on-wafer applications with fully motorized probes. This allows for an automated measurement process, eliminating the need for user intervention and reducing errors that might otherwise be introduced by the user, such as those related to probe contact repeatability.