Low-energy magnonic logic circuits are an actively developing field of modern magnetism. The potential benefits of magnonics for data processing are vitally dependent on units based on nonreciprocal propagation of spin waves, in analogy to semiconductor diodes and transistors in electronics. In this article, we suggest the approach to realize nonreciprocal propagation of spin waves in a ferromagnetic metallic waveguide by exciting them with femtosecond laser pulse. Using micromagnetic modeling, we show that the combination of an external magnetic field and the position of the excitation laser spot across the waveguide leads to unidirectional propagation of the excited spin-wave packet. The results are meaningful for the design of hybrid magnonic-photonic circuits in future generations of data processing devices. Low-energy magnonic logic circuits are an actively developing field of modern magnetism Laser-induced SW dynamics has just begun to be explored in confined elements for magnonics, such as resonators In this paper, we consequently examine SW dynamics in the waveguide subjected to broad-area laser pulse excitation, excitation with elongated laser spot resembling rf antennae geometry, and localized laser spot. We show that the strength of the external magnetic field controls the spatial position of the maximum SW excitation and enables its shift from the center to the edges of the waveguide. Based on these findings, we demonstrate that a combination of the external magnetic field and position of the laser spot across the waveguide leads to tunable nonreciprocity and even unidirectionality in the propagation of the excited SW wavepacket. The results are meaningful for the design of hybrid magnonic-photonic circuits in future generations of data-processing devices The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II we describe the methods and modeled waveguide parameters. Section III A presents calculations of the magnitude of magnetization dynamics triggered by laser-induced heating. In Sections III B-III D we analyze the magnetization dynamics in the waveguide in the case of uniform, elongated, and round-spot ultrafast heating with femtosecond laser pulse sequentially. In Section III E we analyze the nonreciprocal propagation of SWs quantitatively and compare our results with the previously reported ones. The implementation of the observed tunable nonreciprocity to neuromorphic computing and logic gates is also proposed. In the Conclusion we discuss the results obtained, including their possible applications. We use micromagnetic numerical simulation to model SW propagation in a ferromagnetic waveguide with the width of 3.5 μm along the x-axis, length of 43 μm along the y-axis, and thickness of 10 nm along the z-axis (Fig. We consider the impact of the laser pulse as a relative reduction followed by recovery of the magnetic parameters K U and M S , as it is observed experimentally in metallic films a is conserved in the entire magnetic parameters' recovery time, where the superscripts c and h correspond to the parameters before and just after excitation, respectively. Here, we assume the power a = 3 corresponding to the case of uniaxial anisotropy where P stands for M S or K U , and Θ(t) is a Heaviside function. In the work, we vary the shape of the excitation laser spot with corresponding changes in spatial distribution P (x, y). The particular forms of P (x, y) are specified in the corresponding sections below. Additionally, as demonstrated in experiments of laser-induced thermal change of anisotropy parameters in metallic films, the polarization state of the pump pulse does not affect the excited magnetization dynamics All calculations are performed using the GPUaccelerated micromagnetic framework mumax 3 A. Laser-induced deflection of the effective magnetic field First, we perform the simulation of the laser-induced initial deflection of the total effective field H ef f across the waveguide. This deflection defines the initial magnitude of the excited magnetization dynamics Fig. Fig. Above, we considered quasistatic heating. It means, the magnetization vector follows the H ef f . In the case of ultrafast heating by the laser pulse, the direction of H ef f changes much faster than the period of the precession, and the magnetization becomes noncollinear with the new orientation of the effective field Thus, the magnitude of T is proportional to the sine of the deflection angle, obtained above. Therefore, since H ef f has the local contribution of demagnetizing fields varying to the edges, the value of H ext defines the localization of SW excitation upon ultrafast laser-induced heating, following Fig. Further, we are motivated by the experiments with rf antennas and single-frequency excitation, which show the selectivity of SW excitation regions First, we consider the uniform laser excitation of the whole waveguide area (Fig. The dependence of the maximum precession magnitude versus external field shows two peaks at 13 and 136 mT (Fig. The obtained results demonstrate the possibility of laser-induced excitation of different areas across the waveguide depending on the value of H ext . It is in agreement with the torque T spatial distribution predicted in the previous Section. Furthermore, the selectivity of the excitation region could be realized with the pump laser positioning across the waveguide and the spot's shape. Hereafter, we show that such an approach enables one to control the nonreciprocity of SW propagation and even to achieve its unidirectionality. Next, we consider the focused excitation spot elongated across the whole waveguide (Fig. where P (t) has the form (1), and σ = 640 nm. To detect propagating wave packets, we measure magnetization dynamics averaged over a 42 by 27 nm region at various positions across the waveguide x d . The detection area is placed at a distance y d = 10.5 μm from y = 0 in the positive direction of the y-axis. At this distance, the SW dynamics is experimentally detectable using a scanning optical pump-probe technique in the case of unbounded metallic films To shed light on the observed features, we analyze the distributions of M z during the propagation of SWs at low and high H ext (Fig. If H ext increases, the efficient excitation area (the area of larger H eff deflection) shifts to the waveguide edges (Fig. Thus, even if the excitation of the waveguide is homogeneously distributed across its width, sweeping H ext gives the opportunity to tune not only the frequency of SWs, but also their propagation direction in the planar waveguide, and even to suppress them. However, with the laser pulses as stimuli, we obtain an additional de-gree of freedom by changing the shape and position of the excitation area. The simplest case is to focus the femtosecond laser pulses into a round shape spot using a micro-objective lens. In the next section, we examine the effect of the position of the round-spot excitation area across the waveguide on the results previously obtained. Finally, we consider the excitation by femtosecond laser pulses focused into a 2D-Gaussian spot: with σ = 640 nm and various positions of the excitation spot center x 0 across the waveguide (Fig. Distributions of the M z -component at μ 0 H ext = 13 and 17 mT (Fig. At μ 0 H ext = 17 mT, spin waves are excited from the center and from the edges of the waveguide. It is a result of two mechanisms. On the one hand, the deviation of M from H ext is still large enough for the excitation of the center to be nonzero. But on the other hand, the effective excitation region shifts to the waveguide edge (see Fig. At μ 0 H ext = 40 mT (Fig. Thus, focused femtosecond laser pulses make it possible to excite SWs with unidirectional propagation in confined structures. In this section, we go deeper into the origins and quantitative analyses of the revealed uni- directionality of the waves. The most prominent asymmetry in the propagation of the waves is obtained at μ 0 H ext = 13 mT. Fig. To describe the origin of the unidirectionality in detail, we again consider the equilibrium distribution of the magnetization and its initial deflection. Fig. To provide the quantitative analysis, we introduce a dimensionless nonreciprocity parameter δ as follows: where a max is maximum M z magnitude over all positions of x d at |y d | = 10.5 μm. The superscript indicates the direction along the y-axis in which detection is performed. Fig. The interference process at μ 0 H ext = 17 mT results in a change in the sign of δ(x 0 ) and suppression of its maxi-mum value at 40 % with a slight decrease in the detected magnitude. The obtained value of nonreciprocity δ larger than 90 % could be regarded as unidirectional propagation. The recent review on unidirectional spin wave propagation and devices The distinctive feature of the optical approach to SW excitation is its tunability on demand. Furthermore, the shape of the obtained function δ(x 0 ) is smooth and nonlinear (Fig. We demonstrate a number of features of SW propagation at optical excitation in the ferromagnetic metallic waveguide. From the simulation results of the optical excitation of the entire waveguide area (Sec. III B) we obtain two pronounced excitation peaks of spin wave dynamics at external fields of 13 mT, and 136 mT. They correspond to the excitation of the dynamics in the central area (13 mT) and edges (136 mT) of the waveguide. In the case of excitation of the entire waveguide area, the SWs propagate from the edges of the waveguide, as in previous experiments with rf antennae Here, the edges of the waveguide serve as sources of stray field, the change of which gives rise to the torque T acting on the magnetization upon ultrafast heating. The excitation with a focused laser spot elongated across the whole waveguide also demonstrates center-or edge-excitation of SW packets, depending on the external magnetic field magnitude. At low field, the packet from central excitation propagates along the waveguide at some angle to its long axis because of incomplete magnetization alignment with the external magnetic field outside the excitation area (Fig. An excitation with pulses focused into a round spot smaller than the waveguide width brings an additional degree of freedom to manipulate the parameters of the SWs -the position x 0 of the pump spot across the waveguide. In addition to the effects observed at elongated spot excitation, nonreciprocal and even unidirectional wave propagation is observed if the pump area approaches the waveguide edge. We explain these effects by breaking the symmetry of propagation conditions for the SWs excited near the edge of the magnetic medium when the wave propagates toward the center in one direction and towards the edge of the waveguide in the opposite direction. At low field supporting excitation of SWs in the central part of the waveguide, we achieve nonreciprocity exceeding 90%, i.e. unidirectional propagation. At field values that support simultaneous excitation of the SWs from the center and from the edges of the waveguide, the interference between them leads to the change in the nonreciprocity sign, a twofold decrease of its value, and a slight decrease in SW amplitude. Thus, in the waveguide with nonuniform internal fields across its width, a combination of external field and spot position make it possible to tune the SW propagation from symmetrical to unidirectional and even suppress it. We believe that the experimental demonstration of the proposed unidirectionality of SWs is quite straightforward in the metallic waveguides with the all-optical pump-probe technique The effects demonstrated here open up ways of creating magnonic logic elements 