Three-parametric Lenard-Jones and Morse interatomic potentials are the simplest ones, which that can be used to obtain thermophysical properties of the liquid and solid substances. Upon adjusting the model parameters to real substance properties, the interatomic potentials can be used to describe simple mono-component substance with good accuracy. Usually, these tree parameters can be found from the cohesion energy, bulk moduli and the molar volume data or the lattice parameters, obtained experimentally for pure chemically crystalline materials. In our paper, in case of chemically different atoms, for both the Lenard-Jones potential type and the Morse ones, or any other three-parametric potential type, we propose some convenient model relationships expressing the corresponding three parameters through the previously found ones for pure chemical elements. Finding the semi-empirical interatomic interaction potentials is an important task for many aims. First, it may be initial starting point for the modeling of different thermodynamic properties of liquids and solids consisting of pure chemical element and also of multiple chemical components. The Lenard-Jones Here, we introduce two three-parametric potentials, namely, the Lenard-Jones type (LJ-type) and also the Morse type (M-type) potential interaction energy between two neighbouring same atoms in the following form: Here, we have introduced so called Elastic-Bond potential: and the equations similar to Eqs. . As it follows from Fig. that means that the elastic bond is broken at this distance. So, this parameter can be used for any interatomic potential model as well. In present subsection, for any three-parametric potential . Using these ones, the inter-atomic potential itself can be represented as follows: Here, the dimensionless potential function To find these parameters most of researchers use the cohesion energy, bulk moduli and the molar volume (or lattice parameter) data such as represented in Table1 for some f.c.c and b.c.c transition metals taken from Using Eq.( Here, summation is performed over a set of Kc nearest coordination spheres: , where i z denotes the number of atoms on the i-th coordination sphere. N A = 6.02214076×10 23 /mol is the well- known Avogadro's number, and i p is a set of dimensionless distances to the i-th coordination sphere. We also, introduced a dimensionless Lenard-Jones or Morse potential function ( ) and the second derivative value is ( ) for M and LD type potentials, respectively. Further, we will denote ( ) ( ) , as the dimensionless crystal energy per atom. Normally, the internal energy of a crystal must be represented as a function of the molar volume Vm = N A v(r) where, v(r) is the volume per single atom in a given crystalline material. For many ideal crystal structures like f.c.c, h.c.p and b.c.c there is a simple relationship between the atomic volume and the nearest neighbour distance ( ) where, q is a constant dependent on a particular crystal geometry. At the equilibrium distance e r r = , where, we can obtain a dimensionless ratio a r x e e / = and also the equilibrium molar volume: Therefore, using Eqs. ( ) ( ). On the other hand, at zero temperature, the molar cohesive energy is: From Eqs.( Here, ( ) is a value minimizing the dimensionless cohesion energy function that can be obtained solving Eq.( of any interatomic potential discussed in the present paper or some other ones too. So, Eq.( The second parameter, namely, the bonding energy one can find from Eq.( ( ) ( ) And the final, third parameter, i.e, the bonding length a is ( ). ( ) , and, obviously, The data given in Table1 can be used to calculate all the interatomic potential parameters. Normally, it can be done applying appropriate numerical methods. But here, we restrict ourselves by the simplest nearest neighbour approach by setting in Eq.( and finding from Eq.( ( ) . After that, one can see: ). Finally, using Eq.( At the same time, from the Eqs.( ,and also two remaining potential parameters: Here, is the cohesive energy per atom and d is the experimentally measured distance between the nearest atoms in b.c.c f.c.c or h.c.p type crystals. In present section, we will propose some simple ideas, which allow constructing the interatomic potential for two chemically different atoms A and B, shown schematically in Fig. Later we will show that this so-called c-excess parameter exc AB c is small, but nevertheless plays a very important role. These three relationships give us full description of all three parameters for the Lennard-Jones and Morse potential, or any other three-parametric potentials as well. In particular, the bonding energy between the AB atoms can be easily found from the following equation: One can also obtain the following relationships for the exponent parameters b , n Lennard-Jones and Morse potentials: In order to analyze and discuss this equation, it is more convenient to express it in a dimensionless form: The same can be done for parameters as well: or the corresponding dimensionless relationships: Therefore, Eq.( So, finally, from Eq.(28-33)we obtain: In present section, we have proposed some simple ideas, which allowed constructing the interatomic potential parameters for two chemically different atoms A and B. For this aim, we have considered the interatomic distance changes ( ) ( ) ( ) produced by the same weak force f applied to AA, BB and AB atomic pairs. We also assumed that, similarly to the equilibrium interatomic bond length rule ( ) Here P1, P2 and P3 are some fitting constants, which should be found from the analysis of some (minimum three) binary phase diagrams. We are not going to discuss the appropriate procedure for that in details in the present paper and will do that somewhere else. We should only to mention that it is convenient to choose the disordered binary alloys like Cu-Ni, Ni-Au and Cu-Rh. All them have a good solubility at high temperatures, but, experience decomposition below some characteristic temperatures T max and consentrations x max . In case of Cu-Ni these parameters are (t max =355C 0 , x max =0.673) for Ni-Au (t max =812C 0 , x max =0.29) and for Cu-Rh alloy (t max =812C 0 , x max =0.29) 