We present evidence that learned density functional theory ("DFT") force fields are ready for ground state catalyst discovery. Our key finding is that relaxation using forces from a learned potential yields structures with similar or lower energy to those relaxed using the RPBE functional in over 50% of evaluated systems, despite the fact that the predicted forces differ significantly from the ground truth. This has the surprising implication that learned potentials may be ready for replacing DFT in challenging catalytic systems such as those found in the Open Catalyst 2020 dataset. Furthermore, we show that a force field trained on a locally harmonic energy surface with the same minima as a target DFT energy is also able to find lower or similar energy structures in over 50% of cases. This "Easy Potential" converges in fewer steps than a standard model trained on true energies and forces, which further accelerates calculations. Its success illustrates a key point: learned potentials can locate energy minima even when the model has high force errors. The main requirement for structure optimisation is simply that the learned potential has the correct minima. Since learned potentials are fast and scale linearly with system size, our results open the possibility of quickly finding ground states for large systems. In July 2022 the single biggest workload of the largest UK supercomputer, ARCHER2 An important use case for DFT is structure optimisation. The goal of structure optimisation is to find the global minimum of the potential energy surface (PES) of a material, a quantity that helps characterize its functional properties. The success of the optimisation depends on the complexity of the PES, the optimisation algorithm and the DFT approximation known as the exchangecorrelation functional. Here we present the surprising result that machine learned potentials trained on DFT data con-sistently find low energy structures of the target functional outside of the training distribution. This occurs even when force estimates are inaccurate or noisy, and even when the model is trained on a simple harmonic approximation to the energy around ground states in the training set. Our key result is shown in Fig. Our findings have a surprising implication: learned force fields may already be ready for use in ground state discovery for catalytic systems. If DFT optimisation is a useful tool for catalyst discovery, and force field optimised structures have a lower mean energy than DFT geometries, then force fields are useful for catalyst discovery. This is despite the fact that learned models still have non-negligible errors with respect to DFT energies and forces. Our experiments suggest that learned potentials succeed because they have the correct energy minima, even if their force errors are high. To test this hypothesis, we trained a force field on a local harmonic approximation to the DFT energy around optimised structures in the Open Catalyst 2020 ("OC20") dataset Finally, when combining Easy Potentials with VASP relaxations in a hybrid approach, we find that the structures match or exceed the stability of VASP-optimized geometries in 88% of cases. The mean improvement is 0.46 eV, which is remarkably large. Further, these relaxations require half as many DFT steps as VASP optimization from scratch. This means that even practitioners not ready to fully embrace learned force fields can dramatically improve and accelerate their computations by initialising DFT-based relaxations through Easy Potentials. We are given a set of atoms specified by their positions p i ∈ R 3 and atomic numbers a i ∈ {1, . . . , 118}. Denoting the set of atomic positions as P = p i , . . . , p |S | , the forces exerted on the atoms are defined as ì F = -∇ P E(S) ∈ R |S |×3 , where E(S) is the potential energy for S and • is the concatenation operator. The ground state of a PES is the set of atomic positions that minimises the energy, P min = min P (E(S)). DFT is a method to compute the total energy of a system using a functional of the electron density DFT is the most widely used method for computing energies for systems in condensed matter physics, materials science, and chemistry, with key papers having over 100 000 citations Structure optimisation can be sensitive to the choice of functional and the choice of optimisation algorithm Despite its favorable cost-accuracy trade-off relative to other quantum chemical methods, DFT is still rather expensive. Applications such as ab initio molecular dynamics ("MD") A common class of neural networks used for learned atomic potentials are Message Passing Neural Networks Our learned potential, hereafter referred to as ML-FF, is trained and evaluated on different subsets of the OC20 dataset We train our model following the training method described by Zaidi et al. While structure optimisation is typically guided by forces, one can also find ground states by following the gradient of a surrogate potential Ẽ with the same global minimum as E. Indeed, one can choose a surrogate that is smoother than E, leading to faster optimisation and a higher likelihood of escaping local minima. This point is illustrated in Fig. The above example emphasises an important point: the only requirement for a learned potential being useful for material structure optimisation is that its forces are close to zero near the ground states of the target DFT functional. Indeed, our experiments show that Easy Potentials successfully identify low energy configurations outside of their training set even when they exhibit high force prediction error in high energy regions. Counter-intuitively, this also means that ML-FF with high force prediction errors in areas outside a minimum may offer optimisation benefits, as noisy gradients For each ground state ŝ in the training set, the Easy Potential approximates the energy of nearby states s as E(s) = E(ŝ) , where the sum is over each atom i in s with position p i , and || • || 2 is the L2 norm. The specific construction of the neural network predicting E(s) in this manner is inspired by Godwin et al's work into regularisation to prevent over-smoothing Our first experiments demonstrate the ability of ML-FF relaxations to find minimum energy wells of the target DFT energy. Table Table We also calculate the root-mean-square deviation of atomic positions (RMSD). Our analysis indicates that structures with lower DFT energies than OC20 correlate with higher RMSDs. This suggests that ML-FF escapes local minima to obtain qualitatively different structures with lower energies, an example of which is shown in Fig. Does training on synthetic quadratic approximations yield similar results, which tests our hypothesis of primarily needing to train on similar minima? Our experiments for Easy Potential, presented in Table To confirm that these results were not due to different DFT settings in Quantum Espresso and VASP, we also evaluate a sample of 1000 OOD_BOTH structures using VASP, with the exact same settings used in OC20. To check our settings, we first confirmed that VASP results on the ground truth structures matched the energies provided by the OC20 dataset. We observe a distribution shift in which a higher number of structures are less stable, but still find an improvement of -0.13 eV on average. The majority of structures predicted by Easy Potential are still equivalent or lower in energy than DFT relaxations. We also carry out a study where we allow for a larger iteration budget in the refinement stage (950 versus 100 iterations in the second stage), which further improves results against VASP. Finally, we use again use the OOD_BOTH sample relaxed via EP and continue relaxations using VASP in a hybrid approach, which results in -0.46 eV average improvements (for a median of 71 additional DFT relaxation steps) against the original VASP OC20 relaxations (median 147 DFT steps). Figure Fig. Here we perform ablation studies to provide further insight into the performance and trade-offs of ML-FF relaxations. In Table In Table In Fig. capped by the cutoff radius. In Fig. We further validate ML-FF's ability to predict minima by evaluating bond lengths. To do so we predict the potential energy of atom pairs at various bond distances. The bond length is the distance that minimizes the energy. We compare ML-FF predictions with the ground truth computed with Quantum Espresso. The results are illustrated in Fig. We observe more difficulties on some pairs (e.g. Cl-Cl, P-P, Se-Se) which is likely due to a limited number of these bonds in the training data. The key finding of our experiments is that learned interatomic potentials are surprisingly accurate at identifying low energy wells of target DFT PESs, even if force predictions are noisy or the model is trained on a simple harmonic potential. The latter are similar in spirit to gradient fields developed for ML conformer generation useful for practical calculations today. Using ML-FFs and Easy Potentials opens up the possibility of relaxing large systems of tens of thousands of atoms due to their fast execution and linear scaling. We imagine Easy Potentials being used in collaboration with classical methods, for example to obtain an initial fast result within a low energy well, which can then be further refined. As shown when combining EP with VASP in table 2, this combines the guarantees of DFT while reducing the number of steps required while also improving results. Lastly, our results imply that focusing on force and structure distance errors on Open Catalyst and similar datasets may not accurately capture the progress in learned force fields. Instead, predicted structures should be evaluated with singlepoint DFT calculations. Practitioners investigating other approaches to learned potentials may be similarly surprised to find that, by incorporating harmonic potentials or novel optimisation strategies for their relaxations, their force fields may already be sufficiently accurate for ground state catalyst discovery. Our model is a variant of the Graph Net Simulator GNS consists of an encoder that processes input data into a latent space, a processor that executes message passing and updates the latent representation, and decoders that interpret the resulting node embeddings to per-node and graph-level predictions. In the encoder, we use the set of atoms to construct a directed graph G(V, E) with featurized sets of vertices V = {v 1 , v 2 , . . . , v |S | } and edges E = {e i, j } i, j where an edge between v i and v j is added if their distance is less than a connectivity radius of 6 Å, for a maximum of 20 edges per atom determined via a k-d tree for nearest neighbours. Each edge e i, j is represented with the displacement vector p j -p i and the Euclidean norm as features. Distances are then further featurised by computing Gaussian radial basis functions (mean μ = 0, standard deviation σ = 0.5 Å). For each atom (a i , p i ) a vertex v i is represented through a learned embedding of the atom type a i . For OC20, we also utilise another input feature, a "tag" for each atom that indicates whether it is part of the slab, surface, or catalyst, by creating a separate learned embedding. Embedding sizes were set to 512, and all multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) had size 1024 and used shifted softplus activations. Following the input graph construction, the processor iteratively updates node and edge features by applying Interaction Networks Finally, after message passing, forces are decoded by applying an MLP to each node feature. Energy predictions are decoded by applying an MLP to each node feature, aggregating the nodelevel results using a sum aggregation function, and finally applying another MLP to predict the total potential potential energy of the system. Note that energy predictions are not strictly required for relaxations if not differentiating them. We primarily use them for assessing the model's internal evaluation consistency during relaxation (i.e. for analysis without DFT). GNS is implemented in Jax All training is performed on a cluster of 16 TPU v4 devices with 32 GB of RAM. Graphs are dynam-ically batched with up to 10 graphs, 1024 vertices and 12800 edges in a single batch (i.e. the batch is padded to these dimensions once one of them is reached, since input structures have varying dimensions). Parameters are updated using a mean squared error loss and the Adam optimiser Relaxations are implemented using the Adamw • A maximum number of relaxation steps (ML-FF: 1000, Easy Potential/ML-FF two-stage procedure: 50 Easy Potential, 100 ML-FF). • The Frobenius norm of the predicted forces per-atom below a threshold hyperparameter for all atoms (ML-FF: 0.005, Easy Potential/ML-FF two-stage: 0.03). As gradients for Adamw, we use the negative direct per-atom force predictions rather than explicitly computing the derivative of the predicted energy with respect to positions. As discussed in the Model Details section, atom graphs are constructed based on radial distance cutoffs. The relaxed atomic positions change inter-atomic distances. We hence recompute edges after updating positions by re-executing a nearest neighbour lookup within the distance cutoff. Since relaxations are implemented in JAX, we in practice use jit compilation to XLA which requires static shapes. Graphs change shape throughout relaxations, so we compile ahead-oftime to an initial power-of-two for edge counts and pad graphs to this size, and only recompile dynamically as needed to the next power of two to minimize the total number of recompilations throughout a relaxation. For large scale inference, pre-compiling a range of sizes and matching each molecule to the next power-of-two could avoid any runtime compilation and optimize throughput. Relaxations are measured on both CPUs and NVIDIA V100 GPUs with 16 GB RAM. We used the OC20 dataset as provided in https://github.com/Open-Catalyst-Project/ocp. We conducted some data cleaning, removing 580 structures where the surface crossed the unit cell z-axis. This was observed after training, and future models could be adjusted to also handle a periodic z-axis if necessary. We faithfully reproduce the settings described in the Open Catalyst paper Here m = 40 and a 1 , a 2 are the dimensions in the first and second axis of the unit cell of the structure. Since a significant part of our structures are metallic we used a Marzari-Vanderbilt smearing with a Gaussian spreading of 0.2. We do not observe a significant energy difference for the insulators of the dataset with or without smearing. Therefore, for practical reasons, we used smearing for all DFT computations. Moreover, due to computational limitations we do not use the precise pseudo-potentials in We use VASP for a small sample of structures for validation. Our VASP settings exactly reproduce the OC20 results when using the configurations specified in the paper DFT experiments on Google Cloud, as well as to Alison Reid for guiding the open sourcing process. A.M.G. was supported by EPSRC Fellowship EP/T033231/1.