We present a first-principles study of the electronic and magnetic properties of epitaxial interfaces between the Heusler compounds Ti2MnIn and Ni2MnIn and the III-V semiconductors, InSb and InAs, respectively. We use density functional theory (DFT) with a machine-learned Hubbard U correction determined by Bayesian optimization. We evaluate these interfaces for prospective applications in Majorana-based quantum computing and spintronics. In both interfaces, states from the Heusler penetrate into the gap of the semiconductor, decaying within a few atomic layers. The magnetic interactions at the interface are weak and local in space and energy. Magnetic moments of less than 0.1 μB are induced in the two atomic layers closest to the interface. The induced spin polarization around the Fermi level of the semiconductor also decays within a few atomic layers. The decisive factor for the induced spin polarization around the Fermi level of the semiconductor is the spin polarization around the Fermi level in the Heusler, rather than the overall magnetic moment. As a result, the ferrimagnetic narrow-gap semiconductor Ti2MnIn induces a more significant spin polarization in the InSb than the ferromagnetic metal Ni2MnIn induces in the InAs. This is explained by the position of the transition metal d states in the Heusler with respect to the Fermi level. Based on our results, these interfaces are unlikely to be useful for Majorana devices but could be of interest for spintronics. Majorana zero modes (MZMs) have been at the forefront of device physics for over a decade due to the tantalizing possibility of using them to achieve topological, fault tolerant quantum computing Besides the challenge of mitigating defects and disorder, from a technological standpoint, utilizing a global external magnetic field further constrains device geometry due to its necessary orientation orthogonal with the Rashba field. A recent avenue of research thus attempts to replace the external magnetic field with local proximity-induced magnetic interactions We have chosen to investigate Heusler compounds as alternative magnetic materials to EuS. The Heuslers boast a range of intriguing properties. For example, the Heusler family includes topological superconductors The Heusler family of materials has also long attracted interest in the spintronics community, thanks to a high Fermi level spin polarization in certain cases, including some half-metallic compounds In this work, we focus on Heuslers likely to form epitaxial interfaces with the semiconductors most utilized in the Majorana community, i.e. InAs and InSb with their relatively heavy elements and thus large SOC. Ni 2 MnIn and Ti 2 MnIn are lattice matched to InAs and InSb to within 0.1% and 0.2%, respectively. Ni 2 MnIn is a ferromagnetic metal with a moderate magnetic moment of 4.40 μB To our knowledge, no experimental work has been done on Ti 2 MnIn to date. We note that it is possible that Ti 2 MnIn has not been studied experimentally because it is metastable. However, metastable phases can be grown by epitaxial templating on lattice matched substrates (e.g., In the following, we present a DFT analysis of the electronic structure and magnetic properties of Ni 2 MnIn and Ti 2 MnIn, as well as their interfaces with InAs and InSb, respectively. The local and semi-local functionals, which have been used in several studies of Heuslers, cited above, have limited accuracy. Due to the self-interaction error (SIE) We find that adding the Hubbard U correction improves upon the performance of semi-local DFT and produces results closer to a hybrid functional. Importantly, the computational cost of DFT+U(BO) enables simulating large interface models. For both the Ni 2 MnIn/InAs and Ti 2 MnIn/InSb interfaces, states from the Heusler penetrate into the gap of the semiconductor, decaying within a few atomic layers. The magnetic interactions at the interface are localized in space and energy. Weak magnetic moments of less than 0.1 μ B are induced in the two atomic layers of the semiconductor closest to the interface. Based on this, we consider these interfaces unlikely to be useful for Majorana physics, at least via an exchange mechanism. The induced spin polarization around the Fermi level of the semiconductor depends mainly on the spin polarization around the Fermi level of the Heusler, rather than the overall magnetic moment. The ferrimagnetic narrow-gap semiconductor Ti 2 MnIn is more spin polarized around the Fermi level than the ferromagnetic metal Ni 2 MnIn, owing to the position of the transition metal d states. Consequently, the Ti 2 MnIn induces stronger spin polarization around the Fermi level of the InSb than the Ni 2 MnIn induces in the InAs. This has implications for the potential for spin transport through the interface. In particular, in the Ti 2 MnIn/InSb interface it may be possible to achieve spin switching by applying a bias, which makes it of potential relevance for spintronics. DFT calculations were performed using the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) For Ni 2 MnIn and Ti 2 MnIn the optimal U values were found as detailed below. PBE calculations with and without U for both bulk materials used a kinetic energy cutoff value of 350 eV and a k-point mesh of 20 × 20 × 20. The Heyd, Scuseria, and Enzerhof hybrid functional (HSE) For PBE+U(BO) calculations, the U value applied to the p orbitals of In was kept the same as for InAs for Ni 2 MnIn and the same as for InSb for Ti 2 MnIn. Twodimensional BO was used to determine the U values applied to the d orbitals of Ni, Ti, and Mn, as described in Ref. All interface calculations employed the PBE+U(BO) approach, utilizing k-point meshes of 12 × 12 × 1 for Ni 2 MnIn/InAs and 9 × 9 × 1 for Ti 2 MnIn/InSb. The kinetic energy cutoff was 450 eV for Ni 2 MnIn/InAs and 350 eV for Ti 2 MnIn/InSb. For interface calculations, dipole corrections were employed In the following, we provide a brief description of the free electron spin injection analysis introduced in Ref. Figure Figure Figure Figure We next comment on the free electron spin injection analysis performed by Killian and Victora in Slab models of the Ni 2 MnIn/InAs and Ti 2 MnIn/InSb interfaces were constructed with a (001) orientation. The interface models were constructed as periodic heterostructures with no vacuum region. The bulk lattice constants of 6.058 Å (ICSD 24518) for InAs and 6.48 Å for InSb (ICSD 24519) were used under the assumption that epitaxially grown Heusler films would conform to the substrate. The InAs and InSb substrates were As and Sb terminated, respectively. This is experimentally realizable with As(Sb)-rich growth conditions. For each interface, two terminations are possible for the Heusler. To avoid size dependence due to the quantum size effect, once the interface configuration was optimized, the thickness of each material was increased until convergence of the electronic properties to their bulk values was achieved. Once the minimal thickness required to achieve convergence is reached, any further changes to the electronic structure with increasing thickness are insignificant. 47 atomic layers of the semiconductor were used, based on previous band gap convergence studies Figures Figure Spin polarized transport is important for spintronics. In Ref. We have presented a first-principles study of epitaxial Heusler/III-V interfaces of Ti 2 MnIn/InSb and Ni 2 MnIn/InAs using DFT with a machine-learned Hubbard U correction determined by Bayesian optimization. For the bulk materials, adding the Hubbard U correction improves upon the performance of the semilocal PBE functional and produces band structures closer to the HSE hybrid functional. The main effect of the addition of exact exchange in the hybrid functional and of the Hubbard U correction is a shift of the transition metal d bands away from the Fermi level. This has qualitative implications for the electronic structure of Ti 2 MnIn. With PBE it has a near zero gap in the minority spin channel, however with HSE and PBE+U(BO) it is a conventional narrow-gap semiconductor. Ni 2 MnIn remains a ferromagnetic metal but HSE and PBE+U(BO) change the character and curvature of the states around the Fermi level, which may have implications for transport through the interface. Importantly, the computational cost of PBE+U(BO) enables us to study large interface models, which would not be feasible with a hybrid functional. Both the Ti 2 MnIn/InSb and Ni 2 MnIn/InAs interfaces exhibit states penetrating from the Heusler into the gap of the semiconductor, which decay within 18 atomic layers. As expected from branching point theory For the Ni 2 MnIn/InAs interface, the InAs is slightly spin polarized at the Fermi level with majority polarization, opposite to the minority polarization around the Fermi level in the Ni 2 MnIn. This means that the interface may act as a spin polarizer, similar to the Fe/GaAs interface In the context of Majorana devices, the criteria described in the introduction are not met. The few nanometer range of the induced magnetism in the semiconductor is smaller by two orders of magnitude than the typical InAs and InSb nanowire diameter of around 100 nm. We interpret this as signifying that the weak and local magnetic interactions at the interface are likely insufficient to drive proximity-induced magnetism over the body of the wire. These results are in agreement with previous work on EuS/InAs V.