Iron-based superconductors offer an ideal platform for studying topological superconductivity and Majorana fermions. In this paper, we carry out a comprehensive study of the band topology and topological surface states of a number of iron-based superconductors using a combination of density functional theory (DFT) and dynamical mean field theory. We find that the strong electronic correlation of Fe 3d electrons plays a crucial role in determining the band topology and topological surface states of ironbased superconductors. Electronic correlation not only strongly renormalizes the bandwidth of Fe 3d electrons, but also shifts the band positions of both Fe 3d and As/Se p electrons. As a result, electronic correlation moves the DFT-calculated topological surface states of many iron-based superconductors much closer to the Fermi level, which is crucial for realizing topological superconducting surface states and observing Majorana zero modes as well as achieving practical applications, such as quantum computation. More importantly, electronic correlation can change the band topology and make some iron-based superconductors topologically nontrivial with topological surface states whereas they have trivial band topology and no topological surface states in DFT calculations. Our paper demonstrates that it is important to take into account electronic correlation effects in order to accurately determine the band topology and topological surface states of iron-based superconductors and other strongly correlated materials. In recent years, topological insulators (TIs) Nontrivial topological phases have been theoretically predicted in the single-layer FeSe Recently, the Majorana zero modes on the surface of iron-based superconductors FeTe0.55Se0.45 It is well known that there is strong electronic correlation among Fe 3d electrons in iron-based superconductors. A combination of density functional theory and dynamical mean field theory (DFT+DMFT) has been proved to be a more adequate method to study the electronic structures of iron-based superconductors In this paper, we use DFT+DMFT to comprehensively study the band topology and topological surface states of iron-based superconductors. We find that the strong electronic correlation of Fe 3d electrons can change the band topology of some ironbased superconductors, such as CaFeAsF and electron doped LaFeAsO, transforming the DFT-predicted trivial band topology to nontrivial band topology, thus, inducing topological surface states. Moreover, for almost all the iron-based superconductors we studied, the topological surface states are moved much closer to the Fermi energy by electronic correlation. Therefore, it is crucial to include electronic correlation in order to accurately predict the band topology and topological surface states of iron-based superconductors. First-principles calculations are carried out based on DFT The plane-wave cutoff is R K = 8. We also carry out DFT calculations using the projector augmented wave pseudopotential method implemented in the Vienna ab initio simulation package To take into account the strong electronic correlation of Fe 3d electrons, we employ DFT+DMFT The DMFT quantum impurity problem is solved using the continuous-time quantum Monte Carlo method The DFT tight-binding Hamiltonian is obtained by the maximally localized Wannier functions All DFT and DFT+DMFT calculations are performed in the nonmagnetic and paramagnetic state, respectively. The experimental crystal structures of FeSe LiFeAs and SrFe2As2 Our DFT+DMFT calculations reveal that electronic correlation moves the Therefore, the As p band has an odd parity at the Z point. When the As p band with odd parity crosses the Fe d /d bands with even parities along the Γ-Z direction, band inversions with opposite parities occur at the Z point, which leads to nontrivial topological properties. For systems with inversion symmetry, the method proposed by Fu and Kane We continue to compare the DFT+DMFT band structure [Fig. Thanks to the strong electronic correlation effects on the position of the As/Se p band, we find that some iron-based superconductors including LaFeAsOH0. 