Using ab initio dynamical mean-field theory we explore the electronic and magnetic states of layered LixMnO2 as a function of x, the state of charge. Constructing real-space Wannier projections of Kohn-Sham orbitals based on the low-energy subspace of Mn 3d states and solving a multi-impurity problem, our approach focuses on local correlations at Mn sites. The antiferromagnetic insulating state in LiMnO2 has a moderate Néel temperature of TN = 296 K in agreement with experimental studies. Upon delithiation the system proceeds through a number of states: ferrimagnetic correlated metals at x=0.92, 0.83; multiple charge disproportionated ferromagnetic correlated metals with large quasiparticle weights at x=0.67, 0.50, 0.33; ferromagnetic metals with small quasiparticle weights at x=0.17, 0.08 and an antiferromagnetic insulator for the fully delithiated state, x = 0.0. At moderate states of charge, x = 0.67 -0.33, a mix of +3/+4 formal oxidation states of Mn is observed, while the overall nominal oxidation of Mn state changes from +3 in LiMnO2 to +4 in MnO2. In all these cases the high-spin state emerges as the most likely state in our calculations considering the full d manifold of Mn based on the proximity of eg levels in energy to t2g. The quasiparticle peaks in the correlated metallic states were attributed to polaronic states, based on previous literature for similar isoelectronic JT driven materials, arising due to non-Fermi liquid type behaviour of the strongly correlated system. Introduction LiMnO 2 (LMO) The thermodynamically stable phase of LMO at ambient conditions is orthorhombic (Pmmn) Structural phase transitions during cycling have prevented the widespread adoption of layered monoclinic LMO as a cathode material. Upon 50% delithiation, layered phase to spinel structural phase transformation of LMO involves the migration of Mn ions, whilst the close-packed O lattice remains intact. Density-functional theory (DFT) calculations, combined with a hybrid eigenvector-following method to uncover the pathways, show that for the case of x = 0.5, particular orderings of Li + /Li + vacancy and Mn 3+ /Mn 4+ ions play a significant role in this structural transformation Electronic phase transitions occurring during cathode cycling Electrochemical and magnetic phase transition studies of complex layered oxides are made all the more robust through first principles modelling of the electronic and magnetic states of these materials. Whilst the first order metal-insulator transition observed in LCO has been postulated to be a Mott transition by some DFT studies One of the main bottlenecks to the use of DMFT in battery cathodes is that they need to be studied at different states-of-charge. This means dealing with multiple inequivalent sites, and hence solving multi-impurity problems. This has the disadvantage of having to solve very large density matrices which are not only very expensive, but may often have large off diagonal terms, leading to fermionic sign problems. In this letter we predict using DFT+DMFT the phase transitions in layered monoclinic Li x MnO 2 , as a function of x, and explore the temperature versus x phase diagram. We develop a computationally fast method to deal with multi-impurity DMFT calculations. The electronic and magnetic state of pristine LMO are examined and compared to experimental results at temperatures below and above T N . The system is then delithiated systematically and for each x we present the spectral functions, magnetic properties, and transition temperatures. We find a metal-insulator Mott transition as a function of delithiation and the emergence of exotic states like ferrimagnetic correlated metals with large quasiparticle weights and charge-ordered ferromagnetic correlated metals with large quasiparticle peaks arising due to non-Fermi liquid behaviour shown by polarons. We clarify that origin of the charge disproportionated mixed valence states is due to different quasiparticle weights at different sites and postulate this ordering to be present for a range of x. The pathways leading to structural transformations to spinel structure could be traced back to such charge disproportionated state. Computational Methodology We develop a method to carry out multi-impurity DMFT calculations in a novel way by mapping multi-impurity problems to equivalent number of single-impurity problems interacting through bath hybridisation by means of Wannier projections. Delithiating the system results in formation of crystallographically inequivalent Mn sites in the LMO supercell, which requires solving multi-impurity problems, involv- ing solution of extremely large density matrices, which is computationally expensive, and has fermionic sign problem at low temperatures. To make the problem tractable, Maximally Localised Wannier Functions (MLWF) were constructed for all structurally inequivalent sites, however each inequivalent site was solved as a single-impurity problem interacting through the bath with the other inequivalent sites by virtue of the constructed MWLF, and the bath hybridisation. This method works well for strongly localised systems and makes accurate calculations at low temperatures converge faster with much less noise, avoiding the fermionic sign problem. Further details on parameters and comparison to conventional DMFT cf. SI Results To correctly account for dynamic correlation effects on Mn d states, we first carry out single-impurity DMFT calculations for Mn d based low-energy Hamiltonians defined in the basis of DFT-derived Wannier functions (cf. SI). The paramagnetic state of pristine layered monoclinic LMO at T=580K shown by the paramagnetic spectral function in Fig. Using a U = 5 eV within DMFT the antiferromagnetic band gap is ∼1.2 eV. In order to determine the Néel temperature (T N ) we carry out susceptibility calculations with an external field applied on the system. We vary the applied field from 0.01 -0.03 eV in steps of 0.01 eV, and for each value of temperature we obtain the inverse slope of the magnetisation vs applied field within the linear regime. Magnetic fields are applied as a split in energy and the value of magnetic field is added to the DFT Hamiltonian. The contribution -h field × Σ is added to diagonal elements of the Hamiltonian. This gives the inverse of the uniform susceptibility 1/χ vs temperature T , as shown in Fig. Next we look at delithiating the pristine LMO by making two supercells of dimensions 3 × 1 × 1 and 3 × 2 × 1. This results in 6 and 12 symmetry equivalent Mn sites in case of 3 × 1 × 1 and 3 × 2 × 1 respectively. One Li atom is removed sequentially at each stage and various resulting structures are relaxed within DFT using the PBESol exchange-correlation functional. For the sake of brevity we do not enumerate all the structural details here however a significant contraction of lattice parameters and lattice volume is seen on delithiation, as also observed in experiments, as well as a reduction in JT distortion in the system is observed. The various fractions of x considered here are x = 0.92, 0.83, 0.67, 0.50, 0.33, 0.17, 0.08, and 0.00. However, x = 0.00 is an extreme case: removing all the Li from the structure is not possible experimentally and makes the structure unstable. In case of delithiation to x = 0.83, the 6 symmetry equivalent Mn atoms in the pristine 3 × 1 × 1 cell are now split by reduction of symmetry into have 4 structurally inequivalent types, Mn 1 , Mn 2 , Mn 3 and Mn 4 each with multiplicity 2, 1, 2 and 1 respectively. We find a ferrimagnetic state in this case since from the DMFT spectral functions and from magnetic moments in Table A large quasiparticle peak is seen at the chemical potential in Mn 1 and Mn 3 indicating a strongly correlated metallic state Delithiated states with x = 0.67, 0.50, 0.33 show similar electronic structure to each other across this range of x with certain slight differences, and belong to the same phase of charge-ordered ferromagnetic correlated metallic states. In case of x = 0.67 and x = 0.33, the 6 symmetry equivalent Mn atoms in the pristine 3 × 1 × 1 cell are again split by reduction of symmetry into 4 structurally inequivalent types, Mn 1 , Mn 2 , Mn 3 and Mn 4 , each with different multiplicities of 2, 1, 2, 1 respectively, however in case of x = 0.50 there are 2 structurally inequivalent sites each with multiplicity 3. These sites may primarily be grouped again into two categories -one group with large quasiparticle and the other group with small quasiparticle weights. The x = 0.67 state is ferromagnetic since all Mn sites have the same orientation in the spectral function, as shown in Fig. In case of the delithiated state with = 0.17 the 6 symmetry equivalent Mn atoms in the pristine 3 × 1 × 1 cell are also split by reduction of symmetry into 4 structurally inequivalent types, Mn 1 , Mn 2 , Mn 3 and Mn 4 each with multiplicity 2, 1, 2 and 1 respectively. Qualitatively all Mn have similar electronic structures at all sites. A ferromagnetic arrangement is observed here since all Mn sites have same orientation as can be seen from the spectral function in fig. Discussion The exotic phase diagram and associated phase transitions in Li x MnO 2 as a function of x vs temperature, is shown in Fig 3 . The y axis shows the phase change from magnetic to paramagnetic states at each x driven by competition of thermal fluctuations with magnetic order. The change of magnetic phases along x is more nuanced. JT distorted materials show large superexchange which favours anti-ferromagnetism. This is the case of the pristine material x = 1, which is a JT driven antiferromagnetic insulator. As the system is delithiated, JT distortion reduces on different MnO 6 octahedra, which in turn indicates a reduction in monoclinicity. This reduction in JT favours ferromagnetism instead of anti-ferromagnetism. At x = 0.83 there are few sites with reduced JT distortion and hence ferromagnetic exchange whereas majority of other sites still have significant JT distortion and hence show Mn-Mn antiferromagnetic superexchange, leading to an overall ferri-magnetic state. When further delithiated to x = 0.67, and beyond, the overall reduction of JT distortion now favours FM double exchange, between different occupancies at majority of Mn sites. Reduction in JT distortion is usually associated with ferromagnetism particularly in Manganites To elucidate the origin of polaronic quasiparticles on delithiating we look at the crossover from coherence (Fermi-liquid) to incoherence (non-Fermi liquid) behaviour as a function of x. We plot -ImΣ(ω → 0), Σ is self energy, as a function of x shown in Fig. Conclusion In summary we have shown the exotic phase diagram and phase transitions in Li x MnO 2 as a function of state-of-charge x, and temperature. Our study shows a novel method of carrying out multiimpurity DMFT calculations in cathode materials in a computationally tractable way, thus opening up the field of battery physics in terms of strong correlations based many-body studies. It demonstrates an electrochemical method of tuning strongly correlated phase transitions and also shows emergence of polaronic quasiparticle states which contribute to charge disproportionation and which eventually lead to structural transformations seen in this material, and helps us in understanding degradation in cathodes. We find that an antiferromagnetic insulating state emerges in LiMnO 2 , with a Weiss temperature of θ = 769 K, in its +3 formal oxidation state, in high-spin configuration, in excellent agreement with experimental measurements. As the system is delithiated at fractions of x = 0.92, and 0.83 we predict a ferrimagnetic correlated metallic state thus observing a metal-insulator transition, similar to that in LCO. From the DMFT spectral function this metal-insulator transition is seen to be of a Mott type transition with a large quasiparticle weight in the strongly correlated metallic state. At fractions of x = 0.67, 0.5, and 0.33 we find the system to be in ferromagnetic strongly correlated metallic state with a mix of +3/+4 formal oxidation states. The pathways leading to the structural transformation to low energy spinel structure, originates with orderings of Li + /Li vac and Mn 3+ / Mn 4+ mixed oxidation states at x = 0.50 At a high state of charge with x = 0.17, we find a ferromagnetic correlated metal with a small quasiparticle peak near a formal oxidation state of +4. An overall nominal oxidation state change of Mn from +3 in LiMnO 2 to +4 in MnO 2 is observed, through stages of mixed oxidation states. In all these cases the high-spin state emerges as the most likely state considering the full d manifold of Mn in the model. The quasiparticle peaks in the correlated metallic states were attributed to polaronic states, owing to incoherent non-Fermi liquid behaviour, and the correlated metallic systems may be thought of as polaronic hopping semiconductors. Our novel and faster method of carrying out multiimpurity DMFT calculations involves calculating Wannier projections for all impurities and solving each separately keeping others in the bath, interacting through the bath hybridisation. To the best of our knowledge a systematic examination of the electrochemically driven Mott transition and the full phase diagram of LMO from a correlations based perspective does not exist, nor does an explanation for the observed orbital ordering at x = 0.50 and our study is expected to give rise to further experimental studies exploring these aspects of this very important cathode material through possible in-situ XPS+BIS spectra and magnetic susceptibility measurements while charging and discharging of the LMO cathodes.