Utilizing hot carriers is the crucial approach for solar cell to exceed the thermodynamic detailed balance limit, yet effective extraction of hot carriers in absorber materials via most commonly used semiconductor acceptors has been a challenge in both materials and photophysics research for many years. Herein, we build series of CsPbI3 quantum dot and fullerene derivative systems to explore the decisive factors of this process and have for the first time realized efficient hot carrier extraction in these systems (maximum extraction efficiency ~ 84%). We find building the systems as state-coupled complexes creates new carrier transport channels at about 0.22 eV above CsPbI3 quantum dot bandgap, which facilitates highly efficient HC extraction. Our research directly visualizes the inner connection of molecule interaction and ultrafast hot carrier extraction. The knowledge and strategy gained here are of universal meaning, taking an important step forward true hot carrier photovoltaics. In all photovoltaic devices, efficient extraction of carriers from photon absorber materials is directly linked to overall device efficiency since the photogenerated carriers ultimately produce electricity through charge transport, extraction, and collection processes To realize extraction of HCs, slow HC cooling in absorber materials and effective HC transfer at interface are two indispensable parts for competing with the energy loss processes of HCs Unfortunately, broadly used inorganic charge-selective materials, such as TiO2, SnO2 have been indicated to be difficult to extract HCs from perovskite materials due to their weak charge extraction ability and lacking coupling with perovskite Achieving effective HC extraction in perovskite and FD systems is of great benefit to impel perovskite photovoltaics to a new plateau. In this work, we choose colloidal perovskite quantum dots (PQDs) as absorber material, as they provide larger surface area for coupling with FD molecules and the HCs in QDs are easier to transport to surface than bulk materials. We build series of the CsPbI3 QDs and FDs systems to probe their molecule interaction dynamics and ultrafast HC dynamics. We firstly explicate a general strategy to The maximum extraction efficiency of 84% is finally achieved in these complexes by adjusting pump power. We show that efficient extraction of HCs from CsPbI3 QD to broadly used acceptors is feasible with building appropriate chemical combination. Our research updates the perspective of extracting HCs in perovskite materials and move a major step towards true HC photovoltaics. CsPbI3 QDs were synthesized by previous reported two sources hot injection method in oleic acid (OA), oleylamine (OAm), and octadecene Pump power dependent HC cooling mechanisms complicate the evaluation of the HC relaxation time and determination of HC extraction efficiency Subsequent temperature losses are numerically fitted with three temperature model (TTM) Under high pump fluence, HC relaxation changes significantly compared with that at low-fluence pump. Specifically, the HC cooling process is not terminated within picosecond but prolonged to tens of picoseconds. In this case, the time dependent temperature can be divided into three stages. time dependent temperature can be divided into three stages. Stage I is dominated by LO-phonon interaction as same as temperature decay under low pump fluence. It can be demonstrated from the similar value of τLO (0.47 ps) fitted from the energy power loss rate at this stage. The difference of stage I with the temperature decay under low pump fluence lies on HCs eventually heated the LO-phonon to a higher temperature, as the dash red line in Figure Specially, when Tc cooled down to room temperature (~70 ps) the dynamic curve at IBP just decayed into zero, hence, the transient kinetic at IBP is demonstrated with more general applicability to evaluate the HC relaxation for different conditions than GSB formation, PIA decay and EAS. HC extraction from CsPbI3 QD to FDs is explored based on above discussion. and the Jr for CsPbI3-FDs QDs, that is Je(FDs)=Jr(CsPbI3)-Jr(CsPbI3-FDs). For all CAFDs, Je exhibits an apparent increasement starting from carrier temperature higher than 850K and increase steadily with Tc (Figure The most striking observation to emerge from the data comparison were the entirely different HC extraction ability of CAFDs and CMFDs from CsPbI3 QDs. Taking the molecule structures of PCBM and PCBA as comparison (Figure where KD is dynamic quenching constant, KB is the binding constant of the static complex, n is the number of equivalent binding sites for CAFDs onto per CsPbI3 QD. From the fitting results in Table The formation of static complex provides very high bonding stability and close contact distance from QDs to CAFDs, which facilitate the efficient coupling of electronic state for fast carrier transfer. The downer image of Figure Due to the binding sites have already been occupied, the specific interaction by forming static complex for excessive CAFD quenchers is nearly saturated within this stage. As result, it is easily attributing the quenching to standard dynamic quenching rather than standard static quenching although both display linear S-V plots. The equation describes this situation is F0/F=KD2Q+b, where KD2 is dynamic quenching constant, b is constant Figure Density of function theory (DFT) was applied to further understand the nature of the HC extraction. Figure In this work, we explicate a general strategy to quantify HC extraction and achieve efficient extraction of HCs from CsPbI3 QD to widely used organic FD acceptors with appropriately building QDs and FDs into state coupled complexes. For realizing extraction of HCs in FD and perovskite systems, the key is building their effective state couplings. We uncover that the stable chemical bonding in these complexes can acts as a bridge coupling FDs and CsPbI3 QDs and provides effective channels for HC extraction. By adjust pump power, we finally achieve about 84% HC extraction efficiency. Our research provides an alluring strategy for utilizing HCs and pave the way to realize more efficient hot carrier photovoltaic technology. -23. Similar with OA, PCBA binds to both CsI-and PbI2-terminated slabs via covalent bonds. On PbI2terminated QD, both Pb-O bond lengths (LPb-O(1) ≈ 2.51 Å and LPb-O(2) ≈ 2.43 Å) are smaller than the sum of Pb 2+ (1.2 Å) and O 2-(1.4 Å) ion radii, illustrating that the