We study a novel equal-spin pairing state with opposite center of mass momentum for each spin polarization. This state, dubbed a Kramers Fulde-Ferrell (KFF) state, respects time-reversal symmetry and can be realized in a one-dimensional system with spin-orbit coupling and nearest neighbor attraction. We find that the KFF state supports nonreciprocal spin transport for both bulk superconductor and Josephson junctions. In addition to the spin Josephson diode effect, the charge transport is controlled by intriguing dynamics of bound states whose transitions can be manipulated by the length of the KFF superconductor. The KFF state is relevant for embedded quantum structures in monolayer Fe-based superconductors and dissipationless superconducting spintronics. Recent experimental observations of the diode effect in superconductors So far, the study of SC diode effect focused on the nonreciprocity of charge transport. One may wonder if there exists a similar nonreciprocal property in spin transport in certain SC systems. From the symmetry point of view, SC diode effect in charge transport, where critical currents in opposite directions have different magnitudes, requires the system to break both inversion and time-reversal (T ) symmetry, since the charge current operator changes sign under either inversion or T . While the spin current operator changes sign under inversion, it is invariant under T . Thus, the nonreciprocity in spin transport only requires breaking inversion symmetry and can be realized in T invariant superconductors. In this article, we propose a novel SC state that can realize nonreciprocal spin transport. This state has equal-spin pairing and a FF type of order parameter ∆ σ (r) = ∆e iσQ•r , with opposite Cooper pair center of mass momentum for opposite spin polarizations as shown schematically in Fig. This article is organized as follows. We start with the introduction of our model Hamiltonian and meanfield formulation for the KFF state in Sec. II. In Sec. III, we discuss the nonreciprocal spin transport for the bulk SC with KFF order, which is followed by the discussion of the hidden inversion symmetry that is related to the nonreciprocal spin transport in Sec. IV Then we study the transport properties of the Josephson junction structure constructed from the KFF state in Sec. V and discuss various phases realized in the charge transport across JJs of the KFF state in Sec. VI. We finalize the discussion in Sec. VII. We first consider a one-dimensional (1D) spin-orbit coupled chain with nearest neighbor attraction described by the Hamiltonian where t i j are hopping parameters up to the 2nd neighbor (t 1 and t 2 ) and α describes a nearest neighbor SOC. In 1D, SOC leaves a conserved spin quantum number which is taken to be the spin quantization axis along the chain direction. The nearest neighbor attraction V responsible for SC order can be decomposed into equal-spin and opposite-spin pairing channels as where the first term corresponds to the attraction between the electrons with the same spin and the second term corresponds to the attraction between the electrons with opposite spins and N c is the number of sites. If we further define the two pairing operators in equal-spin and opposite-spin channels as Eq. 2 can be written as where these two terms correspond to the pairing channels with equal and opposite spin respectively and here we denote the attraction in these two channels as V 1 and V in the original model in Eq. ( where is the band dispersion with which determines the positions of the Fermi points. From the structure of Fermi points shown in Fig. Here, in equal-spin pairing channel, electrons with up (down) spin pair into the FF state with a nonzero center of mass momentum Q(-Q). The resulting Kramers doublet ensures that T symmetry is preserved. In opposite-spin pairing channel, electrons with up and down spins form zero-momentum pairs, which is in general a mixture of s-wave and p z -wave pairing depending on the phase φ ⊥ . Specifically, φ ⊥ = 0 corresponds to s-wave pairing and φ ⊥ = π 2 corresponds to p z -wave pairing, while other values give rise to a mixed parity state. After the meanfield decoupling, the meanfield Hamiltonian can be written as In the Nambu basis , Eq. 9 can be written as with This meanfield Hamiltonian can be solved self-consistently for a fixed chemical potential μ and various values of Q and -1 -0.5 0 0.5 1 φ ⊥ with the self-consistent equations and the ground state is determined by the states with the lowest free energy density Ω = 1 N c ⟨H MF -μN⟩ which also determines the value of Q and φ ⊥ . We perform the calculation with a general set of parameter and the obtained meanfield phase diagram in Fig. The meanfield Hamiltonian in KFF state becomes which can be written in the Nambu basis where, is block diagonal in spin space, leading to the eigenenergy as and we have E kσ,± = E -k σ,± due to the T symmetry. Then the free energy density at zero temperature Ω(∆ ∥ , Q) can be calculated as where Θ(x) the Heaviside step function. The order parameter ∆ ∥ for a given Q can be determined self-consistently by minimizing Ω(∆ ∥ , Q) with respect to ∆ ∥ , leading to the selfconsistency equation The optimal Q value can be further determined by minimizing Because the latter is directly related to the spin current carried by the KFF state (see Appendix. B) Throughout the remaining text, we define the charge and spin currents in units of e ħ and unity, respectively. Since the spin current carrying state has equal but opposite center of mass momentum ±Q for Cooper pairs in opposite spin channels, the charge current always vanishes due to T symmetry. The critical spin currents in + anddirections are determined by the maximum and minimum values of j s (Q) sustained by the SC state according to j s,c+ = max Q [ j s (Q)] and j s,c-= min Q [ j s (Q)]. When j s,c+ j s,c-, the SC state enables nonreciprocal spin transport as shown in Fig. We performed meanfield calculations using two sets of parameters. In the first case, we set t 2 = 0 and obtain analytically that the ground state has Q 0 = 2θ α = σ(k f σ,+ + k f σ,-), consistent with the SOC split bands where electrons pair across the Fermi points k f σ,± in the same spin sector, giving rise to finite Cooper pair momenta σQ 0 with more details shown in Appendix. C. The zero temperature free energy in Eq. ( To demonstrate the hidden inversion symmetry, we can perform a local gauge transformation in momentum space. Then the meanfield Hamiltonian Eq. 13 becomes Since in the absence of t 2 , ε k+ σQ 2 ,σ = -2t α cos(k + σQ 2 -σθ α ), we can see that in the new basis, the only inversion breaking term θ α owing to the spin-orbit coupling α, is cancelled if Q = Q 0 = 2θ α . In other words, when Q = Q 0 = 2θ α , the inversion symmetry can be recovered in the new basis, where the meanfield Hamiltonian becomes The transformed Hamiltonian describes two spin-degenerate p-wave Kitaev chains In the case with finite t 2 , the dispersion of the noninteracting Hamiltonian reads ε kσ = -2t α cos(k -σθ α ) -2t 2 cos(2k), and then the Fermi momentum k f σ,± no longer have a closed form and the sum of the two Fermi momentum belonging to the same spin polarization is incommensurate in general. Here, we can immediately see that the gauge transformation above can not recover the inversion symmetry as above, since now ε k+ σQ 2 ,σ = -2t α cos(k + σQ 2 -σθ α ) -2t 2 cos(2k + σQ), and the inversion breaking phase of the two cosine function σQ 2 -σθ α and σQ cannot be cancelled by Q simultaneously, so that there is no hidden inversion symmetry that forbids the presence of the nonreciprocal spin transport. Therefore, the transformed model describes the two p-wave Kitaev chains with complex hoppings, which are time-reversal counterparts of each other but not identical and can be written in the real space as Indeed, the results shown in Fig. We next study the transport properties of Josephson chains consisting of a normal metal sandwiched between two KFF superconductors depicted in Fig. A. Spin Diode effect with spin-independent phase bias We first study the transport properties of JJ with spinindependent phase bias φ. The Josephson currents can be calculated by the formula where Ω Jc (φ) is the free energy of the system An intriguing feature in Fig. Such phase differences have a great impact on charge transport. The charge current I e = I ↑ + I ↓ crosses zero at both φ = 0 and φ = π with positive slopes, indicating the free energy Ω Jc (φ) of the junction reaches a local minimum at both φ = 0 and π. This state is called a 0 ′ or π π π ′ state depending on the momentum of the global minimum. It was studied previously in JJs where two superconductors are coupled through an Anderson impurity Here, these remarkable states are realized in T -invariant systems due to the novel KFF SC order. Remarkably, we find that distinct Josephson junction states (0, π π π, 0 ′ and π π π ′ ) can all be realized by tuning the phase shift, which can be easily achieve by changing the length of the SC region. The definition of these states are listed in Table . I. The dependence of the phase shift on the length N s of the SC region can be understood by performing a local gauge transformation that maps the KFF JJ onto a Kitaev JJ consisting of two spin-degenerate p-wave Kitaev chains subject to spin-dependent phase bias φ σ = φ + σQ(N s -1) as shown in Appendix. D. If we further assume the Josephson current for the Josephson chain consisting of two spin degenerate p-wave Kitaev chains with phase bias φ as I 0 (φ) which is identical for the two spin species due to the spin degeneracy, we can then immediately get the Josephson current for each spin species as I σ (φ) = I 0 (φ + σQ(N s -1)), i.e., the Josephson current I σ (φ) is shifted from the current of the transformed junction I 0 (φ) by a phase σQ(N s -1) (mod 2π) so that the relative phase difference of the current between the two spin species is δφ = 2σQ(N s -1) (mod 2π). Various Josephson junction states can be realized by tuning δφ from 0 to 2π through the length N s . This relation is verified numerically in Figs. Interestingly, in this case with only nearest neighbor hopping t 1 , the charge current I e (φ) acquires a period of π in phase φ instead of 2π as in conventional Josephson current at the critical point (N s = 326), which can also be understood in the gauge transformed basis. In this case with N s = 326, the phase bias becomes φ σ = φ+ σπ 2 and we thus have I σ (φ) = I 0 (φ+ σπ 2 ), from which we can get I ↑ (φ + π) = I 0 (φ + 3π 2 ) = I 0 (φ -π 2 ) = I ↓ (φ). Then we can derive a new relation for the total charge current I e as so that the charge current I e (φ) acquires a period of π instead of 2π. The spin current I s (φ) then acquires a minus sign when progressing π phase, so that its period is still 2π. The realization of diverse Josephson junction states by simply controlling the length of the superconductor is an intriguing property. It originates from the opposite nonzero momentum of Cooper pairs in each spin sector in the novel KFF state. The quantum interference of relative phase shifted pairing functions with opposite spin polarization leads to rich phases and physical phenomena. We reported the theoretical discovery of a novel timereversal invariant, finite momentum pairing Fulde-Ferrell state -the KFF state. The concrete effective 1D model we used to realize the KFF state and its many unprecedented properties is intimately connected to the novel physics observed at the atomic line defect (ALD) in monolayer iron-based superconductor Fe(Te,Se), where zero-energy bound states emerge at both ends of the ALD with no signatures of T symmetry breaking The most remarkable of the KFF state is that, in the presence of broken inversion symmetry, it supports nonreciprocal spin supercurrent in both bulk superconductor and JJ. In contrast to nonreciprocal charge transport in SC systems which requires breaking both inversion and T symmetry, nonreciprocal SC spin transport only requires breaking inversion symmetry. This is because the spin current operator is invariant under time-reversal, such that systems with positive and negative spin current are unrelated by the T operation. This is true regardless of whether the system respects the T symmetry or not, making it free of the constraint by the Onsager relation. 10 and ∆ ∥ = 0.169. The normal region has t N = t L = t R = 1 as defined in Appendix. D. (f) The total free energy at the corresponding values of N s in (a-e), showing various junction states labelled by 0, 0 ′ , 0 ′ -π π π ′ , π π π ′ and π π π determined by the distribution of the (local) minima at φ = 0 and π. The charge current I e (φ) in (a-e) vanishes at both φ = 0 and π, the minima of the free energy in (f). We thus propose a novel SC spin diode effect as a potential new frontier for using spins to make dissipationless electronic devices in SC spintronics. While future work is clearly needed which is outside the scope of the current paper, we point out that the unique properties of the KFF state make it plausible for possible realizations in JJs consisting of a ferromagnetic barrier. The exchange field of the barrier favors spintriplet pairing and has very little effect on the critical current of equal-spin triplet pairing such as in the KFF state, resulting in the slow decay of the critical current with increasing barrier length. Both effects have been demonstrated experimentally In order to derive the expression for the spin current, let's consider the free energy density of the KFF state at finite temperature T, which is given as with The current operator for each spin species in the system studied is defined as Next, from Eq. B3 we have and then we further have Then the current for each spin species can be calculated as where f (x) = (1 + e x/T ) -1 is the Fermi distribution function. Here, the operator ĵσ is the density current, from which we can define the charge current operator as ĵe = e( ĵ↑ + ĵ↓ ) and the operator for the spin current carrying spin polarization in z direction as ĵs = ħ 2 ( ĵ↑ -ĵ↓ ). Therefore, we can conveniently define the unit for the charge and spin current as e ħ and 1, so that both currents can be written in a similar format. We finally arrive at the expression for the spin current with spin up polarization as This means the ground state with the optimized value of Q = Q 0 does not carry any net spin current as expected, since ∂ Q Ω(∆ ∥ , Q 0 , T ) = 0, and when a spin current j s is applied to the KFF state, the state with a different value of Q, satisfying j s (Q) = j s is realized. Then the critical spin current for the positive and negative directions are determined by the maximum and minimum values of j s (Q) sustained by the superconducting state, which can be defined as j s,c+ = max Q [ j s (Q)] and j s,c-= min Q [ j s (Q)]. Moreover, due to the presence of T symmetry, ), such that the charge current j c (Q) = σ j σ always vanishes in the KFF state as expected and j s (Q) = σ σ and from Eq. 17 and the T symmetry, we have the free energy density at zero temperature as which leads to the expression for the spin current as We can easily see that when k sin k = 0. Therefore, the ground state is characterized by the momentum , which is also consistent with the Fermi surface of the noninteracting Hamiltonian, where the electrons around the two Fermi points k f σ,± within the same spin species pair together, giving rise to a finite Cooper pair momentum Q 0 . We numerically calculate the zero temperature free energy as well as the current density as shown in Fig. To study the transport properties of the Josephson chain, we consider the system consisting of two superconductors with KFF order sandwiching a normal metal in between as shown in Fig. describe the two SC regions on the left and right sides, describes the normal metal region in the middle and with ε n the n-th eigenvalue for H Jc at the phase bias φ and f (ε) the Fermi distribution function. Next, we demonstrate the dependence of the relative phase difference on the length of the superconducting region N s . Let us consider a simpler case with only nearest neighbor hopping on the superconducting region. We first perform a local gauge transformation We can see that H N , H S NL and H S NR are unchanged in the new basis, and if we further use the relation for the KFF state Q = 2θ α , the phase factors e iσ( Q 2 -θ α ) of the hopping t α in Eq. D8, D9 disappear, and H S L and H S R then describe the spin degenerate p-wave Kitaev chains with superconducting phase φ and -σQ(N s -1), which means H Jc (φ) describes the Josephson chain consisting of two spin degenerate p-wave Kitaev chains with phase bias φ σ = φ + σQ(N s -1) for spin species σ. If we further assume the Josephson current for the Josephson chain consisting of two spin degenerate p-wave Kitaev chains with phase bias φ as I 0 (φ) which is identical for the two spin species due to the spin degeneracy, we can then immediately get the Josephson current for each spin species as I σ (φ) = I 0 (φ + σQ(N s -1)), i.e., the Josephson current I σ (φ) is shifted from the current of the transformed junction I 0 (φ) by a phase σQ(N s -1) (mod 2π) so that the relative phase difference of the current between the two spin species is δφ = 2σQ(N s -1) (mod 2π). We verify this relation numerically in Fig. with Diagonalizing h k , and considering the relation ε k↑ = ε -k↓ = ε k = -2t α cos(k -θ α ) -2t 2 cos(2k) owing to the T symmetry, we can get Then the free energy density at zero temperature Ω(∆ ⊥ , φ ⊥ ) can be calculated as E5) with Θ(x) the Heaviside step function. Therefore, for a given value of φ ⊥ , the order parameter ∆ ⊥ can be determined self-consistently by minimizing Ω(∆ ⊥ , φ ⊥ ) with respect to ∆ ⊥ , leading to the self-consistent equation The value of φ ⊥ can be further determined by minimizing Ω(∆ ⊥ , φ ⊥ ) with respect to φ ⊥ , which is equivalent to have ∂ φ ⊥ Ω(∆ ⊥ , φ ⊥ ) = 0. From Eq. E4 and Eq. E5, we have sin(2k + 2φ ⊥ ) E k dk (E7) If we further consider the case with t 2 = 0, then we have Apparently, when φ ⊥ = nπ 2 -θ α with integer n, the denominator of the integral is even in k while the numerator sin(2k) is odd in k, so that this integral vanishes, which means Ω(∆ ⊥ , φ ⊥ ) reaches extremum when φ ⊥ = nπ 2 -θ α and which one (odd n or even n) is the minimum depends on the details of the parameters. We note that when the free energy reaches a minimum at φ ⊥ = π 2 -θ α , the energy spectrum becomes E k-(φ ⊥ -π 2 ),± = ± (-2t α cos k -μ) 2 + 4V 2 2 ∆ 2 ⊥ sin 2 k which is identical to the spectrum of the KFF state if V 1 = V 2 .