We study Multiple Andreev Reflections in long diffusive superconductor(S)-normal metal(N)superconductor junctions with low-transparency interfaces. Assuming strong thermalization in the weak link we calculate the current-voltage dependence I(V ). At intermediate temperatures, ε Th T ∆, the current is dominated by noncoherent multiple Andreev reflections and is obtained analytically. The results are generalized to a ferromagnetic junction. We find that the exchange field produces a non-trivial splitting of the subharmonic gap structure. This effect relies on thermalization and vanishes in SFS junctions with no energy relaxation in the weak link. Andreev reflection (AR) is the process of an electron reflecting off a superconductor as a hole while the superconducting condensate gains an extra Cooper pair Multiple Andreev Reflections (MAR) is the mechanism behind the subharmonic gap structure (SGS) of current-voltage characteristic (CVC) I(V ) of a biased SNS junction While the idea of MAR is relatively simple, calculation of the current in real systems proves complicated. The sequence of Andreev reflections at alternating NS interfaces outlined above only works in a ballistic link with transparent NS interfaces. This was precisely the model initially proposed in Ref. 4. Normal scattering mixes up this simple picture and produces complicated interference between different trajectories. This is furthermore complicated by the time dependence of the Andreev reflection amplitude r A ∝ exp iφ(t) where φ(t) is the superconducting phase. On the other hand, for a diffusive FIG. weak link with strong disorder (the so-called dirty limit, τ imp ∆ 1), one can take advantage of Usadel equations 5 to describe the disorder-averaged behavior of the system. The proximity effect penetrates N up to the coherence length ξ = D/ε with diffusion constant D. Therefore in long junctions with L D/∆ MAR is incoherent. The SGS in this limit has been calculated in Ref. 6. In short junctions MAR is coherent and has been observed 7 and studied semi-numerically All the above cases imply the absence of inelastic scattering. This is essential to the equivalent circuit method developed in Ref. 6 which relies on the conservation of energy of a quasiparticle in between Andreev reflection events. The presence of inelastic events adds another layer of complexity to the problem. Ref. 9 analytically studied SINIS junctions with strong thermalization focusing on high temperature k B T ε Th and low voltages eV ε Th , where ε Th ≡ D/L 2 is the Thouless energy. In recent years MAR in Josephson junctions with exotic weak links have been studied such as topological materials FIG. In this work we focus on MAR in long diffusive SI-NIS and SIFIS junctions, as presented on Fig. The system consists of a normal metal link with length L much greater than D/∆ (here and below we adopt units = e = k B = 1) between two voltage-biased superconducting leads. We assume a symmetric junction, i.e. the SIN-interfaces have the same resistance R SN = r R N where R N is the resistance of the normal region. In order to resolve an SGS temperature T S has to be much smaller than ∆. We also require T S ε Th . This will allow us to neglect electric potential effects within the weak link. In addition this suppresses coherent MAR, leaving only noncoherent MAR contributions in the current. To describe the system microscopically, we follow Ref. 9, using Usadel equation on disorder-averaged semiclassical Green's function Ǧ(t 1 , t 2 , r) which is a matrix in Keldysh space with components Ǧ11 = ĜR , Ǧ22 = ĜA , Ǧ12 = ĜK , Ǧ21 = 0. Here Ĝi are themselves matrices in particle-hole space. In mixed representation (t = t1+t2 2 ; τ = t 1 -t 2 ), the Usadel equation takes the following form in the normal region (x is measured in units of L). (1) The • means time convolution, which after Fourier transform over τ to ε takes the form Here σi denote σi = 1 K ⊗ τi with Pauli matrices τi acting in particlehole space. The electric potential φ -(t 1 , t 2 ) = φ(t 1 )φ(t 2 ) obeys the electroneutrality condition φ(t) = π 4 Tr G K (t, t) Usadel equation ( We parametrize the Keldysh component ĜK via matrix distribution function ĥ: ĜR ĜK = ĜR • ĥĥ • ĜA (3b) In the bulk of the superconducting leads the Green's functions ǦS is given by ĥS In addition the Green's function satisfies the normalization condition ĜR(A) • ĜR(A) = 1 and the general symmetry relation between advanced and retarded functions: ĜA = -τ 3 ĜR † τ3 . We can neglect the inverse proximity effect due to the assumed low transparency of the interfaces. Therefore the pairing potential ∆(x) and Green's function Ǧ(x) in the superconducting leads retain their bulk values near the N S-interfaces and Ǧright,left in our boundary conditions can be replaced with bulk Green's function of the corresponding superconducting leads. To account for the voltage drops at the NS interfaces in our system we perform a gauge transform on the equilibrium Green's function of Eqs. ( The electrical current is given by the general relation 16 The conductivity σ N takes into account both electron spin projections. Coefficient L -1 in Eq. (5b) appears due to our use of a dimensionless variable x. In this paper we solve Usadel equation ( -1 should be sufficiently large γ r -2 ). Physically, this inequality means that particles spend enough time in the weak link to thermalize, which justifies our choice of zeroth-order approximation. In the normal region we following Ref. 9's notations, parameterizing the Green's function: Normalization condition then takes form One can see, that corrections to the regular Green's functions g are of a higher order in tunnel parameter r -1 than anomalous Green's function f 1,2 . Therefore, we solve Usadel equation on anomalous components, and corrections to the regular part are subsequently derived from the normalization condition. Adopting τ -approximation for collision integral ǏSt and taking into account suppression of electric potential φ - (see Appendix B for more details), we can write down the Usadel equation and boundary conditions for f R 1,2 expanded up to the leading order in r -1 For the validity of linearization, which implies f R 1,2 (x, ε, t) 1, we must restrict applicability of this theory to certain energies: |∆ -|ε|| ε Th /r with auxiliary functions u(ε), v(ε): These results allow us to obtain corrections of the second order in r -1 to the regular Green's function from the normalization condition Eq. ( Here we use following shorthand notation: In the second order in r -1 the Usadel equation (8a) remains linear (corrections to the linearized Usadel equation are third-order in r -1 ), and to obtain second-order approximation to the anomalous Green's function f R(A) 1,2 , we expand boundary conditions (2) up to the second order in r -1 . Near the right boundary this expansion gives Here upper(lower) sign corresponds to f R 1,(2) . To formulate the left boundary condition, one should change the sign of the square bracket and change V to -V . Near the right boundary the solution takes the following form: Minus sign in the r.h.s. of the relation (13b) appears due to the definition of the regular bulk Green's function (4b). First non-vanishing corrections to the distribution function are of the second order in r -1 . We parametrize ĥ = 1h 0 + τ3 h 3 , and taking traces Tr [τ 3 • ] , Tr [ • ], of the Usadel equation and boundary conditions. This helps separate equations on h 0 , h 3 and yields: Here we once again neglected the term related to electric potential φ -. Due to the symmetry of the boundary conditions, solutions of Eq. (14a) take form of a Fourier series with 3 components presented below (explicit expressions for the coefficients are found in Appendix C): Other harmonics in h 0,3 (t) are of higher order in r -1 . Current, determined by Usadel equation, has a constant value across the system and can be calculated at any point. It is convenient to evaluate the expression (5b) near the right superconductor, where we can make use of boundary conditions. This trick allows us to obtain the current in the order r -(n+1) with Green's function only calculated up to the order r -n . Calculated this way, the leading term in the current takes form Here R Σ = 2R SN + R N ≈ 2R SN is the resistance of junction, and δh 1,2 = h S,± -h (0) . In the limit of low temperatures T S ∆ this integral can be evaluated, leading to the familiar square-root voltage-current relation Here θ(x) is Heaviside theta function. To observe an SGS in I(V ) we need to go to higher order in 1/r. Applying the same procedure to the first order corrections to Green's function, we obtain relation for the first-order correction of the current I(t). hs + J + e 2iV t + J (1) FIG. h , (b) J (2) Σ ≡ 8RΣI Σ , here ∆ = 30, ε Th = 1/8, γ = 0.1, r = 40 Here J (1) i represent various integrals which are explicitly listed in Appendix D (except for J (1) 0 which is given below). All terms in the square brackets depend on time, which suggests they refer to coherent MAR and should be negligible (time dependence can only emerge from a dependence on superconducting phase difference, which in turn implies coherence). This is indeed the case: all of them contain v(ε) which is exponentially small at energies ε ε Th , while J (1) 0 contains u(ε) which does not contain exponential smallness. Thus, the only remaining term is contributes to relatively small subgap current (see Fig. g , J (2) f represent rather cumbersome integrals which are presented explicitly in Appendix D). The three terms correspond to contributions produced from including second-order corrections to h respectively. Numerical computations, presented on Fig. (2) h is the term responsible for sharp features in the voltage dependence. At voltages close to 2∆/3 this term exhibits square-root behavior (see Fig. FIG. h , here ∆ = 30, ε Th = 1/8, γ = 0.1, r = 40 and Te = TS = 0. We associate the square-root feature at V ≈ Notice that J (2) h in Eq.( This limit corresponds to the super-thermalized limit where a particle thermalizes before it travels the length We would like to note here, that this way of evaluating integrals, corresponding to a total current, should be corrected for contributions of the third order of r -1 , because multiplication of BCS peculiarities produce nonlogarithmical divergence of integrand, therefore Green's function with energies ε ≈ ∆ should be evaluated more precisely. We now turn to the SIFIS junction. We assume a homogenous exchange field h ex in the ferromagnetic link. Spin projection along h ex is then conserved in the system so that the two spin subbands can be considered independently. The exchange field is incorporated into Usadel equation (1) by formally replacing 22 ε with ε ± h ex where the sign corresponds to spin and h ex = |h ex | is measured in energy units. Since the exchange field is only present in the weak link (but not in the S leads), the substitution ε → ε ± h ex must only be made in functions pertaining to the weak link: κ ε → κ ε±hex and ε → ε ± h ex within the distribution function h A numerical comparison of different contributions to the SIFIS current is presented on Fig. (2) h at V ∼ ∆, (1) 0 , (d) d dV J (2) Σ , here ∆ = 30, ε Th = 1/8, γ = 0.1, r = 40 From relations (23) we see that the splitting is linear in h ex but the coefficients vary between peaks. This is somewhat expected, because the exchange field shifts energy bands as a whole. We present comparison of the results of low-temperature numerical computations via Eq. (D2a) and asymptotic expansions (23) on Fig. Our results for the SINIS junction agree with the established MAR rules: the SGS exhibits singularities at voltages that are fractions of 2∆, i,e, 2∆/n. This fits the diagram pictured on Fig. However, once we add exchange field to the picture and apply the same interpretation to the SIFIS case this energy-counting scheme starts contradicting out results. Suppose we transport a number of Cooper pairs across the junction. The energy released is still precisely 2V per Cooper pair, even with an exchange field to the weak link. The electron energy is also just V and travelling through a ferromagnetic region does not change it. Therefore we must conclude that the SGS grid must remain unchanged, i.e. we still have 2∆/n. Our results Eqs.( In the strong thermalization regime considered in the present paper, the weak link should be treated as a reservoir in its own right: in the zeroth order approximation it supplies particles according to a thermal distribution function -just like a lead does. Therefore, we should not track the adventures of a quasiparticle that enters the weak link from one lead with the quest to escape into the other lead. Instead, we start with a particle that lives on the Fermi surface in N as illustrated on Fig. The SGS structure in the thermalized case can also be understood from analyzing the distribution function. In the zeroth order, i.e. in the limit of disconnected leads, r → ∞, electron occupation numbers in N obey a perfect Fermi distribution h (0) . If we attach leads via tunneling junctions, dissipative current will be able to flow from N to S, provided there are electrons with ε > ∆-V /2. Such electrons can be activated thermally, but this is an exponentially weak contribution. Alternatively, higher energy can be achieved via AR. Occasional AR happening at the interfaces cause a correction to the distribution function: there are now some particles within the (0, V ) window of energies. The amount of such particles is small in 1/r since it requires tunneling to occur, however unlike thermal activation there is no exponential smallness. Some of these particles manage to undergo another AR before energy relaxation gets them. Thus there is another window of energies, (V, 2V ) where occupation numbers are even smaller and given by the next order in perturbation theory in 1/r. This MAR activation mechanism provides us with electrons with energies high enough to enter a superconductor, contributing to current. We can recognize this physics in our calculations. In Eq. ( The CVC observed in the ferromagnetic Josephson junction in Ref. 14 has been demonstrated to be exchange-field sensitive. If we assume the measured to be MAR-related then the system has to be in the thermalized regime following our results. At the same time our calculations, along with theory existing for other cases (ballistic transparent, diffusive with no relaxation etc) suggest that features representing lower MAR numbers n are more pronounced than higher numbers. For example the features at ∆ and 2∆/3 are stronger than those at ∆/2, 2∆/5 etc. However, analyzing the CVC on Fig. To conclude we have calculated I(V ) in long diffusive SINIS and SIFIS junctions with strong thermalization at intermediate temperatures, ε Th T ∆. We found a subharmonic gap structure which exhibits splitting in the presence of an exchange field h ex , with the splitting proportional to the voltage: MAR-related features are seen at V n± = (∆ ± h ex )/n. We have shown that strong thermalization is essential to the field-induced splitting and that no splitting would happen in junctions with weak energy relaxation. Another striking difference is the apparent suppression of even MAR series in the SGS by thermalization. From the form of coefficients A (2) n we determine that for applicability of perturbation theory relation h (0) h (2) 0,3 has to be satisfied. This translates to γr Below we present time-dependent contributions to the total current in the first order of r -1 , which are mentioned in Eq. (18). Here the term J hs corresponds to a contribution, dependent on distribution function of the superconducting leads h S,1 , h S,2 : J Next we present explicit expression of each contribution to the second order correction to the current I 