Oxide-supported single-atom catalysts are commonly modelled as a metal atom substituting surface cation sites in a low-index surface. Adatoms with dangling bonds will inevitably coordinate molecules from the gas phase, and adsorbates such as water can affect both stability and catalytic activity. Here, we use scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), noncontact atomic force microscopy (ncAFM), and x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) to show that high densities of single Rh adatoms are stabilized on α-Fe2O3(11 02) in the presence of 2 × 10 -8 mbar of water at room temperature, in marked contrast to the rapid sintering observed under UHV conditions. Annealing to 50 °C in UHV desorbs all water from the substrate leaving only the OH groups coordinated to Rh, and high-resolution ncAFM images provide a direct view into the internal structure. We provide direct evidence of the importance of OH ligands in the stability of single atoms, and argue that their presence should be assumed when modelling SAC systems. Understanding how metals bind to oxide supports has long been a goal of catalysis research. The issue is particularly pressing in the field of single-atom catalysis (SAC), because the coordination environment of the active site not only decides whether the metal atoms will be stable against thermal sintering, but also strongly affects the catalytic properties. Since transmission electron microscopy (TEM) studies usually assign the isolated adatoms to be located in cation-like sites relative to the bulk structure, At low Rh coverage, the features are occasionally mobile, as can be seen in consecutive STM images taken from the same area. In the four frames shown in Fig. The assumption of two OH groups coordinated to each Rh adatom fits with the OH contribution in XPS (Figure Overall, our data show that single Rh adatoms are stabilized on α-Fe2O3(11 02) in the presence of water. Interestingly, it appears that two different stabilization mechanisms are at work depending on the water coverage. When Rh is deposited, a complete monolayer of water is likely present on the surface. Under these conditions, we find that the adatoms are mobile, but do not agglomerate, indicating thermodynamic stabilization, i.e., single atoms are energetically more favourable than dimers. Using the direct ncAFM imaging of the adsorbed Rh(OH)x complex (Figure The switching of apparent height observed in STM [Figure In addition to stabilizing the adatoms in an active geometry, the presence of water may also directly contribute to reaction pathways, as proposed for low-temperature CO oxidation on the Au/TiO2 system. The high XPS core-level binding energy observed here for Rh 3d [Figure 3(b)] indicates that the electronic structure of the adatoms is also strongly modified by their coordination to water. Clearly, any change to the Rh oxidation state would also affect its interaction with reactants, affecting both infrared frequencies and reaction barriers. A similar effect was previously proposed for Rh adatoms interacting with OH groups on anatase TiO2. Room-temperature STM and XPS results were collected in a UHV setup consisting of a preparation chamber (base pressure < 10 -10 mbar) and an analysis chamber (base pressure < 5 × 10 -11 mbar). This system is equipped with a nonmonochromatic Al Kα X-ray source (VG), a SPECS Phoibos 100 analyser for XPS, and an Omicron μ-STM. The STM was operated in constant-current mode using electrochemically etched W tips. STM images were corrected for distortion and creep of the piezo scanner, as described in ref. Noncontact AFM results were acquired in a separate vacuum setup using an Omicron LT-STM equipped with a QPlus sensor and an in-vacuum preamplifier. Throughout this paper, we define a monolayer as the number of Fe atoms in the surface layer. 1 ML of Rh is therefore defined as two Rh atoms per α-Fe2O3(11 02)-(1 × 1) unit cell, which corresponds to a density of 7.3 × 10 14 atoms cm -2 . The evaporation rate was always calibrated in UHV, even when the deposition was carried out in a background of H2O, which results in errors in the actual coverages. The nominal coverages given in this work are not corrected for these errors and probably overestimate the Rh coverage (see Fig. The experiments were conducted on single-crystalline, 0.03 at.% Ti-doped hematite films grown homoepitaxially by pulsed laser deposition on natural α-Fe2O3(11 02) samples (SurfaceNet GmbH, 10 × 10 × 0.5 mm 3 , <0.3° miscut), as described in detail elsewhere. Figure 