Electrical manipulation of spins is essential to design state-of-the-art spintronic devices and commonly relies on the spin current injected from a second heavy-metal material. The fact that chiral antiferromagnets produce spin current inspires us to explore the magnetization switching of chiral spins using self-generated spin torque. Here, we demonstrate the electric switching of noncollinear antiferromagnetic state in Mn3Sn by observing a crossover from conventional spin-orbit torque to the self-generated spin torque when increasing the MgO thickness in Ta/MgO/Mn3Sn polycrystalline films. The spin current injection from the Ta layer can be controlled and even blocked by varying the MgO thickness, but the switching sustains even at a large MgO thickness. Furthermore, the switching polarity reverses when the MgO thickness exceeds around 3 nm, which cannot be explained by the spin-orbit torque scenario due to spin current injection from the Ta layer. Evident current-induced switching is also observed in MgO/Mn3Sn and Ti/Mn3Sn bilayers, where external injection of spin Hall current to Mn3Sn is negligible. The inter-grain spin-transfer torque induced by spin-polarized current explains the experimental observations. Our findings provide an alternative pathway for electrical manipulation of non-collinear antiferromagnetic state without resorting to the conventional bilayer structure. Recently Mn3X (X = Sn, Ge, Ga, Rh, Ir, Pt) based non-collinear antiferromagnets (AFMs) have attracted significant attention For practical applications, it is important to prepare thin films using commonly available deposition techniques such as sputtering and demonstrate the possibility of electrical manipulation of the non-collinear AFM state, both of which have been reported by several groups recenly Here we demonstrate current-induced deterministic switching of AFM state in Ta/MgO/Mn3Sn/MgO/Ta multilayers in which the thickness of MgO is varied from 0 to 6 nm to control spin current injection from the Ta layer. Clear current-induced switching is observed at all MgO thickness investigated, and interestingly, the switching polarity reverses when the MgO layer is sufficiently thick (> ~ 3 nm). Our results demonstrate that there are two competing mechanisms causing the switching, one is the SOT from the spin current injected from the Ta layer and the other is the inter-grain spin-transfer torque (IGSTT) due to the spin current from neighbouring grains. Current-induced switching is also observed in samples with MgO or Ti seed layer, which further confirms the existence of self-generated spin current in Mn3Sn, in particular in the case of MgO seed layer, the top and bottom interfaces are symmetrical. We argue that, unlike ferromagnets, polycrystalline Mn3Sn possesses sharp domain walls defined by the grain boundaries due to large magnetocrystalline anisotropy in the kagome plane, which makes the IGSTT an efficient mechanism for manipulating the AFM state of individual crystallites. We corroborate our argument with the magnetic properties of polycrystalline Mn3Sn films and magneto-optical Kerr effect (MOKE) imaging of current-induced switching of the crystal grains. Furthermore, the removal of the thick HM layer that was used in previous studies significantly increases the anomalous Hall effect (AHE) signal by more than one order of magnitude, making it more appealing for energy-efficient device applications. Accurate control of grain size and its distribution may provide an effective knob to tune the switching characteristics that is more suitable for emerging applications such as neuromorphic computing. The current-induced switching experiments are performed on sputter-deposited multilayers (Fig. Before we conduct the current-induced switching experiments, we first characterize the structural, magnetic and transport properties of the multilayers. Figure . Here, M s is the total saturation magnetization, α i is the weightage of individual component, β i indicates how responsive each component is to an applied field, and H ci is the coercivity. The ± sign indicates the backward and forward sweeping curves, respectively. Figure Next, we study the transport properties by patterning the Mn3Sn stacks into Hall bar devices (Methods for details). Figure By fitting the longitudinal resistance as a function of tMn 3 Sn, we obtain the resistivity of Mn3Sn and Ta as 225.9 and 680.6 μΩ cm, respectively (see Supplementary Information S3). Using these values, we can calculate the anomalous Hall resistivity (ρ H ) and conductivity (σ H ) as a function of tMn 3 Sn, and the results are shown in Fig. Current-induced switching measurements are performed for Ta/MgO/Mn3Sn with different tMgO. Current pulses with a constant pulse width of 5 ms but varying amplitude are applied along the longitudinal direction, i.e., x-direction, of the Hall bar. In-between two adjacent writing pulses, the AFM state of Mn3Sn is read by current pulses with the same duration as that of the writing pulses but at a much smaller amplitude of 1 mA. Figure Figure The switching ratio, i.e., the ratio between the current and field switched Hall resistance, is shown in Fig. nm. The solid-line in Fig. we have also confirmed from temperature-dependent measurement that the switching only occurs in the temperature region in which Mn3Sn is in the non-collinear AFM phase (Fig. The low switching ratio suggests that the switching of Mn3Sn does not necessarily follow the two dominant mechanisms in SOT-based switching of HM/FM bilayers device. An in-plane field H x along the current direction is also applied to assist the switching. in Fig. The aforementioned results suggest that in addition to the external spin current from the Ta layer, there is another spin current source contributing to the spin dynamics of a particular grain in polycrystalline Mn3Sn, which is from neighbouring grains with misaligned spin sublattices. If we focus on a particular crystalline grain in Ta/MgO/Mn3Sn, the dynamics of the magnetization vector m ξ (ξ = A, B, C) of each kagome sublattice can be described by the Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert-Slonczewski (LLGS) equation ], where , γ and α are the gyromagnetic ratio and Gilbert damping constant, P i , I ci s i , and η i are the spin polarization/spin current angle of Mn3Sn or spin Hall angle (θ SH ) of Ta, charge current, spin polarization direction, and spin injection efficiency of i th spin current source which includes both the Ta layer and neighbouring Mn3Sn grains, respectively, M s and V are the magnetization and volume of the crystal grain to be switched, ħ is the reduced Planck constant, e is the electron charge, and H ξ,eff is the effective field which can be calculated from the magnetic energy density of the three sublattices With the approximated ground state, we now discuss qualitatively the effect of spin current by replacing m ξ in Eq. ( s i = A ∥ η HM θ SH I c,HM s HM . As revealed by previous studies Next, we consider case (ii), which consists of only a single-layer polycrystalline film. In this case, A ∥ ∑ η i P i I ci n i=1 s i only has the contributions from the neighbouring grains (to facilitate discussion, hereafter we refer the neighbouring grains as polarizer and the grains to be switched as analyzer). For ultrathin films, we may assume that there is only a single grain in the thickness direction. Furthermore, the average effects of spin current transverse to the charge current should be largely cancelled out based on symmetry considerations. Therefore, only longitudinal spin current or spin-polarized current is considered to possibly contribute to switching. For a collinear ferromagnet, the equilibrium polarization of spin-polarized current is generally parallel with the local magnetization direction. However, recent studies suggest that transverse polarization also exists (2020), ii) (1011), ( (note x and x ′ are in the same direction in this case) , will lead to magnetization switching due to the STT. The switching polarity should depend on the delicate balance of the spin-polarized current from neighbouring grains. On the other hand, in the configuration shown in Fig. As discussed earlier, the texture of polycrystalline Mn3Sn is well reflected in its M-H loop. From the decomposition of M-H curves as shown in Fig. In addition, as shown in Supplementary Information S2, the M-H loop for Ti(2)/Mn3Sn(60) is very similar to that of Ta/MgO(2)/Mn3Sn, at which sign reversal has not occurred yet, i.e., the switching polarity is the same for Ta/Mn3Sn, Ti/Mn3Sn, and Ta/MgO(2)/Mn3Sn. The XRD profiles and temperature dependent AHE of Mn3Sn in different structures further suggest that there are mostly group ii) and iii) grains in Ti/Mn3Sn (Supplementary Information S1 and S7). Therefore, the switching configurations in Fig. At this stage, however, a quantitative analysis of the switching polarity would be difficult considering the random distribution of the crystalline orientation of the grains. The polarizer (left grain) denotes the grain which provides spin-polarized current, whereas the analyzer (right grain) denotes the grain whose magnetic state is to be switched. j βγ α : spin current flows in β direction with a polarization along α, induced by a charge current in γ direction. The x ′ y ′ z ′ coordinate system is the local coordinate system attached to the polarizer such that x ′ , y ′ are always in the kagome plane, and z ′ is along the c-axis of the polarizer. Lastly, case (iii) is a combination of case (i) and (ii), which represents most of the experimental configurations including the Ta/MgO/Mn3Sn trilayers of present study when the MgO is thin. However, when the MgO is thick, we will have case (ii). The effects of the SOT (due to externally injected spin current) and STT (due to self-generated spin-polarized current) can either add up or partially cancel out, depending on the spin Hall angle of HM and crystallite orientations. In the present case, it seems that they cancel out partially at small tMgO due to opposite sign. This explains why the switching polarity reverses at large tMgO when the SOT effect is mostly suppressed. As mentioned above, from MOKE images for Ta(2)/MgO(4)/Mn3Sn (12) in Fig. Before we conclude, it is worth mentioning that the proposed mechanism is different from previous reports on magnetization switching of single layer FM or AFM which treat the single layer largely homogeneous in terms of the magnetic order parameter. The mechanisms proposed in these early works include spin current with spin polarization transverse to the magnetization The interface-related effect also fails to account for the negligible switching in substrate/Mn3Sn/MgO/Ta, as structural asymmetry is more prominent in this structure. Furthermore, previous study has excluded the interface effect in current-induced switching of Mn3Sn by inserting a Cu layer between Mn3Sn and heavy metal layer In conclusion, we have demonstrated that current-induced AFM state switching is possible in single-layer Mn3Sn polycrystalline films via the inter-grain spin-transfer torque. As it does not require a heavy metal layer, the current shunting effect is significantly suppressed, which leads to a large anomalous Hall signal. Our results shed light on the crucial role of IGSTT in current-driven dynamics of polycrystalline non-collinear AFMs, which reveals the presence of self-generated spin current in non-collinear AFM. The IGSTT may be used to realize devices such as inter-grain spin valve and tunnel junctions. We shall point out that the IGSTT has been studied before in a different context as a possible mechanism in magnetization reversal of heat-assisted magnetic recording, in which the magnetic grains are separated by oxide and the spin-polarized current is generated by heat gradient In addition, the joule heating effect has also been reported recently to play a crucial role in the switching behavior of Mn3Sn Sample preparation. The stacks, except the Ti layer, were deposited on Si/SiO2 (300 nm) substrates using magnetron sputtering with a base and working pressure of <1×10 -8 and 3×10 - Structural and magnetic characterizations. X-ray diffraction measurements were performed in a Rigaku X-ray diffractometer. A Cu-Kα X-ray was used in the diffractometer with a wavelength of 1.541 Å. The cross-sectional transmission electron microscopy imaging was performed using a JEOL JEM 2100F. TEM specimen was prepared using focused ion beam milling. The magnetic properties were characterized using Quantum Design MPMS3, with the resolution of <1×10 -8 emu. The in-plane magnetic field was generated by a pair of electromagnets. To enhance the contrast, the non-magnetic background was firstly subtracted. Afterwards, 10 repeated current pulses with amplitude larger than threshold current were injected to the long axis of Hall bar device. For current-sweeping measurement, a large negative current pulse was applied first to initialize the magnetic state. Then, positive current pulses with increasing amplitude from zero were injected. Same current range was used as the electrical measurement. Images were taken after each pulsed current injection.