Coherent thermal emission for a given polarization has been observed in many metamaterials with micro/nanostructures. A complete description of the thermal emission requires the full characterization of the spectral angular emissivity for all polarization states. Emissivity is typically obtained based on the equivalence between the absorptivity and emissivity according to Kirchhoff's law; however, such relation may be invalid for nonreciprocal media. More general approaches without the constrain of optical reciprocity are necessary when dealing with magneto-optical materials and magnetic Weyl semimetals. Here, a polarimetric analysis of thermal emission is carried out based on fluctuational electrodynamics. The Stokes parameters are obtained using coherency matrix for a multilayered system with anisotropic media, including nonreciprocal materials. The results demonstrate that thermal emission may be circularly or linearly polarized in different directions and frequencies. The findings are consistent with the statements of the modified Kirchhoff's law provided by several groups in recent years, and therefore, justify the appropriateness of both the direct and indirect methods. This study will help the design of desired thermal emitters for energy harvesting and thermal control. Traditionally, thermal radiation from solid materials is thought of as incoherent, broadband, and unpolarized; examples are incandescent lamps, hot plates, bricks, and even human bodies Spectral angular emissivity is commonly obtained by its equivalence to spectral angular absorptivity according to Kirchhoff's law. For an opaque object, since the absorptivity is related to the reflectance, the indirect method allows one to obtain the emissivity from the reflectance. However, as demonstrated recently, Kirchhoff's law does not hold for all thermal emitters, e.g., the nonreciprocal emitters made by a magneto-optical mate- * zhuomin.zhang@me.gatech.edu rial In this work, fluctuational electrodynamics is used as a direct approach to calculate thermal emission from multilayer structures where each layer may be isotropic or anisotropic (whether reciprocal or not) as long as it is nonmagnetic. Electromagnetic field is given in the form of coherency matrix by using fluctuation-dissipation theorem (FDT) with the help of dyadic Green's function (DGF). The coherency matrix is written as a function of a wave vector that corresponds to the direction of emission. To describe the polarization states, Stokes parameters are obtained according to the elements in the coherency matrix; and the polarized emissivities are deter-mined consequently. Several multilayered structures are designed and analyzed to predict the spectral, angular, and polarization-dependent emissivity. These examples are intended not only to demonstrate the methodology but also to explore exotic radiative properties enabled by anisotropic multilayered structures. Fluctuational electrodynamic is a powerful tool for calculating thermal radiation from a body in both the near field and far field. Consider a nonmagnetic medium in a vacuum with a tensorial form of relative permittivity ε ↔ . At thermal equilibrium with a temperature T , the induced electric field E(r, ω) in free space is expressed by the induced current density J(r , ω) in the medium with the help of the dyadic Green's function where r and r denote the locations of the resultant electric field and the source current density, respectively, ω is the angular frequency, i is the unit imaginary number, and μ 0 is the vacuum permeability. The correlation function of the electric field at location r 1 and r 2 is given by a double integration over the volume containing the current source where stands for ensemble averaging, a ⊗ b = ab T , * denotes complex conjugate, and † signifies conjugate transpose. The current density correlation function is given by FDT as Here, ε 0 is the vacuum permittivity, Θ(ω, T ) = ω/2 + ω/(exp( ω/k B T ) -1) is the mean energy of Planck's oscillator, and δ is a Dirac delta function. A factor 4 is multiplied to the expression since only positive frequencies are considered. Once the DGFs are calculated, the local energy density, optical intensity, and Poynting vector can all be evaluated While DGFs have been successfully applied in many studies dealing with isotropic media and relatively simple geometric structures, the evaluation of DGFs in Eqs. (1) and (2) for a medium with tensorial permittivity is mathematically intensive due to the complex dispersion relations. Only in special cases, such as with a uniaxial medium whose optic axis is aligned with one of the coordinates, DGFs that directly relate the current source and resultant field can be explicitly obtained This identity holds true for both reciprocal and nonreciprocal materials. Hence, the electric field correlation function at global equilibrium is reduced to where the subscript "ge" stands for global equilibrium. This relation and its similar forms are called the first kind of FDT that requires the system at global thermal equilibrium where the subscript "vac" represents vacuum. One can apply the similar approach to calculate near-field radiative heat transfer between many bodies at different temperatures As shown in Fig. waves where R is the axial variables, k is the wave vector projection onto the x-y plane given by k = k + k z ẑ , For propagating waves, k z is a real number. The DGF can also be decomposed according to Here, g ↔ denotes the DGF in the wave vector space that can be obtained based on Fresnel's coefficients as briefly derived and expressed in Appendix A. The coherency matrix of the emission generated by the medium in the vector space is written as The components in Eq. ( where φ and θ are the azimuthal angle and the zenith angle in the spherical coordinates that correspond to the direction of k, respectively. In the new coordinates, only the x -and y -components of the electric field are nonzero. Hence, the 3 × 3 coherency matrix in Eq. ( The Stokes parameters and the Poincaré sphere are frequently used in the polarimetric analysis of electromagnetic waves. An important property of Stokes parameters is the additivity Though the unit of correlation functions in Eq. ( Here, j denotes the polarization of the electric field including s-polarized ) is the first Stokes parameter of the blackbody emission. Since thermal emission of the blackbody is unpolarized, a factor of 1 2 is included in the optical intensity of blackbody to represent any particular polarization. The Stokes parameter or optical intensity of the blackbody is derived in Appendix C and the result is expressed as Combining Eqs. ( Once the Stokes parameters are obtained, the polarized emissivities can be solved using the identity where avg is the average emissivity given by the mean value of two emissivities for any orthogonal polarizations. It is well known that uniaxial materials can be used to achieve polarization conversion such as waveplates and selective transmission such as polarizers For partially polarized emissions, Stokes parameters can be broken down into a completely polarized vector and an unpolarized vector, which are mutually indepen-dent where S pol = S 2 1 + S 2 2 + S 2 3 and S unp = S 0 -S pol . The degree of polarization (DoP) is defined by To investigate the angular dependence of the thermal emission from the structure, the emissivities are plotted as a function of φ, at θ = 52 • and ω = 1587 cm -1 , in Fig. One may speculate that the emissivity is unpolarized. However, a sharp difference can be found between 45 • and 135 • at these azimuthal angles, which implies that the emissivity is largely 135 • -polarized. In fact, emissivity can be largely polarized in any orientations depending on the azimuthal angle. Although an intuitive picture of thermal emission is provided by the polarized emissivities as shown in Fig. Unlike the polarized emissivities, the average emissivities represent the magnitude of the polarized and unpolarized portions. Figure The unpolarized portion of the emission can be sufficiently depicted by a single parameter unp . However, to fully specify the polarized portion, one needs to obtain the characteristic parameters of a polarization ellipse as shown in Fig. Figure Since the material is reciprocal, the angular emissivity must equal the angular absorptivity in the antiparallel direction according to Kirchhoff's law. This is not always true for nonreciprocal systems, as to be discussed in the following. Nonreciprocal emitters made of, for example, magnetooptical materials with asymmetric permittivity tensors break down the Lorentz reciprocity and consequently violate Kirchhoff's law In energy harvesting applications, efficiency is limited by Kirchhoff's law since a high absorption indicates a high emission. Nonreciprocal emission/absorption is required to break the constrain and further increase the efficiency which suggests that average emissivity and absorptivity in the direction symmetric to surface normal are always equal. In contrast, the relationship between angular emissivity and angular absorptivity for one polarization could be nonexistent. Guo et al. Here, the analysis of nonreciprocal structures and justification of modified Kirchhoff's laws are carried out based on two nonreciprocal nanostructures as illustrated in Fig. To begin with, the room-temperature emission of bulk WSM shown in Fig. The contour plot of the emissivities and the absorptivities in the antiparallel direction of the hBN-WSM-Ag 7(f)-7(i)). For such kind of thermal emitters, it is impossible to obtain the emissivity by merely referring to its absorptivity. However, in terms of the average emissivity and absorptivity as shown in Figs. 7(e) and 7(j), one can relate them by using Eq. ( Emission characterization of the hBN-WSM-Ag structure needs a total of four independent Stokes parameters or their derived parameters such as ψ, χ, DoP, and avg . Contour plots of these parameters as functions of θ and φ are displayed in Fig. Polarimetric analysis can be used, for instance, to help design the structure with maximum polarized emission to fulfill the functionality of a nonreciprocal energy harvesting system. The analysis on ψ and χ reveals the conditions for the desired polarization ellipse such as linear or circular polarization. However, it does not necessarily lead to a largely polarized emission due to the exclusion of the unpolarized portion. In contrast, the DoLP and DoCP are directly related to the linearly or circularly polarized emission, as shown in Fig. Generally speaking, the polarimetric analysis based on these parameters (ψ, χ, DoCP, DoLP, and avg ) provides a further understanding of the polarization state. Though only a few selected examples are shown, it is expected that such analysis and understanding will help design polarization-and direction-selective nonreciprocal thermal emitters. Fluctuational electrodynamics is applied as a direct approach to predict and analyze thermal emission from multilayered structures consisting of both reciprocal and nonreciprocal anisotropic materials. The direct calculation yields identical results as with the indirect method based on the modified Kirchhoff's law, therefore validating the appropriateness of both the direct and indirect methods. The Stokes parameters are introduced in the framework of fluctuational electrodynamics to carry out the polarimetric analysis. Characteristic parameters such as degree of polarization, rotation angle, ellipticity angle, etc., are used for describing the polarization state. Thermal emission from an intertwisted hBN bilayer on a fused silica substrate, a bulk WSM, a hBN/WSM/Ag structure are modeled. The results show that the emission could be circularly or linearly polarized in different emission directions. Furthermore, this work demonstrates that the preceding characteristic parameters can provide (i) sufficient information for polarization characterization and (ii) convenience in the designing process of the nonreciprocal emitters. This work will help the study of directional thermal emission and polarization control.