A new method is proposed for constructing energy density functionals which include a nonlocal dependence on the density gradients. This method is used to construct functionals for kinetic energy which is a nonlocal generalization of the Thomas-Fermi-Kirzhnits functional. The density functional theory (DFT) [l] is a powerful means for quantitative investigation of the properties of atoms, molecules, and solids. In the DFT, the total energy of the ground state of a system of electrons in the external potential Vext is described by the formula where (r) is the electron density; EH is the Hartree energy; Ts is the kinetic energy of interacting fermions with the same density (r); and Exc is the exchange-correlation energy. The DFT is normally used in a Kohn-Sham formulation [l], in which TS[] is calculated precisely, through solution of the effective single-electron Schroedinger equation for noninteracting fermions. This is associated with the absence of sufficiently precise explicit functionals for TS The following are the known expressions for TS[]: 1. The Thomas-Fermi func- The Weizsacker-Kirzhnits functionalT W [ρ] = (λ/8) ∫(∇ρ/ ρ) 2 ρdr, T TF + T W . The coefficient λ in Weizsacker's original work is equal to one. As Kirzhnits showed in The author examines these functionals from the standpoint of the linear response theory. The following relation is known: χ -1 is the inverse electron susceptibility. In particular, with an almost Uniform electron gas [l] 17 © 1988 by Allerton Press, Inc. where 0 is the normal "Lindhard" susceptibility of noninteracting electrons and V0 is the Coulomb potential. Since 0 and  for a uniform gas are well known, the requirement (3) places substantial limitations on the type of the functionals TS and Exc' While there 'arefunctionals for Exc which satisfy (3) with reasonable precision [l], for TS there are essentially none. In fact, in the momentum space where k F = (3π 2 ) 1/3 . At the same time, according to (3), this value must be equal to χ 0 -1 (k), i.e., In a range of k →0, (4) coincides with (5) for λ=1/9, while λ=1 is the case in a range of k → ∞. It is apparent that the Kirzhnitz-Weizsacker functional cannot correctly describe an almost uniform electron gas. There is an attempt in the literature where the function w is selected from condition (3). In the author's opinion, this method is not physically natural. It is desirable to preserve the appearance similar to (4) with consideration, however, of the relation λ(k), according to (5). It is easy to see that selection (8) where C = 1/40 ensures good precision of fulfillment of (3). It may be expected that by preserving the general structure of the first gradient correction and being precise within an almost uniform density, formula (8) will be sufficiently precise for actual systems as well. In The maximal values of λ here are λ W = 1 and λ K = -1/3. As in the three-dimensional case, here it is convenient to use ρ̅ √ρ(r)ρ(r′) as ρ̅ ; (9) was tested in a system of electrons in a potential box, in a harmonic potential, and for two electrons in a o-shaped well. The results are presented in Table 