The electrical machinery core is formed with a ferromagnetic material that offers high magnetic properties. As ferromagnetic materials have high relative magnetic permeability, they are important in the formation of electromagnetic device cores. Conventional subtractive and powder metallurgy methods for fabrication electrical machineries offer significant core losses and reduce magnetic flux density and magnetic permeability. With the advancement of technology, the limitation of the traditional process can be overcome by using the additive manufacturing process. Hence, this paper proposes a 3D printable model of two types of single-phase transformers, referred to as E-I shape and U-I shape transformers respectively. Possibilities of designing the electrical machinery part which has a ferromagnetic core are investigated. The efficiency of the transformers is evaluated in terms of magnetic flux density distribution and volumetric loss density based on the results of a large number of Finite element simulation methods under various operating situations on COMSOL. The performance of various ferromagnetic materials such as Soft Iron (Fe) and Ferrite (Fe2O3) on the transformer core is evaluated. This analysis reveals that if U-I shaped transformer can be made from 3D printing, it will be the best feasible structure for higher operating frequency. Energy is required in every aspect of our life and its demand is increasing day by day. So, the conversion of energy is needed to fulfill the energy demand.Electric machineries, such as electric motors, electric generators, transformers, and other machines that use electromagnetic forces, are widely used for energy conversion. The cores of electric machines are traditionally made using subtractive techniques and the powder metallurgy process. In the powder metallurgy process, fine metal powders are compacted in suitable dies, and sintering is used to create metal parts. Subtractive manufacturing procedures remove material from a roughly shaped initial part to create the final shape and dimensions. Magnetic cores of electric machines have been typically manufactured by stacking electric steel laminations using subtractive processes Laminations made with traditional methods for extremely efficient electric motors still have significant losses. Eddy current loss is generally proportional to the thickness of the lamination in general Additive manufacturing (AM) or 3D printing technologies are considered a crucial component of the industry 4.0 revolution, due to their improved capabilities above traditional manufacturing techniques. Fully 3D printed objects have been found to have several advantages over conventionally based manufacturing, such as it can be used to print thin-walled hollow parts with high electrical resistivity, complicated core designs may be realized, it has strong core loss reduction potential, and it can considerably lower fabrication costs Ferromagnetic materials are those whose dipoles align with each other in the presence of an external magnetic field. Ferromagnetic materials have high relative magnetic permeability, which is crucial in the development of electromagnetic device cores that work with high magnetic flux for optimum performance. In the previous study, Selective Laser melting (SLM), Binder jetting technology (BJT), Fused Deposition Modeling (FDM), and lamination object manufacturing (LOM) are the 3D printing technologies that have been used to build transformer, motor, and generator cores No researchers have shown the effect of 3D printable U-I and E-I shaped transformers on magnetic flux density and volumetric loss density based on FDM. In this study, U-I and E-I shaped transformer is designed by COMSOL Multiphysics. Then, the effect on magnetic flux density and volumetric loss density is simulated. An electrical machine converts mechanical energy into electrical energy or vice versa. Electric machineries, such as electric motors, electric generators, transformers, and other machines are widely used electric machineries in electrical engineering. Electrical motor application in the compression, drill machine, lathe machine, fans, refrigerator, crusher, pump, blower, and other machines. Radio, television, and telephone circuit used transformers, and for household purposes used distributed transformers The magnetic core of a core-type transformer is made up of laminations that form a rectangle-shaped frame. However, the entire amount of iron as well as the volume might be too enormous. Pooling a core enables decreasing the overall mass of iron. In such a balanced system, overall flow through all the core iron becomes zero as that's the composition from three balanced flows. A single-phase core type involves a larger magnetic core with two wound limbs(fig. A three-limb core is used to produce the core of a singlephase shell type transformer. This design improves the core's mechanical strength. It also improves the safety of windings against mechanical shocks from outside sources. In fig. For modeling the transformer, the commercial finite element program COMSOL Multiphysics® Version 5.6 is used. In engineering and mathematics, the finite element method (FEM) seems to be an extensively accepted methodology for numerically solving differential equations. The FEM is indeed a basic numerical strategy for solving partial differential equations which take into account two or three spatial variables. This is completed by creating a mesh of the object: a numerical domain for the solution, with a finite number of points, that would be accomplished via a specific space finite difference method within spatial dimensions. Materials utilized throughout this modeling would be those that help in a transformer; hence, we obtain three main materials i.e: Iron and Ferrite. Soft Iron. The iron is being used as just a ferromagnetic material for simulating the transformer, whose primary function is to network magnetic flux. Table Ferrite. The properties of Ferrite are shown in Table Relative permeability 2,00,000 4,000 Electrical Conductivity Relative permittivity 1 1 A parameter estimation study in COMSOL Multiphysics® can be used to estimate the values of inputs in a model. Parameter nodes are found under Global Definitions and can be used to create and define global parameters. There is always one parameter node accessible, and it cannot be moved or deleted. When arranging the parameters in numerous nodes, possibly with descriptive labeling, further parameter nodes can be added as needed. Any numerical solution to a problem, particularly one using finite elements, must begin with the design of a mesh depicting the field of inquiry. This stage is frequently delicate since the accuracy of finite element approximation is heavily dependent mostly on mesh structure.In the mesh analysis maximum element size is 5.25 mm and minimum element size is 0.225 mm from one node to another. Fig. In the Density of the magnetic flux profile, the magnetic field value is always at the saturation elbow. This could be owing to the presence of two additional flux return columns, which allow the magnetic field lines in the ferromagnetic circuit to travel freely. Here, B is distributed in the core from 7.08 ×10 -8 T to 21.1 T. Number of windings of the secondary coil in this transformer is higher than the primary coil. As Number of secondary coils windings and primary coils windings is 100 and 20. B is proportional to the number of windings. From this profile, higher values of B were found near the secondary coils. As U-I shaped laminated transformer has a higher air gap, it shows higher values of μ which means a higher B value than E-I shaped laminated transformer. As soft iron has a higher value of μ than Ferrite. B value is higher in the soft iron core of the U-I laminated transformer than that of the Ferrite core because B is proportional to the material's μ. Fig. Multiplying the volumetric loss density by the effective core volume generates a total core loss. As the volumetric loss density rises, the total core loss rises with it. Core loss is more due to total flux through the entire core. When the air gap of the transformer is increased, reducing the slope of the B/H loop, reducing inductance and μ. The air gap also prevents core saturation. Less hysteresis loss is represented by a smaller hysteresis loop area (B/H loop). For lower air gap, the loss is higher comparatively in E-I shaped transformer than U-I shaped laminated transformer. Because the core of a transformer is formed of soft iron magnetizing material, when a current passes through it, an alternating magnetic field is created, which causes a little current to flow through the core material again, increasing core losses. Total core loss is attained by multiplying the volumetric loss density by the effective core volume. As, with increasing Volumetric loss density, total core loss is also increased. The secondary coil loss profile shows a higher volumetric loss density. Other parts of the core loss are in the range from 3.88 × 10 -6 w/m 3 to 1 w/m 3 .One reason for having core loss is lower in U-I lamination type transformer is using frequency above 5 kHz as the model's parameter. When the transformer's air gap is raised, the slope of the B/H loop is reduced, lowering permeability and inductance. The air gap also keeps the core from becoming saturated. A smaller hysteresis loop area (B/H loop) indicates less hysteresis loss. So, another reason, for larger air gap loss is less comparatively in U-I shaped transformers than E-I shaped laminated transformers. This is because only half of the total flux flows in the core because of having a large air gap. As the transformer core of U-I lamination is made from soft iron magnetizing material, whenever a current flow around then an alternating magnetic field is produced that inures again small current to flow in the core material and increased the core losses than Ferrite transformer core. Organizer: Faculty of Mechanical Engineering, Dhaka University of Engineering & Technology (DUET), Gazipur, Bangladesh Website: https://icmmpeduet.com/