We report neutron depolarization measurements of the suppression of long-range ferromagnetism and the emergence of magnetic irreversibilities and spin freezing in CePd1-xRhx around x * ≈ 0.6. Tracking the temperature versus field history of the neutron depolarization, we find clear signatures of long-range Ising ferromagnetism below a Curie temperature TC for x = 0.4 and a spin freezing of tiny ferromagnetic clusters below a freezing temperature TF1 for x > x * . Under zero-field-cooling/field-heating and for x > x * a reentrant temperature dependence of the neutron depolarization between TF2 < TF1 and TF1 is microscopically consistent with a thermally activated growth of the cluster size. The evolution of the depolarization as well as the reentrant temperature dependence as a function of Rh content are consistent with the formation of a Kondo-cluster glass below TF1 adjacent to a ferromagnetic quantum phase transition at x * . Quantum phase transitions (QPTs), defined as zero temperature phase transitions, represent a wellestablished roadmap in the search for new properties of correlated electron systems An increasing number of studies suggest an intricate interplay of microscopic (atomic) and mesoscopic scales at QPTs. For instance, the temperature dependence of the electrical resistivity at the pressure-tuned quantum phase transition of pure itinerant-electron ferromagnets such as Ni 3 Al or ZrZn 2 , for unexplained reasons, is characteristic of disordered ferromagnets While it may be intuitive that mesocale textures may be important in the surroundings of QPTs, it is experimentally difficult to prove their existence and to determine their character. Namely, in bulk materials processes on mesoscopic length scales imply correlation lengths that require ultra-small angle scattering. Also, the size of such textures implies large characteristic time-scales that are difficult to determine experimentally in bulk systems. Taken together, this raises the question for experimental methods capable to provide such information. In the study reported here we explore the potential of neutron depolarization measurements to provide such information for the ferromagnetic to intermediate valent transition in the compositional series CePd 1-x Rh x . Since the seminal work of Halpern and Holstein in the early 1940s The depolarization of a neutron beam depends on the spatial extent and the average magnetization of the magnetic domains generating the Larmor precession along the trajectory of the neutron beam. Given the wavelength (and hence velocity) of the neutrons this implicitly yields a characteristic time-scale, notably the time required for traversing individual domains, at which the polarization of the neutron beam is affected. In other words, a depolarization is expected when magnetized patches are (i) sufficiently large, and (ii) sufficiently long-lived, and (iii) the uniform magnetization is sufficiently large. As compared to conventional bulk and transport properties, neutron depolarization measurements provide microscopic information as inferred from the threshold of the depolarization process. This has long been appreciated, though material-specific and experimental set-up-specific details have neither been reported nor exploited. To explore the potential of neutron depolarization measurements in studies of ferromagnetic QPTs we decided to study CePd 1-x Rh x 68-78 . The rare earth compound CePd 1-x Rh x undergoes a ferromagnetic QPT as a function of Rh content x, where ferromagnetism is continuously suppressed above x = 0.6 Summarized in Fig. The presentation of our experimental results in Sec. IV proceeds in two subsections. We begin with the dependence of the neutron depolarization on the temperature and field history in Sec. IV A. This is followed by the evidence for a precessional rotation of the polarization in the ferromagnetic state of a single crystal sample in Sec. IV B, where we consider the role of the combination of magnetic anisotropy, temperature and small applied magnetic fields. In Sec. V we discuss our observations in the context of previous studies of the bulk properties and present our arguments in support of a Kondo cluster glass. Our paper closes with a summary of the main conclusions in Sec. VI. CePd and CeRh represent isotructural siblings that crystallize in the orthorhombic CrB structure. Whereas pure CePd orders ferromagnetically at T C = 6.5 K 80 , CeRh shows the key characteristics of a non-magnetic intermediate valent system down to the lowest temperatures studied. It has long been recognized that the substitutional series CePd 1-x Rh x permits to explore the evolution from ferromagnetic order to intermediate valent behavior under isostructural conditions 68-70 in the additional presence of strong disorder Seminal studies have established that the evolution of the properties of CePd 1-x Rh x as a function of x share two unusual characteristics with respect to a composition x * ≈ 0.6 68-78 . On the one hand, with increasing x the lattice constant decreases linearly up to x * , consistent with Vegard's law, followed by a fast superlinear decrease for x > 0.6. On the other hand, the Weiss temperature, Θ P , as inferred from the inverse susceptibility above ∼ 100 K is negative for all x. It decreases weakly up to x * followed by a steep decrease between x * and x = 1. In the light of the intermediate valent properties of CeRh, it has been argued that the Weiss temperature reflects a mean-value of the Kondo temperature T K ≈ |Θ P | 82 . Thus, above x * the Kondo temperature appears to increase rapidly such that it exceeds the temperature scales on which ferromagnetism is observed. This suggests that the magnetic properties for x > x * originate from a combination of intermediate valent fluctuations, Kondo screening and disorder. As a function of increasing x the suppression of ferromagnetism in CePd 1-x Rh x , notably the transition temperature T C as inferred from the bulk properties, crosses the increase of the average value of T K in the regime of x * 75,76 . A more detailed inspection reveals an unusual concentration dependence of the signatures of ferromagnetism for intermediate values of x 73,76 . Namely, with increasing x the curvature of T C is initially negative such that T C may be extrapolated to zero approximately around x * . However, as the composition approaches x * a change of curvature is observed at the onset of ferromagnetic correlations as inferred from pronounced maxima in χ ac (T ). These maxima in χ ac (T ) may be discerned up to x = 0.87. The absence of a maximum in χ ac (T ) down to 20 mK for x = 0.9 suggests the suppression of ferromagnetic correlations for a critical composition close to x c = 0.87. Associated with the change of curvature at the onset of ferromagnetic correlations is a change of the character of the processes underlying the maximum in the susceptibility around x * . For x < x * the bulk properties are consistent with a transition to long-range ferromagnetism. In contrast, for x ≥ 0.6 the maxima in the susceptibility exhibit a pronounced frequency dependence characteristic of a freezing process similar to that observed in spin glasses The suppression of ferromagnetic order as well as the suppression of the underlying spontaneous magnetic moment as a function of increasing x in CePd 1-x Rh x reflect the hybridization of the Ce 4f electrons with the valence electrons of the surrounding ligands. Consistent with the evolution of T K inferred from Θ P , Rh ligands in Ce compounds are known to result in much larger Kondo temperatures than observed for Pd ligands. Taken together, CePd 1-x Rh x differs distinctly from other strongly disordered Ce-based systems such as CeNi 1-x Cu x , in which the Ce valence remains nearly trivalent and in which a percolative cluster scenario was proposed Last but not least, the possible role of quantum correlations in CePd 1-x Rh x has been addressed in several studies. Namely, putative evidence of a power-law dependence in the specific heat, C(T )/T ∼ T λ-1 , with λ = 0.6 and 0.67 for x = 0.87 and 0.9, respectively 71,73,75 , as well as the ac susceptibility, raise the question whether T C near x = 0.87 is somehow connected with an additional form of ferromagnetic quantum criticality. This is contrasted by the Grüneisen ratio Γ, which displays a log-divergence, Γ ∝ ln T , as opposed to a power-law divergence expected for quantum criticality (Γ ∝ β/C where β represents the volume thermal expansion coefficient and C the specific heat). Moreover, a power-law form of the magnetic-field dependence of the magnetization at 50 mK was reported for very large x, also consistent with the absence of quantum criticality. Rather, it has been pointed out that these properties are consistent with the scenario of a quantum-Griffiths-phase. However, whereas theory predicts that the values for λ inferred from the specific heat and susceptibility should be the same The properties reported so far for CePd 1-x Rh x consistently point at an unusual interplay of strong correlations with disorder on multiple scales Neutron depolarization measurements are based on the principle of neutron radiography by means of a polarized neutron beam. Since the neutron interacts with magnetic fields via its spin, neutron depolarization measurements allow to identify and determine, within limits, spatially resolved ferromagnetic correlations in bulk materials, i.e., ordered regions such as domains or spin clusters Examples of neutron depolarization measurements include the three-dimensional imaging of ferromagnetic domains in bulk samples In the following the basic principles of neutron depolarization are reviewed in Sec. III A, followed by materialspecific estimates of the spatial and temporal threshold for depolarization to occur in Sec. III B. In Sec. III C the experimental setups used in our study are described. We begin with a summary of the formal description of neutron depolarization measurements of a ferromagnet focussing on a few limiting cases which are required for the interpretation of our results. For the discussion presented in the following we consider a polarized neutron beam, the polarization P of which is given as where I + , I -represent the intensities with respect to the polarization axis. In the following we denote the polarization of the incident neutron beam by P 0 . The neutron beam is transmitted through a ferromagnetic sample, in which it traverses a series of magnetic domains labelled i with intrinsic fields B i . We assume further that these intrinsic fields are oriented randomly. The classical equation of motion for the neutron spin s i that couples to the ferromagnetic domain i is given by the Larmor equation where γ is the gyromagnetic ratio of the neutron. For constant magnetic field Eq. 2 describes a precession of the spin with respect to the direction of the field at the Larmor frequency ω L = -γB i . Assuming an average field B 0 = B i per domain, an average domain length δ in the direction of flight and infinitesimally thin domain walls the polarization in the y-direction may be written as 39,89 where y is perpendicular to the beam direction and parallel to the guide field (representing the quantization axis). Further, B and B ⊥ represent the components of the magnetic field B 0 in each domain parallel and perpendicular to the direction of travel. N = d/δ represents the average number of magnetic domains on a neutron path through the sample and v is the neutron velocity. Here the brackets ... denote the average over the magnetic field or the average domain size as denoted by the subscript. The argument of the cosine function corresponds to the Larmor phase collected in each domain Eq. 3 may be expressed analytically for some limiting cases. First, as proposed by Halpern and Holstein 39 , averaging over the ensemble of randomly oriented domains for small spin rotations per domain ω L τ 2π results in where d is the sample thickness in the direction of flight of the neutron and the magnetic flux B 0 is assumed to be temperature-dependent. The second case, where ω L τ ≥ 2π, represents a large spin rotation per domain. Eq. 3 then yields for the polarization Assuming that the average domain size is constant, the depolarization is then expected to be constant below the Curie temperature T C . Based on the solutions described by Eqs. 4 and 5 it may be concluded that for temperatures below T C the domain configuration leads to a depolarization of the neutron beam, while in the paramagnetic state the polarization is not affected. For the evaluation of our data we assumed that the magnetic field in a single domain may be described using a temperature dependence as follows where M 0 represents the spontaneous magnetization in each domain, β is system specific exponent, μ 0 is the vacuum permeability, and Θ(x) is a Heaviside function that serves to account for an idealized spontaneous symmetry breaking below T C . For β = 1/2 Eq. 6 corresponds to the mean field approximation for ferromagnets. In real systems a smoothed version of the step function such as a Gaussian error function may be used to represent the transition and the emergence of a finite magnetization. In case the data are recorded with a two-dimensional detector, spatially resolved information may be obtained using Eqs. 4 and 5. This provides spatially resolved information on the magnetic ordering temperature T C , referred to in the following as a T C map. Another limit assumes a mono-domain ferromagnetic state, i.e., the sample supports a uniform magnetization without domains If the magnetization is neither parallel nor antiparallel to the polarization (α = nπ for n = 0, 1, 2, . . . ) the polarization vector precesses with respect to the direction of the internal field B 0 . A seeming decrease of the polarization would then be due to a rotation of the polarization away from the direction for which the polarization is analyzed. Moreover, a change of the magnetization caused, for example, by a variation of the temperature, T , or an applied magnetic field, B = μ 0 H, may result in an oscillation of the polarization due to the cosine term. This has been observed in our study of the ferromagnetic single-crystal CePd 1-x Rh x (x = 0.4) as described in Sec. IV B. In this section we present an estimate of the lengthand time-scales of multi-domain ferromagnetic order at which the setup we used for our neutron depolarization study described in Sec. III C was able to detect a depolarization. Several publications have addressed this question 44,45,47-50,52, We consider multi-domain ferromagnetic order with an average domain size δ. For decreasing δ the Larmor phase φ L collected in each domain eventually will no longer be sufficient to depolarize the neutron beam at a level that exceeds the resolution of the setup. This case is described by Eq. 4. Solving this equation for δ and replacing P/P 0 = 1 -∆P yields where ∆P is the minimal change of polarization that may be resolved. In our setup the resolution corresponded typically to ∼ 1 % as estimated from the scatter of the data points. Shown in Fig. Depicted in green shading is the regime, where a notable depolarization is expected. The dashed lines depict the 1 % threshold for wavelengths of λ = 3 A and λ = 7 A, corresponding to the wavelengths at the beamline ANTARES available for monochromatic depolarization measurements. In comparison, the solid black line represents a calculation for a polychromatic spectrum ranging from λ = 4 A to 8.5 A as available at the beamline ANTARES and used in the setup shown in Fig. With increasing B 0 the average size of the domains, δ, that may be detected decreases as shown in Fig. It is important to emphasize that the magnetic domains do not need to be static for a depolarization to occur. Rather, the lifetime of the domains must exceed the time, τ , needed by the neutron to travel across the domains given by τ = δ/v, where v is the neutron velocity. As shown in Fig. Taken together, these considerations highlight the potential of neutron depolarization measurements as a probe of ferromagnetic textures that fluctuate on a nm scale in the sub-ns regime. The temporal resolution associated with the unscreened moment of CePd 1-x Rh x of 2μ B 73 for the experimental setup shown in Fig. For our studies it proved to be essential to record data under different temperature versus field histories. Before turning to an account of the terminology used in our paper, we note that the expression "zero-field" implies the nominal presence of a guide field of roughly 0.5 mT required to maintain the polarization of the neutron beam. Keeping this in mind, we distinguish the following temperature versus field histories, noting that all data were collected while heating the sample at the same constant rate in order to avoid systematic errors of the sample temperature recorded. First, data recorded after cooling in zero-field (zfc) while heating in zero-field are denoted zfc-zfh (zero-field-cooled -zero-field-heated). Second, data recorded after cooling in zero-field to base temperature and the application of a finite field while heating under this applied magnetic field are denoted zfcfh (zero-field-cooled -field-heated). Third, after cooling the sample in the presence of a magnetic field applied at sufficiently high temperatures of several K, data were The neutron beam passed a polarizer (P) and a spin flipper (SF). The polarization was maintained by guide fields (G1 and G2) in the y-direction and hence perpendicular to the neutron path, which was parallel to the z-direction across the sample. The sample was placed in a cryostat which was located in a Helmholtz pair of coils generating a magnetic field at the position of the sample. The polarization was analyzed in the y-direction using an analyzer (A) and detected by a CCD camera (D) in combination with a LiF/ZnS converter and scintillator film. (b) Magnetic fields in positive and negative y-direction could be applied by adding two horizontal guide fields (G2 and G3) pointing in x-direction. (c) Schematic depiction of the setup used for spherical polarization analysis with CryoPAD. Rotatable coupling coils (CC) and two precession coils (PC) were located between two superconducting sheets (SC) that permitted to adjust and to analyze the polarization in arbitrary directions. recorded while heating the sample in the same unchanged applied magnetic field. This is denoted fc-fh (field-cooled -field-heated). The neutron depolarization measurements were carried out at the beamline ANTARES at FRM II Following our first measurements we modified this setup to permit studies of different temperature versus field histories. This required a setup that permitted measurements under arbitrary positive or negative magnetic field strengths. As explained above, true zero-field conditions are very difficult to achive and even small stray fields will cause a severe depolarization of the neutron beam. Therefore, we used small guide fields around the sample position in order to stabilize the polarisation axis. To satisfy these conditions we installed two additional guide fields pointing in the x-direction. As indicated in Fig. For all of our neutron depolarization measurements the samples were cooled to temperatures as low as ∼ 0.07 K by means of bespoke 3 He/ 4 He dilution insert as combined with a pulse tube cooler. Magnetic fields were generated with a pair of Helmholtz coils operated at room temperature. In addition, spherical neutron polarimetry was carried out using CryoPAD at the beam-line POLI at FRM II Shown schematically in Fig. In our studies we adjusted and analyzed the polarization always in the same direction to be able to distinguish a generic depolarization from a spherical rotation of the direction of the polarization. Therefore, both nutator angles Θ and both angles χ as determined by the precession coils were always kept the same. Finally, the single crystal sample was oriented such that the crystallographic ac-plane corresponded to the plane perpendicular to the neutron beam and thus the xy-plane in the coordinate system used to account for the polarization. The magnetic easy axis of the system, which corresponded to the crystallographic c-axis, hence resided in this plane. The resistivity, ac susceptibility, magnetization, and specific heat of the CePd 1-x Rh x samples we investigated in our neutron depolarization measurements were examined rather comprehensively prior to our study as reported elsewhere 72,75,79 . Details of the sample preparation may be found in these papers. All samples were polycrystals with the exception of the sample with x = 0.40 which was a single crystal. The presentation of the experimental data is organized in two parts. It begins with the dependence of the neutron depolarization on the temperature and field history in Sec. IV A for a wide range of compositions. This is followed by the variation of the neutron depolarization due to the magnetic anisotropy in single-crystal CePd 1-x Rh x for the ferromagnetic composition x = 0.4 in Sec. IV B. Data reported in the following were recorded at the beam-line ANTARES using the setups shown in Fig. Shown in Fig. The zfc-zfh data recorded in the sample with x = 0.40 shows a sharp drop of the polarization at T C consistent with spontaneous ferromagnetic order forming large domains in zero field or in the presence of small applied magnetic fields as described by Eq. 5. The spontaneous depolarization under zfc-zfh sets in at a well-defined transition temperature and saturates rapidly below T C . For increasing applied magnetic field a small broadening is observed at T C while the strength of the depolarization increases slightly. In comparison to the sample with x = 0.40 the temperature dependence under zfc-zfh for x = 0.60 displays only a weak and gradual decrease just below T F1 consistent with small domains and/or weak internal fields as described by Eq. 4. Here the size of the depolarization increases remarkably under fc-fh in a small field of 7.5 mT. When further increasing the magnetic field the temperature dependence qualitatively and quantitatively changes only slightly. For x = 0.65 the depolarization below T F1 almost vanishes under zfc-zfh. This suggests that spontaneous correlations are virtually suppressed for this Rh concentration on the scales sensitive to neutron depolarization, i.e., underscores to the formation of a cluster glass below TF1 for x ≥ 0.6. The evidence for spontaneous ferromagnetic correlations that are sufficient to depolarize the neutron beam vanishes for x > 0.60. However, in this regime a small applied field enhances the depolarizing effects. the magnetic properties must be featuring very small domains or clusters which are spatially separated from each other. Alternatively, the zfc-zfh data for x = 0.65 may reflect a strongly fluctuating state. Yet, in the presence of a small applied magnetic field a noteable depolarization is observed consistent with a weak form of ferromagnetism. This suggests that a small applied field stabilizes a ferromagnetic character on length and time scales sensitive to neutron depolarization. We will return to this point in Sec. V. The pronounced depolarization below a characteristic temperature T F1 observed under zfc-zfh and fc-fh is contrasted by a pronounced reentrance of the polarization observed under zfc-fh as illustrated in Fig. Finally, above a critical concentration around x = 0.65 no significant spontaneous depolarization is observed under zfc-zfh as a function of temperature. Nonetheless sizeable reentrant behaviour under zfc-fh is still observed, as shown in Fig. An important facet of the interpretation of the neutron polarization concerns the difference between a generic depolarization and a possible spherical rotation of the direction of the polarization. Such a rotation may be caused by the magnetic anisotropy of the material. Previous studies of the magnetization of CePd 1-x Rh x are consistent with an easy magnetic c-axis 72 . To follow up on the role of the magnetic anisotropies at zero magnetic field, we tracked the anisotropy of the depolarization as determined at the instrument POLI at FRM II using the 3D polarization analysis device CryoPAD. Our measurements were performed on the singlecrystalline sample with x = 0.40. This represents a composition for which the bulk properties provide unambiguous evidence of long-range ferromagnetism consistent with the neutron depolarization reported above. The orientation of the sample with respect to the coordinate system of the instrument is illustrated in Fig. In the angular scan of χ there was also a small additional oscillation which suggests that the surface at which the sample was attached to the sample holder, i.e., the crystallographic ac-plane, was not oriented perfectly perpendicular to the neutron beam. Two well-defined minima and maxima were observed for a complete angular scan of the polarization vector. The maxima correspond to the case where the easy axis of the magnetization (in this case the crystallographic c-axis) was almost parallel or anti-parallel to the polarization vector. The minima correspond to a maximum in depolarization where the 10 x = 0.60 and x = 0.65 we observe a decrease of T F2 with increasing x that roughly tracks the decreases of T F1 . An important facet of the interpretation of the neutron polarization concerns the di↵erence between a generic depolarization and a possible spherical rotation of the direction of the polarization. Such a rotation may be caused by the magnetic anisotropy of the material. Previous studies of the magnetization of CePd 1 x Rh x are consistent with an easy magnetic c-axis 56 . To follow up on the role of the magnetic anisotropies at zero magnetic field, we tracked the anisotropy of the depolarization as determined at the instrument POLI at FRM II using the 3D polarization analysis device CryoPAD. Our measurements were performed on the singlecrystalline sample with x = 0.40. This represents a composition for which the bulk properties provide unambiguous evidence of long-range ferromagnetism consistent with the neutron depolarization reported above. The orientation of the sample with respect to the coordinate system of the instrument is illustrated in Fig. The ac-plane of the sample was oriented in the xy-plane of the coordinate system of the instrument, with an angle of approximately 55 deg between the crystallographic c-axis and the y-axis of the set-up. The polarization as a function ⇥ and are shown in Fig. In the angular scan of there was also a small additional oscillation which suggests that the surface at which the sample was attached to the sample holder, i.e., the crystallographic ac-plane, was not oriented perfectly perpendicular to the neutron beam. Two well-defined minima and maxima were observed for a complete angular scan of the polarization vector. The maxima correspond to the case where the easy axis of the magnetization (in this case the crystallographic c-axis) was almost parallel or anti-parallel to the polarization vector. The minima correspond to a maximum in depolarization where the polarization vector was almost perpendicular to the preferred magnetization axis. The small amount of depolarization for the case when the polarization was parallel or antiparallel to the anisotropy axis suggests that the magnetic domains were dominantly aligned parallel or antiparallel to the c-axis. For such a regular pattern of domains a depolarizing effect may still be expected due to a finite beam divergence polarization vector was almost perpendicular to the preferred magnetization axis. The small amount of depolarization for the case when the polarization was parallel or antiparallel to the anisotropy axis suggests that the magnetic domains were dominantly aligned parallel or antiparallel to the c-axis. For such a regular pattern of domains a depolarizing effect may still be expected due to a finite beam divergence resulting in slightly different neutron path lengths across the sample. It is in particular instructive to explore the interplay of an applied magnetic field with the effects of magnetic anisotropy, domain populations, neutron depolarisation and spherical precession of the polarization. Namely, the application of a magnetic field results in an effective internal magnetic field B int that changes the ratio of the domain populations. Moreover, for a small applied magnetic field the internal field will point along the easy axis, even if the easy axis is not parallel to the applied field. As the Larmor phase collected by the neutrons depends on their wavelength, a polychromatic beam such as that used in the setup shown in Fig. The polarization observed at POLI in a singlecrystalline sample suggests that the magnetic domains in CePd 1-x Rh x (x = 0.4) dominantly support a magnetization along the easy magnetic c-axis of the material characteristic of a 3d Ising ferromagnet and consistent with the magnetization 72 . At zero magnetic field the populations of up and down domains are equal such that the integrated internal field vanishes, B int = 0. In the presence of an applied magnetic field this ratio changes according to the internal field. The precession of the polarization with respect to the internal field may then be described by Eq. 7 where B 0 is replaced by B int . If B int changes, e.g., due to changes of the applied magnetic field or changes of the magnetization as a function of temperature, and if the angle between the polarization and the internal field is finite, the cosine part of Eq. 7 causes oscillations in the polarization. These oscillations were observed both in temperature and field scans slightly above the Curie temperature T C = 5.26 K. At lower temperatures the strong depolarization prevents the appearance of oscillations. Mathematically this effect may be described by a multiplication of Eq. 5, recognizing that the sample is strongly ferromagnetic, and Eq. 7. To account for the finite distribution of Curie temperatures across the sample, the Heaviside function is replaced by an error function centred at • (1 -P offset ) + P offset (9) which varies between P offset = 3 -N and 1. The parameter m represents the slope at T = T C such that represents the half-width, ∆T C , of the distribution of T C . The polarization in the presence of a magnetic anisotropy, i.e., an angle between the easy axis and the crystallographic c-axis, is then given by Experimental evidence for this behavior may be observed in the single-crystal with x = 0.40 using the setup illustrated in Fig. Shown in Fig. In comparison, the temperature dependence of the polarization became more complex under fc-fh as recored in various applied magnetic fields between 0 and 30 mT, shown in Figs. 9 (b) through 9 (f). In a small applied field of 2.5 mT the onset of the decrease of the polarization shifted to higher temperatures and exhibited considerable broadening. Similar behavior was observed in several neutron depolarization measurements reported in the literature Further, when increasing the applied magnetic field oscillations in the polarization as a function of temperature emerged close to T C . These oscillations may be explained by a precession of the polarization with respect to the effective internal field comprising the interplay of the magnetization under the applied magnetic field and the easy magnetic axis of the sample. This interpretation is corroborated by the observation of a polarization that is nominally negative for B = 10 mT which cannot be accounted for by a depolarization alone. Similar oscillations of the polarization were also observed in magnetic field sweeps. As explained above, the setup shown in Fig. With increasing temperature above T C = 5.26 K the angle α decreases. As the magnetic anisotropy inferred from the bulk properties is unchanged up to 100 K 79 the temperature dependence may be attributed to the decrease of the easy-axis susceptibility and the associated decrease of the life-time of fluctuations in the paramagnetic state vis a vis with the time needed of a neutron to traverse the regime of a fluctuation. As depolarizing effects decrease with increasing temperature above T C , the combination of these time-scales may be effectively viewed in terms of a magnetic field causing dominantly a rotation of the polarization direction. For the interpretation of our experimental results it is helpful to recall at first the notions and terminology used in conventional spin freezing processes starting from a paramagnetic state. In so-called canonical spin glasses the separation and interactions between the spins are sufficiently small, such that the frozen state is characterized by an ensemble of essentially randomly oriented, uncor-related microscopic spins. In systems with a larger density of spins and larger interactions, clusters of correlated spins may form under decreasing temperature. The associated frozen state is commonly dubbed a cluster glass. Finally, in the limit of strongly interacting densely packed spins, correlated regimes may form that behave essentially like very large macroscopic spins and the behaviour is referred to as superparamagnetism. For completeness we note that spin-frozen states which emerge from longrange ordered states are referred to as a reentrant spin glass -a misleading expression as the long-range ordered state actually exhibits the reentrant temperature dependence. Regardless of the precise character of the spin-frozen state, neutron depolarization is expected if the same threshold conditions are satisfied as in a multi-domain ferromagnet. To distinguish long-range ferromagnetism from a spin-frozen state is, in turn, not straight-forward and requires consideration of further information such as the bulk properties. In particular, apart from quantitative differences of the size of the depolarization, the onset of the depolarization will be insensitive to the precise magnetic field and temperature history. The former depends on the precise alignment of the domains, whereas the latter depends on the interactions and the size of the correlated regimes. Further, it is also important to distinguish a generic depolarization from the rotation of the polarization axis. Both effects may be present simultaneously as reported in the literature, e.g., for Ni and observed in our study of CePd 1-x Rh x for x = 0.4. This compares with Fe 1-x Cr x We turn now to the evolution of the nature of ferromagnetic correlations in CePd 1-x Rh x as a function of increasing Rh content x, which is the result of several microscopic interactions. Notably, magnetic moments develop with decreasing temperature that interact by virtue of an exchange coupling. Crystal electric fields and spinorbit coupling partly quench the magnetic moments and introduce magnetic anisotropies. The Kondo effect results in an additional screening of these moments and changes of the concomitant interactions. As a function of increasing Rh content the spontaneous moment at zero temperature decreases from an almost unscreened large value for x = 0. Both the change of the lattice constant and the concomitant decrease of the density of states at the Fermi level, as well as the increase of the Kondo screening under increasing Rh content control the suppression of ferromagnetism. For all CePd 1-x Rh x samples studied we observe neutron depolarization. Up to x = 0.65 even a spontaneous depolarization under zfc-zfh conditions is observed. This provides unambiguous microscopic evidence of the ferromagnetic character of the spin correlations up to x = 0.70, the largest value studied. In addition, the T C maps depicted in Fig. The onset of the neutron depolarization at T C /T F1 is in excellent agreement with the ordering/freezing temperature observed in the bulk properties. The behaviour at T C /T F1 does not depend on the temperature and field history, apart from a small broadening at T C for x = 0.4. Indeed, for x = 0.4 the strong easy-axis ferromagnetism causes a Larmor rotation of the polarization even well above the Curie temperature, whereas a pronounced depolarization is observed below T C . The properties of the ferromagnetically ordered compositions are, hence, perfectly consistent with an Ising ferromagnet without noticeable evidence of disorder, e.g., such as depolarization above T C . This provides an important point of reference for the emergence of the reentrant and glassy behaviour near quantum criticality. For x > 0.6 the agreement of T F1 observed in the depolarization and the bulk properties contrasts the observation of a small but finite hysteresis in the magnetization for T > T F1 that has been attributed to the formation of clusters 76 . The absence of depolarization above T F1 thus shows that the size and the life-time of the clusters inferred from the magnetization must be tiny and below the threshold of depolarization, consistent with a decrease of the ordered moment and the interactions under increasing Rh content. The behaviour we observe in CePd 1-x Rh x contrasts that observed in the superparamagnetic regime of Fe 1-x Cr x where a sizeable depolarization is observed well above the freezing temperature A highly unconventional property emerges, finally, under zero-field-cooling/field-heating. All samples with x > 0.6 exhibit a pronounced reentrance of the depolarization between T F1 and T F2 . In fact, even the ferromagnetic single-crystal with x = 0.4 displayed a reentrance at T F2 , though barely noticeable. Here it may be helpful to note that the reentrant temperature dependence of the depolarzation under zfc-fh cannot be the signature of a reentrant spin-glass. Rather, the lack of depolarization up to T F2 under zero-field-cooling/field-heating implies that the clusters which undergo a freezing at T F1 must be tiny in the absence of an applied field. This is con-sistent with the absence of a depolarization above T F1 despite the presence of hysteresis in the magnetization. Yet, the applied magnetic field of 7.5 mT under which reentrance is observed is small, and the energy scale associated with the applied field corresponds to a temperature of several hundred milli-Kelvin. The Zeeman energy of the applied magnetic field is hence roughly consistent with the values of T F2 . Thus, when heating the sample in a small applied magnetic field after zero-field-cooling, a thermally activated formation of clusters may take place at T F2 , where the resulting clusters are sufficiently large to generate a sizeable depolarization. Considering the combination of energy scales in CePd 1-x Rh x mentioned above, it is instructive to discuss the possible origin of the small size of the clusters at zero magnetic field that undergo the spin freezing at T F1 . Experimentally we find that the freezing temperature T F1 and the reentrance temperature T F2 decrease with increasing x and roughly track each other. As a function of increasing Rh content, this is consistent with the reduction of the spontaneous magnetic moment and the strength of the interactions, as well as the steep increase of the Kondo screening and the distribution of Kondo temperatures for x > x * ≈ 0.6. Namely, as the moment decreases the freezing temperatures decrease, empirically suggesting that the additional Kondo screening above x * controls the small size of the clusters. The setup shown in Fig. Fitting the depolarization shown in Fig. The average size δ of the clusters may, finally, be estimated when taking into account the magnetic moment of CePd 1-x Rh x 70,72,78,81 . In the field-cooled state the cluster size decreases continuously from a value exceeding 6 nm to 4 nm when the Rh concentration increases from x = 0.4 to 0.7. Under zero-field-cooling δ decreases from 5 nm to a value below the detection threshold. This is consistent with basic estimates of the cluster size of approximately 5 spins in the tail region of the phase diagram 79 . In conclusion, we have carried out neutron depolarization measurements of ferromagnetism and spin freezing in CePd 1-x Rh x . We find clear signatures of ferromagnetic correlations up to a Rh concentration of x = 0.70, where the 3D polarization analysis of a single crystal with x = 0.4 underscores well behaved long-range ferromagnetic order. The ordering and freezing temperatures are in good agreement with the bulk properties. A reentrant temperature dependence of the depolarization under zero-field-cooling/field-heating of the Rh compositions featuring spin freezing reveals thermally activated cluster growth in the spin-frozen state. The sensitivity of our setup and the estimated size of the ferromagnetic correlations provide microscopic information consistent with the formation of a Kondo cluster glass, initially proposed on the basis of the bulk properties. 