Machine learning potentials (MLPs) developed from extensive datasets constructed from density functional theory (DFT) calculations have become increasingly appealing for many researchers. This paper presents a framework of polynomial-based MLPs, called polynomial MLPs. The systematic development of accurate and computationally efficient polynomial MLPs for many elemental and binary alloy systems and their predictive powers for various properties are also demonstrated. Consequently, many polynomial MLPs are available in a repository website 1 . The repository will help many scientists perform accurate and efficient large-scale atomistic simulations and crystal structure searches. Machine learning potentials (MLPs) have been increasingly required to perform crystal structure optimizations and large-scale atomistic simulations more accurately than with conventional interatomic potentials. MLPs have been generally developed from large datasets constructed by systematic density functional theory (DFT) calculations; hence, they can improve the accuracy and transferability of interatomic potentials significantly. Therefore, many recent studies have proposed a number of procedures to develop MLPs and have shown their applications . Simultaneously, MLPs themselves are necessary for their users to perform accurate atomistic simulations. Therefore, the development and release of MLPs for a wide range of systems should be useful, similarly to the conventional interatomic potentials available in several repositories This paper reviews a formulation representing the potential energy in elemental and alloy systems. In the formulation, polynomial models of polynomial invariants for the O(3) group, which are referred to as "polynomial MLPs", are derived. This paper also includes procedures for generating structure datasets used for the DFT calculation, estimating the polynomial MLPs, and finding the optimal MLPs. Because the accuracy and computational efficiency of polynomial MLPs are conflicting properties, there is no single optimal MLP, and the solutions are the Pareto-optimal MLPs with different trade-offs between them The Pareto-optimal polynomial MLPs developed using the current procedures are available in the Polynomial Machine Learning Potential Repository 1 , in which many physical properties predicted using the polynomial MLPs can be found. Moreover, a user package that combines the polynomial MLPs with atomistic simulations using the lammps code Section II introduces the formulation of the potential energy models and procedures for developing the polynomial MLPs. In Sec. III, the Pareto-optimal polynomial MLPs for a wide variety of elemental and binary alloy systems are shown. A procedure for selecting an appropriate MLP from the whole set of the Pareto-optimal MLPs is also proposed. The selection of MLPs is an essential process for performing the subsequent large-scale atomistic simulations. In Sec. IV, the predictive powers of the Pareto-optimal MLPs for various properties are demonstrated. Finally, this study is summarized in Sec. V. This section introduces potential energy models used for developing the polynomial MLPs and procedures for generating DFT datasets and estimating potential energy models. Section II A derives a general formulation of the relationship between the potential energy and the neighboring atomic distribution as a starting point of developing polynomial MLPs and other types of MLPs. Section II B shows polynomial invariants composed of order parameters representing the neighboring atomic distribution. The current polynomial invariants are systematically enumerated from order parameters in terms of products of radial and spherical harmonic functions. Section II C suggests polynomial functions representing the potential energy with respect to the polynomial invariants. Section II D explains about the DFT datasets required to estimate the polynomial MLPs. The current datasets are generated so that the polynomial MLPs have high predictive power for a wide variety of structures. Section II E shows computational procedures for estimating the coefficients of the polynomial MLPs. In Sec. II F, a procedure for finding the optimal MLPs is demonstrated. Although the potential energy will be formulated for multicomponent systems throughout this study, element indices can Schematic illustration of the neighboring atomic distribution around atom i of element A in an A-B-C ternary structure and its decomposition into the neighboring atomic densities of elements A, B, and C around atom i of element A. be ignored in the formulation for elemental systems. The short-range part of the potential energy for a structure, E, is assumed to be decomposed as where E (i) denotes the contribution of atom i within a given cutoff radius r c , referred to as the atomic energy. The atomic energy of atom i is then approximately given by a functional of its neighboring atomic densities. Figure where ρ (i) (si,s) denotes the neighboring atomic density of element s (s ∈ {A, B, • • • }) around atom i of element s i . The neighboring atomic density of element s around atom i is then expanded in terms of a basis set {b n }. The expansion enables the functional form to be replaced with a function of its expansion coefficients. The neighboring atomic densities can be expanded as where a n,(si,s) denotes the nth order parameter characterizing the neighboring atomic density of element s around atom i of element s i . By introducing order parameters for unordered pairs of elements, a (i) n,t , where t ∈ {{A, A}, {A, B}, • • • }, and defining order parameter a (i) n,t to be zero if s i is not included in t, the atomic energy is written as In this equation, all pair combinations with the replacement of elements are considered for each n. A more detailed derivation of Eqn. ( A number of functions are useful as function F to represent the relationship between the invariants and the atomic energy, such as artificial neural network models 2,3,5-8 , Gaussian process models The invariants composed of order parameters representing the neighboring atomic density are hereafter referred to as "structural features" for representing potential energy. A procedure to systematically enumerate structural features that can control the accuracy and computational efficiency of MLPs (e.g., Refs. 27 and 33) plays an essential role in automatically developing accurate and efficient MLPs. Therefore, the current MLP employs systematic sets of polynomial invariants up to the sixth order derived from order parameters representing the neighboring atomic density in terms of radial and spherical harmonic functions. When the neighboring atomic density is expanded in terms of products of radial functions {f n } and spherical harmonics {Y lm }, the neighboring atomic density of element s at a position (r, θ, φ) in spherical coordinates centered at the position of atom i is expressed as where order parameter a nlm,{si,s} is component nlm of the neighboring atomic density of atom i. Although the order parameters are not generally invariant for the O(3) group, a pth-order polynomial invariant for a radial index n and a set of pairs composed of the angular number and the element unordered pair {(l 1 , t 1 ), (l 2 , t 2 ), • • • , (l p , t p )} is given by a linear combination of products of p order parameters, expressed as where coefficient set {c of the radial index n and the element unordered pair t. The coefficient set ensures that the linear combinations are invariant for arbitrary rotation. A numerical way to obtain linearly independent coefficient sets for a given set {l 1 , l 2 , • • • , l p } is the group-theoretical projector operation method, which is the general process of reducing the Kronecker products of irreducible representations Figure Note that the second-and third-order invariants are equivalent to a multicomponent extension of the angular Fourier series and the bispectrum reported in the literature, respectively Moreover, nonzero polynomial invariants are derived from the sets of t p satisfying the condition that the intersection of t p is not the empty set, An example where the intersection of element pairs becomes the empty set is the case that a polynomial invariant is composed of order parameters with t 1 = {A, A} and t 2 = {B, B}. Such polynomial invariants are eliminated. Using this condition, possible sets of pairs that are composed of the angular number and the element unordered pair {(l 1 , t 1 ), (l 2 , t 2 ), • • • , (l p , t p )} are enumerated for a given maximum angular number to obtain the entire set of polynomial invariants. The current MLPs adopt a finite set of Gaussian-type radial functions as f n given by where β n and r n denote parameters. Cutoff function f c ensures the smooth decay of the radial function, and the current MLP employs a cosine-based cutoff function expressed as The order parameters of atom i and element pair {s i , s} are approximately estimated from the neighboring atomic density of element s around atom i as (11) where (r ij , θ ij , φ ij ) denotes the spherical coordinates of neighboring atom j centered at the position of atom i. Although the Gaussian-type radial functions are not orthonormal, such an approximation of the order parameters is acceptable in formulating the polynomial MLP, as discussed in Ref. 27. In the special case that the neighboring atomic density is expanded in terms of only radial functions {f n }, the neighboring atomic density around atom i is expressed as Since order parameter a n,{si,s} is invariant for the O(3) group, it can be a pairwise structural feature denoted as A pairwise structural feature is then approximately estimated as The current MLPs employ the following polynomial functions representing the relationship between the atomic energy and structural features as function F in Eqn. (5). Given a set of structural features D = { d 1 , d 2 , • • • }, the polynomial functions are represented as where w denotes a regression coefficient. Polynomial function F ξ is composed of all combinations of ξ structural features. A polynomial MLP in the repository is identified with each of the following combinations of the polynomial functions and structural features. The current models have no constant term; hence, the atomic energy is measured from the sum of the energies of isolated atoms. The simplest model is a polynomial of pairwise structural features. When a set of pairwise structural features is described by the pairwise polynomial model is expressed as The pairwise polynomial model includes the special case that only powers of the pairwise structural features are considered, which was introduced for elemental systems in Refs. 13 and 14. Because the current MLPs are regarded as extensions of conventional interatomic potentials, a classification rule of conventional interatomic potentials based on the type of structural features 42 is applicable to the current MLPs. Following the classification in Ref. 42, the pairwise polynomial model is classified into a pair functional potential. In addition, as discussed in Ref. 15, the pairwise polynomial model can also be regarded as a straightforward extension of embedded atom method (EAM) potentials. The second model is the linear polynomial of polynomial invariants given by Eqn. (7). The second model is written as which was introduced in Ref. 27 for elemental systems. A set of polynomial invariants D (i) is described as where a set of pth-order polynomial invariants is denoted by nl1l2l3l4,t1t2t3t4,(σ) } . A second-order invariant is identified with a single l value because second-order linear combinations are invariant only when l 1 = l 2 The most general model is a polynomial of polynomial invariants described as It is classified as a cluster functional potential using the classification in Ref. 42. Note that a quadratic polynomial model of polynomial invariants up to the third order is equivalent to a quadratic SNAP Other extended models are also introduced, which are given by They are decomposed into a linear polynomial of structural features and a polynomial of a subset of the structural features. In multicomponent systems, only nonzero polynomial terms are retained, which is analogous to the enumeration of nonzero polynomial invariants. A structural feature is composed of order parameters, each of which has an attribute on the element unordered pair t. Therefore, when the element pair of the p th order parameter in structure feature d i of a polynomial term is denoted by t i ,p , a nonzero polynomial term satisfies the condition that the intersection of {t i ,p } is not the empty set: For example, the intersection of element pairs becomes the empty set if a polynomial term is composed of structural features with t i ,p i = {A, A} and t j ,p j = {B, B}. Such polynomial terms are eliminated from the polynomial functions. Finally, the advantages of the polynomial MLPs will be emphasized. The polynomial MLPs can be regarded as linear models with respect to the structural features and their products. Therefore, their model coefficients can be efficiently estimated by using well-optimized efficient algorithms of linear regression. In particular, when developing many MLPs for a wide variety of systems, such an efficient estimation of regression coefficients is essential. In addition, the forces acting on atoms and the stress tensor are also expressed by linear models with the regression coefficients for the potential energy, as derived in Ref. 27. Therefore, the forces and the stress tensor obtained by the DFT calculation can be used for regression in a straightforward manner as will be shown in Sec. II E. Each of the polynomial MLPs is developed from a training dataset, and the prediction errors for the energy, force, and stress tensor are estimated using a test dataset. Here, training and test datasets are generated from prototype structures, whose atomic positions and lattice constants are fully optimized by the DFT calculation. They are referred to as structure generators. For elemental systems, structure generators are prototype structures reported in the Inorganic Crystal Structure Database (ICSD) For each elemental system, 13000-15000 structures are generated from the structure generators using the following procedure. They are randomly divided into training and test datasets at the ratio of nine to one. For each binary alloy system, 30000-50000 structures are included in either dataset, where the structures used for the elemental systems are also included. Each structure in the datasets is constructed by introducing random lattice expansion, random lattice distortion, and random atomic displacements into a supercell of a structure generator. When matrix A and vector f represent the lattice vectors of the original supercell and the fractional coordinates of the atom in the original supercell, respectively, the lattice vectors of the new structure A and the fractional coordinates of an atom in the new structure f are given as where the (3×3) matrix R and the three-dimensional vector η are composed of uniform random numbers ranging from -1 to 1. Parameter ε is given to control the degree of lattice expansion, lattice distortion, and atomic displacements. DFT calculations were performed for the structures in the datasets using the plane-wave-basis projector augmented wave method The accuracy of the polynomial MLP depends on the training dataset size. Figure It is worth emphasizing that the current datasets contain structures with much larger displacements than required to compute harmonic phonon force constants and structures with large lattice distortions. As a result, the structures in the datasets show a wide range of the cohesive energy, although the range of the cohesive energy strongly depends on the system. For example, the cohesive energy ranges from -3.43 eV/atom, corresponding to that of the most stable structure, to 5.00 eV/atom, corresponding to its given upper bound in elemental Al. The cohesive energy also ranges from -4.55 eV/atom to 5.00 eV/atom in elemental Si. Contrary to this study, if the training and test datasets are composed of only structures with small displacements, the prediction errors of MLPs for a test dataset tend to be small. Such an MLP is seemingly accurate because of the small prediction error. It may be accurate only in limited applications, whereas it should have low predictive power for many applications. Coefficients of a polynomial MLP are estimated from all the total energies, forces, and stress tensors included in a training dataset. Because the forces acting on atoms and the stress tensor are derived from the potential energy as linear models with its coefficients, the predictor matrix X and observation vector y can be simply written in a submatrix form as The predictor matrix X is composed of three submatrices, X energy , X force , and X stress , which contain structural features and their polynomial contributions to the total energies, the forces acting on atoms, and the stress tensors of structures in the training dataset, respectively. The elements of X force and X stress were derived in Ref. 27. The observation vector y also has three components, y energy , y force , and y stress , which contain the total energy, the forces acting on atoms, and the stress tensors of structures in the training dataset, respectively, obtained from DFT calculations. It is also possible to consider only the total energies and the forces acting on atoms. In such a case, the predictor matrix and observation vector are represented by Once the predictor matrix and the observation vector are evaluated, the coefficients w are estimated by linear ridge regression. Linear ridge regression shrinks the regression coefficients by imposing a penalty and minimizes the penalized residual sum of squares expressed as where λ denotes the magnitude of the penalty. This is referred to as L 2 regularization. The solution is represented as where I denotes the unit matrix. The solution is easily obtained using linear algebra algorithms while avoiding the well-known multicollinearity problem occurring in the ordinary least-squares method. Least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (Lasso) regression and elastic net regression, which combines the L 1 and L 2 penalties where parameter α determines the mixing of the penalties, and the values of λ and α simply control the accuracy and sparseness of the solution. The minimization function with α = 1 corresponds to that of the Lasso. The Lasso and elastic net regression were introduced in the development of MLPs with linear models When the predictor matrix is estimated to be large, a sequential implementation of linear ridge regression is practical, which is similar to an algorithm for updating model coefficients using appended data where X i and y i denote the predictor submatrix and the observation vector of the ith batch of the training dataset, respectively. Using this decomposition, matrix X X and vector X y can be calculated without requiring the entire predictor matrix using the relationships and The residual sum of squares (RSS) for the dataset is also computed without using predictor matrix X as Also, it is indispensable to consider the weights that are given to data entries in the coefficient estimation. Firstly, the units for the energy, force, and stress tensor in the observation vector are different. The units must be selected carefully because it is equivalent to the setting of weights in the regression. Figure where W denotes the diagonal matrix composed of weights. This means that the weights modify matrix X and vector y to X = W 1/2 X and y = W 1/2 y, respectively, where W 1/2 is the diagonal matrix whose ith diagonal element is the square root of the ith diagonal element of W , √ W ii . The accuracy and computational efficiency of the polynomial MLP strongly depend on the given input parameters. They are (1) the cutoff radius, (2) the type of polynomial function F , (3) the order of polynomial function F , (4) the number of radial functions, and (5) the truncation of the polynomial invariants, i.e., the maximum angular numbers of spherical harmonics {l max } and the maximum polynomial order of invariants p max . Therefore, a systematic grid search is performed for each system to find their optimal values. As pointed out in Ref. 27, the accuracy and computational efficiency are conflicting properties whose trade-off should be optimized. However, there is no single optimal solution to this multiobjective optimization problem involving several conflicting objectives. In such a case, Pareto-optimal points can be optimal solutions with different trade-offs between the accuracy and computational efficiency Figure (2) Distribution of MLPs for elemental Zn obtained from a grid search to find the optimal model parameters. The elapsed time for a single point calculation is estimated using a single core of Intel® Xeon® E5-2695 v4 (2.10 GHz). The blue closed circles show the Pareto-optimal points of the distribution obtained using a non-dominated sorting algorithm. Distributions of the errors in the training and test datasets for selected MLPs and their histograms with a bin size of 2 meV/atom are also shown. ized by the number of atoms because it is proportional to the number of atoms, as shown later. As can be seen in Figs. Figure the binary Ti-Al system At this time, the Pareto-optimal polynomial MLPs are available in the repository website for elemental Ag, Al, As, Au, Ba, Be, Bi, Ca, Cd, Cr, Cs, Cu, Ga, Ge, Hf, Hg, In, Ir, K, La, Li, Mg, Mo, Na, Nb, Os, P, Pb, Pd, Pt, Rb, Re, Rh, Ru, Sb, Sc, Si, Sn, Sr, Ta, Te, Ti, Tl, V, W, Y, Zn and Zr and binary Ag-Au, Ag-Ba, Ag-In, Ag-La, Ag-Pb, Ag-Sn, Al-Ag, Al-Au, Al-Ba, Al-Ca, Al-Cu, Al-Ga, Al-Ge, Al-In, Al-K, Al-La, Al-Nb, Al-Pb, Al-Pt, Al-Sc, Al-Si, Al-Sn, Al-Sr, Al-V, Al-Y, Al-Zn, Al-Zr, Be-Al, Be-Ge, Be-Si, Be-Sn, Ca-Ag, Ca-Au, Ca-Cu, Ca-Ga, Ca-Ge, Ca-In, Ca-Pb, Ca-Sc, Ca-Sn, Ca-Ti, Ca-Zn, Cu-Ag, Cu-Au, Cu-Zn, Ga-Ag, Ga-Sn, Ge-In, Ge-Pb, Ge-Sn, Ge-Sr, K-Ge, K-Pb, K-Sn, K-Zn, Li-Ag, Li-Al, Li-Au, Li-Ba, Li-Be, Li-Bi, Li-Ca, Li-Cu, Li-Ga, Li-Ge, Li-In, Li-Mg, Li-Pb, Li-Si, Li-Sn, Li-Sr, Li-Ti, Li-Zn, Mg-Ag, Mg-Al, Mg-Au, Mg-Ca, Mg-Cu, Mg-Ga, Mg-Ge, Mg-In, Mg-K, Mg-Sc, Mg-Si, Mg-Sn, Mg-Ti, Mg-Y, Na-Al, Na-Ga, Na-Ge, Na-In, Na-Mg, Na-Pb, Na-Si, Na-Sn, Pd-Pt, Si-Ag, Si-Au, Si-Cu, Si-Ga, Si-Ge, Si-In, Si-Pb, Si-Sn, Si-Zn, Sn-Pb, Sr-Pb, Ti-Al, Zn-Ag, Zn-Ga, Zn-Ge, Zn-In, and Zn-Sn alloy systems. For each system, the behavior of the relationship between the prediction error and the computational efficiency can be found in the repository. For each Pareto-optimal MLP, its estimated accuracy, its computational efficiency, the input model parameters used for developing the MLP, and the distributions of the predicted energies can also be found in the repository. An appropriate MLP must be chosen from the Paretooptimal ones to perform an atomistic simulation according to its target system and purpose. The current MLPs often exhibit high predictive power for the properties shown in the following section. However, it should be noted that the current MLPs are not necessarily accurate for some properties and for structures far from those in the training dataset. Therefore, it is necessary to examine the predictive power for properties relevant to the target properties and their convergence behaviors in terms of the computational cost using the whole set of Paretooptimal MLPs. If there are no Pareto-optimal MLPs with high predictive power for the properties of interest, additional DFT calculations for their related structures and the re-estimation of model coefficients for the MLPs are desirable. Fujii and Seko investigated the grain boundary structures, grain boundary phonon properties, and lattice thermal conduction at grain boundaries using large-scale perturbed molecular dynamics and phonon wave-packet simulations with a Pareto-optimal polynomial MLP in silicon Thus, the convergence behaviors of the Pareto-optimal MLPs can play an essential role in finding a reasonable MLP. In the repository website, the convergence behaviors of the cohesive energy and the equilibrium volume for selected structures and the dependence of other properties such as elastic constants on the Pareto-optimal MLP can be easily accessed 1 . They should help users select an MLP from the Pareto-optimal MLPs. Based on the convergence behaviors, it is desirable to select MLPs showing high computational cost perfor- Convergence behaviors of the RMS error for the phonon frequency of the diamond structure, the lattice thermal conductivity of the diamond structure, and the grain boundary energies with respect to the computational time of MLP in silicon mance. In other words, they exhibit high computational efficiency without significantly increasing the prediction error. A procedure to determine such an MLP is to evaluate the convex hull of the distribution of MLPs. The convex hull provides a set of MLPs minimizing at + ∆E for some positive values of parameter a, where ∆E and t respectively denote the RMS error for the energy and the computational time per atom for a single point calculation. Since at + ∆E is regarded as a score for measuring the computational cost performance, the MLPs on the convex hull showing the converged values of properties can be candidates for use in the subsequent simulations. This section shows the predictive power of only a small part of the polynomial MLPs in the repository, whereas predictions of properties using the other MLPs can be found in the repository website Figure Figure Figure In Fig. - The high predictive power for the alloy formation energy enables us to predict the phase stability between ordered structures and accomplish accurate crystal structure searches in alloy systems. On the other hand, the formation energy of a given ordered structure is more challenging to predict accurately than its cohesive energy because high predictive power is required for not only the ordered structure but also the reference structures, e.g., hcp Ti and fcc Al in the Ti-Al system. Furthermore, the local geometry relaxation for the ordered structure is crucial for evaluating the formation energy. Therefore, MLPs are required to derive an accurate potential energy surface around the initial and equilibrium structures. Figure The predictive power of the MLPs for the elastic constants, phonon properties, and thermal expansion is examined. The predicted elastic constants for nine ordered structures in the Ti-Al system 32 are shown in Fig. The thermal expansion is more challenging to predict accurately than the phonon DOS and the phonon dispersion curves. Figure In Ref. 56, the temperature dependence of the lattice thermal conductivity of the diamond-type structure predicted using the polynomial MLP in silicon was also predicted. The lattice thermal conductivity was calculated by using the finite displacement method and solving the Boltzmann transport equation with the single-mode relaxation-time approximation implemented in phono3py 58 . To reconstruct the lattice thermal conductivity, the third-order force constants must be accurately predicted using the MLPs. As found in Fig. In the datasets used for developing the current polynomial MLPs, no structures in which crystal defects are explicitly introduced are included, although many of them are generated by introducing large lattice distortions and large atomic displacements into structure generators. Therefore, the predictive power for properties related to simple crystallographic defects should be examined before performing large-scale simulations with some crystallographic defects. Firstly, the predictive power for the vacancy formation energy is demonstrated. Figure where u and v denote the fractional coordinates defined by the vectors 110 /2 and 11 2 /2, respectively. Figure The GSFE surfaces predicted using the MLPs and DFT calculation are similar, whereas that predicted using the EAM potential is different from that predicted by the DFT calculation. Thus, the current polynomial MLPs should have high predictive power for the stacking faults and related properties. Nishiyama et al. examined the predictive power of polynomial MLPs for grain boundary properties by systematically evaluating the grain boundary energy for 100 symmetric tilt grain boundaries (STGBs), 110 STGBs, and 100 pure-twist grain boundaries in the fcc elemental metals Ag, Al, Au, Cu, Pd, and Pt This paper has overviewed the formulation of the polynomial MLP, the procedures for estimating the polynomial MLP, and the systematic development of the polynomial MLPs for various elemental and binary alloy systems. The polynomial MLPs are formulated using polynomial invariants for the O(3) group enumerated from order parameters in terms of products of radial and spherical harmonic functions. Combined with a dataset constructed by systematic DFT calculations for a wide variety of structures, the polynomial MLPs have high predictive power for many structures and properties. Currently, the polynomial MLPs with different tradeoffs between accuracy and computational efficiency for 164 elemental and binary alloy systems are available in the repository from the website 1 . The number of MLP entries in the repository is continuously increasing. In particular, MLPs with high computational cost performance in the repository, showing high computational efficiency without increasing the prediction error, should help users to perform accurate and fast atomistic simulations for most practical purposes.