We report the magnetic properties, electrical resistivity, and Vickers microhardness of as-cast and annealed high-entropy alloys (HEAs) FeCoNiPd and FeCoNiPt with the face-centered cubic structure. The heat treatment at 800 • C does not largely affect the physical properties in each HEA. The values of the Curie temperature and the saturation moment at 50 K are 955 K and 1.458 μ B /f.u. for the annealed FeCoNiPd, and 851 K and 1.456 μ B /f.u. for the annealed FeCoNiPt, respectively. Each HEA is a soft ferromagnet and shows metallic resistivity. The electronic structure calculations of both HEAs support the ferromagnetic ground states. The comparisons between experimental and theoretical values are made for the Curie temperature, the saturation moment, and the residual resistivity. The Vickers microhardness of annealed FeCoNiPd and FeCoNiPt are both 188 HV. The hardness vs. valence electron count (VEC) per atom plot of these HEAs does not largely deviate from an expected universal relation forming a broad peak at VEC∼6.8. This study would give some hints on designing a soft ferromagnetic HEA with high hardness. High-entropy alloys (HEAs) receive much interest due to their rich functionality, such as high strength, corrosion resistance, energy storage, radiation protection, superconductivity, soft ferromagnetism, and biocompatibility Magnetic HEAs are attracting much attention because of their good soft ferromagnetism coexisted with high strength and/or high hardness We are focusing on HEAs with the combination of 3d magnetic elements and noble metals (e.g., Rh, Ir, Pd, and Pt) The Vickers microhardness is usually measured to evaluate the hardness of a material. In HEAs, it is reported that the Vickers microhardness empirically correlates with the valence elec- This paper reports the magnetic properties, electrical resistivity, and hardness of as-cast and annealed fcc FeCoNiPd and fcc FeCoNiPt. The electronic structure was calculated to elucidate the ferromagnetism in each HEA. We have found that the heat treatment does not significantly influence the physical properties of FeCoNiPd and FeCoNiPt. The soft ferromagnetic behaviors are observed in both HEAs. The comparisons between experimental and theoretical values are made for T C , M s , and the residual resistivity. The hardness of FeCoNiPd and Fe-CoNiPt do not deviate from the empirical relationship between the hardness and the VEC. Polycrystalline samples of FeCoNiPd and FeCoNiPt were synthesized by a home-made arc furnace using constituent elements Fe (99.9 %), Co (99.9 %), Ni (99.9 %), Pd (99.9 %), and Pt (99.9 %) under Ar atmosphere. The button-shaped samples were remelted several times on a water-cooled Cu hearth and flipped each time to ensure homogeneity. The as-cast samples were annealed in an evacuated quartz tube at 800 • C for four days. Room temperature X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of samples were recorded using an X-ray diffractometer (XRD-7000L, Shimadzu) with Cu-Kα radiation. We used thin slabs cut from the samples due to their high ductility. The scanning electron microscope (SEM) images were collected using a field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM, JSM-7100F, JEOL). The chemical composition was also evaluated by an energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectrometer equipped with the FE-SEM. The temperature dependence of dc magnetization χ dc (T ) between 50 and 300 K was measured using VersaLab (Quantum Design). The high-temperature χ dc (T ) from 300 K to 1173 K was measured by a vibrating sample magnetometer (TM-VSM33483-HGC, Tamakawa) to estimate T C . The isothermal magnetization (M) curve at 50 K was taken using the VersaLab. The temperature dependence of electrical resistivity ρ (T ) between 3 K and 300 K was measured by a conventional dc fourprobe method using a home-made sysytem in a GM refrigerator (UW404, Ulvac cryogenics). The Vickers microhardness was measured under the applied load of 0.49, 0.98, 1.96, 2.94, and 4.903 N, respectively, using a Shimadzu HMV-2T microhardness tester. The holding time under the diamond indenter is 10 s. We also performed the electronic structure calculation using the coherent potential approximation (CPA) approach because of no report of the density of states (DOS) in the previous study Figure Figures Here we compare the magnetic properties of FeCoNiPd and FeCoNiPt with those of fcc FeCoNi. The lattice parameter, T C , and M s of fcc FeCoNi are reported to be 3.599 Å, 1000 K, and 163 emu/g (=1.687 μ B /f.u.), respectively Next, M s and H c of FeCoNiPd and FeCoNiPt are compared with those of related systems. The values of M s in the unit of emu/g for FeCoNiPd and FeCoNiPt after annealing are 116 emu/g and 88 emu/g, respectively. The corresponding values of FeCoNi-related systems Figure In the electronic structure calculations of fcc FeCoNiPd and fcc FeCoNiPt, the lattice parameters obtained for the annealed We have investigated the fundamental magnetic properties, electrical resistivity, and Vickers microhardness of as-cast and annealed fcc FeCoNiPd and fcc FeCoNiPt. After the heat treatment at 800 • C, both HEAs keep the single-phase fcc, and the annealing does not largely alter the physical properties. The values of T C and M s at 50 K are 955 K and 1.458 μ B /f.u. for annealed FeCoNiPd, and 851 K and 1.456 μ B /f.u. for annealed Fe-CoNiPt, respectively. The coercive fields of both HEAs are very small, and they are soft ferromagnets. In each HEA, the electrical resistivity shows the metallic temperature dependence. The electronic structure calculations of both HEAs were performed, and the ferromagnetic ground states were obtained. The total moments are close to those reported in the database made by the density functional theory calculation and agree with the experimental M s s. The theoretical values of T C and ρ res are also reported in the database. While the theoretical T C values are relatively higher than the experimental ones in both HEAs, good agreement is confirmed between the theoretical and experimental ρ res values. The database would be beneficial for the materials research on magnetic quarternary HEAs. In addition, the comparisons of magnetic properties of HEAs investigated and FeCoNi are made. The Vickers microhardness of FeCoNiPd or FeCoNiPt slightly decreases after the annealing. The hardness vs. VEC plot of these HEAs does not essentially deviate from the expected universal relation forming a broad peak at VEC∼6.8. This study provides a possible material design of soft ferromagnetic HEA with high hardness; a magnetic HEA based on FeCoNi with an alloying for tuning VEC=8 is promising.