We developed a process to fabricate nanoscale metallic gate electrodes on scanning probe cantilevers, including on the irregular surface of protruding cantilever tips. The process includes a floating-layer technique to coat the cantilevers in electron-beam resist. We demonstrate gate definition through a lift-off process, as well as through an etching process. The cantilevers maintain a high force sensitivity after undergoing the patterning process. Our method allows the patterning of nanoscale devices on fragile scanning probes, extending their functionality as sensors. Cantilevers are widely used in scanning probe microscopy, where they find application as force transducers in e.g. atomic force microscopy, magnetic force microscopy, and kelvin probe microscopy Based on an approach used for patterning on flakes of 2D materials FLOATING PMMA METHOD Fig. In order to define gates using the lift-off process, we first structure the non-contact AFM cantilever using focused ion beam (FIB) milling. Originally, the slope of the AFM tip with respect to the main cantilever surface is 54.7°, resulting from the anisotropic KOH etching of silicon used to fabricate the cantilevers. We succesfully cover cantilevers with such large slope angles with PMMA and perform EBL showing good pattern transfer after development. However, with these large slope angles, we find that the lift-off process does not fully remove the unexposed parts of the resist in the tip area. To improve lift-off, we therefore prestructure the tip by milling away part of it, adjusting its slope to ∼30°(see inset Fig. We also mill away selective parts of the tip in this step, resulting in a flat mesa at the top of the tip (see Fig. Before fabricating the gates, we use atomic layer deposition (ALD) to cover the cantilever with a 60 nm thick layer of Al 2 O 3 (Fig. For lift-off, the sample is submerged in acetone for at least 1 h at 50 °C (Fig. In order to be able to fabricate gates on cantilever tips with higher slopes, we developed an etching process which does not require a lift-off step, thus avoiding problems due to incomplete material lift-off. By overdosing the same type of PMMA as before, it can be used as a negative resist As shown in the work of Cai et al. For the cantilevers to maintain their function as sensitive scanning probe force transducers, it is important that their mechanical properties remain unaffected by the lithography processes. To evaluate this, we measure (in high vacuum, at room temperature) the resonance frequency and quality factor of the first flexural mode of a cantilever, before and after processing. We measure the quality factor using a ringdown method. Before processing, we measure a tipped cantilever with a quality factor of 80 k and a resonance frequency of 306.8 kHz. Next, we test the effect of our floating PMMA coating and liftoff process, first without any metal deposition. Here, we find no significant change in resonance frequency or quality factor. Finally, we measure after performing the lift-off process, this time with deposition of 5 nm Ti and 25 nm Pd gates, as in Fig. In future work, the resolution of the gate patterns could be improved by the use of thinner PMMA layers, or by etching down the developed PMMA layer before pattern transfer 