A promising direction for harnessing the laws of quantum mechanics to perform quantum computation 1 is the topological quantum computation 2, 3 , for which topological superconductivity is one of the physical platforms. Intensive theoretical studies 4-14 have been carried out and followed by tremendous experimental efforts 1. The topological surface superconductivity is hence expected in the three-dimensional (3D) system and the topological edge superconductivity in the two-dimensional (2D) system. The application of this measure to the intrinsic topological superconductors FeTe 1-x Se x (x ∼ 0.5) supports the validity of such an accessible, convenient, and reliable transport technique for the identification of topological superconductivity. The new form of theory on topological superconductivity together with the developed identification technique is expected to guide the search of topological superconductors in future. At the dawn of the 21st century, Alexei Yu Kitaev proposed a one-dimensional (1D) theoretical model of unconventional p-wave superconductor Inspired by the Kitaev chain model and the Read-Green model, more theoretical models of topological superconductivity are developed in conventional s-wave superconducting systems In 3D, the heterostructure formed by an s-wave superconductor (SC) and a topological insulator (TI) was proposed by Liang Fu and Charles L. Kane In these intrinsic candidates of topological superconductors, one also needs to confirm that the issue in the exploration of topological superconductivity. In the following, we demonstrate that the nucleation of superconductivity Nucleation is the first step of a thermodynamic phase transition prior to the bulk transition when there are preferential sites. In our case of topological superconductors, boundaries are preferential for the Cooper pairs to accumulate. Deep in the superconducting phase, contributions from the boundaries are negligible due to the lower dimensionality compared to the bulk. However, near the bulk phase transition, the bulk coherence length becomes so divergent that boundaries can also affect the bulk significantly, resulting in a nucleation prior to the bulk phase transition. To explore the nucleation of topological superconductivity on surfaces, similar to the previous theoretical models, we construct a theoretical model in Fig. We consider the Ginzburg-Landau (GL) regime, which is near the superconducting phase transitions and at distances greater than the zero-temperature bulk coherence length ξ 0 . Since the topological surface states usually extend to the bulk by a few atomic layers where ψ(r) is the superconducting order parameter and r = (x, y, z) is the spatial coordinate. The bulk Cooper pairs are described by the kinetic energy |Dψ| 2 /2m and the potential energy A|ψ| 2 . Here m is the electron mass, D = -i∇ -2πA/Φ 0 is the momentum operator with vector potential A and flux quantum Φ 0 = h/(2e), and A = α(T -T c0 ) depends on temperature T with T c0 being the bulk critical temperature. The surface Cooper pairs are described by the surface energy σ, which can be negative, zero and positive. In our model, without topological surface states, the surface energy is zero; while with topological surface states, the surface energy is negative. Microscopic derivations of such conclusion and Eq. (1) can be found in Methods. We would like to point out that ψ describes the pairing correlation, which is related to but not directly proportional to the energy gap of Bogouliubov quasiparticles. In the maintext, we deal with the topological case of negative surface energy (σ < 0). Other cases of σ ≥ 0 can be found in Methods. First we consider the nucleation at zero field. The free energy Eq. (1) has a negative surface energy, suggesting the preferential accumulation of the Cooper pairs on the open surface. As a result, the superconducting phase transition at zero field consists of two steps as the temperature goes down, whose order parameters are plotted in Fig. Next we consider the nucleation under a magnetic field B = ∇ × A. In fact, the mechanism at zero field also applies to the nucleation under finite fields, in which the negative surface energy requires order parameters to increase near the surface, so that the nucleated superconductivity can bear stronger magnetic fields. This enhanced critical field is denoted as the nucleation critical field B c3 (T ). In this work we focus on the type-II superconductor, but our theory of nucleation critical field also applies to a type-I superconductor sufficiently close to T c , as long as its Ginzburg parameter is not too small We start with examining the bulk nucleation of type-II superconductors under finite fields. Near the upper critical field B c2 , any bulk line away from the open surface could be a nucleus for Cooper pairs to accumulate, as found by Abrikosov in terms of vortices Due to the isotropic bulk free energy in Eq. ( We first consider in-plane fields B xy-plane. As shown in Fig. At weak fields and temperatures close to T c , the nucleated surface superconductivity is essentially 2D in the xy layer with an effective thickness ∼ l s along the z-axis. The nucleation critical field is thus and the critical exponent of the in-plane magnetic field is 1/2 As the magnetic field increases and the temperature is slightly away from T c , the nucleation critical field is found to be B c3 ∝ |T c -T | γ with the fractional exponent γ = 2/3, based on a heuristic argument as follows. In the trivial case, the inhomogeneity of nucleated bulk supercon-ductivity along the z-axis is characterized by the coherence length ξ, and when the magnetic flux trapped in the area ξ 2 is on the order of Φ 0 , the nucleated bulk superconductivity is destroyed. In the topological case, the inhomogeneity of nucleated surface superconductivity along the z-axis turns out to be characterized by the length ζ = (ξ 2 l s ) 1/3 . Similarly, when the magnetic flux trapped in the area ζ 2 is on the order of Φ 0 , the nucleated surface superconductivity is destroyed. Hence the in-plane nucleation critical field in the intermediate field regime is The exact order parameter and the exact nucleation critical field in the full GL regime are given in Methods, from which the weak field regime is found as B < 0.01B s , and the intermediate The full phase diagram of temperature and in-plane magnetic field in the GL regime is shown in Fig. In the regime B c2 < B < B c3 , nucleated superconductivity and topological states coexist on the surface, resulting in the topological surface superconductivity (TSSC). Then we consider out-of-plane fields B z-axis. As shown in Fig. The full phase diagram of temperature and out-of-plane magnetic field in the GL regime is shown in Fig. We have thus found two types of nuclei in 3D topological superconductors. At zero field, the only nucleus is the surface, and under finite fields, bulk nucleus also arises due to the orbital effect. Our methods can also be applied in 2D topological superconductors where topological surface states are replaced by topological edge states, and the surface nucleus is replaced by the edge nucleus. The model and results are summarized in Fig. We construct a 2D theoretical model as shown in Fig. Under in-plane fields, the orbital effect is screened In Table Our theory could be applied in intrinsic topological superconductors To examine the validity of the proposed critical field measure from experiments, we choose the well defined candidate of intrinsic topological superconductors FeTe 1-x Se x (x ∼ 0.5) as examples. The theoretical calculations Thanks for the high magnetic field measurements which were carried out on FeTe 0.52 Se 0.48 and FeTe 0.5 Se 0.5 at Toulouse in 2010 For 3D topological superconductors, one can analyze the evolution of electrical resistivity during the superconducting phase transition. According to the Mermin-Wagner theorem 1 The curves are the theoretical fitting results to the data points by using the critical exponent γ of 2/3 and 1 for the ab plane and c axis for the topological superconductivity with the surface state given in Table Table Microscopic derivations. To demonstrate the main steps of microscopic derivations, we consider the microscopic Hamiltonian at zero field with on-site attractive interaction among electrons where c = {c μ } T , c μ (r) denotes an electron at site r with band index μ, H(r, s) is the normal state Hamiltonian matrix of the topological material, and g > 0 is the on-site attraction strength between electrons. We would like to compute the s-wave pairing correlation ∆(r) = g c ↑ (r)c ↓ (r) in order to obtain the physics of superconductivity in this system, where O ≡ Tr(Oe where K is the kernel in terms of sum over Mastubara frequency ω = (2n + 1)πk B T (n ∈ Z): and we introduce eigenstates Hφ a = ξ a φ a , including both bulk states φ B and surface states φ S . Deep in the bulk, the kernel only involves bulk states and hence has full translation symmetry The bulk critical temperature T c0 and the bulk coherence length ξ 0 at zero temperature are determined by (v F is the bulk Fermi velocity) The introduction of the topological surface states on the open surface z = 0 breaks the translation symmetry along the z axis. On the scale r ≫ ξ 0 , the free energy can be rewritten as Here we introduce the superconducting order parameter ψ, the temperature-dependent potential energy A and the temperature-independent surface energy σ as follows 40 where N(r) is the local density of states, N 0 = lim z→-∞ N(r) is the bulk density of states, and Since gL ∼ ξ 2 0 , we expect l s ∼ ξ 2 0 /l c where l c is the decay length of topological surface states Ginzburg-Landau equation and de Gennes boundary condition. By minimal coupling -i∇ → D = -i∇ -2πA/Φ 0 , the derived Ginzburg-Landau free energy is then Eq. (1) of the maintext The variation of the Ginzburg-Landau free energy with respect to the order parameter reads In the thermodynamic equilibrium, δF = 0 for any δψ * . The variation in the bulk leads to the linearized Ginzburg-Landau equation (GLE) and the variation on the surface z = 0 leads to the de Gennes boundary condition (dGBC) Finally, at infinity we find the von Neumann-type boundary condition Nucleation at zero field in 3D topological superconductors. Without external fields A = 0, near the phase transition the GLE is and the dGBC reads The order parameter is hence localized exponentially on the surface corresponding to the onset critical temperature Nucleation under the in-plane fields in 3D topological superconductors. Without loss of generality, under a magnetic field B x along the x axis, we choose the Landau gauge A = (0, -Bz, 0), then the GLE can be written as and the dGBC is the same as the zero-field case since A z = 0: As plotted in Fig. where l B ≡ Φ 0 /2πB is the magnetic length, and D ν (η) is the parabolic cylinder function. Optimization of the critical field leads to k = 1/ξ, and the equation for the nucleation critical field B c3 = B(T ) is hence derived from dGBC Ginzburg-Landau free energy in 2D superconductors. In a 2D superconductor, the surface energy reduces to the edge energy σ ′ , and the Ginzburg-Landau free energy is where we assume the region of x ≤ 0 is the 2D superconductor. When edge states exist along the open edge x = 0, then σ ′ = -(2ml s ) -1 < 0, the GLE and dGBC in 2D are Nucleation at zero field in 2D topological superconductors. Without external fields A = 0, near phase transition the GLE is (-∇ 2 /2m + A) ψ = 0, and the dGBC reads The order parameter is hence localized exponentially on the edge ψ = exp(-|x|/l s ), corresponding to the onset critical temperature T c = T c0 + (2mαl 2 s ) -1 . Nucleation under the in-plane fields in 2D topological superconductors. Under a magnetic field B n in the xy plane ( n ⊥ ẑ), we choose the Landau gauge A = Bz n × ẑ, then A ≡ 0 since the superconductor is confined in the plane z = 0. In other words, the orbital effect of magnetic fields can be neglected in 2D superconductors. But the potential term A is modified by the magnetic field via Zeeman effect, and a magnetic energy is introduced Hence the GLE and the dGBC read -1 2m ∇ 2 + A + βB 2 ψ = 0, and ∂ x ψ -l s -1 ψ x=0 = 0 respectively. The solution is still localized exponentially on the edge ψ = exp(-|x|/l s ) as shown Nucleation under fields in 2D trivial superconductors. Without topological surface states, the superconductor is trivial, N(r) ≡ N 0 and the edge energy is zero (σ ′ = 0). In this case, there is no nucleation at zero field and hence there is only one critical temperature T c0 . There is no nucleation under in-plane magnetic fields as orbital effect is screened, and the Zeeman effect leads to B c3 = B c2 = α(T c0 -T )/β. There is an edge nucleus under the out-of-plane magnetic fields similar to Extended Data Fig. In summary, we find that in 2D, the critical exponent of magnetic fields in the trivial case is 1 along the out-of-plane direction and 1/2 along the in-plane directions, while in the topological case, the critical exponent is 2/3 along the out-of-plane direction and 1/2 along the in-plane directions, where the plane is the superconductor itself. These results are also listed in Table Nucleation in superconducting heterostructures. When the region of z > 0 is a metal or an insulator, a superconducting heterostructure is formed. in two magnetic field directions. The excellent agreement between the theory and experiments adds solid evidence for the topological superconductivity in the studied FeTe 1-x Se x from the high magnetic field measurements. Importantly, the comparison demonstrates that the critical field measure is indeed effective and powerful in judging topological superconductivity.Besides the critical field measure, the electrical resistivity at zero field also carries up the feature of topological superconductors. For 2D topological superconductors, one can measure the local tunneling conductance at zero bias