We report direct imaging of boundary magnetization associated with antiferromagnetic domains in magnetoelectric epitaxial Cr2O3 thin films using diamond nitrogen vacancy microscopy. We found a correlation between magnetic domain size and structural grain size which we associate with the domain formation process. We performed field cooling, i.e., cooling from above to below the Néel temperature in the presence of magnetic field, which resulted in the selection of one of the two otherwise degenerate 180 0 domains. Lifting of such a degeneracy is achievable with a magnetic field alone due to the Zeeman energy of a weak parasitic magnetic moment in Cr2O3 films that originates from defects and the imbalance of the boundary magnetization of opposing interfaces. This boundary magnetization couples to the antiferromagnetic order parameter enabling selection of its orientation. Nanostructuring the Cr2O3 film with mesa structures revealed reversible edge magnetic states with the direction of magnetic field during field cooling. Under zero applied magnetic field and below Néel ordering temperature (TN) the antiferromagnetic (AFM) interactions in AFM materials lead to a collinear or noncollinear spin orientation in the ground state that can be represented by one single vector of unit length, called the Néel vector. The samples used in this study consist of Cr2O3 films grown on (0001) sapphire substrates. The sapphire substrates were cleaned using a modified Radio Corporation of America protocol. The NV-SPM microscope (Fig. NV magnetometry probes the stray magnetic field resulting from local surface spins Where D is the zero-field splitting = 2.87 GHz, γ NV = 28 GHz/T is the gyromagnetic ratio of the electron spin. The second term of the Hamiltonian is the Zeeman splitting term. By increasing /decreasing the amplitude of BA the resonance of the |m s = 0 > to |m s = -1 > transition peak shift to higher/lower frequencies respectively. By monitoring the NV fluorescence increase/decrease, we can measure the magnetic field generated by the magnet BA and the additional local stray field BNV generated from scanning across the spin textures of Cr2O3 film. This is the basis of DC magnetic sensing scheme of NV magnetometry. For our measurement we used B dual-Iso imaging method In most of surface magnetometry techniques, the inverse problem is used to calculate the magnetization distribution. The size of the measured domains varies between 200 nm to 2 m and it is bigger than the average AFM domain size measured on granulated films (~ 230 nm). The antiferromagnetic domain pattern in Cr2O3 film is strongly affected by the applied magnetic field and temperature conditions, as shown in Fig. Of notice is the spatial resolution of our NV-SPM microscope (~ 50 nm), as determined from the magnetization reconstruction of BNV map in Fig. In Summary, NV stray-field imaging measurements on magnetic field cooled epitaxial Cr2O3 films revealed switching of the AFM order to just one magnetic state we explained by the presence of a parasitic magnetic moment, tied to Néel vector. The domain formation in PLD grown samples is different from the domain formation in sputtered samples where structural grains act as nucleation centers giving rise to an increased number of domains with reduced size. At the same time, the domain wall width seems to be unaffected by the growth method and is primarily controlled by a narrowing mechanism caused by lattice strain. The lattice strain depends on the mismatch between substrate and thin film and, hence is identical for all Cr2O3 thin films grown on c-plane sapphire. Furthermore by nanostructuring the chromia film we created edge states that switch its orientation based on the direction of applied field during field cooling experiments. These results could motivate further investigations of DW engineering in antiferromagnets. 