We have investigated the surface of lithium metal using x-ray photoemission spectroscopy and optical spectroscopic ellipsometry. Even if we prepare the surface of lithium metal rigorously by chemical cleaning and mechanical polishing inside a glovebox, both spectroscopic investigations show the existence of a few tens of nanometer-thick surface layers, consisting of lithium oxides and lithium carbonates. When lithium metal is exposed to room air (~50% moisture), in situ real-time monitoring of optical spectra indicates that the surface layer grows at a rate of approximately 24 nm/min, presumably driven by an interface-controlled process. Our results hint that surface-layer-free lithium metals are formidable to achieve by a simple cleaning/polishing method, suggesting that the initial interface between lithium metal electrodes and solid-state electrolytes in fabricated lithium metal batteries can differ from an ideal lithium/electrolyte contact. Recently, metallic lithium (Li) electrodes have attracted attention due to their potential application for lithium metal batteries (LMBs). Here we report that at least a few nanometer-thick lithium carbonate layers commonly exist on lithium metal surfaces. Even if we perform a thorough surface-preparation of lithium metal, i.e., cleaning and mechanical polishing inside a glove box or a dry room, the nanometer-thick surface layer is observed by x-ray photoemission spectroscopy (XPS) and optical spectroscopic ellipsometry (OSE). Moreover, when lithium metal is exposed to ambient conditions, the surface layer grows at a rate of approximately 24 nm/min according to real-time monitoring of in situ optical spectra. Our results indicate that achieving a surface-layer-free lithium metal is a rather formidable task without a chemical etching or physical removal process. Because of this, the initial interfacial states between lithium metal electrodes and solid-state electrolytes in most fabricated solid-state LMBs can be far from a perfect lithium/electrolyte contact. It can also influence the SEI layers formed in the conventional LMBs with liquid electrolytes since the surface state of lithium metal will significantly impact the electrolyte reductions. We prepared mirror-like surfaces with 0.75-mm-thick lithium metal foils (Alfa Aesar), as shown in Fig. The chemical composition of the surface layer was revealed using XPS measurements. The Kα x-ray photoemission spectra of (a) Li 1s (b) C 1s, and (c) O 1s orbitals are observed, as shown in Fig. The OSE results, shown in Fig. Figure It is also important to investigate how the surface layer would change when the sample is exposed to the ambient condition. Ψ(ω) and Δ(ω) change drastically as a function of time after lithium metal is exposed to air (humidity ~50%), as shown in Fig. • , change systematically with an isosbestic point at around 2.4 eV as the exposure time to air increases (Fig. Our in situ spectroscopic investigations of both XPS and OSE give indispensable information about the existence of the surface passivation layer of lithium metal even after rigorously preparing its surface inside a glovebox. Hence, the potential impact of this lithium passivation layer should be taken into account when understanding the interface phenomena between lithium metal and solid-state electrolytes, including charge transfer, interfacial reactions, and interfacial mechanical stabilities. Lithium oxide (Li2O) and lithium carbonate (Li2CO3) are insulating materials, of which layers may suppress electrolyte decomposition. As a result, the additional SEI layers formed on the top surface may not be dense enough to protect the lithium metal electrode effectively. On the other hand, lithium carbonate is an electronic insulator but a Li + ionic conductor. It was suggested that glassy Li2CO3 would be desirable for efficient SEI 