Achieving electrical injection of exciton-polaritons, half-light, half-matter quasiparticles arising from the strong coupling between photonic and excitonic resonances, is a crucial milestone to scale up polaritonic devices such as optical computers, quantum simulators and inversionless lasers. Here we present a new approach to achieve strong coupling between electrically injected excitons and photonic bound states in the continuum of a dielectric metasurface monolithically patterned in the channel of a light-emitting transistor. Exciton-polaritons are generated by coupling electrically injected excitons in the gate-induced transport channel with a Bloch mode of the metasurface, and decay into photons emitted from the top surface of the transistor. Thanks to the high-finesse of the metasurface cavity, we achieve a large Rabi splitting of ~200 meV and more than 50-fold enhancement of the polaritonic emission over the intrinsic excitonic emission of the perovskite film. Moreover, we show that the directionality of polaritonic electroluminescence can be dynamically tuned by varying the source-drain bias which controls the radiative recombination zone of the excitons. We argue that this approach provides a new platform to study strong light-matter interaction in dispersion engineered photonic cavities under electrical injection, and paves the way to solution-processed electrically pumped polariton lasers. Exciton-polaritons are bosonic quasiparticles arising from the strong coupling between excitons and confined photons. The hybrid nature equips exciton-polaritons with extremely small effective mass, strong nonlinearities and fast relaxation, The typical platform for studying electrically driven exciton polaritons is that of light emitting diodes (LEDs) integrated with distributed Bragg reflector (DBR) microcavities, Dielectric metasurfaces, on the other hand, enable complete mode and dispersion engineering of the polaritons, but achieving electrically driven exciton-polaritons in metasurfaces is challenging due to the need of smooth contacts between the active materials and the charge injection layers to guarantee efficient charge carrier transport. By comparison, the lateral configuration of light-emitting transistor (LET) devices enables the fabrication of pixelated metasurfaces directly in the emission zone, with minimal degradation of device performance. In this work, we demonstrate electrically driven exciton-polaritons in a perovskite lightemitting transistor with metasurfaces directly patterned into the open surface between top electrodes. Metal halide perovskites are chosen as both, active medium and dielectric matrix due to their unique combination of high optical gain and luminescence quantum yield, good charge carrier transport, and high refractive index. The high refractive index of metal halide perovskites allows the monolithic integration of functional dielectric metasurfaces in light-emitting devices. The reduction of EL emission energy compared to the PL spectrum peaking at 1.66 eV may be due to energy transfer toward the smaller bandgap phase or emission from radiative trap states of the MAPbI3 film upon electrical injection (Fig. The perovskite metatransistor transfer characteristics show predominantly n-type charge transport behaviour with an on-off ratio larger than 10 3 and electron mobilities up to ~0.16 cm 2 V -1 s -1 (Fig. To fulfil the criteria of strong coupling, the averaged decay rate of the excitonic (γ) and photonic resonances (κ) has to be smaller than the rate of the energy exchange (g) between them, i.e., 2g ≥ (κ + γ)/2 Both TM and TE polarizations support symmetry-protected BICs at the Γ point located near 1.58 eV and 1.76 eV, respectively, indicated by the white arrow. The BICs are evidenced by the vanishing reflectance at the normal incidence, corresponding to the intrinsic near-zero linewidth and the ultrahigh radiative Q-factor of the passive metasurface (Fig. Interestingly, the polaritonic EL reaches a maximum 56-fold enhancement under TE polarization and 15-fold enhancement under TM polarization compared to the excitonic emission from the unstructured portions of the device channel, due to Purcell enhancement and scattering from the exciton reservoir into the LPB (Fig. Unlike conventional LEDs where charge injection, and thus emission, is homogeneous across the active region of the device in the vertical multilayer stack, the recombination (emission) zone of LETs can be shifted towards the drain or the source electrode by adjusting the source-drain bias In conclusion, we demonstrated electrically driven exciton-polaritons in a MAPbI3 lightemitting metatransistor with maximum Rabi splitting energy of 206 meV at 78 K. Low damping rates of the photonic BICs supported by the metasurface facilitate their strong coupling with the perovskite excitonic resonance to form polariton BICs under optical or electrical injection. This leads to more than 50-fold enhancement of EL from the LPB over the excitonic emission of the unpatterned MAPbI3 film. Moreover, the directionality of the polaritonic emission can be reversibly tuned by controlling the position of the recombination zone within the transistor channel with different source-drain biases. Our proof-of-concept demonstration shows that the light-emitting metatransistor platform, which is compatible with various monolithic cavity designs and pixelated metasurface fabrication, enables complete polaritonic mode and dispersion engineering for the study of strong light-matter interactions under electrical excitation. To assess whether the threshold for polariton lasing is within reach, we estimated that the charge carrier density in the unoptimized MAPbI3 LET device (1.2×10 17 cm -3 ) is only one order of magnitude lower than the threshold density obtained for photonic BIC lasing in MAPbI3 metasurfaces (1.6×10 18 cm -3 ), Perovskite LETs were fabricated in a bottom-gate and top-contact configuration on heavily p-doped Si substrates with a thermally grown SiO2 (500 nm) layer as the gate insulator. MAPbI3 thin films were fabricated from a 1.3 M precursor solution of CH3NH3I (Dyesol) and PbI2 (99.99%, TCI) (molar ratio 1:1) in anhydrous dimethylformamide (DMF, Sigma-Aldrich). The as-prepared solution was magnetically stirred for 2 hrs at 373 K in N2 filled glovebox, then filtered by a polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) syringe filter (0.45 μm) before spin-coating. Prior to perovskite deposition, substrates were cleaned with ultrasonication for 15 min in acetone, isopropanol and deionized water. Subsequently, substrates were dried with the flow of nitrogen, followed by an oxygen plasma cleaning treatment. The perovskite precursor solution was spin-coated onto the quartz substrates with a speed of 4500 rpm for 30 s using the anti-solvent deposition method, with toluene drop-cast on the substrates 5 s after starting spinning. The resulting films were finally annealed at 373 K for 15 min. Afterwards, 100 nm thick Au electrodes were thermally evaporated in high vacuum (~10 -6 mbar). To avoid thermal decomposition of the perovskite films, samples were placed on a water-cooled substrate holder at 291 K during the electrode deposition. The resulting LET channel length (L) and width (W) were 80 μm and 1 mm, respectively. To complete the metatransistor devices, nanobeam arrays were patterned on the perovskite film by focused ion beam (Helios 600 NanoLab, FEI) milling to form the subwavelength grating metasurface. The lateral dimension of each fabricated metasurface was 30 μm×30 μm. Electrical and optical characterization was carried out using a temperature-controlled probe stage (HFS600E-PB4/PB2, Linkam) at the temperature of 78 K in the dark and under vacuum (~10 -3 mbar). DC characteristics were acquired with a 2-channel precision source/measure unit (B2902A, Agilent). Charge-carrier mobilities were extracted from the forward sweeping of transfer characteristics obtained at Vds = 40 V, using the conventional equations for metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS) transistors in the saturation regime: Photoluminescence spectra were measured using a home-built setup based on an optical microscope (Eclipse LV100, Nikon) with LU plan fluor × 10 and × 50 objectives. The excitation source was a 405 nm picosecond laser diode (P-C-405B, Picoquant) operated at a 40 MHz repetition rate. The PL signal was detected by an AvaSpec ULS-RS-TEC, Avantes spectrometer. Electroluminescence measurements of unpatterned devices were performed on the same optical setup as the PL measurement, under AC-driven mode by applying constant drainsource bias (Vds=80 V) and square wave bias to the gate electrode (100 kHz modulation frequency), using an arbitrary waveform generator (3390, Keithley) coupled with a highvoltage amplifier (WMA-300, Falco Systems). Optical images and videos were taken and acquired by a cooled sCMOS scientific camera (PCO.edge 3.1m) coupled to the optical microscope. Angle-resolved reflection, PL, and EL measurements were performed with a home-built micro-spectrometer. The system consists of an inverted optical microscope (Nikon Ti-U), a spectrograph (Andor SR-303i with 150 lines/mm grating), and an electron-multiplying charged-coupled detector (EMCCD, Andor Newton 971). A lens system along the light path between the microscope and the spectrograph is used to project the back focal plane of the collection objective (Nikon ×50, with numerical aperture NA=0.45) onto the slit of the spectrograph. This configuration allows spectral measurement with angular information corresponding to the NA of the objective. A linear polarizer placed on the optical path of the lens system was used to select the collection polarization. A halogen lamp was used as an excitation source in reflection measurements, while in PL measurements, samples were excited by a 488 nm continuous wave solid state laser. The coupling between photon and exciton resembles the coupling of two harmonic oscillators, so the system can be described by the coupled oscillator model. Assuming the photonic oscillator in the optical cavity possesses the resonance energy of E cav with the decay rate of γ cav while the excitonic resonance has the energy of E exc with a nonradiative decay rate of γ exc , the Hamiltonian of this system can be written with a coupling strength of 2g 0 (corresponding to the Rabi splitting energy ħΩ) and the system can be described by the following eigenvalue equation: The C and X are the weighing factors of the photonic and excitonic oscillator, referring to the Hopfield coefficient. Let ∆E = E exc -E cav , X and C are given by: Solving the eigenvalue equation ( where, the E UP and E LP are the energy of the lower polariton state and upper polariton state, respectively. The formation of these two new eigen modes indicates a clear anticrossing behavior. Assuming a non-dispersive E exc with regard to the in-plane wave vector k ∥ , the dispersion of the polariton bands can be determined by the dispersion of the photonic bands E cav (k ∥ ). The coupling strength between the two oscillators must be larger than the averaged decay rates in order to observe the splitting of the lower polariton state and the upper polariton state: The angle-resolved reflection spectra were computed in Comsol Multiphysics 5.4. Floquet periodic boundary conditions were used in the transverse direction, and perfectly matched layers were used in the propagation direction. The system was excited by a periodic port above the array. The far-field distribution of the emission in the momentum space was calculated by the reciprocity method, i.e., integrating the electric field intensity (~|E| 2 ) inside the perovskite grating metasurface for different angles of incidence. The optical bands and Q-factors were calculated by an eigenfrequency solver using the same model. 