We report on the influence a preferential magnetic vortices motion has on the magnitude of the inverse ac Josephson effect (the appearance of dc current Shapiro steps) and the coherent operation of asymmetrical parallel arrays of YBa2Cu3O7- Josephson junctions (JJ) irradiated with microwave (MW) radiation in the presence of an applied magnetic field B. The preferential direction of motion of the Josephson vortices is due to the asymmetry-induced ratchet effect and has a dramatic impact: for a particular positive dc bias current I when the flux-flow is robust multiple pronounced Shapiro-steps are observed consistent with a coherent operation of the array. This suggests an efficient emission/detection of MW in related applications. In contrast, when we reverse the direction of I, the flux-flow is reduced and the Shapiro-steps are strongly supressed due to a highly incoherent operation that suggests an inefficient emission/detection of MW. Remarkably, by changing B slightly, the situation is reversed: Shapiro steps are now suppressed for a positive I, while well pronounced for a reverse current -I. Our results suggest that a preferential vortex-flow has a very significant impact on the coherent MW operation of superconducting devices consisting of either multiple JJs or an asymmetrically biased single long JJ. This is particular relevant in the case of flux-flow oscillators for sub-terahertz integrated-receivers, flux-driven Josephson (travelling-wave) parametric amplifiers, or on-chip superconducting MW generators which usually operate at bias currents in the Shapiro step region. Achieving coherent microwave (MW) operation of Josephson junctions (JJ)-based devices operating in the presence of an applied magnetic field B is essential in many applications such as MW generators/detectors Remarkably, when we change the value of the B field slightly the opposite occurs: the Shapiro steps are now strongly supressed for positive I, while they are well pronounced for negative I (in agreement to general features of dynamical equations which are invariant under B→-B, I→ -I, x→-x transforms). Based on extensive numerical simulations we were able to explain this behaviour by various degree of coherence reached in the 10 JJ-arrays. Our results are particular relevant where reaching coherent operation in JJ-array-based devices is essential such as fluxflow oscillators for sub-terahertz integrated-receivers The JJ-arrays were fabricated by depositing high-quality epitaxial, 100 nm thick c-axis Families of IVC's and dI/dV ' s were measured by a 4 point-contact method at various temperatures T between 10K and 49K, for different B field values in the range (-53.5 T, 53.6 ) and various MW powers (MW voltage bias VMW in the range 1-50 mV). The B field was changed in small steps of n. Shapiro steps are better defined on dI/dV's relative to the IV's data: they appear as peaks as opposed to current steps. For that reason in the following the dI/dV data will be analysed. Consequently, we define the height of the Shapiro steps as the height of the Shapiro peak on the dI/dV curves. An example of a complete set of data for a particular MW bias voltage VMW =4.5 mV is shown in Fig. To better understand the physics behind the asymmetry in the Shapiro steps induced by the preferential directions of vortices we perform numerical simulations based on a model consisting of an array of resistively shunted junctions connected via superconducting inductances. The asymmetric Josephson transmission line can be described by a set of coupled ordinary differential equations In order to match the experimentally implemented design, n runs from 1 to 8 in the middle equation of set ( 