Graphene layers placed on SrTiO3 single-crystal substrates were investigated using temperature-dependent confocal Raman spectroscopy. This approach successfully resolved distinct Raman modes of graphene that are often untraceable in conventional measurements due to the strong Raman scattering background of SrTiO3. Information on defects and strain states was obtained for a few graphene/SrTiO3 samples that were synthesized by different techniques. This confocal Raman spectroscopic approach can shed light on the investigation of not only this graphene/SrTiO3 system but also various two-dimensional layered materials whose Raman modes interfere with their substrates. Understanding the properties of graphene deposited on various substrates or templates is essential for the advancement of graphene-based device applications. The physical properties of the two-dimensional (2D) carbon atoms in a honeycomb lattice are strongly influenced by the substrate material However, characterizing graphene layers placed on SrTiO3 substrates has been a formidable task. Raman spectroscopy is one of the standard non-destructive tools for inspecting the properties of graphene layers since Raman spectral features can tell us about the sample's defect densities and types Nevertheless, this approach has had limitations for graphene/SrTiO3 samples because a strong multiphonon scattering of SrTiO3 makes both the D mode and G mode peaks untraceable in conventional micro-Raman spectroscopic measurements, as shown in Fig. In this letter, we report that confocal Raman spectroscopy combined with simple spectral subtraction can be used effectively for characterizing graphene layers placed on SrTiO3 single crystals. By aligning the confocal plane of the laser beam, we can obtain the Raman spectra of graphene layers and SrTiO3 substrates, respectively, with a substantially reduced spectral intensity overlap. This approach of confocal Raman spectroscopy overcomes the drawback of conventional micro-Raman spectroscopic measurements and reveals inelastic light scattering peaks of graphene layers, enabling quantitative spectral analysis. For example, Raman spectra of two different graphene samples that are synthesized using silicon carbide (SiC) and germanium (Ge), respectively, and transferred to SrTiO3 substrates indicate that they have distinct defect densities and types. Temperature-dependent Raman spectra reveal that graphene layers on SrTiO3 experience strain from the substrate that is different from either silicon (SiO2/Si) substrates or copper (Cu) foils. The outcome of this confocal Raman spectroscopic approach on graphene/SrTiO3 provides indispensable information not only in understanding the material but also in the device application for remote epitaxy of functional oxides. graphene/SrTiO3 sample without a need of additional SrTiO3 reference measurement. We can distinguish the spectral features of graphene (red curve) and SrTiO3 (blue curve) even though there are some common peaks near 1200 -1700 cm -1 between the two. The graphene-focused spectrum (red curve) also exhibits the multiphonon peaks of SrTiO3 due to the confocal plane being thicker than the graphene layer, i.e., 0.5 μm > 0.35 nm. Nevertheless, by subtracting the SrTiO3-focused spectrum (blue curve) from the graphene-focused spectrum (red curve), we can obtain the graphene-only spectrum (black curve), which is consistent with the previously reported Raman spectrum of graphene Temperature-dependent confocal Raman spectra show that the graphene layer on SrTiO3 substrates exhibits a distinct temperature coefficient compared to other graphene layers transferred to SiO2/Si substrates and grown on Cu foils. Figure Figure 