Titanium and niobium are the main materials used for the fabrication of Superconducting Radio Frequency (SRF) cavities. These two metals are usually joined , using various welding techniques, using a third material in between. This contribution focuses on the development of an innovative electron beam welding technique capable of producing a strong bond between these two different materials. Several samples are produced and tested to assess the mechanical strength at room and cryogenic temperature as well as the composition of the resulting welded joint. Also, the first units of the Single Spoke Resonator type 2 (SSR2) cavities for the Proton Improvement Plan-II (PIP-II [1]) have been fabricated joining directly various grades of titanium to niobium and results gathered through the fabrication will be reported. to prove that such joints can be suitably used for the fabrication. Such joints are mechanically characterized at Room Temperature (RT) and at Liquid Nitrogen (LN) temperature. Energy Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy (EDS) is also used to check if the titanium can diffuse into the niobium as part of the welding process and following heat treatment. The materials used for the weld development are: • High purity niobium (Nb) (Residual Resistivity Ratio >300) • Titanium Grade 2 (Ti Gr.2) (UNS R50400) SRF cavities used in particle accelerators are, for the most part, manufactured by forming, machining and Electon Beam (EB) or Tungsten Inert Gas (TIG) welding materials such as Niobium, Titanium and Stainless Steel. Niobium, and in particular high purity niobium, is the metal used for the fabrication of the superconducting resonators because of its high transition temperature, high critical magnetic field and its availability in the forms of sheets and rods/tubes. Given the low operating temperatures of the superconducting structures (around 2 -4 K) and, in case of the need for proper heat dissipation, liquid helium is required. An external vessel (also called helium jacket), joined to the niobium resonator, is therefore needed. The search for vessel's materials that preserve appropriate strength and ductility at cryogenic temperatures and, among other characteristics, are also paramagnetic, commercially available and machinable/weldable sees the titanium as the one mostly used. One of the challenges of the cavity design is the development of the transition from the niobium resonator to the helium tank. Niobium resonators with titanium helium jackets, are historically joined using a third material that is an alloy of the 2: Nb55Ti. This approach increases the number of welded joints, and thus, the cost of the overall project with respect to joining the 2 materials directly together. While designing the new pre-production SSR2 (ppSSR2) cavity The Ti Gr.2 is a material that can be used for the construction of pressure vessel according to the ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code All the EB welds are performed using a Sciaky 60kV EB Table The base materials (Nb, Ti Gr.2 and Ti Gr.5) used to produce the welded coupons are cut according to ASTM Nb-Ti Gr. Nb side outside the welded area and HAZ both at RT and LN temperature. The Heat Treatment at 650 °C for 10 hours slightly reduce the strength of the base material:Nb Samples are prepared using a diamond saw before mechanically polishing the cross section of the weld. Images are acquired with the usw of a SEM.The EDS elemental characterization is also performed. Fig. A total of 3 out 4 welded flanges go through cleanroom cleaning, which involves ultrasonic cleaning with UPW and detergent, and dry cleaning using ionized nitrogen. The flanges are then sealed with a blanks using the same hardware that will be used on the SSR2 cavities, which includes threaded rods made of 316L Stainless Steel (SS), Silicon Bronze nuts and an aluminum gasket with hexagonal cross section. The blanks used to mate the welded ones are made of 316L SS as the flanges of the bellows that will be assembled on the SSR2 beamline A new type of EB welded joint is developed at Fermilab using Nb and 2 titanium grades. This allows to join directly the SRF cavities' most used materials enabling a step forward in the fabrication and design processes. The joints welded as part of this work showed structural integrity before and after HT and also at LN temperature. Titanium does not appear to contaminate the Nb side of the weld and the HT does not affect its morphology. The welded flanges passed cold shock in LN and leak check. The technology is deemed solid and is implemented for the fabrication of the SSR2 cavities at Fermilab 