Among various 2D materials, graphene has received extensive research attention in the past 2-30 years due to its fascinating properties. The discovery of graphene has provided a huge boost and a new dimension to materials research and nanotechnology. Many lightweight materials with good performance have been widely used in the aviation field, which has greatly promoted the development of military and civilian industries and In recent years, with the continuous development and progress of nanoscience and nanotechnology, we are pursuing new aviation materials with high reliability and long life. Graphene has a wide range of application prospects in the field of aviation materials due to its excellent mechanical, thermal, electrical, optical, tribological properties, super resistance to air permeability and super large specific surface area In 2004, K. S. Novoselov et al Figure Table Advantage Application prospects in aviation thinnest, hardest, strongest (1) The thickness is only the thickness of a single layer of carbon atoms; (2) Mohs hardness is higher than diamond; (3) Micro-strength can reach 125 GPa, which is more than 100 times that of traditional steel. Ultra-thin and ultra-light aviation composite material. Ultrahigh electronic conductivity (1)2× 10 5 cm 2 /(V*s) at room temperature, which is 100 times that of silicon. (2) The theoretical value is 1×106cm 2 /(V*s), reaching 1/300 of the speed of light Aerospace thermoelectric materials, integrated circuits Large specific surface area Up to 2630m 2 /g, much higher than activated carbon (1500m 2 /g) Aviation gas sensor High light transmittance, high toughness The light transmittance reaches 97.7%, and it will not break when stretched by 20% Solar battery 2 Application of graphene in energy devices in the aviation field In aviation energy devices, graphene is mainly used in supercapacitors and solar cells. Therefore, it will have a revolutionary impact on the development of aviation industry. A supercapacitor is an energy storage device that has high power and long cycle life, does not cause excessive pollution to the environment, and can achieve rapid charging and discharging functions. When graphene is used as the electrode of a supercapacitor, the specific capacity is about 100mAh/g. In the aviation field, supercapacitors can be widely used. For example, when the aircraft opens the door, it needs a particularly strong explosive power, and the supercapacitor will complete this function. It provides explosive power for the aircraft to open the door, with a service life of 25 years and 140,000 flight hours, which has been certified by Airbus. Solar cells can convert solar energy into electrical energy. After combining with graphene, it can significantly improve the transparency and conductivity of the material through doping or modification There are π bonds with weak binding energy in the direction perpendicular to graphene 2D plane(Figure The energy storage mechanism of supercapacitors is divided into electric double-layer capacitors and pseudocapacitive capacitors. Electric double-layer capacitors store energy through the double layer formed between the electrode and the electrolyte. The electrode materials are mainly activated carbon, carbon fiber, carbon nanotubes, graphene and other carbon materials; In pseudocapacitive capacitors, if the electroactive material is deposited on the surface or the 2D or quasi-2D space of the electrode material, the Faraday oxidation-reduction reaction occurs, and the capacitance related to the electrode charging potential is generated. The electrode material is mainly metal oxide and Conductive high molecular polymer The main disadvantage of supercapacitors is low energy density. The energy density of supercapacitors is 2∼10W•h/kg, which is lower than that of lead-acid batteries (20∼40W•h/kg), nickel-hydrogen batteries (40∼100W•h/kg) and commercial lithium-ion batteries (100∼ 200W•h/kg). Graphene materials with unique ultra-thin 2D structure, excellent conductivity (5000 S/cm), high specific surface area (2620 m 2 /g), high theoretical specific capacity (550F /g), high area specific capacity (21 F/cm 2 ) and good mechanical properties have been proved to be an ideal material for supercapacitor electrodes. Applied graphene electrode materials to supercapacitors can significantly increase their energy density by more than tens of times and greatly improve their power density Doping heterogeneous atoms in the graphene character can significantly improve its electrochemical performance. The introduction of heterogeneous atoms can change the intrinsic physical and chemical properties of graphene, including basic electronic properties, mechanical properties, and hydrophilic and lipophilic properties. Common doping heteroatoms include nitrogen atoms (N), boron atoms (B), sulfur atoms (S), and phosphorus atoms (P). Among them, N atoms are the most widely studied. According to the different positions of N atom doping, graphitized nitrogen, pyrrole nitrogen and pyridine nitrogen can be obtained. The latter two can significantly improve the electrochemical performance of graphene. The specific capacity of graphene electrode materials doped with nitrogen atoms is generally 200-400F/g, which is nearly 4 times higher than that of undoped graphene Graphene/metal oxide and graphene/conductive polymer are the two types of graphene composite electrode materials that have been studied most deeply. Common metal oxides include manganese oxide (MnO2) and ruthenium oxide (RuO), and conductive polymers include polyaniline and polypyrrole, etc. Metal oxides and conductive polymers can be used as pseudocapacitive electrode materials to undergo rapid and reversible redox reactions on the surface, thereby delivering high specific capacity. However, these materials themselves have disadvantages such as low conductivity and poor cycle performance, which greatly limits their practical application in supercapacitors. In order to improve this situation, graphene with high specific surface area, high conductivity and room temperature inertness is usually used to composite with metal oxides and conductive polymers to form a new type of pseudocapacitive electrode material. This type of graphene composite material combines the advantages of graphene and metal oxides or conductive polymers, and a significant synergistic effect can be produced between the two First, the pseudocapacitive material is loaded on the graphene surface to prevent re-stacking between graphene sheets, which not only facilitates ion transport, but also increases the active specific surface area available for graphene, thereby improving charge storage. Secondly, pseudocapacitive materials can usually be uniformly bonded to conductive graphene surfaces in special nanostructures or particles, not only greatly promoting reversible redox reactions on the surface of pseudocapacitive materials, but also accelerating the transmission of electrons, increasing the specific capacity of pseudocapacitive materials. Furthermore, the pseudocapacitive nanomaterials are anchored on the surface of graphene, which can effectively prevent the particles from gradually agglomerating and growing up and the electrodes powdered or destroyed during the repeated Faraday reaction process, thereby improving the cycle stability of the material. Therefore, the synergistic effect of the composite material can not only increase the conductivity of the oxide or polymer material, the specific capacity of the pseudocapacitive and the electric double layer of graphene, but also greatly improve the cycle stability of the pseudocapacitive electrode material It should be pointed out that the pseudocapacitive material and the graphene composite material undergo different preparation methods, and the mass specific capacity is very different. For example, the mass specific capacity of the polyaniline/graphene composite is 500-1200F/g, and the polypyrrole/graphene composite is 300-600F/g. The mass specific capacity of composite materials tends to increase as the content of pseudocapacitive materials increases, but its conductivity decreases. Compared with pure pseudocapacitive materials, the mass specific capacity of graphene composite materials may be slightly reduced, but its cycle performance and power density will be significantly improved Flexible supercapacitors are a very promising energy storage device. The key point of its development is to find electrode materials with good flexibility, high conductivity and excellent electrochemical performance. Graphene, especially graphene film and fiber materials are ideal raw materials for preparing flexible electrode materials. Based on graphene materials, macroscopic bulk electrode materials constructed through structural design and assembly, such as one-dimensional graphene fibers, 2D graphene films, and threedimensional graphene networks, endow the new type of graphene flexible electrodes with unique properties. It has the common characteristics of high specific surface area, developed pore structure, high conductivity, high breaking strength, and no need for additives and conductive agents. Importantly, these graphene flexible electrodes can be used as flexible support substrates and electrode conductive network skeletons, as well as high-performance energy storage electrode active materials, and can be widely used in flexible, bendable, and stretchable supercapacitors Hybrid supercapacitors generally refer to devices composed of different types of positive and anode electrode materials: one electrode is a battery material containing pseudocapacitors, and the other electrode is a double-layer capacitor material. Hybrid supercapacitors combine the fast charge and discharge characteristics of electric double layer materials and the high energy density of pseudocapacitors. They can have high power density and high energy density at the same time, making up for the vacancy that cannot be achieved in both batteries and supercapacitors. Graphene-based hybrid supercapacitors can obtain high energy density and power density at the same time, combined with the advantages of double layer capacitor and Faraday quasi capacitor, can better meet the overall requirements of the energy density and power density of the power system, suitable for short time large current discharge, can be used as the electric vehicle start and braking power supply For decades, with the emergence of new equipment and technologies, storage and effective use of solar energy has been a new way to encourage the exploration of clean energy production. The sun is rich, safe, and can be directly converted into cheap and clean electric energy without pollution and environmental problems. Photovoltaic materials and devices promote the conversion of sunlight to generate electricity through the photovoltaic effect. Due to its unique optical and electrical properties, graphene is a very important material for industrial applications and basic research. Graphene has the characteristics of high light transmittance, high carrier mobility, zero band gap and high mechanical strength. Graphene-based materials have been extensively studied in photovoltaic (PV) technology (Figure Dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSCs), as a promising low-cost solar cell, has attracted the interest of academia and industry due to its relatively high photoelectric conversion efficiency, low production cost and environmental friendliness Both organic solar cells and perovskite cells have material structure diversity and low cost. They have developed rapidly in recent years, and the photoelectric conversion efficiency has been continuously improved At present, the transparent conductive film (TCE) of solar cells is mainly made of indium tin oxide (ITO). However, due to the limited supply of indium on the earth, issues such as pH sensitivity With the continuous progress and update of preparation technology, researchers have conducted a lot of research on the application of graphene and its derivatives in solar cells. Graphene has the unique characteristics of high carrier mobility, low resistivity and transmittance, and 2D network, so it can be used as additives in electrodes, functional layers, absorber layers or semiconductor layers. Especially when used as electrodes in flexible devices, its mechanical stability and flexibility can solve the problems of rigidity and brittleness of traditional TCO. Although graphene-based photovoltaic devices have made significant progress, they still face many challenges in the future. It is necessary to develop a cost-effective technology for mass production of large-scale continuous graphene films, and also consider the influence of the number of graphene layers, doping, and functionalization on the overall performance of the device. In short, graphene has broad application prospects in solar cells, but more basic research and development are still needed to support the large-scale and commercialization of the solar photovoltaic industry A sensor is a detection device that can perceive the measured information, and can convert the sensed information into electrical signals or other required forms of information output according to a certain rule, so as to meet the requirements of transmission, processing, storage, display, recording and control, etc. re- quirements. The characteristics of sensors include: miniaturization, digitization, intelligence, multi-function, systemization, and networking. There are about 2,000 to 4,000 sensors on the plane. The main sensors are: airspeed tube, static pressure hole, temperature, stall sensor, gyroscope, angle of attack sensor, ground sensor, humidity sensor, acceleration sensor, etc. They play a huge role related to flight safety. Graphene has its own characteristics such as high conductivity, high toughness, high strength, large specific surface area and other outstanding properties, which can play a significant role in the field of sensors. For example, gas sensor: oxygen monitoring; strain sensor: aircraft load spectrum test; electrochemical sensor: aircraft corrosion detection; magnetic field sensor: aircraft high-precision navigation and positioning; photoelectric sensor: fuel control system for fuel control. Graphene is densely packed with sp2 carbon atoms and can be rolled up to form zero-dimensional fullerenes and one-dimensional carbon nanotubes. Because of this structure, the carrier dynamics is strictly limited in the 2D layer. The honeycomb lattice has two equivalent lattice points, A and B, as shown in Figure Scientists' growing interest in graphene is not only driven by its unusual physical properties, but also by its potential to develop various types of sensors. Its mechanical stiffness is about 1TPa, and its inherent breaking strength at 25% strain is 130GPa, which is comparable to the significant planar value of graphite and other materials with high mechanical strength A gas sensor is an electronic device that can qualitatively or quantitatively detect a specific gas. It has been widely used in many fields such as indoor and outdoor gas monitoring, industrial control, agricultural production, medical diagnosis, military and public security Since the first discovery of graphene, nanomaterials with two-dimensional (2D) structures have aroused widespread research interest worldwide Table Table Strain sensors monitor fatigue loads experienced by tactical aircraft at various speeds, weights, and mission configurations, and can monitor critical landing gear structures and control surfaces to prevent fatigue damage from high-gravity maneuvers and high-stress landings. With the unremitting pursuit of low cost and miniaturization of devices, traditional silicon semiconductors are facing challenges, and recent research on strain sensors has focused on nanomaterials. Similarly, low-dimensional carbon Graphene-based strain sensors have attracted much attention due to their potential applications in miniaturized, high-performance strain sensors, which will break the limitations of traditional silicon-based strain sensors. Even so, there is still a long way to go to realize commercial and sensitive graphene-based strain sensors. Fiber grating is a micro-optical component that has developed rapidly in recent decades. It has opened up a new application research field for fiber-optic sensing technology. The optical fiber is divided into three parts: core, cladding and coating layer from inside to outside along the radial direction. With a special ultraviolet light irradiation process, the refractive index of the fiber core is permanently perturbed to form a passive optical fiber device, and it can partially or completely reflect the light of a certain wavelength in the incident light, and the wavelength that meets the Bragg condition is reflected by the fiber grating. Fiber gratings have a certain sensitivity to changes in the surrounding environment. Zhang et al The aerospace industry is an area where sensors are used intensively, and it has very high requirements for sensor sensitivity, volume and weight. In order to monitor pressure, temperature, vibration, fuel level, landing gear status, wing and rudder position, etc., an aircraft needs to use more than 100 sensors. Therefore, the size, weight, and integration of sensors become important. The fiber grating sensor has only one optical fiber, and the sensitive element (grating) is made in the core. From the advantages of small size and light weight, almost no other sensor can compare with it. The application of fiber optic sensors in composite structures has been developed in the aerospace industry, and these industries clearly need these light-weight, rugged and durable sensors. The representative fact is that the optical fiber sensors have been all embedded in the laminated graphite composite board between the layers arranged in the same direction, and all the embedded optical fiber measurement sensors can directly measure the internal stress. The data from the fiber optic sensor is especially decisive under re-entry conditions, and the electrical signal in this case is often blurred due to radio frequency interference. The fiber grating is embedded in a large aircraft, combined with advanced fiber optic communication technology, can form a super distributed intelligent sensor network, which can monitor the internal mechanical performance and external environment of the large aircraft in real time, such as the stress and strain of the large aircraft , Temperature, structural damage and other health conditions. According to the measurement results, the following functions can be realized: (1) Automatic alarm and positioning of structural health The fiber grating structure health monitoring system automatically conducts real-time temperature and strain inspections on the installation area of the fiber grating sensor, detects abnormal fluctuations in the monitored parts of the large aircraft, and detects and alarms in time before possible accidents; (2) Status query The monitoring information of each monitoring point is saved to the large-capacity memory of the fiber grating demodulator, the system divides the data into historical information and real-time information according to time, and operation and maintenance personnel can dynamically adjust the real-time status monitoring time interval of monitoring points according to different periods to meet actual requirements. Managers and operators can view the physical parameter change curve of each monitoring point to provide data support for decision-making and maintenance; (3) Alarm condition setting The designer can set the alarm trigger conditions of the fiber grating structure health monitoring system to adapt to the differences in monitoring parameters of different parts and different flight conditions; (4) Line inspection and fault location function The analysis function of the optical fiber grating demodulator can accurately locate the loss and breakpoint position of the optical fiber transmission line, which is convenient for system debugging, maintenance and line overhaul. Although fiber grating sensing technology is still in the stage of rapid development, it is foreseeable that with the commercialization and performance of fiber grating sensors, graphene fiber grating sensors will surely show great vitality in the field of sensing. It plays an important and irreplaceable role in the construction of national defense and national economy, especially in the structural health monitoring of large aircraft, which has a very broad application prospect Corrosion is a material degradation phenomenon that affects all metals and structures By including graphene membranes that are sensitive to specific ions, molecules, and environmental parameters, aircraft corrosion monitoring technology can benefit from the selective sensitivity of functionalized graphene. For example, GO is sensitive to moisture and has been used in various sensors such as capacitive sensors, surface acoustic wave and RFID-based sensors In corrosion monitoring, pH changes are an important parameter indicating corrosion events and their progress. Therefore, monitoring the pH value will help maintain the safety and durability of the aircraft structure. Over the years, several pH sensing methods have been developed, the most common methods are based on paper strips and glass electrodes. However, the accuracy of these methods is limited by their fragility, low sensitivity and unsuitability for miniaturization In aircraft applications, the weight of the structure is a key parameter that determines its performance. The need for the lowest possible structural weight has led to the development of high-performance composite materials using carbon fiber and epoxy resin. In the past few years, their use has gradually increased, leading to a decline in the use of metal materials. Compared with traditional aircraft materials such as aluminum, titanium, and steel, composite materials are lighter in weight, have higher strength and stiffness values, and are also corrosion resistant The aircraft exposed some important problems during the flight, these problems will lead to its performance degradation, and even major accidents may occur. One of the problems is that lightning strikes will hit the surface of the aircraft Aircraft composite materials for lightning protection are generally divided into conductive and nonconductive types. Conductive composite materials are used to protect internal flow bands or damage and prevent electric field penetration. On the other hand, these are also non-conductive composite materials, and they cannot conduct lighting current because they are electrical insulators. Therefore, the electric field of a lightning strike can easily penetrate these materials. To prevent this problem, conductive coatings or paints combined with non-conductive composite materials can prevent electric field penetration. In addition, the application of non-conductive composite materials is usually used for secondary structures such as fairings, fins, wings and radomes, or for enclosures that are transparent to radar and radio waves In order to reduce the damage caused by lightning strikes to aircraft, researchers have developed various methods of nanomaterials. For example, a conductive carbon nanotube (bucky paper) rubber paper was developed to resist and disperse the effects of lightning; Bucky paper is an effective mechanical, electrical, thermal and other physical properties, and it is a viable engineering material. These materials are used in many applications, including actuators, capacitors, electrodes, field emission devices, radio frequency filters, strain sensing, etc. In the space shuttle, the most serious corrosion is the structure of the aircraft fuselage. During the take-off and climb phases, due to the temperature difference between the ground and high altitude, a large amount of condensation formed on the surface and interior of the aircraft fuselage. When the relative humidity of the atmosphere in the external environment exceeds 65%, a water film of about 0.001μm thick is deposited on the surface of the fuselage and structural parts The development level of heavy-duty coatings is an indicator to measure the advanced level of a country's coatings industry. Aiming at the phenomenon that aluminum alloys are easily corroded, a series of heavyduty anti-corrosion coatings have been developed at home and abroad. These mainly include: (1) Epoxy heavy-duty anticorrosive coating, a macromolecular chain of epoxy resin, which contains two or more epoxy groups. Thermosetting resins have high viscosity and are extremely hard. Therefore, it is widely used in building materials. However, epoxy resin has extremely high porosity, is easily corroded by oxygen, water, and chloride ions, and has poor acid resistance. Other disadvantages include poor ultraviolet rays and brittle paint film; (2) Polyurethane heavy-duty anticorrosive coating. Due to the reactive cyanate ester groups (-NCO) on the macromolecular chain, this material has extremely high flexibility and high viscosity, and has excellent wear resistance. In the field of heavy anti-corrosion, because of its mechanical properties, it is often used as a top coat to protect the substrate, but its anti-ultraviolet performance is poor, and the anti-corrosion performance is greatly reduced after ultraviolet aging; (3) Fluorocarbon coatings containing a large amount of C, and fluorocarbon resins with a binding energy of up to 485.6 kJ/mol F bond, have excellent chemical resistance and UV resistance. They are widely used in ships, pipelines and aerospace fields, but their adhesion and pigment wettability are poor In order to find better materials, a lot of research by scientific researchers. For example, Pourhashem et al Aviation tires Therefore, higher standards are set for comprehensive functional indicators such as strength, wear resistance, heat dissipation, grip, air tightness, and static conductivity of aviation tires; With the development of large aircraft, especially military aircraft, more stringent requirements have been placed on the comprehensive functional indicators of aviation tires. However, in the existing technology, aviation tires have problems such as poor wear resistance, short use cycle, impact friction block, poor heat dissipation leading to a decline in tire strength or even flat tire and weak tread grip, which is easy to lead to plane side sliding or rush out of the runway in rain and snow weather, which cannot meet the actual needs; Aviation tires also have a mandatory function of conducting static electricity. The friction between the tires and the ground during the take-off and landing of the aircraft, the friction between the surface of the body and the air in flight, and the electromagnetic mutual inductance generated by the operation of the aircraft control electrical equipment will generate a large amount of charge accumulation and generate static electricity. High-potential static electricity can cause electrical equipment to work instability, and even breakdown and burn electronic components, which is prone to fire when refueling. Static electricity is also very harmful to the body of drivers and passengers, especially under the premise of continuous improvement of the level of intelligence, static electricity hazards can cause serious safety accidents. In order to ensure the normal operation of aircraft equipment, especially electronic equipment, and protect the drivers and passengers from static electricity, it is stipulated that the static electricity of the aircraft body must be discharged through the tires during the landing and take-off process Graphene has outstanding mechanical properties: Graphene is a new material with the highest known strength. Its tensile strength is 125GPa, elastic modulus is 1.1TPa, and its strength limit is 42N/m 2 . Its structure is compact and has good flexibility. For example, packaging bags made of 100 nm graphene film can withstand the pressure of 2T heavy objects; Graphene has outstanding thermal conductivity: the thermal conductivity of graphene at room temperature is 5300W/ (m*k), which is 13 times that of copper; And graphene has good physical and chemical mutual solubility with polymer materials. It can be seen that the powerful and broad graphene is an ideal raw material for aero tires to derive static electricity. It can not only meet the requirements of static electricity, but also can effectively overcome the "magic triangle" effect of material functions, and realize a new material that improves the physical properties of aviation tires. Graphene is a contemporary new 2D nano-carbon material, and its excellent properties can be reflected in new aerospace materials. The excellent conductivity of graphene is widely used in supercapacitors, solar cells and lithium batteries. Due to its high toughness and high strength, graphene can be used in sensors comparable to the significant planar value of graphite and other materials with high mechanical strength. In addition, graphene also has broad prospects in aviation fields such as anti-corrosion materials, thermoelectric materials, and lightning protection materials. Because graphene is very difficult to produce on a large scale, graphene can only be used to transform or enhance aircraft, not to build them, but they can solve various problems in the aviation field, such as energy transmission, energy storage, as well as lightning protection and deicing protection materials. They can bring immeasurable influence to the aviation industry. In the future, when we want to develop high-reliability and long-life new aviation materials, we can pay more attention to graphene, a material with great potential.