The purpose of this research is to generate wheat straw based super absorbent which is eco-friendly. The chemical approach of graft-copolymerization is used to create this novel super absorbent polymer. Polyacrylic acid is the building block polymer that is utilized in the production of highly absorbent polymer. Furthermore, water absorption capabilities of these environmentally friendly absorbents are investigated in a variety of conditions and then compared to one another. The polymer is then tested for absorbency. It is discovered that several optimized factors, such as the time span of the immersed sample, the effect of different solutions, and the temperature, has an impact on the absorbencies of the super absorbent. Optical microscope pictures provided proof of the morphological characteristics. The excellent product is achieved with absorbencies of 251 percent in distilled water and 528.34 percent in a 4-weight percent sodium hydroxide solution, respectively. It is also discovered that the absorbency increased in accordance with the increase in temperature. At 80 degrees Celsius, the maximum absorbency is observed in water, at 548.6 percent. Superabsorbent polymers (SAPs), also known as hydrogels or hydrocolloids, can absorb and hold many times their own weight in fluids like water under moderate pressure. A change in the size of polymer gels as a result of exposure to particular environmental conditions alters their core structure as well as the optical and mechanical characteristics of the polymer network. It is because of this ability to withstand and absorb fluids up to a hundred times their own mass that they are referred to as "superabsorbent materials. "Superabsorbent polymers are now often employed in the production of sanitary items that absorb and retain bodily fluids Wheat straw can be modified through chemical method and used as skeletal material, on which some monomers such as AA and AM can graft so as to form superabsorbent composite Total methodology of this experiment can be divided into these parts: Acrylic Acid (C3H4O2) of reagent grade purity 98.5%, Ammonium per sulfate (APS), N-N.-Methylene-Bis-Acrylamide grade purity 97% were purchased from Khulna scientific, Khulna, manufactured, by Avon Chemical, United Kingdom. Sodium hydroxide (NaOH) solution and Chloroacetic acid were used for pulverization. Brine water solution, NaOH solution and Saline solution were made in the laboratory to do the absorbency test of the superabsorbent. Organic wheat straw was bought from Panchagarh district. It is an attractive class of organic compound used for synthesis of water absorbent. The wheat straws are chopped and dried in an 80 0 C drying oven for 8 h. The dried wheat straws are then grinded and the fine wheat straw powder is weighed 40g and dipped in a 500 ml beaker with 4% sodium hydroxide solution. The aqueous suspension is heated and stirred at 90 0 C for 3 h, and then the aqueous suspension filtered and washed with 95% ethanol solution. The filter residue is transferred into a beaker with 2.5% sodium hydroxide solution in water bath, and then interfused by 5g chloroacetic acid, and being stirred and heated at 70 0 C for 1 h. After that, the mixed solution is filtered with 75% ethanol solution, and the chemically modified pulverized wheat straw (CMPWS) is dried at 150 0 C. Dried Chemically modified pulverized wheat straw was grinded and gone through sieve to make Nano particles powder. An amount of chemically modified pulverized wheat straw powder (CMPWS), N, N'methylenebisacrylamide (MBA), ammonium per sulfate (APS) and acrylic acid (AA) with different degrees of neutralization were prepared by the following procedure. A weight quantity of dried CMPWS powder and 20g Acrylic acid were added into a flask and stirred. A solution of 5g ammonium per sulfate (APS) after neutralization, certain amount (1g) of MBA and 10ml de-ionized water were added. The water bath was kept at high temperature A specific quantity of the super-absorbent was immersed in distilled water, brine water, NaOH aqueous solution and saline solution to swell equilibrium, respectively. Swollen samples were then separated from unabsorbed water by filtered over a sieve screen. The water absorbency (QH2O) of super-absorbent composite was determined by weighing the swollen samples and calculated using the following equation: ) m1 and m2 are the weights of the dry sample and the water-swelling sample (g), respectively. QH2O is expressed as grams of water per gram of sample (g/g). Then it is mixed with distilled water and then allowed to hydrate at different temperatures to determine the absorption rate at different temperatures. And finally, these results are analyzed. Superabsorbent polymers were immersed in brine water, NaOH solution and saline solutions in order to test their ability to absorb water. Water absorption was studied on SAPC samples. Although the weight proportion of crosslinker and initiator remained consistent, the solution in each sample was different. Water absorption was measured by examining samples of superabsorbent polymer in various solutions for varied amounts of time. Water absorption by the specimen containing 54% Wheat straw was measured at 147 percent after it was submerged in brine water for one hour. However, specimens submerged in brine water showed an increase in water absorption as the immersion period increased. After two hours in brine water, the sample had the maximum water absorbency of 194 percent. Increase of absorbency continued until 4 hours. Then it reached saturation point. And the maximum absorbency was 215 in Brine water. The water absorbency of a specimen that had been soaked in water for one hour was measured to be in the region of 205 %. However, it was shown that increasing the duration spent submerged in water resulted in an increase in the water absorbency. After 2 hour the absorbency was 251%. Water absorbency in water reached saturation point after Six hours and the maximum absorbency was 503%. When immersed in 4% NaOH solution, polymer absorbed more water than other solutions. Water absorbency by the superabsorbent immersed for one hour in NaOH solution was measured in the range of 477%. However, it was also found that as the time of immersion was increased, increase in water absorbency for specimens immersed in NaOH solution was witnessed. The water absorbency of 528.34% was measured in the specimen having 54% wheat straw immersed in NaOH solution for Two hours. Increasing of absorbency continued till 10-12 hours for NaOH solution. And maximum absorbency was 1236%. The water absorbency of the superabsorbent after being submerged in Saline solution for one hour was measured to be in the region of 357 %. However, it was shown that increasing the length of immersion for specimens immersed in Saline solution resulted in an increase in the water absorbency of the specimens examined. SAP soaked in a saline solution for two hours had with a reading of 405.7 %. It reached saturation point after 10 hours. Maximum absorbency in saline solution was 1040%. For brine solution, the interactions between wheat straw and acrylic acid decreased gradually with increasing time consumption, resulting in decreased creation of physical and chemical cross-links in the matrix of polymer, and the elasticity of the polymer chains increases with more crosslinks in the polymer composite. The ability of the superabsorbent polymer composite to absorb NaOH solution is greater than water, saline water or brine solution. Carbon dioxide capture by chemical absorption has been one of the most popular approaches. However, low solubility of CO2 in water and high energy demand for absorbent regeneration hinder its feasibility in water. When NaOH was added with water these drawbacks were hindered and it consumed more water. To measure the effect of temperature in absorbency, samples were dipped in water solution at 28.3 0 C, 40 0 C, 60 0 C and 80 0 C respectively. The water absorbency of the specimen in water at 28.3 0 C was observed by keeping 1 hour. It was seen that with time water absorbency was increasing. At 28.3 0 C the water absorbency was in the range of 251%. Water absorbency seemed to increase with increasing temperature. Specimen was kept in water at 40 0 C for 1 hour. The water absorbency at 40 0 C was in the range of 368.2%. So, it was seen temperature increasing effecting the water absorbency. In the case of 61.3 0 C, Water absorbency appeared to rise more rapidly as temperature increased. For one hour, the specimen was maintained in water at 61.3 0 C. At 61.3 0 C, the water absorbency was in the region of 408.6 %. Temperature increases resulted in an increase in absorbency. The absorbent polymer in aqueous solution exhibited the greatest absorbency when heated to 80 0 Celsius. For one hour, the specimen was submerged in water at 80 degrees Celsius. At 80 degrees Celsius, the water absorbency was in the region of 548.6 %. As a result, the influence of temperature was thoroughly investigated, and it was discovered that the absorbency rose as temperature increased. Increased molecule movement (vibration and rotation) occurs at higher temperatures; hence, more energy is required at higher temperatures, resulting in a rise in absorbance. The interactions between wheat straw and acrylic acid decreased gradually with increasing temperature, resulting in decreased cross-linking of the polymer matrix in a physical and chemical manner, which enhances the elasticity of the polymer chains. That's why absorbency increases with increasing temperature. 3), a tighter surface and less porous structure can be detected, but a larger network and more porous structure increase the surface area of the copolymer hydrogel at the higher temperature of 80 0 C (Right, Fig. From the results, the following conclusions can be deducted: By altering the solutions, the water absorbency of the superabsorbent polymer may be enhanced. The absorbency of brine water was lower, but the absorbency of NaOH solution was higher. As a result, it can be stated that the NaOH solution containing 54 weight percent of Wheat straw in the polymer matrix provides the highest water absorbency. The amount of water that can be absorbed depends on the amount of time that has passed. It rises in proportion to time, such that the best absorbency may be reached at a longer time interval. Increasing the temperature causes the water absorbency of the polymer to rise, and because of the reduced proportion of crosslinker in the polymer, a porous structure is created, resulting in an increase in the porosity of the super absorbent When temperature increases, the surface became porous and more absorbency was seen.