When applying an oscillatory electric potential to an electrolyte solution, it is commonly assumed that the choice of which electrode is grounded or powered does not matter because the time-average of the electric potential is zero. Recent theoretical, numerical, and experimental work, however, has established that certain types of multimodal oscillatory potentials that are "non-antiperodic" can induce a net steady field toward either the grounded or powered electrode [Hashemi et al., Phys. Rev. E 105, 065001 (2022)]. Here, we elaborate on the nature of these steady fields through numerical and theoretical analyses of the asymmetric rectified electric field (AREF) that occurs in electrolytes where the cations and anions have different mobilities. We demonstrate that AREFs induced by a non-antiperiodic electric potential, e.g., by a two-mode waveform with modes at 2 and 3 Hz, invariably yields a steady field that is spatially dissymmetric between two parallel electrodes, such that swapping which electrode is powered changes the direction of the field. Additionally, using a perturbation expansion, we demonstrate that the dissymmetric AREF occurs due to odd nonlinear orders of the applied potential. We further generalize the theory by demonstrating that the dissymmetric field occurs for all classes of zero-time-average (no dc bias) periodic potentials, including triangular and rectangular pulses, and we discuss how these steady fields can tremendously change the interpretation, design, and applications of electrochemical and electrokinetic systems. Application of ac electric potentials to liquids is a ubiquitous element of electrokinetic systems, including induced-charge-electrokinetics (ICEK) For a sinusoidal applied potential of amplitude φ 0 and angular frequency ω, the one-dimensional AREF between parallel electrodes is antisymmetric with respect to the midplane However, the aforementioned characteristics of AREF do not necessarily hold for other classes of zero-time-average (no dc bias) periodic potentials. In fact, a recent study by Hashemi et al. Consider a dilute binary 1-1 electrolyte confined by two parallel, planar, electrodes spaced by a gap 2 (Fig. ( The starting point in theory to investigate the dynamics of such a system is the Poisson-Nernst-Planck (PNP) model. The Poisson equation relates the free charge density to the electric field gradient, while the transport of ions is governed by the Nernst-Planck equations, Here the symbols denote permittivity of the electrolyte, ε; electric potential, φ; free charge number density, ρ; charge of a proton, e; thermal potential, φ T ; ion number concentration, n ± ; diffusivity, D ± ; location with respect to the midplane, x; and time, t. Initially, the ions are uniformly distributed n ± (x,0)=n ∞ (the bulk electrolyte concentration), and the electric potential is zero everywhere φ(x,0) = 0. Note that for simplicity, we neglect the intrinsic zeta potential of the electrodes. Finally, at x=± (i.e., the electrodes), we set the flux of ions equal to zero (i.e., no electrochemistry). The system of equations is solved numerically following the algorithm reported by Hashemi et al. where 2τ is the period of the applied potential (or that of the harmonic solution), and gcd(1,α) is the greatest common divisor of 1 and α The behavior becomes more complicated at the Debye scale (i.e., up a few Debye lengths away from the electrodes). Fig. We now ask what happens if we flip the sign of the applied potential (-ψ(t) instead of ψ(t)). For α=1 (antisymmetric AREF), the curves of the induced AREF by ψ(t) and -ψ(t) potentials are superimposed (Fig. We provide an explanation for this numerical observation using symmetry arguments. Note that the field-induced ion motion depends only on the potential gradient (not the potential itself). Therefore, one can show that flipping the sign of a periodic, time-varying, potential ψ(t) at x=-is equivalent to swapping the powered and grounded electrodes (by adding the potential ψ(t) to the both electrodes). In other words, {φ(-,t) = -ψ(t),φ( ,t) = 0} ≡ {φ(-,t) = 0,φ( ,t) = ψ(t)}. Now, a simple change of variable x→-x clarifies that if the potential ψ(t) yields the electric field E(x,t), the potential -ψ(t) would yield the mirrored version, -E(-x, t) (cf. Fig. Focusing on the midplane (x = 0), one can write that the functional E(0,t)= (t)=f(ψ,t) is odd in ψ. Therefore, if (t) is the induced electric field at the midplane due to the potential ψ(t), -(t) would be that due to the potential -ψ(t). Now consider antiperiodic potentials, i.e., ψ(t + τ) = -ψ(t). We prove that (i.e., AREF at the midplane) has to be zero for antiperiodic potentials: Therefore, (t+τ)=-(t), which upon taking a time-average yields =-, indicating =0. It is worth mentioning that the above argument is general and holds for any antiperiodic potential ψ(t). It appears that for such potentials the zero-frequency components of the induced electric field cancel each other at the midplane, yielding an antisymmetric AREF. However, they do not necessarily cancel out when the excitation is non-antiperiodic. Fig. In Fig. The effect of the applied frequency f = ω/(2π) is more complicated. Even for a single mode potential, it has been established that the spatial oscillation of the AREF (its shape) is very sensitive to frequency Following Hashemi et al. We emphasize that our theory is not limited to any specific potential wave form. A general zero-mean function ψ(t) with a period 2τ has a Fourier series of the form ψ(t) = ∞ n=1 (a n cos(nπt/τ) + b n sin(nπt/τ)), which is antiperiodic if a n = b n = 0 for even n. Therefore, any antiperiodic ψ(t) can be expressed as and the ratio of any two frequencies will be the ratio of two It should be understood that for a given applied potential ψ(t) in the first half of the period t∈[0,τ], there is a unique antiperiodic potential that occurs by setting ψ(t+τ)=-ψ(t). But an infinite number of non-antiperiodic potentials can be constructed. We demonstrate this argument for a triangular pulse of period 2τ, illustrated in Fig. In this section, we develop a perturbation expansion solution (in terms of Φ 0 = φ 0 /φ T ) to the PNP equations for a two-mode applied potential. Our results indicate that the dissymmetric AREF is a consequence of the odd-order (3, 5,...) perturbation terms. Indeed, an extension to the second-order solution derived by Hashemi et al. A. Second-order perturbation solution (single-mode) First, we briefly review the second-order solution to the PNP equations derived by Hashemi et al. where the ion flux j± is given by j± =-1 1∓β and the initial and boundary conditions are ñ± (x,0)=1, (10) φ(±κ , t)=∓ ψ( t), ( Here, the dimensionless variables and parameters are defined as where In the limit of small potentials (Φ 0 1), one can approximate the solution by the power series ñ± (x, t)= ñ(0) where the superscript (i) denotes the perturbation order. We substitute the above series for ñ± and φ into the PNP equations (Eqs. 7 and 8), and the corresponding initial and boundary conditions (Eqs. 10-12), equate terms with common powers of Φ 0 , and then solve separately for the zeroth, first, and second order solutions. The zeroth-order solution is simply ñ(0) ± =1, φ(0) =0, and the first-order solution is given by where n(1) ± and φ(1) are odd (with respect to x) complex functions given by Eqs. ( The second-order governing equations for ñ(2) ± and φ(2) are Here the ion flux is given by ± , ± =±ñ The boundary conditions are ± (±κ , t)=0. Hashemi et al. focused only on the second-order time-average electric field which was shown to accurately predict AREF via a simple linear ordinary differential equation (ODE), the AREF equation with --1 2 s ( + . An important point is that Hashemi et al. -κ =K. But for Ẽ(2) to be odd K has to be 0 which justifies the assumption. An alternative would be to solve for the potential via the following rank-deficient problem: subject to φ(2) =0 at x=±κ . Solving the problem using singular-value-decomposition (SVD) along with the total charge neutrality condition, yields the same results as that of setting Ẽ(2) =0 at x=±κ . B. Second-order perturbation solution (two-mode) In this section we follow the same procedure to derive the perturbation solution for the two-mode potential ψ( t)=Φ 0 sin(Ω t)+sin(αΩ t) . For the two-mode system, the zeroth-order solution remains unchanged. The first-order solution is obtained by superposition of the first-order solutions due to Ω and αΩ modes: φ(1) (x, t)=Im φ(1) (Ω)e iΩ t + φ(1) (αΩ)e iαΩ t . (30) One can show that f (2) for the two-mode case is the superposition of the RHSs due to Ω and αΩ. Hence, following Hashemi et al. Consequently, we suspect that the dissymmetric AREF is a third-order phenomena. To investigate this hypothesis we need to first fully solve the second-order system to find the temporal and spatial distributions of the ion concentrations and the potential/electric field. The first and second order solutions will provide the RHS of the third-order AREF equation. We use Fourier series to solve the problem. Consider solutions of the form: Here Ω c = Ω gcd(1, α) is the common angular frequency of the applied potential, i.e., 2π/Ω c is the period of the two-mode applied potential/harmonic solution. Inserting Eq. 31 and Eq. 32 into the second-order governing equations and boundary conditions yields the following differential equations for the coefficients of the Fourier series. Eq. 33a and Eq. 33c can be combined to yield ± =0. Now, taking the derivative of Eq. 33b with respect to x, and subsequent substitution of ∂c ± 0 /∂x from the above equation results in -. Note that we could write this equation in terms of c E 0 =-∂c φ 0 /∂x to get: + , which is equivalent to the linear ODE used by Hashemi et al. ± ∂x e -ikΩc t , (35a) ± e -ikΩc t at x=±κ , We solve the above equations numerically to find c ± k and c φ k (k = -∞,...,∞). Of course we do not need to solve for k →±∞ and we truncate the series at a much smaller k value (i.e., k =-K,...,K). Considering the source terms (Eq. 23) as a multiplication of first-order solutions, the maximum possible frequency component can be obtained. For example, for a single-mode applied potential of angular frequency Ω, the first-order terms (i.e., ñ ± , Ẽ(1) ) oscillate with Ω and hence, the highest possible angular frequency of the source terms becomes 2Ω=2Ω c and K =2. Similarly, for a two-mode system (Ω and αΩ), the highest angular frequency component, given α ≥ 1, is 2αΩ = 2αΩ c /gcd(1,α) ⇒ K = 2α/gcd(1,α). Note that when α=1, K =2 is recovered. The third-order system of equations is identical to that of the second order, except the source terms which are The third-order AREF equation is given by where --1 2 s + . (38) An analysis of the RHS f (3) provides some insight regarding the dissymmetric AREF. We note that the second-order solutions φ(2) and ñ2 ± are even functions. Therefore, f (3) is an even function in space which, in turn, indicates that Ẽ(3) is even. Hence, when f (3) =0, the third-order electric field adds a dissymmetric contribution to the overall AREF. Fig. The k th order solution (k ≥ 2) contributes to the overall AREF via the ODE It can be shown that the source terms are odd functions with respect to the midplane for even k values, yielding an antisymmetric contributions to the solution. The source terms for odd orders are even functions in space, resulting in even contributions to the electric field. Therefore, if s (k) is nonzero for k =3,5,..., the perturbation solution suggests a dissymmetric shape for the AREF. In summary, our results show that ions and charged colloids can be concentrated to one side of a slit channel, or another, by tuning the applied potential waveform. We demonstrate that the induced AREF between parallel electrodes by a non-antiperiodic electric potential is spatially dissymmetric. An intriguing implication is then that swapping the powered and grounded electrodes of an electrochemical cell alters the system behavior, an observation at odds with the classical understanding of the electrokinetics. The dissymmetric AREF can tremendously change the design of electrokinetic systems and their applications. It was recently shown at length that the AREF-induced electrophoretic forces are several orders of magnitude larger that gravitational and colloidal forces 