We analyze the effect of the tilt on the transverse thermoelectric coefficient of Weyl semimetals in the conformal limit, i.e., zero temperature and zero chemical potential. Using the Kubo formalism, we find a nonmonotonic behavior of the thermoelectric conductivity as a function of the tilt perpendicular to the magnetic field, and a linear behavior when the tilt is aligned to the magnetic field. An "axial Nernst" current (chiral currents counter propagating perpendicularly to the magnetic field and the temperature gradient) is generated in inversion symmetric Weyl materials when the tilt vector has a projection in the direction of the magnetic field. This analysis will help in the design and interpretation of thermoelectric transport experiments in recently discovered topological quantum materials. Emergent low-energy massless quasiparticles in threedimensional (3D) Dirac and Weyl semimetals (WSMs) provide a testbed for investigation of interesting phenomena beyond standard relativistic quantum field theory (QFT) and Landau Fermi liquid paradigm One of the most interesting aspects of the physics of massless Dirac fermions in QFT is related to quantum anomalies A lesser known quantum anomaly in condensed matter physics is the scale or conformal anomaly associated the quantum breakdown of scale invariance. The conservation of the corresponding Noether current (dilatation current) implies the traceless of the energy-momentum tensor In this paper, we analyze the effect of the tilt in the previous context and develop a theory to investigate new unconventional thermomagnetoelectric effects in type-I Dirac and WSMs. We show that a tilt-dependent transverse current is induced by a temperature gradient in the presence of a perpendicular magnetic field. In tilted Dirac materials with full inversion symmetry, the tilt component parallel to the magnetic field gives rise to a novel axial (valley) current. Since the tilt is a generic feature of the topological semi-metals, this study will be useful in the design and analysis of experiments related to the thermoelectric transport at very low temperatures and electron densities. We consider an undoped topological WSM with and without inversion symmetry. Within the continuum model, a tilted cone with chirality s = ± is described arXiv:2209.14331v2 [cond-mat.mes-hall] 15 Jan 2023 by the Hamiltonian where v F is the isotropic Fermi velocity, σ i , i = 1, 2, 3 are the Pauli matrices, p is the momentum operator, and t s is the tilt vector. The eigen-energies of the Hamiltonian are where λ = ± refers to the conduction and valence bands,and we have set the reduced Planck constant = 1. For the inversion symmetric, case we have t s = st, while for the broken inversion symmetry case, we will fix t s = t. The transition from type I to type II WSMs occurs when |t| > 1 In four-dimensional combined space-time notation, the fermionic Lagrangian density is given by where ψ is the fermionic field and γ μ are the standard contravariant gamma matrices Since the tilt vector coupling is dimensionless, the classical action remains scale invariant and the corresponding canonical energy-momentum tensor is traceless (T s ) μ μ = 0. We consider a flat space Minkowski metric η μν = diag(+1, -1, -1, -1). In Ref. COEFFICIENT. We will compute the thermoelectric transport coefficient in the presence of an applied magnetic field within a Kubo formula as devised by Luttinger in Ref. We chose the magnetic field to point along the z direction, B = B ẑ and include it in the Hamiltonian (1) by the minimal coupling p → p + eA where e = |e| is the electron charge and A = -By x is the vector potential in the Landau gauge. For each chiral Weyl spinor, the Hamiltonian in the presence of the magnetic field reads, We first assume that the tilt vector has a projected component along both the magnetic field t s = t z s ẑ and perpendicular to it t s = t x s x, and find the eigensystem of the Hamiltonian. Then, we investigate the effect of each component on the unconventional quantum transport in tilted undoped Weyl semimetals, separately. To find the unconventional transverse thermoelectric response of undoped tilted WSMs in the presence of a temperature gradient, we use the Luttinger approach Within this formalism, the transverse thermoelectric susceptibility χ ij s of tilted Weyl quasiparticles, defined by, is given by the following retarded response function where V is the system volume and Θ is the Heaviside step function. The details of the computation are depicted in the Appendix A. With all the previous ingredients (see Appendix A, we find the static and long-wavelength unconventional transverse response function of an undoped tilted WSM in the limit T → 0 to be, where γ N is a normalization factor that depends on the number of LLs N that are taken into account in the evaluation of the response function, and more importantly, on the tilting vector t s . This equation is our main result. In general, we can decompose the normalization factor γ N in eq. ( ing parameter as γ even(odd) In the following, we will compute the normalization factor γ N for type-I WSMs in different tilting geometries. For the sake of completeness, we first look at the untilted case, where was first introduced in Refs. Chernodub et al. where γ N =0 = 1 and by definition γ N =-1 = 0. A. Tilt perpendicular to the applied magnetic field When the tilt vector of the Weyl cone is perpendicular to the applied magnetic field, t ⊥ B, we find, dk z e -P 2 (9) where the integration limit is (-∞, ∞), except for n = 0, where it is [0, ∞). In this case, the normalization factor is an even function of tilting, and thus independent of the chirality s. The response was solved numerically and the result is shown in Fig. FIG. untilted case, in the deep quantum limit where only the lowest LL is filled, one may only take into account 0 → ±1 transitions. However, in the case of perpendicular tilt, where the dipolar selection rule |m| = |n| + 1 is not valid anymore, it might be reasonable to consider higher transitions 0 → n with |n| ≤ N . Considering these transitions, we find a qualitatively different response. The response of the system shows a nonmonotonic behavior as a function of tilting parameter, see Fig. When the tilt vector is parallel to the magnetic field, it can be shown that the response of the tilt term in the Hamiltonian is algebraically added to the untilted response function, γ N (t z s ) = γ N (t s = 0) + δγ N (t z s ), where, with n kzms is the equilibrium Fermi-Dirac distribution function. Since we are using a linearized model Hamiltonian to describe the low-energy Weyl quasiparticles, this contribution is logarithmically divergent, so we introduce an ultraviolet wavenumber cutoff k c z to get, for N ≥ 0, where Λ = l B k c z / √ 2 is the dimensionless wavenumber cutoff and by definition δγ -1 = 0. We esti-mate the ultraviolet cutoff as k c z ≈ 1/a, where a is the lattice constant of a Weyl or Dirac semimetal. Figure This term is odd in the tilt vector, and thus in the inversion symmetric case, its contribution to the total normalization factor of the two Weyl cones is zero, and thus the tilting has no contribution to the total charge current J i c . However, this term will have a contribution to a valley (or axial) current J i A ≡ J i + -J i -. Therefore, we will find an "axial Nernst" current perpendicular to an applied magnetic field and to a gradient of temperature, in the conformal limit (zero temperature and zero chemical potential) in inversion symmetric tilted WSMs. In this section we will discuss the salient features arising from Eq.( When the tilt vector along the magnetic field, such squeezing of the effective magnetic field does not occur, so the only term depending of the tilt vector is the one present in the current operator and we expect a monotonously increasing behavior (linear at low t z s ) of γ N . This behavior is plotted in Fig. To finish this section, we would like to comment on what we can expect for the transport coefficient χ xy when the tilt, being perpendicular to the magnetic field, points along the direction ŷ (the direction of ∇T ) instead of pointing along x (the direction of the computed current), as discussed in the previous section. According to the point of view adopted here, under the condition of the tilt vector t to be perpendicular to B, a Lorentz transformation made to the tilted system is formally equivalent to study the system with no tilt but in the presence of effective magnetic and electric fields, B and E ∼ t, the latter pointing along ŷ. This implies the presence of a drift velocity that points perpendicularly to both B and E ∼ t, that is, v d pointing along x that also scales with t y as it does E . This drift velocity would generate a component of the current J x that scales with t y that is not contained explicitly in the operator J x in Eq.(A3), as, remember, the tilt now points along ŷ. Also, as t is still perpendicular to B, there will be a squeezing of the magnetic field in the transformed reference frame B . Then, we expect a similar qualitative behavior to the case when t = t x shown in Fig. We have investigated the effect of Weyl cone tilting in Dirac and WSMs on the novel thermoelectric response based on the conformal anomaly, proposed in The effects of the tilt of the cones on the transport properties of other Dirac materials in two and three spacial dimensions has been analyzed previously in the literature In absence of the tilt vector, t s = 0 and β = 1, this LL spectrum reduces to the dispersion of the untilted case E 0 kzms (B) ) where H n (x) are the Hermite polynomials, θ s = -s tanh -1 t x , l B = 1/(eB) is the magnetic length, and L x(z) is the system size along the x(z) direction. We also define It is interesting to note that the LLs collapse when |t x s | ≥ 1 We will consider the charge current operator at each Weyl node, where we have defined modified Pauli matrices as σi s = σ i + st i s σ 0 . We can define the total charge current as J i c = J i + + J i -and charge-neutral valley current as J i v = J i + -J i -. Without loss of generality, in the following, we assume ∇T ŷ, and compute the transverse charge current J s x in the presence of a magnetic field along the z direction. In systems with broken time-reversal symmetry, the total current, computed within the linear response theory, is the sum of an observable transport current and a circulating orbital magnetization current that does not contribute to the observable current To investigate the unconventional transport arising from the scale anomaly, we should compute the static transverse response of the system at the long-wavelength limit. After some tedious but straightforward analytical calculations 