We investigate ferroelectric-and resistive switching behavior in 18-nm-thick epitaxial BaTiO3 (BTO) films in a model electrolyte-ferroelectric-semiconductor (EFS) configuration. The system is explored for its potential as a ferroelectric microelectrode in bioelectronics. The BTO films are grown by pulsed laser deposition (PLD) on semiconducting Nb-doped (0.5 wt%) SrTiO3 (Nb:STO) single crystal substrates. The ferroelectric properties of the bare BTO films are demonstrated by piezoresponse force microscopy (PFM) measurements. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurements in EFS configuration, with phosphate buffered saline (PBS) acting as the liquid electrolyte top contact, indicate characteristic ferroelectric switching peaks in the bipolar current-voltage loop. The ferroelectric nature of the observed switching peaks is confirmed by analyzing the current response of the EFS devices to unipolar voltage signals. Moreover, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements indicate bipolar resisitive switching behavior of the EFS devices, which is controlled by the remanent polarization state of the BTO layer. Our results represent a constitutive step towards the realization of neuroprosthetic implants and hybrid neurocomputational systems based on ferroelectric microelectrodes. Bioelectronic interfacing of nerve cells with microelectrode arrays (MEAs) is the basis for neural stimulation and recording in neuroprosthetic devices and hybrid neurocomputational systems. To provide the electro-neural interface in MEA technology, two main types of materials have been utilized up to now: (i) conductive materials and (ii) insulating dielectric materials. (i) The traditional approach is based on conductive microelectrodes, which are in direct contact with neural tissue, as demonstrated by Thomas et al. in their seminal work in 1972 (ii) As a different approach, bioelectronic interfacing based on insulating dielectric materials has been introduced in the 1990s, by the demonstration of recording of neural activity with an insulated-gate field-effect transistor Very recently, a new concept of bioelectronic interfacing -ferroelectric microelectrodes -has been introduced in Ref. with C s being the specific capacitance of the microelectrode and V 0 being the amplitude of the applied voltage signal V (t). For the successful integration of ferroelectric microelectrodes into bioelectronic devices (e.g. CMOS-MEAs), it is important to mimic the physiological conditions. In order to do that, the utilized ferroelectric should be operated with a liquid electrolyte top contact. A possible choice for the liquid electrolyte top contact is phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) solution, which is different compared to a conventional metallic (solid) top contact A stoichiometric BaTiO 3 target was used to grow epitaxial single crystalline films on (001)-oriented Nb-doped (0.5 wt%) SrTiO 3 (Nb:STO) single crystal substrates (5 × 5 mm) by means of pulsed laser deposition (PLD). Prior to PLD deposition, the substrates were heated up in vacuum to 950 • C for 1 h to promote formation of step terraces. For the deposition of 18-nm-thick BTO films, the temperature T was fixed at 650 • C with an oxygen partial pressure of p O2 = 5 mTorr The microstructure of the films was investigated by x-ray diffraction (XRD), x-ray reflectivity (XRR) and atomic force microscopy (AFM) to obtain information on crystallinity, thickness and roughness. Piezoresponse force microscopy (PFM) measurements were performed with Pt-coated tips and the PFM contrast was recorded in Cartesian coordinates to remove background signals Figure In the following, we present results from electrical measurements on bare BTO thin films and BTO films in EFS device configuration. The high-resolution XRD scan along the 2θ-ω axes of the BTO film is shown in Fig. Figure For a perfectly insulating ferroelectric material, conduction current J c is absent and the J-V loop contains only displacement current density ∂D/∂t, i.e. Note, for common extracellular capacitive stimulation, ferroelectric polarization current ∂P (FE) /∂t is absent and so from Eq. ( where V 2+ o denotes a doubly ionized oxygen vacancy. The concentration of defects and associated charge carriers in BTO films is also dependent on the strain state of the films To investigate the resistive switching behavior of the EFS device in more detail, we conducted EIS measurements. The results are shown in Fig. In order to extract quantitative values for the specific resistance and the specific capacitance for the two polarization states ±P r of the EFS device, we evaluated the measured impedance response with an equivalent-circuit consisting of an effective capacitor C eff in parallel with an effective resistor R eff We will now discuss the physical mechanism of the resistive switching behavior in the EFS device in more detail. So far, a comprehensive theory of polarizationmodulated charge transport across a (semiconducting) ferroelectric/electrolye interface is missing. However, a model for the influence of ferroelectric polarization on the properties of a (semiconducting) ferroelectric/metal Schottky contact exists where ε st is the static dielectric constant of the depleted region, e is the electron charge, N eff is the effective charge density in the depleted region and V bi is the apparent built-in potential which is modified by the ferroelectric polarization according to with δ being the distance between the surface polarization charge and the interface of the Schottky contact. According to Eqs. ( In analogy to the model of ferroelectric/metal interface For neural stimulation with ferroelectric microelectrodes, resistive switching behavior is undesired since electrochemical charge transport (conduction current J c ) across the ferroelectric/electrolyte interface may negatively affect long-term stability In conclusion, polarization reversal in epitaxial 18-nmthick ferroelectric BTO films with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) acting as liquid electrolyte top contact is demonstrated. This is an important step for the realization of bioelectronic devices based on ferroelectric microelectrodes. In addition, the investigated electrolyte-ferroelectric-semiconductor (EFS) device exhibits polarization-modulated resisitve switching behavior. This effect could be exploited in future in hybrid neurocomputational systems combining artificial and biological neurons.