Cross-slip is a thermally activated process by which screw dislocation changes its glide plane to another slip plane sharing the same Burgers vector. The rate at which this process happens is determined by a Boltzmann type expression that is a function of the screw segment length and the stress acting on the dislocation. In continuum dislocation dynamics (CDD), the information regarding the length of the screw dislocation segment and local stress state on dislocations are lost due to the coarse-grained representation of the density. In this work, a data driven approach to characterize the lost information by analyzing the discrete dislocation configurations is proposed to enable cross-slip modeling in the CDD framework in terms of the coarse-grained dislocation density and stress fields. The analysis showed that the screw segment length follows an exponential distribution, and the stress fluctuations, defined as the difference between the stress on the dislocations and the mean field stress in CDD, follows a Lorentzian distribution. A novel approach for cross slip implementation in CDD employing the screw segment length and stress fluctuation statistics was proposed and rigorously tested by comparing the CDD cross-slip rates with discrete dislocation dynamics (DDD) rates. This approach has been applied in conjunction with three crossslip models used in DDD simulations differing mainly in the functional form of cross slip activation energy. It was found that different cross-slip activation energy formulations yielded different cross-slip rates, yet the effect on mechanical stress-strain response and dislocation density evolution was minimal for the [001] type loading. Predicting the self-organized dislocation microstructure is considered a holy grail of the dislocation theory, which is currently belied to be potentially achievable through continuum dislocation dynamics (CDD) models Achieving this goal requires modelling the dislocation mechanisms within the CDD framework. One such important mechanism is cross-slip, which is a thermally activated process in which the screw dislocations change their glide plane. It is well established that cross slip contributes to pattern formation Therefore, it is essential for continuum dislocation dynamics models to accurately incorporate cross-slip mechanism to aid the prediction of dislocation microstructure evolution. Broadly, there exists two types of models that explain the mechanism of cross-slip, Friedel-Escaig mechanism (FE) Continuum dislocation dynamics models represent dislocations as coarse-grained density fields which have information about the average line orientation and magnitude of the dislocation density. The advantage of using this spatially smooth variable in studying the dynamics is the evolution of the system can be encapsulated in terms of the average quantity, e.g., dislocation density, rather than tracking the motion of all discrete states There exist different classes of continuum dislocation based models in the literature Since cross-slip is a thermally activated process, the estimation of the activation energy barrier required for the screw segment to transition from glide plane to cross-slip plane is the crucial step. Predominantly, two different approaches have been considered in the literature to estimate the activation energy barrier; the line tension models In this work, a new cross-slip model for vector-based CDD model is proposed. This model incorporates information about the screw segment statistics and internal stress fluctuations. Section 2 introduces the fundamental equations of the CDD model which is followed in section 3 by a discussion of the strategy for estimating the cross-slip rate using DDD statistics in terms of coarse-grained fields. In section 4, the validity of the proposed model is demonstrated by comparing the results with the cross-slip rates evaluated using the DDD. The effects of the different cross-slip activation energy formulations on the mechanical behavior and dislocation microstructure evolution in CDD is also discussed in this section. We conclude by discussing the results and summarizing the conclusions in Section 5 and 6. Continuum dislocation dynamics models generally include two sets of equations describing the crystal mechanics and dislocation kinetics, which, together, capture the spatial-temporal evolution of dislocation system and the deformation and mechanical state of the crystal under mechanical boundary conditions. The crystal mechanics part is modelled as an eigen distortion problem and dislocation kinetics is captured in terms of a curl type dislocation transport reaction coupled with dislocation processes like cross-slip and junction reactions. The governing equations for the crystal mechanics include the stress equilibrium equation, Hooke's law and boundary conditions: (1) In the above equation, σ is Cauchy stress tensor, C is elastic tensor, u is the displacement, β e and β p are elastic and plastic distortions, respectively, Ω is the domain of solution, ∂Ω u and ∂Ω t , are the parts of the boundary on which the displacement u = u ̅ and the traction t ̅ are prescribed respectively. Solution of the above boundary value problem yields the stress which is then used to determine the dislocation velocity for each slip system, i, using a linearized mobility law commonly used in literature where b and B are the magnitude of the Burgers vector and the drag coefficient, respectively. The 〈•〉 corresponds to the Macauley bracket and sgn function corresponds to the sign of the argument. τ i is the resolved shear stress along slip system i and τ 0 is the lattice friction. τ p i is the Taylor hardening stress that accounts for short range interactions due to sessile junctions on slip system i which is defined as (3) In the above, α is scaling factor, μ is the shear modulus, b is the magnitude of Burgers vector, a ij is the average strength of an interaction between slip system i and j, ρ j is the scalar dislocation density of the slip system j interacting with slip system i and ρ f is the sum of the dislocation densities of the slip systems that react with slip system i and form Lomer or Hirth lock. F(ρ i , ρ f ) corresponds to a function that accounts for the dislocation pile up effect -1 based on the work of The dislocation velocity obtained from Eq. ( Cross-slip is a thermally activated process by which a screw dislocation changes its original glide plane to another glide plane which shares the same Burgers vector. In CDD, the change in dislocation density due to this process for slip system i is denoted by ρ̇c s i in Eq. ( where ρ s i and ρ s j denote screw dislocation densities in slip system i and j, ṙc s i→j and ṙc s j→i correspond to the cross-slip rates of screw segments that cross-slipped from i → j and j → i respectively. It is evident from Eq. ( where c is normalization constant, E act (σ) is the cross-slip activation energy barrier which depends on the local stress state of the dislocation segment, k is the Boltzmann constant and T is the temperature. Based on the cross-slip probability value, the cross-slip event is executed following the Metropolis algorithm. Then, the average cross-slip rate for a given time step over the entire simulation domain for the discrete case can be written as where l cs,screw and l screw correspond to the length of screw segments belonging to slip system i that crossslipped to slip system j and length of screw segments belonging to slip system i respectively and Δt is the time step. In CDD, the dislocation content is represented as density field which is a coarse-grained representation of the discrete dislocation. For the case of vector density based CDD model Following the steps mentioned in where σ d (r k ′ ) represents the stress on a dislocation line located at the point with position vector r k ′ within the voxel, [σ c ] ⌊r k ⌋ represents the average stress within a voxel which is estimated by taking the average stress value of all crystal points ⌊r k ⌋ located within the voxel. Λ and S corresponds to the set of points on the dislocation and set of points on the crystal respectively. For the case of cross-slip, the stress fluctuation statistics of two components of stress tensor σ, namely Schmid and Escaig are relevant. Schmid stress τ s is the resolved shear stress that drives the dislocation motion while Escaig stress τ e is the stress component that widens or shrinks the stacking fault between partial dislocations. If the Burgers vector of a given slip system i is defined as bb ̂i, with b being its magnitude, the slip plane normal be n ̂i, and the direction of glide vector be d ̂i = n ̂i × b ̂i, then the Schmid and Escaig components along a slip system i can then be defined as Based on the statistics of the screw segment length distribution and scaled stress fluctuations, the cross-slip rate in CDD can then be defined following Eq. (7) as where l m corresponds to the length of the m th sampled screw segment, Δt corresponds to the timestep, N corresponds to the number of screw segments in the unit volume, I cs,m is the cross-slip indicator function for the m th screw segment, and R is a random number. The cross-slip indicator function is 1 for the m th segment if the cross-slip probability based on Eq. ( The definitions of the parameters in the above three model equations are given in Table Table In this section, the numerical experiment used to validate the newly proposed cross-slip framework, referred to as CDD cross-slip framework hereafter, is discussed first. This involves comparing the average crossslip rates obtained using the CDD cross-slip framework and DDD methodology for a given DDD configuration. Following that, the effect of different cross-slip models on the mechanical behavior and dislocation microstructure is studied by performing bulk CDD simulations using different cross-slip models of interest. The main objective behind developing a new framework for cross-slip modelling in CDD is to capture the cross-slip rates accurately in CDD. Hence, to validate the CDD cross-slip framework a discrete configuration is sampled from DDD simulation, and the cross-slip rate is evaluated using the CDD framework and compared with DDD cross-slip rate. The DDD simulation tool used to conduct this experiment is the DDD simulation code microMegas The first step in the cross-slip rate comparison process is converting the chosen DDD configuration into a CDD configuration by performing a coarse graining process. The coarse graining process involves partitioning the domain into small volumes and smearing out the discrete dislocation within each volume to obtain a continuum representation of the discrete configuration. The details regarding the coarse graining procedure can be found in The average DDD cross-slip rate is estimated based on the Eq. ( Table The aim of this section is to study the effect of different cross-slip activation energy formulations on the mechanical response of the dislocation system and the dislocation microstructure evolution. Hence, CDD simulations using Kubin's model The simulation domain size in these simulations is 5μm × 5μm × 5.303μm and the applied strain rate is 20s -1 along [001] direction. The slip plane normal and Burgers vectors of all the slip systems for a FCC crystal in CDD is given in Table Fig. This can be attributed to the origins of Kubin's model, which was discussed in the previous section. Fig. shows the average cross-slip rate ṙc s 2→1 for slip system 2, which is the collinear slip system of 1, for all three models. Comparing Figs. 5(a) and 5(b), it can be observed that the average cross-slip rates of collinear slip systems are similar for both Kubin and Malka's model, but the behavior is markedly different for the case of Hussein's model. The difference in behavior for the case of Hussein's model stems from the bias which the activation energy expression enforces on the cross-slip probability. Since the activation energy depends on the difference between Escaig stress in both the glide and cross-slip plane, as can be seen from Eq. ( Comparing Fig. Consequently, we observe for models with higher cross-slip rate, the yield stress is lower due to fewer dislocations and the rate of hardening is higher due to faster increase in dislocation density. Fig. A relaxation experiment was performed wherein the dislocation configuration is loaded to a strain level of 0.25% in a single time step, at a strain rate of the order 10 6 s -1 along [001] direction and then allowed to relax. Loading the simulation domain to 0.25% strain in a single time step results in high stress levels since the applied strain gets converted mostly to elastic strain as the dislocations do not have enough time to move. Once the high stress is induced in the domain, the system is then allowed to relax by maintaining the mean strain at 0.25% subjected to periodic boundary conditions. This approach was chosen to study the dislocation microstructure evolution at high stress levels because accessing such stress values through typical monotonic loading simulations is near impossible due to the computational constraints and strain levels required to reach such stresses. The relaxation experiment described above was conducted for the three cross-slip models along The results presented in the previous section highlight the capability of the new CDD cross-slip framework which represents an improvement over the other existing approaches used to model cross-slip in CDD. The cross slip modeling approach proposed here incorporates the information about local coarse grained stress, dislocation density, the screw segment length statistics, and stress fluctuation statistics, thus allowing to overcome the shortcomings of other approaches used to capture the cross-slip process in CDD The validity of the newly proposed cross-slip modeling approach was tested by comparing the cross-slip rate estimated using CDD and DDD methodology for a chosen DDD configuration. Cross-slip rate estimated using DDD methodology made use of the stress on the screw dislocations and screw segment length whereas the cross-slip rate obtained by using the CDD formalism used the coarse-grained stress and dislocation density in addition to the values sampled from DDD statistics like the screw segment length and stress fluctuation distribution. The sampled values correspond to one of the many possible configurations of the ensemble and hence it is indeed expected that the estimated cross-slip rate will vary along a spectrum and will not be an accurate match to the actual cross-slip rate. Nevertheless, Fig. The effect of different cross-slip activation energy formulations on the mechanical behavior and dislocation microstructure was investigated in this work. It was shown that the different cross-slip activation energy formulations indeed resulted in different average cross-slip rates, but the effect of the different cross-slip rates on the stress-strain response and dislocation density evolution was shown to be minimal in Fig. A data driven approach to model cross-slip behavior in CDD was proposed. The model made use of the screw segment length distribution and stress fluctuation statistics from DDD to inform CDD model about the essential information required for cross-slip modelling which was lost due to coarse graining. It was shown that the screw segment distribution in DDD follows the exponential distribution and the stress fluctuation statistics for screw segments follows the Lorentzian distribution. Using these statistics from DDD, it was shown that the average cross-slip rate over the whole domain obtained using the new framework was able to match the DDD cross-slip rate. In addition, the effect of different activation energy formulations on the stress-strain response, dislocation density evolution and dislocation microstructure were studied. It was found that, although the average cross-slip rates of the different cross-slip activation energies were different, the effect on stress-strain response and dislocation density evolution were minimal. Furthermore, it was shown that in the presence of high local stress and dislocation density, the new CDD framework was able to capture the dislocation self-organization in cell-like structure typically observed along the {100} and {110} type planes in experiments.