We investigate tunable electric polarization and electronic structure of quasi-two-dimensional (quasi-2D) allotropes of selenium, which are formed from their constituent one-dimensional (1D) structures through an inter-chain interaction facilitated by the multi-valence nature of Se. Our ab initio calculations reveal that different quasi-2D Se allotropes display different types of electric polarization, including ferroelectric (FE) polarization normal to the chain direction in α and δ allotropes, non-collinear ferrielectric (FiE) polarization along the chain axis in τ -Se, and antiferroelectric (AFE) polarization in η-Se. The magnitude and direction of the polarization can be changed by a previously unexplored rotation of the constituent chains. In that case, an in-plane polarization direction may change to out-of-plane in α-Se and δ-Se, flip its direction, and even disappear in τ -Se. Also, the band gap may be reduced and changed from indirect to direct by rotating the constituent chains about their axes in these quasi-2D Se allotropes. It is not widely known that the term ferroelectric (FE) has been coined already in 1912 by Erwin Schrödinger as an electric counterpart to a ferromagnet In this study, we investigate the polarization and band structure of four quasi-2D allotropes of Se, which we call α-Se, δ-Se, η-Se and τ -Se. These quasi-2D allotropes are formed from their constituent one-dimensional (1D) compounds we call the a-helix, b-chain, c-helix and dchain, which possess a rotational degree of freedom about their axis. All atoms in the isolated 1D structures have two neighbors at the same distance and are structurally as well as electronically equivalent. In the quasi-2D allotropes, however, differences arise among individual atoms due to the inter-chain interaction. Our ab initio density functional theory (DFT) calculations reveal that the Bader charge of inequivalent Se sites deviates from six valence electrons, indicating the possibility of a macroscopic electric polarization. As we will discuss further on, we find a FE polarization in α-Se and δ-Se, whereas η-Se behaves as an antiferroelecric (AFE). τ -Se behaves as a non-collinear ferrielectric (FiE), with FE polarization along the chain axis and AFE polarization in the out-of-plane direction. Rotating each constituent 1D chain of these quasi-2D Se allotropes changes the atomic symmetry, causing a change in the electrical properties. As for α-Se and δ-Se, the in-plane polarization can be changed to the out-of-plane direction. At specific rotation angles, τ -Se distorts to a highly symmetric structure and its FiE polarization disappears. Rotation of the constituent 1D chains in the quasi-2D allotropes also changes the band structure. We observe a modification of the fundamental band gap and a change from an indirect to a direct band gap in δ-Se. Our calculations of the stability, equilibrium structure, and energy changes during structural transformations have been performed using the density functional theory (DFT) as implemented in the VASP One characteristic of group-VI elements is their propensity to form a variety of stable 1D structures including linear sulfur/selenium chains The dynamical stability of the four quasi-2D Se allotropes discussed in this work has been confirmed by the phonon spectra displayed in Fig. We have found the quasi-2D α-Se, δ-Se, and η-Se structures to be stable at T = 300 K, but τ -Se to be stable only at the lower temperature of T = 200 K. Additional information about the MD simulations is presented in Section D of the Appendix. The reason why we call these allotropes 'quasi-2D' and not '2D' or '1D' is that the inter-chain interaction within the layer is much smaller than that of covalent bonds, but still stronger than the inter-layer 'vdW' interaction. Our DFT calculations based on the PBE-D2 functional show that in comparison to isolated 1D structures, the quasi-2D allotropes gain ∆E = 117 meV/atom in α-Se, ∆E = Assembly of isolated 1D structures to layers also leads to a charge redistribution that may cause polarization changes in the system. Bader charges of individual Se atoms, which were all the same in isolated chains, change by ∆Q≈0.05e in α-Se, ∆Q≈0.02e in τ -Se, ∆Q≈0.04e in δ-Se, and ∆Q≈0.05e in η-Se. Such charge transfers are a signature of forming local electric dipoles. Judging from Fig. Ferroelectricity in well-studied 3D systems such as BaTiO 3 Our calculations indicate that α-Se and δ-Se are ferroelectrics with the polarization values P = 2.53 pC/cm in α-Se and P = 2.96 pC/cm in δ-Se. These values are comparable to values observed in typical 2D monochalcogenide ferroelectrics of group IV elements Within the chalcogen group, tellurium (Te) should be similar to Se not only in its chemical behavior, but also in its electronic properties. As could be expected, results published for β-Te indicate that this 2D allotrope displays about half the polarization found in Se, since systems containing this heavier element are more metallic Even though the inter-chain interaction in the 2D systems discussed here is stronger than a pure vdW interaction, it is weaker than a covalent interaction, thus al-lowing this rotational degree of freedom to be activated at moderate energy cost. We may thus expect gradual changes in the magnitude and direction of the polarization when activating the axial rotation degree of freedom. Unlike in uniform, traditional 2D materials, where all atoms are connected by strong chemical bonds of typically 1 eV/atom, the quasi-2D allotropes of Se we consider here consist of 1D chains bonded by a weaker interchain interaction of around 0.1 eV/atom. This weaker interaction does not restrict the rotation of individual constituent chains. Whereas in-plane strain, applied to a general 2D system, changes the atomic structure, it usually maintains the symmetry. Rotation of the individual chains by a nonzero angle θ, however, does modify the symmetry of the system. As a result, the polarization of the system, which is related to symmetry, will also be modified. As also implied in Fig. Rotation of individual chains within the quasi-2D layer is an energetically activated process, with the barriers related to the inter-chain interaction. For simpler systems, the transition path is usually determined using the Nudged Elastic Band (NEB) approach. Considering the number of atoms per unit cell, each with 3 degrees of freedom, and the possibility of Bravais lattice vector changes, optimizations would have to be performed in a roughly 20-dimensional configuration space, well beyond the scope of NEB. To be tractable, we make specific assumptions about the path in configuration space in an approach dubbed "poor-man's NEB" that has been introduced previously During the chain rotation from state A to A , significant changes occur in the electronic structure and especially the polarization. Our results indicate that both out-of-plane and in-plane polarization components are changing, with the polarization direction depicted in Fig. An independent Bader charge calculation indicates that polarization changes are caused by charge reorganization during the rotation of individual chains. We have found that rotation of a-chains in α-Se changes Bader charges on individual atoms by ∆Q≈0.01e. According Not only the net polarization, but also the band structure of the system is affected by the chain rotation. Results of our DFT-PBE calculations, presented in Fig. We also study the effect of in-plane uniaxial strain on the polarization. To do so, we strain the lattice uniformly along the a 1 direction, which is aligned with the axes of the constituent chains in α-Se, δ-Se and τ -Se. To reproduce the realistic response of a system subject to this strain, we allow the a 2 lattice constant to relax for each value of a 1 . As the quasi-2D structures are stretched along the a 1 direction, they shrink linearly along the a 2 direction, indicating a positive Poisson ratio. For α-Se shown in Fig. The net polarization as a function of strain is also shown in Fig. As can be inferred from Fig. We also study the effect of in-plane uniaxial strain on the band structure of α-Se, δ-Se and τ -Se. Our results, presented in Fig. We studied the possibility to tune the electric polarization of four quasi-2D allotropes of Se. Besides α-Se, the naturally occurring phase consisting of a-helices, we also studied δ-Se, η-Se and τ -Se, which differ only in their dihedral angles and should be similarly stable. The transformation of the a-helix to a b-chain, the constituent of δ-Se, has been discussed earlier Our calculations of the polarization behavior in these unusual systems are performed using a well-established approach Changes of the electric polarization in ferroelectrics are caused by relative displacement of sublattices. In most common ferroelectrics including BaTiO 3 , the interaction among atoms forming such sublattices is indirect, effectuated by strong covalent or ionic bonds to atomic neighbors in other sublattices. In absence of a hierarchy of weaker and stronger interactions in the system, a selective mechanical displacement of a sublattice appears impossible. The situation is very different in quasi-2D Se allotropes discussed here, which consist of covalently bonded 1D constituents that form sublattices. The weaker interaction between the 1D systems provides one additional degree of freedom, namely the axial rotation. This rotation, as we have shown, may change not only the magnitude, but also the direction of the polarization from in-plane to out-of-plane. We can imagine two scenarios to effectuate such a rotation. One of these scenarios uses nano-sized combs that have been synthesized recently We also imagine two scenarios to flip the direction of the polarization in our quasi-2D Se allotropes. Both scenarios involve atomic motion across a barrier in an energetically activated process. In the first scenario, which involves a higher activation energy and is discussed in more detail in Appendix C, atoms in a rigid unit cell are displaced in opposite directions from the initial state A, across a highly symmetric transition state B S , to the final state A with the same energy as A. This process is shown in Fig. The second scenario involves a special rotation of the constituent 1D structures in the quasi-2D Se system, as illustrated in Fig. The high flexibility of 1D Se chains in terms of bond length, bond angle and dihedral angle suggests that many more structures beyond the four allotropes discussed here may be realized, resulting in other quasi-2D structures with very different electronic properties. In summary, we have performed ab initio DFT calculations to study the polarization and band structure of four quasi-2D allotropes of Se, which we called α-Se, δ-Se, η-Se and τ -Se. These allotropes are formed from their one-dimensional (1D) constituents, which we call the a-helix, b-chain, c-helix and d-chain, and which possess a rotational degree of freedom about their axis. The inter-chain interaction is not strong enough to suppress the rotation of these chains, but still causes a charge redistribution within the quasi-2D structures that results in a net polarization. α-Se and δ-Se display an FE behavior with an in-plane polarization, directed normal to the 1D chains. An in-plane polarization also occurs in η-Se, which displays an AFE behavior. τ -Se behaves as a non-collinear ferrielectric, with FE polarization along the chain axis and AFE polarization in the out-of-plane direction. Rotating each constituent 1D chain in these quasi-2D Se allotropes changes the atomic symmetry and also the electronic structure. In the α and δ allotropes, chain rotation changes the polarization direction from in-plane to out-of-plane. At specific rotation angles, τ -Se distorts to a highly symmetric structure and its FiE polarization disappears. Along with changes in polarization, caused by chain rotation, come changes in the electronic band structure of these semiconducting allotropes including a modification of the fundamental band gap, which may change from an indirect to a direct gap in δ-Se. In-plane strain along the axial direction of the 1D structures only modifies the magnitude of the polarization. Polarization studies of a given allotrope using the Berry phase approach begin with the construction of a highly symmetric PE counterpart of this allotrope with no local electric dipoles. Specifics of the construction process are outlined in Appendix B. For the allotropes in this study, we display the morphology of the PE state, characterized by the symbol B S , in Fig. Comparing the charge difference between these quasi-2D allotropes and their corresponding B S states, we observe an parallel electrical polarization along the a 2 direction of α-Se and δ-Se indicating FE behavior, shown in Fig. As a result, τ -Se displays a non-collinear polarization behavior, indicated in Fig. We use a traditional approach to construct the highly symmetric paraelectric state called B S . We start from the initial structure A and identify the polarization direction. We reflect A about a mirror plane that is perpendicular to the polarization direction to arrive at A . Since A and A are mirror symmetric, the polarization of A is opposite to that of A. A state mid-way between A and A has zero polarization and is identified as the paraelectric reference state B S . As can be seen in Fig. We calculate the phonon spectra of these paraelectric structures B S and show the results in Fig. α: θ=0o τ: θ=0o τ: θ=10.27o δ: θ=90o α: θ=30o Γ X S Y Γ Γ X S Y Γ Γ X S Y Γ δ : σ x =-4% δ : σ x =-2% δ : σ x =+2% δ : σ x =+4% Γ X S Y Γ Γ X S Y Γ Γ X S Y Γ Γ X S Y Γ