Phase-field modeling has become a powerful tool in describing the complex pore-structure evolution and the intricate multi-physics in non-isothermal sintering processes. However, the quantitative validity of conventional variational phase-field models involving diffusive processes is a challenge. Artificial interface effects, like the trapping effects, may originate at the interface when the kinetic properties of two opposing phases are different. On the other hand, models with prescribed antitrapping terms do not necessarily guarantee the thermodynamics variational nature of the model. This issue has been solved for liquid-solid interfaces via the development of the variational quantitative solidification phase-field model. However, there is no related work addressing the interfaces in nonisothermal sintering, where the free surfaces between the solid phase and surrounding pore regions exhibit strong asymmetry of mass and thermal properties. Also, additional challenges arise due to the conserved order parameter describing the free surfaces. In this work, we present a variational and quantitative phase-field model for non-isothermal sintering processes. The model is derived via an extended non-diagonal phase-field model. The model evolution equations have naturally cross-coupling terms between the conserved kinetics (i.e., mass and thermal transfer) and the nonconserved one (grain growth). These terms are shown via asymptotic analysis to be instrumental in ensuring the elimination of interface artefacts, while also examined to not modify the thermodynamic equilibrium condition (characterized by dihedral angle). Moreover, we demonstrate that the trapping effects and existence of surface diffusion in conservation laws are direction-dependent. An anisotropic interpolation scheme of the kinetic mobilities which differentiates the normal and the tangential directions along the interface is discussed. Numerically, we demonstrate the importance of the cross-couplings and the anisotropic interpolation via presenting thermal-microstructural evolutions. Sintering is a typical densification technique in thermal processing of bulk materials from packed powders Therefore, it is essential to identify and understand the physical effects and interactions of these factors in the sense of bridging the process parameters, microstructure, and properties of the materials to further tailor the performance for applications of interest. Two major types of interfaces are essential for sintering process, namely the free surface between pore and substance and the grain boundary between adjacent crystal grains. There are analytical models for describing the pores/grains evolution, the two-particle coalescence model For such purpose, phase-field modeling and simulation is promising. In the conventional variational phase-field theory, order parameters (OP) are applied to represent the spatio-temporal distribution of microstructure, i.e. pores and grain orientations in the case of sintering. The thermodynamic potential of the microstructure can then be formulated by an energy functional w.r.t. the OPs, including the interface contribution through the corresponding gradient terms of OPs. From non-equilibrium thermodynamics, the evolution equations of the OPs can be derived on the basis of the variational theory. It circumvents the necessity of interface tracking. There are variational phase-field sintering models considering an isothermal scenario. For instance, Kazaryan et al. On the other hand, one theoretical issue of the conventional variational phase-field models involving thermal/chemical diffusive process is the quantitative validity. Artificial interface effects may originate from violation of conservation laws and discontinuity of the chemical/thermal potentials at the interface (trapping effects) It should be noted that modifying a variationally derived evolution equation by prescribed antitrapping terms do not necessarily guarantee the variational nature of the model, which is, however, important for thermodynamics soundness. Therefore there have been efforts to develop variational formulations of quantitative phase-field models. Using phenomenological linear relations, variational formulation of quantitative phase-field models have been developed by considering kinetic crosscoupling between the conserved diffusion fields and the nonconserved OPs (non-diagonal model) By separately considering the thermodynamic quantities of two opposing phases and then treating the interface as a mixture of the phases (two-phase variational approach), Ohno et al. Based on literature review, there is currently no variational quantitative phase-field model for non-isothermal sintering. In comparison to the non-isothermal solidification models with non-conserved OPs, additional challenge can be expected due to the conserved OPs involved here. In this work, we derive variational formulation of a quantitative phase-field model for non-isothermal sintering processes where the free surfaces between the solid phase and surrounding atmosphere/pore regions have strong asymmetry of both mass and thermal properties. The model is derived via an extension of the non-diagonal phase-field model. Different from the conventional variational non-isothermal sintering phase-field models, the derived model contains cross-coupling terms in the diffusion and phase-field evolution equations, which are essential to ensure the quantitative validity of the model. Furthermore, we demonstrate that the existence of the trapping effects and presence of surface diffusion in conservation laws are direction-dependent. It hence high-lights the need of an anisotropic interpolation of the diffusivity tensor. The paper is structured as follows. The formulations of the quantitative model (denoted as "quantitative model" hereinafter) are derived in Section II where the entropy functional and time evolution equations are explicitly given. Sharp-interface description across solid free surfaces is briefly explained in Section III. Afterwards, a linkage between model parameters and sharp-interface equations using a reduction procedure is demonstrated in Section IV. Section V shows the verification and importance of quantitative model followed by comparing with the non-isothermal sintering model proposed in our former work (denoted as "existing model" hereinafter). Conclusions are presented in Section VI. Underlying physical processes involved in nonisothermal sintering can be classified as but not limited to: (a) the mass/heat transport, including diffusion through sorts of paths (volume, surface, and grain boundaries) and mass flows (viscous or fluid flow); (b) the structural relaxation, including the rigid-body motions of powders and interface (mostly the grain boundaries) migration. All underlying interactive processes collectively lead to two significant phenomena: one is the densification (eliminating the pores), in which the total surface energy should be reduced; the other is the grain coarsening, in which the total grain-boundary energy should decrease In this model, a conserved OP ρ denoting the solid density fraction is used to indicate the solid region (ρ = 1) and the atmosphere/pores region (ρ = 0) while a series of non-conserved OPs {η i } are used to represent the different grain orientations of the solid grains. Considering a non-isothermal scenario, the entropy functional S for a subdomain Ω within the sintering system is defined as where s is the local entropy density, e is the internal energy density while κ ρ and κ η are the gradient energy coefficients associated with ρ and {η i } respectively. s ss is the solid phase bulk entropy density and is dependent on the internal energy density of the solid e ss . The bulk entropy density of the atmosphere s at is dependent on the internal energy density of the atmosphere e at . h(ρ) = 2ρ -1 is an interpolation function. The configurational entropy s cf is related to the spatial distribution of entropy density proportional to ρ and {η i }. It is formulated in a form of Landau-type polynomial similar to the one given by Ref. where C cf and D cf are constants. The multi-well potential in Eq. ( . One advantage of this potential form is that its constant parameters can be directly linked to material properties Assuming e can be expressed as where e pt accounts for the spatial distribution of the internal energy proportional to ρ and {η i } and is also formulated similar to s cf as where C pt and D pt are constants. Following the Legendre transformation, we can obtain the free energy functional F as with where f ss and f at are the free energy densities of the solid phase and the atmosphere, respectively. T is the temperature. Substituting Eqs. ( with Considering that ρ and e are conserved OPs, they satisfy mass and energy conservation laws respectively: where J ρ is the mass diffusion flux and J e is the energy flux. Following our previous work with where ∇(δS/δρ) is the driving force associated with J ρ , ∇(δS/δe) is the driving force associated with J e and δS/δη i is the driving force associated with ηi . In the view of the phenomenological linear laws of non-equilibrium thermodynamics and also ensuring nonnegative production of the entropy, we can define the relationships between the fluxes, the non-conserved OPs time evolution equations and their driving forces as . . . where μ = δF /δρ is defined as the chemical potential and n represents the total number of grain orientations. L ρρ , L ρe , L eρ and L ee are positively defined rank 2 tensors and for i = 1, 2, • • • , n , L ρηi , L eηi , L ηiρ and L ηi,e are positively defined rank 1 tensors while L ηiηi is a positively defined rank 0 tensor. Diagonal terms L ρρ and L ee are the diffusional mobilities of mass and energy diffusion respectively. Mobility term associated with the grain orientations, L ηiηi is simply a scalar function and is thereafter taken as L η where we assume isotropic condition taking it to be the same regardless of i. The non-diagonal terms in the Onsager matrix in Eq. Formulations expressed in Eqs. Since the variation of mass density and internal energy is found across free surfaces of the solid grains, the crosscoupling terms L -1 ρηi = L -1 ηiρ and L -1 eηi = L -1 ηie should be defined such that they are only evaluated at the free surfaces. Also, the non-equilibrium effects associated with these cross terms scale with the diffuse interface width l. Accordingly, following Refs. where M 1 and M 2 are scalar functions used to parametrize the associated cross-coupling terms. l∇ρ is a vector normal to the free surfaces and has a magnitude of 1 at the center of the free surfaces assuming the parameter α used to adjust the definition of l in Ref. Furthermore, time evolution equations can be obtained as c at is the relative specific heat, where c ss = ∂e ss /∂T and c at = ∂e at /∂T are the volumetric specific heat of solid and atmosphere, respectively. Comparing the heat transfer equation (Eq. ( the second term on the right-hand-side (RHS) can be likened to the thermal antitrapping current related to the elimination of thermal trapping (associated with temperature jump) at the free surfaces. Similarly, the second term on the RHS of Eq. (16a) represents some form of antitrapping current valued only at the free surfaces. Similar to solutal antitrapping current Moreover, considering no variation of solid density and thermal properties across the grain boundaries, Eq. (16c) has no cross-coupling terms and simply takes a form of Allen-Cahn equation at the grain boundaries. Consequently, we limit our subsequent analysis and derivations to the free surfaces where the cross-coupling terms are significant. Considering a simple nonisothermal system consisting a sharp free surface between a solid grain and the atmosphere, the following set of sharp-interface equations can be described in the bulk regions: where for a bulk region rg ("ss" for solid and "at" for atmosphere), M rg , c rg , and k rg represent the region's effective mass mobility coefficient, volumetric specific heat, and effective thermal conductivity respectively. ρ here adopts the physical meaning of normalised density of the solid. Eqs. ( where v is the velocity of the migrating free surface, and ∇T | ss and ∇T | at are the spatial gradients of the temperature at the solid and atmosphere sides of the free surface respectively. n sf is the unit vector normal to the free surface. J T is the normal heat flux flowing through the free surface. Similarly, explicit formulation of mass conservation at the free surface is given as where ρ ss and ρ at are the bulk densities in the solid and atmosphere, and ∇μ| ss and ∇μ| at are the spatial gradients of the chemical potential at the solid and atmosphere sides of the free surface respectively. M sf represents surface diffusion mobility. ∇ 2 sf is surface Laplacian. The last term in Eq. ( where v s and v b are the velocities contributed by surface diffusion and bulk/volume diffusion respectively and can be expressed in terms of their corresponding mass fluxes; where V m is the molar volume and ∇ sf is the surface gradient. J sf is the mass flux along the free surface associated with surface gradient of the free surface curvature k sf ; J sf ∝ ∇ sf k sf . J b is mass flux from the solid bulk to the free surface associated with the gradient of the chemical potential in the solid bulk grains μ ss ; J b ∝ ∇μ ss , In addition, the chemical potential and temperature at the free surface obey the following relations: where μ| ss and μ| at represent chemical potentials at the solid and atmosphere sides of the free surface, respectively. T | ss and T | at represent the temperatures at the solid and atmosphere sides of the free surface, respectively. R s represents Kapitza-type thermal resistance. In this work, we assume negligible R s , thereby Eq. (24a) and Eq. ( where A, B and C are kinetic coefficients of the positivedefinite Onsager matrix. Entropy production at the free surface σ s can be formulated as Substituting Eqs. ( In this section, still considering a system consisting a free surface between a solid grain and the atmosphere, we establish the relationships between A, B and C and the phase-field parameters following the reduction procedure presented in Ref. According to the phase-field method, the entropy production (Eq. ( where L ss ρρ = L ρρ (ρ = ρ ss ) and L at ρρ = L ρρ (ρ = ρ at ) are the effective mass mobilities in the corresponding regions. Also, L ss ee = L ee (ρ = ρ ss ) and L at ee = L ee (ρ = ρ at ) are the effective energy mobilities in the corresponding regions. L η,sf is mobility of η at the free surface. It can be noted that in the bulk regions (|x| > l/2), only the fluxes J ρ (x) and J e (x) contribute to entropy production as η and ρ ′ (x) both go to zero. The entropy production of the system considered can be formulated within the sharp-interface description as Comparing Eqs. ( where for a region rg ("ss" for solid and "at" for atmosphere), J rg(ρ) and J rg(e) represent the region's bulk mass and energy fluxes respectively. For the purpose of making direct relations between Eq. ( We integrate both sides of the conservation laws, ė = -J ′ e (x) and ρ = -J ′ ρ (x) after substituting Eq. ( J ss(ρ) dρ, J ss(e) dJ e = v e at eq e ss eq de where ρ eq rg and e at rg (rg = ss, at) are the equilibrium conserved OP and internal energies, respectively. The integrals in Eq. Furthermore, we adopt the sigmoid formulation for the profiles of ρ(x) and η(x) in this work as with the diffuse interface width l. Taking into account all the aforementioned, we obtain σ s to be It should be noted that the integration range of Eq. ( The explicit formulations of A, B, and C implies that the phase-field parameters can be carefully tuned so as to obtain A = 0, B = 0 and C = 0 which guarantees δμ = 0 and δT = 0 across a migrating free surface. However, it is important to note that even if δμ = δT = 0 is guaranteed, Almgren ]. with and In Eq Noting that L ⊥ ee = k ⊥ T 2 and therefore substituting Eq. ( with where e ht = e ss -e at . The functions defined in Eq. ( Following with and the volumetric entropy as where the linear approximation is sometimes taken as s v ≈ R/V m with the ideal gas constant R and molar volume V m We propose M 1 to have a similar formulation as M 2 in Eq. ( with Substituting Eqs. ( and also taking into account: The functions defined in Eq. ( Therefore, in order to ensure A = 0, we take (64) The mobility L -1 η,gb of {η i } can be obtained from the physical grain boundary mobility G eff gb and grain boundary energy γ gb as [8, 55] Recalling Eqs. (16c) and ( Recalling the anisotropic definitions of L ee and L ρρ in Eqs. ( as L ⊥ ee and L v ρρ are respectively one of the eigen-values of L ee and L ρρ , corresponding to the eigen-direction of n sf (n sf ≡ ∇ρ/|∇ρ|). It is worth noting that M 1 and M 2 are derived based on the constant postulate, i.e., M 1 and M 2 are spatiotemporal independent constants for a sintering system with known mass diffusivities and thermal conductivities of substance and atmosphere as well as given diffuse interface width, since the spatio-temporal dependency of all OP-related terms (Eqs. ( In order to examine the capability of the model in ensuring δμ = δT = 0 at the free surface, we perform diffusion-driven reshaping simulations of an elliptical inclusion with major axis A and minor axis B morphing into a circle. We set up a simulation domain with the lengths L x and L y in x and y direction, respectively. The domain is further subjected to an initial temperature gradient ∇T = g 0 along the x-axis. ρ is taken to vary smoothly from one in the inclusion (ρ ss = 1) to zero outside (ρ at = 0) with l = 1. A full schematic of the simulation setup is given in Fig. First, we consider a case of asymmetric mass transport where D at /D ss = 2. We set k at /k ss = 1, hence only employing the mass antitrapping current term associated with mass diffusion while the thermal antitrapping current is tentatively dropped. Profile of chemical potential μ(x) across the moving free surface is presented for the cases M 1 = 0 and M 1 ̸ = 0 in Figs. We also note the existence of another chemical potential drop ∆μ across the free surface, characterizing the differences between the bulk values, as depicted in Figs. Furthermore, Fig. Additionally, we investigate a case of asymmetric heat transport with k at /k ss = 0.05. Similar to previous simulation, we examine the thermal antitrapping term associated with heat transport. The mass antitrapping term is tentatively dropped by setting D at /D ss = 1. Simulations are performed for existing model (i.e., M 2 = 0) and quantitative model with M 2 ̸ = 0. Further details of results are given in supplementary material (Fig. In this section, we perform simulations for grain coalescence of two spherical grains with distinct sizes. Comparisons of microstructure and temperature distribution are made between quantitative model where antitrapping terms are taken into account and existing model where these terms are not considered. The two models are referred to as model with ATs and model without ATs in the following discussions. We set up a simulation domain with the lengths L x and L y in x and y direction, respectively. Similar to previous setup, the domain is subjected to ∇T = g 0 along the x-axis. Simulations are performed for asymmetric mass and heat transport where D at /D ss = 2, k at /k ss = 0.05 with l = 2. A full schematic of the simulation setup is supplemented in Fig. Transient microstructures and temperature profiles for both models are compared and presented in Fig. We further examine the in-process sintering neck λ and dihedral angle Φ of the simulation as presented in Fig. where C ηi and C ηj are the fitted semi-circular tendencies by coordinates of contour η i = 0.5 and η j = 0.5, respectively. ∂Cη i ∂x and ∂Cη j ∂x then provide the slopes of C ηi and C ηj . In this sense, Φ is calculated using the difference between these two angles of slope at the neck point, as shown in inset of Fig. It is worth noting that Φ approaches Φ eq when two particles with identical size are sintered isothermally, as λ reaches the maximum and stays constant, i.e., the system reaches equilibrium Here, we particularly demonstrate the importance of the anisotropic interpolations of the kinetic mobilities. First, we investigate a steady-state heat transfer case. The numerical validation test proposed by Nicoli et al. where a ≈ 0.90 for k at /k ss = 10. Here, it is important to note that the formulation in Eq. ( where p ss (ρ) and p at (ρ) are interpolation functions valued as one only in the solid phase and atmosphere region respectively. Average mass flux J ρ,x is obtained across a grain with the plots of J ρ,x against normalized time t shown in Fig. The thin-interface limit analysis showed that eliminating chemical potential jump across the free surface does not require a specific mass diffusivity interpolation. Correspondingly, it has been derived in Refs. In this work, we have developed a variational quantitative phase-field model for non-isothermal sintering processes following the non-diagonal phase-field approach introduced in Refs. Numerical tests were done to highlight the importance of these cross-coupling terms. The results presented showed the emergence of chemical potential jump (δμ) and temperature jump (δT ) at the free surface when M 1 = 0 and M 2 = 0. δμ ̸ = 0 and δT ̸ = 0 negates the sharp-interface sintering description. However, employing M 1 ̸ = 0 and M 2 ̸ = 0 as described in quantitative model eliminates these jumps. The convergence behavior of δμ in respect to interface width (l) was presented for model with M 1 = 0 and model with M 1 ̸ = 0. For both models, δμ → 0 as l → 0 demonstrating their efficacy at relatively smaller l. The major usefulness of quantitative model is seen as l ≫ 0 where δμ is significantly large for model with M 1 = 0 compared to model where M 1 ̸ = 0. Additionally, the difference in transient microstructure and temperature profiles were examined for model with antitrapping currents and model without antitrapping currents. It was seen that the antitrapping currents helps to eliminate extra driving forces brought about by δμ ̸ = 0 and δT ̸ = 0 at the free surface. Moreover, it was demonstrated that the antitrapping currents only modify the sintering kinetics and have no impact on the thermodynamic conditions. Furthermore, we demonstrated numerically how the anisotropic interpolation of kinetic mobilities delivers effective description of diffusion fluxes comparable to sharp-interface description. Therefore, the proposed model can serve as a great tool in studying quantitative simulations of non-isothermal sintering and other related solid-state processes. A major outlook of this work is to further investigate the convergence of interface velocity with respect to interface width obtained using proposed model. The authors declare that the data supporting the findings of this study are available within the paper. Source codes of MOOSE-based application NIsoS and related utilities are provided in the online repository bitbucket.org/mfm_tuda/nisos.git. The analyses of Cahn-Hilliard dynamics in Refs. Additionally, since the antitrapping coefficients M 1 and M 2 are dependent on the bulk values ρ ss and ρ at , we examine the variations of M 1 and M 2 with ∆ρ ss and ∆ρ at up to 0.1, as seen in Fig. 