The process of crystal nucleation can be accelerated or retarded by ultrasonic vibration, which is particularly attractive for the addictive manufacture and thermoplastic forming of metallic glasses, however, the effect and mechanism of oscillatory loading on the nucleation process are still elusive. Here, by using molecular dynamics simulation, the changes in the time-temperature-transformation (TTT) curve under oscillatory external loading are systematically investigated in two typical binary alloys. A glass forming ability dependent response to the external loading is found, and the shortest incubation time is insensitive to the external loading, while the corresponding temperature can be significantly shifted. Within the framework of classical nucleation theory, a fitting formula is proposed to describe the simulation data quantitatively. In contrast to stationary shear, the elastic stress, rather than the strain rate, is the key parameter to control the evolution of TTT curve under oscillatory loading. Furthermore, the model shows that oscillatory loading can decouple the mobility and nucleation in the deeply supercooled liquid, hence the deformation ability can be enhanced while the nucleation is suppressed, which is particularly helpful for the forming and manufacturing of metallic glasses. Understanding solidification phenomena during which a liquid morphs either into an amorphous or crystalline state is of fundamental importance as well as practical interest for materials manufacturing in industrial applications. It would enable a better control by defining the nonequilibrium pathway that determines the microstructure, both for natural and artificial materials However, in metallic alloys, the metallic bond is less directional and weaker leading to a close-packing tendency, which makes the nucleation easier to happen during the quench. Since the seminal work of Turnbull Such a relationship may find its roots at the atomic scale in terms of the variety of favoured local structures Recently, new fabrication processes such as rheological processing In the present paper, by using molecular dynamics simulation (MD), we investigate the homogeneous nucleation behavior of alloys under oscillatory shear conditions, with amplitude and period as varying parameters. For this purpose, two typical binary alloys, namely Ni 50 Al 50 and Cu 23 Zr 77 , were considered as they both have a stable underlying crystalline structure, but display a significantly different GFA The samples were first equilibrated at 3000 K for 1 ns, where the temperature was far above the liquidus temperature (T L ) of each system. The investigated samples were prepared by fast quenching from 3000 K to a target temperature with a fast cooling rate around 10 13 K/s at constant pressure. During cooling, a configuration is taken and saved at each target temperature to further construct the TTT curves for various loading conditions along isotherms. Subsequently, during the isothermal homogeneous nucleation, the simulation box was deformed by using a sinusoidal shear deformation along the x direction. The time dependent oscillatory shear strain is γ(t) = γ A sin(2πt/t p ), where γ A is the amplitude and t p is the oscillation period. During the deformation, we solved the SLLOD equations We monitored the degree of crystallization at the target temperature by calculating the parameter F 6 where q 6m is the standard bond-orientations order parameter Where Θ(x) is the step function and N c (i) is the number of neighbours of atom i. The parameter F 6 is obtained by averaging f 6 over all atoms of the simulation box. For a perfect crystal, F 6 = 1 and in a liquid state, F 6 is small and approaches zero. For all data points reported, five independent simulations were used to improve the statistics and estimate the error bars. Dynamical modulus analysis is widely used in the deformation and relaxation mechanism of amorphous solid and supercooled liquids Here σ(t) is the shear stress along the shear strain direction, and N is the number of cycles, here N = 100. We obtained the dynamical modulus spectrum of Cu 23 Zr 77 at 700 K with γ A = 0.06, which will be used in the following. A. Time-temperature-transformation (TTT) curve According to classical nucleation theory (CNT), the nucleation process from a supercooled liquid can be ascribed to the competition between kinetic and thermodynamic factors where A is a prefactor, W/k B T is the kinetic factor which describes the difficulty for atomic attachment to the crystalline nuclei. As temperature decreases, the kinetic factor increases. W is the kinetic barrier. Both A and W are supposed to be insensitive to temperature. ∆G(T )/k B T is the thermodynamic factor, which describes the difficulty for generating a critical crystalline nucleus through thermal fluctuations. ∆G(T ) is is determined by the balance between the chemical potential difference and the liquid-crystal interfacial energy ∆G(T ) varies with temperature, increasing rapidly near the liquidus temperature (T L ) and then decreasing with temperature. Approaching the liquidus temperature, the thermodynamic factor is larger than the kinetic factor, and the nucleation process is dominated by the thermodynamic barrier (∆G(T )). As temperature decreases, the influence of the ther-modynamic factor declines but the kinetic factor becomes dominant. Below a certain temperature, the kinetic factor becomes a dominant factor in the nucleation process. Therefore the nucleation time of the supercooled liquid is non-monotonically dependent on temperature, and with a transition from thermodynamically to kinetically controlled nucleation as temperature decreases. This non-monotonic behaviour is usually illustrated by the timetemperature-transformation (TTT) curve (Figure Next, we used a sinusoidal deformation to investigate the effect of external loading on the TTT curve. Figure For γ A = 0.1, however, the nucleation process is retarded and has a behaviour typical of nucleation from a moderately supercooled liquid (above T N ). This suggests a transition from kinetic control to thermodynamic control as the strain amplitude is increased at fixed temperature in Cu 23 Zr 77 . The oscillatory shear can change both the kinetic and thermodynamic factors. Following the work of Turnbull Where by convention τ 0 ≡ 10 -12 s. k B is Boltzmann constant and T is the temperature. There are four parameters in equation 6, which are independent of temperature but sensitive to external loading: the prefactor δ(γ A , t p ) , the kinetic barrier W (γ A , t p ), the liquid-crystal interfacial parameter Γ(γ A , t p ) and the liquidus temperature T L (γ A , t p ). Those parameters can be obtained by fitting equation 6 to the simulation results. We systematically obtained the TTT curves for different strain amplitudes, keeping the period fixed at t p = 0.02 ns on the one hand, and for different periods, with a strain amplitude γ A = 0.06 or γ A = 0.1, on the other hand. Figure In contrast, for Cu 23 Zr 77 , the nucleation process is relatively slow, and τ N is larger than when the ratio τ Q N /t p is approaching the situation of Ni 50 Al 50 , the nose temperature is insensitive to the amplitude of the strain. For faster oscillations, the ratio τ Q N /t p is large, and the thermodynamic factor will be increased notably by the strain, so that the nose temperature will be shifted to a lower temperature (Figure Generally, the liquidus temperature T L can be changed by an external loading, as has been observed and well studied in the stationary shear flow situation A , and indicates that the shear melting is induced by an additional elastic work associated with the external loading. However, the shear melting effect in the case of oscillatory shear is distinct from the case of stationary shear flow. For stationary shear flow, the strain rate γ is the only external loading parameter, in contrast, there are two parameters in the oscillatory shear: the amplitude γ A and the period t p . For stationary shear flow, both the thermodynamic and kinetic factors can be modified by a function of strain rate For oscillatory shear, we argue that the elastic stress, rather than shear rate, is the key parameter in crystal nucleation and shear melting. As is well known, the viscoelastic response of glasses is strongly frequency dependent. In the frequency range covered by our simulations, the storage modulus for our systems behaves typically as an inverse power of frequency, G ∝ 1/t α p , with an exponent α 0.2, which is far less than one (Figure to represent the external perturbation on the shear melting, where T B is a material parameter. We also note that the GFA of alloys measured by τ X at the nose is insensitive to the perturbation at first order (figure Where Te ≡ T e /T Q N is an adimensional effective temperature, and , where T Q L is the liquidus temperature at the quiescent state, the predicted curve matches pretty well with simulation results (see Figure Furthermore, there is a good correlation between the prefactor and the kinetic factor at nose temperature ( see Figure Where B, Ĉ are material parameters. We fitted B and Ĉ from the numerical results of well with the simulation data of various strain amplitudes γ A and periods t p (Figure An interesting observation of equation 9 is that the oscillatory deformation induces a linear decrease of the kinetic factor, and increases the thermodynamic factor quadratically as a function of the stress. For γ A (τ Q N /t p ) α < 1, the decrease of the kinetic factor is faster than the increase of the thermodynamic factor, and the nucleation will be accelerated by the atomic mobility, in contrast, for γ A (τ Q N /t p ) α > 1, the thermodynamic factor increases more rapidly than the kinetic factor decreases. Therefore one can on the one hand improve the atomic mobility of the alloy, and on the other hand, the nucleation can be significantly retarded. This is important and attractive for the fabrication of metallic glasses and control the nucleation process of the alloy, one can use ultrasonic vibration to enhance mobility meanwhile avoiding crystallization during forging or cold joining of metallic glasses In conclusion, we find the TTT curve under oscillatory shear can be adjusted by tuning the amplitude of the strain and its frequency. We provide an empirical model to describe the dependence of the TTT curve on the loading, which can quantitatively well represent the numerical data. This formula is interpreted by introducing the elastic stress associated with the loading, which appears to be the essential parameter that will influence the nucleation time. Our study shows that, using oscillatory loading, the mobility and nucleation of alloys can be decoupled in the deeply supercooled liquid state, therefore the formation ability can be enhanced and nucleation can be retarded. This is particularly attractive and useful for the manufacturing and processing of metallic glasses. the system size. In contrast, below T N , the nucleus grows sluggishly, and the incubation time is insensitive to the system size. We investigated the sensitivity of the TTT curves on the threshold of the incubation time τ X . Figure 