The skyrmion-substrate interaction is an important issue to consider when studying particle-like skyrmions in nanostructures, which may strongly affect the skyrmion dynamics and lead to complex dynamic phenomena. Here, we report the current-driven dynamic behaviors of particle-like skyrmions interacting with the funnel obstacle in a ferromagnetic layer. We computationally demonstrate that a funnel obstacle with enhanced perpendicular magnetic anisotropy can be used to modify the dynamics of skyrmions due to the repulsive skyrmion-funnel interaction, which could generate several nontrivial effects, including the compression, clogging, annihilation, guided motion, and capturing of skyrmions. It is also found that the funnel obstacle can separate an incoming flow of skyrmions into two asymmetric flows. Moreover, we show that it is possible to capture skyrmions by the funnel obstacle in both static and dynamic ways. Our results are useful for understanding the skyrmion dynamics interacting with the substrate and could provide guidelines for the control of skyrmion flows in a transmission channel. The particle-substrate interaction is an important issue in the study of active matter systems Most recently, several experimental reports demonstrated that the perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (PMA) in a magnetic substrate hosting skyrmions could be modified locally in a precise manner Asymmetric obstacles, such as the funnel-shaped pinning barriers, can be used to modify the dynamics of self-driven particles In this work, we study the current-induced dynamic behaviors of particle-like nanoscale skyrmions interacting with a funnel obstacle under the framework of micromagnetics. The funnel obstacle has an enhanced PMA in a ferromagnetic layer with interface-induced Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction (DMI) where m is the reduced magnetization, t is the time, γ 0 is the absolute gyromagnetic ratio, α is the Gilbert damping parameter, and h eff = -1 μ0MS • δε δm is the effective field with μ 0 , M S , and ε being the vacuum permeability constant, saturation magnetization, and average energy density, respectively. The energy terms in our model include the ferromagnetic exchange energy, interfacial DMI energy, PMA energy, and demagnetization energy For the sake of simplicity, we consider the damping-like spin-orbit torque as the driving force, which is expressed as , where is the reduced Planck constant, e is the electron charge, a is the sample thickness, j is the current density, and θ SH is the spin Hall angle. We note that we do not include the field-like spin-orbit torque in Eq. ( The magnetic parameters are adopted from Refs. 43-45: γ 0 = 2.211 × 10 5 m A -1 s -1 , α = 0.3, M S = 580 kA m -1 , the exchange constant A = 15 pJ m -1 , the PMA constant K = 0.8 MJ m -3 , and the DMI constant D = 3 mJ m -2 . We assume that θ SH = 1 so that the driving force is simply determined by the current density j (i.e., u ∼ j). The simulations are performed by the MUMAX 3 micromagnetic simulator In order to facilitate the interaction between the funnel obstacle and skyrmions in our system, we first study the intrinsic skyrmion Hall angle of a single skyrmion driven by the damping-like torque τ d . The reason is that the direction of motion of skyrmions is determined by the intrinsic skyrmion Hall angle before encountering the obstacle or the edge of the ferromagnetic layer. Hence we place a relaxed isolated skyrmion with Q = -1 at the center of a clean sample (i.e., at x = 1000 nm and y = 500 nm) and drive the skyrmion into motion by the damping-like torque with p, where we define the spin-polarization angle between the spin-polarization direction p and the +x direction as θ. The value of θ ranges from 0 • to 360 • and can be controlled by changing the injection direction of a uniform electron flow ĵe in the heavy metal layer as p = ĵe × n with n being the surface normal vector of the ferromagnet/heavy metal interface We numerically find that the skyrmion Hall angle θ SkHE induced by a moderate current density j = 0.5 MA cm -2 at θ = 0 • (i.e., p = +x) is equal to 158.97 • , where we numerically define the skyrmion Hall angle as the angle between the skyrmion velocity vector and the +x direction, i.e., θ SkHE = atan2(v y , v x ). We note that the simulated skyrmion has a relaxed diameter of ∼ 15 nm and shows no deformation during its motion driven by a small or moderate current density, justifying the rigidity of particle-like skyrmions considered in our system. We then obtain the θ-dependent intrinsic skyrmion Hall angle θ SkHE (θ) in our system according to the fact that the angle between the spin polarization direction p and the skyrmion velocity v is a fixed value, as shown in Fig. where v = (v x , v y ) is the steady skyrmion velocity and j e = (j x , j y ) is the electron current that produces the dampinglike torque. G = (0, 0, -4πQ) is the gyromagnetic coupling vector associated with the Magnus force term. The intrinsic skyrmion Hall angle could be straightforwardly defined as θ SkHE = arctan(v y /v x ), so one could have As p = ĵe × n and the angle between p and the +x direction is θ, we could have j x = j e cos(θ + 90 • ) = -j e sin θ and j y = j e sin(θ + 90 • ) = j e cos θ. Hence, the skyrmion Hall angle Eq. ( From Eq. ( We first study the interactions between a large number of particle-like skyrmions and a funnel obstacle in the ferromagnetic layer. Technically the funnel obstacle is a region locally modified to have an enhanced PMA K o . The region with enhanced PMA is able to repel the skyrmions outside but closely around the region Figure The initial state is a triangular lattice of 380 relaxed particlelike skyrmions with Q = -1 at the left side of the ferromagnetic layer (i.e., x = 0 -1000 nm and y = 0 -1000 nm). The funnel obstacle is placed at the right side of the ferromagnetic layer with its apex pointing to the +x or -x direction. In this work, the apex angle is set to 60 • and the tip-to-tip width of the funnel obstacle is set to ∼ 578 nm. The wall width of the funnel obstacle is set to ∼ 25 nm. We note that the periodic boundary condition applied in the y direction can avoid the interactions between the skyrmions and the top and bot-0 5 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 5 0 0 2 0 0 0 2 5 0 0 -4 0 0 -3 0 0 -2 0 0 -1 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 5 0 0 2 0 0 0 2 5 0 0 0 . 9 2 0 . 9 4 0 . 9 6 0 . 9 8 1 . 0 0 0 . 9 2 0 . 9 4 0 . 9 6 0 . 9 8 0 . 9 2 0 . 9 4 0 . 9 6 0 . 9 8 0 . 9 2 0 . 9 4 0 . 9 6 0 . 9 8 0 . 9 2 0 . 9 4 0 . 9 6 0 . 9 8 . (e) Time-dependent Q and mz for j = 0.7 MA cm -2 . (f) Time-dependent Q and mz for j = 0.9 MA cm -2 . The simulation time is 2500, 2000, 1500, and 1000 ps, for the systems driven by j = 0.3, 0.5, 0.7, and 0.9 MA cm -2 , respectively. tom edges of the ferromagnetic layer and, therefore, can ensure that most skyrmions can interact with the funnel obstacle effectively. By considering the periodic boundary condition in the y directions, the skyrmions interacting with the funnel obstacle in the system may be treated as the interactions between the skyrmions and a one-dimensional array of funnel obstacles at certain conditions. From this point of view, the opening size between the adjacent tips of two funnel obstacles would be equal to ∼ 425 nm in our system. We first study the interactions between the particle-like skyrmions and the funnel obstacle with its apex pointing to the +x direction [see Fig. As shown in Fig. Many skyrmions in the triangular region between the upper and lower funnel walls, especially those near the funnel apex, are not moving during the compression, which may be referred to as a clogging effect of skyrmions, although many skyrmions could move toward the right edge of the ferromagnetic layer through the openings between the top/bottom ferromagnetic layer edge and the upper/lower funnel tip. When the compression effect is over (i.e., no more skyrmions are driven into the triangular region), the skyrmions inside the triangular region between the upper and lower funnel walls could escape from the triangular region via moving slowly along the lower funnel wall, showing a negative v x and v y . Once the skyrmions are out of the triangular region, they will move toward the right edge of the ferromagnetic layer. Especially, the skyrmions moving along the lower funnel wall will show a U-turn at the lower funnel tip, as indicated by the cyan arrows in Fig. We also note that the skyrmions arrive at the right edge of the sample at t ∼ 530 ps. As periodic and open boundary conditions are applied in the y and x directions, respectively, the skyrmions will accumulate near the right edge of the ferromagnetic layer and form a flow of skyrmions moving along the edge toward the -y direction [see Fig. When most skyrmions in the triangular region between the upper and lower funnel walls have escaped, a line of several skyrmions moves along the lower funnel wall and gets out of the funnel obstacle from the lower funnel tip, as shown in Fig. In Fig. In Figs. be noted that the interactions between the skyrmions and the funnel obstacle can be more generally regarded as the interactions between the skyrmions and a one-dimensional array of funnel obstacles because of the periodic boundary condition applied in the y direction of the ferromagnetic layer. We continue to investigate the interaction between the particle-like skyrmions and the funnel obstacle with its apex pointing to the -x direction [see Fig. We first apply a small current of j = 0.3 MA cm -2 to drive the skyrmions toward the funnel obstacle (see SM Video 5 As some skyrmions in the upper half of the ferromagnetic layer and close to the upper funnel wall will move to the lower half of the ferromagnetic layer when interacting with the funnel obstacle, the skyrmion flow moving toward the right ferromagnetic layer edge in the lower half of the ferromagnetic layer has more skyrmions and forms an obvious clogging effect around the lower tip of the funnel obstacle, as shown in Fig. On the other hand, the moving skyrmions near the upper and lower funnel walls are compactly arranged in a triangular lattice due to the compression effect. The compression effect could lead to a reduced spacing between neighboring skyrmions as well as a reduced size of skyrmions; however, the compression and clogging of skyrmions around the funnel obstacle do not result in the annihilation of skyrmions, which can also be found by comparing the time-dependent Q and m z given in Figs. The skyrmions in the system first arrive at the right edge of the ferromagnetic layer at t ∼ 400 ps, and the skyrmions near the right edge will move toward the -y direction to form a flow of compactly arranged skyrmions [see Fig. As shown in Fig. We also study the skyrmion dynamics interacting with a funnel obstacle in the systems driven by larger current densities. The results induced by j = 0.5, 0.7, and 0.9 MA cm -2 are given in Figs. 6(b), 6(c), and 6(d), respectively (see SM Videos 6-8 1 . 0 0 T i m e ( p s ) 0 . 9 2 0 . 9 4 0 . 9 6 0 . 9 8 0 . 9 2 0 . 9 4 0 . 9 6 0 . 9 8 0 . 9 2 0 . 9 4 0 . 9 6 0 . 9 8 haviors of the skyrmions interacting with the funnel obstacle are qualitatively similar to that driven by a small j = 0.3 MA cm -2 [see Fig. We have studied the particle-like skyrmion dynamics interacting with a funnel obstacle, where the angle of incidence of incoming skyrmions is adjusted to be zero (i.e., the intrinsic skyrmion Hall angle θ SkHE ∼ 0 • ) by setting the spinpolarization angle as θ = 201 • . In this section, we con-tinue to investigate the skyrmion-funnel interaction for the systems where the angle of incidence of skyrmions is nonzero. Namely, the intrinsic skyrmion Hall angle is controlled to be in the range of θ SkHE = -90 • -90 • , which could be realized by setting the spin-polarization angle to be θ = 112 • -291 • as discussed in Sec. III A. We first focus on the system with a funnel obstacle with its apex pointing to the +x direction [see Fig. As shown in Fig. In Fig. 0 . 9 2 0 . 9 4 0 . 9 6 0 . 9 8 0 . 9 2 0 . 9 4 0 . 9 6 0 . 9 8 0 . 9 2 0 . 9 4 0 . 9 6 0 . 9 8 In Fig. In Fig. Lastly, we focus on the system with a funnel obstacle with its apex pointing to the -x direction [see Fig. In conclusion, we have studied the dynamics of a larger number of particle-like skyrmions interacting with a funnel obstacle in a ferromagnetic layer with periodic boundary condition employed in the y direction. It is found that the interactions between the skyrmions and the funnel obstacle depend on several controllable factors, including the driving current density j, the spin-polarization angle θ (i.e., the intrinsic skyrmion Hall angle θ SkHE ), and the orientation of the funnel obstacle. For the system with θ = 201 • (i.e., θ SkHE = 0 • ), we find that the interactions between the skyrmions and the funnel obstacle may result in the compression and annihilation of skyrmions near the funnel walls. The funnel walls can guide the motion of skyrmions and may lead to the clogging of skyrmions in the system. In particular, due to the repulsive skyrmion-funnel interaction, the funnel obstacle can separate the incoming skyrmions with an angle of incidence of zero into two asymmetric flows, and form a single beam of skyrmions for a certain duration of time. For the system with θ SkHE = 0 • , where the angle of incidence of the skyrmions is nonzero, a certain number of skyrmions can be effectively captured by the funnel obstacle in either a dynamic or static way, which can be controlled by adjusting the value of the spin-polarization angle θ. The capturing of a dynamic flow of skyrmions is realized by the guided motion of skyrmions along the funnel walls, while the capturing of static and compressed skyrmions is realized by the repulsive skyrmion-funnel interaction inside the triangular region between the upper and lower funnel walls. We note that the amount of skyrmions captured by the funnel obstacle could be controlled, in principle, by changing the driving current density, the spin-polarization angle, and the funnel geometry. We also point out that the dynamic behaviors of skyrmions interacting with a funnel substrate have been studied in Refs. 39 and 40 using the particle model 