A recent experimental work on palladium hydrides suggested that metastable structures with hydrogen atoms occupying tetrahedral sites could lead to superconductivity above 50 K, a huge increase compared to the 10 K critical temperature of the stable structure with all hydrogen atoms occupying octahedral sites. By generating many structures with hydrogen atoms randomly occupying the octahedral and tetrahedral sites of the face-centered cubic lattice and calculating their energy at different theoretical levels from first principles, we determine that metastable structures with partial or full occupation of tetrahedral sites are possible, even when the ionic quantum zero-point energy and anharmonicity are included in the calculations. Anharmonicity is crucial in palladium hydrides when hydrogen atoms occupy octahedral sites and, in fact, makes the structure with full octahedral occupation the ground state. Despite the metastable existence of structures with full or partial tetrahedral sites occupation, the superconducting critical temperature is reduced with the number of tetrahedral sites occupied. Our calculations discard that the occupation of tetrahedral sites can increase the critical temperature in palladium hydrides. The discovery of superconductivity above 200 K at megabar pressures in hydrogen-based compounds, beating all the records previously set by the cuprates, is one of the greatest discoveries in physics of the last years Palladium hydrides have been largely studied since their discovery The general consensus is that the ground state structure of stoichiometric PdH is formed by hydrogen atoms occupying the octahedral interstitial sites of the face centered cubic (fcc) palladium lattice. This statement is supported by early neutron diffraction experiments both on the hydride and the deuteride The question of where the hydrogen atoms sit in PdH is of particular importance because the main hypothesis to explain the experiments in Ref. The manuscript is organized as follows. In Sec. II we describe the details of the ab initio calculations, in Sec. III we present the results of our work, and in Sec. IV we summarize the main conclusions. In the present analysis we work always with the stoichiometric ratio x = 1. In order to study the energies of configurations with tetrahedral site occupation, we have constructed a 2 × 2 × 2 supercell starting from the primitive fcc lattice, i.e. with 8 Pd atoms, and randomly place 8 hydrogen atoms between the octahedral and tetrahedral sites. We classify the structures by the number of occupied octahedral sites in the beginning. In any configuration, if n hydrogen atoms occupy octahedral sites (with n from 0 to 8), then 8 -n hydrogen atoms occupy tetrahedral sites. Note that per Pd atom in the fcc lattice there is one octahedral site and 2 tetrahedral sites. The structure with full octahedral occupation, n = 8, has a space group symmetry F m 3m and all positions are fixed by symmetry. Configurations with partial or full tetrahedral occupation have a lower symmetry and, in most of the cases, atoms are no longer fixed to a specific lattice site and can thus relax. We have performed these relaxations both in the classical case, assuming that ions are classical objects and therefore adopt the positions given by the local minima of the Born-Oppenheimer energy surface V (R), and in the quantum case within the SSCHA. The SSCHA is a variational method that minimizes the free energy of the system as a function of the centroid positions R and auxiliary force constants Φ that parametrize the ionic density matrix ρR,Φ the renormalized average positions of the ions including ionic quantum effects and anharmonicity at a nonperturbative level. Classical structural relaxations on the Born-Oppenheimer energy surface were performed with DFT making use of the plane-waves Quantum ESPRESSO package SSCHA quantum anharmonic structural relaxations were performed on the same 2 × 2 × 2 supercell with 16 atoms. The SSCHA minimization requires the calculation of atomic forces on different random configurations generated according to ρR,Φ . These forces were calculated ab initio with DFT, with the same parameters used for the classical relaxations. Due to the reduced symmetry of many of the structures analyzed, a large number of random configurations were needed to converge the SS-CHA minimization, in the order of 10000 per compound for the less symmetric cases. We have calculated the phonon spectra of the structures relaxed at the quantum level with the SSCHA both at the harmonic level and the anharmonic level. The electron-phonon interaction is also estimated at the harmonic and at the SSCHA levels for these structures. The harmonic calculations have been performed within density-functional perturbation theory (DFPT) We start our analysis of possible metastable states with partial tetrahedral sites occupation by creating configurations in the 2×2×2 supercell by randomly occupying tetrahedral and octahedral interstitial sites in the fcc Pd lattice as described above, assuming a lattice parameter of 7.814 a 0 , the equilibrium lattice parameter obtained in the Born-Oppenheimer classical energy surface for PdH with full octahedral occupation within PBE and without considering the zero point motion. For each initial number of atoms in octahedral sites, we create 10 random structures. As shown in Fig. As mentioned above, once tetrahedral interstitial sites start being occupied, the symmetry of the crystal is reduced and atoms are not fixed to their sites by symmetry anymore. We first relax these structures to the Born-Oppenheimer energy minima only modifying the internal positions, without modifying the fcc primitive lattice vectors and keeping the 7.814 a 0 lattice parameter. These reduces considerably the energies of the structures with tetrahedral sites occupied (n < 8) with respect to the full octahedral occupation, but still the full octahedral site structure remains the lowest energy one. However, considering that the n < 8 structures still are subject to a positive pressure with this unit cell, the energy is not the appropriate thermodynamic quantity for the comparison. We thus fully relax these structures to the Born-Oppenheimer minima with a target pressure of 0 kbar, with a tolerance of about 10 kbar. Most of the cell relaxations are performed by only adjusting the length of the lattice parameters, keeping fcc lattice vectors. In order to study the possibility of symmetry breaking of the cell, we also relaxed some structures allowing full adjustment of the lattice vectors with no restrictions. After the cell relaxations the pressure of all structures is comparable and the energy becomes the right thermodynamic variable. Interestingly, structures with partial or even full tetrahedral occupation have a lower energy than the full octahedral structure, remarking that tetrahedral and octahedral occupation of interstitial sites are very competitive in energy, as previously described in the literature The evolution of the classical relaxation of some of these structures is illustrated in Fig. Considering the large anharmonicity at play in PdH, at least in the fully octahedral configuration The impact of ionic quantum effects on the centroid positions is structure dependent. While some structures are radically changed by quantum effects, others do not exhibit drastic changes (see Fig. Our SSCHA calculations can also analyze which of these states is the ground state structure once the ionic zero point energy and anharmonicity is considered in the calculations. As shown in Fig. The reason why quantum effects affect one structure more than others is reflected in the phonon spectra shown in Fig. The existence of metastable states with full and partial occupation of tetrahedral sites suggests that it may be possible to synthesize these structures with fast-cooling techniques, as suggested by Syed et al. The critical temperature calculated for the full octahedral configuration here is overestimated with respect to previous calculations also including anharmonic effects By analyzing many possible occupations of interstitial sites in palladium hydrides within DFT including ionic quantum and anharmonic effects, we conclude that, despite the configuration with all hydrogen atoms in octahedral sites is the ground state, partial and full tetrahedral sites can be occupied metastably. This opens the door to synthesizing structures with partial or full tetrahedral occupation, as suggested by recent experiments 