Optically connecting quantum bits can effectively reduce decoherence and facilitate long-distance communication. Optically addressable spin-bearing molecules have been demonstrated to have a good potential for quantum computing. In this report optically induced exchange interactions and spin dynamics, which are inherently important for spin-based quantum computing, have been calculated for a bi-radical -a potential quantum computing circuit unit. Consistent with the previous experimental observation of spin coherence induced by optical excitation, our work demonstrated an optically driven quantum gate operation scheme, implying a great potential of molecular quantumcircuit network. A blueprint of quantum circuit, integrating two-dimensional molecular network and programmable nano-photonics, both of which have been under extensive investigations and rather mature, was proposed. We thus envisage computational exploration of chemical database to identify suitable candidates for molecular spin quantum bit and coupler, which could be optimally integrated with nano-photonic devices to realize quantum circuit. The work presented here would therefore open up a new direction to explore 'Click Chemistry' for quantum technology. Quantum computer needs a good control on the interaction among well-isolated quantum bit (qubit), which should be addressed properly by optimal design Organic radical, containing 1 2 -spins, is a natural realisation of qubit Extensive experimental efforts, combining time-resolved electron paramagnetic resonance (TREPR) and optical excitations A. First-principles density-functional-theory calculations for exchange interactions First-principles calculations have been carried out using hybrid exchange density function theory (HDFT) with a 6-31G basis set in the Gaussian 09 code Supposing that an MRTS consists of two radicals and one spin coupler, and that the exchange interaction dominates over both dipolar interactions and spin-orbit coupling, then the Heisenberg spin Hamiltonian before optical excitations reads where J 0 is the exchange interaction between radical spins ˆ s 1 and ˆ s 2 , which can be computed as the energy difference between the triplet and broken-symmetry (BS) states of radicals, J 0 = 2(E triplet -E BS ). When the spin coupler is in a triplet state after optical excitations, the spin Hamiltonian changes to where J 1 (J 2 ) is defined as the exchange interaction between radical spins ˆ s 1 ( ˆ s 2 ) and the triplet spin ˆ S. J 3 is the exchange interaction between two radical spins after optical excitations. To compute J 1 , J 2 , and J 3 , we first find the total energies of the states |a = | ↑⇑↑ , |b = | ↑⇑↓ , |c = | ↓⇑↓ , and |d = | ↓⇑↑ , where ↑(↓) is defined as the spin state |s = 1 2 , s z = 1 2 (|s = 1 2 , s z = -1 2 ) of a radical and ⇑ as |S = 1, S z = 1 for the spin-coupler triplet. Then we can have where ∆E ij = E i -E j is defined as the energy difference between the states with the spin configurations i and j (∈ {a, b, c, d}). Note that the broken-symmetry singlet and triplet states formed by two radical spins alone have the same z-component of spin as |c and |b , |d , respectively, but much lower energies, owing to the triplet excitation energy (∼ eV in general). The Kohn-Sham orbitals therefore need to be repopulated in order to drive the system into |b , |c , or |d . If two radicals are symmetric, then E b = E d and therefore The expectation value of the total spin operator ˆ S total = ˆ s 1 + ˆ S + ˆ s 2 is 6 for the state |a (since it is a total spin eigenstate with S total = 2), 3 for |b and |d , and 2 for |c . We adopted that the exchange interactions are antiferromagnetic (AFM) when J > 0 while ferromagnetic (FM) when J < 0. The spin Hamiltonians in eq.1 and eq.2 and the computation of the exchange interactions therein can be easily generalized to the molecular structure with more radicals. Here J 1 is equal to J 2 because the biTYY-DPA molecule has an inversion symmetry. J 0 , J 1 and J 3 were computed for the dihedral angles between the phenyl ring and the anthracene, ranging from 0 • (coplanar) to 90 • (perpendicular) with 10 • increments. In all the calculations, we freezed the TYY radicals and rotate only the phenyl ring, which meant we assumed the dihedral angles at each end of the coupler are equal. The coherent processes include spin-spin interaction among radicals and triplet and optical driving field (V ), while the incoherent one the inter-system crossing and the decays of the triplet and singlet excited states. The decay rates kST , kT G, and kEG are also illustrated. TR-EPR spectra simulations After taking into account the optical driving field, our total Hamiltonian reads Here S 0 is the singlet ground state, S 1 the first singlet excited state, and T 1 the triplet ground state. D and E are the zero-field splittings (ZFS) for the triplet. g r is the g-factor for the radical spin, while g c for the coupler spin. Here V is the transition matrix element between the ground and excited singlet states (S 0 and S 1 ) due to the optical driving field. B is a static magnetic field and μ B is the Bohr magneton. Ĥ0 and Ĥ1 are defined in eq.1 and 2, respectively. Here we assume that the exchange interaction between radicals J 0 is unchanged in the singlet excited states. To include the environment effects on the time evolution of the density matrix, we used the super operators (the Liuvillian) within the Markovian approximation, leading to the Lindblad formalism. These super operators read Here ρ is the density matrix for MRTS. The incoherent processes are described by γ μ i (the decoherence rate) and lμ i (the quantum jump operator), where i labels different decoherence processes and μ the operators in the process. And n i is the number of the operators in each physical process i. For our system, i = 1 to 5. L1,2 with n 1,2 = 3 is used to describe the relaxation of the radical spins s 1 and s 2 as follows, l1,2 1,2 (spin-1 2 raising operator), and l1,2 3 = ŝz 1,2 (the zcomponent of the spin- 1 2 ). The ŝz operator is responsible for the pure dephasing of quantum states, whereas ŝ+ and ŝ-for quantum jumps. L2 with n 2 =8 is used as a super operator to describe the relaxation of the triplet state. We have used the corresponding eight Gell-Mann matrices for these operators. Moreover, we have taken into account the spin-spin (transverse spin) relaxation Here, we have taken into account the ISC in L3 , assuming that the total spin angular momentum and its z-component are both conserved, i.e., S total = 0 or 1 (twice), thus obtaining the following operators. L3 with n 3 = 7 describes the transitions from the single excited state to the triplet state. For example, some of the operators read l1 Here we use |S total , S total,z to represent our states formed in the triplet (T 1 ) and the S 1 manifolds as shown in Fig. , and l4 5 = |1, 1 S0 1, 1| S1 . All the coupling parameters γ μ i (i from 1 to 5) have been simplified by using a single parameter γ radical , γ triplet , k st , k tg , and k eg for these five incoherent processes. The lifetime of the triplet, characterized by the parameter k tg , is usually long (ms) because the decay to the singlet ground state is forbidden due to spin momentum conservation and hence dominated by nonradiative processes. Therefore the total Liuvillian operator can be written as follows. Li ]ρ Here the first part is the coherent interaction from the effective spin Hamiltonian and optical field (see eq.5), which is the commutator between the Hamiltonian and the density matrix. The second part includes the incoherent processes associated with relaxations and crossovers between states (see eq.6). Therefore, we have 20 by 20 Hamiltonian matrix (4 for the singlet ground and excited states with radicals, 12 for the triplet ground states with radicals), leading to a 400 by 400 Liuvillian. The TR-EPR spectra can be computed as follows Here S total mw = S total • e mw , where e mw = (-sin φ, cos φ, 0), is the total spin component along the microwave field direction, which is alway perpendicular to the static magnetic field along e static = (sin θ cos φ, sin θ sin φ, cos θ) direction, and ω is the microwave field frequency. We have also computed the powder-averaged TREPR spectra as follows, Numerically we have chosen 50 points uniformly along θ and 100 points uniformly along φ (5000 points in total) as done in Easyspin When the spin coupler is in its ground state, the two TYY radicals interact weakly through the spin polarisation (induced by the radical spin) on the coupler. After the optical excitation and ISC, the spin polarisation on the coupler is mostly dominated by the triplet spin, as shown in Fig. The mechanism for the strong radical-triplet exchange interaction J 1 can be understood using the Ovchinnikov's topological spin alternation rule for π-conjugated systems We have also computed the dynamics of the whole system based on the theory of open quantum systems described in §II B. In Fig. (L and R label the radical on the left and right, respectively). We have also investigated the TREPR spectra at the early stage (T = 6.2 ps) in Fig. exchange interaction, we need other instruments to probe them, such as neutron scattering Quantum computer-aided design (QCAD) has been proposed recently for the quantum computing architectures based on silicon quantum dots Regarding the feasibility of fabricating optical devices, one choice is to use nanometer-size single photon emitter recently developed such as the gold tips or nanoscale gaps on WSe 2 In this work, we have computed the exchange interaction between the radicals and optically induced triplets in biTYY-DPA from first principles, which are consistent with the previous experimental results observing the spin alignment with optical excitations. We find the radicaltriplet exchange interactions J 1 are enhanced very significantly (by approximately two orders of magnitude on average) relative to the ground-state coupling J 0 between the radicals without optical excitations. This large ratio of J 1 to J 0 implies the possibility of 'switching on' a two-qubit interaction by optical excitation, thus facilitating the construction of molecular networks for quantum computing. The time evolution of the reduced density matrix for the radical suggests we could create the entanglement between the radicals through the optical excitation and ISC. We have also calculated the TREPR spectra, which is in agreement with the previous experiments. Our methodology presented here demonstrates a universal route to design QC networks by integrating nanophotonic devices and suitable molecules that can be identified through machine learning screening for chemical database 