The thirst for fabricating environment friendly silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) as biosensors via the green route is highly demanded among researchers due to their free of cost and less impact on creating pollution compared to other methods involving risk interference from toxic chemicals as reducing, stabilizing and capping agents. Here, for the first time, Coffee arabica leaf extracts (CAE) were used for the production of highly stable AgNPs in an easy and eco-friendly manner. Within ten minutes, we can visually confirm the reduction of Ag + to Ag 0 from a change of yellow color to dark brown by the addition of silver nitrate (AgNO3) solution with CAE. The structural, optical, stability, morphological and elemental characteristics of CAE-reduced AgNPs (CAE-AgNPs) were investigated using ultraviolet-visible (UV-Vis) spectroscopy, Fourier transforms infrared spectroscopy in ATR mode (FTIR-ATR), Raman spectroscopy, Zeta potential analyzer and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). The prepared CAE-AgNPs show good sensing performance for the amino acid L-cysteine (Cys) with high sensitivity, a limit of detection (LOD) of 0.1 nM, selectivity and good stability. Hence, the proposed novel method is highly promoted among other nanoengineered green AgNPs in the medical field as a valuable biosensor. The usage of silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) for various consumer goods like health care products, sensing devices, cosmetics, food and engineered devices is increasing, due to their unique physical and biological properties In this context, the green chemistry approaches play a vital role to implement sustainable and environmental friendly pathways to produce desirable modes with uncontaminated products having minimum toxicity and side effects. The green reduction method especially using plant parts, commonly known as "phytosynthesis", is an alternate synthesis procedure rather than using microbial that involve biological risk factors. There are several advantages of phytosynthesis routes over other methods like, it is easy and simple to conduct, safe to handle, zero-energy based, readily available, not require controlled ambience, rapid and single-step process, cheap, renewable, and no utilization of harsh and costly chemicals, zero waste products and finally eco-friendly Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopic studies reveal that the primary phytochemicals present in plants like alkaloids, polyphenols, terpenoids, glycosides etc., involves in the reduction of Ag ions (Ag + ) to AgNPs due to metal ion hyper accumulating and reductive capacity Recently, one research group have studied the structural properties and yield of ZnO NPs using the coffee leaf extract as a reducing agent 11 . To our best knowledge, there is no study using coffee arabica leaf extracts (CAE) to synthesize AgNPs. So, it would be interesting to synthesize CAEreduced AgNPs (CAE-AgNPs) to produce value-added products and apply them to various fields. Green synthesized AgNPs are being used in various molecular diagnostic processes like bio sensing There have been various selective and sensitive detection methods for Cys monitoring which include fluorescence analysis In this study, we have introduced the green synthesis of AgNPs using CAE for the first time and it opens a new domain in the field of fabrication of highly stable AgNPs for a sustainable environment. To explore the practical value of CAE-AgNPs, we have reported its sensing ability towards Cys and the interaction of the analyte with AgNPs is discussed using vibrational assignments in Raman and FTIR spectroscopic techniques. Fresh and young Coffee arabica leaves were collected from the local coffee plantation of Vythiri village, Kerala, India. The leaves were washed several times with deionized (DI) water to remove the dust. Silver nitrate (AgNO3) with a 98% purity and Cys were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Chemical Co. L-Alanine (Ala), L-Arginine (Arg), Butyric acid (Ba), L-Glutamic acid (Glu), Glycine (Gly), L-Isoleucine (Ile), L-Tryptophan (Trp) and L-Valine (Val) were purchased from LobaChemie Pvt. Ltd. All chemicals were used without any further purification. All experiments were carried out using DI water. 10 gm of washed coffee leaves (Scheme 1) were cut into small pieces and boiled with 250 ml of DI water at 100 °C for 5 min. The extract was allowed to cool up to room temperature. The obtained yellow color extract was filtered using Whatman No.1 filter paper and the supernatant was stored at 4 °C for further studies. Scheme 1. Schematic of the synthesis procedure for CAE-AgNPs. The AgNP colloid was prepared by adding 1 ml of CAE to 5 ml aqueous solution of AgNO3 (1 mM) followed by gentle shaking at room temperature. Within 5-10 min the color of the solution changed from pale yellow to brownish-yellow, which indicates the reduction of Ag + to AgNPs. The CAE-AgNPs suspension was also collected for different AgNO3 concentrations (1, 2, 3 and 4 mM) and CAE volumes (2, 3, 4 and 5 ml), respectively (Fig. The characterization of green synthesized AgNPs was done using a UV-1800 Shimadzu double beam spectrophotometer of 1 nm resolution in the wavelength range 200 -800 nm. A quartz cuvette of path length 1 cm was used for collecting the absorption spectrum. The bio-reduction of Ag + in aqueous plant extract at various concentrations of CAE and metal ions was monitored by diluting the suspension using DI water. The size, morphology and crystalline nature of sample A1 (CAE-AgNPs suspension with 1 ml of CAE) before and after adding an adequate amount of Cys was investigated by high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HR-TEM). TEM micrographs were taken using FEI TecnaiG2 Spirit Bio-Twin TEM at an accelerating voltage of 300 kV and an ultra-high-resolution pole piece. The samples were prepared by placing a drop on a graphite grid and drying it in a vacuum. Surface analysis of CAE and CAE-AgNPs was done using PerkinElmer frontier FT-IR spectrometer of Attenuated total reflection mode (FTIR-ATR) and Confocal Raman Microscope with 785 nm laser (Horiba France SAS Lab RAM HR Evolution). A particle size analyzer of Malvern Nano ZS (4 mW, 633 nm) was used for measuring surface load and the average size of A1. Stability studies were done by checking the zeta potential of AgNPs prepared using different volumes (1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 ml respectively) of CAE by Zeta Check-Particle Charge Reader (Microtrac, PMX 500). For the selectivity study, 1 ml of each of the nine different amino acids (Ala, Ba, Gly, Cys, Arg, Trp, Gla, Va and Isl) with 1 mM concentration were added to A1 and the color change and absorbance were noticed under the same conditions as that of the sensitivity study using UV-Vis measurements. Sensitive detection of Cys A1 was diluted 50 times and the pH was adjusted to 6.0. 1 ml of Cys with different concentrations (2×10 -3 to 2×10 -8 M) was added to 1 ml of A1. After 5 minutes the color change was observed and the corresponding SPR bands were studied by UV-Vis measurements. To find out the limit of detection (LOD) using Raman measurements, additionally, two more diluted Cys samples were used. Caffeine and CGA are the most powerful purine alkaloid and phenolic components found abundant in coffee leaves in the ratio of 1:4 (per mg/g of dry matter) which is the reason behind the popularity of coffee as a stimulant Morphological studies of CAE-AgNPs were investigated using TEM which shows that particles are dispersed well and spherical symmetry is predominant (Fig. Being a low-cost colorimetric probe, AgNPs are becoming a promising sensing tool among researchers. Mainly their LSPR property is utilized for fabrication of LSPR-based nanosensors. The parameters like size, shape, inter particle distance, dielectric constant of the medium, surface characteristics and composition are in turn related to the LSPR phenomena. Here, the reason for distinct color change and drastically decreased absorption intensity of CAE-AgNPs after the addition of Cys (as shown in Fig. But compare to carboxyl group, the greater affinity of thiol group towards Ag metal NPs induces a replacement of CAE in CAE-AgNPs and gets adsorbed on the surface of AgNPs through ligand exchange reaction. Since FTIR-ATR fails to study below the wavenumber region 400 cm -1 at which metal-S bonds are usually formed, a far better choice is the Raman study whose signals are very susceptible to intermolecular interactions. Here, Fig. To the best of our knowledge, this work is the first attempt to demonstrate a highly stable and ecological friendly phytosynthesized AgNPs using CAE. The prepared AgNPs having an average diameter of 25 nm showed excellent stability with a zeta potential value around -57 mv after 3 months from synthesis. We have revealed the reduction mechanism behind the formation of NPs by the dominant alkaloid caffeine as the sole stabilizer and reducing agent with evident support from characteristic peaks and corresponding changes that occurred in spectroscopic studies. The zero-valent and spherical AgNPs with a diameter range of 28 nm were tightly associated with CAE, forming a stable CAE-AgNPs colloid suspension ready for colorimetric detection. The selective detection of Cys containing a thiol-group among 9 amino acids has been confirmed by monitoring the color change from yellow to brown-red with naked eyes and UV-Vis spectroscopy in just 5 min. We performed a detailed study on the chemical interaction after the adsorption of Cys on the surface of CAE-AgNPs using conventional Raman spectroscopy that showed a lower 