A recent experiment showed that proximity induced Ising spin-orbit coupling enhances the spintriplet superconductivity in Bernal bilayer graphene. Here, we show that, due to the nearly perfect spin rotation symmetry of graphene, the fluctuations of the spin orientation of the triplet order parameter suppress the superconducting transition to nearly zero temperature. Our analysis shows that both Ising spin-orbit coupling and in-plane magnetic field can eliminate these low-lying fluctuations and can greatly enhance the transition temperature, consistent with the recent experiment. Our model also suggests the possible existence of a phase at small anisotropy and magnetic field which exhibits quasi-long-range ordered spin-singlet charge 4e superconductivity, even while the triplet 2e superconducting order only exhibits short-ranged correlations. Finally, we discuss relevant experimental signatures. Introduction -Graphene based two-dimensional materials have emerged as a highly tunable platform for studying spin-triplet superconductivity. Notable examples include rhombohedral trilayer graphene (RTG) An important task prompted by this recent experiment is to identify the role of the proximity-induced spin-orbit coupling in promoting spin-triplet superconductivity in BBG. One possibility is that spin-orbit coupling selects a particular symmetry-broken parent state from which the superconductivity emerges, and previous work In this work, we present a novel mechanism by which the proximity-induced spin-orbit coupling promotes the spin-triplet superconductivity observed in graphene. Specifically, we show that the presence of Ising spin-orbit coupling breaks the nearly perfect spinrotation symmetry in graphene and thus suppresses the order parameter fluctuations caused by the otherwise gapless Goldstone modes corresponding to fluctuations of the orientation (in spin space) of the triplet order parameter (for a precise definition of Ising-type spin-orbit coupling see the discussion below or Supplemental Material). While triplet superconductivity is formally impossible in intrinsic graphene on account of the Mermin-Wagner theorem, it is allowed via a BKT-type transition once spin-rotation symmetry is broken by the WSe 2 . A similar proposal was recently put forth in Ref. To some extent, this phenomenology is relevant to all reports of spin-triplet superconductivity in graphene and may offer a degree of universality once one takes superconducting fluctuations in to account. In particular, we expect that all perturbations which break spin-rotation symmetry, such as in-plane magnetic field or induced Ising spin-orbit coupling, can help stabilize fluctuating spin-triplet superconductivity; a magnetic field stabilizes a spin-polarized condensate Microscopic Model -We begin by considering a minimal microscopic model for BBG, consisting of two spindegenerate parabolic bands at valleys K and K in the presence of an induced Ising spin orbit coupling of strength λ. This is depicted in Fig. where ξ k is the quadratic dispersion of each band. To include the effects of triplet pairing, we express the Hamiltonian in terms of the eight-component Nambu spinor This model features vector order parameter d = which describes an isotropically gapped f -wave, valley-singlet, spin-triplet state such that the gap takes the opposite sign in the K and K valleys This spin-singlet, valley-triplet order parameter has recently been argued to generally correspond to the most energetically favorable state in graphene-based systems Using this Hamiltonian, we can carry out the standard procedure for deriving the Ginzburg-Landau freeenergy for the triplet order parameter d near the critical point (see Supplemental Material for details). We work within the weak-coupling BCS limit [14], and find the free-energy density (2) The first term with K gives the superconducting phase stiffness, the second term is the bare pairing susceptibility, with r ∼ log(T /T BCS ) changing sign at the meanfield BCS temperature, and Γ ⊥ is the spin-orbit induced pinning energy for the out-of-plane orientations, with |d ⊥ | 2 = |d x | 2 + |d y | 2 (see discussion below). The nonlinearity u respects an enlarged SU (3) symmetry while the nonlinearity v = u further penalizes the non-unitary equal-spin pairing states, and breaks the symmetry down to SO(3). Crucially, for nonzero symmetry-breaking spin-orbit coupling λ (see Hamiltonian in Eq. 1 for definition) we find a finite d-vector pinning energy Γ ⊥ which selects the z-axis as the favored orientation of the d-vector, depicted in Fig. Goldstone Modes-We now explore the phase diagram of the Ginzburg-Landau functional in Eq. ( The key quantity of interest is the condensate ψ ∼ d z . Within mean-field theory, this is simply the solution to the saddle-point equation and is given by |ψ| = -r/u when T < T BCS and zero above. Once the orderparameter fluctuations are taken in to account Here Γ⊥ = Γ ⊥ /N (E F ) is the unitless pinning energy relative to the density-of-states at the Fermi level, C is a unitless ultraviolet cutoff on fluctuations given by . The important parameter here is the Ginzburg-Levanyuk which is a measure of the strength of superconducting fluctuations. Solving this for T c we find a power-law behavior in Γ ⊥ scaling as . The Ginzburg-Levanyuk parameter is not known well experimentally in this system since it requires a knowledge of the "pseudogap" temperature characterized by a spectral gap appearing at T BCS , and spectroscopic experiments have not yet been performed on this material. In other graphene-based superconductors however, it has been argued that this may be quite large with values of T BCS /T F ∼ 0.1 This behavior is illustrated schematically in Fig. Magnetic Field-In addition to proximity inducing spin-orbit coupling, we briefly consider breaking the spinrotation symmetry by applying an in-plane magnetic field, as was done in the Santa Barbara experiments which first saw putative triplet pairing in BBG where H = H ext e x is the applied in-plane magnetic field that couples to the non-unitary condensate moment, which has an effective magnetic moment of μ eff . While we find that within the BCS model and quasiclassical approximation this coupling vanishes, we expect that in a strongly-coupled superconductor this coupling will in general appear with a coefficient proportional to the degree of particle-hole symmetry breaking; in the Supplemental Material we find μ eff ∼ 2μ B N (E F )/g f where N (E F ) is a measure of the particle-hole asymmetry and gf = N (E F )g f is the dimensionless BCS coupling constant in the relevant channel. We estimate that for a 100 mT field, At the level of mean-field theory, this term has two effects. The first is that it actually slightly raises T c , and the second is that it causes the transition to now enter into a fully spin-polarized condensate, analogous to the A 1 phase of 3 He The free energy up to quadratic order is then characterized by the potential Evidently, the system first orders into the m = 1 condensate once r -H becomes zero. This gain in energy is linear in the condensate density, whereas the energy penalty for non-unitary pairing due to the v coefficient is only quadratic and thus near T c , when the condensate density is small, it will always enter into a fully-polarized condensate. In the polarized phase the magnetic field is expected to also suppress fluctuations since it breaks spin-rotation symmetry. One can check that there is only one remaining Goldstone mode, which is the overall U (1) gauge symmetry; the remaining modes are pinned by the field with a gap of order |μ eff H ext |. While a quantitative treatment of this effect is left to future studies, one would then expect a similar behavior as to the case of the Ising spinorbit coupling, with the replacement of Γ ⊥ → μ eff H ext . Comparing the pinning energy of the lowest-lying Gold-stone mode between the case of magnetic field and spinorbit coupling, we see that the spin-orbit interaction, with Γ ⊥ ∼ 30 N (E F ), is roughly 150 times stronger than the pinning energy of the 100 mT field, which gives gH ext ∼ 0.2 N (E F ). It is therefore plausible that there will still be a significant decrease in the fluctuations when passing from a 100 mT magnetic field to the 0.7 meV spin-orbit interaction. 4e-Condensate-We now return to the existence of 4epairing. In the ansatz used to solve the large-N theory, this corresponds to a complex order parameter χ, which couples to d 2 . This parameter allows for a breaking of the U (1) gauge symmetry while still leaving the SO(3) spin-rotation symmetry unbroken, with a condensate of d 2 = 0. Therefore, this 4e condensate is more robust against fluctuations and can in principle appear at small spin-orbit coupling Γ ⊥ . This is seen in the phase-diagram (greatly exaggerated relative to the mean-field condensate) in Fig. Thus, the phase boundary decreases exponentially with increasing Γ ⊥ before eventually colliding with the phase boundary of 2e condensate at a multi-critical point, with critical spin-orbit coupling Γ ⊥c = N (E F )Gi Further lowering the temperature, we expect that the 4e phase will exhibit a second phase transition into the unitary (spin nematic) phase characterized by a condensate in d z , shown in Fig. As to signatures of the fluctuations, a good starting point may be measurements of the Nernst-effect, which is sensitive to mobile vortices forming above T c In general, we expect that the presence of strong triplet fluctuations will lead to a strongly non-BCS character of the spin-susceptibility in the normal state just above T c . This is explored in more detail in the Supplemental Material, but neglecting the 4e pairing, we expect that the zero-field in-plane magnetic susceptibility (which probes only the spin susceptbility) has a characteristic behavior of χ ∼ Gi (2) /(r eff + Γ ⊥ ) and for small spin-orbit coupling this has an apparent divergence as the critical point r eff = 0 is approached, though this may be complicated by the emergence of 4e-singlet or other competing orders at small spin-orbit coupling. We note this is in contrast to the standard case of a BCS triplet superconductor, which has no anomalous behavior at the critical point in the transverse spin-susceptibility. Finally, spectroscopic measurements would be useful in establishing the existence of a pseudogap phase above the actual transition, which in turn would indicate the presence of strong-fluctuations. This has already been accomplished in the case of twisted bilayer and trilayer graphene, which have indicated at least strong-coupling physics Conclusion-In conclusion, we have presented evidence which supports the claim that graphene multilayers, and in particular BBG, may support triplet superconductivity. In its intrinsic form, graphene has almost perfect spin-rotation symmetry and this, combined with the two-dimensional nature of graphene, leads to remarkably strong fluctuation effects which profoundly affect the phase diagram. Applying either Ising spin-orbit coupling or an in-plane Zeeman field would suppress these fluctuations and lead to an enhancement of the superconducting transition temperature, as have been experimentally observed. While our work is to some degree universally applicable to triplet pairing in graphene, there remain a number of qualitative complications due to the particular broken symmetry states which are proximal to the triplet pairing. It therefore remains important to understand what role the fermiology plays and how this couples to the fluctuation physics we have outlined here. In particular, it is interesting to consider the interplay between the fluctuating triplet order and possible charge-density wave orders, such as the intervalley coherent order In the future, more direct evidence of triplet pairing, and of fluctuating superconductivity with a pseudogap, is still needed. Theoretically, it will be important in the future to account for the role of broken symmetry normal states and their potentially competing order parameters in our model. Similarly, more careful consideration of the role of vortices and BKT physics is also needed, especially to make contact with experiments. We believe that generally, the study of fluctuation effects in lowdimensional, clean, highly-symmetric graphene systems provides a unique opportunity to study superconductivity beyond mean-field, and in the presence of strong correlations. Weak which allows us to compute the quadratic coefficients appearing in the Ginzburg-Landau functional studied in the main text. In particular, we find that the r coefficient reflects the singular piece of the fluctuation propogator that determines the mean field transition temperature Meanwhile, the d-vector pinning is This quantity is plotted as function of the spin orbit strength λ in Fig. For simplicity, we evaluate the coefficients of the gradient terms K zz = K ⊥ ≡ K to lowest order in λ. We also expand the action to fourth order for q = 0, and again evaluate the resulting expansion coefficients to leading order in λ. The results for these coefficients are presented in Table We now minimize over ψ and r eff to obtain the phase diagram. This yields two equations r + (u + v)I + u|ψ| 2 ψ = 0 (A.11a) Since I is in general dependent on r eff this last equation can be simplified to read We see the condensate density follows (r eff -v|ψ| 2 )ψ = 0 and thus the transition to non-zero |ψ| occurs when r eff = 0. This gives the phase boundary of For simplicity, we neglect the temperature dependence of the fluctuations and set T = T BCS , which simplifies the system and is formally justified provided the renormalization is not to too low temperature. Defining the Ginzburg-Levanyuk number as u/(4πKN (E F ))T BCS = 1 2 Gi (2) and taking C/N (E F ) ∼ (E F /T BCS ) 2 we find the renormalized critical temperature of . (A.14) We have defined untiless pinning energy Γ⊥ = Γ ⊥ /N (E F ). This goes to zero as Γ and for large Γ ⊥ will ultimately be expected to saturate to T BCS . Above the renormalized T c we have appreciable pair fluctuations but no condensate. We now include the possibility for 4e pairing in order to complete the picture of the phase diagram. In order to accommodate 4e pairing, which we expect to reside at small Γ ⊥ , we must modify the ansatz we use to evaluate the correlation functions. In particular, we include an off-diagonal symmetric coupling via The parameters here are r eff and ψ which characterize the renormalized critical temperature and condensate respectively. The free energy of this ansatz is responsible for the changes counting from the phase transition point (see green dotted line in the inset of Fig. Since the system has gone through already one phase transition that resets the chemical potential, we estimate the Fermi energy associated with the large Fermi surface to be roughly half of the total change in chemical potential, that is approximately 10 meV. While we do not know which Fermi surface is more responsible for the spin-triplet pairing, we note that Pauli-limit violation is also observed in twisted graphene multilayers 