Above cryogenic temperature, random laser (RL) emission under continuous wave (CW) optical pumping is often challenging for materials having plenty of lattice defects. Thus, intensive care is required while fabricating the RL device. Synthesis of 2D materials having unique functionality at the atomic limit is necessary for use in such devices. In this work, defects-free 2D yellow pearl (2D-YP) has been synthesized from bulk south sea pearl using liquid-phase exfoliation (LPE) technique. Thereafter, 2D-YP has been employed as passive scatterer to achieve CW pumped RL emission from a conventional gain molecule, i.e., Rhodamine B (RhB). Compared to other semiconductor (TiO2) and 2D (Graphene and h-BN) passive scatterers, ~25 times improvement in gain volume is observed for the disordered system consisting of RhB and 2D-YP, i.e., 2D-YP@RhB, which is found to be due to the formation of a large refractive index gradient, as induced by the thermal nonlinear optical (NLO) interaction. Hence, incoherent RL (ic-RL) emission ~591 nm is reported for 2D-YP@RhB at a lowest threshold input pump power and a linewidth of 65 mW and 3 nm, respectively. Additionaly, a clear transition from ic-RL to mode tunable coherent RL (c-RL) emission is also possible by altering the configuration of the 2D-YP@RhB container. Therefore, the newly designed Van der Waals heterostructure, i.e., 2D-YP with intrinsic photon trapping capability may pave an avenue towards developing future exciting optoelectronic devices. The emergence of 2D materials, like graphene and beyond, has attracted attention from the photonics community due to their interesting electronic and optical properties. Naturally available bulk materials with laminar structures are suitable for liquid phase exfoliation. A simple LPE process is opted for synthesizing the 2D-YP from bulk south sea yellow as shown schematically in Ca atoms with C atoms placed between. This reveals the orthorhombic crystal structure of aragonite. XRD spectra of both bulk yellow pearl nacre and the exfoliated 2D-YP sample are shown in Figure The thickness of the 2D material was calculated using line profile and a histogram was obtained as shown in Figure Based on their fascinating optical characteristics, 2D-YP has been employed as a passive scatterer to generate random laser (RL) emission from Rhodamine-B dye (1 mM, gain medium). A commonly used experimental set up is used for RL generation experiment. Meanwhile, the small absorption of 2D-YP at 532 nm, allowed RhB dye to absorb the most of the incident radiation without any extra optical loss. The scattering property of 2D-YP may also arise due to the contrast in the refractive index Where, e(), a() and m are the emission cross section , absorption cross section and refractive index of the gain medium, respectively. Ng= 1.20 × 10 17 nos. ml -1 is the number density of the gain molecules. N1 is the number of gain molecules in the first excited state. For the used gain medium i.e., RhB, the N1/Ng have two minimums ~590 and 625 nm as observed (Figure The peak emission intensity for the system 2D-YP@RhB is found to be increases slowly upto Pin ≈ 65 mW. However, when the value of Pin is larger than 65 mW, the peak intensity of the emission spectrum increases dramatically. Following similar trend, the FWHM of the emission spectrum narrows sharply to ~3 nm when Pin exceeds 65 mW. Therefore, we obtain that the pump threshold, i.e., Th Pin, defined by the sharp narrowing of the emission spectrum and the slope changing of the peak intensity as the Pin increases, is about 65 mW. Unlike the bare dye system, sharp RL emission peak ~591 nm appears on the top of SE background with the addition of 2D-YP into the gain medium, and is a signature of ic-RL emission. Thereafter, the light scattering performance of 2D-YP in generating RL emission has been compared with other materials such as Graphene, 2D-hBN and TiO2, and the results are presented in Figure Meanwhile, RL emission is observed when the experiment is performed in the systems TiO2@RhB and Gr@RhB. The value of Th Pin and FWHM for TiO2@RhB and Gr@RhB systems is found to be the higher in comparison to that of the 2D-YP@RhB, as summarized in Here we have used spatial self-phase modulation (SSPM) technique as a tool to track the origin of light scattering for RL emssion from the as designed colloidal disordered mediums. SSPM experiment is performed at Pin =80 mW inside a quartz cuvette of path length 0.5 cm. The SSPM patterns for different systems shown in Figure When a laser beam passes through a liquid medium, generation of convection currents takes place due to local heating. Subsequently, a redistribution of local density of the gain molecules as well as the 2D scatterers may take place. This may lead to a formation of temperature dependent change in refractive index within the medium. Generally, thermo-optic coefficient (dn/dT) is the parameter which can be used to quantify the change in refractive index with temperature. The values of dn/dT (K -1 ) for each of the systems can be estimated from the corresponding SSPM patterns and by using the relation, Where, K (W m -1 K -1 ) is the thermal conductivity of the solution. Generally, K can be considered as thermal conductivity of solvent (IPA), nacre, graphene, hBN and TiO2. In case of liquid systems containing RhB, 2D-YP, graphene, TiO2 and 2D-hBN, respectively. p= 532 nm is the pump wavelength.  (m -1 ) and Leff (m) are the linear absorption coefficient and effective path length of each the liquid systems, respectively. Here, φ (≈0.82) and em (~592 nm) are the quantum yield and emission wavelength of the gain medium, respectively. The as estimated value of dn/dT is found to be maximum for 2D-YP@RhB in comparison to that of the other systems. Notably, dn/dT is found to be the lowest for 2D-hBN@RhB. Hence, the largest dn/dT of 2D-YP@RhB system may lead to photon confinement within the random media for achieving RL emission ~591.20 nm at low Th Pin. In this regard, we have also estimated the value of characteristic length scales such as scattering length (lsc =1/Nsc×sc), gain length (lg=1/Ng×e), and transport mean free path (lt) for our disordered system. Where, d and sc are length (=400 nm) and the scattering cross section of 2D-YP scatterer, e is the emission cross-section of the gain medium. In our case, the estimated values of sc, e, lsc , and lg for the disordered system are found to be 4×10 -7 cm 2 , 1.04 × 10 -15 cm 2 , 160 m and 80 m, respectively. And for Rayleigh scattering limit, (md/) lsc = lt. The evolution of mode patterns on the top of the SE background with increasing beam diameter is shown in Figure Interestingly, 2D-YP@RhB generates RL emission at ~587 nm and at Th Pin ~60 mW, when kept inside a capillary tube (Figure g) The corresponding variation of output emission intensity and FWHM with Pin. We have successfully synthesized an uncovational 2D material namely the 2D-YP from bulk south sea yellow pearl by using a simple room temperature LPE approach. The exfoliated 2D-YP is observed to be composed of orthorhombic crystal structure of aragonite with fascinating linear optical and NLO responses. In diffusive regime and under CW pumping, the problem of achiving RL emission from RhB is metigated here by utilizing the structural and optical properties of the passive scatterer i.e., 2D-YP. Notably, unlike other 2D materials, the 2D-YP is reported to have a highest dn/dT (16 × 10 -6 K -1 ) within the colliodal disorder system 2D-YP@RhB. Therefore, due to a largest Vg (~50 ×10 8 m 3 ), the Th Pin (FWHM) of the ic-RL in 2D-YP@RhB is reported to be 1.08 (1.84) times lower than the system Gr@RhB. On the other hand, increase in the possibility of multiple scattering wihin the colloidal 2D-YP@RhB may lead to transition of ic-RL to c-RL emission, as we have varified through a phenomological experiment. Therefore, in presence of external feedback, c-RL emssion having a intense lasing mode (linewidth) ~589 nm (~1.5 nm) and 587 nm (0.80 nm) is achived when 2D-YP@RhB is placed inside a 5 nm cuvette and capilary tube of inner diameter 1 mm, respectively. Non-van der Waals 2D materials, such as 2D-YP discussed in this manuscript, will continue to be an important material class for future applications in electronics, optoelectronics, multifunction al coatings, and beyond. As such, the novel 2D-YP based RL is demonstrated as a proof of concept for further exciting applications in the field of non-linear optics and towards developing optoelectronic devices. All materials obtained are of analytical grade and were used without any further purification. Cultured south sea yellow pearls (www.ratnabhandar.com), isopropyl alcohol (IPA, Loba Chemie), de-ionised water were used in the synthesis process. Rhodamine B (C28H31ClN2O3, Loba Chemie) was used for making dye solutions. A simple liquid exfoliation process was opted for preparing 2D-YP due to its laminar structure. South sea yellow pearls were broken into small pieces using a hammer. These pieces were hand ground into fine powder using an agate mortar and pestle. The material obtained was stored at room temperature for further use. LPE was opted to obtain welldispersed 2D-YP. The process is shown in Figure In order to investigate the microstructural features and physiochemical properties of the 