Spin-lattice relaxation within the nitrogen-vacancy (NV) center's electronic ground-state spin triplet limits its coherence times, and thereby impacts its performance in quantum applications. We report measurements of the relaxation rates on the NV center's |ms = 0 ↔ |ms = ±1 and |ms = -1 ↔ |ms = +1 transitions as a function of temperature from 9 to 474 K in high-purity samples. We show that the temperature dependencies of the rates are reproduced by an ab initio theory of Raman scattering due to second-order spin-phonon interactions, and we discuss the applicability of the theory to other spin systems. Using a novel analytical model based on these results, we suggest that the high-temperature behavior of NV spin-lattice relaxation is dominated by interactions with two groups of quasilocalized phonons centered at 68.2(17) and 167(12) meV. Introduction.-The nitrogen-vacancy (NV) center is a point defect in diamond that has become a promising platform for quantum technologies ranging from nanoscale magnetic resonance imaging To our knowledge, the only systematic measurements of phonon-limited double-quantum relaxation to date are Refs. In this Letter, we present measurements of the temperature dependence of the single-and double-quantum relaxation rates of the nitrogen-vacancy center's electronic ground-state spin triplet in high-purity samples from 9 to 474 K. In contrast to prior theoretical understanding Experimental methods.-Figure The experimental methodology we employ to measure γ and Ω is similar to that of prior works Results.-Figure Prior work has fit the temperature dependence of the single-quantum relaxation rate Ω using an empirical model in which two terms chiefly contribute to phononlimited relaxation: one term that scales in proportion to the phonon occupation number at a specific energy, and a second term that scales with temperature as T 5 . The first term has been described as an "Orbach" We argue that Walker's process is negligible in systems like the NV -ground-state triplet where the spin-phonon interaction strength is much smaller than typical phonon energies. Under this condition, Raman scattering will be driven by second-order, rather than first-order, spinphonon interactions. According to Fermi's golden rule, the rate of Raman scattering due to first-order interactions scales quadratically with the squared first-order interaction strength divided by the energy of the virtual state mediating the transition. Gauging the magnitude of the spin-phonon interaction using the zero field splitting, the first-order interaction strength is roughly hD•(∆u/a), where D ≈ 2.87 GHz is the NV zero field splitting, ∆u is the atomic displacement associated with lattice vibrations, and a is the nearest neighbor distance in diamond. If the nearest excited state is beyond the phonon cutoff frequency (i.e. there are no low-lying excited states to enable an Orbach process cally with the second-order interaction strength, approximately hD • (∆u/a) Motivated by these observations, we develop an ab initio theory of spin-lattice relaxation where Raman scattering is driven by second-order interactions. The relaxation rate may be expressed (1) where the superscript indicates the order of the spinphonon interaction (terms with superscript 1 or 2 are linear or quadratic in the atom displacements respectively) and the subscript indicates the order in perturbation theory. The term Γ (1) 1 describes single-phonon processes which are only relevant below 1 K for the NV center Raman scattering appears as two different secondorder terms in Eq. 1: first-order interactions applied to second order in perturbation theory Γ for spin states |m s and |m s . Here, V ll msm s is the matrix element coupling |m s to |m s via phonons l and l , and ∆E ± = E m s ± ( ω lω l ) -E ms is the energy difference between the final and initial states of the composite system. The mean occupation number for mode l is n l = [exp( ω l /k B T ) -1] -1 . For high energy phonons, we approximate ∆E ± ≈ ±( ω lω l ) and consider only the diagonal l = l terms. In the continuum limit Eq. ( where the spectral function F (2) msm s ( ω, ω) accounts for the phonon density of states and the spin-phonon coupling strengths. For the NV center, we identify Γ and Γ (2) 1(+-) as the relaxation rates Ω and γ respectively. (See Sec. VIII of We obtain the matrix elements V ll msm s by calculating the derivatives of the NV center's spin-spin induced Ŝ2 (black), which cause single-quantum relaxation, double-quantum relaxation, and dephasing respectively. The spectral function displays peaks near the values of 68.2 zero field splitting tensor with respect to atomic displacements. The calculation is performed using a plane wave supercell density functional theory simulation package The double-peaked form of the spectral function F (2) msm s ( ω, ω) suggests that Eq. 3 can be wellapproximated by an analytical model of the relaxation rates with two terms corresponding to two effective phonon modes: are the mean occupation numbers at characteristic energies ∆ 1;2 = ω 1;2 , A 1;2 and B 1;2 are coupling coefficients for the effective modes, and A 3 (S) and B 3 (S) are sample-dependent constants. Eqs. (4) and The model of NV spin-lattice relaxation proposed here differs qualitatively from the empirical models used in prior works to describe the temperature dependence of the single-quantum relaxation rate Ω Discussion.-Spin-lattice relaxation is an incoherent process that fundamentally limits achievable coherence times. Much past work with NV centers has neglected the effect of γ on this limit, thereby overestimating the maximum achievable coherence times for superpositions in the {|0 , |±1 } single-quantum subspace and for superpositions in the {|-1 , |+1 } double-quantum subspace The consistency of the ratio between the measured coherence times and T 2,max in the phonon-limited regime (Fig. Our results have several implications for future research with NV centers and related systems. Because T 5 n(n + 1) at high temperatures, we predict that NV spin-lattice relaxation will be slower than expected based on prior work at temperatures exceeding those accessed in this or previous studies. The NV spin can be coherently manipulated up to 1000 K Conclusion.-We have presented measurements of the temperature dependence of the NV center's single-and double-quantum relaxation rates in high-purity diamond samples from 9 to 474 K. We argued that Raman scattering in NV centers primarily arises from second-order spin-phonon interactions, and we have developed widely applicable ab initio tools for evaluating the relaxation rates that result from these processes. Our ab initio calculation of the NV spin-phonon spectral function demonstrates that two distinct groups of quasilocalized modes provide dominant contributions to NV relaxation at high temperatures. Accordingly, we have developed an analytical model of NV spin-lattice relaxation with just two effective phonon modes with characteristic energies of 68.2 Experiments were conducted using a homebuilt confocal microscope with dual support for low-temperature (9 K to ambient) and high-temperature (ambient to 474 K) operation modes (Fig. As stated in the main text, the experimental sequence used to extract the relaxation rates is the same as that used in prior works Optical polarization is achieved using a 1 ms pulse of approximately 1.5 mW of 532 nm light.The population in |0 is readout optically by collecting fluorescence from the phonon sideband above 638 nm. Microwaves are delivered using a coplanar waveguide (CPW) mounted on top of the diamond sample. The CPW has an Ω-shaped loop along the signal trace which is shorted to the ground trace. The loop features an 1 mm diameter aperture in the center to allow for optical access to the sample underneath. It was manufactured by PCBWay and consists of a single 0.5 oz gold-plated copper layer on a 25 micron polyimide substrate. A coaxial connection is provided by a coplanar MMCX end-launch soldered onto pads at the end of the CPW. Data from two different chemical-vapor-deposition grown samples is presented. The NVs in both samples are formed naturally during diamond growth. Sample A, from Chenguang Machinery & Electric Equipment Company, displays an NV concentration of approximately 1 ppb. Measurements in this sample were performed on the ensemble of NVs within a single confocal volume, which we estimate contains about 30 (150) NVs of a given orientation for low-temperature (high-temperature) operation mode. Ensembles in high-temperature operation mode contain more NVs than ensembles in low-temperature operation mode due to the difference in NA between the low-and high-temperature mode objectives. Sample B, from Element Six, displays an inhomogeneous NV concentration with different areas exhibiting concentrations between 10 -5 and 10 -3 ppb. The higher-concentration regions are localized in irregularly-spaced planes, each approximately 5 microns thick. Measurements in sample B were conducted with single NVs isolated within the higher-concentration planes. The NV concentrations quoted in the main text are estimated by NV counting or by comparing the observed fluorescence rate to that of a single isolated NV. In both samples, measurements were conducted with NVs several microns below the diamond surface so as to avoid the effects of surface noise. In several instances, we use a modified version of the standard relaxation rate experiment sequence described in prior works The assumption of a single-valued Ω to describe phonon-limited relaxation on both the |0 ↔ |-1 and |0 ↔ |+1 transitions has been verified empirically in previous work The fit parameters for the proposed model in the phonon-limited regime are presented in Table Several experimental studies have measured the temperature dependence of the single-quantum relaxation rate in bulk diamond samples The single-quantum relaxation rates measured by Lin et al. in Ref. At temperatures below 125 K, sample-dependent constants begin to make non-negligible contributions to the relaxation rates. The values of these constants as determined from the fit of the proposed model (Eqs. ( B3 (Sample B) (s -1 ) 0.013 a significant difference between their respective constants for Ω. Interestingly, we observe that the constant for γ is around 5 times larger in sample B ([NV] ≈ 10 -3 ppb) than in sample A ([NV] ≈ 1 ppb). While a full investigation of this effect is out of scope for the present work, we suggest that the unexpectedly large constant for γ in sample B may be associated with a dark defect species present at higher levels in sample B than in sample A. Fig. In prior work We note that the occupation number n is written in exponential form. As the Orbach-like term describes scattering of phonons at a specific energy ∆, the full temperature dependence of this term is n(n + 1) Fits to the experimental data according to Eqs. (S2) and (S3) are nearly identical to those provided by the proposed model described by Eqs. ( The analytical model we propose (Eqs. 4 and 5 of the main text) assumes that the NV spin-phonon spectral function is best approximated by a sum of two strongly coupled effective phonon modes. It is sensible to ask whether a similar model consisting of just one mode provides an adequate fit to the experimental data, or if a model with more modes provides a superior fit. Fig. . Ratio of γ to Ω as a function of temperature in the phonon-limited regime. The lines are the ratios of the fits to the measured relaxation rates γ and Ω according to the proposed model described by Eqs. ( In Ref. We proceed with the ab initio calculation of the spin-lattice relaxation rates by first computing the spin-phonon matrix elements up to second order, then applying Fermi's golden rule, and finally taking the continuum limit, converting sums over matrix elements into integrals over spectral functions. We note that we apply Fermi's golden rule with the random phase approximation such that interference terms are dropped. In this section we describe our computational methods for evaluating the spin-phonon matrix elements for the NV center. While the present discussion is limited to the NV center for specificity and clarity, we emphasize that our approach can be easily generalized to other systems with zero field splittings. While the particular spin and symmetry of the NV center limit the number of matrix elements that must be calculated here, more complicated systems can also be treated using the same techniques at the expense of added computational complexity. Similarly, our discussion assumes that the zero field splitting arises from the spin-spin interaction, but analogous calculations may be carried out for systems with zero field splittings that results from the spin-orbit interaction. We calculate the spin-phonon matrix elements using plane wave supercell density functional theory (DFT). We apply the VASP implementation The spin-phonon matrix elements are then obtained by exploiting the dependence of the D-tensor on the normal coordinates: where a homebuilt script is used to extract the coefficients in Eq. (S4). In order to evaluate the second-order derivatives, we consider only the diagonal terms which satisfy i = j and distort the C 3v symmetric atomic positions by all degenerate e x , e y phonon modes of the supercell by (∆R) 2 = 0.1 Å√ a.m.u.. The second-order spin-flipping matrix elements V ll +0 and V ll +-then determine the D-tensor according to the symmetry-adapted expression: where R i , X l and Y l are the dimensionless coordinates (not normal coordinates) for the phonon mode at energy ω i or ω l . We note that while the index l only covers the e modes once, the index i covers all a 1 , a 2 , e x , e y modes and thus runs over the e modes twice. Therefore, we omit e x 's degenerate partner e y modes from our calculations because their effect is the same. Eq. (S5) can be transformed into the spin-phonon interaction V by: where ← -S = -→ S † = Ŝx Ŝy Ŝz . We expand the dimensionless coordinates in terms of the phonon creation and The first-order analog of Eq. ( where the V l msm s are the first-order spin-phonon coupling coefficients from the first-order spin-phonon interaction V (1) = lmsm s V l msm s (a † l + a l ). As in the main text, ∆E ± = E m s ± ( ω lω l ) -E ms is the energy difference between the final and initial states of the composite system. Making the approximation that the energy of the NV is small in comparison to the phonon energy, Γ In the continuum limit we replace the coupling coefficients with the first-order spectral function F (1) msm s ( ω)F (1) We estimate the first-order spectral function for a macroscopic diamond by convolving the first-order coupling coefficients with a Gaussian of standard deviation σ = 7.5 meV: The ab initio first-order coupling coefficients and spectral function are displayed in Fig. C. Relaxation due to second-order spin-phonon interactions From Fermi's golden rule taken to first order in perturbation theory, the second-order interaction V (2) = ll msm s V ll msm s (a † l + a l )(a † l + a l ) from Eq. (S6) drives Raman scattering at the rate shown in Eq. ( main text, which we reproduce here: Again assuming that the NV energies are small in comparison to the phonon energies, Γ We transform Eq. (S12) into its integral form: by introducing the second-order spectral function F (2) Following Eq. S10, we estimate the second-order spectral function for a macroscopic diamond by convolving the second-order coupling coefficients with a Gaussian of standard deviation σ = 7.5 meV: We plot the square root of ab initio spectral function in Fig. Fig. For a generic solid-state spin system that features a zero-field splitting, it is to be expected that the most strongly coupled phonon modes are those which induce large displacements of the specific atoms that primarily host the electronic wavefunction. We therefore predict that the most strongly coupled modes are also (quasi)localized modes for defects with highly localized electronic wavefunctions. Indeed, for the NV center we find that the most strongly coupled phonon modes are associated with large displacements of the three carbon atoms that support the unterminated "vacancy lobes" of the NV's 3 A 2 electronic ground state triplet wavefunction. The most localized vibrational mode ( 18% probability on the three carbon atoms) with doubly degenerate "E" symmetry is at 62.4 meV and exhibits the largest spin-phonon coupling coefficients at 2 MHz for V ll +-and 0.6 MHz for V ll +0 , as can be seen in Fig. In order to compare the salient characteristics of the experimental and ab initio relaxation rates, it is useful to fit both data sets to the same model so that the fit parameters may be compared. Here, we fit a version of the proposed model without sample-dependent constants (i.e., a sum of two Orbach-like terms) to the relaxation rates predicted by the ab initio simulations up to 5000 K. The results are shown in Fig. to the larger occupation numbers, and thus larger contributions to the calculated relaxation rates, associated with lower-energy features of the spectral function. Using a toy model spectral function, we observe that the magnitude of the activation energy underestimation increases with the width of the Gaussian used for broadening the spectral function. We therefore anticipate that larger supercell calculations which allow for narrower Gaussian broadening may demonstrate less bias in the activation energies extracted from the fit. The theory presented in this work can be generalized to other spin systems. In particular, second-order interactions will dominate Raman scattering in systems that have no low-lying excited states and feature phonons whose energies are much higher than the strengths of their respective couplings to the spin. We expect systems in which both the defect and lattice consist of light elements with strong covalent bonds to commonly meet these criteria. Other likely candidates are defects with ground state orbital singlets, due to the absence of the spin-orbit interaction. While our computational approach is not limited to spin-1 or C 3v symmetric systems, we highlight that our arguments and methods could be applied with little modification to several other spin-1 crystal defects with similar symmetries to the NV center, such as divacancy centers in silicon carbide T (K) Ω (s -1 ) γ (s -1 ) NV T (K) Ω (s -1 ) γ (s and secondorder interactions applied to first order in perturbation theory Γ (2) 1 . As discussed above, Γ (1) 2 Γ (2) 1 for the NV