We investigate the dynamics of the cavitation bubble induced by 2.9 μm mid-IR laser pulses (10 ns, 10-50 μJ) resulting in a plasmafree direct fast heating of water due to a strong vibrational absorption. We establish a direct correlation between the laser fluence (up to 6 J.cm -2 ) and the maximum bubble radius (up to 200 μm). From experimental data, key parameters (threshold energy, internal pressure) can be retrieved by simulations including the water absorption saturation at 2.9 μm. At a fluence of 6 J.cm -2 , we obtain 13 % of the laser energy converted to a bubble energy and we can predict that operating at higher fluence > 10 J.cm -2 will lead to a maximum of 20 % conversion efficiency. This results open the door to bioprinting applications using direct absorption of the laser radiation without any additional absorber. Bioprinting of living cells has become in the last decade a new key technology to create complex 3D structures of bio-compounds Laser Assisted Bioprinting (LAB) is a beautiful biophotonic application involving laser technology, light-matter interaction, fluid mechanics and biology A widespread method of energy transfer consists in using a substrate coated with a thin layer of absorbing material supporting a 100-200 μm thick film of bio-ink. Various materials have been used as a "sacrificial" absorber such as metals, metal-oxides or polymers To circumvent this limitation, the plasma can be created in the medium itself. When near IR 10 μJ femtosecond A direct method for heating of liquids is the 'one photon' absorption by water in some spectral bands. Depending on the physical and chemical processes following absorption, the survival of living cell can be affected by critical parameters such as pressure, temperature, or chemical composition. Although fast and highly localized, water photolysis and the risk of DNAdegradation limits in practice the use of UV-lasers Taking advantage of the strong absorption of water in the mid-IR range allows adjuvent-and plasma-free energy deposition. We thus investigate laser-induced bubbles in the ∼2.9 μm vibrational absorption band of water. IR generated bubbles have been firstly observed with a 1 J-50 ns-10.6 μm CO 2 laser More recently, 45 ns-2.85 μm millijoule-class laser have been used to study shock waves and bubble cavitation The experimental setup is depicted in Fig. A time resolved imaging is used to acquire sequences of images in a shadowgraphic configuration. It consists of a collimated-500 ns (FWHM)-pulsed blue LED propagating through the spectroscopic cell's sidewalls and a triggered CMOS camera (UI-3260CP, IDS). A delay generator (SRS DG535) is used to externally trigger the laser and to synchronize the delays between the laser shot, the pulsed blue diode and the camera. A homemade program manages the delays, the camera and the recording of image sequences. The images are calibrated with a resolution test target (USAF) and a zoom lens assembly (OPTO) allowing a 3.7 maximum magnification resulting in a resolution of 3.57 μm/pixel. For each laser energy, the bubble movie is reconstructed by recording 50 images at each delay t after the laser pulse thus providing enough statistics for averaging shot-to-shot fluctuations. Each image was processed by Fuji To estimate the fluence, we first determined the focal spot size. Since direct measurement of the focal spot is not feasible with standard largepixel middle-infrared imaging sensors, we estimated the beam waist by using ablation spot size imaging. A 20 nm thick gold layer is ablated by a single shot of 2.9 μm laser pulse for different laser energies E 0 and different focal lengths. Then, the ablation spots are imaged using a microscope (NIKON) as shown in inset in Fig. The measured ablation spot is plotted against laser energy (Fig. As already reported In Fig. where ρ l = 1000 kg.m -3 is the liquid phase (water) density, σ = 0.072 N.m -1 the surface tension, μ = 10 -3 Pa.s the dynamic viscosity, P B the pressure on the bubble surface, and P a 10 5 Pa the ambient atmospheric pressure The first bounce is well reproduced (solid lines in Fig. To reveal the dependence of maximum bubble radius R max on laser fluence F 0 , several bubble dynamics were obtained using different laser energies and focusing conditions. Each focusing condition leads to a different R max vs. energy E 0 relationship. However, all curves merge together when the measured averaged bubble radii R max is plotted vs. the fluence (Fig. Contrasting with what can be observed with plasma-induced cavitation bubble in water, we didn't observe any remaining bubbles in the cell even for the highest fluence investigated here. The absence of gas creation or accumulation between laser shots (repetition rate here typ. from 1 to 4 Hz) along with the absence of any recombination plasma light strongly indicates that the process is plasma-free. No residual gas products from water photolysis such as H 2 , O 2 , and O 3 that might affect the living cells have been observed. This is consistent with the fact that the maximum density of energy deposited α * (F 0 )F 0 20 kJ.cm -3 at F 0 = 10 J.cm -2 , while the first and the second O-H bond dissociation energy density of the water molecule in liquid phase are 27.4 and 23.6 kJ.cm -3 respectively. Hence, only the strong one-photon absorption at 3 μm in water is involved in the process of bubble generation. Since the range of fluence (> 1 J.cm -2 ) leading to the observation of cavitation bubble sizes ( 100 μm) is relatively high, we need to take into account the saturation α * (F ) being the fluence dependent absorption coefficient (thereafter, the use of * means that the saturation of absorption is taken into account) where α 0 = 12787.3 ± 18.1 cm -1 is the unsaturated absorption coefficient, ∆α = -10906.6±23.9 cm -1 the asymptotic drop of absorption and f = F/F s with F s = 0.136 ± 0.006 J.cm -2 the saturation fluence. Although different from conventional saturated formulae, not only Eq.( and the maximum bubble diameter is retrieved with the cavitation bubble energy E B expressed by Vogel et al. The energy E * ex and the volume V * allow us to estimate the initial pressure p * (see Supplementary material). In Fig. The relative amount of energy released in the shock-wave ∆ sw = E sw /E B can be evaluated from the dimensionless parameter where ∆P av = P a -P v is the pressure difference at R max and P nc is the noncondensable gas pressure at R max , c = 1500 m.s -1 is the speed of sound in water, and Λ = 1/κ according to the Keller-Miksis model The rest of the energy is used to start the growth of the bubble with a lower initial pressure P 0 . In order to evaluate this pressure, we solved the Rayleigh-Plesset for all dynamics with a varying initial radius R * eb and a varying initial pressure P 0 with a numerical sensitivity of 1 %, P 0 being refined by least-square fitting the first cycle dynamics. In Fig. An another important aspect is the efficiency of light-to-mechanical energy conversion process. The bubble initially grows with a constant velocity and the corresponding maximum kinetic energy E k = πρ l R 3 Ṙ2 is calculated by fitting the initial dynamics of the bubble for each conditions. As it can be seen in Fig. Moreover, at low fluence, most of the laser energy is used to heat the liquid, only a small fraction is being converted into explosive boiling. At 2 J/cm 2 , we achieve with the 2.9 μm-10 ns laser 7 % efficiency of bubble generation analogous to what Pushkin et al. In this letter, we have investigated the dynamics of cavitation bubble in water generated by microjoule nanosecond pulses emitted at 2.9 μm with different focusing and energy conditions. As far as bioprinting applications are concerned, few directions can be drawn from this work. It clearly shows that the cavitation bubble dynamics is only governed by the deposited laser fluence in the medium. At this wavelength, only the strong single photon absorption of water is involved through the explosive boiling in the bubble generation, while no evidence for any plasma creation has been observed. The constant location of the bubble without any added artificial absorber and other chemical compounds created during the interaction is a highly beneficial advantage compared to the other methods, insuring repeatability, stability and purity. In the regime of fluence > 1 J/cm 2 , the saturation of the water absorption must be taken into account in order to estimate correctly the volume of interaction and the energy transferred from the laser to the bubble. In these conditions, we have shown that at high fluence (> 10 J/cm 2 ) a maximum of 20 % of the laser energy can be expected to be transferred into the bubble, the rest being converted in shock wave. For the targeted bioprinting application, longer focal length thus seem preferable in order to decrease the internal pressure in the bubble that might be experienced by the cells. These experiments and analysis pave the way to complex structuring of living tissues by using mid-IR laser technology without any assistance of artificial absorber. It also opens the way towards a full automation of the bioprinting where the reproductibility and stability of the cell deposition in a shorter time ensure a reliable, cost-effective process compliant with the GMP grade requirements. Note that E B and E k are not maximum at the same time in the dynamics. The expected bubble energy with 100 % (blue dash line) and 20 % (green dash line) of the excess energy converted are also compared with the total energy (red dash line). For low fluence (<1 J/cm 2 ) most of the laser energy is dissipated in heat without explosive boiling of water. For fluences >10 J/cm 2 a maximum of 20 % of the laser energy can be expected to be converted in bubble energy, the rest being dissipated in shock wave. Supplementary Material: Plasma free bubble cavitation in water by a 2.9 μm laser for bioprinting applications Pulse propagation and ad hoc formula for saturated absorption Due to the range of fluence used in laser induced cavitation, the energy deposition cannot be simply described by a linear Beer-Lambert's absorption law. Instead, we must include saturation effects of the middle infrared (2.9 μm) absorption band by replacing the linear (unsaturated) absorption coefficient α with a fluence dependent one α * (F ). Here F (ρ, z) = I(ρ, z, t )dt is the fluence of a laser beam with a time-dependent intensity I(ρ, z, t) propagating along z and * denotes the saturation. For simplicity we assume the beam is initially Gaussian in space and time such that: where w 0 in the beam waist and τ 0 is the duration. In cylindrical coordinates (ρ, φ, z) the fluence reads F (ρ, z = 0) = F 0 • exp(-2ρ 2 /w 2 0 ) where the maximum fluence is Even in the presence of saturation, the strong absorption in the 3 μm range results in a very limited penetration depth typically on the order of few central wavelength. In this regime where diffraction phenomena can be neglected, the evolution of F (ρ, z) can be written as As a consequence, Eq.( The fluence dependent absorption coefficient α * (F ) can be written: where α 0 is the unsaturated absorption coefficient (F → 0), ∆α the drop of absorption (F → ∞) and F s the saturation fluence. Eq.( The Eq.( where η = ∆α/α 0 , and β = η/(1 + η). Introducing the fluence F (L) at the output of the sample of thickness L such that F (L) = T • F 0 where T is the incident fluence dependent transmission, one can write: Using Eq.( Effective threshold fluence F * eb for explosive boiling We first define F * eb as the effective critical fluence for which the density of deposited energy u * dep,eb = α * (F * eb )F * eb = H eb ρ l exactly corresponds to the explosive boiling energy density with no excess energy. Considering the expression Eq.( where q = (α 0 + ∆α)/α 0 = 1 + η, ∆F = F eb -F s and F eb = H eb ρ l /α 0 = 0.1 J.cm -2 is the threshold in the absence of saturation effect (u dep,eb = α 0 F eb = H eb ρ l ). After calculation, we find F * eb = 0.21 ± 0.02 J.cm -2 which is almost twice higher than the threshold in the absence of saturation F eb . As it propagates, when the local beam fluence F (ρ, z) > F * eb , the density of deposited energy exceed the specific spinodal energy H eb ρ l required to vaporize the water explosively, thus leading the vapour creation. If F (ρ, z) < F * eb , then the pulse energy is still absorbed resulting in a temperature rise yet remaining below the vaporization limit. Consequently, there is a region of space z > 0 defining a volume V * satisfying F (ρ, z) > F * eb where vapour will be created with some excess energy leading to the bubble expansion. Critical radius R * eb , penetration depth z * eb and the corresponding volume V * for explosive boiling In order to evaluate V * for a Gaussian beam, we first note that at the input z = 0 where the CaF 2 -water interface is located (see Fig. Similar to the ablation spot-size formula, we can thus define a critical radius: Within the beam profile, explosive boiling thus can only occur if ρ < R * eb . Secondly, as the beam penetrates into the liquid, its fluence decreases with z (see Fig. where f = F (ρ)/F s and f * eb = F * eb /F s . Eq.( we can thus derive the volume V * where explosive boiling occurs given by: where g(x) = 1+η•x/F s , and dilog(x) is the dilogarithm function (dilog (x) = ln(x)/(1 -x)). The variation of V * as a function of F 0 is represented in Fig. ex available for explosive boiling The energy E * dep deposited within the volume V * where F (ρ, z) > F * eb is the difference between the incident energy E * inc that may lead to explosive boiling: and the remain output energy that will further be absorbed but without leading to explosive boiling. Since by definition, F (ρ, z = z * eb (ρ)) = F * eb one can simplify: A fraction W * eb of the deposited energy E * dep corresponds to the specific spinodal energy H eb ρ l required to vaporize the water explosively, integrated over the volume V * : The vapour finally receives an energy excess out -W * eb (Fig. The threshold for bubble formation F 0 > F * eb = 0.2 J.cm -2 is clearly visible on the excess energy E * ex as shown in Fig. Resulting initial pressure p * The energy E * ex (Eq.17) and volume V * (Eq.12) allow us to estimate the initial pressure p * = E * ex /V * at the onset of bubble formation. However such a direct evaluation could be misleading (although correct for estimating an upper limit) since V * is initially a flat volume while hemispherical bubbles are experimentally observed. A more realistic evaluation of p * can thus be obtained by substituting V * by Ṽ * = (V * + 2πR * 3 eb /3)/2 that accounts for the rapid energy redistribution associated with the doming from the flat excited volume V * to the hemispherical bubble seed. Typically here, p * is in the GPa range (Fig. 