Standard superconductors display a ubiquitous discontinuous jump in the electronic specific heat at the critical superconducting transition temperature. In a growing class of unconventional superconductors, however, a second order parameter component may get stabilized and produce a second heat capacity jump at a lower temperature, typically associated with the spontaneous breaking of time-reversal symmetry. The splitting of the two specific heat discontinuities can be controlled by external perturbations such as chemical substitution, hydrostatic pressure, or uniaxial strain. We develop a theoretical quantitative multi-band framework to determine the ratio of the heat capacity jumps, given the band structure and the order parameter momentum structure. We discuss the conditions of the gap profile which determine the amplitude of the second jump. We apply our formalism to the case of Sr2RuO4, and using the gap functions from a microscopic random phase approximation calculation, we show that recently-proposed accidentally degenerate order parameters may exhibit a strongly suppressed second heat capacity jump. We discuss the origin of this result and consider also the role of spatial inhomogeneity on the specific heat. Our results provide a possible explanation of why a second heat capacity jump has so far evaded experimental detection in Sr2RuO4. A growing number of superconductors realize multicomponent condensates, some with clear evidence for spontaneous time-reversal symmetry breaking (TRSB) below the critical superconducting transition temperature T c The current status of superconductivity in Sr 2 RuO 4 can be condensed into the following open question: what nodal spin-singlet time-reversal symmetry breaking superconducting multi-component order parameter, whose product transforms as B 2g , is realized below T c ? As mentioned above, nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) dictates a condensate of primarily spin-singlet nature, implying even-parity Cooper pairs. Spectroscopic probes For all these mentioned multi-component pairing candidates, however, there is an important "fly in the ointment" that needs to be addressed. Specific heat measurements under uniaxial pressure up to around 0.6 GPa detect only a single phase transition even as the leading T c rises from 1.5 to 3.5 K Here, we perform a general theoretical investigation of the specific heat transition of double-component superconducting phase transitions, and identify the key conditions determining the ratio of the amplitudes of the specific heat jumps at the two transition temperatures. This study is of relevance to all TRSB two-component superconducting phase transitions. In addition, we compute the specific heat explicitly from recent microscopically obtained s + id xy , and d x 2 -y 2 + ig xy(x 2 -y 2 ) superconducting orders specific to Sr 2 RuO 4 , and consider the effects of uniaxial strain and spatial inhomogeneity. We discuss the results in light of the recent specific heat measurements on Sr 2 RuO 4 , and conclude that the fortuitously degenerate superconducting candidate orders obtained from realistic material-specific models are consistent with currently available specific heat data. The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II we derive the ratio of the heat capacity jumps for a general two-component order parameter. The result is explored within a microscopic Ginzburg-Landau framework, and with a numerical demonstration in a simple one-band model. In Sec. III we apply our formalism to the case of Sr 2 RuO 4 by calculating the heat capacity for two recently-proposed order parameter candidates as a function of uniaxial in-plane strain. In Sec. IV we discuss a series of other putative time-reversal symmetry-broken superconductors with possible double transitions in light of our results at the qualitative level. The paper is concluded in Sec. V. In Appendix A we provide details of the derivation of the heat capacity in multiband superconductors. Appendix B includes a self-contained derivation of the microscopic Ginzburg-Landau approach. In Appendix C we list the three-band tight-binding model of Sr 2 RuO 4 and its strain parametrization, and in Appendix D we provide supplementary heat capacity plots for Sr 2 RuO 4 . We consider a two-component order parameter with a general temperature dependence, as parameterized by the two functions ∆ 0 (T ) and X(T ): Here, a and b are symmetry labels denoting two different one-dimensional irreducible representations (irreps) of the appropriate point group. The order parameter is in general multiband; a band index has been left implicit in the above ansatz. The form factors are normalized as max p∈FS |f a/b (p)| = 1. In the current scenario where the two components of the condensate belong to different irreps, the temperatures at which ∆ 0 (T ) and X(T ) onset, which we denote by T c and T TRSB , respectively, are generally different. Generically, re-condensation at T TRSB makes ∆ 0 (T ) nonanalytic at this temperature, which has important consequences for the second specific heat jump that we address in detail in the following. Sketches of the temperature dependencies of ∆ 0 and X are shown in Fig. The heat capacity of a superconductor, C(T ) = T ∂S/∂T , is derived from the entropy of the free Fermigas where n F (E) denotes the Fermi function and E μ (k) is the quasiparticle excitation energy of band μ at momentum k. As the electrons condense into Cooper pairs, both at the primary (T c ) and the secondary (T TRSB ) transitions, there is an associated reduction of entropy that results in a discontinuous jump in the heat capacity. We define the heat capacity jumps as the change in value across the respective transitions, It is a straightforward task to calculate the ratio of the two jumps in the thermodynamic limit, which we denote by η, starting from Eq. (2) and using the general order parameter ansatz of Eq. ( This result comes about as two terms are picked up in the evaluation of ∆C TRSB /T TRSB since generally the temperature dependence of both order parameter components, ∆ 2 0 (T ) and ∆ 2 0 (T )X 2 (T ), are non-analytic at T TRSB , as caused by terms in the free energy that couple the two components. Formally, the non-analyticity is expressed via Finally, in Eq. (3) we introduced the dimensionless integral I(z 2T TRSB f a (p), and the Fermi surface averages are evaluated as In the particular case of ∆ 0 (T ) being analytic at T TRSB , we see that A = 0. In the BCS-like case of ∆ 0 (T ) = ∆ 0a (1 -T /T c ) 1/2 , and We stress that when the two order parameter components repel, the resulting non-analyticity of ∆ 0 (T ) suppresses the second heat capacity jump, with the conditions for an observable second transition being quantitatively dictated by Eq. (3). To shed light on the heat capacity jump ratio in Eq. ( where with V being the reciprocal space volume, j = a, b, and h(x) ≥ 0 is sharply peaked around x = 0 for low tem-peratures and is given in Eq. (B12). Above, we asserted that f a condenses at T c1 and f b at T c2 . The free energy is minimized over ∆ 0 (T ) and X(T ), and in Appendix B 2 we show that this results directly in T c = T c1 and T TRSB = T TRSB (T c1 , T c2 ) ≤ T c2 (equality when β ab = 0). Since the temperature dependence of the quartic order is weak and not a leading-order effect, we evaluate the β's at T = T c . When further using α j (T, T cj ) = α 0 j (T /T cj -1) with α 0 j ≥ 0, which holds close to the respective transition temperatures, we find that the Ginzburg-Landau solution yields for the coefficients in Eq. ( It is worth noting that the free energy of Eq. ( The expression of Eq. ( First, η is generally highly sensitive to the order of which the order parameter components onset. Intuitively, the more of the Fermi surface that is gapped-out by the primary component (at T c ), or correspondingly the fewer the quasiparticles left to be gapped-out by the secondary component (at T TRSB ), the smaller the second jump. This can be inferred directly from Eq. ( Second, η is suppressed in cases where the two components share momentum structure over the Fermi surface. This can be seen from the behaviour of the dimensionless integral appearing in Eq. ( , where c is a positive constant. This expression will be small if, for a given mo-mentum on the Fermi surface, |f a (k)| is maximal (minimal) where |f b (k)| is maximal (minimal). Consequentially, if the two components have a similar momentum structure over the Fermi surface, the second heat capacity jump is suppressed. In cases where the Fermi velocity is anisotropic, the regions with minimal velocity (particularly in the vicinity of van Hove points) will dominate the Fermi surface average and dictate where a matching momentum structure is decisive to get a suppressed second jump. We note that this criterion of a matching momentum structure is generally not limited to nodal regions, which is commonly accepted, but applies in principle to the entire Fermi surface. Third, but indirectly related to the second point, increasing the repulsion between the components reduces the second jump. The repulsion is controlled by β ab , which A (in Eq. ( Since a and b label different one-dimensional irreps both symmetry-breaking and symmetry-preserving perturbations (with respect to the point group), commonly labelled , will a priori cause a splitting of T c and T TRSB since ∂T c1 /∂ = ∂T c2 /∂ generally, and the ratio T c /T TRSB largely controls η. In the limit Tc Eqs. ( Experimentally, natural symmetry-preserving perturbations to consider include, e.g., disorder, impurity doping In this section we demonstrate the basic principles stated in Sec. II C for controlling the size of the second specific heat jump by calculating the heat capacity discontinuity from Eq. (3) in the simplest case of a circular Fermi surface with ∆ 0 (T ) = ∆ 0a (1 -T /T c ) 1/2 , and The circular Fermi surface emerges, for example, on the square lattice with nearest-neighbor hopping, ξ(k) = -2t(cos k x + cos k y ) -μ, in the low-filling limit μ ≈ -4t: We consider a perturbation that causes a splitting of T c and T TRSB . In the unperturbed case we assume that the two temperatures T =0 c ≈ T =0 TRSB such that the splitting can be meaningfully expanded in the small quantity y := 1 -T TRSB /T c . We further assume, as is standard, that the magnitudes of the order parameter components scale with the respective temperatures, i.e., ∆ 0a = ∆ =0 0a T c /T =0 c and ∆ 0b = ∆ =0 0b T TRSB /T =0 TRSB . Consequentially, we find that η to leading order in y is given by To obtain the above expression we made use of the small argument expansion of the dimensionless integral, I(z), see Appendix A 2. Notably, we see that the O(y) correction is negative semi-definite under the above conditions, so the leading effect of, e.g., uniaxial in-plane strain ( = ε xx ) is a reduction of the second heat capacity jump. From here it is a simple task to calculate the ratios of Fermi surface averages appearing in Eq. ( To further illustrate the points made in the preceding sections, we calculate the heat capacity numerically in the case of the simple square lattice. We fix the nearestneighbor hopping to t = 100 meV, the electronic filling to n = 0.6 and consider the critical temperatures T c1 = 1.5 K and T c2 = 1.2 K. For the order parameters, we consider the cases s + id xy and d x 2 -y 2 + ig xy(x 2 -y 2 ) , and we employ the leading lattice harmonics for the individual components. As for the temperature dependence we use ∆ 0 (T ) and X(T ) as derived in Appendix B 2 with Ginzburg-Landau parameters α 0 a = α 0 b = 30 meV -1 and β a = β b = 1 meV -3 fixed for simplicity. Fixing these parameters is done for illustrational purposes and to highlight the role of β ab . The results clearly confirm the two key points of . We take β ab = 0 (blue curves), β ab = 0.2βa (green curves) and the opposite order of both components with β ab = 0 (red curves), using the fundamental harmonic order parameters shown in the insets. Sec. II C: the second jump is suppressed if the least nodal component onsets first, and turning on β ab reduces the second jump further. In the s + id xy case of Fig. Combined heat capacity and muon spin relaxation (μSR) measurements have demonstrated that the onset of superconductivity and TRSB split under uniaxial (100) strain in SRO Within recent spin-fluctuation based calculations for superconductivity in Sr 2 RuO 4 , it was demonstrated that including longer-range Coulomb interactions in the random phase approximation (RPA) renormalized susceptibility can result in a close competition between s and d xy solutions to the linearized gap equation, making an s + id xy order parameter a microscopically viable candidate order parameter for Sr 2 RuO 4 For the band structure we employ a 2D three-band tight-binding model describing the t 2g orbitals of the Ru atoms consistent with angular resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) measurements As mentioned above, combined heat capacity and μSR measurements have demonstrated that the onset of superconductivity and TRSB split under uniaxial (100) strain in Sr 2 RuO 4 In Fig 8 The effect of smearing is more easily understood in a toy model for the heat capacity (per temperature) where Θ is the Heaviside function and a is the slope of c below T c . If the step locations T c are drawn from a normal distribution with mean Tc and standard deviation σ, then lim where Erf is the error function; the width of the smeared transition is straightforwardly controlled by σ. One may therefore expect a significantly smeared double transition when T c -T TRSB σ. In Fig. Considering the results of the unstrained material in the top panel of Fig. Noticeably, in the unstrained case the second jump of the s +id xy order is very tiny, and an order of magnitude smaller than for d x 2 -y 2 + ig xy(x 2 -y 2 ) . Under uniaxial inplane strain, the second jump is initially found to grow in the case of s + id xy before decreasing again for strains p < -0.02. For d x 2 -y 2 + ig xy(x 2 -y 2 ) the second jump evolves differently with strain but remains sizeable and outside the threshold for detection reported in Ref. The second jump evolving non-monotonically under strain in both order parameter scenarios points to the importance of the A-term in Eq. ( In both order parameter scenarios considered here, the A 1 and B 1 form factors exhibit accidental nodes in the vicinity of k x , k y = π/3 at zero strain. Figures When smearing is added in Fig. Among the aforementioned order parameter candidates recently proposed for Sr 2 RuO 4 we have so far not addressed the d xz + id yz state (E g irrep of D 4h ) a two-dimensional model for the band structure, we note that previous microscopic three-dimensional models have found this state unfavourable Contrasting the focus on exotic multi-component orders relying on accidental degeneracies, the simpler explanation of the specific heat data of Sr 2 RuO 4 in terms of a single d x 2 -y 2 order parameter should not be dismissed (cf. the gray dashed line in Fig. In the heavy fermion compound UPt 3 there is convincing experimental evidence of a two-component order parameter deep in the superconducting phase. Two distinct transition temperatures are revealed by two jumps visible in the ultrasound velocity as a function of temperature UTe 2 has attracted significant attention recently as an unconventional superconductor. The Kerr effect indicating TRSB has been observed Another material relevant for multi-component superconductivity is UBe 13 . In this material, a second heat capacity jump is observed under doping of UBe 13 to U 1-x Th x Be 13 Finally, TRSB has been also observed in PrOs 4 Sb 12 , which has a tetrahedral crystal symmetry T h We have provided a general theoretical framework for the specific heat transitions in multi-component timereversal symmetry broken superconductors. This allowed a thorough discussion of the amplitudes of the specific heat jumps at the two transition temperatures. Specifically, one expects comparable specific heat discontinuities for most two-dimensional irreps due to the maximally misaligned nodes and the symmetry-imposed equality of order parameter component magnitudes. On the other hand, a significantly reduced second jump may be expected for TRSB superconductors that have competing order parameter components with similar momentum structure, and where the least nodal component onsets first. We applied the theoretical setup to perform a comprehensive discussion of the low-temperature electronic specific heat relevant for Sr 2 RuO 4 . While the specific heat data alone for this material are most straightforwardly explained by a nodal single-component superconductor, several other experimental probes point to TRSB multi-component superconductivity ) Above, the Green's functions G μ (p, ω n ) = 1/(iω n -ξ μ (p)) with fermionic Matsubara frequencies ω n = π β (2n + 1) for integer n were introduced. Next, we factorize the order parameter as ∆ aμ (p) = ∆ 0a f aμ (p), with f aμ (p) being a (real) normalized form factor, and ∆ 0a is a (complex) variational parameter. The above equations simplify to ∆F = ∆F (2) after performing the Matsubara sums. Above, V is the unit cell volume, the momentum dependent order parameter components are without loss of generality assumed real, and In the two-component case of Eq. ( For convenience we also introduce the temperature and Appendix C: Three-band tight binding model for Sr2RuO4 We employ an effective 2D three-band model for the band structure of Sr 2 RuO 4 , where ] T and where s ∈ {↑, ↓} denotes spin and a ∈ {xz, yz, xy} denotes the d-orbitals of the Ru atoms, which are relevant close to the Fermi energy. For h s (k) we take where spin-orbit coupling is parametrized by λ, and the above energies are given by Here (100) strain is parameterized by the deformation parameter p and the Poisson's ratio ν. The tight-binding parameters are summarized in Table In Fig. Finally, in Fig. resolvable for both the s + id xy and the d x 2 -y 2 + ig xy(x 2 -y 2 ) order parameters, at least for some strain values. 