Hydrostatic pressure has been commonly applied to tune broadband light emissions from selftrapped excitons (STE) in perovskites for producing white light and study of basic electron-phonon interactions. However, a general theory is still lacking to understand pressure-driven evolution of STE emissions. In this work we first identify a theoretical model that predicts the effect of hydrostatic pressure on STE emission spectrum, we then report the observation of extremely broadband photoluminescence emission and its wide pressure spectral tuning in 2D indirect bandgap CsPb2Br5 crystals. An excellent agreement is found between the theory and experiment on the peculiar experimental observation of STE emission with a nearly constant spectral bandwidth but linearly increasing energy with pressure below 2 GPa. Further analysis by the theory and experiment under higher pressure reveals that two types of STE are involved and respond differently to external pressure. We subsequently survey published STE emissions and discovered that most of them show a spectral blue-shift under pressure, as predicted by the theory. The identification of an appropriate theoretical model and its application to STE emission through the coordinate configuration diagram paves the way for engineering the STE emission and basic understanding of electron-phonon interaction. Broadband light emission from self-trapped exciton (STE) in metal halide perovskites has attracted enormous attention because it can not only be used for applications such as single-component white light sources, but also provides a unique venue for studying strong electron-phonon interactions Although providing insightful results, the FPC lacks the functionality of some of the parametric models that convey more transparently the pressure action on STEs. So far, there is no theoretical model that has been used to predict whether the STE spectrum in perovskites will shift to higher or lower energy under pressure. The lack of functional models prevents us from gaining insights into electron-phonon interactions and hinder potential applications of STE emission. In this work, we first identify a theoretical model based on the standard coordinate configuration diagram that correctly describes the effect of pressure on the STE absorption line. We then present our original observations of extremely broad STE light emission in the indirect wide-bandgap CsPb2Br5 crystals and the ultra-wide spectral tuning of this emission under moderate pressure. After identifying the free exciton (FE) emission of CsPb2Br5 in the low temperature photoluminescence (PL) spectra and having confirmed it by first-principles calculations, we establish a proper configuration coordinate diagram that provides a notable agreement between the theory and our experiment: a linear increase in STE energy with pressure and a nearly pressureindependent STE emission linewidth. Based on the model and experimental results at higher pressure, we show that at least two groups of STEs coupled to multiple phonons are involved in the STE PL emission. At the end, we review recent publications on pressure evolution of STE emission and find that nearly all of them exhibit a spectral blue-shift, in agreement with the model presented in this paper. The theory of STE has been well elaborated HR factors are a measure for the strength of electron-phonon coupling with phonons ω g and ω e in the ground and excited states. Generally, the phonon mode frequencies in the ground and excited states are not equal but in some cases they can be very close. The HR factor in the ground state also determines the PL linewidth of STE through Γ STE = 2.36 √ S g ħω g at low temperatures The energy of STE PL band center in Fig. corresponding optical absorption were studied in detail in Refs. where k g(e) = mω g(e) 2 (p) are the force constants of participating phonons in the ground g and excited e states at pressure p, mmasses of vibrating atoms, and ∆(0) is the Q-distance between the minima of g and e potential wells at p = 0, denoted as Δ in Fig. and the STE PL linewidth also depends on p: The second term in Eq. 1 represents one of the effects of increasing ω g (p) with pressure, namely the curvature of the ground state potential energy well versus Q increases and this alone results in decreasing E STE (p). We especially note this effect because it is easily predictable but can produce only red shifted E STE (p) with increasing pressure. The blue-shifted STE PL comes from the last two terms in Eq. 1 when they prevail over the second one. In the simplest case, k e ≅ k g (ω g ≅ ω e ) and a weak dependence of the phonon frequency on pressure ω g (p) ≅ ω g (0) , shown in Fig. Large size CsPb2Br5 microplates were synthesized simply by dropping CsPbBr3 micro-powder in large quantities of deionized water in a flask UV LED. Fig. At the same time, the PL peak experiences a large blueshift. After that, the intensity starts to decrease, while the broad light emission band continues to shift to shorter wavelength, and eventually disappears at above 5 GPa. The large PL bandwidth accompanied with the blue shifted band center makes it possible for the broad light emission to cover a wide spectral range from nearinfrared to blue. This also can be seen in the direct optical images in Fig. GPa to 5 GPa is observed (Fig. Before comparing the theory with our experiments, we want to further prove that the 423 nm low temperature emission is due to FE radiative recombination as this is an essential parameter in the STE theory in Fig. positions and FWHM of CsPb2Br5 versus pressure. To obtain a better view of the PL line shape evolution with pressure, we present in Fig. The pressure range of 0-2 GPa is particularly interesting because the energy bandgap changes are negligibly small and the same can be expected for the free exciton energy E FE In the transitional pressure range 2 GPa to 3 GPa, the PL bandwidth starts to increase while the PL band is still blue shifted. We relate this behavior to the inhomogeneous broadening as the PL energies of the two STEs start to change at different pace with pressure. Notably, a collapse of the c-axis of CsPb2Br5 crystals under pressure was observed around 2 GPa Above the apparent split at ~3 GPa, the energy of one of the PL bands, empty circles in Fig. 