Domain walls are ubiquitous in materials that undergo phase transitions driven by spontaneous symmetry breaking. Domain walls in ferroics and multiferroics have received tremendous attention recently due to their emergent properties distinct from their domain counterparts, for example, their high mobility and controllability, as well as their potential applications in nanoelectronics. However, it is extremely challenging to detect, visualize and study the ferro-rotational (FR) domain walls because the FR order, in contrast to ferromagnetism (FM) and ferroelectricity (FE), is invariant under both the spatial-inversion and the time-reversal operations and thus hardly couple with conventional experimental probes. Here, an FR candidate NiTiO3 is investigated by ultrasensitive electric quadrupole (EQ) second harmonic generation rotational anisotropy (SHG RA) to probe the point symmetries of the two degenerate FR domain states, showing their relation by the vertical mirror operations that are broken below the FR critical temperature. We then visualize the real-space FR domains by scanning EQ SHG microscopy, and further resolve the FR domain walls by revealing a suppressed SHG intensity at domain walls. By taking local EQ SHG RA measurements, we show the restoration of the mirror symmetry at FR domain walls and prove their unconventional nonpolar nature. Our findings not only provide a comprehensive insight into FR domain walls, but also demonstrate a unique and powerful tool for future studies on domain walls of unconventional ferroics, both of which pave the way towards future manipulations and applications of FR domain walls. Domain walls are low-dimensional features that lie between neighboring domains related by broken symmetries through second order phase transitions in solids. In particular, domain walls in ferroics and multiferroics have attracted tremendous attention and have been intensively studied because of two perspectives. First, domain walls possess distinct symmetries from their domain counterparts and exhibit unique properties that are often absent inside the domains. For example, enhanced electrical conductivity Ferro-rotational (FR) order, a ferroic order made of a toroidal arrangement of electric dipoles, distinguishes itself from other ferroic orders by its invariance under both the spatial-inversion and the time-reversal operations. Because of this unique symmetry property and its axial vector order parameter, there are no readily available conjugate vector fields that can couple to the FR order, making it an extremely challenging task to detect and distinguish the degenerate FR domains, as well as to control the domain walls between them. This FR order has been experimentally probed very recently Electric quadrupole (EQ) SHG, in contrast to ED SHG that only survives when spatial inversion in broken, is present in all systems while exhibiting much weaker intensities than ED SHG. EQ SHG can be described by E i (2ω) ∝ P i eff (2ω) = χ ijkl EQ E j k k E l , where χ ijkl EQ is the EQ SHG susceptibility tensor; E j , E l and E i are electric fields of the incident and SHG light; and k k is the light wavevector. Comparing to linear optics, EQ SHG provides multiple copies of participating vector fields, E i (2ω), E j,l (ω), and k k that can combine to construct tensor fields, allowing a direct coupling with high-rank multipolar orders (e.g., the FR order). Furthermore, the rank-4 EQ SHG susceptibility tensor χ ijkl EQ contains more tensor elements and is thus more sensitive to point symmetries than the linear optical counterpart. In this study, based on its own merits, we apply EQ SHG to investigate the FR order of NiTiO3 single crystals. By measuring the polarization rotational anisotropy (RA) of EQ SHG, we probe the point symmetries of the two degenerate FR domain states and reveal that those two states are related by vertical mirror operations. By performing scanning EQ SHG microscopy at the polarization angle with a maximum SHG intensity contrast between the two domain states, we manage to visualize the real-space FR domain structure in detail and quantify its physical properties. More importantly, by aligning the polarization angle at the vertical mirror direction where the two domain states have an equal SHG intensity, the FR domain walls are clearly visualized in the scanning microscopy as one-dimensional lines with a suppressed SHG intensity. We further confirm the presence of the mirror symmetry and the unconventional nonpolar nature at the domain walls with local EQ SHG RA measurements. We investigate the FR domains and domain walls on single crystal NiTiO3. Above the FR phase transition temperature T c = 1560 K, NiTiO3 crystalizes in a corundom structure with the space group R3 ̅ c (point group 3 ̅ m) where the oxygen atoms form a distorted hexagonal close packing and two-thirds of the oxygen octahedra cages are randomly occupied by Ni 2+ and Ti 4+ (Fig. The structure possesses a C 3 rotational symmetry along the c-axis as well as three mirror planes parallel to the c-axis (Fig. Experimentally, we first perform the EQ SHG RA measurements [see Methods] on a normal-cut sample (Fig. Remarkably, this 34° rotation angle difference between the EQ SHG RA patterns is much more significant than that of the tiny rotational distortions of the crystal structures between the two domains. This rotation of the SHG RA pattern depends on the relative amplitudes between the susceptibility tensor elements of the paraphase and those of the FR phase which are wavelengthdependent Besides the FR domains, thanks to the high resolution of the domain map, we can clearly visualize the boundaries between the two FR domains, i.e., the domain walls. From the domain map, we observe that the domain walls twist and turn along the way. Figure Remarkably, scanning EQ SHG and local EQ SHG RA measurements can be applied to selectively image the domain walls and probe their symmetries. As shown in Fig. in contrast to that observed on NiTiO3 that results from the restoration of mirror symmetry on the domain walls. The uniform drop of the signal along the domain wall negates its polar nature since polar domain walls break the spatial-inversion symmetry and therefore are expected to show stronger SHG from the leading order ED contribution. For example, the 2 nm thick polar ferroelectric domain wall in CaTiO3 can give rise to much more significant SHG signals than the nonpolar ferroelastic domains and are prominent in the scanning SHG mapping Having established the presence of the mirror symmetry at domain walls, we here propose that the domain walls retain the crystal structure of the paraphase where Ni 2+ and Ti 4+ are distributed randomly and preserves the mirror symmetries, in contrast to the FR domains where the ordering of Ni 2+ and Ti 4+ takes place below Tc. To confirm this, Fig. The weight of the contributions from domain A, B and walls are displayed at the bottom right corner of each polar plot. Note that across the boundary from domain A to B, the contribution from domain A gradually decreases while that from domain B increases, whereas along the domain wall, the contributions from domain A and B are consistently almost equal. To summarize the structure change of the FR phase transition, as the temperature goes down, ordering of Ni 2+ and Ti 4+ takes place in a layer-by-layer fashion and form two degenerate FR domain states. At the intersection between the two domains, there is a region (the domain walls) where the crystal structure does not change and connect the two FR domains (Fig. In summary, we investigate the FR domains and domain walls in NiTiO3 crystals by ultrasensitive EQ SHG techniques. The EQ SHG RA patterns from distinct FR domains rotate in the opposite directions from each other and are related by the vertical mirror operations that are present in the crystal, demonstrating the capability of EQ SHG RA to distinguish the degenerate FR domains. High-resolution FR domain maps are realized by scanning EQ SHG microscopy, showing almostequal populations between the two degenerate domains with the domain lateral size mostly lying in the 20-30 μm range, much larger than the typical size of FE domains, close to that of the FM domains and smaller than that of the FT domains. More importantly, these EQ SHG techniques enable us to resolve the domain walls and probe their symmetries, despite the presence of spatialinversion symmetry. We observe the meandering feature of the FR domain walls and confirm the presence of mirrors at the domain walls, as well as their nonpolar nature. The high-resolution FR domain and domain wall maps enabled by the EQ SHG techniques pave the way for the future study on the interactions between FR domain walls as well as the manipulation of FR domain walls by external stimuli. Moreover, it also provides a unique tool to study the interactions between the FR order and other orders coexisting in a system. It has been suggested that in many type-II multiferroics, the FR order is a prerequisite for subsequent noncentrosymmetric magnetic orders, which are the necessary ingredient for type-II multiferroicity Sample fabrication: The single crystal of NiTiO3 was grown by using a two-mirror type infrared image furnace in air after synthesizing polycrystalline feed rod by mixing NiO (99.999%) and TiO2 (99.999%) in a stoichiometric ratio EQ SHG measurements: The 800 nm ultrafast laser source is of 50 fs pulse duration and 200 kHz repetition rate. It is focused down to a 15 μm diameter spot on the sample at a power of 3.7 mW, corresponding to a fluence of 10.5 mJ/cm 2 . The laser light is shined normal to the sample surface and are moved across the sample surface to construct EQ SHG maps at various locations across the NiTiO3 single crystal. For EQ SHG RA measurements, the same power and beam size are used. The polarizations of the incident and reflected light can be selected to be either parallel or perpendicular to each other, whose azimuthal angle φ can change correspondingly. The SHG signal is collected by a photomultiplier-tube, and then amplified by an electronic current preamplifier and a lock-in amplifier in sequence. Multiple vertical and horizontal line-cuts have been extracted from the EQ SHG scanning maps shown in Fig. For the radius of curvature analysis, the domain walls are first picked out manually and then smoothened by the Polynomial Approximation with Exponential Kernel (PAEK) method based on a smoothing tolerance of 0.001 pixel size using ArcGIS software The radius of curvature is then calculated at each point [see Supplementary Materials For the SHG signal analysis along the domain wall, the domain walls are first picked out manually by ArcGIS software. The distances from each pixel to the domain wall are then calculated by ArcGIS and the average SHG signals are calculated along each contour that has a fixed distance to the domain walls. where α and β are the cutting azimuth angle and the cutting polar angle, respectively. The susceptibility tensors for domain A and B that lead to the functional forms under the 3 ̅ point group are related by the mirror operation along the yz-plane. During the fitting process, SHG RA patterns from both domain A and domain B in both the parallel and the cross channels are fitted together and yield robust fitting results. We confirm the bulk electric quadrupole (EQ) as the origin of the SHG signal and rule out the possibility of surface electric dipole (ED) contribution by performing oblique incidence SHG RA measurements on the normal-cut NiTiO3 sample. The simulated SHG RA signal as a function of the incident polarization angle φ in the S-P channel is given by for the surface ED (point group 3), and for the bulk EQ (point group 3 ̅ ), where χ ijk and χ ijkl are the susceptibility tensors for the ED and EQ SHG process; θ and φ are the incident polar angle and the polarization angle of the incident light. Figure Comparing to the normal-cut sample, the tilt-cut sample increases the anisotropy of the SHG RA patterns, making it possible to nicely see the contrast between two FR domains over a wide polarization angle range. Specifically, the SHG RA patterns from the tilt-cut sample only have two-fold rotational symmetry (Figure The determination of the FR domain mapping color scale shown in Fig. We then choose the cross-points between the two curves to be the signal level of the domain wall (dash line in Fig. We have carefully considered the possibility of destructive-interference-induced SHG intensity suppression at domain boundaries. In this section, we work along the following 3 steps to rule it out. In literature, the wide field SHG imaging technique has been used to visualize domain walls as dark lines (i.e., suppressed SHG intensity as compared to domains) In our experiment, we used scanning SHG microscopy technique where the focused laser beam raster-scan across the sample and the reflected SHG signal is sent to a PMT detector. For our system and experimental setups, they are different from the literature for both conditions: a) our domain states are related by a mirror operation, i.e., χ domain I = m[χ domain II ], that does not lead to the opposite sign of the whole tensor, and hence the full destructive interference, as the literature does; b) we deliberately put the PMT detector significantly off-focus from the lens in front of it so as to ruin the imaging condition between the sample and the detector as well as prevent the light across the domain walls from arriving at the same physical spot on the detector. Due to the difference in both a) and b) conditions, it is unlikely that our slightly suppressed intensity at the domain walls originates from the destructive interference as the literature does. We choose Ni3TeO6 as our test candidate which has two domain states with opposite SHG susceptibility tensors, fulfilling condition a) in literature. We have performed the wide field SHG imaging in the very same way as described in literature, fulfilling condition b), and also our scanning SHG microscopy with the off-focus setting between the detector and its collecting lens, violating condition b). We show in Fig. We have further performed SEM measurements to check the domain wall width. Figure Assuming the excitation laser beam has an intensity profile of where A is the laser intensity at the center of the beam and σ is the standard deviation of the Gaussian beam profile, which is related to the full width at half maximum (FWHM = 15 μm) of the laser beam by FWHM ≈ 2.355 σ. The SHG generated will be proportional to the square of the incident power, namely, SHG(x, y) ∝ P(x, y) The total SHG generated inside the beam region without the domain wall will then be P(x, y) = πA 2 σ 2 . Now, assume that there is a domain wall region with a width w at the center of the laser beam. The SHG that corresponds to this region is then which corresponds to the 7.0 ± 1.5% drop of the SHG signal shown in Fig. Solving for w we have w = 0.76 ± 0.20 μm.