This study investigates the prospect of using reduced graphene oxide encapsulated between thin wood membranes as a composite filter for water filtration. Graphene oxide (GO) with a volume range of 0.2 to 0.5 mL was deposited on a 95 mm 2 area of thin sheets of Balsa wood with a thickness range of 2.20 -3.50 mm. The dried GO deposits were laser treated in reduced oxygen environment to prepare a reduced graphene oxide-wood composite (rGO-wood). The rGO substrate of the composite was sandwiched between 2 wood sheets which were glued using polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) to give a stable membrane. Fabricated membranes improved the Allura red rejection from 8.29 ± 0.69 % in the controls (sandwiched wood sheets without rGO) to 93.14 ± 1.31 % in the 1 mL total rGO composites. The ratio of percentage permeance drop of the treatments over the controls ranged from 62.8 ± 4.3 to 85.4 ± 5.2 % from the 0.4 to 1 mL rGO composites respectively. The correlation coefficient (r) between the GO volume and rejection was 0.94 suggesting that the GO treatments provided some control over the transport of molecules through the membrane. The correlation coefficient between wood thickness, and Allura red rejection shows that the wood sheets did not influence the rejection. The permeance was weakly affected by the membrane thickness (r = -0.46). An 93% improvement in rejection performance of the composite membranes over the controls was observed. The overall data suggests that the wood-rGO composite has potential for water filtration applications. The need to reduce human exposure to many chemicals of emerging concern in water has been a driving force for research into inexpensive, effective, energy efficient and environmentally friendly water treatment systems. Many of these studies involve evaluating the filtration efficiency and stability of filters with nanopores and nanochannels(1, 2) or materials with large surface area and chemically active sites(3, 4). For instance, Burgmayer and Murray(5) studied the transport and rejection properties of an electrically controlled gold grid channel coated with a conducting polymer over three decades ago. Water transport and filtration through carbon nanotubes, nano-sized pores fabricated in monolayer graphene, as well as with multilayer graphene oxide (GO) sheets have been studied(6-8). Ions with hydration shells greater than 13Å was rejected by 2 D slits devices fabricated from graphite The regular interlayer spacing and the charges on GO sheets are two properties that make GO membranes highly appealing towards water purification applications Graphene oxide/polyacrylamide composite membranes with proper interlayer spacing and improved performance over pristine GO was prepared by Cheng et al. While these physical confinement strategies improved the stability of GO for filtration applications, the issue of environmental and health concerns of the membranes arise since the polymeric materials used for these confinements may leach into the water being purified and some of them are not readily biodegradable after the membranes serve their useful lives. In this study we explored the potential of immobilizing a multilayer of reduced GO between thin wood sheets to form a biodegradable composite. It is hypothesized that the reduction of the GO and its confinement between the thin wood sheets will provide reproducible stability for the GO membrane. We have confirmed that the porous structure of wood sheets supports good water flux for the fabricated composite membrane Balsa wood block purchased from Midwest Products (Hobart, Indiana) was used for this experiment. Thin sheets were chipped off from the transverse sections of the wood block. The sheets were planed and thinned further by rubbing with a sandpaper grit to achieve a thickness range of 2.20 to 3.57 mm. Roughly square sheets of 1.5 x 1.5 cm were cut out of the smoothened sheets. The obtained sheets were repeatedly rinsed in deionized water until a largely clear water filtrate was observed. Thereafter they were placed in deionized water and sonicated for 30 minutes to aid the removal of dust particles clogged in the pores. The sheets were thereafter dried at 40°C overnight. Prior to deposition of GO on the surface of the chips, an 11 mm circle was marked on the wood chip surface using laser. Thereafter, all areas outside the circle was covered with polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) and allowed to dry, creating a hydrophobic surface outside the circle. Graphene oxide was then pipetted into the circular interior and allowed to dry at 40 °C overnight in an oven. Graphene volumes of 200 to 500 μL on individual wood sheets were investigated in this study. The wood sheets containing dried graphene oxide were laser treated under reduced oxygen conditions. Briefly, the dried wood-GO membrane was attached to the inner surface of a glass petri dish with the GO surface in contact with the dish. The petri dish was then placed on a vacuum stand, and the pressure in the dish was evacuated to 2.2 Torr. Under this condition, a laser beam with a wavelength of 405 nm set to a 35% power of 317 milliwatts power rating was used to scribe the GO surface for about 30 seconds. A Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR; Thermo Fisher Jessup, MD, USA) was used to investigate the reduction of oxygenated functional groups. A raman spectroscope (Thermo Fisher, Jessup, MD, USA) with a 532 nm laser and power of 1 mW was used to evaluate the quality of rGO produced from GO. The surface morphology of the membranes as well as the thickness of the GO layers were studied using a scanning electron microscope (SEM; NanoScience, Phoenix, AZ, USA) Two pieces of the wood-rGO membrane (with the same GO volume treatment) were then sandwiched and glued together by applying PDMS over the non-GO areas. Pressure was applied over the sandwiched sheets overnight at room temperature to give a stable membrane with fully immobilized rGO between the wood sheets. Fabricated composite membranes were placed in deionized water and allowed to sit for an hour to wet their pores after which the thicknesses of the wet membranes were measured. The rejection of Allura red molecules in solution through the membranes was then carried out using Side-Bi-Side PermeGear diffusion cells (Hellertown, PA, USA). The cells have a 6 mm orifice which allows water flux through the membrane. A pressure difference of 0.5 bar was used to drive the feed solution of Allura red dye (10Å molecular diameter) through the membrane. The absorbance of the feed and the permeate solutions were determined using a UV-Visible spectrophotometer (Brea, CA, USA). The volume of permeate solution was also measured over time to determine the hydraulic flux of the membranes. Figure The obtained SEM images from the wood sheets show most of the pore diameters within the 40 μm range as seen in Figure The functional groups on the GO were evaluated before and after laser scribing. The graphene oxide (GO) film on the wood membrane prior to scribing (Fig. After laser treatment, observable changes occurred with respect to the oxygenated functional groups in the GO. The reduced GO (rGO) showed a disappearance in the O-H stretch present in the GO as seen in Fig. The raman spectra shows the characteristic D, G and 2D bands for graphene oxide (Fig. The 2D peak has been shown to be very sensitive to the pi band in the electronic structure of graphene and is used to evaluate the stacking of graphene multilayers It was observed that the GO deposit prior to laser treatment dissolved readily in water even after significant drying on the wood sheet. This phenomenon is believed to arise from the electrostatic repulsion of the negative charges generated on the stacks after hydration The SEM images of the GO membranes before and after treatment are shown in Fig. A high permeance is desired in filtration membranes as it reflects reduced pressure drop, improved water flux, thus requiring lesser energy for filtration. The permeance of the composite membranes were computed from the permeate flowrates through the membranes using equation (1): volume flow rate across membrane (L h -1 ) Membrane area (m 2 ) . Pressure difference (bar) The hydrodynamic conductivity (k) [see equation 2] was also calculated for the control membranes to compare with values reported by Boutilier and others where Q represents the rate of water flow in m 3 /s through the membrane of thickness L (m) and cross-sectional area of A (m 2 ) across a pressure drop of ∆P pascal. The Hydraulic conductivity for the control membranes ranged from 1.19 x 10 -7 -4.61 x 10 -7 m 2 s -1 Pa -1 . This range was higher than the approximate 5 -6 x 10 -10 m 2 s -1 Pa -1 reported by Boutilier and others For further comparison of the water flux of composite membrane with other graphene oxide-based membranes, the permeance is discussed (Fig. The impact of the reduction and immobilization of the GO on the reduction in the amount of hydration and swelling is seen in the permeance range of 399.04 L m -2 bar -1 h -1 obtained by Cheng and others Evaluation of the impact of the thickness of the wood sheet on the rate of water transport was determined by assessing the correlation between the wood membrane thickness and the water flux of the membranes. As observed from Figure This suggests that by reducing the thickness of the wood sheets used for encapsulating the rGO, minimal improvements in the permeance may be obtained. The results also suggests that the rGO layers influenced the pearmeance drop in the composites more than the wood sheets as a correlation coefficient of -0.67 was obtained between the GO volume and permeance. Abraham et al The rejection of the approximately 7 x 10 -6 M solution of Allura red was used to evaluate the selectivity of the membranes via vacuum filtration. The obtained results are captured as Fig. The rejection error percent of replicates for each GO treatment is under 1.5% except for the 400 μL treatments that is 4.1%. These low error bars suggest the reproducibility of the membrane fabrication method used. The effect of the thickness of the wood sheets on the rejection performance of the composite membranes was assessed and no correlation was observed over the combined thickness variation of 0.48 mm of all membranes used in the study. This suggests that the thickness of the wood sheets did not play a significant role on the rejection performance of the composite membranes. It may also be inferred that reducing the wood sheet thickness to improve the permeance may not affect the rejection efficiency to an extent. The overall performance of the fabricated membranes in relation to the controls was determined by evaluating the ratio of the percent improvements of the Allura red rejection to the drop in hydraulic conductivity (absolute value). This value suggests that the fabricated composite membranes showed an approximately 13-fold better performance over the membranes without rGO ( In this study the potential of encapsulated reduced graphene oxide stacks between wood sheets to give stable, reproducible and composite membranes was explored. It was hypothesized that the xylem pores of the wood sheets would serve as transport channels for water molecules travelling through the graphene layers. Obtained data suggests that the reduced-graphene oxide layers exerted consistent filtration/adsorption of Allura red molecules. Rejection as high as 93% was observed in the composite membranes. While there was a decrease in permeance with GO treatments, obtained values were in the range of data from other studies. The data from the study suggests that encapsulated reduced-graphene oxide between wood sheets produces stable membranes with potential for water filtration via sieving and/or adsorption of contaminant molecules. Further studies are ongoing to understand the mechanism of filtration and the relationship between graphene volume treatment and molecular size cut-off. to the matter under discussion, limited experimental and spectral data, and crystallographic data. 1 