The interface between magnetic material and superconductors has long been predicted to host unconventional superconductivity, such as spin-triplet pairing and topological nontrivial pairing state, particularly when spin-orbital coupling (SOC) is incorporated. To identify these novel pairing states, fabricating homogenous heterostructures which contain such various properties are preferred, but often challenging. Here we synthesized a tri-layer type van-der Waals heterostructure of MnTe/Bi2Te3/Fe(Te, Se), which combined s-wave superconductivity, thickness dependent magnetism and strong SOC. Via low-temperature scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), we observed robust zero-energy states with notably nontrivial properties and an enhanced superconducting gap size on single unit-cell (UC) MnTe surface. In contrast, no zeroenergy state was observed on 2UC MnTe. First-principle calculations further suggest the 1UC MnTe has large interfacial Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction (DMI) and a frustrated AFM state, which could promote non-collinear spin textures. It thus provides a promising platform for exploring topological nontrivial superconductivity. When materials with different quantum orders meet at the interface, new physical phenomena may emerge and bring potential applications. A well-known example is the ferromagnet -(s-wave) superconductor interface. Intensive studies have shown that while the spin-singlet pairing potential decays fast in ferromagnet, an odd-frequency spin-triplet pairing state can be induced To experimentally identify these unconventional pairing states, fabrication of high quality magnet-superconductor heterostructures with proper interface is highly desired, since unconventional pairing is often sensitive to disorder or inhomogeneity, and local probe study such as STM favors atomically flat surface/interface. Several recent STM studies In this work, we successfully synthesized a tri-layer type heterostructure of MnTe/Bi2Te3/Fe(Te, Se) which possesses atomically sharp interface. It combines the magnetism of MnTe, strong SOC from Bi2Te3 and superconductivity from Fe(Te, Se). Via lowtemperature STM, we observed zero-energy conductance peaks (ZECP) on many regions of one unit cell (UC) thick MnTe surface, and an enlarged superconducting gap with comparing to that of Fe(Te, Se). The ZECPs show several distinguished properties: they are not correlated to the observed surface defects, robust under out-of-plane field and display saturated conductance at low tunneling barriers. Meanwhile, no in-gap state was observed on 2 UC MnTe surface. Our first-principle calculations suggest that 1UC MnTe with the Bi2Te3 host large interfacial DMI and a frustrated AFM state, which can promote non-collinear spin textures. Thus the emergence of ZECPs and their nontrivial features may originate from topological pairing state. MnTe is a layered antiferromagnetic (AFM) insulator with a NiAs-type hexagonal structure Having identified the interface structure, the electronic states are studied by tunneling spectroscopy. Fig. To further investigate the spatial distributions of superconducting states, Figs. To explore the origin of ZECP and the in-gap states, we further measured their response to external magnetic field, elevated temperature and lowered tunneling barrier. Fig. We also measured the superconducting state in 2UC MnTe/Bi2Te3. Fig. The quite different superconducting states in 1UC and 2UC MnTe imply that magnetism may play an important role. Since the bulk MnTe displays inter-layer AFM and intra-layer FM state The calculated AFM1 state in 1UC MnTe/Bi2Te3 is different from single UC MnTe in the bulk form. This is checked to be due to interfacial effect (e.g. lattice strain), as our calculation can correctly predict the in-plane AFM state of bulk MnTe (see SM). However, the above LSDA+U calculations only involve Heisenberg interactions, while for magnetic systems without inversion symmetry (such as heterostructures), SOC should give rise to DM interactions which favor twisted spin configuration. Based on a first-principles linear-response (FPLR) approach, we further calculated the DM interaction together with Heisenberg parameters of 1UC MnTe/Bi2Te3 (Section S11). The Heisenberg coupling (J) estimated by FPLR well agrees with that calculated by LSDA+U (≈ 20.0 meV). Meanwhile, the strength of nearest-neighbor DM interaction |DD| is estimated to be 4.2 meV (specific values of the D vector are shown in Table The robust ZECPs with non-trivial properties and enhanced superconducting gap in 1UC MnTe/Bi2Te3/Fe(Te, Se) are rather unconventional phenomena. Below we will discuss their origin. Firstly, the observed ZECPs are located inside of the MnTe terrace, not at the edge. This excludes their origin of chiral edge mode which was predicted for FM/TI/SC heterostructures Then the above calculations of magnetism can provide an alternative explanation. It was shown that DM interaction and frustrated AFM state can both promote (in-plane) non-collinear spin texture such as skyrmions Besides, the enhanced superconducting gap in 1UC MnTe is another remarkable founding. To our knowledge, this is a very rare case that a proximity induced gap in magnetic material can be notably larger than the host superconductor. Most tunneling measurements on magnet/superconductor heterostructures have reported a reduced gap At last, we shall point out another possibility for observing in-gap states at B= 0T: the "spontaneous" vortex state which was suggested for certain ferromagnet/superconductor interface In summary, we have successfully fabricated a tri-layer type magnet-superconductor heterostructure of MnTe/Bi2Te3/Fe(Te, Se) which has atomically sharp interface, and in which strong SOC is intentionally introduced. The observation of robust zero-energy modes and enhanced superconducting gap in 1UC MnTe region strongly suggest an unconventional pairing state. Via first-principle calculations, we show that 1UC MnTe/Bi2Te3 has large DMI due to its inversion asymmetric structure and strong SOC, which can generate non-collinear spin textures and give rise to ZECP. The enhanced gap could also be related to the frustrated magnetism and electron correlations in 1UC MnTe. Therefore, this heterostructure provides a promising platform for further exploring unconventional and topological nontrivial superconductivity. Growth of the heterostructure: The sample growth was conducted in a low-temperature STM system (UNISOKU 1300) equipped with a MBE chamber. The FeTexSe1-x (x ≈ 0.55) single crystal with TC = 14.5K was cleaved in UHV chamber at 78K. 1 UC Bi2Te3 was firstly grown on cleaved surface by co-depositing Bi (99.997%) and Te (99.999%) with a flux ratio of ≈ 1:10. Then 1~2 UC MnTe was grown by co-depositing Mn (99.95%) and Te (99.999%) with a flux ratio of ≈ 1:10. The substrate was kept at 200°C during the growth and was post-annealed at the same temperature for 10 min to further improve the quality. The sample was transferred in-situ from the MBE chamber to STM chamber after growth. STM measurement: STM experiments were conducted at T= 0.4K or 4.2 K. PrIr tip was used after treatment on Au(111) surface. The dI/dV spectra were collected by a standard lock-in technique with a modulation frequency of 741 Hz and amplitude (ΔV) of 0.5 mV at 4.2 K and 0.1 mV at 0.4 K. The energy resolution and the zero point of sample bias were calibrated before measurement (Fig. To quantitatively analyze the correlation between the surface defects and emergence of ZECP over large scale, we calculated the cross-correlation functions between the topographic image of 1UC MnTe and corresponding, as shown in Fig. The mappings on 1UC MnTe surface at different magnetic fields are shown in Figs. In Fig. We occasionally observed some ring-like structure in zero-bias mapping of 1UC MnTe region, as that shown in Fig. Before studying the magnetism of heterostructures, we first check our calculation to predict the magnetism of bulk MnTe. Here four magnetic configurations as shown in Fig. To explore the magnetism in the heterostructure, we performed the first-principles calculations for 1UC and 2UC MnTe/Bi2Te3. First of all, considering that the atoms on the plane perpendicular to c axis form the hexagonal lattice for both bulk MnTe and Bi2Te3, there is a chance to form stable interface by means of these two materials. Furthermore, the hexagonal lattice constants of them are similar, where the constant of MnTe is aM=4.193Å and that of Bi2Te3 is aB=4.369Å. The corresponding mismatch rate is 2|aM-aB|/(aM+aB)×100%=4.11%. The mismatch rate smaller than 5% means that stacking the hexagonal unit cells of MnTe and Bi2Te3 alone c axis to form the heterostructure is reasonable. The lattice constant of heterostructure before the structure optimization is set to the average of aM and aB. Then, due to the different end faces of these two materials, we consider six possible scenarios for 1UC and 2UC heterostructures, respectively (Fig. Then the magnetism of optimized M2B2 structures is studied. We first consider different magnetic configurations of Mn atoms in the cases of 1UC and 2UC (Fig. For the magnetic moment of Mn, its magnitude increases when U becomes larger. In addition, in the case of 2UC, the magnetic moments of Mn atoms belong to different planes are different. To be specific, the Mn close to Bi2Te3 layer has a larger magnetic moment. By mapping these total energies for different magnetic configurations obtained with LSDA+U calculations in Tables , where JJ iiii stands for the spin exchange parameter, while ee ii and ee ii represent the unit vectors in the direction of local magnetic moments on the site i and j. For 1UC heterostructure, we only consider the nearest-neighbor interactions in ab-plane (labeled as J1), while for 2UC heterostructure, we consider the in-plane and interplanar nearest-neighbor interactions, which are labeled as J1 and J2, respectively. The calculated exchange couplings from the energy mapping analysis are summarized in Table The anisotropy of relatively stable magnetic configurations for 1UC and 2UC (AFM1 and AFM2) is further studied. Here four directions of moments as shown in Fig. Due to the lack of inversion symmetry in these magnetic systems, spin-orbit coupling can give rise to the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya (DM) interactions (ref. The nearest-neighbor calculated exchange couplings from FPLR approach are summarized in Table The first-principles calculations are based on the density functional theory (DFT) implemented by Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) (Kresse, Comput. Mater. Sci. a The two columns of data represent the magnetic moments of Mn atoms belong to different planes perpendicular to c, and the second one more closer to the Bi2Te3 layer. This convention is the same for AFM2 and AFM3. 