The doped perovskite BaBiO3 exhibits a maximum superconducting transition temperature (Tc) of 34 K and was the first high-Tc oxide to be discovered, yet pivotal questions regarding the nature of both the metallic and superconducting states remain unresolved. Although it is generally thought that superconductivity in the bismuthates is of the conventional s-wave type, the pairing mechanism is still debated, with strong electron-phonon coupling and bismuth valence or bond disproportionation possibly playing a role. Here we use diffuse xray scattering and Monte Carlo modeling to study the local structure of Ba1-xKxBiO3 across its insulator-metal boundary. We find no evidence for either long-or short-range disproportionation, which resolves a major conundrum, as disproportionation and the related polaronic effects are likely not relevant for the metallic and superconducting states. Instead, we uncover nanoscale structural correlations that break inversion symmetry, which has far-reaching implications for the electronic physics, including the pairing mechanism. This unexpected finding furthermore establishes that the bismuthates belong to the broader classes of materials with hidden spin-orbit coupling and a tendency towards inversionbreaking displacements. Similar to other perovskite and perovskite-derived superconducting oxides, such as strontium titanate, strontium ruthenate and the high-Tc cuprates, the basic structural unit in the (nearly) cubic bismuthates is a metal-oxygen octahedron (Fig. Here we use diffuse x-ray scattering and Monte Carlo modeling to study short-range structural correlations in Ba1-xKxBiO3 (BKBO). We find that static and low-energy breathing distortions are absent in samples with a sufficiently high potassium (and, hence, hole) concentration, on either side of the insulator-metal boundary. This places strong constraints on any local CDW scenario and the associated polaronic effects. However, we uncover correlations of a different nature that involve anticorrelated bismuth and oxygen shifts and break inversion symmetry (Fig. Figure Importantly, no diffuse signal is present around (1⁄2 1⁄2 1⁄2) and equivalent positions in any of the studied samples (Extended Data Fig. We therefore cannot rule out the presence of breathing distortions at higher energies, and breathing phonon modes are certainly present (between 70 and 80 meV We can achieve a more refined understanding of the local structure by generating a threedimensional vector pair distribution function (3D-ΔPDF) using established punch-and-fill methods to eliminate contributions from the average structure (see Methods). The 3D-ΔPDF therefore only shows short-range pair correlations that deviate from the average structure and enables model-free insight into the real-space local structure Two important conclusions can be drawn from the 3D-ΔPDF. First, features that would correspond to breathing distortions of the Bi-O bonds are absent, as already seen from the reciprocal space data (Extended Data Fig. We obtain further microscopic insight through classical Monte Carlo modeling of the local structure, and first explore a toy model of (static) short-range CDW correlations using an effective Ising-type Hamiltonian based on Bi valence disproportionation. The bismuth valences +3 and +5 play the role of Ising spins, and K substitution disrupts the CDW, since it locally favors the +5 state. Free parameters of the model (see Methods) can be adjusted so that long-range CDW order disappears at low K concentrations, as expected, but short-range correlations survive up to higher K concentrations. We also introduce the accompanying breathing distortion by using a valencedependent interaction and relaxing the Bi-O distances using Monte Carlo importance sampling. This invariably generates superstructure peaks at (1⁄2 1⁄2 1⁄2) and equivalent reciprocal space positions even for weak short-range correlations (Extended Data Fig. In order to capture the observed diffuse scattering features, we then construct a minimal model that only includes Bi and Ba/K displacements, under the assumption that all Bi atoms are equivalent. Furthermore, it is assumed that local lattice distortions are caused by incomplete screening of the local ionic charges, which leads to electrostatic repulsion that is stronger for Bi-Ba pairs than for Bi-K pairs. This is achieved with a screened Coulomb (i.e., Yukawa) potential to describe ionic interactions (see Methods). In the relaxed structure, Ba and Bi then prefer to be further apart than K and Bi (Fig. We further investigate the role of oxygen by extending the minimal model to include oxygen displacements perpendicular to the Bi-Bi direction. Using the bond valence sum method to estimate the oxidation states of Bi, Ba and K (see Methods), we find Bi and K oxidation states in reasonable agreement with their nominal values, whereas Ba is significantly underbonded. At low K concentrations, the system compensates for this through symmetry-lowering structural transitions Our results establish that bismuth valence disproportionation and oxygen breathing-mode polarons are likely not relevant to superconducting BKBO. However, other electron-phonon composite states could be present, particularly states that involve the inversion-breaking Bi-O phonon mode. Ab initio studies suggest that the coupling of electrons to the longitudinal Bi-O mode around 20 meV is in fact stronger than the coupling to high-energy oxygen breathing modes The existence of local correlated inhomogeneity has profound implications for both the metallic and the superconducting states. Similar to other prominent metallic perovskites, such as titanates Samples. Ba1-xKxBiO3 crystals were grown using a low-temperature electrocrystallization method similar to previous work Sharp superconducting transitions from dc magnetization and ac susceptibility (including nonlinear susceptibility Diffuse x-ray scattering. The measurements were performed on beamline 6-ID-D of the Advanced Photon Source, Argonne National Laboratory, USA. The beamline uses a superconducting magnet undulator insertion device and a double-crystal monochromator to produce a monochromatic highenergy x-ray beam. We used a photon energy of 87 keV, slightly below the Bi K-edge at 90.526 keV, which likely suppresses the relative intensities of the diffuse scattering/PDF peaks that involve Bi. A Pilatus 2M CdTe detector with sensor layer optimized for high energies was used to collect frames with 0.1 s exposure time, while samples were continuously rotated at 1° s -1 about a horizontal axis. Three sets of rotations were performed in each measurement, between which (i) the detector was translated by 5 mm in both the horizontal and vertical directions to cover gaps between detector chips, and (ii) the sample rotation axis was offset by ±15° from perpendicular to the beam to allow masking of artefacts caused by scattering in the sensor layer. The overall counting time at each temperature setting was 20 min. See Supplementary Material in The real-space correlation length of the displacement was obtained from a representative linecut (0.5 ≤ x ≤ 6, y = 0, and z = 0) of the 3D-ΔPDF. The absolute values of the signal peaks along the linecut were fit to an exponential function (Extended Data Fig. Temperature and doping dependences of diffuse scattering. The temperature and doping dependence of the asymmetric component of the diffuse signal was obtained as follows. First, a Bragg peak free of any artefacts such as streaking (due to Compton scattering) or powder rings was chosen. For a comparison of relative scattering intensities among different samples, it is essential that the same Bragg peak and Brillouin zone be used, as there exists considerable intensity variation across different zones. Because BKBO is nearly cubic at the measured temperatures, there are 8 equivalent sites for each hkl position in reciprocal space, and the positions (±4 0 ± 6) were chosen. A one-dimensional (1D) intensity profile along [100] was obtained by summing between ± 0.04 r.l.u. along [010] and ± 0.08 r.l.u. along [001]. The result in Fig. where N is the length of the 1D array, x the intensity at index n, and 0 ≤ k ≤ 41 (this is well into the range of k where the contribution of each higher value becomes vanishingly small). This transformation returns both real values, which correspond to the amplitudes of the symmetric parts of the signal, and imaginary values, which correspond to the asymmetric scattering intensities. For each sample at each temperature, the asymmetric intensities were summed and normalized by the maximum value in the 1D dataset to obtain a 'temperature factor'. This normalization functioned quite well for a comparison of datasets for the same sample; however, a second normalization was required to compare results for different samples to account for differences in illuminated sample volumes and background levels. This normalization consisted of finding the Bragg peak intensity at the same temperature for each sample and scaling each sample's temperature factors by the ratio of its Bragg peak intensity to that of the sample with the strongest Bragg peak intensity. Notably, this procedure involved uncertainties that were difficult to quantify, most importantly possible partial saturation (nonlinearity) of the detector at the Bragg peaks for the largest samples, which might affect the comparison in Fig. Monte Carlo modeling. We used classical Monte Carlo (MC) to simulate short-range ordered structures where N is the total number of unit cells, and the brackets denote the ensemble obtained via MC importance sampling. Similarly, short-range order is captured by the chemical correlation coefficient where P ij is the joint probability that bismuth sites i and j are occupied by the same oxidation state +3 (+5), and θ is the overall concentration of +3 (+5) atoms. Negative values of c ij correspond to situations where the two sites tend to be occupied by different oxidation states, which is used to quantify remnant CDW correlations. For the sake of computational efficiency, the model neglects the possibility of partial charge transfer between different BiO6 octahedra and operates only with discrete values of charge perfectly localized on Bi atoms. Though likely unrealistic, this assumption still serves our purpose, since the relevant diffuse features will mostly be determined by the range of CDW correlations and the octahedral breathing amplitude, and not by the exact Bi oxidation states. The charge should thus be viewed as an effective charge variable. The first term in the Hamiltonian (J 1 > 0) models the Coulomb interaction between nearest-neighbor charges localized on Bi atoms and is thus responsible for CDW formation. The second term (J 2 < 0) captures the disruption of the CDW order by the presence of K atoms, which play the role of effectively negatively charged impurities and locally favor the +5 state. A representative statistical ensemble of equilibrium configurations was obtained by simulating many 20 × 20 × 20 supercells with periodic boundary conditions, such that the basic move involves a swap of +3 and +5 atoms in order to preserve the effective charge balance, and by using simulated annealing (4) where K is the effective spring constant and r 0 (s i ) the Bi-O equilibrium distance for two different oxidation states i. The value of the spring constant K ≈ 19 eV/Å 2 can be estimated by fitting the Raman-active 70 meV breathing mode The second part of the analysis involved a minimal model that captures the essential features of the observed diffuse scattering (Fig. where Q i represents the ionic charge of the i-th ion and k S ≈ 0.49 Å -1 where the equilibrium distance between atoms r 0 is determined by the size of the unit cell. The constant b determines the "softness" of the bond and was taken from To complete the picture, we constructed a model of the local structure of oxygen octahedra, whose features are not obvious in reciprocal-space data, but can be inferred from the 3D-ΔPDF. We used the well-known perovskite (ABO3) tolerance factor as an indicator of structural stability, where r O = 1.26 Å where r is the bond length and R0 and b are parameters tabulated in where r is the O-O distance, r eq is their distance in the average structure, and the spring constant k = 10 (in MC temperature units) was chosen to be sufficiently large, thus penalizing, but not precluding non-rigid displacement patterns of the oxygen octahedra. Given the qualitative nature of the model, the exact proportion of rigid tilts as opposed to non-rigid polar distortions is hard to estimate, as it heavily depends on the relative weights of g and U R (r). Still, overall trends in the doping dependence can be discerned either by looking at the distribution of O-O distances (Extended Data Fig. where N is the number of nearest neighbours of a given atom, and r are vectors from this central atom to a pair of opposite neighbours. This parameter is a convenient measure of deviations from centrosymmetry, and it increases with K concentration (Extended Data Fig. 