Hall insulator with a 45 μeV wide non-trivial topological gap induced by the intrinsic spin-orbit coupling. Even though this zero-field spin splitting is weak, it makes graphene an attractive candidate for applications in quantum technologies, given the resulting long spin relaxation time. On the other side, the staggered sub-lattice potential, resulting from the coupling of graphene with its boron nitride substrate, compensates intrinsic spin-orbit coupling and decreases the non-trivial topological gap, which may lead to the phase transition into trivial band insulator state. In this work, we present extensive experimental studies of the zero-field splittings in monolayer and bilayer graphene in a temperature range 2K-12K by means of sub-Terahertz photoconductivity-based electron spin resonance technique. Surprisingly, we observe a decrease of the spin splittings with increasing temperature. We discuss the origin of this phenomenon by considering possible physical mechanisms likely to induce a temperature dependence of the spin-orbit coupling. These include the difference in the expansion coefficients between the graphene and the boron nitride substrate or the metal contacts, the electron-phonon interactions, and the presence of a magnetic order at low temperature. Our experimental observation expands knowledge about the non-trivial topological gap in graphene. The intrinsic spin-orbit (ISO) coupling in graphene comes from carbon atom d orbitals [ 1 ; 2 ] which hybridize with the p z ones. Indeed, the p z orbitals themselves have no net orbital momentum along z, so the spin-orbit interaction is expected to be weak [ 3 ]. The intrinsic spin splitting is therefore proportional to the spin-orbit coupling of the d states. The ISO opens a gap of opposite sign at each Dirac point of magnitude of about ∆ I = 45 μeV [ 4 ; 5 ; 6 ]. Indeed, an electron state at K valley and a hole state at K' valley are connected by sublattice symmetry. The emergence of this gap therefore moves graphene from the family of Dirac semimetals to the one of quantum spin Hall insulators [ 7 ; 8 ]. This topological phase results in the emergence of the edge states connecting electron and hole bands at different Dirac points [ 5 ]. However, this sublattice symmetry in graphene can be broken, for instance, by the coupling of graphene to the boron nitride substrate [ 9 ; 10 ; 11 ], which in its turn induces staggered potentials (∆ at A-sites and -∆ at B-sites) and thus open a bandgap of 2∆. This makes it energetically favourable for the electrons to stay in one of the sub-lattices, resulting in pseudo-spin order [ 12 ]. This staggered sub-lattice potential competes with the ISO potential, as the former leads to a trivial band insulator state, while the latter induces a topological insulator phase. These phenomena of ISO coupling and spin splitting of sub-lattices were addressed both theoretically and experimentally on graphene on hBN In this work, we adapt from [ 18 ] a sub-THz magneto-photoconductivity technique to detect ESRs in monolayer and bilayer graphene embedded or not in hexagonal boron nitride (hBN). We measure several spin resonances and, by extrapolating their energy evolution to zero magnetic field, we observe two ZFS attributed to the sub-lattice and ISO potentials. The photoconductivity signal being greater there, we focused our study on the graphene samples encapsulated in hBN. Interestingly, the ZFS energies are very comparable in monolayer and bilayer graphene. By decreasing the temperature, an increase of the energies of the two ZFS is observed, which is discussed in the context of the thermal strain of the graphene layers, magnetic ordered phase, and the electron-phonon interaction. Graphene-based Terahertz (THz) detectors are fast and sensitive devices, operating on different photoconductivity mechanisms in a wide range of frequencies [ 19 , 20 ]. These physical phenomena include bolometric [ 21 ], thermoelectric [ 22 ] and ratchet effects [ 23 ], as well as ballistic [ 24 ] and plasma waves effects [ 25 ]. In all these cases, the electric field of the incident THz wave is rectified and transformed into a potential drop between two contacts of the graphene-based sensor. This THz photoconductivity technique is sensitive to all kinds of conductivity changes in the material. In the presence of a perpendicular magnetic field, it is also sensitive to magnetic-field driven resistance oscillations [ 26 ], to the carrier's population imbalance between Landau levels, or to quantum fluctuations of conductance [ 27 ]. Therefore, a non-resonant (or broad band) signal in the photovoltage, ∆U, is first expected when the resistance of the graphene sheet experiences Shubnikov-de Haas oscillations. But more interestingly, whatever the physical phenomena at the origin of the rectification, and the type of THz detector mentioned above, a resonant signal is also expected when the energy of the incident sub-THz radiation matches the Zeeman splitting of the electronic states. The photoconductive response is produced by a perturbation of the equilibrium electron spin polarization [ 28 ]. Our experimental method is indeed similar to the "Electrically Detected ESR" (EDESR) technique [ 29 , 30 ] which is very sensitive as it exploits the effects of spin-dependent interactions on the conductivity of the sample instead of directly measuring the sub-THz power absorbed by the spin system [ 31 ].The particularity of our photoconductivity technique is based on the optimization of the electromagnetic coupling between the incident THz wave and the two-dimensional electron gas. This technique therefore represents an effective EDESR method capable of operating with a high sensitivity over a wide range of frequencies ranging from tens of GHz to THz (See Methods for more details). The origin of the EDESR signal in graphene has not been deeply discussed in previous works. The authors only mentioned the resonant microwave absorption at the spin-flip transition energy as the phenomenon responsible for the observed signal We carried out THz photoconductivity measurements in the presence of a perpendicular magnetic field with THz sensors based on two Ratchet devices on monolayer graphene (sample A) and bilayer graphene (sample B) both encapsulated in hBN, as well as on p-n junctions on CVD grown monolayer graphene (sample C). The manufacturing details of these devices and their mode of operation are explained in the "Methods" section. The experiments were carried using radiation frequencies between 45 GHz and 220 GHz (sweeping the magnetic field up to 9 T), and temperature range from 2.6 to 12 K. The amplitude of the detection signal and the signal-to-noise ratio were generally much greater in the two Ratchet devices than in the p-n junction. This is why we focus in the main text of this article on these ratchet sensors, although the first results on p-n junctions reported in the Supplementary Material section show the same trends and features in the results. In both Ratchet sensors at low magnetic field, the photoconductivity signal shows usual Shubnikov-de Haas like oscillations at all frequencies, as observed elsewhere in different systems [ 33 , 34 ]. With incident frequency of 112 GHz, at magnetic field B in the range from 3.5 T to 4.3 T, the spectra clearly exhibit three resonances whose positions are independent of the back gate voltage (Fig. We then studied the evolution of these different resonances as a function of the excitation frequency. The frequency of these spin resonances scales linearly with the magnetic field from 45 GHz up to 220 GHz. Fig. Python library, with a window width typically of 50 mT. Then, this signal is numerically derived in regard to the magnetic field B using numpy.diff python method, followed once again by a smoothing from a Savitzky-Golay filter with a window width typically of 50 mT. This first derivative is then derived again in regard to the magnetic field B and smoothed with a Savitzky-Golay filter, and denoted afterwards the second derivative . A peak of photoconductivity has a second derivative form itself by a narrower peak but at the same position, with two side peak four times lower in amplitude. These peak positions are automatically extracted from those data using find_peak routine of scipy.signal library in Python, with typically prominence parameter of 0.5, and peak distance of 100 mT. Local maxima appear then in red while local minima are plotted in blue. For magnetic fields lower than 1 T in magnitude, those peaks measured in the signal are independent of the working frequency and they are interpreted as Shubnikov-de Haas-like oscillations with no dependence with the incident wave frequency. For larger magnetic field, several lines with a linear dependence with the frequency and magnetic field are clearly visible (grey dashed lines in Figure For sake of clarity, Fig. The lowest resonance γ' corresponds to the ZFS attributed to the sub-lattice splitting ∆γ due to the coupling of the graphene sheet with the hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) encapsulation In Figure Resonance Slope (GHz/T) Frequency at B=0 (GHz) ' Table For single layer graphene (sample A), the Landé factor, calculated from the slope, was measured to be g = 2.09±0.02 (more information can be found in supplementary materials), and g = 2.02±0.02 for bilayer graphene sample. In Fig. The extrapolation of the central feature ( or ) intersects with the axis at its origin, when the other two lines extrapolate to finite positive and negative energy values (Fig. -Landé g-factor, ∆ γ and ∆ I extracted from measurements on sample A (single layer graphene) and sample B (bilayer graphene). The value of the a resonance frequency intercept at B=0T field, noted , is also indicated in energy unit ( ). Values from Ref. From level scheme of Fig. ). However, one observes only three resonances (α, β and γ') over the five expected, attributed to different strength so that resonances β' and γ are not visible within the signal-to-noise ratio of the experimental setup used. Such difference in resonance strength has been reported in reference Ref. Finally, we address the question of the behaviour of these different electron spin resonances as a function of temperature. The experimental study was carried out between 2.6 K and 12 K. Figure shows the photoconductivity signal for sample A, measured at different temperatures as a function of magnetic field, with an incident frequency of 60 GHz. The probe frequency has been chosen such that resonances are observable up to at least 10K. For each temperature, several relevant peaks appear in the signal in the middle of other structures induced by different conductance oscillations and other measurement noises. Relevant peaks are clearly visible in typical frequency and magnetic field maps provided in Fig. Figure The uncertainty is sufficiently low to identify unambiguously each line of interest in Fig. To the best of our knowledge, this modification of the ZFS driven by temperature has never been reported in graphene. A similar effect was however observed at higher temperatures in copper II dimer [ 37 ], where it was supposedly induced by the dynamic Jahn-Teller effect, and in hBN nanopowders [ 38 ] in which it was attributed to the thermal expansion. Additionally, a similar a similar temperature dependence was also observed at lower temperatures in several magnetic materials such as CrCl 3 [ 39 ] or BaAg 2 Cu[VO 4 ] 2 , resulting from ferromagnetic and antiferromagnetic states. Therefore, a first way of interpreting our experimental observation might be to consider the presence of a magnetic order at low temperature [ 40 ] likely to modify the influence of the external magnetic field on the spin resonances. However, this interpretation is unlikely for several reasons. Firstly, the β and γ' spin resonances evolve towards opposite magnetic fields, while the α resonance remains independent of temperature. Secondly, the temperature evolution of the ESR intensity signal, χ ESR , which is directly proportional to the spin susceptibility [ 41 ], shows no trace of magnetic order. The signal seems indeed to obey Curie's law with a Curie-Weiss constant tending to zero (Fig. SM 3 in Supplementary Information). It is conceivable that the staggered sub-lattice potential can be modified by a temperature-driven strain of the graphene layer, as soon as the sub-lattice symmetry is broken by the interaction of the graphene layer with its hBN substrate. For instance, it was evidenced in [ 42 ] that the strain caused by thermal expansion coefficient mismatch between graphene and substrate cannot be neglected when compared with suspended graphene. In [ 43 ] authors found that when cooling graphene from 300 K to 10 K, the influence of strain on the monolayer and top and bottom layer of the bilayer graphene is large and shown a pronounced temperature-dependent variation. But the idea seems less natural with regard to the ISO which represents an intrinsic parameter of graphene sheets. One would indeed tend to say at first glance that the amplitude of the ISO should not depend on the temperature since it is a purely relativistic phenomenon due to the motion of electrons around carbon atoms. However, it was also shown in [ 44 ] that geometric curvature of the graphene sheet should affect the spin-orbit coupling. Later, B. Gong et al. [ 45 ] have shown using tight-binding approach that uniaxial strain can be used as a reversible and controllable way to tune the ISO coupling in graphene. In the case of applied uniaxial strain, not only the change in atomic distances has to be taken into account but also the lattice deformation, which affects the orbitals reorientation. The dependence of ISO splitting on the type of the strain is theoretically predicted by means of first-principles calculations in [ 46 ]. Additionally, by using a tight-binding model, it has been found that the strain should make it possible to control the strength of Rashba and intrinsic spin-orbit coupling [ 47 ]. And very recently the thermal expansion coefficient of bilayer and trilayer graphene was finally measured [ 48 ]. In this work, the authors claim that the metal deposit may cause local strain in 2D materials around metal elements such as contacts and top gates, even though edge contacts were found in there to have no significant impact on the resulting strain. However, A. De Sanctis et al. have shown experimentally in a twist-angle Graphene/hBN device [ 49 ] that top-contacts induce a complex strain pattern in the graphene layer. Indeed, as the thermal expansion coefficients of gold and graphene are opposite, this leads to complex contraction behavior upon cooling depending on the overall geometry and design of the graphenebased device. In our case, the device are dual grating top-gate structures composed of long parallel metal fingers dedicated to the coupling of the incident THz radiation to the 2D electron system (See Fig. Although their model is not specifically adapted to the case of graphene, it can be noted on the one hand that their theoretical results present qualitative similarities with the behaviour observed in our samples, and on the other hand the vacancy of a carbon atom in the crystal lattice of graphene can indeed be reconstructed by means of a Jahn-Teller distortion [ 55 , 56 ]. However, our results do not seem to indicate signs of quenching of the spin-orbit coupling predicted by their model, but rather a saturation of its value beyond 8 K. Additional experimental and theoretical studies are needed to elucidate the origin of the temperature evolution of ZFS. An experimental way to investigate these hypotheses in more detail would be for example to study the influence of the hydrostatic pressure on the ISO in a similar experimental configuration. In conclusion, by means of a sub-Terahertz photoconductivity-based electron spin resonance technique, we have investigated the influence of temperature on different spin-splittings in monolayer and bilayer graphene. We have observed three main electron spin resonances systematically in our two Ratchet THz detectors over a frequency range from 45 GHz to 220 GHz. By extrapolating these resonance frequencies at zero field, we extracted two ZFSs, attributed to ISO and sublattice potential, whose values are comparable to those in the literature. By varying the temperature of these two samples, we found that these two ZFS increase by about 25 % when the temperature drops from 12 K to 2.6 K. We attempt to interpret these results by considering successively the possible presence of a magnetic order, the strain effect induced by the difference in thermal expansion between the graphene and the top gate contacts, and finally the electron-phonon interactions. None of these hypotheses is completely satisfactory, therefore the origin of our experimental observation requires further theoretical and experimental investigations. Beyond this particular behaviour, we also validate the fact that graphene-based photoconductive THz detectors allow efficient measurement of electronic spin resonances at high frequencies and magnetic fields. Indeed, even if the signal was higher in the ratchet detectors, the spin resonances were clearly observed in both types of THz sensors. Sub-THz source generated by Shottky diode of multiplied frequency are used to obtain frequencies in the ranges from 45 GHz to 75 GHz (optical power about 150 mW), and 82 GHz to 125 GHz (optical power about 10 mW). The sub-THz beam is focalized on the sample, through three Z-cut quartz windows, with golden parabolic mirrors. A magnetic field up to 5.5 T is oriented perpendicular to the surface of the sample and parallel to the wave-vector of the incident radiation. The signal is detected as a voltage drop at the edges of the detector, which is then amplified and measured via a standard lock-in technique (using an Amatek Signal recovery 6270). Similar setup on a 16T vertical magnet system is used to obtain results at higher frequencies with a sub-THz source from 150 GHz up to 220 GHz (power source of 5 mW). Detection principle: In the two encapsulated graphene samples with the DGG structure, the THz radiation results in the ratchet current, which is caused by the combined action of a spatially periodic asymmetric in-plane potential and the spatially modulated light due to the near-field effects of the radiation diffraction [57,58, 63 ]. The amplitude and the sign of the photocurrent induced in graphene is defined by the lateral asymmetry parameter given by Here the overline stands for the average over the ratchet period, is the derivative of the coordinate-dependent electrostatic potential , and the distribution of the radiation electric field being coordinate dependent due to the near field of diffraction. In this study both top gates are kept at zero bias, however, the asymmetry is created by the built-in potential due to the metal stripes of different widths (TG1 and TG2) deposited on top of the encapsulated BLG. Note that in sample B the zero-magnetic field ratchet effect was studied in detail in Ref. With a single p-n junction formed in the graphene channel by a split gate or chemical doping, the response (dc) signal V s appears because of a non-uniform Joule heating and thermoelectric effects, . The Peltier effect will either help the Joule heating or reduce it, depending on the direction of current through the p-n junction. By averaging the instant signal voltage over one period of the THz radiation, one finds the mean value of the signal, which is measured in the experiment. In the case of no intentionally made p-n junction in the graphene channel, two latent p-n junctions can still exist because of extra doping through the proximity to metal electrodes. These p-n junctions normally do not contribute to the output signal because they are connected back-to-back and their individual contributions to the signal compensate each other. However, in the presence of a small dc current, one of the junctions will be heated more than another because of the Peltier effect. This will break the symmetry of the device and result in a non-compensated signal [ 64 ]. . It is impossible to retrace the evolution of the intensity of the α line because it is too weak in all of our results. However, we plot the amplitude of the second derivative of the signal for the γ' and β transitions over the entire temperature range in Fig. Since the probe frequency (60GHz) involves rather low energies of 240μeV (3 K equivalent temperature), one expects thermal activation to play a significant role in the temperature dependence voltage generator (Keitley 2600B) allowed to control the current applied on the device. The measurements were done at 1.7 K by applying a current of -140 μA on the device. Sub-THz source generated by Shottky diode of multiplied frequency were used to obtain frequencies in the ranges from 82 GHz to 125 GHz (optical power about 10 mW). The signal was detected as a voltage drop at the edges of the detector, which is then amplified and measured via a standard lock-in technique (using an Amatek Signal recovery 6270). Although the intensity of the photoconductivity signal and the signal-to-noise ratio obtained in the p-n junction were lower than with the ratchet devices, we were able to detect spin resonances and followed their evolution as a function of the incident frequency and the magnetic field. It turns out that the positions of the resonances are comparable to those obtained in the ratchet detectors. The results obtained with this p-n junction-based sensor as a function of the incident frequency are plotted in the form of a color mapping in Figure Two spin resonances in the p-n junction of graphene are observed, whose zero-field extrapolation allows their identification. The first gives a g-factor roughly equal to two, just like that measured in ratchet detectors. The second allows us to extract a zero-field splitting of the order of 17.6 GHz (73 μeV), instead of the approximately 13 GHz observed in ratchet devices at low temperature. It should be noted that the measurement uncertainty is high given the low signal-to-noise ratio. We also underline that the geometry of the p-n junction detector requires a wide log-periodic metallic antenna placed on the graphene sheet to effectively rectify the incident THz wave. The strain effects on the graphene layer should therefore be significant at low temperature and could be responsible for this higher ZFS value. Unfortunately, it was impossible to follow the evolution of this ZFS value as a function of temperature because the intensity of the signal dropped below the detection threshold at temperatures slightly higher than that used for these results. In situ Electron paramagnetic resonance spectroelectrochemical study of graphene-based supercapacitors: Comparison between chemically reduced graphene oxide and nitrogen-doped reduced graphene oxide, B. Wang, V. Likodimos, A. J. Fielding, R.A.W. Dryfe, Carbon, 160, 236-246 (2020) FMR Evidence of Stable Ferromagnetic Correlations at Zigzag Edge States in Graphene, M. A. Augustyniak-Jablokowa, M. Maćkowiak, K. Tadyszak and R. Strzelczyk, Acta Phys. Polish. A 127, 537 (2015)