Heterogeneous catalysts based on sub-nanometer metal clusters often exhibit strongly size-dependent properties, and the addition or removal of a single atom can make all the difference. Identifying the most active species and deciphering the reaction mechanism is extremely difficult, however, because it is often not clear how the catalyst evolves in operando. Here, we utilize a combination of atomically resolved scanning probe microscopies, spectroscopic techniques, and density functional theory (DFT)-based calculations to study CO oxidation by a model Pt/Fe3O4(001) "single-atom" catalyst. We demonstrate that (PtCO)2 dimers, formed dynamically through the agglomeration of mobile Pt-carbonyl species, catalyse a reaction involving the oxide support to form CO2. Pt2 dimers produce one CO2 molecule before falling apart into two adatoms, releasing the second CO. Interestingly, Olattice extraction only becomes facile when both the Pt-dimer and the Fe3O4 support can access metastable configurations, suggesting that substantial, concerted rearrangements of both cluster and support must be considered for reactions occurring at elevated temperature. 125 character teaser: Non-equilibrium cluster and support morphologies are important when modelling heterogeneous catalysis at elevated temperatures The continuing trend to downsize the precious-metal component of supported heterogeneous catalysts has seen attention turn to the sub-nano regime Nevertheless, the field remains controversial because characterizing single-atom catalysts pushes the limits of current experimental techniques, and there remains much discussion as to whether catalytic activity really stems from isolated adatoms, or sub-nano particles One of the biggest challenges to understanding such systems is that catalysts typically evolve under reaction conditions In this paper, we use a combination of atomically-resolved scanning-probe microscopy, surface-sensitive spectroscopy, and density functional theory to study CO oxidation on a Pt/Fe3O4(001) model catalyst. We show that (PtCO)2 dimers are formed dynamically due to CO-induced sintering, and that these species catalyse CO oxidation through a reaction with the support. Characterizing the initial state by noncontact atomic force microscopy (ncAFM) confirms the (PtCO)2 geometry determined by density functional theory (DFT) calculations, and allows direct imaging of individual CO molecules adsorbed on a sub-nano cluster. We demonstrate that CO oxidation occurs from a metastable (PtCO)2 configuration that becomes available at elevated temperature, and that a rearrangement of the lattice of the support is also required to quantitatively reproduce the experimental results. Scanning Tunnelling Microscopy (STM) Measurements of Pt/Fe3O4(001). The experiments described here rely on the remarkable stability of metal adatoms on the Fe3O4(001)-(√2×√2)R45° support In recent years, ncAFM has emerged as a tool to image surfaces and adsorbates with unprecedented resolution The bright protrusions observed in ncAFM measurements can be explained using the minimum energy configuration for a (PtCO)2 species calculated by DFT+U (Figure To investigate the reactivity of the Pt/Fe3O4 system we performed TPD experiments. First, the Fe3O4 single crystal sample was heated in 1×10 -6 mbar 18 O at 900 K for 3 hours, leading to a surface (mostly) isotopically labelled by 18 O (see low-energy ion scattering data in Fig. To estimate the amount of CO2 produced in the experiment, we calibrated the CO2 peak area against a saturated monolayer of physisorbed CO2, which has a known density of 5.68×10 14 cm -2 on Fe3O4(001) Subsequent TPD cycles exhibit a 13 CO desorption peak around 400 K, consistent with desorption of CO from Pt nanoparticles. Somewhat surprisingly, if the sample is cooled to room temperature following the TPD experiment and then re-exposed to 10 -6 mbar.s CO, the desorption peak at 525 K vanishes from the CO and CO2 spectra. Instead, a broad m/e = 29 13 CO signal is observed over the range of 300 -550 K. A very low m/e = 47 13 C 16 O 18 O desorption signal peaks at ≈ 450-500 K. Further repetitions yield almost identical behaviour. Therefore, only the sample obtained following the initial sintering of the Pt1 adatoms produces significant amounts of CO2 at 520-530 K. To ascertain why, we imaged the surface using STM over a series of experiments mimicking the TPD, and counted the various Pt-containing species present at each step. For an initial coverage of 0.4 ML Pt1 adatoms (5.68 ×10 13 Pt1 cm -2 ), the most common species on the surface following CO-induced sintering is the (PtCO)2 dimer, with a coverage of 5±0.4 ×10 12 cm -2 . The (PtCO)2 density falls sharply to (5±1) ×10 11 cm -2 after heating to 510 K, and the resulting surface comprises a mixture of Pt1 adatoms and larger clusters (see Figure When this surface is exposed to CO, many of the Pt1-CO species that are formed are captured by larger clusters, and the (PtCO)2 density increases to (6±1) ×10 11 cm -2 . The broad CO desorption feature with a maximum at 400 K observed in the second TPD experiment is likely linked to these larger Pt clusters, which do not re-disperse on heating. The system does not change significantly with further CO exposure, so the third TPD resembles the second. To be sure that the surface did not evolve further between room temperature and the reaction temperature we heated the (PtCO)2/Fe3O4(001) system to 550 K, and then imaged it at room temperature with STM (Fig. Inspecting the (PtCO)2 geometry shown in Fig. Another possibility is that the (PtCO)2 splits into two adatoms, and that the PtCO species react independently with the surface. The barrier to split the stable (PtCO)2 is high (2 eV), however, and the process should not occur until 680 K. Since the observed CO2 evolution cannot be explained using the minimum-energy (PtCO)2 configuration, we next consider the possibility that the dimer can adopt a non-equilibrium morphology at elevated temperature. This isomerization, sometimes referred to as fluxionality In what follows, we describe the reaction pathway that, according to our analysis, leads to CO oxidation in the (PtCO)2/Fe3O4(001) system (blue path in Fig. Finally, we address the CO2:CO ratio. While the reaction described in Fig. Based on the experimental and theoretical evidence presented above, we conclude that Pt2 dimers catalyse the initial CO oxidation activity in what was nominally a Pt1/Fe3O4(001) model system (in the absence of CO). The main reason for this is that CO-induced sintering is facile even at room temperature, The most unexpected aspect of the proposed mechanism is that the reaction occurs when both the (PtCO)2 species and Fe3O4 support enter a metastable configuration. Metastable cluster geometries are increasingly invoked to explain the reactivity of sub-nano clusters In Fig. Recently, the Sykes group Finally, since utilizing Pt1/Fe3O4(001) as a single-atom catalyst is clearly hampered by PtCO diffusion, it is tempting to consider whether other metals might fare better. We have recently shown that a model Ir1/Fe3O4(001) is stable against CO-induced sintering, primarily because the formation of carbonyl/dicarbonyl species creates a stable pseudo-squareplanar environment for the cation In summary, we have shown that Pt2 dimers, formed dynamically on a Pt/Fe3O4 model catalyst facilitate the extraction of oxygen from the support lattice at 525 K. The energy required is minimized when both cluster and support adopt non-equilibrium configurations, highlighting the need to consider dynamic restructuring for reactions occurring at elevated temperatures. Ultimately, our work is a clear demonstration that metastable active species can form upon exposure to gases, and that the addition of just one atom can make a big difference to a "single-atom" catalyst. STM and ncAFM experiments in Fig. Electrochemically etched W tips were glued to the tuning fork and cleaned in-situ by field emission and self-sputtering in 1 ×10 -6 mbar argon For the TPD/XPS experiments, CO was dosed using a calibrated molecular beam source, which is described in detail in ref. The Vienna ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) The NEB calculations have been performed at the PBE+D2 level, because our system tends to get stuck in local minima when using optB88-DF. More precisely, the climbing image method (CI-NEB) was used to determine the saddle points. Long diffusion processes were split into multiple smaller NEB calculations, each holding 3 intermediate configurations. Intermediates of reactions such as different positions along diffusion paths or OCO intermediates were calculated utilizing optB88-DF, essentially taking advantage of its tendency to get trapped in local minima. Transition states obtained using PBE+D2 CI-NEB calculations were recalculated using optB88-DF with the atomic positions fixed to obtain the corresponding energies. The simulated AFM images shown in Fig. The energies shown in Figure The kinetic model applied here is based on the previous work of Campbell et al. The rate constant is calculated with the usual Arrhenius equation: The entropy term (ΔSTST, within transition state theory (TST)) for a barrier-less desorption process takes into account the change in entropy between the adsorbed phase and the entropy of the free molecule in the gas phase. For the gas phase, we used partition functions from the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) database, and removed the translational contribution to S along the desorption path, i.e., normal to the surface The steady state approximation is used to treat multi-step processes, taking into account reversibility. Reaction rate constants and coverages are calculated iteratively as the temperature ramp (step in the model) is set equal to 1 K.s -1 , as in the TPD experiment. The kinetic model ultimately allows us to clearly determine the minimum energy path (MEP) at finite temperature starting from the initial configuration (e.g., a (PtCO)2 dimer, see Fig. The aim of this section is to further support the credibility of our DFT-suggested mechanisms and paths, as well as underline the quantitative agreement with the experimental results (parts 2.1 and 2.2). Additionally, we show the hypothetical minimum energy path (MEP), for adatoms, in case dimers would not be formed (part 2.3). Finally, in the last part (2.4), we discuss alternatives to the main pathways mentioned in the main text. 2.1-Benchmarking DFT While investigating this system, many reaction paths leading to CO2 were found. In the majority of cases, the DFT-based kinetic model predicted temperatures that were too high with respect to the experimental observation of 520 K. (We show some of these alternatives in section 2.3 for discussion purposes.) But an important question is: how high is too high? Thus, it is important to estimate what constitutes a reasonable offset between the computationally determined temperatures and the experimentally. Here, we discuss a selection of results that allow us to estimate that a 30 K overestimation of the desorption temperature constitutes acceptable agreement. The first such data, recently published The diffusion of PtCO and Pt1 on Fe3O4(001) were investigated computationally. The diffusion path of PtCO is shown in two short animations (supplementary movies Diffusion_PtCO_path-across andalong. Diffusion across the Fe rows, or along the Fe rows can occur with a similar barrier (Diffusion along Fe rows: 1.18 eV, diffusion across Fe rows: 1.21 eV) and thus occur at similar temperatures. This is in agreement with STM data, where no preferential diffusion direction was observed In room-temperature STM movies, PtCO species are observed to diffuse and form (PtCO)2 In the right panel, we show the best alternative pathways for PtCO at room temperature that would lead to CO desorption and CO2 formation/desorption. The dashed line corresponds to the maximum barrier calculated in the left panel. We see that diffusion is preferred to CO oxidation reaction at 325 K, but that the difference is within the error of our calculations. Given that no CO2 (and very little CO) evolution is observed at temperatures below 525 K in the TPD experiment, we conclude that the trend is correct, and that the reaction to form CO2 does not occur before diffusion leads to the formation of (PtCO)2 species. In Figure Figure Path C is based on the stable (PtCO)2 dimer configuration shown in Fig. Path D begins like the favored pathway with the formation of the metastable (PtCO)2 dimer. However, in this path, the Fe3O4(001) surface remains static. The system distorts the dimer in order to free one of the surface oxygen atoms to which the Pt is bound. The low oxygen vacancy formation energy of these O1 atoms makes the final state lower in energy than that considered in path C, but the process has a significant barrier, and will not occur. Path E corresponds to splitting of the (PtCO)2 dimer. The cause of the high barrier is the strong stability of dimers with respect to PtCO species. Note that this is essentially the reverse of the (PtCO)2 formation pathway shown in the right panel of Fig In the main text, the minimum-energy path in Fig. The energy required to desorb the CO directly from the Pt2CO species is 3.37 eV. This process is thus not possible at 550 K. Path C2: The energy required to desorb the CO from state B, where one Pt atom occupies a surface substitutional site and the other a 2-fold adatom site is 1.1 eV. This is significantly less than the barrier for surface diffusion (≈0.5 eV), and thus does not happen before the system sinters to form clusters. In each case the surface was exposed to ∼3 CO/u.c., which results in the saturation of the surface by CO. Note that CO was dosed at 60 K here, rather than 300 K as in Fig. 