Flux-periodic oscillations of the superconducting gap in proximitized core-shell nanowires are explored. Periodicity of oscillations in the energy spectrum of a cylindrical nanowire is compared with nanowires having hexagonal and square cross-section geometry, along with the effects of Zeeman and Rashba spin-orbit interaction. A transition between h/e and h/2e periodicity is found and shown to be dependent on the chemical potential, with correspondence to degeneracy points of the angular momentum quantum number. For a thin shell of a square nanowire, solely h/e periodicity is found in the infinite wire spectrum and shown to result from energy separation between the lowest groups of excited states. In the past decades, periodicity of magneto-oscillations has been broadly discussed in relation to doubly connected mesoscopic systems, both normal conducting 1 and superconducting Core-shell nanowires are radial heterojunctions, where a nanowire core is enveloped by layers of different materials. By combining a resistive core with a conductive shell, a tubular conductor can be formed in a core-shell nanowire Flux-periodicity is considered to be an experimental signature that can probe the underlying pairing symmetry of superconducting systems Semiconductor nanowires with proximity induced superconductivity incorporate both spin-dependent interactions and superconductor pairing. The paper is structured as follows. In Sect. II, the Little-Parks effect is introduced and contrasted with flux-periodic oscillations in normal conducting rings and cylinders using a simple model. Sect. III details the nanowire model, basis and parameters. In Sect. IV, fluxperiodic oscillations in a cylindrical wire are compared for the cases of vanishing/nonvanishing Zeeman and spinorbit interaction, along with energy spectra and dispersions for both the normal conducting and superconducting wire. Sect. V consists of an analogous treatment for wires with hexagonal and square cross-sections, along with a detailed discussion of the effect of the chemical potential on periodicity for the hexagonal case. Lastly, conclusions are summarized in Sect. VI. The Little-Park effect is attributed to supercurrents induced within the walls of a thin superconducting cylinder Rewriting the supercurrent with ψ = |ψ|e iφ and integrating around a closed contour gives 53 where e * and m * are effective charge and mass. The right hand side integral must be an integer multiple n ∈ N of 2π if ψ is to be single valued. In the case of Cooper pairing, e * = 2e, leading to the superconducting flux quantum The left hand side of Eq. ( which can be rewritten as Since the critical temperature and coherence length are proportional to the square of the supercurrent velocity which can equally be expressed in terms of the magnetic vector potential using Green's curl theorem, working in cylindrical coordinates (r, θ, z), The Hamiltonian of the system is given by The effective mass is m e = m x • m 0 where m 0 is the electron rest mass and the parameter m x is material dependent. Solving the time-independent Schrödinger equation Ĥψ = Eψ with the eigenfunctions ψ = e ilθ results in the energy spectrum Rewriting in terms of the normal flux quantum, Φ N 0 = 2π e = h e , results in Thus for a given energy level, periodic fluctuations occur with increasing magnetic field strength as states with increasing angular momentum are traversed. Spin can be implemented by doubling the internal degrees of freedom, leading to the Pauli equation with Zeeman interaction and spin-orbit coupling, which are also obtained by relativistic corrections to the Schrödinger equation in the non-relativistic limit of the Dirac equation where the second term is the Zeeman interaction, the third and fourth terms account for spin-orbit coupling, the fifth term is the Darwin term, which can be seen as a kind of spin-orbit term for s-orbitals with zero angular momentum where σ 0 denotes a two by two identity matrix, σ z is a Pauli matrix and | μ| = g e e/4m is the magnetic moment for a spin-1/2 particle, given respectively in terms of the (effective) g-factor, charge and mass. For electrons, the spin g-factor has a value 59 close to 2, however, for carriers in particular materials such as InSb, it becomes effectively much larger due to the contribution from orbital motion where μ B = -e /2m 0 is the Bohr magneton. Defining the energy parameter t = 2 /2m e r 2 and factor γ = m x g e /2, Eq.( Flux-periodic oscillations of the energy spectrum E l with t = 2 /2mer 2 for spin up (red) and spin down (blue) for γ = -0.361 corresponding to InSb. In materials, spin-orbit coupling falls into two categories, Rashba 61 and Dresselhaus 62 , corresponding to surface and bulk inversion symmetry breaking respectively. In two dimensional systems, the spin-orbit Hamiltonian takes the form where α and β are the Rashba and Dreselhaus coupling coefficients respectively. Surface inversion symmetry breaking at a planar interface of two materials results in an uneven charge density, inducing an electric field perpendicular to the interface. The induced field is given by E = |E|ẑ if the interface lies in the xy-plane. Then which shows the similarity to the spin-orbit term in Eq. (11). A core-shell wire with differing core and shell materials can be considered to host two-dimensional electron gas confined to the shell, which is embedded in the radial interface electric field A semiconductor nanowire shell with proximityinduced superconductivity, situated in an external magnetic field directed parallel to the wire, Fig. written in the particle-hole symmetric Nambu space The Hamiltonian for the wire in cylindrical coordinates is given by the sum of transverse, longitudinal, Zeeman and spin-orbit terms respectively, where σ = ±1 is the spin quantum number. The symmetric gauge vector potential A φ = 1 2 Br incorporates the axial external magnetic field B, giving rise to the Zeeman term H Z where g e is the effective Landé g-factor and μ B the Bohr magneton. The spin-orbit term describes the angular Rashba interaction, arising from a radial electric field induced by crystal asymmetry at the core-shell interface The eigenstates of the wire Hamiltonian ( where |anσ denote respectively transverse modes, longitudinal modes and spin. Both finite and infinite wires are modeled by considering longitudinal modes in a sine and exponential basis. The former leading to discrete spectra whilst the latter gives the dispersion relation. For the infinite case, the Hamiltonian becomes a function of the wavevector k. The eigenstates (20) along with the particle-hole space |η = ±1 form a basis |q = |ηg for the BdG Hamiltonian (18) with the following matrix elements. For and for η = η ′ , Energy spectra and eigenstates are obtained by numerical diagonalization of a finite-difference approximation using Fortran. Parameters for the numerical simulation are chosen to correspond to a proximitized n-doped indium antimonide (InSb) The eigenstates are initialized at zero magnetic field strength and calculated step-wise up to a field strength of |B| = 1.30 T with an interval of 0.013 T. Basis modes for the wire Hamiltonian are 9 transverse and 200 longitudinal. The chemical potential is situated above three spindegenerate states in the absence of Zeeman and spin-orbit interaction. Four cases of vanishing/non-vanishing Zeeman and spin-orbit interaction are compared at the maximum magnetic field strength, to highlight spin-dependent effects. The grid cross-section is shown in Fig. Fig. We proceed by comparing with a hexagonal shell, and for a fair comparison, the minimal shell thickness is set equal to the cylindrical shell. In this way, the sides are of similar thickness to the cylindrical case, whilst the corner radius is slightly larger, Fig. The oscillations of the BdG spectrum of the infinite wire at k = 0, Fig. In Fig. Further increasing the magnetic field strength, the two bands join and the lowest energy is overtaken in a sense so that the energy keeps lowering up to the value of one flux quantum, Fig. To investigate the effects of increased corner localization, the energy values for a square cross-section are calculated, Figs. Flux-periodic oscillations in a core-shell nanowire system with proximity induced superconductivity are explored numerically. We explore the instance where supercurrents are absent in the semiconductor shell, as in the case of full-shell covering of the nanowire by a thick superconductor. Magneto-oscillations of the lowest energy states of the Bogoliubov-de Gennes Hamiltonian (BdG) and its components are calculated for cylindrical, hexagonal and square cross-section geometries. For the former two cases, h/2e periodicity is found for specific values of the chemical potential whilst the periodicity for the square wire is found to be strictly h/e. The superconducting gap parameter is constant throughout the calculation, with no phase dependency imposed. Zeeman and spin-orbit interaction are found to influence the magneto-oscillations considerably so that a periodicity of a fractional superconducting flux quantum is obtained at a zero wavevector in the infinite wire BdG dispersion. The fluxperiodicity arises from minimal coupling in the diagonal components of the BdG Hamiltonian. The transition between h/e and h/2e periodicity is found to be dependent on the adjacent higher energy level with respect to the chemical potential. In contrast to the case where supercurrents impose h/2e oscillations, corresponding to a 2e charge unit, we have shown that in their absence, the magnetooscillations are determined by the spectrum of the semiconductor nanowire in the normal state. If the nanowire has a minimal deviation from cylindrical symmetry, the oscillations can have the periodicity of h/e or h/2e, depending on the position of the chemical potential relative to the energy bands. If the cylindrical symmetry is sufficiently broken, solely h/e periodicity is obtained. The results show in what way the chemical potential, which is controllable by a gate voltage, may influence flux-periodicity in hybrid semiconductor-superconductor devices.