By performing dynamic Monte Carlo simulations, we investigate the microrheology of isotropic suspensions of hard-core colloidal cuboids. In particular, we infer the local viscoelastic behaviour of these fluids by studying the dynamics of a probe spherical particle that is incorporated in the host phase and is dragged by an external force. This technique, known as active microrheology, allows one to characterise the microscopic response of soft materials upon application of a constant force, whose intensity spans here three orders of magnitude. By tuning the geometry of cuboids from oblate to prolate as well as the system density, we observe different responses that are quantified by measuring the effective friction perceived by the probe particle. The resulting friction coefficient exhibits a linear regime at forces that are much weaker and larger than the thermal forces, whereas a non-linear, force-thinning regime is observed at intermediate force intensities. Complex fluids are present in a wide variety of day-today consumables, including cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, paints and foods. A common thread shared by these families of products is the correlation between the interactions established at the sub-micron scale and their macroscopic response as well as the ability of their microscopic domains to rearrange upon the application of external stimuli Among complex fluids, colloidal suspensions of anisotropic particles are especially attractive for their rich phase behaviour and ability to self-assemble in a wide spectrum of mesophases, such as nematic and smec-tic liquid crystals (LCs). In particular, biaxial particles, such as boards, ellipsoids, rhombuses and bent-core particles, are able to form exotic LC phases To this end, in this work, we employ the dynamic Monte Carlo (DMC) simulation technique to investigate the viscoelastic response of suspensions of hard cuboids by active MR. The DMC method has been recently shown to reproduce MR results of Langevin Dynamics in systems of spherical and rod-like particles to an excellent degree of qualitative and quantitative agreement Our systems consist of N c = 1000 hard board-like particles (HBP) and N s = 1 hard spherical tracer, constrained in an elongated box with volume V box = L x × L y ×L z , where L x = L y and L z = 3L x . HBPs are cuboids of thickness T , length L and width W , with T the system unit length. In this work, all HBPs have a reduced length given by L * ≡ L/T = 12, while the reduced width, W * ≡ W /T , is a simulation parameter that takes the values W * = {1, L * ≈ 3.46, 8}, providing respectively prolate, self-dual shaped and oblate geometries. The spherical tracer has a diameter σ = T . A schematic representation of these particles is given in Fig. where v 0 = T W L is the volume of one HBP and the contribution of the spherical tracer has been disregarded where λi = x, ŷ, ẑ are unit vectors respectively aligned with W, T and L, while I is the identity tensor. The diagonalisation of Q λλ results in three eigenvalues (S 2,W , S 2,T , S 2,L ) and their corresponding eigenvectors ( m, l, n). A phase is considered nematic if at least one of the eigenvalues is larger than 0.40. In our equilibrated phases, all the uniaxial order parameters are below the threshold required to be classified as nematics. The resulting I phases are then used as initial configurations in the DMC production runs. The DMC method produces Brownian Dynamics (BD) trajectories by rescaling an arbitrarily set MC time step, δt MC,m , with the acceptance rate, A m , where m = c, s refers to the cuboidal bath particles and spherical tracer, respectively. The interested reader is referred to our past works for further details on the DMC technique -2 τ and 10 -7 τ , where τ = ηT 3 /(k B T b ) is the time unit, while T b and η are, respectively, the bath temperature and viscosity. As a result, the MC time step of the tracer is obtained through the corresponding acceptance rates (see Supplemental Material at [URL] for details). More specifically, when the tracer is subjected to a one-dimensional external force in the positive direction of ẑ, taking the form F ext = F ext ẑ, the time step δt MC,s is obtained from the following relationship where A s and A c are the acceptance rates of spherical tracer and cubes, respectively. It should be noted that the external force is considered in the above equation by means of A s . According to our previous work, A s ∼ 1 -βF ext δx z /4 where β = 1/k B T b , with k B the Boltzmann's constant and δx z the maximum displacement of the tracer in the direction of the force. The so-equilibrated δt MC,s , along with δt MC,c , are then used to produce the time trajectories by DMC simulations. We applied periodic boundary conditions to our elongated simulation boxes and do not perform unphysical moves such as jumps, swaps and cluster moves in order to produce the correct dynamics. The tracer is pulled by an external force F ext parallel to the z-axis that takes the form: where a = σ/2 is the tracer radius, and P e is the Péclet number which gives the ratio of advection to thermal forces. The displacement of the HBPs' centres of mass, δr i , is decoupled into three terms: δr c,i = X W û + X T v + X L ŵ, where X α , with α = W, T, L, is the maximum displacement allowed to a generic HBP. These displacements are set by the following Einstein relations: where D tra α,i are the translational diffusion coefficients at infinite dilution along the three particle direction. Similarly, the rotation of the HBPs are performed via three consecutive rotations with maximum rotation Y W , Y T and Y L around û, v and ŵ, respectively. These maximum rotations read where D rot α,i are the rotational diffusion coefficients at infinite dilution. Both translational and rotational diffusion coefficients have been calculated with the open-source software HYDRO++ As far as the spherical tracer is concerned, we disregard rotations and only consider translational moves. In particular, the displacement of the tracer's centre of mass reads δr s = Z ∥ î + Z ⊥ ĵ + Z ⊥ k, where î is the displacement vector parallel to the external force F ext while ĵ and k are vectors orthogonal to î and to each other. Due to the presence of the external force, the resulting maximum displacement of the spherical tracers incorporates two contributions and reads while the maximum displacement in planes perpendicular to F ext is similar to that of HBPs: The tracer diffusion coefficient at infinite dilution, D s , is obtained from the Stokes-Einstein relation: In this paper, we are interested in the rheology of HBPs in the I phase. To evaluate this, we computed the effective friction coefficient derived from the Stokes-drag expression: where γ 0 = 6πηa is the friction coefficient of the medium and ⟨v s ⟩ is the mean velocity of the tracer at long times. The initial I phases were equilibrated in a way to ensure that all configurations were mutually uncorrelated. Following equilibration, in the DMC production run, we applied an external force of magnitude (0, 0, F ext ) = (0, 0, P e k B T b /a) to the tracer and allowed it to displace a distance of at least L z /2 (half of the longest box length). We set between 2 × 10 5 to 4 × 10 MC cycles for our simulations, depending on the values of φ and P e. All data points are averaged from 750 independent trajectories. We first report the effect of increasing the system packing fraction on the effective friction coefficient in I phases of self-dual-shaped HBPs. At this particular geometry, where W = LT ≈ 3.46T , the I phase is stable up to φ = 0.30. At any other particle width, within the range 1 ≤ W * ≤ 12 and φ = 0.30, oblate or prolate nematic LCs are observed At P e < 0.5, corresponding to relatively weak external forces, a plateau is observed, with γ eff /γ 0 ≈ 1.6, 1.7 at 1.85 and φ = 0.20, 0.25, and 0.30, respectively. At such small P e numbers, the advection force exerted by the tracer is too weak to significantly perturb the local particle distribution of the host HBPs, merely leading to weakly distorted microstructures in the bath At P e ≥ 1, advection forces begin to dominate over thermal forces and a force-thinning regime, with the friction coefficient decreasing with increasing the intensity of the force applied, develops. This non-linear regime closely reminds the shear-thinning observed in non-Newtonian fluids, whose viscosity decreases as the shear rate increases. It spans over 1 ≤ P e ≤ 5 for φ = 0.20 and 0.25, and over 1 ≤ P e ≤ 20 for φ = 0.30. The occurrence of a force-thinning regime is in line with what has been reported by theoretical predictions Finally, at larger P e numbers, the effective friction coefficient exhibits a second plateau. This plateau corresponds to the high-P e regime, where the advection force dominates thermal forces In Fig. In light of these considerations, we now examine the effect of altering the shape anisotropy of HBPs on the effective friction induced by a tracer with diameter σ = T at φ = 0.20. In particular, we investigate the impact of particle anisotropy in baths of prolate (W * = 1), selfdual-shaped (W * = 3.46) and oblate (W * = 8) HBPs. In Fig. In addition to relative tracer/HBP size, also the phase behaviour of each system at φ = 0.20 plays a role in determining the effective friction coefficient of the bath. Although all systems at this packing fraction are in the I phase, the features of their phase behaviour are different due to how far they are from their respective I-N phase boundary. In particular, at φ = 0.20, the systems with prolate (W * = 1) and oblate (W * = 8) HBPs are closer to their respective I-N phase boundary than those made of self-dual-shaped HBPs (W * = 3.46) In summary, we performed fixed-force active microrheology DMC simulations 