Polymers are attractive membrane materials owing to their mechanical robustness and relatively inexpensive fabrication. An important indicator of membrane performance are free volume elements (FVEs) -microporous void spaces created by the inefficient packing of bulky groups along the polymer chain. FVEs tend to degrade over time as polymer chains reorganize irreversibly. While it is widely accepted that polymer flexibility has an impact on membrane transport properties, the molecular nature of this impact is still not well-understood. By establishing a correlation between local chain dynamics and the distribution of free volume elements (FVEs), penetrant transport can be regulated more efficiently in amorphous polymer membranes. In this work, we implement all-atom molecular dynamics (MD) simulations to explore the relationship between chain dynamics and free volume in three polymers with different levels of backbone flexibility-polymethylpentene (PMP), polystyrene (PS), and HAB-6FDA thermally rearranged polymer (TRP). We construct these polymers at different temperatures and examine how temperature impacts the FVE distribution and segmental mobility. Our analysis shows that chain segments near FVEs have higher mobility compared to the atoms in the bulk; the extent of this difference increases with chain flexibility. Increasing chain flexibility by increasing the temperature results in a broader FVE distribution. Rigid polymers such as TRP show the most robust FVE distribution and are not significantly affected by temperature change. To capture penetrant diffusion through the polymer matrix, hydrogen is inserted, and the diffusion is measured at different temperatures; hydrogen mobility is influenced by the FVE structure and overall mobility of polymer chains. At low temperatures, hydrogen mobility is influenced by void distribution, while at high temperatures, polymer dynamics dictates hydrogen transport. Traditional hydrocarbon purification is carried out through cryogenic distillation, which requires a large amount of energy. Physical aging and plasticization are two phenomena preventing the utilization of hydrocarbon separation membranes on a commercial scale, both of which are related to chain flexibility. Physical aging involves structural relaxation in glassy polymers under ambient conditions, driven by the difference in the current specific volume of the membrane and its equilibrium specific volume. Common FVE characterization techniques such as positron annihilation lifetime spectroscopy (PALS), NMR spectroscopy, and photochromic probing have been used to obtain the average FVE distribution in a polymer membrane at a given point in time. In this work, we utilize all-atom molecular dynamics (MD) simulations to create three distinct amorphous polymers, namely polymethylpentene (PMP), polystyrene (PS), and HAB-6FDA thermally rearranged polymer (TRP). These polymers exhibit diverse chemical structures, with TRPs belonging to a class of novel polymers with tunable pore distributions. Amorphous polymers below their Tg are known to have a long relaxation time which makes it challenging to characterize their dynamics in classical MD timescales. To investigate the trends in flexibility, it is necessary to sample the systems at elevated temperatures, where the mobility of the polymer can be distinctly captured, hence we simulate these systems at three temperatures ranging from 100 K to 500 K. We probe the structure of these systems using two different free volume element measurements. Next, we study segmental dynamics by calculating the bond autocorrelation function. To investigate the interplay between chain flexibility and void distribution on diffusion properties, we randomly introduce hydrogen molecules into the three polymer systems and analyze the diffusion behavior of hydrogen with respect to polymer chemistry and temperature. Quantifying the dynamics of different segments of the polymers with respect to FVEs can be used to elucidate the potential for a polymer to undergo rearrangement and deviate from its initial FVE distribution when used as a membrane material. To model the polymer systems, we utilize the OPLS-AA forcefield to represent the interactions in the three polymer chemistries. OPLS-AA parameters are taken from LigParGen web server which uses 1.14 CM1A and 1.14 CM1A-LBCC charge models. Before the addition of each bond, energy minimization is performed to relax the newly formed bond. Short MD simulations in the NVT and NPT ensembles are performed after every fifth bond in order to perturb the system and allow polymerized fragments to connect. After the formation of a single chain, twenty chains are packed into a large simulation box following which a 21-step equilibration protocol is performed to bring the systems to the appropriate density at the desired temperature and 1 atm. Production runs are performed at different temperatures (100K, 300K, 500K) and 1 atm for 20 ns, over which data is collected. Nose-Hoover thermostat and barostat are employed, with a timestep of 1fs, and temperature and pressure damping parameters of 100 ps and 1000 ps, respectively. To study penetrant diffusion, hydrogen gas molecules are randomly inserted into the three equilibrated polymer structures at the different temperatures such that it corresponds to a gas concentration of 1.18 mol/L, equivalent to hydrogen molecular density at 29.6 atm and 300 K. After this, a short equilibration of 1 ns followed by a 20 ns production run was performed in NVT, similar to the method outlined in prior work. To probe the structure of the three polymers, we assess their microporosity by calculating the free volume of the polymer matrix. Free volume in polymers can be defined in different ways; a summary of these definitions and their differences can be found in the detailed perspective by White and Lipson. To calculate the overall void volume, we utilize the alpha-shape method within the molecular visualization package Ovito. A common criterion of choosing probe size is to use a value higher than the nearest neighbor atom separation distance. The probe radius employed (0.25 nm) was chosen to be higher than the atomic distance between two carbon atoms along a polystyrene backbone. As seen in Figure De-densification of the polymer could contribute to some changes in the free volume as well. To understand the distribution of FVEs across the different systems, we employ the Void Analysis Codes and Unix Utilities for Molecular Modeling and Simulations (VACUUMMS). Next, we evaluate the translational dynamics of the three polymers at the different temperatures by calculating the mean squared displacement (MSD). MSD measures the change in the position of the particles from their initial positions, defined as: where r (t0 + t) is the position of a particle at time t. We do not examine the center of mass motion of each chain, but instead compute the dynamics of all atoms (including hydrogen atoms along the polymer backbone and sidechain) across the three systems to improve statistics. Universally, polymers exhibit three distinct regions in the mean-squared displacement. To study the orientational dynamics and to probe relaxations on a more local scale, we calculate the bond vector autocorrelation function (bond ACF). It is defined by where B(t) is bond vector at time t. Averaging is done over all bonds in the system. Calculating the bond ACF enables us to capture small-scale orientational fluctuations in these amorphous systems. As seen in Figure We observe increased dynamics in the atoms that are at the surface, compared to atoms in the bulk, as evidenced by the faster relaxation of bond ACF of surface bonds compared to bulk bonds. The increased dynamics of the surface segments can be attributed to the greater number of degrees of freedom for these atoms, as a result of their proximity to a free interface. Our results also reveal that the contrast in dynamics between surface and bulk atoms is more distinct in PMP compared to PS and TRP. This can be attributed to the inherent rigidity of PS and TRP chains, regardless of their position in the bulk or near the surface. Conversely, the flexible chains in PMP exhibit a marked difference in dynamics between the bulk and surface regions. Atoms in the bulk region exhibit significantly slower dynamics due to the increased number of neighboring atoms that restrict their movement. The observed correlation between the dynamics of surface segments and the change in free volume element (FVE) distribution is ascribed to the fact that the surface segments constitute the walls of FVE, and thus their mobility directly influences the alteration in FVE. The dynamics of the surface segments offer an indication of the susceptibility of FVE distribution to change. The relatively slower dynamics in TRP compared to PMP suggests a more robust FVE distribution in TRP. We find that for the timescales considered here, there is no difference in dynamics between surface and bulk groups at 100 K for PS and TRP, and the difference in dynamics for PMP segments is noticeable only at long times at 100 K. Interestingly, for PMP the bulk vs. surface groups at 300 K show a greater difference in segmental dynamics than that at 500 K. This could be because the total segmental mobility is very high for PMP at 500 K, and the proximity to voids does not speed up the relaxation as much as it does at 300 K, where the overall mobility is restricted, thus the presence of voids causes a sharp increase in dynamics. A similar trend is observed for the PS and TRP systems at 500 K. While the PS segments show faster relaxation compared to TRP, we see that the difference in dynamics between surface and bulk bonds at 500 K is more pronounced in TRP than it is in PS. This is attributed to the fact that the overall high chain mobility reduces the impact of the void interface in PS, however, in TRP, the presence of voids greatly enhances the dynamics of chain segments that are close to it. To investigate the impact of polymer structure on penetrant diffusion in the three systems, hydrogen molecules were introduced, and their trajectories were analyzed to gain insight into the nature of molecular transport under different temperature conditions. First, we investigate hydrogen transport qualitatively over 300 ps, as shown in Figure This can be ascribed to the elevated microporosity of TRP, enabling hydrogen molecules to hop between the voids. However, as the temperature increases to 300 K, we see a reversal in this trend. At short times, H2 diffusion is highest in TRP, followed by PS and then PMP, however, at around 100 ps, the MSD of H2 in PMP surpasses that of TRP. At 500 K, H2 diffusion is highest in PMP, followed by PS and TRP. To provide additional insight about hydrogen dynamics, we compute the ensembleaveraged displacement of hydrogen molecules using the self-part of Van Hove correlation function, given by: where G(r,t) is the probability distribution, r is the position, t is the time, δ is the Dirac delta function, and N is the number of particles. Assuming that the particle is initially located at the origin at time t=0, the function G(r,t) denotes the probability of detecting the particle at position r within a time interval of dt. Figure At 100 K, most hydrogens remain localized, resulting in small changes in peak height for PMP and PS. Additionally, the displacement remains nearly constant across different time intervals due to the limited mobility of hydrogen molecules. The peak height in TRP shows the most variation with dt, with a larger shift toward longer displacements, signifying that hydrogen dynamics is highest in TRP at 100 K. This is in line with the MSD results, as well as the fact that TRP has the largest void distribution at 100 K (Figure The increase in hydrogen mobility in PMP at higher temperatures can be attributed to two factors. The first is that the PMP chains are inherently more mobile compared to TRP and PS, this mobility contributes to the penetrant motion. However, this is predominant only at high temperatures. At lower temperatures, when chain mobility is restricted, void volume and FVE distribution dominates, which is why H2 diffusion is higher in TRP, as it has larger voids at 100 K (Figure In summary, we implemented MD simulations to highlight the interplay between temperature, local chain dynamics, free volume element distribution, and penetrant transport in amorphous polymers. By using geometric and energetic methods to calculate the size and FVE distribution of different systems at different temperatures, we were able to probe the stability of FVE distribution against backbone flexibility and polymer segmental motions. We also calculated the dynamics of polymer segments as a function of distance from the voids in the matrix. As polymer segments near the surface have more degrees of orientational freedom, they exhibit faster bond decorrelation compared to bulk segments. With the increase in temperature within a given system, there is an increase in local segmental dynamics, leading to a redistribution of FVEs. The expansion and coalescence of FVEs are evidenced by a shift of FVE distribution towards higher diameter values, coupled with a reduction in the number of smaller FVEs. Upon the introduction of hydrogen penetrant, polymer mobility, in addition to FVE distribution, plays a critical role in the diffusion trends observed across different systems and temperatures. The diffusion of hydrogen in PMP exhibits a significant increase with increasing temperatures, even though its microporosity is lower than PS and TRP. This phenomenon is attributed to assisted transport of polymer chains, where the motion of polymers contributes to the enhancement of hydrogen diffusion. This work suggests that the relaxation of polymer segments, particularly surface segments, can serve as a useful method for assessing the stability of FVE distribution in different polymer membranes. The mobility of surface segments is directly correlated with the FVE redistribution in the polymer. The impact of backbone flexibility on the stability of FVE distribution is significant, as it affects emergent phenomena such as plasticization and physical aging. Using segmental dynamics to establish a direct correlation between the polymer flexibility and FVE distribution can guide the design of superior membrane materials to address these challenges. Furthermore, while designing polymers for separation applications, it is imperative to decouple the contributions of polymer mobility and void distribution on penetrant transport. Future studies will be carried out to understand how tunable parameters such as polymer chemistry, polydispersity, and crosslinking influence physical aging.