The interface between two-dimensional topological Dirac states and an s-wave superconductor is expected to support Majorana bound states that can be used for quantum computing applications. Realizing these novel states of matter and their applications requires control over superconductivity and spin-orbit coupling to achieve spin-momentum locked topological surface states which are simultaneously superconducting. While signatures of Majorana bound states have been observed in the magnetic vortex cores of bulk FeTe0.55Se0.45, inhomogeneity and disorder from doping makes these signatures unclear and inconsistent between vortices. Here we report superconductivity in monolayer FeTe1-ySey (Fe(Te,Se)) grown on Bi2Te3 by molecular beam epitaxy. Spin and angle resolved photoemission spectroscopy directly resolve the interfacial spin and electronic structure of Fe(Te,Se)/Bi2Te3 heterostructures. We find that for y = 0.25 the Fe(Te,Se) electronic structure overlaps with the topological Bi2Te3 interfacial states which disrupts the desired spin-momentum locking. In contrast, for y = 0.1 a smaller Fe(Te,Se) Fermi surface allows for clear spin-momentum locking observed in the topological states. Hence, we demonstrate the Fe(Te,Se)/Bi2Te3 system is a highly tunable platform for realizing Majorana bound states where reduced doping can improve characteristics important for Majorana interrogation and potential applications. The interplay between topology and electronic correlations can fractionalize electronic degrees of freedom into exotic quasiparticles as Majorana bound states (MBS) that demonstrate non-Abelian statistics which can be used for topological quantum computation applications. The recent discovery of the ability to synthesize high quality epitaxial FeTe1-ySey films on Bi2Te3 offers a new avenue to explore topological superconductivity. We find a bulk-like electronic structure of Fe(Te,Se) films as well as the topological interfacial Bi2Te3 Dirac states at the Fermi surface. Surprisingly, we find the Fe(Te,Se) films are superconducting down to the single monolayer (ML) limit. However, the momentum space proximity of the Fe(Te,Se) and topological states can overlap and disrupt the spin texture in the topological states measured by SARPES. Nonetheless, the electronic structure of both Bi2Te3 and Fe(Te,Se) are tunable and an idealized electronic structure is found that shows clear spinmomentum locking in a superconducting heterostructure with significantly lower Se doping than the bulk Fe(Te,Se) counterpart. High quality Fe(Te,Se) overlayers of different thicknesses and Se concentrations were synthesized on both as-grown and annealed Bi2Te3 films grown on Al2O3 substrates, as shown in Figure For the thicker ~20 ML Fe(Te,Se) films grown on Bi2Te3, the bulk-like Fe(Te,Se) electronic structure was observed with no evidence of the topological interface states from Bi2Te3 as shown in Figure For the y = 0.1 electronic structure shown in Figure To understand how the topological interfacial states align with the bands from the superconducting overlayer, Fe(Te,Se) films with thickness slightly over a monolayer (nominally 1.25 ML as measured with a quartz crystal monitor) were grown on the annealed Bi2Te3 films. This thickness was chosen to ensure complete coverage of the Bi2Te3 surface while limiting the thickness to observe clear signatures of the interfacial topological states as shown in Figure The interfacial electronic structure for y = 0.25 is shown in Figure However, the clarity of the linearly dispersing bands and the replica bands from quantum confinement are far superior for the y = 0.1 case. It is unclear if there is Se intermixing with the Te in the Bi2Te3 during Fe(Te,Se) growth, but the improved clarity of the topological bands is indicative of a sharper interface with less interfacial disorder. To realize proximity induced topological superconductivity, the spin-momentum locking in the topological Dirac states must exist at the interface. To interrogate the spin of the electrons, SARPES measurements are performed at a fixed energy while scanning across different momentum. To benchmark the expected spin texture for our Bi2Te3 films, SARPES measurements were performed on an annealed Bi2Te3 film without any Fe(Te,Se) overlayer as shown in Figure where Seff = 0.275 is the effective Sherman function for our ferrum spin detector. The Fermi surface for the Fe(Te,Se)/Bi2Te3 films with y = 0.25 and 0.1, shown in Figure Bulk FeSe is a superconductor and the addition of Te simultaneously introduces a large spin orbit coupling and pushes the pz band downward in energy towards EF which creates a band inversion and nontrivial topology for the system. The topological Dirac electronic states on the boundary of a topological insulator arise due to the interface between topologically nontrivial and topological trivial systems. The heterojunction between Fe(Te,Se) and Bi2Te3 creates the necessary boundary conditions to realize the topological Dirac band structure at this buried interface. Hence, for topological superconductivity the needed spin-momentum locked topological band structure is provided by the Fe(Te,Se)/Bi2Te3 interface which is directly adjacent to the superconducting Fe(Te,Se) overlayer. Previous results show superconductivity with Tc ~ 10 K in Fe(Te,Se)/Bi2Te3 down to y ~ 0.03 and our 1.25 ML Fe(Te,Se) films with y = 0.1 on Bi2Te3 are still superconducting. Beyond the tunability of the superconducting and topological electronic structure, this system has other advantages over other proposed hybrid topological superconducting systems. Three dimensional topological insulating materials need to be thicker than a critical thickness to prevent hybridization of the topological electronic structure at the top and bottom boundaries of the material. We observe that the monolayer Fe(Te,Se)/Bi2Te3 has the necessary ingredients for topological superconductivity. As a next step, investigations to observe the zero bias MBS peaks in the vortex cores using scanning tunneling spectroscopy or non-local transport methods are required. We have investigated the spin resolved electronic structure of Fe(Te,Se) films grown on Bi2Te3. We observe the Fe(Te,Se) is superconducting down to the monolayer limit but TT cc RR=0 is lower than observed for thicker films. This monolayer superconductivity is robust enough for ex situ measurements and is observed for y = 0.25 and y = 0.1 thin films with different Fe(Te,Se) Fermi surfaces. For the thin 1.25 ML Fe(Te,Se) films we observe the Bi2Te3 topological interface states. For Fe(Te,Se) films with y = 0.25 we find overlapping electronic structures of the Fe(Te,Se) and Bi2Te3 which disrupts the spin-momentum locking observed in the topological states by SARPES. However, the electronic structure of both Fe(Te,Se) and Bi2Te3 can be tuned and optimized to reveal the needed spin-momentum locking. We have demonstrated Fe(Te,Se)/Bi2Te3 is a flexible system that can support MBS with expected Tcs above that of swave superconductors like Nb while simultaneously minimizing chemical inhomogeneities from Se doping. Thin Film Synthesis and Transport: Films were grown by molecular beam epitaxy on c-plane sapphire following a similar recipe previously reported. Spin and Electronic Structure Measurements: Spin and angle resolved photoemission spectroscopy measurements were performed in a lab-based system, coupled to the molecular beam epitaxy system, using a Scienta DA30L hemispherical analyzer with a base pressure of 