Despite their technological relevance, a full microscopic understanding of glasses is still lacking. This applies even more to their surfaces whose properties largely differ from that of the bulk material. Here, we experimentally investigate the surface of a two-dimensional glass as a function of the effective temperature. To yield a free surface, we use an attractive colloidal suspension of micron-sized particles interacting via tunable critical Casimir forces. Similar to crystals, we observe surface melting of the glass, i.e., the formation of a liquid film at the surface well below the glass temperature. Underneath, however, we find an unexpected region with bulk density but much faster particle dynamics. It results from connected clusters of highly mobile particles which are formed near the surface and deeply percolate into the underlying material. Because its thickness can reach several tens of particle diameters, this layer may elucidate the poorly understood properties of thin glassy films which find use in many technical applications. Solids typically begin to melt far below their bulk melting temperature by the formation of a liquid layer at their surface Here, we present real-space experiments of the surface melting of a two-dimensional (2D) colloidal glass where the motion of particles is fully resolved in space and time. We find that the glass melts from the surface by forming a broad transient region composed of liquid and supercooled liquid in coexistence with an underlying bulk glass (BG). Surprisingly, adjacent to the BG, we observe a region with bulk density but a faster particle dynamics, the latter resulting from connected cooperative clusters of highly mobile particles which are formed at the surface and proliferate deep into the system. The thickness of this unexpected region varies non-monotonically with the effective temperature and becomes largest near the bulk glass transition point. To yield an equilibrated gas-solid interface in a 2D colloidal system, an attractive particle interaction is required. In our experiments this is achieved by critical Casimir forces which arise due to fluctuations of the solvent's composition near its critical temperature T c Upon variations of the temperature ∆T = T c -T , one can control the attraction between colloids suspended in the critical mixture in a fully reversible manner The Debye screening length of the system is about 30 nm Figure Figs. To investigate how the material's properties change with increasing distance to the surface, we evaluated the z-resolved mean-squared displacement (MSD) and intermediate scattering function F s (q, t) (Supplementary Note 2). Exemplarily this is shown for ∆T = 4.5 K in Fig. Since the particle area fraction gradually increases from the surface towards the bulk, the observation of a smooth transition (liquid -supercooled liquid -glass) may simply reflect the density-dependence of the phase behavior of a disordered colloidal system. This, however, is not in agreement with our results. Opposed to the area fraction which saturates for ∆T = 4.5 K at z ≈ 18 σ s (Fig. Because F s (q, t) decays rather slowly at large depths, a quantitative analysis of its characteristic decay time is difficult on our experimental time scales. Therefore, we have also calculated the self-part of the overlap function q s (t, z) which measures how similar particle configurations remain after time t over distance z Our results demonstrate that surface melting of glasses is qualitatively different com- pared to crystals and leads to the formation of a surface glass layer. This layer contains cooperative clusters of highly mobile particles which are formed at the surface and which proliferate deep into the material by several tens of particle diameters beyond the region where the particle density saturates. This might explain why the properties of thin glassy films considerably deviate from their corresponding bulk properties 