Using the RT formula and the subregion CV conjecture, we numerically investigate the holographic entanglement entropy (HEE) and holographic subregion complexity (HSC) for two holographic d-wave superconducting models with backreactions. We find that the HEE and HSC can probe these two d-wave superconducting phase transitions. The HEE of the superconducting phase is always lower than that of the normal phase. For the HSC, however, it behaves differently and interestingly, which depends on both the strip-width L x and backreaction κ. More specifically, when the backreaction is larger than a particular critical value, or the strip-width of the boundary subsystem is smaller than a particular critical value, the HSC in the superconducting phase is larger than that in the normal phase, and vice versa. The anti-de Sitter/conformal field theories (AdS/CFT) duality (or gauge/gravity duality) provide a powerful tool for strongly coupled quantum systems. The gauge/gravity duality originated from the study of superstring theory. More specifically, Maldacena proposed that the Type IIB string theory (D3 branes) on (AdS 5 × S 5 ) N with some appropriate boundary conditions (and possibly some boundary degrees of freedom) is dual to 4d N = 4 U (N ) Super-Yang-Mills theory in the large N limit Thus, as an attempt, we consider the backreaction for the BHRY d-wave model in this work, without looking in detail at the constraint equations required to obtain the correct number of propagating degrees of freedom, just as in the CKMWY d-wave model In addition to its wide application in CMP and QCD, the gauge/gravity duality has been recently extended in quantum information physics (QIP), such as the entanglement entropy and the computational complexity. Considering a quantum system divided into two subsystems, A and B, the total Hilbert space can be written as the direct product of two subspaces H tot = H A ⊗ H B . Then the entanglement entropy of subsystem A can be defined by von Neumann entropy, S A = -tr A (ρ A log ρ A ) with the reduced density matrix ρ A = tr B (ρ tot ). The entanglement entropy can be used to measure how closely entangled (or how "quantum") a given wave function is. It's very difficult to calculate the entanglement entropy of arbitrary submanifolds A directly in higher dimensional QFT. Fortunately, a holographic interpretation of entanglement entropy in CFT was proposed by Ryu and Takayanagi where Area(γ A ) is the area of the static minimal surface in AdS spacetime whose boundary is given by ∂A. G N is the Newton constant. Indeed, the authors Another information-theoretic quantity, computational complexity where L is the AdS radius, and G N is Newton's constant. It is worth noting that, due to the metric being divergent on the infinite boundary of an asymptotic AdS geometry, to regulate this quantity, we need to put a UV cutoff = 1 r near the boundary r = ∞ just like we did in the HEE. One can find the universal term of the HSC C u by subtracting the diverging term from the total complexity. The HSC in s-wave and p-wave superconducting models has been studied Another research motivation of this paper comes from analyzing some existing results in the literature In this section, we will briefly introduce the d-wave superconductor described by the background geometry of a black hole coupled with a symmetric, traceless second-rank tensor field B μν and a U(1) gauge field. The total action takes the following form 1 where κ B μν is a symmetric traceless tensor with the change q and mass m, respectively. D μ = μ -iqA μ is the covariant derivative in curved spacetime. We consider a planar Schwarzchild-AdS ansatz to study the fully back-reacted holographic superconductor. The Hawking temperature of this black hole (4), which will be interpreted as the temperature of the dual CFT, is given by For the convenience of calculation, we change the above metric into the following form after the coordinate transformation r = r + /z. In the rest of the calculation, we will set r + = 1. 2 . At this time, z = 0 is the boundary where the dual d-wave superconductor lives, 1 It's worth noting that we've already used the familiar form for the material fields L m by the rescaling The d-wave superconductor condensate on the x-y plane of the boundary with translational invariance. The condensate changes its sign under every π/2 rotation on the x -y plane and the rotational symmetry is broken down to Z(2). Considering these characteristics and simplifying the equations of motion as much as possible, we choose two ansatzes that the spatial components of symmetric traceless tensor field are B μν : ). If either of the two ansatzes is chosen, the other must vanish. Two ansatzes are equivalent under a θ = π/4 rotation on the x -y plane, and the equations of motion for both ansatzes are the same We consider one of them for the tensor field B μν and gauge field A μ , i.e, After the variation of the action (3), the equations of motion can be easily obtained 3 Without loss of generality, we will set q = 1 and keep κ 2 finite when we consider the backreactions 4 . Notice that these equations of motion are very similar to those for swave superconductors 3 Notice that we have hidden the AdS radial L in the above equations of motion, since we have taken L = 1. We set L = 1 because we have the scaling symmetries L → aL, z → a -1 z, t → at, q → a -1 q. 4 If one re-scales the tensor field B μν and the gauge potential A μ to B μν → Bμν q and A μ → Aμ q in the action, the tensor field and Maxwell field equations ( boundary. Because of f (z h ) = 0 and φ(z h ) = 0 where the coefficients ψ 0 , φ 1 , and χ 0 are some constants. To obtain ψ(z), φ(z), χ(z), and f (z) that satisfy the asymptotic boundary conditions of the equations, we can solve the equations of motion ( where with the BF bound m 2 ≥ -17/4. If ∆ -≤ 0 (m 2 ≥ -2), the normalizability requires that ψ -must vanish. According to the gauge/gravity dictionary, the coefficient ψ + corresponds to the vacuum expectation value of the operator dual to the components of the tensor field B μν , and ψ -is dual to a source for this operator. In this paper, we consider m 2 = -1/4 (i.e. ∆ -= -1/2 and ∆ + = 7/2). To get the metric In Fig. In Fig. One can fit these curves near the critical point and observe that the expected value of the operator behaves like O xx ∼ (T c -T ) 1/2 , which implies that the d-wave superconducting phase transition is a second-order phase transition with the exponent 1/2. Finally, it is essential to emphasize that the physical quantities we want to obtain are independent of the scaling scale. Notice that, according to the scaling symmetry the quantities T, μ, ρ and O xx scale as Therefore, to analyse the physics, it is helpful to make these quantities dimensionless, i.e., With the same strategy, in this section, we study the effect of backreactions on the d-wave model proposed by BHRY. This holographic model with a symmetric tensor field φ μν and a U(1) gauge field A μ is described by the following action with where D μ = μ -iqA μ , φ ≡ φ μ μ , and R μ νρλ is the Riemann tensor of the background metric. The parameter q is the charge of the massive spin-two fields. We shall set q = 1 without loss of generality in the following discussion. An ansatz where φ μν and A μ depend only on the radial coordinate z is considered, and only the two spatial components of φ are turned on with all other components of φ μν setting to zero, and the real φ and ψ. The ansatz Using the planar Schwarzchild-AdS ansatz (6), we can quickly get the equations of motion. The tensor field's charge was set to q = 1 without losing generality. We can solve these equations of motion by the shooting method, which detail has been introduced in the previous section. Near the asymptotically AdS boundary, the Maxwell field φ, and tensor field 7 After changing φ μν to B μν , the matter part L m of the action for this model is very similar to the one for the CKMWY d-wave model in the previous section except for the last term 2R μνρλ φ * μρ φ νλ . 8 We've set the AdS radius L = 1 here. where with the stability bound m 2 ≥ 0. To keep the conformal dimension ∆ + the same as that of the CKMWY d-wave model studied in the previous subsection, we would like to consider the mass of tensor field m 2 = 7/4, i.e., ∆ -= -1/2 and ∆ + = 7/2. According to the gauge/gravity dual dictionary, O xx ≡ ψ + is interpreted as the expected value of the operator O xx , and ψ -is dual to a source for this operator and must vanish. We can also read out the chemical potential μ and the related charge density ρ from the expansion of φ(z). In Fig. It is interesting to note that the critical temperature of this d-wave model is slightly smaller than that of the CKMWY d-wave model (see the red line) when both the parameters κ and ∆ + between the two models keep the same. Therefore, we can conclude that the non-zero curvature term 2R μνρλ φ * μρ φ νλ in action ( In this section, we will numerically study the HEE and HSC for a strip subregion of the 2-dimensional boundary system for the CKMWY and BHRY d-wave superconducting models. We can get the induced metric from the linear element ( Then the area for a strip subsystem A with the range x ⊆ -Lx 2 , Lx can be given by the following formula The area of the minimal surface γ A can be obtained by making a variation of the integrand function above, and the HEE can be obtained by the RT formula where z * is the turning point of the minimal surface. There is another boundary condition, which is the regular boundary of the asymptotic infinity z → 0 where ε is a UV cutoff used to avoid the divergent problem and will be taken as a small value in our numerical strategy. Substituting Eq. ( where S u is the universal term that is physically important. is a divergent term that comes from pure AdS background and can be removed by the regularization where the computational details are included in Appendix A. From Eq. ( The volume enclosed by the minimal surface γ A and the strip region A can be obtained from the volume integration of the minimal surfaces in bulk Using Eq.( where C u is the universal term, and F(z * )/ε 2 is the diverging term. The divergence term comes from the pure AdS background where the computational details are included in Appendix A. Although the divergent term does not have an exact expression, we can still solve it numerically. Since the finite term does not change with the cutoff ε, we can subtract the complexity from each other that corresponds to two different cutoffs ε 1 and ε 2 , so that the finite term can be eliminated and F(z * )/(ε 2 1 -ε 2 2 ) will be left, where the numerator F(z * ) of the divergent term will be obtained numerically. Under the scaling symmetries of Eq. ( Therefore, the dimensionless forms of these quantities are helpful In Figs. From sub-figure (a) of Figs. In addition, we also find that the HEE increases with the increase of the backreactions κ 2 for a fixed temperature. When considering the effects of non-zero backreactions, we can see that the HEE of the superconducting phase is always lower than that of the normal phase for a given temperature T below the critical point. As the degrees of freedom condense below the critical temperature, the entropy exhibits a lower value, similar to the result of s-wave superconductors CKMWY d-wave. Lx ρ =5 κ 2 =0.07 Similar phenomena that the different behaves of the HSC for different fixed strip-widths in superconducting phase transitions have also been found recently in Refs. Furthermore, in the Figs. In this paper, we investigated the HEE and HSC of two holographic d-wave superconducting models with backreactions. Firstly, we studied the condensation characteristics of these two d-wave models after phase transition. Using the same ansatz and keeping the same dimensions of operators, we obtained the critical temperatures of phase transitions under different backreactions, showing that the critical temperature decreases as the backreaction increases. This indicates that the backreaction will hinder the d-wave condensation to be formed. It's also worth noting that, when keeping both the parameters κ and ∆ + corresponding to two models the same, the critical temperature of the BHRY model is slightly smaller than that of the CKMWY model. Further analysis revealed that this slight but essential difference is due to the coupling term of the tensor field and curvature in action 19. Secondly, we studied the HEE and HSC for these two holographical d-wave superconducting models. When the strip-widths L x of subregions were fixed, we found that the slope of HEE and HSC varies with temperature and is discontinuous at the point of critical temperature, which means that both the HEE and HSC can be used as good probes to the phase transition in holographic d-wave superconductors. Furthermore, when the temperature was fixed, we observed that the HEE and HSC showed similar linear growth behavior for large widths of subregions. We also noted that the d-wave superconducting phase always has a lower HEE than the normal phase due to the condensation of degrees of freedom below the critical temperature. However, the behaviors of HSC are more complicated. More specifically, we found that the behaviors of HSC depend on the strip-width of the subregion and the backreaction. When the width of the subregion is smaller than a critical value or the backreaction is larger than a critical value, the HSC of the superconducting phase is larger than that of the normal phase. In this case, the HSC decreases with the temperature increase, which is similar to the result in Ref. It shows that the HSC has the potential to offer much richer physical information than the HEE, although the physical mechanisms involved are still unclear. It should be emphasized that we only focus on the "CV" conjecture of the subregion. It is interesting and necessary to use the "CA" conjecture and general "CV" conjecture to study the holographic complexity in holographic superconducting systems. be expressed in the general form where S u is the universal term of total HEE and is physically important for asymptotic AdS black holes. Considering the same approximation, we can also solve the integral of the minimal surface in the Eq. ( x(z) = is the divergent term of the total HSC caused by the pure AdS background. For different cases, the numerators F(z * ) of the divergent terms have different forms, but we can still get them numerically. Therefore, for all 4-dimensional asymptotic AdS black holes, the total HSC can be expressed in the general form where C u is the universal term of the total HSC and is physically important for asymptotic AdS black holes. This is allowed because we have the scaling symmetry r → br, (t, x, y) → b -1 (t, x, y), f → b 2 f, φ → bφ. To keep the norm of the gauge potential A μ A μ = g tt φ 2 finite at the horizon, we must make the gauge potential φ vanish at the horizon. This is allowed by the rescaling symmetry e χ → a 2 e χ , φ → φ/a, t → at for a particular value a.