Acoustic modeling serves audio processing tasks such as de-noising, data reconstruction, model-based testing and classification. Previous work dealt with signal parameterization of wave envelopes either by multiple Gaussian distributions or a single asymmetric Gaussian curve, which both fall short in representing super-imposed echoes sufficiently well. This study presents a three-stage Multimodal Exponentially Modified Gaussian (MEMG) model with an optional oscillating term that regards captured echoes as a superposition of univariate probability distributions in the temporal domain. With this, synthetic ultrasound signals suffering from artifacts can be fully recovered, which is backed by quantitative assessment. Real data experimentation is carried out to demonstrate the classification capability of the acquired features with object reflections being detected at different points in time. Acoustic signal modeling plays a key role in the technology stack of tomorrow's sensor systems, with important use cases in medical analysis, non-destructive testing, robotics and vehicle navigation. In ultrasound sensing, real world data is characterized by a heterogeneous superposition of echoes varying in magnitude and shape as they are reflected from an environment of complex topologies. This work presents a robust, nonlinear regression framework for acoustic feature extraction to support signal compression, denoising, data recovery, modelbased testing and -most importantly -classification at low computational cost. An overview of the proposed processing pipeline is outlined in Fig. Echo detection in Time-of-Flight (ToF) applications is a well-studied subject across disciplines, adopting methods including dictionary-based approaches Three-stage NLLS Fitting Feature Processing Hilbert Transform Fig. noting that these asymmetric Gaussian regression models find application in other domains such as laser beam modeling While these models serve as solid groundwork for modelbased simulations, their performance falls short in object recognition applications such as presence detection scenarios. This requires realistic modeling of multiple components as materials absorb, transmit and reflect transducer signals in various ways, yielding different energy distributions that expose a multimodal representation of asymmetrically shaped Gaussian curves. For this purpose, this paper introduces a Multimodal Exponentially Modified Gaussian (MEMG) model with an oscillating term to regard multiple echoes as univariate probability distributions in the time domain. This acoustic feature model is sub-divided into three-stages of Non-Linear Least-Squares (NLLS) regression with each being solved by the Levenberg-Marquardt (LM) algorithm to achieve fast convergence. As the proposed framework offers characteristic features, it thereby enables echo segmentation and lays the groundwork for classification tasks. The experimental section complements existing work by empirically demonstrating that a single skew term borrowed from stochastic calculus sufficiently represents asymmetric shapes of recorded chirp reflections. This supports the reconstruction of overlapped phase signals corrupted by noise and qualifies MEMG to be used for object classification purposes. In particular, feeding MEMG features to a Random Forest classifier shows that the proposed model helps recognize echoes across frames acquired at different points in time. Let an EMG with oscillation term be defined as where x ∈ R X denotes the time domain with a total number of X samples and p = [α, μ, σ, η, f, φ] ∈ R D contains the normalization α, mean μ, spread σ, skew η, frequency f and phase φ. With this, the Gaussian function is given by and the term Φ(x|η, μ, σ) covering an asymmetric shape with by means of the error function erf(•). The oscillating function is obtained by using the cosine. To consider superpositions of multiple components, we aggregate EMGs by with p = [p 1 , p 2 , . . . , p K ] ∈ R DK concatenated parameters and k = {1, 2, . . . , K} components, accordingly. Prior to the MEMG model estimation, an oscillating signal is routed through a band-pass filter that eliminates spectral intensities around the dominant frequency detected by a Fourier transform. A second pre-processing stage counteracts the power loss over distance, which is caused by anisotropic radiation. Each incoming frame y(x) is treated with an exponential fit of a /y(x) b where a and b are fitted variables. To assess candidates p, a loss function L (p) is defined as where f ∈ R X is the residual vector and y n (x) represents the band-pass filtered measurement data at frame number n. The objective in ( with the Jacobian J ∈ R X×DK w.r.t. p(j) at each iteration j and diagonal matrix D = diag [J J] with an adaptive damping term δ. Each Jacobian is computed from analytical derivatives. The optimal solution vector p is obtained by representing the best approximation out of p(j) candidates. Iterative optimizations are known to be error-prone for start values with large numerical distance from the solution. For a robust regression, LM iterations are split into a three-stage process with (a) Hilbert-only EMG parameter regression of where H [•] denotes the Hilbert transform. Other parameters are initialized for all k with α k ), σ = f e and φ (1) k = 0 where f e is the operating frequency given in kHz to avoid a large condition number in the Jacobian. Phase estimates are constrained to be φ Given the extracted echo feature dimensions, one may infer quantitative information about their estimation reliability. 1) Confidence Measures: For blind MEMG assessment, we define the confidence C n per A-scan by , ∀n where M (•) and ŷn (•) denote the fitted and raw signals in the range of the detected position μ k at 5σ k , respectively. 2) Standardization: Let a solution parameter vector be reshaped to a matrix p ∈ R DK → P(n) k ∈ R D×K with K components and D features that belongs to a set { P(1) k , P(2) k , . . . , P(N) k } with N as the total number of A-scan frames. After removal of components suffering from feature outliers, each P(k) n is standardized according to with μ s ∈ R D×1 and σ s ∈ R D×1 for valid feature evaluation. 3) Object Detection Classifier: The classification goal is to distinguish between pronounced echoes and reverberation clutter based on the acquired feature space. More specifically, the object detection task is formulated as an identification of unimodal components across frames whereas the classifier is unaware of the acquisition times, i.e. to which frame an echo belongs to. This implies that positional features μ k are left out in the classification to enable detection of echoes at different points in time independent of the ToF. Using a set of standardized echo features P(n) for training, corresponding components are determined in test frames via the Random Forest (RF) classifier as an ensemble learning method. The estimation parameters, e.g. number of decision trees, are selected based on stratified cross-validation and can be found in the experimental section III-B. Validation of the presented framework is conducted by simulation and experimentation. First, the model's reconstruction capability is tested by means of a simulated oscillating MEMG signal suffering from noise with quantitative analysis from the Peak-Signal-to-Noise-Ratio (PSNR). Second, real ultrasonic sensor data is used to scrutinize the relevance of the skew parameter η introduced in (1). Finally, a set of features extracted from several real data frames is fed to proposed feature metrics to demonstrate object detection. For denoising evaluation, a simulated Ground-Truth (GT) signal g(x) = K=4 k=1 m (p k ; x) with 8-bit signed integer quantization at a sampling rate f s = 300 kHz is used. Quantitative validation is carried out using a PSNR given by where s(x) is a measured signal. Equation ( For experimental analysis, real sensor data is acquired from a single airborne transducer at f e = 175 kHz operating frequency, which collects A-scan frames of L = 126 samples every 100 ms. A convex-shaped piece of metal with 4-by-7 cm size served as a target for a total number of N = 21 frames. The heuristic conventions made in the evaluation are explained hereafter. Samples within the blind zone are omitted. The gradient is computed by sample distance 1 and τ = 100. Frequency and phase are disregarded as commonly done in NDT. LM iterations are limited to 200 each. Feature outliers are identified and rejected by μ k < 0 and σ k < 0 while all remaining components undergo further assessment. One objective of the experimental validation is to scrutinize the importance of the skew parameter η. Exemplary frame confidences C n and c (n) k from real acquisitions are provided in Table This study shows that super-imposed ultrasound echoes are robustly represented by an accumulation of oscillating EMGs. Quantitative assessments confirm this hypothesis in a simulation analysis by reconstructing a signal with a 40 dB PSNR gain. Real data experimentation is carried out to demonstrate the relevance of Gaussian skew. The echo classification capability is supported by an F1-score of 1.0 regardless of the arrival time. This suggests that the presented framework is a viable acoustic feature extractor in ToF applications. 