Crystal structure prediction for a given chemical composition has long been a challenge in condensed-matter science. We have recently shown that experimental powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) data are helpful in a crystal structure search using simulated annealing, even when they are insufficient for structure determination by themselves (N. Tsujimoto et al., Phys. Rev. Materials 2, 053801 ( The prediction of crystal structures at the atomic level is one of the most fundamental challenges in condensed matter science One approach to accelerating the theoretical structure search is the utilization of the experimental data with conventional calculations Putz et al. Under such circumstances, we introduce a new correlationcoefficient-type penalty function to the experimental (XRD) data-assimilated approach to improve the success rate and robustness to the experimental noise. We discuss whether this approach is applicable for hydrogen-containing material, in The central idea of the data assimilation method is based on Bayes' theorem. This method can be interpreted as a kind of maximum likelihood estimation. From Bayes' theorem, the conditional probability of the crystal structure given the experimental data is where R represents the atomic positions and lattice parameters and I ref is the reference experimental data. In this work, we adopt the diffraction pattern as I ref , though it can be arbitrary experimentally observable quantities. In the case of optimization by simulated annealing, the probability of finding the crystal structure follows the Boltzmann distribution: where E(R) is the interatomic potential energy and β is the inverse temperature. Meanwhile, by presuming that R giving calculated data (I calc ) similar to I ref should resemble the target structure, ρ(I ref |R) is defined in the following manner: where N is the number of atoms and α is a weight parameter. D is the penalty function obtained from the similarity between calculated and experimental data: D takes zero when I ref and I calc match perfectly, whereas it takes positive value otherwise. As a result, from eqs.(1)-(3), ρ(R|I ref ) is proportional to the exponential of the cost function F (eq.( Therefore, by minimizing F, we can maximize ρ(R|I ref ) to find the target structure referring to the given experimental data and efficiently obtain the target structure with this dataassimilated approach. The concept of our method is summarized in the schematic diagram shown in Fig. As the penalty function in the previous study where I calc is the calculated diffraction intensity, θ is the diffraction angle, [θ min ; θ max ] is the reference angle range, and θ obs is the peak position observed in the reference experimental diffraction pattern I ref . This penalty function does not depend on the experimental intensity information and represents the degree of coincidence of peak positions between experimental and calculated diffraction patterns. By minimizing this penalty function, we can restrict the search space to satisfy the same extinction rule as in the experiment. Because of experimental errors such as the effect of preferred orientation, the peak intensity rate in experiments sometimes deviates from the ideal one. In such a case, this penalty function works well even with an unreliable experimental intensity rate. However, it does not work well when the target structure has low symmetry without the extinction law, or when it is difficult to determine peak positions owing to noise. In this study, we propose to use the correlation coefficient between I calc and I ref as follows: where Ĩ = I -Ī and Ī is the average intensity over the reference angle range [θ min ; θ max ]. This penalty function represents how well the shape of the calculated diffraction pattern agrees with that of the experiment. Therefore, it mainly fits the large peaks and their intensity rates in the experiment and includes not only the peak position but also the intensity information. The other feature of this penalty function is that it rarely requires pretreatment of experimental data. Even when the experimental noise is so large that we cannot distinguish some small diffraction peaks from noise, background subtraction is sufficient to capture the feature of the experimental XRD pattern using the correlation-coefficient-type penalty function. In this study, we perform data assimilated MD simulations to predict SiO 2 (coesite) and ε-Zn(OH) 2 in the following manner: First, we set the appropriate simulation cell size to reproduce the experimental data in the target system. Although we used the known lattice parameters (a = 7.14, b = 12.37, c = 7.12 Å, β = 119.57 • for coesite: a = 4.87, b = 5.06, c = 8.75 Å for ε-Zn(OH) 2 ) in this report, in practice, we can use excellent programs for Miller indexing and subsequent lattice parameter determination, such as Conograph For MD simulations, LAMMPS The success rate of finding the target structure is significantly improved by using the new correlation-coefficient-type penalty function. Figure The above conclusion is further confirmed by the interatomic potential energy of the optimization trajectories as a function of D CC (Fig. D CC from 0.0 to 0.6. Thus, we conclude that the correlationcoefficient-type penalty significantly accelerates the structure search compared with the previous crystallinity-type penalty. The use of correlation coefficient improves not only the success rate but also the noise robustness. To verify the noise robustness of the data-assimilated structure prediction method, we add Gaussian white noise to the reference XRD pattern, as shown by the red line in Fig. Success rate of finding coesite structure using XRDassimilated MD simulations with noisy reference XRD data as a function of the weight parameter α. σ represents the standard deviation for the introduced Gaussian white noise. following manner: Here, I MAX,σ =0 and ξ represent the intensity of the largest diffraction peak and a random number, respectively. The random number is chosen so that its probability distribution equals to Gaussian distribution function with σ : As shown in the figure, because of the large noise, it is almost impossible to distinguish the signal from the noise except for the largest and second largest peaks at 25.9 and 28.9 • , respectively. Figure The applicability of data-assimilated MD simulations to hydrogen containing materials is discussed in this section. D CC . Note that, for ε-Zn(OH) 2 , various structures hosting different hydrogen bonding or H 2 O molecules also have comparably small D CC . To highlight the subtle difference in D CC , we plotted log D CC in the horizontal axis. As shown in the figure, without the XRD penalty function, there is a local minimum at around log(D CC )= -0.9-0.0, suggesting that conventional SA using DFT-MD simulation rarely leads to the ε-Zn(OH) 2 structure. On the other hand, XRD-assimilated DFT-MD simulation can yield the ε-Zn(OH) 2 structure, as shown by the structures obtained at around log D CC = -5 (purple dots in the figure). However, there are still local minima at around log D CC =-2.35 and -4, which reduce the success rate. These local minimums are probably related to H 2 O molecule formation, since almost all of these structures at log D CC =-2.35 and -4 (purple dots in Fig. In this study, we introduce a new correlation-coefficienttype penalty function for XRD data-assimilated simulations to improve the success rate of finding the target structure and noise robustness. Using the correlation-coefficient-type penalty function, the success rate of finding the coesite structure with noise-free reference data almost exceeds 80%, which is almost twice as much as that obtained with the crystallinitytype penalty function. In addition, the use of this penalty function enable us to predict the coesite structure even with noisy reference data in which the minor peaks are almost indistinguishable from the noise. It is also found that this XRD dataassimilated MD simulation can be applied to the hydrogencontaining materials even though the hydrogen atoms negligibly contribute to the XRD data. The success rate of finding ε-Zn(OH) 2 structure is about 30% using the reference XRD pattern and DFT potential, suggesting that this method is useful for the structure determination of high-pressure metal hydrides, where the angle range of XRD patterns is too small to determine the structure through an experimental approach.