In recent years, demand for scintillation detectors with high time resolution (better than 100 ps) has emerged in high-energy physics and medical imaging applications. In particular, time of flight positron emission tomography (TOF-PET) can greatly benefit from increasing time resolution of scintillators, which leads to the increase of signal-to-noise ratio, decrease of patient dose, and achievement of the superior spatial resolution of PET images. Currently, extensive research of various types of materials is carried out to achieve the best time resolution. In this review, the recent progress of various approaches is summarized and scintillation compounds with the best temporal characteristics are first reviewed. The review presents the physical processes causing fast luminescence in inorganic and organic materials. Special attention is paid to nanocomposites which belong to a new perspective class of scintillating materials, consisting of a plastic matrix, inorganic nanocrystalline fillers, and organic or inorganic luminescence activators and shifters. The main features and functions of all parts of existing and prospective nanocomposite scintillators are also discussed. A number of currently created and investigated nanocomposite materials with various compounds and structures are reviewed. Scintillation counting is one of the methods to detect ionizing radiation, based on an ability of some materials to convert absorbed energy into luminescence. Detectors based on scintillating materials (scintillators) are characterized by a low relative cost, simple production technology and high sensitivity, which makes them advantageous for various scientific and technological applications Positron emission tomography allows to monitor the contribution of different molecular pathways to metabolic processes in a patient body, which makes this technique an invaluable medical imaging tool for cancer, neurodegenerative, cardiovascular and many other diseases. For diagnostics, a positron emitting radiopharmaceutical agent is injected into the body. The annihilation of the positron with an electron from a human body results in the formation of a pair of 511-keV photons simultaneously emitted in opposite directions. Typically, the detection system is designed as a ring of ionizing radiation detectors placed around a patient body Currently, research teams from all over the world are trying to reach the 10 ps CTR. With the support of many leading scientific institutes, the "10 ps challenge" In section 2, the main factors that determine the timing properties of a time-of-flight scanner are observed and illustrated by the example of TOF-PET. In addition, common scintillating materials used in modern medical devices and high-energy physics experiments are listed and their properties are examined. The processes of absorption and conversion of ionizing radiation energy in inorganic and organic scintillators are discussed in section 3. The main advantages and shortcomings of scintillators based on inorganic and organic materials will be described. In section 4, the general concept of hybrid nanocomposite materials will be presented together with the description of energy transport and conversion of electronic excitations between organic and inorganic components. The main constituents of nanocomposite materials and the primary requirements to their properties will be discussed. A comparative analysis of materials suitable for usage in fast hybrid nanocomposite scintillators will be conducted. Let us consider the mechanism of the detection of ionizing radiation particles with high time resolution on the example of PET. All parts of the detection chain contribute to the time resolution of PET scanner: scintillation material, photodetector and analog readout circuits. A detailed description of the contribution of each factor and graphical representation of scintillator detection chain (Figure where p start (t) and p stop (t) are the timing probability densities for the start and stop detector, respectively. The best CTR value of 58 ps for a PET-compatible inorganic scintillation detection chain has been reported for a SiPM coupled with а single crystal of LSO:Ce,Ca Besides the SPTR, which quantifies the contribution of SiPM, the time parameters of scintillation materials themselves have a strong impact on the time resolution of the scintillation detection chain (Figure where N phe is a number of photoelectrons detected by the photodetector. Within the above reasoning, it is proposed to take a fresh look at the main characteristics of the known scintillators summarized in Table NaI:Tl 28200±100 5.8 (1%), 28 (4%) + long [15] 21.5 (13%), 43.8 (87%) Organic compounds, particularly in the form of plastic scintillators, have also found their application besides inorganic single crystals There is also an active development of a J-PET scanner based on a plastic scintillator 3 Energy dissipation processes in typical scintillators Let us consider the general principles of energy dissipation processes in inorganic scintillators. After the absorption of an ionizing radiation photon, a primary electron-hole pair is born, which afterwards undergoes a series of relaxation processes preceding the photon emission, and thus determining the luminescence rise time. The current understanding of the scintillation process dynamics was distilled to a single chart by A. Vasil'ev (see Figure to each stage. Generally, the duration of each subsequent stage is by 2-3 orders of magnitude slower than the preceding stage, therefore they all occur in sequence with no parallel processes. However, it is a challenge to calculate the respective durations of the scintillation stages in particular materials more precisely or to measure them experimentally. Direct measurement techniques have been widely available only for the recombination stage (the scintillation lifetime) and to some extent for the transport stage (the scintillation rise time) for slow transport cases. Figure Courtesy of A.N. Vasil'ev. On the first stage, primary hot electrons and holes are formed after incident ionizing radiation quanta absorption. Then the hot electrons and holes are losing energy for the creation of secondary charge carriers during the inelastic scattering (10 -16 -10 -14 s). Only after that holes and electrons can be thermalized with phonon creation (10 -14 -10 -12 s) and captured by luminescence centers or form excitons (10 -12 -10 -10 s). The diffusion transport of thermalized charge carriers and their recombination takes generally place in time intervals longer than 10 -10 s. These are the main processes for the common scintillating materials like NaI:Tl, BGO, LaBr3:Ce, LSO:Ce and others. A decent amount of experimental data indicate that, in some cases, the transport stage can be slow enough to interfere with recombination, for example, in CsI:Tl demonstrating a long rise time of the order of 10 ns. Figure The capture stage (Figure However, due to rather low excitation energy the thermalization stage is truncated as compared to the entire scintillation event. Three types of materials with different routes of charge carriers self-trapping were identified The duration of the thermalization stage is currently outside the reach of any time-resolved technique, not only because of time resolution requirements, but also because the above-mentioned methods cannot distinguish high-energy band carriers from thermalized ones. However, the general analysis sets this duration to about 1 ps, and as one can see in the case of fast self-trapping of excitons, the capture stage is much faster and lies in the sub-picosecond domain. Therefore, the thermalization may sometimes occur on the same time scale as the capture, potentially allowing for a competing process like a hot capture which is a direct trapping (or self-trapping) of a hot charge carrier with subsequent release of excess energy as phonons during lattice relaxation. There are also processes which circumvent some scintillation stages, leading to ultrafast scintillation. In quantum dots (QDs), electron-hole pairs are confined within one nanoparticle, which prevents them from escaping, thus circumventing the transport stage. As a result, the rise time of the luminescence caused by their recombination is determined by the capture stage duration, which can be below 1 ps Several alkali halides, including KI and RbI, have an energy barrier between the free and selftrapped exciton state, which leads to rather long self-trappingup to 2 ns at 4.2 K Finally, one should also mention Cherenkov light which is emitted when the electron velocity is greater than the speed of light in a medium and may serve as another possible source of prompt a) b) photons. In this case, the time interval between the incident γ-photon absorption and visible photon emission is no more than few ps and depends only on the travel path length of γ-photon before the first interaction. This phenomenon is observed in inorganic crystals with high refractive index, such as LSO and BGO It becomes evident from the analysis of Figure The processes of absorption and conversion of ionizing radiation in organic materials are different to those in inorganic crystals. Their luminescence is due to the transition of π-electrons from excited states and, therefore, it is observed in compounds possessing unsaturated bonds in their molecular structure where I0 is the intensity at t=0 and τ is the fluorescence decay time Compounds in which direct radiative transitions dominate are much more suitable for scintillation applications than those showing triplet luminescence. Typical properties of organic scintillators are summarized in Table The second mechanism is responsible for slow luminescence components, which appear due to the population of a metastable state (T1 state in Figure Nowadays there are several ways to combine the advantages of organic and inorganic scintillators aimed at applications demanding fast ionizing radiation detection. One of the possibilities is the manufacturing of a detecting cell consisting of alternating layers of inorganic single crystal and organic compound. In An alternative way to improve the scintillating characteristics is to dissolve quantum dots into common organic scintillating materials. Quantum dot systems are characterized by high luminescence quantum efficiency and ultrafast decay times The idea of the development of scintillating heterostructure materials for the detection of high energy radiation is not new. First polymer-based scintillating materials with distributed filler for fast neutron detection were investigated in the beginning of the 50s of the last century Later in the 80s, the results of study of composite PMMA-based materials with 70 wt.% of filler (BaF2 powder) for proton detection were presented Despite the widespread use of composite scintillators in high energy physics for a long time, the concept of scintillator heterostructure for small energies (511 keV) has only been introduced for the first time by P. Lecoq in 2008 Several functional elements distinguishing nanocomposite scintillators from the abovedescribed scintillator configurations can be highlighted: an organic matrix, a uniformly distributed heavy inorganic filler and a dissolved phosphor or several different phosphors (Figure The primary phosphor acts as an activator, which converts electronic excitations of the matrix into luminescence, which usually happens by the mechanism of Förster Resonant Energy Transfer (FRET). This mechanism has characteristic times which are usually much less than the radiative lifetime of a phosphor, thus not introducing luminescence rise times. Another (secondary) phosphor can also be added perform a function of a wavelength shifter to increase the effective Stokes shift and minimize luminescence re-absorption, but the shifter usually uses radiative energy transfer from the primary phosphor leading to significant rise times The matrix in a nanocomposite material plays additional roles of a binding medium and a light guide for luminescence The matrix is a binding medium for the structural parts of composite materials such as phosphors and fillers. It should provide unimpeded distribution of the luminescence light and, therefore, high optical transparency in the phosphor emission range is one of the basic requirements for the matrix substance. Organic polymers are among the most suitable matrix substances in terms of the simplification of the production and postproduction treatment. Generally, organic molecules with π bonds in their structure have absorption bands in the UV spectral range and can exhibit luminescence Nowadays, there are several different polymer compositions, which can be used as organic matrixes in nanocomposite scintillation materials. The main properties of such materials are listed in Table Table 1.49 1.49-1.58 Another perspective compound which could be used as a matrix is polymethyl methacrylate. The main feature of this polymer is high optical transparency in a wide spectral region extending to UV (300-800 nm) (see Figure Incident ionizing radiation not only excites luminescence, but also breaks chemical bonds, producing harmful color centers and deteriorating optical characteristics of a polymeric matrix. Polysiloxane may be considered as one of the most irradiation resistant polymers (Table Polyurethane (PU) is one more class of promising compounds for organic matrix. Polyurethanes are synthesized by exothermic reaction between polyols, compounds with at least two OH groups in one molecule, and isocyanates, compounds with more than one N=C=O group in one molecule (diisocyanats, polyisocyanates). Physical properties of resulting polymer can be predefined by altering the polymerization routine. The size of polymer chain, molecular weight and degree of hydrogen bonding may be increased by means of chain-extenders. Due to a variety of initial compounds, PU with defined physical properties can be produced, whereby they have widely found application as elastomers Combined with high optical clearance, it allows to use these polymer materials as binder media for luminescence nanoparticles Based on the discussion above, one can conclude that the existing polymer scintillation materials possess along with advantages also a number of shortcomings which limit their applicability as nanocomposite matrixes. Therefore, the search for new optimal matrix materials is still a crucial task. Transparent organic material of a host compound consists mainly of light elements with low atomic number such as H (Z = 1), C (Z = 6), N (Z = 7), O (Z = 8). As a result, organic compounds have a small value of the effective atomic number Zeff and interact weakly with high-energy radiation. Therefore, to register X-rays and gamma rays with organic materials, large volume detectors are required. The large dimensions have a negative impact on the time and energy resolution due to the increase in the light travel path inside the detector. The efficiency of the absorption of ionizing radiation by organic compounds can be increased by introducing an inorganic filler. In the structure of the nanocomposite material under consideration, the filler material with high effective atomic number acts as an absorber of the energy of ionizing radiation. The main luminescence mechanisms of inorganic compounds involve, the relaxation and capture of electronic excitations by luminescence centers, the formation of excitons and emitting light typically within the time intervals of 10 -9 -10 -7 s (see Table These time characteristics do not satisfy the demands of novel tasks related to the implementation of time-of-flight techniques as described in Introduction, therefore, it is necessary to use in a composite material with complex additives including an efficient filler and faster activator. The purpose of the inorganic filler is not the fluorescence, but the transformation of the absorbed gamma photon into electronic excitations, which will then be transferred through nonradiative mechanisms to the activator. The role of the activator is to transform the captured electronic excitation into a prompt luminescence photon. In the described energy transfer process, the luminescence characteristics of the filler will not affect the decay time of the composite scintillator. In addition to the atomic number of filler elements, the size and morphology of its particles play an important role. As the particle size decreases, the specific surface contact area of the filler and host increases. Due to this, the processes of electronic excitation transfer become more efficient. When choosing a filler material, it is also necessary to consider its effect on the optical characteristics of the material. In a heterogeneous structure, additional scattering will appear at the particle-host interface. This process can be quantitatively described using the Rayleigh scattering formula for spherical particles where I is the intensity of the transmitted light; I0 is the intensity of the incident light; p is the volume fraction оf nanoparticles; r is the particle radius; x is the optical path length; λ is the wavelength of light; np and nm are the refractive indices of the filler (nanoparticles) and matrix, respectively. According to this formula, the degree of light scattering inside the nanocomposite material depends on the difference between the refractive indices of the matrix and the filler. Organic compounds are usually characterized by a small range of nm values: 1.3-1.7 The main problem associated with the use of nanoparticles is their agglomeration. Due to the large specific surface area, the interaction between such particles is strong due to the van der Waals forces and large surface energy, which facilitates the formation of agglomerates A molecule of a surfactant consists of two components: a polar group that binds to the surface of nanoparticle and a hydrophobic tail that can participate in the polymerization process or form a bond with a polymer molecule. Anchor polar groups include amines (-NH2) phosphonates -PO (OH2) 69.6% (for the 500 nm band) with 40 wt% Gd2O3 The main task of the phosphor, or luminescence dopant, is to convert the electronic excitations created by the filler particles into luminescence photons. The temporal characteristics of a nanocomposite material are largely determined by this very substance. Thus, a high rate of the luminescence process is a key condition in choosing an activator. Other important characteristics are high light yield and good solubility in the matrix. The felicitous combination of these features in the organic phosphors, which are widely used in industrial plastic scintillators, makes them promising activators for ultrafast nanocomposite scintillators. Within the whole class of organic phosphors, the systems consisting of chains of benzene rings combined by single bonds are characterized by the highest scintillation efficiency [146], 2.9 (toluene) Due to the effect of quantum confinement, nanocrystals of some semiconductors acquire unique properties, including high quantum efficiency and ultrafast decay times transparent nanocomposites based on PMMA containing 0.5 wt.% CdTe QDs, as well as thin films based on PVA and CdTe with emission maxima at 565nm and 650 nm respectively (see Figure CdSe/CdS core-crown nanoplatelets (ccNPLs) Second, the ccNPLs have subnanosecond fluorescence lifetimes, while the emission decay of biexcitons efficiently formed via direct excitation by secondary electrons at higher excitation densities is even faster (<200ps), Organic molecules can also be used to increase the scintillation efficiency of composites with QDs. For example, a nanocomposite based on CdSe QDs and a matrix demonstrates a higher scintillation efficiency when PPO is added Figure Further development of diagnostics and therapy of diseases by nuclear medicine methods and research in the field of high-energy physics became almost impossible without the creation of conceptually new scintillation materials. These materials are subjects to increased requirements, unattainable for single-component systems. In particular, such requirements as fast timing response, high luminescence intensity, high stopping properties in relation to X-ray and gamma radiation, high optical transparency, radiation resistance, low cost of production and operation of scintillators have to be taken into consideration. The fulfilling of all these requirements for scintillation material will lead to a significant increase in the time and spatial resolution of the devices using TOF methods. Research in this area has been intensified in recent years. New single-crystal and polycrystalline materials are being developed along with various structures which combine the properties of inorganic and organic substances. The most promising candidates are materials based on polymer matrices containing an inorganic filler with a high Zeff value and a dopant with a short decay time. Fast rise and decay times of the emission of QD and organic activators allow one to expect for nanocomposite scintillators CTR values of the order of tens picoseconds, that are characteristic for plastic scintillators. In addition, loading with a heavy inorganic filler can increase the efficiency of energy absorption as it has been shown for a number of compounds. Despite the listed advantages, nanocomposite scintillators have also a number of drawbacks that limit their application. The Zeff value cannot exceed those of inorganic crystals. There is also a limitation of possible concentration of different additivities, which is set by matrix properties. At high concentrations, the polymerization reaction may be incomplete, which leads to a decrease in mechanical and temperature stability as well as radiation hardness. Besides, due to light scattering optical losses of such compounds are higher than in plastic scintillators and bulk inorganic crystals. As shown above, systematic studies of the processes occurring in heterogeneous nanocomposite structures are very scarce. Many problems associated with the synthesis of composite materials and understanding of the processes of creation and migration of electronic excitations in the nanocomposite materials remain unsolved. Nevertheless, the search for the most efficient combinations of components for nanocomposite scintillation detectors is at full throttle.