Ultrafast switching of magnetic materials has been shown to be predominantly thermally driven, but excess heating limits the energy efficiency of this process. By employing atomistic spin-lattice dynamics simulations, we show that efficient coherent magnetisation switching of an insulating magnet can be triggered by a THz pulse. We find that switching is driven by excitation near the P-point of the phonon spectrum in conditions where spins typically cannot be excited and when manifold k phonon modes are accessible at the same frequency. Our model determines the necessary ingredients for low-dissipative switching and provides new insight into THz-excited spin dynamics with a route to energy efficient ultrafast devices. The control of magnetic order on an ultrafast timescale in an efficient and robust manner is crucial for the development of the next-generation of magnetic devices A number of new possibilities have been presented recently using ultrafast excitations in the terahertz (THz) regime by means of femtosecond lasers or THz sources The most exciting results, however, are related to the possibility of magnetisation switching via THz phonon pumping. Such a possibility was anticipated by theoretical investigations Thus, energy-efficient magnetisation switching is particularly interesting to explore in insulators. This is due to the fact that, firstly, the electronic system with its low specific heat can have little participation in the energy uptake and, secondly, that excitation of the spin-phonon system on the subpicosecond timescale will have minimal interaction with the outside world in terms of energy diffusion. Therefore, one can try to find conditions for almost dissipationless ("cold") switching when the angular momentum is efficiently transferred from phonons to spin and the energy is used to switch magnetisation without losses. In this Letter, we demonstrate magnetisation switching under the application of a THz phonon pulse, as shown schematically in Fig. The computational model for this work has been previously employed in the systematic investigation of equilibrium and dynamic properties of BCC Fe To model the effect of THz phonon excitation, we apply a periodic external force to each atom , where Θ(t p -t) is the Heaviside step function, t p is the rectangular pulse duration, α the x, y, z coordinates of the forces. The excitation force F x T Hz is nonhomogeneous in space by choosing different k-vectors and for simplicity is applied along the x direction. The complete magnon-phonon spectrum is presented in Fig. In spite of these differences in the excitation spectrum, we have observed magnetisation switching for both potentials. Fig. To characterize the spin system we calculate the spin temperature One of the main characteristics of the switching is that a minimum duration of the THz pulse, ca. 50 ps is required, as shown by the phase diagram. A detailed examination shows that the switching is precessional due to the fact that the application of the force on the x direction for the k-vector corresponding to the P point in the Brillouin zone was selected to generate a coupling field that acts in plane, on the x direction (see Fig. Finally, Fig. Financial support of the Advanced Storage Research Consortium and ARCHER2-eCSE06-6 is gratefully acknowledged. MOAE gratefully acknowledges support in part from EPSRC through grant EP/S009647/1. The simulations were undertaken on the VIKING cluster, at the University of York. SR, RWC, RFLE acknowledges funding from European Union's Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation Programme under grant agreement No. 737709. The authors acknowledge the networking opportunities provided by the European COST Action CA17123 "Magnetofon" and the short-time scientific mission awarded to MS. Fig. x ) in the case of Morse Potential (MP) and Harmonic Potential (HP). In the case of HP, since the phonons present a large peak due to the flat phonon spectra, the coupling field will inherit this peak and will lead to a strong magnon-phonon coupling which translates to a strong spin response when applying the THz pulse. This is not the case with the Morse potential, where the coupling has lower intensity peaks, and hence, the magnons are not so efficiently coupled to the THz pulse. We observe that switching occurs in the same frequency range as for the T = 0K ( Fig. During the application of the THz pulse, the lattice displacements are relatively low (less than 5 -7% depending on frequency of the THz pulse). Fig. The perpendicular xyz components of the coupling field in the case of Morse potential (switching and non-switching events presented in panels c, d in Fig. 