Rings comprising chemically bonded atoms are essential topological motifs for the structural ordering of network-forming materials. Quantification of such larger motifs beyond short-range pair correlation is essential for understanding the linkages between the orderings and macroscopic behaviors. Here, we propose two quantitative analysis methods based on rings. The first method quantifies rings by two geometric indicators: roundness and roughness. These indicators reveal the linkages between highly symmetric rings and crystal symmetry in silica and that the structure of amorphous silica mainly consists of Page 2 of 37 distorted rings. The second method quantifies a spatial correlation function that describes three-dimensional atomic densities around rings. A comparative analysis among the functions for different degrees of ring symmetries reveals that symmetric rings contribute to the local structural order in amorphous silica. Another analysis of amorphous models with different orderings reveals anisotropy of the local structural ordering around rings; this contributes to building the intermediate-range ordering. Amorphous materials exhibit a disordered structure owing to the lack of translational periodicity. Unlike crystals, which exhibit translational periodicity, amorphous materials do not have a long-range structural order. The formation of a short-range order, whose definition is based on the distances between two nearest neighbor atoms, can be observed in the pair distribution function (PDF) obtained via X-ray diffraction (XRD) and neutron diffraction (ND) measurements for both crystals and amorphous materials. For example, the short-range order of amorphous and crystalline silica (SiO2) under ambient conditions is based on a regular SiO4 tetrahedron. The interconnection of tetrahedra with cornersharing oxygen atoms forms a network structure. Meanwhile, for some amorphous materials, such as SiO2, these diffraction experiments also provide the evidence of a structural order on a length scale larger than the atomic bond length, i.e., the intermediate range. The formation of intermediate-range order of amorphous SiO2 is often discussed in terms of the first sharp diffraction peak (FSDP) observed in the diffraction data However, the origin of FSDP % & sin θ with the scattering angle 2θ and X-ray or neutron wavelength λ and that the periodicity with the coherence length is approximately 10 Å $= !" &# !"#$ &, where Δq FSDP is the width of FSDP Structural models of glass, based on a network structure consisting of cornersharing tetrahedral motifs, as found in SiO2, help to investigate the intermediate-range structural orders in amorphous materials. The first structural model for glass was the crystallite model proposed by Frankenheim 10 in 1835, which described glass as an aggregate of small crystallites. The crystallite model, also known as the discrete crystalline model, presumes that crystalline clusters are embedded in a glass matrix, owing to the relatively sharper feature of FSDP in the diffraction data. However, this model has been found inappropriate because the estimated lattice constants of the crystallites are larger than those of b-cristobalite, thereby leading to a discrepancy between the observed and calculated densities. Subsequently, continuous crystal Here, we propose extensions from conventional ring analysis for structural order analysis: (1) quantitative characterization of ring shapes and (2) a spatial correlation function around rings to visualize local structural orders. The advantage of our approach is that it enables a direct combination of the size, shape, and spatial distribution of rings based on both atomic configuration and network topology. The direct approach is effective for deeply understanding intermediate-range structural orders because crucial topological structures formed by chemical bonds are embedded in the atomic configuration. Our methods are applied to analyze amorphous and crystalline silica for a deeper understanding of the structural orders around rings. To reveal the contribution of the network topological order to the intermediate-range structural order, we propose two analysis methods based on rings: (1) ring shape characterization (Fig. The proposed procedure characterizes the shape of a ring through computation of the eigenvector and eigenvalue of the covariance matrix of atomic coordinates (so-called point cloud) in the ring, as shown in Fig. The first eigenvector is computed as the direction with the largest variance of the point cloud. Under the restriction that the first and second eigenvectors are orthogonal with each other, the second eigenvector is computed by maximizing the variance of the point cloud in the vector. Furthermore, the third eigenvector is computed as the vector orthogonal to the first and second eigenvectors. As their eigenvalues are proportional to the variances of the point cloud along these vectors, they can be used to measure the ring shape. This approach uses eigenvectors, which provide second-order information. This is equivalent to approximating a ring by an ellipsoid, wherein the first and second eigenvectors correspond to the directions of the major and minor axes of the ellipse approximating the ring, respectively, whereas the third eigenvector is the normal vector of the plane of the ellipse. We proposed two shape indicators for a ring: roundness and roughness, as illustrated in Fig. Assuming a square root of the three eigenvalues, s + , s ! , and s , , the first indicator "roundness" is defined as It evaluates how close the ring is to a perfect circle. The roundness value for a perfect circle is 1. The second indicator "roughness" is defined as It evaluates the flatness of the ring. These normalizations, i.e., s + for roundness and the geometric mean of s + and s ! for the roughness, are included to remove the effect of the ring size. These indicators can be generalized by weighting atoms in computing ring centers and variance-covariance matrices. Variances of atomic positions weighted by atomic masses, called the radius of gyration, was proposed as a measure to evaluate ring compactions Examples in Fig. The second proposed procedure (Fig. Our proposed correlation function is a generalized formulation of the results from a recent study In this study, we focused on amorphous and crystalline materials with corner-sharing tetrahedral motifs, which are represented by a structural model of amorphous silica (a-SiO2), along with those of nine crystalline polymorphs of silica: a-tridymite We generated a large-scale structural model of a-SiO2 by classical molecular dynamics (MD) simulation of a melt-quenching procedure, followed by refinement using the reverse Monte Carlo (RMC) Hereafter, the generated structure is referred to as the MD-RMC model. The X-ray and neutron total structure factors S(q) of the model showed good agreement with the experimental data (Supplementary Figures Guttman ring 15 , King ring 17 , and primitive ring Notably, the ring sizes of coesite I and II are widely distributed, as in the amorphous material shown in the bottom panel, thus indicating that the structures of coesite I and II are topologically disordered, owing to its high density. The ring size of a-SiO2 is also widely distributed, with the peak of the ring size distribution located at approximately sizes 6 or 7, similar to the cases of phases of cristobalite and tridymite. For these structural models, we applied the proposed ring-shape characterizations, as summarized in Fig. We demonstrated that a set of three eigenvalues of a ring can be used as an indicator of the ring's shape. Notably, the set is also useful for enumerating isomorphic rings in crystalline materials because these values are identical when the ring shapes are identical. The isomorphic rings identified in crystalline SiO2 and their shape characterizations are summarized in Fig. Next, we analyzed linkages between ring symmetries and space groups of crystals. As a factor of the ring symmetry, the point group of each isomorphic ring is listed in Supplementary Table For example, b-cristobalite includes only an isomorphic ring (A6-1) with the highest symmetry evaluated by both point group and our shape measures, as shown in Supplementary Table We further investigated the linkage between ring symmetries and crystal polymorphs based on the pressure-temperature phase diagram, as shown in Fig. first, that high-temperature phases are more symmetric than the low-temperature ones. The symmetry is evaluated by the number of isomorphic rings and ring symmetries (such as roundness, roughness, and point group). For example, b-phases (such as b-cristobalite) are more symmetric than a-phases (such as a-cristobalite). In addition, cristobalites are more symmetric compared with tridymites. Second, except for stishovite, which has different atomic coordination numbers from other crystals, low-pressure phases are more symmetric than the high-pressure ones. For example, phases of cristobalite and tridymite are more symmetric than those of quartz and coesite. These two findings are consistent with the fact that b-cristobalite is the most symmetric among SiO2 crystal polymorphs since the phase is located at the lowest pressure and highest temperature in the phase diagram. The bottom panels in Fig. The broad distribution of the shape indicators in a-SiO2, covering those of all isomorphic rings in crystalline materials, suggests that the distribution in a-SiO2 is a mixture of isomorphic rings in crystalline materials and their variants. The influence of ring symmetries on the local structural ordering was evaluated using our proposed spatial correlation function. To visualize the functions of SiO2 materials, corresponding cross-sectional mappings at approximately v + = 0, v ! = 0, or v , = 0 were computed by integrating the correlation function over the cross-section thickness t, as shown in Fig. Fig. As shown in Fig. For the amorphous SiO2, we performed an additional analysis to find a linkage between the roundness and roughness of rings and the symmetry of the intermediate-range atomic configuration around rings. To confirm the linkage, the b-cristobalite, which has the highest crystal symmetry and contains one type of symmetric ring with large roundness and small roughness, is used as a standard. In the analysis, we first selected four subsets of rings using their roundness and roughness values, as shown in Fig. A series of analyses showed an anisotropic local structural order in the amorphous silica (a-SiO2) model, whereas isotropic halo rings were observed in the reciprocal space by macroscopic diffraction data. A transition from anisotropic to isotropic order prevails while transitioning from microscopic to macroscopic viewpoints. Notably, the anisotropic local structure originates from the rings, which is an essential topological motif in network-forming materials. Here, we discuss the influence of the anisotropic local structural order on the degree of structural order in amorphous structures through the comparison of some additional amorphous models. To validate our analyses further, we generated three additional amorphous structural models from a random configuration. The same number of atoms and the same size of the simulation box were used for these additional models. The first model (Rand-Coord) was generated from a random configuration, followed by a hard-sphere Monte This study proposed two analysis methods for the structural orders of rings and those around rings based on the ring shapes in network-forming materials. The proposed analysis approach for crystalline and amorphous SiO2 first demonstrated that the distribution of ring shape characteristics is a strong tool for analyzing the amorphous models of SiO2. The roundness-roughness distribution showed that the major rings in amorphous SiO2 are similar to those in two crystals, a-cristobalite and a-tridymite, whose mass densities are similar to those of amorphous SiO2. In addition, it was found that the rings in quartz and coesite phases are included as minor rings in amorphous SiO2. This indicates that various rings found in crystalline polymorphs are necessary to form bulk amorphous materials a-cristobalite, a-tridymite, b-cristobalite, and b-tridymite. In addition, this study found that rings with low roughness tend to construct planes parallel to the central rings, as shown by the ring shape characterization of isomorphic rings on crystalline materials. To validate the applicability of our approaches, three amorphous SiO2 structural models with different ordering degrees were prepared. The corresponding anisotropic local environments, as described above, were confirmed in all models. Although the actual degree of order for amorphous SiO2 is still arbitrary, observations in this study showed that even if amorphous SiO2 satisfies the experimental structure factors, it has anisotropic local structures. Furthermore, our analysis assumed that the observed pseudo-Bragg planes, presumably yielding the first sharp diffraction peak, are correlated with the intermediate-range structural orders in amorphous SiO2. To link structural orders and material properties and realize data-driven material design, quantitative evaluations for various structural models are necessary. In crystalline materials, the macroscopic properties are linked to the lattice structure and their symmetry because they include all structural information. Conversely, amorphous materials do not have such linkages because they do not have the lattice and symmetric structures. Therefore, we should explore the linkages through another approach using structural motifs such as rings. An example of this approach is using different fictive temperatures Various additional numerical descriptors such as geometric information of rings like roundness and roughness, and those of structural ordering from diverse perspectives are needed for finding new linkages between macroscopic properties and structural orders. For network-forming materials, we developed new descriptors and demonstrated useful applications for analyzing the structural orders of SiO2 materials, although the applicability of the approach is not limited to SiO2. Furthermore, the analysis of other network-forming materials using our proposed methods and a comprehensive comparison of the results should provide further information to help understand intermediate-range structural orders in network-forming materials. Structural models of amorphous silica were generated by a melt-quenching procedure in classical MD simulation, followed by RMC techniques to fit the diffraction measurements of the synthesized materials Furthermore, the interactions were described by pair potentials with short-range Born-Mayer repulsive and long-range Coulomb terms: where r is the interatomic distance between the atoms i and j, B GH and ρ GH represent the magnitude (10 D+J J) and softness (Å) of the Born-Mayer term, respectively, Z G is the effective charge on atom i (Z E4 = 2.4 and Z F = -1.2), e is the elementary charge, and ε I is the permittivity of a vacuum. The coefficients used in the simulation were B GH = 21.39 × 10 D+J J and ρ GH = 0.174 Å for an atomic pair of Si and O, and B GH = 0.6246 × 10 D+J J and ρ GH = 0.362 Å for a pair of O atoms. In the potential function, the interactions between the Si atoms were ignored, similar to our previous work The atomic configuration was initialized at random, and the system was equilibrated at 4,000 K for 100,000 steps. Subsequently, it was cooled to 300 K for 5,000,000 steps and annealed at 300 K for 100,000 steps. The generated model was refined via RMC modeling using XRD and ND measurements. RMC was implemented with the constraints of the coordination numbers, bond angles of O-Si-O, and the partial pair-distribution functions within the first coordination shell. The constraint of the bond angle was performed by preserving the distribution of the structures by the MD simulation. These constraints were added to preserve the physically meaningful structure generated by MD, which is discussed in detail along with some structural statistics. This model was named MD-RMC. Under the assumption that the first coordination distance is less than 2.0 Å for Si-O, a network was generated for each structural model of SiO2. Primitive rings can be efficiently enumerated based on the shortest-path algorithms 