Uniaxial strain affects pairing symmetry states in superconductors by changing the lattice symmetry, and by altering Fermi surface topology. Here, we present a systematic study of these effects within a one-band negative-U Hubbard model for s, p and d-wave pairing states. We consider a general 2D model that can be applied to superconductors under uniaxial strain, modelled via hopping anisotropy, on a square lattice. The results presented here model an in plane compression along the x-axis, which reduces the lattice symmetry from a tetragonal to an orthorhombic crystal space group. The effects of hopping anisotropy on the different types of gap pairings are explored. We show that changes in Tc are tunable with hopping anisotropy and depend on the orientation of the gap function in relation to the opening of the Fermi surface during the Lifshitz transition. In comparing the model results to experimental data for the case of Sr2RuO4 it is found that both the d + id and d + ig pairings best describe the changes in Tc for the superconducting state in regards to its response to small uniaxial strain. I. Unconventional superconductivity is defined by a pairing state which spontaneously breaks both gauge and crystallographic space group or spin rotational symmetry. In this context the effects of uniaxial strain can provide a unique probe of the pairing state symmetry, principally by altering the crystallographic space group, for example from hexagonal or tetragonal to orthorhombic, in a controlled and repeatable way. Group theory, combined with Ginzburg-Landau symmetry arguments can provide a clear picture of the effect of strain on different group representations Uniaxial strain may also be a useful probe of the pairing state even when the pairing state corresponds to a non-degenerate irreducible representation. External strain will lead to changes in the physical bond lengths in the crystal, which in turn would lead to anisotropy in hoping parameters and hence changes in the Fermi surface shape. These effects will be most pronounced at strains where the Fermi surface undergoes a Lifstitz change in topology, accompanied by a van Hove Singularity (VHS) in the density of states The original motivation for the theoretical analysis of strain on unconventional superconductors came in the 1980s in the context of heavy fermion systems, such as UPt 3 in which a split transition at T c was observed The first evidence that Sr 2 RuO 4 is unconventional was provided by experiments showing the strong suppression of the superconducting state by the introduction of nonmagnetic impurities The aim of this paper is to examine the effects of uniaxial strain in a generic microscopic model of unconventional superconductivity. The original symmetry arguments were made via Ginzburg-Landau theory Below we examine in detail the effect of strain in a simple negative U model of superconductivity on a square lattice. We treat strain as a small uniaxial perturbation introduced into the hopping parameters which changes the tetragonal lattice to an orthorhombic lattice breaking the x-y symmetry. For simplicity we consider a one band model. The band parameters are chosen to be similar to those of the γ-band of Sr 2 RuO 4 to allow some limited comparison to experiments. But this is not intended to be a fully accurate model of the full band structure of Sr 2 RuO 4 under strain. In the following sections we first define our model of the strain dependent band structure, ε k . We then examine changes in T c and the gap function corresponding to a variety of different superconducting pairing states, including s-wave, chiral p-wave, d x 2 -y 2 , s ± , d + id and d + ig. In cases where the order parameter degeneracy is split by the uniaxial strain we examine the splitting in the self-consistent order parameter in the two channels. As well as changes to the order parameter symmetry, strain can also have a significant impact on the transition temperature, T c . There are several possible mechanisms but the simplest is the fact that strain can move the system through a Lifshitz transition in the Fermi surface topology accompanied by a van Hove singularity (VHS) in the density of states at the Fermi level. Other strain related effects on T c could also include softening of certain phonons related to crystal lattice instabilities, or changes to Fermi surface nesting, the spin-fluctuation spectrum, or moving a system away from or closer to a Mott instability by changing the effective electronic bandwidth. These latter effects are beyond the scope of this paper, where we concentrate on the effects of the Lifshitz transition assuming a constant effective pairing interaction. Here, we present a simple model using a one band negative-U Hubbard model where H 0 is the kinetic term with hopping between electron sites on the lattice accounted for via the hopping integrals t r,r On the square lattice we set t r,r = ε 0 , t r,r = -t for nearest neighbours and t r,r = -t for next nearest neighbours. Then uniaxial strain along the x direction modifies the hopping to t x for nearest neighbour bonds along x and t y for nearest neighbour bonds along y. The four next neighbour bond lengths remain equivalent so we retain a single hopping parameter, -t . Transforming to k-space we have the Hamiltonian where a and b are the lattice constants of the rectangular unit cell and the single particle energy band dispersion is ε k . Results are presented in units of the unstrained hopping parameters, t 0 which is evaluated at t 0 = 81.62meV. We assume the general interaction between two particles at positions r and r , V (1) , is given by a generalized Hubbard type interaction where the creation and annihilation operators (c † rσ and c rσ ) take their usual meaning where In order to analyse different Cooper pair symmetries it is useful to redefine the pairing interaction into symmetry distinct pairing channels. To do this we treat V k,k as a linear operator which we define via an eigenvalue equation where U i is a eigenvalue corresponding to eigenvector Γ i (k). The properties of the group representations will ensure that the eigenvectors Γ i (k) can be classified according to the different irreducible group representations of the appropriate symmetry group, in this case either square, or rectangular. The corresponding eigenvalue, U i , is the effective pairing strength in that symmetry channel. We use the linear expansion of an operator to rewrite V k,k as a sum of the basis eigenvectors Here, we used the fact that the eigenfunctions Γ i (k) can be chosen as real valued functions for the cases of the D 4h and D 2h point groups, and assumed that the orthogonal eigenfunctions are normalized to obey k Γ i (k) 2 = 1. In principle we have an infinite set of eigenvectors for a general operator, but assuming our original pairing interaction V (r, r ) was limited to either on-site, nearest neighbour or next nearest neighbor bonds, we typically have only a unique eigenfunction or pair of degenerate eigenfunctions for each symmetry channel, as specified in the relevant character tables given in Appendix 1. We solve the k-dependent BCS gap equation where the k-dependent gap function is and the ∆ i are the order parameter amplitudes in each pairing channel is the Fermi-Dirac function evaluated at eigenenergy E k . Note that the factor of 1 2 from Eq. ( More general types of triplet pairing, such as nonunitary states, would require a more complex gap equation. The self consistent equation (Eq. 9) can be solved numerically on a grid in k-space making use of the group tables, table I and II, to choose the corresponding function Γ(k) given by table III Physical insight into the effects of strain on T c can be gained by considering the linearized gap equation in which a single order parameter component ∆ i is nonzero, but infintesmimally small. Linearizing Eq. ( but where the effective density of states is weighted by the eigenvector Γ i (k) of the specific pairing channel which becomes non-zero at T c The presence or absence of a van Hove singularity in this weighted density of states at the Fermi energy (ε = 0) will then be a useful guide to whether or not strain leads to an enhanced T c in the corresponding pairing channel ∆ i . The remaining consideration is the inclusion of lattice anisotropy resulting from the uniaxial strain. In our approach it is most convenient to simply model this by adjusting the hopping integrals for the x and y oriented bonds in the crystal lattice, as resulting from the shrinking or increasing the physical distance of the bonds in real space. To better model the physical system we note that the uniaxial strains xx and yy are not fully independent, but linked by the Poisson ratio. In compressing the x-axis an expansion of the y-axis will result from the Poisson ratio of the material (Sr 2 RuO 4 : V xy ≈ -0.4 To avoid additional unknown parameters we assume, for simplicity, that the next neighbor hopping t is unchanged by strain. We also assume that the pairing interaction V (r -r ) is unchanged by the strain. The overall strength of the pairing interaction in the unstrained lattice is tuned to give a T c of about 1.5K, similar to that of Sr 2 RuO 4 , in each channel, U i considered below. Finally, note that the strain induced changes to the hopping integrals alter the band structure ε k significantly, especially as the van Hove singularity is approached. The changed band energies can lead to an unwanted side effect, changes in the total number of electrons (N e ) given by Clearly the total number of electrons has to remain constant as a function of strain, and so we adjust the on-site energy ε 0 together with the hopping integrals t x and t y keeping N e constant and the chemical potential at zero for all values of the strain. First, we study the density of states (DOS) in the normal state as a function of strain induced lattice anisotropy (see Fig. For all anisotropies we can identify two VHS, the one at lower energy gradually crossing the Fermi energy at higher tensions and a second one at high energies. The first gives rise to the Lifshitz transition and we will label it V HS Lif shitz . For the uncompressed system its energy is at roughly 15 meV corresponding to the band at (k x , k y )=(π, 0) in good agreement to experiment As the Lifshitz transition is a topological change of the Fermi surface which can be caused by applying high pressure In a first step we present the critical temperature T c as a function of hopping anisotropy for conventional s-wave pairing in Fig. To obtain more insight in the effects of changing symmetries on the DOS we present in Fig. Among the other symmetries considered only the d-wave (d x 2 -y 2 ) symmetry induces two clearly defined VHSs, with one of them crossing the Fermi energy at the Lifshitz point. In the other cases shown, chiral p x , p y , d xy and g-wave symmetry, the only visible VHS is pushed to higher energies essentially merging with the VHS arising from the band edge. A similar behavior is seen in the case of extended s-wave symmetry (Fig. To clarify the origin of these differences in the weighted density of states in a microscopic picture we show the regions predominantly contributing to the superconducting gap equation for all pairing symmetries in Fig. In contrast, there is no peak in T c at the Lifshitz point in any other pairing channel shown in Fig. The much stronger splitting in the T c values for the d + id case is a consequence of the existence of the strong VHS singularity crossing the Fermi level in the d x 2 -y 2 pairing channel, which is totally absent in the d xy channel (Figs. We now consider the above results in the context of the recent uniaxial strain experiments on Sr 2 RuO 4 In the full three band model there is also a significant spin orbit coupling, SOC, associated with the Ru d-orbitals, which is not included in the one band model A further complication in a more realistic multiband model is that it would require changing many unknown parameters in the model corresponding to the change caused by uniaxial hopping anisotropy. This contrasts with the simplicity of the one band model which has the advantage of requiring only one significant parameter which we must take from experiment, effectively related to the Poisson ratio of x and y uniaxial strains. Under our assumption, the changes in the second neighbor hopping integral t are negligible compared to the changes in t x and t y arising from the uniaxial strain. Then the only strain related variables become t x and t y , which are related by the assumption that both hoppings vary linearly in the corresponding strain and that the ratio of these variations is given by the Poisson ration, Eq. 13. We present our results in the previous section as functions of the hopping anisotropy t x /t 0 , rather than specific physical strain values of Sr 2 RuO 4 . Comparisons to the case of Sr 2 RuO 4 then simply need to map from our critical value for the Lifshitz transition (t x ≈ 1.07t 0 ) to the experimental strain where the transition is observed, as about xx ∼ -0.5% Above we have laid out the assumptions for treating the potential V (r, r ) as a tune-able constant. However it should be noted that this could be better treated including the position dependence since the bond length will change with strain. The strains used here are small and hence we have assumed the strain to have a low impact on the change of the potential. It would, of course, be straightforward to allow the pairing interaction to explicitly depend on the lattice strain, but at the expense of adding another unknown parameter into the model. With the above caveats aside; we move onto the interesting results obtained by comparing our results, Fig. We note that there is a remarkably small discrepancy, of about 0.2K, between the calculated value of T M AX c as we move through the topological transition, Fig. We note that the peak in T c is roughly similar for both the pure d x 2 -y 2 pairing state, the d + id pairing state and for the d + ig pairing state, see Figs. A note of interest for the 'd-wave' models considered here is that once the lattice is strained, the d-wave model has an automatic anisotropy between x and y directions, which provides an implicit mixing of two non degenerate order parameters d x 2 -y 2 and s ± . However the calculations shown in Fig. Note that the other model we considered here with TRSB the p x + ip y state has a degeneracy required by symmetry and so would not be ruled out by the experiments of Grimenko In summary, despite its simplicity, the one band model has accurately reproduced experimental data and provided insight into what happens through the Lifshitz transition. In Fig. We can use Ginzburg-Landau theory combined with some considerations from group theory to examine the effects of the lattice symmetry changes induced by uniaxial strain on different symmetry pairing states. In systems with a single superconducting order parameter we expand the free energy density in the usual form (A1) A more general phase transition breaking both gauge and lattice symmetries can be represented by a Ginzburg-Landau free energy of the form where we have a set of order parameter components {ψ i }, the covariant derivatives D i = (-i ∇ -2eA) and summation convention of the repeated indices is implied. The principles of spontaneous symmetry breaking phase transitions imply that the parameters in the Ginzburg-Landau expansion α ij , β ijkl and K ijkl possess the full symmetries of the normal state, which in this case implies full lattice point group symmetries. The unique property of applied uniaxial strain, compared to isotropic pressure, doping or other bulk lattice changes, is that by changing the lattice point group symmetry it provides direct symmetry specific information on the superconducting phase transition. To be more specific let us now consider the specific case of a two-dimensional square lattice, as considered in the main part of this paper. In Eq.A2 the matrix of quadratic terms α ij (T ) can be decomposed into submatrices corresponding to the different irreducible representations of the symmetry group,D 2h or D 4h in this case. Above T c all eigenvalues of the matrix are positive and the phase transition T c is the temperature at which one of the eigenvalues first becomes zero. The corresponding eigenvector(s), ψ i , therefore belong to a single irreducible representation of the symmetry group (assuming no "accidental" eigenvalue degeneracies, a possibility discussed further below). The character tables for the strained, orthorhombic, D 2h and unstrained, tetragonal, lattices are given in tables I and II. For simplicity we omit the additional parity label, noting that singlet superconductivity implies even parity while triplet pairing implies odd parity, since both crystal structures are centrosymmetric. Considering first the unstrained case the possible order parameter symmetries are derived from table II and the specific cases we consider in this paper, motivated by proposed pairing states of Sr 2 RuO 4 , are given in table III. The singlet cases, s, extended-s and d-wave pairing correspond to a superconducting gap function on the Fermi surface of the form ∆ k indicated by the function Γ(k) (ignoring multiplicative constants) and the triplet case represents the chiral triplet order parameter d k ∝ Γkẑ In order to understand the symmetry induced changes in T c in these various model pairing states it is helpful to consider the lattice strain ij as an additional parameter in the Ginzburg-Landau theory. In two dimensions we have only to consider the tensor components xx , yy and xy . The shear strain xy can be classified as perturbation with symmetry B 2 in Table We focus now only on the symmetry breaking B 1 component of the strain xxyy as a perturbation in the Ginzburg Landau expansion. If we condider first a single component order parameter, for example local s-wave (A 1 ), extended s-wave (A 1 ) or pure d-wave (B 1 ) pairing states from Tables II then the leading order term in the the Ginzburg Landau expansion determining T c is of the form This form is dictated by the requirement that the terms in the Ginzburg Landau expansion all have full lattice symmetry (A 1 ) and the group representation identity B 1 × B 1 = A 1 implies that only a quadratic function of strain is allowed. So we immediately see that the T c changes at most as a quadratic function of the B 1 component of strain Note that the unknown coupling parameter c could be either positive or negative, and so symmetry alone does not tell us if T c increases or decreases, only that the change is a quadratic function of the perturbation. A more interesting case is provided by the chiral triplet state, p + ip in Table where the specific form is determined by the identity . From this we can immediately see that the degenerate transitions split linearly in the strain with two transition temperatures The specific state of the order parameter below T c is determined by the higher order terms in the Ginzburg Landau expansion which we do not consider here. But without any further analysis we can immediately infer that between the two transition temperatures there can be no spontaneous time reversal symmetry breaking. This is because the order parameter is non-degenerate (A 1 in the orthorhombic group Table The final cases we consider are states where there are two non-degenerate, or "accidentally" degenerate order parameters associated with the unstrained lattice. First we consider the case of mixed d-wave and extended swave pairing from table III. The two order parameters have B 1 (ψ d ) and A 1 (ψ s ) symmetry, and so are not expected to be degenerate at zero strain. However the B 1 symmetry breaking strain couples these linearly in the form The same conclusion can be reached by consideration of the character table I. The B 2 state of D 4h is preserved in D 2h (it becomes renamed as B 1 ), while the B 1 state in D 4h becomes A 1 in D 2h , and so these two distinct symmetry states remain distinct despite the change from tetragonal to orthorhombic lattices. This situation also applies in the case of d + ig pairing 