We theoretically study the tunnel magnetoresistance (TMR) effect in (111)-oriented magnetic tunnel junctions (MTJs) with SrTiO3 barriers, Co/SrTiO3/Co(111) and Ni/SrTiO3/Ni(111). Our analysis combining the first-principles calculation and the Landauer formula shows that the Cobased MTJ has a high TMR ratio over 500%, while the Ni-based MTJ has a smaller value (290%). Since the in-plane lattice periodicity of SrTiO3 is about twice that of the primitive cell of fcc Co (Ni), the original bands of Co (Ni) are folded in the kx-ky plane corresponding to the ab plane of the MTJ supercell. We find that this band folding gives a half-metallic band structure in the Λ1 state of Co (Ni) and the coherent tunneling of such a half-metallic Λ1 state yields a high TMR ratio. We also reveal that the difference in the TMR ratio between the Co-and Ni-based MTJs can be understood by different s-orbital weights in the Λ1 band at the Fermi level. I. The tunnel magnetoresistance (TMR) effect is essential not only for applications to magnetic sensors and memories but also for deepening our understanding of spin-dependent electron transport. A series of studies on Fe/MgO/Fe(001) magnetic tunnel junctions (MTJs) In contrast, our recent studies Although such a mechanism of high TMR ratios is physically significant, the interfacial resonant tunneling might be sensitive to atomic configurations at interfaces of MTJs. Moreover, the application of bias voltages tends to suppress the interfacial resonant tunneling, since the energy level of the interfacial state is shifted oppositely in the two interfaces. These motivate us to find other (111)-oriented MTJs with robustly high TMR ratios. In this work, we consider (111)-oriented MTJs with SrTiO 3 tunnel barriers. Historically, SrTiO 3 has been recognized as an important material for tunnel barriers. Comparative experimental studies on Co/X/La 0.7 Sr 0.3 MnO 3 (X = SrTiO 3 , Al 2 O 3 , and Ce 0.69 La 0.31 O 1.845 ) clarified that the spin polarization of effective tunneling electrons but not that of ferromagnets plays a crucial role in the TMR effect Our first-principles-based transport calculation demonstrates that the Co-and Ni-based MTJs show relatively high TMR ratios of 534 and 290%, respectively. We also reveal that the high TMR ratios can be explained by the coherent tunneling of electronic states of bulk ferromagnets, meaning that the obtained TMR ratios are more robust against interfacial imperfections and bias voltage than those driven by the interfacial resonant tunneling. The simple fcc Co and Ni given by their primitive unit cells have no Λ 1 bands crossing the Fermi level in the high-symmetry line Λ corresponding to the [111] direction. We show however that these ferromagnets have a half-metallic band structure in the Λ 1 state when attached to SrTiO 3 , because the in-plane periodicity of SrTiO 3 is about twice that of fcc Co (or Ni) and the original band structure of Co (or Ni) is folded in the k x -k y plane. This is a kind of "band-folding effect" found and studied in (001)-oriented MTJs with spinel-oxide tunnel barriers Ni-based MTJs and clarify that this comes from different s-orbital weights in the Λ 1 band at the Fermi level. We first considered supercells of Co/SrTiO 3 /Co(111) and Ni/SrTiO 3 /Ni(111) (Fig. where E tot is the total energy of the optimized supercell with each interfacial atomic configuration, N i is the number of atoms of the element i and μ i is its chemical potential. In the present work, we used μ Co , μ Sr , μ Ti , and μ O derived from energies of hcp Co, fcc Sr, hcp Ti, and O 2 molecules. Table We calculated the TMR ratios on the basis of the ballistic transport theory. The Landauer formula was used in ballistic transport calculations with the first-principles DFT method, which is implemented in the PWCOND code Table tance G P,↓ is much larger than the up-spin conductance G P,↑ in both MTJs. This is a significant feature for the present TMR effect and its origin is discussed below. In Fig. Let us discuss the mechanism of the TMR effect on the basis of the electronic structures of the tunnel barrier and ferromagnetic electrodes. We mainly focus on the Co/SrTiO 3 /Co(111) MTJ, since the similar mechanism is expected for both the MTJs. As mentioned above, the smooth peak in the k -dependent conductance [Fig. Figure In Fig. We next calculated the band structure of fcc Co along the Λ line as shown in Figs. Note here that the half-metallic band structure in the We emphasize that this is in sharp contrast to the bandfolding effect in Fe/MgAl 2 O 4 /Fe(001) We finally address the difference in the TMR ratio between the Co-and Ni-based MTJs. As mentioned above, since both Co and Ni in the present MTJs have the Λ 1 half metallicity, a more detailed comparison of the electronic structure is required. Here, we focus on the weight of the s-orbital component in the Λ 1 band, since the sorbital state contributes dominantly to transport properties including the TMR effect owing to its small effective mass. Such a significance of the s-orbital state on the TMR effect has been reported in many previous studies We investigated the TMR effect in unconventional (111)-oriented MTJs with SrTiO 3 tunnel barriers by means of the first-principles calculation and the Landauer formula. We obtained relatively high TMR ratios of 534 and 290% in Co/SrTiO 3 /Co(111) and Ni/SrTiO 3 /Ni(111), respectively. The analysis of the bulk band structure in the electrode and the barrier re- gions of the MTJ clarified that the TMR effect in the present MTJs can be explained by the coherent tunneling of electronic states of bulk ferromagnets; actually, we found that fcc Co and Ni in the MTJs have halfmetallic band structures in the Λ 1 state and these halfmetallic states transmit through SrTiO 3 with an evanescent Λ 1 state, leading to relatively high TMR ratios. A usual primitive cell of fcc Co (Ni) has no Λ 1 state at E F . However, since the in-plane lattice constant of SrTiO 3 is about twice as long as that of fcc Co (Ni), the 2×2 inplane cell of fcc Co (Ni) fit the unit cell of SrTiO 3 . This yields a band folding in fcc Co (Ni) in the k x -k y plane and the folded bands give a half metallicity in the Λ 1 state. Therefore, we can conclude that the band folding is the key for the Λ 1 half-metallicity and resultant high TMR ratios. We also discussed the difference in the TMR ratio between the Co-and Ni-based MTJs and found that this is attributed to the different weights of the s-orbital component in the Λ 1 band at the Fermi level. Unfortunately, the TMR ratios of the present MTJs are not so high compared to that of the conventional Fe/MgO/Fe(001). This is because SrTiO 3 has a slow-decaying evanescent state with Λ 3 symmetry, as well as that with Λ 1 symmetry. Since fcc Co (Ni) has both up-and down-spin Λ 3 bands at E F , these bands degrade a TMR ratio by increasing the conductance in the antiparallel magnetization state. Therefore, finding ferromagnetic materials that have a half metallicity not only in the Λ 1 state but also in the Λ 3 state is required for obtaining a giant TMR ratio in the (111)-oriented MTJs with SrTiO 3 barriers.