Hardware spiking neural networks hold the promise of realizing artificial intelligence with high energy efficiency. In this context, solid-state and scalable memristors can be used to mimic biological neuron characteristics. However, these devices show limited neuronal behaviors and have to be integrated in more complex circuits to implement the rich dynamics of biological neurons. Here we studied a NbO x memristor neuron that is capable of emulating numerous neuronal dynamics, including tonic spiking, stochastic spiking, leaky-integrate-and-fire features, spike latency, temporal integration. The device also exhibits phasic bursting, a property that has scarcely been observed and studied in solid-state nano-neurons. We show that we can reproduce and understand this particular response through simulations using non-linear dynamics. These results show that a single NbO x device is sufficient to emulate a collection of rich neuronal dynamics that paves a path forward for realizing scalable and energy-efficient neuromorphic computing paradigms. As the interest in Artificial Intelligence (AI) grows, spiking neural networks offer an energyefficient, hardware-compatible, and event-driven alternative to conventional artificial neural networks A leading idea to engineer this new type of devices is to exploit the intrinsic physics of nanoscale materials to implement neurons In this work, we fabricate and characterize memristor neurons based on a simple Pt/Nb 2 O 5 / Ti/Pt stack with current inputs and output voltage shapes that are close to the shape of a biological action potential, thanks to the effect of an inductance. These devices are straightforward to model with physics equations, and simultaneously, feature multiple computational properties such as tonic spiking, stochastic spiking, spike latency, leaky-and-fire integration (LIF), all-or-nothing firing, and phasic bursting. These neuron-like dynamics can be modelled and understood through physical equations and standard non-linear dynamics. 2 Fabrication and method N bO x memristors, comprising 5 μm × 5μm cross-point structures, were fabricated by successive film deposition and patterning. A 4-nm Ti adhesion layer and a 25-nm thick Pt layer were first deposited on a SiO 2 /Si substrate by electron-beam evaporation. These layers were subsequently patterned using optical lithography and ion-beam etching to define the bottom electrodes. A 30 nm N b 2 O 5 layer was then deposited onto the bottom electrodes using radio-frequency sputtering from a N b 2 O 5 target at room temperature in an Ar ambient. The metal-oxide-metal device was completed by adding a top electrode (10 nm Ti -25 nm Pt) deposited by electron beam evaporation. For electrical measurements, the bottom electrode was connected to ground and the source applied to the top electrode. I-V characteristics were measured with a Keysight B1500A Semiconductor Device Analyzer after current-controlled electroforming with a positive polarity. Pulse measurements were performed using an Agilent 81160A pulse generator and a voltage-pulse to current-pulse converter (see Supplementary Materials figure Before the electroforming process, the resistance of the device was about 4 MΩ at 0.3 V. Electroforming was achieved by the application of a current ramp from 0 to 0.5 mA to the device (see Supplementary Materials figure The simulations presented in figure The quasistatic I-V characteristics of our device are shown in figure The physical basis of this behavior has been under debate but is generally understood to arise from an increase in the oxide electrical conductivity due to local Joule heating. Indeed, Gibson In the case of the Poole-Frenkel effect, a filament of oxygen vacancies connects both electrodes after electroforming. The oxygen vacancies act as potential traps for electrons. If an electric field is applied to the device, the energy profile of the conduction band in the oxide around the traps becomes asymmetric. Trapped electrons are then able to be thermally injected into the conduction band, leading to the traditional Poole-Frenkel equation for the device resistance R d as a function of the temperature T d and the voltage V d across the device: where E a is the activation energy associated with the carrier trap level, 0 the vacuum permittivity, r the relative permittivity of N bO x , q the elementary charge, and d the thickness of the oxide film. V d is the device voltage and T d is the temperature of the active device volume where T amb is the room temperature, and C th and R th are respectively the thermal capacitor and resistor. We simulated the I-V curve of our device using these equations (see methods). The simulation results presented with a dotted line in figure To understand this behavior, figure The restoration part of the neuron-like voltage spike is seen in the output voltage but not in the current and temperature curves; this is due to the presence of a parasitic inductance (see figure Having analyzed the N bO x neuron spike shape, we now explore its computational properties. Figure When the input is constant and lies between the threshold current and the hold current, the neuron spikes with a constant frequency, a behavior called tonic spiking for biological neurons, as shown in figure The neuron also exhibits spike latency, as evidenced in figure Moreover, the neuron may exhibit all-or-nothing behavior. In figure In order to quantify the effect, a statistical study of phasic bursting as a function of input current is presented in figure We now present a theoretical analysis to determine the origin of the experimentallyobserved phasic bursting. We model our system with the circuit of figure where I s is the input current and R d is the Poole-Frenkel resistance defined in equation 1. The second equation is the Newton Law of Cooling (equation 2). Equations 2 and 3 can be solved numerically, leading to the different trajectories plotted in blue in figures 4b,c,d for the input current values I s of 0.9, 0.96702 and 1.A mA respectively. The system nullclines are also shown in dotted lines. These curves correspond to the zero values of the right-hand side of equations 3 and 2. Their intersection in the two-dimensional phase space (T d ,V d ) corresponds to points for which the derivatives of T d and V d are zero, and therefore gives the fixed point of the system for each input current. Consistent with equation 2, the temperature nullcline does not depend on the input current I S and is therefore identical in figures 4b,c,d (orange curve). On the other hand, increasing the input current vertically shifts the voltage nullcline to the top of the phase space. The current-dependent fixed points can therefore be obtained by following the temperature nullcline. For each of these points the Poole-Frenkel resistance can be computed, and by plotting the input current I s as the function of the voltage V d (thanks to the equilibrium relation The analysis of figure Volatile N bO x memristors are excellent neuron candidates as they are scalable, present reliable threshold switching, and are compatible with memristive synapses such as Hf O 2 Metal-Insulator-Metal structures. We have shown that the P t/N b 2 O 5 /T i/P t stack presents wellsuited I-V characteristics: a current-controlled S-shaped Negative Differential Resistance, which can be modeled by assuming Poole-Frenkel conduction. This type of devices is able to spike and the resulting shape is very close to the one of a biological neuron with initial depolarization followed by hyperpolarization due to an inductance. We demonstrated that this device presents multiple computational properties such as Leaky-Integrate-and-Fire (LIF) characteristics, all-or-nothing-firing, and phasic bursting. We also investigated the origin of phasic bursting through the analysis of the physical equations of the devices. This phenomenon comes from the bifurcation between an unstable fixed point (limit cycle) and a stable fixed point (equilibrium) driven by Poole-Frenkel dynamics. These results pave the way to easily-scalable neurons that can be easily modelled and simulated but still show a complex behavior in order to mimic biological computations. 