Using fully self-consistent thermal broken-symmetry GW we construct effective magnetic Heisenberg Hamiltonians for a series of transition metal oxides (NiO, CoO, FeO, MnO), capturing a rigorous but condensed description of the magnetic states. Then applying high-temperature expansion, we find the decomposition coefficients for spin susceptibility and specific heat. The radius of convergence of the found series determine the Neel temperature. The NiO, CoO, and FeO contain a small ferromagnetic interaction between the nearest neighbors (NN) and the dominant antiferromagnetic interaction between the next-nearest neighbors (NNN). For them the derived Neel temperatures are in a good agreement with experiment. The case of MnO is different because both NN and NNN couplings are antiferromagnetic and comparable in magnitude, for which the error in the estimated Neel temperature is larger, which is a signature of additional effects not captured by electronic structure calculations. Simulating and designing novel antiferomagnetic materials (AFM) materials has been one of the main interests of solid-state chemistry, condensed matter, materials science, as well as engineering. AFM are of technological importance for designing spin valves, roomtemperature electrical switches, colossal magnetoresistive effects, fast magnetic moment dynamics, and other antiferromagnetic spintronic applications. The Neel temperature is the most important characteristic parameter describing AFM. It determines their technological applicability, since above the Neel temperature AFM undergoes a phase transition to a disordered phase from a phase where spins are displaying antiferromagnetic ordering. The theoretical determination of Neel temperature for realistic systems is very challenging due to several reasons. First, electronic structure of AFM is multiconfigurational and requires simultaneous treatment of both strong and weak electron correlation. Second, according to the Hohenberg-Mermin-Wagner theorem, magnetic critical phenomena can happen only in 3D bulk. Consequently, numerical simulations should be performed for periodic problems with taking into account possible finite-size effects. This requirement limits techniques such as exact diagonalization that are traditionally used for model Hamiltonians. Moreover, even for paradigmatic model systems such as 3D Hubbard model, a brute-force diagrammatic approach of evaluating finite-temperature susceptibilities gave unsatisfactory estimates of critical temperatures While using only model systems or brute-force realistic diagrammatic approaches have severe shortcomings, an alternative approach that is ab-initio and is based on quantum mechanics is still viable. In such an approach, effective exchange couplings present in the quantum Heisenberg Hamiltonian can be extracted from DFT or wave-function calculations only using a limited number of computed states. These states are routinely accessible in standard electronic structure calculations. Subsequently, the constructed quantum Heisenberg Hamiltonian is extrapolated to encompass the states that cannot be efficiently captured by electronic structure calculations. Such a procedure is a very efficient way of computation of magnetic properties for molecular systems Recently, we introduced a broken-symmetry GW approach 1. Extraction of magnetic couplings J from wave-function or broken-symmetry selfconsistent periodic GW calculations and estimation of finite-size effects for J. 2. Evaluation of an extrapolated Heisenberg Hamiltonian for a large or even infinite system and reconstruction of the magnetic manifold of states of the target system. 3. Application of a high-temperature expansion (HTE) for spin susceptibilities and specific heat. 4. Determination of convergence radii of the expansions yielding the estimates of the Neel temperature. We benchmark this approach on bulk NiO, CoO, FeO, and MnO against other theories and experiments. Effective Hamiltonian. Magnetic phenomena can be accurately described with effective Hamiltonians since magnetic states are usually separated well from other states in the spectrum. In wave-function theories, such effective Hamiltonians can be constructed within the Bloch formalism as a result of an exact transformation from target to model spaces For the metal oxides, we consider the following form of the the effective Hamiltonian established by previous broken-symmetry DFT calculations where i, j are the unique nearest-neighbor (NN) pairs, i, j are the unique next-nearestneighbor (NNN) pairs, J 1 is the NN effective exchange coupling, J 2 is the NNN effective exchange coupling, S i are the local (model) spins on metal center i. In all compounds studied in this work, the J 2 constant is antiferromagnetic. Therefore, all these oxides show spin frustration that makes the determination of critical point especially difficult. To obtain exchange couplings, we use energy differences between the solutions with maximum and zero (broken-symmetry) spin projections evaluated using different unit cells. The exchange couplings are extracted according to the expressions below where E(• • • ) denotes the energy of the high-spin (HS) and broken-symmetry (BS) solutions in cells 1 and 2 (see Ref. In this work, we neglect relativistic effects since according to the Kanamori's estimate High-temperature expansion (HTE). HTE was introduced by Opechowski in 1937 The idea of the HTE is the following. Thermodynamic quantities, such as spin susceptibility and specific heat, respectively, can be written as a Taylor series around where β is the inverse temperature. We would like to note that in this work we neglect the orbital contribution to the magnetic susceptibility since its impact on the critical temperature is expected to be small. The first coefficient c 0 = 0, which gives the decay of χ to zero at an infinite temperature, corresponds to Curie law (c 1 defines the Curie constant). Critical temperature limits the radius of convergence of the series, since at the critical temperature the thermodynamic quantities are not analytic functions. To find the critical temperature, the following ratios are commonly used The q n and s n correspond to the d'Alembert test of convergence. At a large n, both q n and s n converge to the critical temperature. Another commonly used test is the root test based on |c n | 1/n . However, each c n is a homogeneous polynomial of degree (n -1) of J 1 and J 2 . So the root estimate is unphysical because it is not strictly proportional to J. The ratios do not have this problem. Instead of applying the root test to the χ, we apply the root test to χ β or ∂χ ∂β : The g n and h n are proportional to J, which makes them more reliable. At the same time, coefficients for the specific heat d n are homogeneous polynomials of degree n of J 1 and J 2 . We applied all of the estimators described above, which we report in Section 3 in SI. We also tried various extrapolation techniques For the transition-metal oxides studied, Table symmetry UHF and GW estimates for FeO and CoO evaluated in this work yield ferromagnetic J 1 and antiferromagnetic J 2 constants. For both NiO and MnO, similarly to FeO, GW increases the magnitude of J 2 in comparison to UHF. This can be explained by enhancement of the superexchange due to a partial stabilization of charge-transfer contributions because of the effective screened interaction W . FIG. We validate the high-temperature expansion by applying it to cubic lattices as described in Section 1 in SI. There, we also provide a comparison of limiting cases with the previously published results from Refs The Neel temperatures extracted from different convergence radius estimates can vary vastly. This behaviour is illustrated by Figure The behavior of the convergence radius estimates for CoO and FeO (S = 3/2 and S = 2) is similar to NiO. In SI, Tables FIG. In SI, Tables Table In this work, we applied broken-symmetry fully self-consistent GW approach and evaluated the effective exchange couplings in nickel, manganese, cobalt, and iron oxides. In both FeO and CoO, the J 1 constant is ferromagnetic and the J 2 constant is antiferromagnetic similar to NiO. The GW estimate of |J 2 | is several times larger than the UHF estimate. This observation is consistent with other solid and molecular compounds with significant superexchange, which can be explained by the inclusion of screened interactions in GW stabilising ionic contributions We found that when the signs of J 1 and J 2 are different, the q n ratios contain multiple poles close to the computed J 1 /J 2 values, making critical temperature estimates based on q n unreliable in this regime. The estimates based on roots (g n , h n , f n , r n ) are much more stable and converge faster than q n . The Neel temperature estimates derived from spin susceptibility and specific heat are in excellent agreement with each other. For NiO, the critical temperature evaluated from GW is in agreement with the estimates from the wavefunction calculations. The estimated critical temperatures from GW for NiO, CoO, and FeO reproduce the trend in the experimental estimates of critical temperature for this series of compounds. If the signs of J 1 and J 2 are the same, the q n are separated from the poles and become stable. This regime is observed for MnO, for which q n converge faster than the root estimates. The Neel temperature of MnO is very sensitive to its J values, which can be explained by large spin (S = 5/2) and large effective coordination number. For MnO, the GW overestimates the critical temperature. While the precise cause of this overestimation is not known, plausible causes, such as spin-vibronic effects and deviation from Heisenberg Hamiltonian, will be investigated in our future work. a : Reference e : Reference