Understanding the various competing phases in cuprate superconductors is a long-standing challenging problem. Recent studies have shown that orbital degrees of freedom, both Cu eg orbitals and O p orbitals, are a key ingredient for a unified understanding of cuprate superconductors, including the material dependence. Here we investigate a four-band d-p model derived from the first-principles calculations with the variational Monte Carlo method, which allows us to elucidate competing phases on an equal footing. The obtained results can consistently explain the doping dependence of superconductivity, antiferromagnetic and stripe phases, phase separation in the underdoped region, and also novel magnetism in the heavily-overdoped region. The presence of p orbitals is critical to the charge-stripe features, which induce two types of stripe phases with s ′ -wave and d-wave bond stripe. On the other hand, the presence of d z 2 orbital is indispensable to material dependence of the superconducting transition temperature (Tc), and enhances local magnetic moment as a source of novel magnetism in the heavily-overdoped region as well. These findings beyond one-band description could provide a major step toward a full explanation of unconventional normal state and high Tc in cuprate supercondutors. Over 35 years since its discovery In cuprate superconductors, for a long time, the anomalous features have been investigated as the physics of an effective single band crossing a Fermi surface These studies indicate that both p-and d-orbital degrees of freedom should be properly taken into account for the understanding of cuprate superconductors. In the previous work, we have proposed a four-band d-p model composed of the Cu d x 2 -y 2 and d z 2 orbitals and the O p x and p y orbitals as a minimal model to obtain the unified description of cuprate superconductors In this paper, we investigate the four-band d-p model with the VMC method in more detail. We take the La 2 CuO 4 and HgBa 2 CuO 4 systems as typical examples, and especially, elucidate the competing orders of superconductivity, antiferromagnetic (AF) and stripe phases, phase separation in the underdoped region, and novel magnetism in the heavily-overdoped region. Our major findings are as follows. First, charge/spin stripe state is stable over a wide doping range, and its period decreases as the hole doping rate x increases. At x = 1/8, we obtain the same stripe phase as observed experimentally, which is extremely robust in the La-based system, but fragile in the Hg-based system. The AF phase is confined to a narrow doping range near x ∼ 0. In the underdoped region 0 < x < 1/8, the phase separation (PS) occurs between the AF and the x = 1/8 stripe phase. Suppression of the AF correlation by finite intersite d-d repulsion causes the transition to a d-wave bond stripe observed in non-La-based systems. Second, concerning the superconductivity, the material dependence of the T c dome as a function of x is consistently explained. The dome shape is shown to be strongly correlated with whether the undoped AF insulator is Slater-or Motttype. Finally, we show that novel magnetism observed in the heavily-overdoped region comes from the development of Cu local moments via the Hund's coupling due to the rapid increase of d z 2 component with doping. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we introduce the model and the numerical method used in this paper. effects. The behavior of d z 2 hole density and the local magnetic moment is studied in Sec. III C. The novel magnetism in the heavily-overdoped region is also discussed. Finally, the paper concludes with a summary in Sec. IV. The details of the variational wave functions are shown in Appendix . As mentioned in Introduction, it is important to incorporate the four orbitals, the Cu e g orbitals and the O p x /p y orbitals, to provide a unified description of the cuprate superconductors. Therefore, we consider a fourband d-p model on the two-dimensional square lattice [see Fig. First, the kinetic term H kin is described by where Eq. ( Second, the Coulomb interaction term H int is composed of eight terms, Here, n α i = n α i↑ + n α i↓ with n α iσ = c † iασ c iασ is the number operator and S α i is the spin angular momentum operator at site i with orbital α. d 1 and d 2 are abbreviations for d x 2 -y 2 and d z 2 orbitals, respectively, and , and J ′ represent on-site intraorbital, interorbital, Hund's coupling, and pair-hopping interactions between d orbitals, respectively. In this study, we set J ′ = J and U d = U ′ d + 2J Finally, the double counting correction term H dc is introduced, where nd and np are the average electron densities of the d and p orbitals per spin per orbital obtained from the first-principles calculation. This term is subtracted from the Hamiltonian to correct the energy shift that has already been included in the first-principles calculation. In the d-p model, this double counting correction is important to obtain a reasonable result In general, it is very difficult to treat the effect of Coulomb interactions correctly. Here, the VMC method |Φ is a one-body part obtained by diagonalizing the onebody Hamiltonian including many variational parameters and filling the eigen states in ascending order to the corresponding electron density. The chemical potential is determined in this process. We can construct longrange-ordered states of charge, spin, and superconductivity. The explicit forms of them are described in Appendix. The Gutzwiller factor is the one extended for the two-orbital system G , possible 16 patterns of charge and spin configuration of the d x 2 -y 2 and d z 2 orbitals at each site |γ , i.e., weighted with e -gγ and {g γ } are optimized as variational parameters. The remaining operators and are charge and spin Jastrow factors, which control longrange charge and spin correlations, respectively. α and β run over four orbitals. s z iα is the z component of the spin angular momentum operator at site i with orbital α. The set of {v c ijαβ } and {v s ijαβ } are variational parameters. The variational parameters in |Ψ are simultaneously optimized using stochastic reconfiguration method We study the La 2 CuO 4 and HgBa 2 CuO 4 systems as typical examples of single-layer hole-doped cuprates. The maximally localized Wannier orbitals Figure Starting from these energy band structures, we will investigate the ground state property of the La-and Hgbased systems using the VMC method. In the following, we set t 1 as a unit of energy. The d-orbital onsite Coulomb interaction U d /t 1 is varied as a parameter. The other Coulomb interaction parameters are set as (U ′ d , J, U p , V dp , V pp ) = (0.8, 0.1, 0.5, 0.25, 0.2) U d for both La-and Hg-based systems with reference to Ref. The results obtained are presented in three parts, A. AF and Stripe phases, B. Superconductivity, and C. Heavily-overdoped region. In VMC calculations, charge ordering and magnetic ordering generally tend to be more stable than superconductivity. This can be due to insufficient incorporation of quantum fluctuations, which is an issue to be addressed in the future. Instead, the discussion here focuses on the doping and material dependence of each phase. The effect of randomness is out of the scope of this paper. We show results for N S =L×L=24×24=576 unit cells (and thus 576×4=2304 orbitals in total), which is large enough to avoid finitesize effects. In this paper, the stripe phase with charge and spin periodicity λ c and λ s is denoted as a Cλ c Sλ s phase according to the convention. For example, the most familiar stripe phase observed around x = 1/8 in several La-based systems corresponds to the C4S8 phase. Our FIG. Figure Figure Next, to dissect the stripe structure, we compute the excess energy per added hole x , and illustrate it in Fig. Next, let us discuss the spin degree of freedom. For all the stripe phases considered here, we find the socalled "spin-charge locking" where k is a peak position of the spin structure factor of the stripe phase. In the stripe phases for λ c ≥ 4, δ = x is satisfied [blue shaded area for 1/16 ≤ x ≤ 1/8 in Fig. Figure in Fig. Next, let us consider the internal structure of the stripe phases. Figure On the other hand, a stripe structure with an antiphase CDW of the p orbital in Fig. is shown in Figs. Next let us consider d x 2 -y 2 -wave spin-singlet superconductivity. Although the coexistence of stripe and superconducting phases is proposed in several cuprates where ∆ † τ (R i ) is a creation operator of singlet pairs between nearest-neighbor d x 2 -y 2 orbitals, and τ represents four nearest-neighbor Cu sites (τ = ±e x , ±e y ). f τ τ ′ is a form factor of a superconducting gap function with d x 2 -y 2 symmetry, namely, f (dd) τ τ ′ = 1 for τ τ ′ and -1 for τ ⊥ τ ′ . If P dd (r) is saturated to a finite value for r = |r| → ∞, superconducting long-range order exists. In the following, we take the saturated value of P dd (r → ∞) as a strength of superconductivity P dd . The x dependence of P dd for the La-based system is shown in Fig. The x dependence of P dd for the Hg-based system is shown in Fig. We also note that the dip structure around x = 1/8 becomes slightly more visible as U d /t 1 increases, in both La-based and Hg-based systems. In fact, the dip structure around x = 1/8 is widely observed in cuprate superconductors. This structure is more pronounced the more stable the stripe states are, as in LBCO and LNSCO with the LTT distortion mentioned in Sec. III A 1. The dip structure we found is tightly related to this fact. This implies that although our variational wave functions for the superconductivity do not explicitly include the charge modulation, stripe fluctuations are partially included through the Jastrow factors. Finally, we mention the finite-size effect. The domeshaped behavior and the material dependence of P dd are obtained also for N S = 16 × 16. We consider that N S = 24 × 24 used here is large enough to discuss the superconductivity in the present model. Here, we discuss the hole density of the d z 2 orbital n z 2 and novel magnetism in the heavily-overdoped region. First of all, in Figs. Second, in Figs. where S z i = α S z iα is the z component of the total spin angular momentum operator at site i and α runs over four orbitals in the unit cell. As shown in Figs. Finally, let us comment a novel magnetism in the heavily-overdoped region. It has been discussed in various ways. Magnetic susceptibility measurements suggest the emergence of local paramagnetic moments in LSCO In this paper, we present a unified explanation of the doping and material dependence of the ground state in cuprate superconductors using the VMC analysis of the four-band d-p model derived from the first-principles calculations. First, we found the following results from a comparison of total energies of the AFI, AFM, and stripe phases. In the Hg-based system, a slight hole-doping causes the appearance of AFM phase, but in the La-based systems, the AFM state is less likely to appear due to strong correlations. In the La-based system, the experimentally observed s ′ -wave bond stripe phase is quite stable, and all stable stripe structures are in the spin-charge locking state. Overall features of spin incommensurability observed in the neutron scattering experiments are explained. In the Hg-based system, introducing a small but finite V dd or slightly increasing V pp can lead to a transition to the d-wave bond stripe structure and even a spin-charge unlocked state. PS appears in the low-doping region of both La-and Hg-based systems. All of these behaviors are consistent with experimental observations, and our results generally capture their characteristic features well. Next, we computed the superconducting correlation functions P dd , and clarified that the dome-shaped P dd , indicative of the T c dome as a function of the hole doping rate, is originated from the dual nature of the Coulomb repulsion, that is, the enhancement of the pairing interaction and the depairing effect by the decrease of mobile electron pairs. ε d z 2 and ∆ dp are material-dependent key parameters for high T c . Our result suggests that deep ε d z 2 and small ∆ dp raise the T c . This is the reason why T c of the Hg-based system is higher than that of the Labased system. Finally, we investigated novel magnetism in heavilyoverdoped region. For the hole doping rate x > 1/8, both the d z 2 hole density n z 2 and the local moment at Cu sites increases almost linearly with x in the La-based system. This means that the e g orbital spins are aligned parallel via the Hund's coupling. These local spins can be ferromagnetically aligned by the double-exchange mechanism, which is consistent with previous proposals. On the other hand, such a multiorbital effect is not observed in the Hg-based system because the d z 2 orbital is located much lower and thus almost inactive. These findings, which are beyond one-band description, could provide a major step toward a full explanation of unconventional normal state and high-T c in cuprate supercondutors. First, we show the construction of the noninteracting tight-binding energy band discussed in Sec. II C. It is obtained by diagonalizing the following one-body Hamiltonian: where c † kασ (c kασ ) is a creation (annihilation) operator of an electron with wave vector k, spin σ (=↑, ↓), and orbital α (= 1, 2, 3, 4) corresponding to (d x 2 -y 2 , d z 2 , p x , p y ), respectively. The hopping integrals t i (i = 1 -6) and the site energy of each orbital ε α are determined to fit the band structures obtained from the LDA or QSGW calculation. To construct the trial wave function for superconductivity, we employ the Bogoliubov de-Gennes (BdG) type Hamiltonian in real space and m α i = (-1) xi+yi m α sin[q α s (x i -x α s )], (A.17 where ρ α and m α are the amplitude of charge and spin orderings, respectively. x α c and x α s control the relative phases of charge and spin orderings, respectively. λ α c , λ α s , ρ α , m α , x α c and x α s are all variational parameters to be optimized.