It is a well known phenomenon in optics that spectroscopic resolution of a diffraction grating is much better compared to an interference device having just two slits, as in the Young's famous doubleslit experiment. On the other hand, it is well known that a classical superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) is analogous to the optical double-slit experiment. Here we report experiments and present a model describing a superconducting analogue to the diffraction grating, namely an array of superconducting islands positioned on a topological insulator (TI) film Bi 0.8 Sb 1.2 Te 3 . In the limit of extremely weak field, of the order of one vortex per the entire array, such devices exhibit a critical current peak that is much sharper than the analogous peak of an ordinary SQUID. Because of this, such arrays can be used as sensitive absolute magnetic field sensors. An important finding is that, due to the inherent asymmetry of such arrays, the device also acts as a superconducting diode. Topological insulator (TI) films can be made superconducting, using the the proximity effect, by placing superconducting electrodes on the TI surface Another phenomenon which has attracted attention recently is the superconducting diode effect The focus of our study is a square array of superconducting Niobium islands overlaying an intrinsic Bi 0.8 Sb 1.2 Te 3 topological insulator film (Nb-BST-Nb array). The system acts as the superconducting analogue of a diffraction grating. We observe an extreme sensitivity of the array to the external magnetic fields because of the diffraction-gratingstyle interference the condensate flows through in all parallel junctions. The interference peak is so narrow that it allowed us to distinguish magnetic fields which differ by about 8 nT, using a simple dc technique. The zeroth-order critical current interference peak is significantly sharper and taller than all other maxima, thus allowing absolute magnetic field measurements. By contrast, regular superconducting quantum interference devices Our experiments demonstrate that topological insulatorsuperconductor arrays can behave as efficient superconducting rectifiers. In other words, the system of proximity-coupled islands acts as a superconducting diode, i.e., it exhibits a dependence of the critical current on the polarity of the bias current. Our design might be superior in some aspects with respect to previously published designs. For example, our system requires only very small magnetic fields, of the order 10 μT, for the occurrence of the diode effect. Such fields are orders of magnitude lower than those used in a previously reported system To explain the results we propose a model which takes into account the high kinetic inductance of surface states of the topological insulator. Another key ingredient of the model is the naturally occurring variation in the Nb-BST junctions parameters. To fabricated superconducting arrays we use high quality topological insulator (TI) thin films (40 nm thick) of nominal composition Bi 0.8 Sb 1.2 Te 3 (BST) grown by molecular beam epitaxy. Similar films were used in a study of the superconducting proximity effect in which it was shown that this composition provided undoped topological insulators without bulk carriers or an accumulation layer caused by band bending. The only free carriers in this material are the topological surface carriers due to the inter-band Dirac cone that exhibits spin-momentum locking. There it was shown that the proximity effect was restricted to the surface in contact with the superconductor. All experiments were performed at a temperature T = 0.3K. The voltage and the current leads were carefully filtered against electromagnetic noise and well thermalized. The filtering was done by winding a highly resistive twisted-pair of constantan wires around a copper cold finger and coating them with stycast epoxy filled with Cu particles, which efficiently absorbs parasitic electromagnetic noise. For the purpose of thermalization, varnish-coated Cu wires have been squeezed between Cu bars maintained at 0.3K. All electrical signals were passed through such cold Cu wire segments to ensure that all leads attain the base temperature. In addition to the above measures, 1.9MHz π-filters were installed at the top of the cryostat. Also, a 100 kOhm resistor was placed right at the BNC input leading to the current biasing connection of the sample. This resistor served to further reduce the interference of the external noise. The high efficiency of our filters was confirmed by the fact that the observed fluctuations of the critical current were extremely low, only about 0.1%. The resistance versus temperature (R-T) curve (Fig. A typical resistance versus magnetic field (R-B) curve is shown in Fig. where A = (w + d) 2 = 1.69μm 2 is the area of the unit cell of the square lattice, B is the external magnetic field, and φ 0 is the magnetic flux quantum. Thus, the oscillation period, defined as f = 1, corresponds to the theoretical value ∆B = 1.22mT. The experimental value, ∆B = 1.23mT, was used when normalizing the field. The resistance is measured by calculating the slope of the best linear fit to the V-I curve. The V-I curve is measured using a low frequency ac signal, the amplitude of which is indicated on the graph. The V-I is nonlinear, thus explaining why the resistance is generally larger for larger amplitudes of the bias current (Ibias). The main features of the R-B plot are the presence of sharp minima in the resistance at f = 0 and f = 1 and a well pronounced minimum at f = 3. However, the expected minimum at f = 2 is missing. The existence of such sharp resistance minima can be understood as a result of vortices, which, in the range of the relatively weak fields considered here, are localized in the N-regions of the SNS junctions of the array. Here "S" stands for superconductor (Nb) and "N" represent the conducting normal surface states of the topological insulator. These states are, in fact, also weakly superconducting due to the proximity effect. Generally speaking, the resistance is defined by the level of dissipation in the array, which is proportional to the concentration of vortices and their mobility. Thus, the minimum at f = 0 is explained by the lack of vortices in the array at zero magnetic field. On the other hand, the minima f = 1 and f = 3 correspond to cases where the number of vortices per unit cell is an integer (equal f ). In the cases of f being an integer, the vortex lattice is commensurate with the Nb islands lattice. Such commensurability ensures a pronounced minimum of the sample resistance, strong pinning of the vortices, and low mobility of the vortices which corresponds to a low dissipation. Recently, it has been demonstrated explicitly that vortices in SNS junctions have normal cores So far we have presented the multiple-island interference and the Fraunhofer diffraction effects, as they appear on the R-B curve. The same phenomena can been distinguished on the critical current versus magnetic field (Ic-B) curve (Fig. As we zoom in on the central peak of the critical current (see signals if the amplitude of the applied ac current is larger than the critical current of one polarity but lower than the the critical current of the opposite polarity. We demonstrate the diode effect directly by applying an ac current (10 Hz) with an amplitude that is lower than max(I - c ) but larger than max(I - c )/η. The result, a clear rectification effect, is shown in Fig. It might be instructive to compare these results to previously published observations of analogous phenomena. Recently, a superconducting diode was realized using a noncentrosymmetric superlattice. The lattice was made of alternating epitaxial films of tantalum, vanadium, and niobium Model We model the system as a two-dimensional array of wide Josephson junctions between square Nb islands of the size w × w separated by the gaps of width d. The Josephson current flows through the proximized BST layer, which has small induced superconducting gap ∆ under the islands and no gap between the islands. The physics of Josephson arrays is very rich. For example, they exhibit superconductor -insulator phase transitions In the experiment we observe ac bias current rectification at small but finite magnetic fields, see Fig. Let us consider the gap between two neighboring rows of Nb islands in the middle of the array, namely the gap between the rows with the numbers i and i + 1. We express the Josephson current as an integral along the line going through the middle of this gap, Here W = N(w + d) is the total width of the array, N is the number of the islands in one row (N = 23 in our sample), y is the coordinate along the line, j C (y) is the coordinate dependent critical current density, and φ(y) is the gauge invariant phase difference across the Josephson junctions. Here we assume the usual sinusoidal current-phase relation for the junctions. The current density j C (y) equals to zero in the gaps between the Nb islands. In Eq. ( where φ(y) = φ i+1 (y) -φ i (y) is the difference between the phases of the superconducting order parameters in the two adjacent islands belonging to the rows i + 1 and i, and φ 0 is the magnetic flux quantum. To elucidate the well-known relation between Eq. ( where is the critical current versus flux dependence for a single junction and I C is the critical current of the whole array at f = 0. In Eqs. (4,5) f = B z (w + d)d/φ 0 , where B z is the field in the gaps between the bulk islands. Due to flux focusing, this field is larger than the external field created by the magnet. Flux conservation ensures that one can equivalently express the parameter f by Eq. ( To find the rectification effect, we start from the expression for the current density in the proximized BST layer under a single square Nb island. Adopting the disordered superconductor model, we obtain j = (π∆/2eR )(∇φ -2eA/ c). Here φ is the phase and ∆ is the absolute value of the induced superconducting order parameter in BST and A is the vector potential with the components A x = B z y, A y = A z = 0. We assume that the current flows along the x-axis, and we also fully ignore the screening of the field by thin Nb islands. Since ∇j = 0 and ∇A = 0, the phase under the island satisfies the equation ∇ 2 φ(x, y) = 0 with the boundary conditions derived from the conditions for the current components j x (0, y) = j x (w, y) = j C (y) sin[φ(y)], j y (x, 0) = j y (x, w) = 0. Solving the equations for the phase φ(x, y) under the two neighboring Nb islands from the rows i and i + 1 and taking the difference between the phases at the edges of these islands, we arrive at the self-consistent equation for the gauge invariant phase (3) in the form Here φ 0 is an arbitrary constant phase shift. Assuming further that the current density j C (y ) sin[φ(y )] slowly varies with the coordinate y , one can re-write Eq. ( Here φ0 is independent of the y part of the phase and f = B z (d + w)(d + 0.3537w)/φ 0 . This parameter slightly differs from the normalized flux f defined in Eq. ( The effective field B eff z changes sign depending on the direction of the bias current and in this way causes the rectification effect. Indeed, the maxima of the curves I ± C ( f ) shift from zero in the opposite directions and occur at f = f 0 for I + C and at f =f 0 for I - C with f 0 ∝ B eff z . Evaluating the Josephson current (2) with φ(y) obtained from Eq. ( In this limit, one can derive a general expression for the shift of the critical current maximum f 0 for an arbitrary critical current distribution j C (y), One can verify that f 0 0 only if the distribution j C (y) is asymmetric, i.e. j C (y -W/2) j C (W/2 -y). The critical current versus flux dependence in this approximation becomes For the simplest asymmetric critical current distribution of the form where β is a dimensionless asymmetry parameter, one finds We note for clarity that the distribution (11) ignores the gaps between the islands because in our sample d w. Thus, in this approximation the array is essentially replaced by a single junction with the width W. From Eq. ( Let us check if Eq. ( Although the simple equations (12,13) explain the data reasonably well, they have been derived under the assumption α 1. However, with the parameters outlined above one finds α ≈ 4. For this reason, we have lifted the restrictions on α and have solved Eq. ( To get better agreement with the experiment, we have slightly adjusted the critical current of the whole array choosing I C = 2.88 μA, and have also changed the value of the gap taking ∆ = 59 μeV. In Fig. Moreover, the experiment shows a clear jump at B = 25μT, which can be due to a vortex entrance, the phenomenon also found within the model. This might be not the first vortex entering. The first vortex entrance seems to be associated with a massive and and sharp drop of the critical current observed at about B = 6μT. This magnetic field is close to the estimated value. Indeed, since the field required to populate each unit cell with exactly one vortex is 1.23 mT and the number of unit cells is 23x23=529, the field needed to put just one vortex in the array is 2.3μT. The experimental field at which a vortex can enter (6μT) is somewhat larger, probably due to some nonnegligible screening. If one further examines Fig. To reveal the rectification effect, in Fig. We observe both the interference and the diffraction effects on a superconducting array involving an intrinsic topological insulator. The system is analogous to an optical diffraction grating. The interference, originating from multiple superconducting islands, produces a very sharp peak of the critical current. The diffraction effect causes the second matching peak to disappear. We develop a model which captures the main features of the experiment. One aspect in which the model differs from the experiment is that the model predicts that at many various values of the magnetic flux the critical current should return to zero due to either interference or the diffraction. Yet the experiment demonstrates that the critical current never approaches zero. Such so-called node lifting could be a sign that a more advanced model of the disorder is needed. It is also consistent with a more exotic phenomenon of node lifting caused by Majorana zero modes The sample also exhibits a superconducting diode effect. Our model explains it based on the assumption of a significant kinetic inductance of the topological surface states combined with some inhomogeneity. The rectification appears at very lower fields of the order of a few micro-Tesla. Finally, we find that the devices can be used as sensitive absolute magnetic field detectors due to the interference phenomenon analogous to an optical diffraction grating. The substrate for TI growth is a single-side polished c-plane sapphire (MTI Corp) that was annealed in oxygen at 1100 • C for several hours for atomic-level flatness and large crystalline terraces. The unpolished side was coated with 100 nm Titanium to allow for accurate measurements of substrate temperature using a pyrometer, as sapphire is transparent in the infrared spectrum. The substrate was clamped onto a tantalum holder using tantalum wire at its four corners and allowed to outgas in the load lock for several hours before being introduced into the growth chamber for high-temperature outgassing. The growth chamber base pressure was at a low 10 -8 torr level. The composition of the film was controlled by the flux ratio of Bismuth/Antimony from Knudsen effusion cells with an excess Tellurium flux to compensate for tellurium losses from the surface. A Te/(Bi+Sb) ratio greater than 6 is sufficient. Two quartz crystal microbalance (QCM) measurements of the Bi and Sb fluxes were taken to ensure the fluxes are stable. The substrate was heated to the growth temperature of 200-215 • C on the pyrometer (260 • C on a thermal couple placed on the backside of the substrate) and the tellurium shutter was opened for 10 seconds to ensure the starting layer of the quintuple stacked Te-(Bi+Sb)-Te-(Bi+Sb)-Te structure is tellurium. Then the Bi and Sb shutters were opened and shut simultaneously for periods of time calculated using their flux measurements. A two-stage growth method was used, where the first 3 quintuple layers (QLs) are grown and annealed in an excess of Te flux for an hour before growing the remaining 37 QLs. At the end of film growth, the film was annealed for 4 hours at around 260-265 • C on the pyrometer (330 • C on the thermal couple), but with a lowered Te flux to prevent excess Te buildup. Once the annealing was completed, the tellurium flux was cut off. The film was then moved into the load lock and allowed to fully cool down, before being removed from the vacuum. To prevent oxidation from happening at the exposed film surface due to exposure to the atmosphere, polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) was dropped onto the film immediately when it was removed and allowed to dry. PMMA layer was completely removed prior to device fabrication by dissolving protective PMMA film in acetone and rinsing the sample in isopropyl alcohol. For device fabrication, a two-session electron beam (e-beam) lithography method was used. In the first session the film was coated with PMMA 950 A4 and exposed under a 10kV e-beam to define the array structure, electrodes and alignment markers. The sample was developed in Methyl isobutyl ketone (MIBK):IPA 1:3 solution for 25 seconds and immediately loaded into a plasma sputtering system for metal deposition. A two-second ion milling was applied to briefly clean the BST surface, followed by 30 nm Nb sputtering. Lift off was done by placing the sample inside acetone at room temprature for 2 hours and sonicating it for 5 seconds. In the second lithography session the trenches are aligned and exposed on the sample. After developing in MIBK:IPA 1:3 solution, a 60 second ion milling session was applied to completely remove the TI, such that the electrodes for current and voltage probing are defined and separate from each other. Department of Physics, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801, USA; Pico Group, QTF Centre of Excellence, Department of Applied Physics, Aalto University School of Science, Aalto 00076, Finland