It is predicted that a vortex in a topological superconductor contains a Majorana zero mode (MZM). The confirmative Majorana signature, i.e., the 2e 2 /h quantized conductance, however is easily sabotaged by unavoidable interruptions, e.g. instrument broadening, non-Majorana signal, and extra particle channels. To avoid these interruptions, we propose to obtain strong Majorana evidence following our novel Majorana hunting protocol that relies on dissipation introduced by disorders at e.g., the sample-substrate interface. Within this protocol, we highlight three features, each of which alone can provides a strong evidence to identify MZM. Firstly, dissipation suppresses a finite-energy Caroli-de Gennes-Matricon (CdGM) conductance peak into a valley, while it does not split MZM zero-bias conductance peak (ZBCP). Secondly, we predict a dissipation-dependent scaling feature of the ZBCP. Thirdly, the introduced dissipation manifests the MZM signal by suppressing non-topological CdGM modes. Importantly, the observation of these features does not require a quantized conductance value 2e 2 /h. A Majorana zero mode (MZM) Zero-bias conductance peak (ZBCP) has also been reported as a Majorana feature in spectroscopic measurements of vortex states via the standard scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) technique In this paper, we solve problems above, by introducing dissipative environments that couple to the electron tunneling between tip and vortex. Experimentally, dissipation can be introduced via a disorder layer More recently, Ref. The observed results in vortex Majorana hunting can be classified into three generic situations: (i) the case with a ZBCP and multiple finite-energy CdGM conductance peaks We consider the setup of Fig. Generically, a vortex in a topological superconducting island contains a zero-energy Majorana, and multiple finite-energy CdGMs. These CdGMs can be considered as Andreev bound states that are recognizable in the energy space (see e.g., that depends on the tunneling amplitude t MZM [of the Hamiltonian (3)], dissipation r and the inverse of the ultra-violate cutoff τ c (∼ 1/E F , with E F the fermi energy). The value of ε ch is experimentally tunable by changing the tip-sample distance. Theoretically, ε ch labels the energy above which scaling feature begins to develop. As an experimentally reasonable value, We take the scale ε ch = ∆ sc /400 (in both Figs. More specifically, in Fig. tance landscape of the topological (a) and trivial (b) situations. Of the trivial case, the ZBCP is assumed to come from a zero-energy Andreev bound state. We plot only conductance of positive bias, as the landscape is symmetric in bias. In both figures, the blue curves are plotted with a smaller tip-sample distance -equivalently, a stronger tip-sample tunneling than those of the red curves. In Fig. The universal feature can be observed by changing either the temperature [(a), at zero bias V = 0], or the bias [(b), with a fixed temperature T = 5ε ch ]. Of the latter case, the universal feature appears when V bias is much larger than the temperature T = 5ε ch . When V bias ≪ T , the conductance saturates to a value smaller than 2e 2 /h, due to the finite-temperature effect. The Majorana coupling tMZM has the same value for (a) and (b). The universality might be alternatively detected by measuring the zero-bias conductance as function of the tip-sample distance L (c), after obtaining the dependence of tunneling amplitude on L, i.e., tMZM(L). In making (c) we have assumed the tip-sample tunneling tMZM ∝ exp(-L/λ), as an easy example. All curves are obtained following Eq. ( when the tip-sample distance becomes small, the CdGM conductance peak (the red curve) can split into a valley (the blue curve). This peak-valley transition signifies the influence of dissipation on the tunneling into a CdGM. Experimentally, one can fix the experimental temperature T exp , and observe the peak splitting by decreasing the tip-sample distance L. In this work we treat the tip-sample junction as a tunneling barrier, with which the tip-sample transmission Γ 0 (L) ∝ exp(-2L/λ) decays exponentially when L increases. The decaying width λ reflects the feature of the tunneling potential barrier. As a natural question, what is the requirement on the tip-sample distance L, to observe the peak splitting at a given experimental temperature T exp ? To answer this question, we provide the following experimental steps. As the first step, one measures the transmission Γ 0 (L) at a temperature T 0 . This temperature is chosen to be high enough such that (within the range of L during this measurement) interruption from dissipation can be avoided. Then, we switch back to the experimental temperature T exp < T 0 , where dissipation will play an important role. At T exp , we expect to see the CdGM peak-splitting as long as L < L * ,where the critical distance L * is defined by its corresponding transmission that satisfies Γ 0 (L * ) = ln[1/(1β)]/ ln(T 0 /T exp ) (see Appendix C). Factor β < 1 is non-universal and depends on the position detected by the tip: β is close to (1 -2r)/(1 + 2r) in case of an extremely large asymmetry among different weights of the CdGM at the tip position. Here, the weight specifically means the weight between different components of the CdGM wavefunction [see Eq. ( By contrast, when the total electron and hole weights equal, β approaches one, where the CdGM conductance signature at the detected position strongly mimics that of a real Majorana. Fortunately, the symmetric weight situation for a non-Majorana CdGM is not robust and can be only preserved at some special tip locations. Therefore, a CdGM with accidental symmetric weight can be distinguished (from a Majorana) by detecting its tunneling signal at different positions. In strong contrast, the zero-energy Majorana peak remains, and keeps growing when decreasing the tipsample distance. We emphasize that for a real MZM, this Majorana-specified feature does not depend on the tip position (in the 2D plane parallel to the sample). Indeed, the dissipative tunneling into a MZM is anticipated as a universal process The above protocol to detect MZM with the conductance landscape however does not apply to the special case (see e.g., Ref. One can instead confirm the Majorana signal by investigating the dissipation-dependent universality class (i.e., the conductance scaling features) of the Majorana ZBCP. Briefly, near the weak tunneling regime, dissipative tunneling into a MZM displays the scaling feature of the conductance G MZM ∝ ε 2r-1 Measurement of the scaling feature also helps confirming a MZM of generic cases (i.e., the cases with multiple CdGMs within the superconducting gap). Indeed, with both pieces of evidence observed (i.e., the scaling feature of the ZBCP and the splitting of CdGM peaks), the existence of the MZM can be more strongly confirmed. However, for generic cases, the observation of the scaling feature in bias requires a large-enough CdGM energy: otherwise the Majorana ZBCP scaling feature in bias is disguised by the CdGM contribution. In previous paragraphs, we assume CdGMs that are distinguishable in energy. For a vortex with CdGM energy level spacing smaller than the STM resolution, those CdGMs instead form into a continuous spectrum described by the density of states ρ(ε). Of this case, dissipation also benefits the identification of the Majorana signal. Briefly, when the tunneling is dissipation free, the Majorana tunneling signal is disguised by the CdGMs around zero energy [Fig. Based on the strong Majorana evidence discussed above, we provide a protocol to identify Majorana in a vortex, in Fig. A vortex of the considered topological system (Fig. Step 1: Pre Majorana-hunting procedures Obtain dissipation ! via conductance fitting, e.g. Ref. Choose a high temperature " # and a relatively large distance $ # . The corresponding dissipation effect is invisible; 2. Case with Intermediate dissipation influence (with parameters " % and $ % ): Dissipation effect is visible. FIG. states can be described by the Hamiltonian ) where r labels the (three dimension) tip position, ψ σ refers to the tip fermion with spin σ, and a n refers to the vortex state (n = 0 for the Majorana and otherwise for a CdGM). The electron and hole sectors of a local state are labelled by e and h, respectively. In Eq. ( where r = Re 2 /h is the dimensionless dissipation amplitude. The dynamics Eq. ( where γ = γ † = (a 0 + a † 0 )/ √ 2 is the vortex MZM. Due to its polynomial long-time feature Eq. ( with the combined phase Φ = (φ tip +φ)/ √ 1 + 2r and the MZM-coupling strength t MZM . The operator of Eq. ( In contrast to the Majorana situation, generically the tip-CdGM tunneling involves four independent tunneling parameters as shown in Eq. ( for α = e ↑, h ↑, e ↓ and h ↓, and all n values alike. The parameter l = exp(ε 0 /ε) -1 labels the progress in the RG flow, where ε 0 is the initial RG cutoff. It equals zero initially (where ε = ε 0 ), and increases with a decreasing RG cutoff ε. In real experiments, ε refers to the energy fluctuation of the system. Specifically, it can be considered as either the difference between local-state energy and the applied bias, or the system temperature, whichever is larger. Following Eq. ( where only the leading process t e↑ remains relevant, and approaches perfect transmission after the RG flow. Notice that a finite current can only be produced via the successive application of e and h-involved tunneling processes. Of the t e↑ -dominating situation, the flow of current is then determined by t h↓ , i.e., G/(e 2 /h) ∝ 2t 2 e↑ t 2 h↓ /(t 2 e↑ + t 2 h↓ ) ∼ 2t 2 h↓ (see Appendix A), where t e↑ ≫ t h↓ ≫ other tunnelings near the fixed point. This combined process of G is irrelevant in the RG, with the scaling dimension 1 + 4r. This irrelevance of current tunneling, remarkably, is distinct from the relevance of tunneling before the flow Eq. ( Finally, when the island contains a continuous CdGM spectrum, the dissipative conductance can be obtained with the so-called P (E) method with which the current equals Here R T is the tunneling resistance (indicating the tunneling barrier strength), ρ is the density of state of the sample at the tip location, ρ tip is the tip density of state, f (E) is a fermionic distribution, and finally, P (E) incorporates the chance to dissipate electron energy E via the dissipative environment In this paper, we have studied the transport features of a dissipative tunneling into a topological vortex. Instead of the 2e 2 /h conductance quanta, we propose three dissipation-unique phenomena that can help the identification of a Majorana. Firstly, the CdGM peak can split when the tip approaches the sample (see Fig. Before closure, we briefly discuss the relevant experimental parameters, including the dissipation amplitude r and the charging energy of the sample. To begin with, we choose the dissipation r ∼ 0.2 since such a dissipation amplitude has been proven as enough to suppress false positive signals (i.e., conductance peaks due to Andreev bound states) in a hybrid nanowire system requires a large sample radius R sample and large (relative) dielectric constant ε sample (here ε 0 is the vacuum dielectric constant). For instance, a 2D sample with radius R sample ∼ 2μm is required to have a relative dielectric constant around ε sample ∼ 50, to produce a small enough charging energy E c ∼ 10μeV ∼ 100mK. Fortunately, Majorana hunting experiments in iron-based vortexes, e.g., Refs. Appendix A: Coulomb-gas RG equations Briefly, the renormalization group (RG) method investigates the low-energy system features (e.g., the conductance) by figuring out the change of system parameters (the so call "RG flow") when decreasing the system energy (temperature, bias, or the inverse of some dephasing time). In general, a RG method deals with the system action with the form where φ is some field, and γ α is the prefactor of the operator O α labelled by α. The system has an initial cutoff Λ in energy at the beginning of the RG flow. When this cutoff decreases Λ → Λ -δΛ, particle states with energies between the initial and reduced cutoffs should be removed, after effectively incorporating the interaction between these states and the states with energies below the new cutoff. These interactions then effectively modify the prefactors γ α , leading to an effectively new action S system [φ, Λ -δΛ, {γ ′ α }]. When δΛ is infinitesimal, the change of parameters γ α follows the RG flow equations. This basic idea applies to most RG methods, including the Coulomb gas RG. More specifically, for the Coulomb gas RG method, one deals with the partition function ) that is required to be invariant during the RG flow. In Eq. (A2), the integral of "time" is between zero and the temperature inverse β = 1/T . As a consequence, strictly Coulomb gas RG equations describe the flow of equilibrium systems by decreasing the temperature. However, if within the weak-tunneling regime, temperature and bias are exchangeable as both can be considered as the energy cutoff. Indeed, difference between temperature and bias emerges only in the crossover regime The partition function Eq. (A2) contains "kinks" at moments τ 1 , τ 2 ...τ i ... when the system state changes. In the Coulomb gas RG method, a cutoff in time τ c is introduced. The Coulomb gas RG contains the steps below. To begin with, before each RG step, the "time difference" |τ iτ i+1 | > τ c between any two kinks is assumed to be larger than the cutoff τ c , forbidding the occurrence of two kinks within τ c . When the RG step begins, this cutoff increases to τ c → τ c + δτ c , where δτ c > 0 refers to the changing of the cutoff. Notice that 1/τ c can be interpreted as the cutoff in energy. The increasing of τ c then indicates the decreasing of the energy cutoff. Due to the increasing of cutoff in time, kinks now have the chance to occur within the new cutoff, i.e., τ c < |τ iτ i+1 | < τ c + δτ c . Contribution of these kinks should then be integrated out within this RG step. The contribution of the integrated pairs to the partition function then leads to the modification of the partition function , with a set of modified parameters γ ′ α . Finally, to guarantee the invariance of partition we rescale the cutoff back to τ c . When δτ c ≪ τ c is infinitesimal, the modification of parameters can be written in terms of differential equations known as RG equations. Now we go back to our specific system i.e., the dissipative tunneling into the vortex. Experimentally, the realization of this system is distinct from that of a hybrid nanowire. However, the tunneling Hamiltonian Eq. ( where g = 1/(1 + 4r), and l ∝ ln ε labels the RG process in terms of the energy ε. In experiments, ε can be considered as temperature or bias. Initially, l = 0, where both parameters K 1 (l = 0) = K 2 (l = 0) = 0 equal zero. At this point, all tunneling parameters of Eq. (A3) follow the same flow equation, i.e., dt α /dl = [1 -(r + 1/2)]t α for α = e ↑, h ↑, e ↓ and h ↓. The values of K 1 and K 2 begin to change when l increases, following (A4) Noticeably, Eq. (A4) is asymmetric with respect to tunneling parameters, through which the final values of K 1 and K 2 are determined by the leading process. For instance, with t e↑ dominant, K 1 = K 2 = -1 after the RG flow, leading to a most strongly reduced scaling dimension of t e↑ [Eq. ( To proceed, one needs to solve the dispersion function of quasiparticles (kink and anti-kink), as functions of the rapidity θ. More specifically, the dispersion function can be figured out from the integral equation × ln 1 + e β ′ V bias /2T -ε β ′ (θ,V bias /T ) , (B1) where β, β ′ equal 1 and -1 for kink and anti-kink, respectively. The function Φ β,β ′ is related to the quasiparticle scattering matrix in the bulk The first term of Eq. (B1), i.e., M exp(θ)/T influences the interaction-free contribution. The choice of M is a common prefactor that will not influence the final conductance. With the dispersion function obtained, the current equals eT n(r) 2h ˆ∞ -∞ dθ 1 cosh 2 {(r -1/2) [θln(T ref /T )]} ln 1 + e V bias /2T -ε(θ+ln(M/2T ),V bias ) 1 + e -V bias /2T -ε(θ+ln(M/2T ),V bias ) , (B3) where T ref is the effective "reflection" amplitude. When T ref /T ≪ 1, reflection is weak, and conductance approaches the quantized value 2e 2 /h. In the opposite limit T ref /T ≫ 1, reflection is strong, and conductance approaches zero. A large T ref indicates a small tip-sample tunneling, or a large tip-sample distance. In Eq. (B3), the function n(r) is a normalization factor. Theoretically, it equals 2r + 1. In real numerics, its value might deviates from 2r + 1 by e.g., one to two percents. Due to the smallness of conductance in the weak tunneling limit, one needs to figure out the precise value of the normalization factor. With Eq. (B3), we obtain the Majorana conductance peaks in Figs. 