Skyrmions can appear in non-centrosymmetric material because of the non-vanishing Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interactions (DMI). In this paper, we study the magnetic properties of the rhombohedral MX3 (M: V, Cr, Mn, and Fe. X: Cl, Br, and I) van der Waals materials with centrosymmetric lattice by combining first-principles calculations and Monte Carlo simulations. We found that the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya vector acting between the second nearest neighbor sites of the intra-layer is non-zero and quite large even in MX3 due to the breaking of the local inversion symmetry. We have found that the large DMI causes nano-scale magnetic vortexes, so-called skyrmions in MX3. The diameter of skyrmions, e.g., in CrCl3, is small, i.e., 2 nm, which is promising for the application of high-density magnetic memory devices. We have also found that not only conventional skyrmions in CrCl3 and VCl3 but also antiferromagnetic skyrmions in FeCl3 and meron in MnCl3 appear. Furthermore, we have found that the skyrmions in ClCl3 and VCl3 have a different helicity, which shows the possibility of controlling the helicity by electron/hole doping in MX3 materials. Van der Waals materials, which have a great advantage of high degrees of freedom in structures such as heterostructures and twisted structures, exhibit high potential as skyrmion materials. Skyrmion, a tiny magnetic swirl, is promising for future spintronic applications such as race track memory devices 2D materials have a high degree of structural freedom such as heterostructure and twisted structures, and recently offer an interesting arena for future electronic device and various new physics, e.g., superconducting and Fermi velocity modulation in twisted bilayer graphene In this work, we derive Hamiltonian from firstprinciples calculations, where the essential parts are isotropic exchange, antisymmetric exchange (also known as Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction), magnetic anisotropy, and Zeeman term are taken into account. The Hamiltonian of Heisenberg model is used as where g is the g-factor, μ B is the Bohr magneton, k u is the uniaxial anisotropy constant. The first term expresses the exchange interactions between spins at sites i and j. The spin tends to be parallel to the neighboring site when the magnetic exchange coupling constant J m ij is positive while the spin is antiparallel to the neighboring spin for negative J m ij . The magnetic exchange coupling constants can be calculated by using the Liechtenstein formula in density functional theory (DFT) -→ e u is set as out-of-plane (c direction) and k u is evaluated from the value of magnetocrystalline anisotropy energy (MAE) in first-principles calculations The temperature-dependence of magnetization and magnetic susceptibility of CrCl 3 are shown in FIG. When the external magnetic field is sufficient large, the spin polarized of ferromagnetic state can be formed. The snapshot of the skyrmion phase will be discussed in FIG. The magnetization versus magnetic field (M -H) curve of CrCl 3 and CrBr 3 are shown in FIG. We have found that the skyrmion phase also exists in other MCl 3 materials. The magnetic exchange coupling constants and the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya length of MCl 3 as a function of distance over lattice constant are shown in FIG. The in-plane components of Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya vector for second nearest neighbor of intra-layer of CrCl 3 and VCl 3 are shown in FIG. The snapshots of the other compounds in Monte Carlo simulations are shown in Figure The snapshot of MnCl 3 at 10 K and zero external magnetic field is shown in FIG. The snapshot of FeCl 3 at 10 K and external magnetic field equal to 4 T along the positive z direction are shown in FIG. In summary, the magnetic properties of van der Waals centrosymmetric MX 3 (M: V, Cr, Mn, Fe. X: Cl, Br, and I) materials are studied by combining first-principles calculations and Monte Carlo simulations. The effect of Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction, which is usually ignored in centrosymmetric lattice, is considered in this study. The Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction of second nearest neighbor intra-layer is non-negligible, which originates from the broken of local inversion symmetry. It becomes an indispensable factor to determine the magnetic properties of these compounds such as the skyrmion in CrCl 3 and VCl 3 . The small size of skyrmion in the centrosymmetric materials is promising for spintronic applications such as high-density magnetic memory devices. Not only conventional skyrmion (CrCl 3 and VCl 3 ) but also antiferromagnetic skyrmion (FeCl 3 ) and meron in MnCl 3 are found in centrosymmetric materials of the present work. Our present work extends a new class of material as centrosymmetric lattice with rare earth free, where the skyrmion can be existed due to the finite Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction. The relaxed crystal structure parameters and magnetocrystalline anisotropy energy were obtained using the VASP code with optB86b exchange functional as the van der Waals density functional (vdW-DF) 