Amorphous mixed titania-tantala coatings are key components of Bragg reflectors in the gravitational wave detectors (GWDs). Attaining the lowest possible values of optical absorption and mechanical losses in the coatings is of paramount importance for GWDs, and this requires a complex optimization of the coating deposition and post-deposition annealing. We present here a systematic investigation of the optical properties and internal friction of amorphous mixed titania-tantala coatings grown by ion beam sputtering. We consider coatings with six different cation mixing ratios -defined as Ti/(Ti+Ta) -and we study them both in the asdeposited and annealed state. All coatings have been subject to the same annealing of 500 • C for 10 hours in air, which is the post-deposition treatment adopted so far for Bragg reflectors in GWDs applications. By exploiting spectroscopic ellipsometry data and modelling, along with ancillary techniques, we retrieved the dielectric function of the coatings in a wide spectral range. When varying the mixing ratio and performing the annealing we find monotonic -in some cases, almost lineartrends for most of the aforementioned properties. Remakably, the post-annealing Urbach energy displays a definite minimum for a mixing ratio around 20%, very close to the composition of the coatings showing the lowest optical absorption for GWDs applications. We suggest that the observed minimum in the Urbach energy depends not only on the mixing ratio, but also on the annealing parameters. On the other hand, the minimum coating loss angle was found to be weakly dependent on the considered measurement frequency and to lie within a rather broad range of Ti content (cation ratios of 21% and 44%), suggesting that the search for an absolute minimum following post-deposition annealing should be rather sought in the study of the best annealing parameters for each specific cation ratio considered. This work constitutes a reference for the optical properties of the amorphous mixed titania-tantala coatings, and highlights the relevance of the Urbach energy in the optimization process of materials for high-performing Bragg reflectors. Amorphous oxides are key constituents of high-performance Bragg reflectors in technologies as diverse as optical atomic clocks, 1 passive optical gyroscopes, 2 ultrastable frequency laser cavities Optical multilayer coatings for GWDs are composed of alternating high-and lowrefractive index amorphous oxides deposited at room temperature using ion beam sputtering (IBS). A strategy of primary importance towards the improvement of mirror coatings therefore consists in identifying adequate high-index mixed oxides. The simplest mixed oxides are typically envisioned as a combination of two pure oxides, one which is stable at the relevant annealing temperatures, and another one which has a higher index. Important examples include TiO 2 -Ta 2 O 5 , Today, the physical mechanisms at work in mixing remain to be clearly understood, with the consequence that the identification of optimal binary mixtures largely rests on educated guesses and a trial-and-error process. In this work, we study TiO 2 -Ta 2 O 5 coatings by systematically varying the cation mixing ratio (defined in percentage as Ti/(Ti+Ta)), before and after the standard annealing procedure for GWDs applications (10 hours at 500 • C in air). We measure the dielectric function in a wide spectral range, accurately characterizing the fundamental absorption edge of the coatings. This edge is characterized not only by the energy gap, but also by a measure of the tail states within the gap -that is, the Urbach energy. This parameter is of particular relevance because it has been associated with topological or compositional disorder, Our samples consist in six sets of amorphous oxide coatings of varying cation ratio Ti/(Ta+Ti)= 0%, 21%, 44%, 71%, 85% and 96%, as measured through Rutherford backscattering spectrometry. They were deposited by IBS at the Laboratoire des Matériaux Avancés For optical investigation, in order to avoid backside reflections, the coatings were deposited on single-side polished silicon wafers. For mechanical measurements, which require low-loss substrates, they where deposited on silica disk-shaped resonators (2" or 3" of diameter and 1 mm thick). The Grand Coater enabled us to deposit these coatings at the same time on all the required substrates, thus guaranteeing that the optical and mechanical investigation are carried out on identical samples. All samples have been analysed as-deposited and after annealing at 500 °C for 10 hours (ramp rate of 100 °C/hour), which is the post-fabrication annealing procedure for GWDs coatings so far adopted. Annealing induced the partial crystallization of the two coatings with the highest cation ratio (85% and 96%). In this work we focus on the properties of amorphous coatings, therefore we analyzed these two samples only in the not-annealed state. The optical characterization relied on spectroscopic ellipsometry (SE), which is especially well suited to study thin films, Ellipsometry measurements were performed with a J.A. Woollam Co. Variable Angle Spectroscopic Ellipsometer. The considered spectral range was 190-2500 nm (0.5-6.5 eV), thus encompassing a large portion of the spectrum both below and above the energy gap. For each dataset the ellipsometry angles Ψ and ∆ plus the percentage of depolarization were acquired at three angles of incidence (AOI) (55 • , 60 • , 65 • ); the spectral density was set to one datapoint each nm, totalling 2310 datapoints per spectrum. SE data were analyzed with the software WVASE 3.718 by J.A. Wollam Co. In order to model the SE data, we adapted a well-proven strategy based on the Cody Lorentz (C-L) model, where L(E) is the Lorentz oscillator and G(E) describes the Cody behaviour for a parabolic electronic density of states where E g is the energy gap and E p is the limit energy separating the Cody behaviour from the Lorentz oscillator. U (E) is related to the Urbach tails via the following equation, where E t is the limit between the localized transitions of exponential tails and transitions involving only extended states and E U is the Urbach energy. In addition to the C-L model we also fitted the experimental SE data point by point, that is, without a parametric dispersion model. In a point-by-point fit, the calculated optical constants at different wavelengths are independent of one another; 34 this guarantees the best agreement with the experimental data, however the resulting optical constants are more noisy with respect to the ones obtained with a parametric model. We use the point-by-point fit as a further validation of the C-L model and results. In amorphous materials, thermally driven random transitions cause a local variation of the elastic moduli of the film giving rise to dissipation. This mechanical dissipation is measured through the resonant method 36 using a Gentle Nodal Suspension (GeNS). where φ is the so-called loss angle that quantifies the internal friction. The loss angle is obtained from the characteristic decay time τ k of several resonance modes k with frequency ν k in the range 0.1 -40 kHz through the relation φ k = (πν k τ k ) -1 . In composite resonators, made of substrate and coating, the coating loss angle is worked out by subtraction of the measurements of the bare substrate from that of the coated sample. In our study, for each Ti concentration, two nominally identical substrates have been coated at the same time in order to increase the statistics of the results and have a double check of the measured loss angles. ) show the ellipsometry data (Ψ and ∆) measured on the as-deposited (i.e., not annealed) samples. For the sake of clarity, only the data at 60 • AOI are reported here. Generally speaking, each spectrum in Fig. In Table The data show that the thickness of the films systematically increases as a result of the annealing; the percent variation decreases monotonically as the Ti content increases. In Fig. In Fig. In Fig. So far we have determined by measurements and data analysis how several properties in mixed titania-tantala coatings vary as a function of the mixing ratio and annealing. Here, we will attempt to link the observed variations and trends to their underlying physical causes, to draw comparisons with the existing reports in the literature where possible, and finally to extract useful information for optimizing the performance of this kind of coatings. The interpretation of the dielectric function of mixed oxides is usually based on generalisations of the Clausius-Mossotti (CM) formula, resulting in the so-called "oxide additivity rule", which allows to predict the dielectric function (and therefore the square of the refractive index) of a very large number of binary and ternary metal oxide alloys, in general with an accuracy better than a few percent. The relation between density and mixing ratio (Fig. and m a,(T a) = 180.9u). The relation, however, is only approximately linear for nonannealed samples. Annealing induces a slight (∼1-2%), but measurable reduction of the film density. This effect is better seen from the associated changes in film thickness in Table As for pure tantala coatings, our findings are fully compatible with previous reports both from the standpoint of the absolute density, 7.4±0.1 g/cm 3 , which compares with Ref. [45], and with regard to the density change upon annealing for films of similar thickness (∼1-2% in Refs. [14, 42, 46, 47]). We shall now consider the energy gap, displayed in Fig. In the second case, we register a significant decrease in the Urbach energy for mixing ratio 0% and 21%, but very small and no variation at all for mixing ratio 44% and 71%, respectively. This means that the annealing parameters employed so far (10 hours at 500 °C) can have large effects on the Urbach energy, but only for certain mixing ratios. In order to explain for this peculiar behavior, it is useful to recall that from an atomistic point of view, Urbach tails have been related to extended structural patterns, involving a correlation of interatomic bond lengths or angles overal many interatomic distances. We hypothesize that the observed behavior is determined by the fact that for medium Ti content, the maximum temperature (and/or time duration) of the annealing are not sufficient to remove the extended structural patterns mentioned at the beginning of this paragraph. Indeed, the same annealing parameters can have profoundly different effects on the microscopic structure of the coatings with different mixing ratios -in the extreme case, the same annealing can lead the coatings with high Ti content to crystallization, while leaving those with low Ti content perfectly amorphous. Following our hypothesis, we suggest that the minimum observed in the Urbach energy for cation ratio of 21% could not be the one and only for this kind of materials -other minima could be found at different cation ratios and with a different annealing protocol (i.e., with a different combination of maximum temperature and time duration). Interestingly, the minimum of the Urbach energy reported in this work is mirrored by the minimum in the optical absorption measured in the region of transparency (1064 nm) in similar coatings; 23 this implies that both the extended disorder (which gives rise to the Urbach tails) and the localized, individual defects (which give rise to optical absorption deep within the energy gap) are minimized in annealed titania-tantala coatings with mixing ratio around 20%. The available data show that annealing induces a significant reduction of the loss angle, a finding which confirms the previous results from the literature. We have systematically studied the dielectric function and loss angles in amorphous titania-tantala coatings, determining how they vary as a function of the cation mixing ratio and after a thermal annealing. We found that the aforementioned properties scale monotonously with the mixing ratio, with the notable exception of the Urbach energy of the annealed samples which has a clear minimum at the cation ratio of 21%. A minimum in the Urbach energy can be correlated to the least amount of extended defects in the amorphous structure, which is a potentially good configuration for a coating material in GWDs applications. Indeed, a very similar mixing ratio was found to yield the lowest optical absorption in the transparency region. On the other hand, our data on mechanical losses show no clear minimum for intermediate Ti content, a feature that can be ascribed to the choice of the annealing parameters which might be different for obtaining the lowest loss at each Ti content. Therefore, we suggest that the minimum we found in the Urbach energy is not the one and only possibile in amorphous titania-tantala coatings -other minima could be found at different mixing ratios, depending on the annealing protocol. This work constitutes a reference for the optical properties of amorphous titania-tantala coatings and proposes the Urbach energy a parameter to guide the optimization process of amorphous mixed oxide coatings for high-performance Bragg reflectors. http://lma.in2p3.fr/