In this paper, we extend the discrete-to-continuum procedure we developed in 1. Introduction. In this paper, we apply a discrete-to-continuum procedure to develop a model that predicts relaxation in a twisted bilayer of hexagonal atomic lattices. Relaxation of bilayer graphene, other layered twodimensional materials, and van der Waals heterostructures has attracted significant interest over the last several years Relaxation can be understood by considering a bilayer of graphene in which the two layers are given an initial small relative rotation. Variations in the local stacking between the layers generate a quasiperiodic moiré pattern with a period that scales inversely with the size of the angle of the relative rotation (see Figure In In In In This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we formulate a discrete energy of the system of a graphene sheet over a substrate. In Section 3 we derive a continuum energy that keeps track of the mismatch of the spacing between the atoms on each curve. Section 4 includes numerical results that compare the atomistic model with the continuum model. We summarize in Section 5. 2. Atomistic Model. We consider a discrete system that consists of parallel 2-dimensional atomic lattices, Â1 and Â2 , both infinite in extent. The atoms in Â2 can move and each of these atoms interacts with its neighbors within Â2 via a strong bond potential. Â2 describes a layer of a 2-dimensional material that is nearly inextensible and has a finite resistance to bending. In the absence of interactions with atoms on Â1 , the atoms in Â2 in equilibrium form a flat hexagonal lattice that has lattice parameter h 2 . The atoms in Â1 are fixed and form a flat hexagonal lattice with lattice parameter h 1 . In this work, Â1 describes a rigid substrate. All atoms in Â2 are assumed to interact with all atoms in Â1 via a weak interatomic potential. Below we refer to Â1 as the rigid lattice and to Â2 as the deformable lattice. We assume that Â2 deforms periodically and that, in its reference configuration, one periodic cell of Â2 occupies a parallelogram-shaped, planar domain A 0 2 with sides of length L. To define A 0 2 , we set a 2 1 = (1, 0) and a 2 2 = (1/2, √ 3/2), we let A be the 2 × 2 matrix with a 2 1 and a 2 2 as its columns, and we define (2.1) The set D can be divided into N 2 2 unit cells each containing two atoms. See Figure respectively. Then the positions of the atoms in the reference configuration are and the positions of the atoms in the deformed configuration are where u k ij is the displacement in the x, y plane, and v k ij in the z-direction. Because Â2 deforms periodically, we identify i = N 2 + 1 with i = 1 and j = N 2 + 1 with j = 1. For the rigid lattice, the current and the reference configurations are the same. To describe these, we define the rotation matrix R(θ) = cos θ -sin θ sin θ cos θ and we define a 1 i as the transpose of R(θ)(a 2 i ) T for i = 1, 2. We assume that there is a unit cell of Â2 whose lower left corner sits directly above the lower left corner of a unit cell in Â1 . Then, the positions of atoms on the rigid lattice are Note that we assume that the rigid lattice is infinite in extent in order to appropriately compute the nonlocal weak energy. Fig. We assume that, in the reference configuration, the lattices are planar and parallel. Also, the lattices are separated by a distance σ, where σ is a length scale associated with the weak potential. When h 1 = h 2 (e.g., bilayer graphene) and θ = 0, the equilibrium configuration of the system is Â2 shifted relatively to Â1 such that half of the atoms in Â2 sit above the centers of the hexagons in Â1 (AB stacking). The system would be in global registry. In this paper, we consider the situation where Â1 and Â2 in the reference configuration have slightly different orientations (small values of θ) and/or when they have slightly different lattice parameter (h ). See Figure That is, the total energy is the sum of the intralayer energy-composed of the stretching E s , torsional E t , and dihedral E d energies-and the interlayer (weak) energy E w . The stretching energy E s is the energy associated with stretching or compressing bonds between neighboring atoms in Â2 . Using a harmonic potential, we define where the vectors represent the bonds between the atom q 2 ij and its neighbors for every cell i, j = 1, . . . , N 2 (see Figure The torsional energy is the energy associated with changing the angle between adjacent bonds. We model this energy by assuming we have torsional springs between adjacent bonds. Each atom is related to three torsional springs, and therefore each cell contains 6 torsional springs. The torsional energy is where k t is the torsional spring constant and φ(a, c) is the angle between the vectors a and c. Right of Figure Assuming that admissible in-plane deformations of Â2 are small, we can use the approximation Certain out-of-plane deformations are not penalized by the extensional and torsional energies. For example, there is no energy cost for folding along a direction parallel to the sides of the domain D. To penalize for such deformations, we introduce the dihedral energy by assuming that a dihedral spring connects every triplet of adjacent bonds. This spring energy is minimized when the third bond lies in the plane formed by the first two bonds. See Figure where k d is the dihedral spring constant and ψ is the dihedral angle defined as in Hence the total dihedral energy is The bending between interatomic bonds is penalized by introducing harmonic torsional springs and dihedral angles between the bonds. The expressions for the extensional and torsional springs, respectively, show that the sum of the corresponding energy components is minimized when the atoms on Â2 form a hexagonal lattice with sides of length h 2 / √ 3. Finally, we consider 2 choices for the energy of the weak interaction between Â1 and Â2 . Our first choice is to define where g LJ is the classical Lennard-Jones 12-6 potential The parameters σ and ω define the equilibrium interatomic distance and the strength of the Lennard-Jones potential, respectively. Note that the inner double sum in (2.10) is taken over the entire rigid lattice to properly account for weak interactions between the lattices. The Lennard-Jones potential fails to adequately account for the registry dependence in the interaction between bilayers. The Kolmogorov-Crespi potential addresses this deficiency where g KC is a version of the Kolmogorov-Crespi potential having the form In (2.12), ρ(a) is the length of the projection of a onto the xy-plane, which is the plane containing the fixed lattice Â1 . For g KC , ω can be associated with the strength of the potential. The parameters σ and δ are lengths; σ is related to the equilbrium spacing between the layers. The constants λ, C, C0 , C2 , and C4 are dimensionless parameters 3. Continuum Model. First, we briefly describe the approach we take to derive the continuum model. We assume that the atoms on the deformable lattice Â2 are embedded in a smooth surface A 2 ⊂ R 3 and we describe this surface parametrically in terms of the displacement field. Nondimensionalizing the discrete problem introduces a small geometric parameter ε = σ/L, equal to the ratio of the equilibrium distance of the weak interaction to the length of the side of the domain D. Evaluating the displacements at atomic positions, substituting these into the expression (2.5) for the discrete energy, expanding the result in terms of ε, and converting summation into integration, leads to an expansion in terms of ε for the continuum energy, written as a functional of the displacement field. We identify the leading-order terms in this expansion, up to the order at which contributions from the extensional, torsional, and dihedral springs, as well the van der Waals interactions are included. The resulting continuum energy is of Ginzburg-Landau type and contains terms of different powers in ε. The minimizers of the continuum energy typically exhibit bulk regions of registry, separated by thin walls where the gradient of the displacement field is large. Thus, within the walls, the contributions from higher-order terms generally cannot be neglected. We choose to cut off the expansion that leads to the continuum energy at the order when all components of the displacement contribute to the energy density inside the walls at leading order. Finally, in the next section, we present the results of simulations confirming that the behavior of minimizers of the continuum energy match that of minimizers of the discrete energy. We assume that the deformed configuration of a periodic cell of Â2 is embedded in a sufficiently smooth surface Next, we assume σ << L, that is, the length scale associated with the equilibrium spacing between the lattices is much smaller than the lateral extent of the system. Then, we define ε = σ/L and introduce the rescalings We define the nondimensional parameters The numerical coefficients in the definitions of γ s , γ t , and γ d are explained later. The scaling for the displacements are appropriate for small deformations considered here. With a slight abuse of notation, we now set where D 1 is the rescaled parallelogram D now of side 1. We assume that δ i = O(1), i = 1, 2, that is, the lattice parameters for Â1 and Â2 are comparable to the distance between Â1 and Â2 (and hence both are much smaller than the lateral extent of the system). Furthermore, in order to observe the registry effects on a macroscale, we assume that so that the mismatch between the equilibrium lattice parameters of Â1 and Â2 is small. In the rescaled coordinates, the atoms on A 0 2 are located at the points for i, j = 1, . . . , N 2 and k = 1, 2, are obtained by dividing r k ij by L in (2.2). Atom k in the i, j cell is then displaced to the point Note that here and in what follows we continue to use the notation q k ij , r k ij , and b p ij , but now to denote the corresponding nondimensional quantities. 3.1. Elastic Energy Contribution. The developments in this section closely follow those in As we did in An important feature of our approach is that, to define the function G, we develop an expression for the local mismatch between the two lattices in their reference configurations. This expression depends on χ and on the relative rotation and lattice parameter mismatch. The Lennard-Jones potential is considered first. Starting with the inner double sum on the right-hand side of (2.10), we observe that the total interaction energy corresponding to the atom ijk on Â2 with all the atoms on the rigid lattice Â1 is Next, we define t ijk , the local horizontal mismatch between the lattices Â1 and Â2 in the reference configuration as measured at atom ijk on Â2 . To determine t ijk , we project the vector r k ij onto the plane of Â1 . The projection falls inside one of the unit cells of Â1 . Let ̃ , m be the indices of that unit cell. We define t ijk as the vector from the atom p k ̃ m on Â1 to the endpoint of the projection of r k ij onto the plane of Â1 . See Figure Recall from (3.4) that αε, the relative mismatch between the lattice parameters, is O(ε). In a similar way, we define so that Θε, the relative rotation between the lattices, is O(ε). Hence, we can linearize t ijk in ε to write t ijk = t t ijk + t r ijk , where t t ijk is the relative mismatch when θ = 0 and t r ijk is the relative mismatch when α = 0. We next derive expressions for t t ijk and t r ijk . Recall that we assume that the left bottom corner of the 0,0 cell of Â2 lies directly above the left bottom corner of the 0,0 cell of Â1 . To write down t t ijk , we assume that θ = 0 and hence a 1 i = a 2 i for i = 1, 2. We then have where i 1 = i - ̃ and j 1 = j -m, and where the final equal sign uses To write down t r ijk , we assume δ 1 = δ 2 , and in this case, we have where i 2 = i - ̃ and j 2 = j -m. Recalling that the lattice Â1 is rotated with respect to Â2 by the angle θ = εΘ, we see that Inserting these expressions into (3.19) yields where ( Now we substitute (3.21) into where in the last line we changed the indices → 2i -- ̃ and m → 2j -m -m. Therefore, we can write To complete the definition of G for the Lennard-Jones potential, we now set where For the Kolmogorov-Crespi potential, we note that ρ αχ is the length of the projection of q k ij -p k m onto the xy-plane, which is the plane containing the fixed lattice Â1 . In this case, we set Finally, the nondimensional version of either (2.10) or (2.12) takes the form where g is either g LJ or g KC with the appropriate arguments and G is defined using either G LJ or G KC . This establishes (3.13). 3.3. Continuum Energy. Combining (3.10)-(3.12) and (3.27) yields a continuum energy functional that can be written as for any M = (m ij ) ∈ M 3×3 sym . Note that the elastic contribution to the energy (3.28) is like that of the Föppl-von Kármán theory. The corresponding variational problem is of Ginzburg-Landau type, where the minimizers are determined via a competition between the elastic energy and the potential energy, which has multiple wells associated with the low-energy commensurate regions. The system is forced to reside in these wells, with the sharp transition between the wells being smoothed out due to the penalty imposed by the elastic energy. Consequently, we expect the minimizers of (3.28) to develop walls of characteristic width ε. Here the first two equations describe the force balance in the plane of the deformable lattice, while the last equation is the vertical force balance. 4. Numerical Results. To validate our discrete-to-continuum procedure, in this section we compare the predictions of the discrete and the continuum models. We consider results for both the Lennard-Jones 12-6 potential (2.11) and the Kolmogorov-Crespi potential (2.13). To solve the atomistic model numerically, we use LAMMPS In this subsection we describe how the boundary conditions are implemented in the simulations below. Recall that we assume that Â2 is infinite in extent and deforms periodically. This requires that the surface A 0 2 satisfies the following constraint. If we pick two points identified on the edges of A 0 2 and project the position vectors for these points onto Â1 , then Â1 is invariant when translated by the vector between the two projected points. See Figure θ := arctan Note that the first condition in (4.1) is also satisfied. Hence the reference configuration will satisfy the 'corner-tocorner' periodicity condition. Next we use (4.2) to derive useful expressions for the parameters α and Θ appearing in The main observation from Figures 4.2 and 4.3 is that for both values of ε, we see good agreement between the discrete and the continuum models. We note that, for the out-of-plane displacement η, our simulations predict spatial patterns that have been observed for twisted graphene bilayers in many studies In this same set of plots, we see that the hot spots occur at 2 different possible heights. In this case, we refer to the wrinkles emanating from the higher hot spots as primary wrinkles and the other wrinkles, which connect 2 lower hot spots, as secondary wrinkles. We note that the secondary wrinkles are less discernible in the plots from the discrete simulations compared to the plots from the continuum simulations. We can see this when comparing In Figure Next we consider the effect of changing the value of the parameter ω, which appears in the Lennard-Jones potential and measures the strength of the interaction, or the well-depth. See We now compare these plots to the results depicted in Figure To demonstrate that the match between the discrete and the continuum improves as ε gets smaller, we consider results for two different values of ε. Figure We present a set of results that indicates how the size of the elastic constants affects the smoothness of the deformed configurations. We consider two cases, one case in which the elastic constants are relatively small and one case in which the elastic constants are relatively large. The parameter values used in the simulations are listed in Tables 4.3 (a), (b) and Table In Figure In Figures 4.8, we show results based on the Kolmogorov-Crespi-z potential for the case when the elastic constants are relatively small. In this case, we get a poor match between the predictions of the discrete and continuum models. In particular, Figure To explain these results, recall that a basic assumptions justifying our discrete-to-continuum modeling procedure is that the discrete lattice can be embedded in a smooth surface. The small scale oscillations we see in Figure One could conjecture that the problem is with the use of the Kolmogorov-Crespi-z potential. To show that this is not the case, we compare the predictions of the discrete model using the full Kolmogorov-Crespi potential versus the predictions of the Kolmogorov-Crespi-z potential. See Figure We derive a continuum model of a graphene bilayer in which one layer is fixed. We start with a discrete energy containing elastic terms and a weak interaction term. After expanding these terms in a small geometric parameter, we truncate the expansions and approximate sums with integrals to arrive at a continuum energy having a Ginzburg-Landau structure. To validate our modeling, we perform numerical simulations to compare the predictions of the original discrete model and our continuum model. This comparison shows excellent agreement between the two models if the dimensionless elastics constants that appear in the continuum model are sufficiently large. The continuum model predicts spatial patterns that have been observed for twisted graphene bilayers in other papers For certain cases, we see discrepancies between what the discrete and continuum models predict for the outof-plane displacements of some hot spots and wrinkles. This occurs for both the Lennard-Jones potential and the Kolmogorov-Crespi potential. Surface plots of solutions show small-scale spatial oscillations in the horizontal displacement when the elastic constants are not sufficiently large relative to the strength of the weak interaction. The existence of these oscillations violates a basic assumption of our discrete-to-continuum modeling procedure, and we believe that this explains why the discrepancies occur. For the Lennard-Jones potential, decreasing ω, which controls the strength of the weak interaction, increases the dimensionless elastic constants that appear in the continuum model. In this case, we see a good match for the out-of-plane displacement of all hot spots and wrinkles. Likewise, we see a good match for the Kolmogorov-Crespi potential when we directly increase the size of the elastic constants in the discrete model. In this paper, we apply our discrete-to-continuum modeling procedure to a discrete energy in which the weakinteraction term is based on either the Lennard-Jones potential or a version of the Kolmogorov-Crespi potential that assumes that the layers are locally parallel. Each of these potentials has the feature that the interaction between two non-bonded atoms is computed from a simple function of the positions of the two atoms. In particular, neither of these potentials requires additional information about the layers near the atoms, for example, information about the local orientation of the normals. Our approach is based on finding the local horizontal offset in the reference configuration. We decompose this offset into contributions from the lattice mismatch of the layers and from the misalignment between the layers. Because of the relatively simple form of the potentials we work with here, we can in a straightforward way incorporate these contributions as parameters in the final form of the potential in the continuum model. It would be of interest to explore whether this approach can be adapted to more complicated potentials. For example, the full Kolmogorov-Crespi potential depends not just on the positions of the interacting atoms but also on the local orientation of the lattices near the atoms. 6. Acknowledgment. This work was supported by the National Science Foundation grant DMS-1615952. 7.1.1. Extensional Springs. We expand the first term in (2.6) in ε. We first expand b 1 ij . Since all of the bonds relate to χ 2 ij , we will use it for the expansion. We have that where v 2 = (v 21 , v 22 ) = 0, 1/ √ 3 and 6 . Note that in (7.1) and in the expressions that follow, all partial derivatives are evaluated at χ 2 ij . We next expand we have that A similar computation for the second term in (2.6) yields and third term We now combine (7.6), (7.7), and (7.8), which yields and the same for the other similar terms. To transform this sum to an integral, we use that the area of the small cells have dimension 7.1.2. Torsional Springs. We expand the first term in (2.8) in ε using the expansions (7.1) and (7.2), and then (7.4) for the norm. Notice that here, there are other terms of order ε 2 that are left out by following the work in We also have that and therefore, For the following term, we need the expansion of b 3 i-1j . For it, we can write We also need Combining (2.8) with (7.13), (7.14), (7.15), (7.20), Returning to (2.9), we now must expand By combining (7.45)-(7.57), we get Then, (7.63) 7.3. Euler-Lagrange Equations. In here we want to deduce the Euler-Lagrange equations corresponding to our continuum energy ,11 + 16η Let ( ξ, η) be the minimizer of the energy F ε [ξ, η]. Let ξ 1 = ξ 1 0 . We define (7.66) Then, at γ = 0 we have that A(0) = D V ∇ ξV T + ε 2 V (∇η ⊗ ∇η) V T and because of linearity of D and ∇, we have that A (0) = D V ∇ξ 1 V T . So, we can write that = ∇f (A(0)) : ∇ηV T and M =   γ s B 11 γ t B 12 γ t B 13 γ t B 21 γ s B 22 γ t B 23 γ t B 31 γ t B 32 γ s B 33   , where B (b) Dimensionless Parameters for the Continuum Model. Θ is in radians. 1: Parameter Values for Simulations using LJ Potential. 3: Parameter Values for Additional Simulations using KC Potential.   .