A key issue in the development of high-performance semiconductor devices is the ability to properly measure active dopants at the nanometer scale. 4D scanning transmission electron microscopy and off-axis electron holography have opened up the possibility of studying the electrostatic properties of a p-n junction with nm-scale spatial resolution. The complete description of a p-n junction must take into account the precise evolution of the concentration of dopants around the junction, since the sharpness of the dopant transition directly influences the built-in potential and the maximum electric field. Here, a contacted silicon p-n junction is studied through in-situ biased 4D-STEM. Measurements of electric field, built-in voltage, depletion region width and charge density in the space charge region are combined with analytical equations as well as finite-element simulations in order to evaluate the quality of the junction interface. The nominally-symmetric, highly doped (NN AA = NN DD = 9 × 10 18 cccc -3 ) junction presents an electric field and built-in voltage much lower than expected for an abrupt junction. These experimental results are consistent with electron holography data. All measured junction parameters are compatible with the presence of an intermediate region with a graded profile of the dopants at the p-n interface. This hypothesis is also consistent with the evolution of the electric field with bias. These results demonstrate that in-situ biased 4D-STEM enables a better understanding of the electrical properties of semiconductor p-n junctions with nm-scale resolution. Increasingly stringent performance demands for semiconductor devices have led to downsizing device regions to the nanoscale. In such nanodevices, the functionality is often determined by the concentration and profile of electrically active dopants. Profiling the dopant concentration in a semiconductor can be done by Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry (SIMS) Techniques based on transmission electron microscopy (TEM) can provide access to the profile of active dopants Advances in detector technology have led to the development of four-dimensional (4D) STEM, where the conventional segmented annular dark field detectors are replaced by high-speed pixelated devices, allowing the recording of the convergent beam electron diffraction (CBED) pattern at each scan point of the electron beam, resulting in an electron diffraction map, which is a 4D data map (2 dimensions for scanning directions and 2 directions in the diffraction patterns). In particular, the implementation of momentum-resolved 4D-STEM has allowed to measure internal electric fields with ultrahigh spatial resolution. The sample under study is a symmetrically doped silicon p-n junction grown by reduced-pressure chemical vapor deposition. Dopants were phosphorus for the n-type region and boron for the p-type segment, both at a concentration of 9 × 10 18 cccc -3 . The lamella specimen was mounted in a Protochips Aduro 500 system and prepared using a FEI Strata dual beam focused ion beam (FIB) tool. The specimen was welded by FIB-assisted metal (W) deposition across a biasing chip, and isolation cuts were made so that bias is applied across the p-n junction. The specimen was prepared using optimized protocols to reduce gallium implantation. Figure As an additional information, the density of ionized dopants can be extracted from the derivative of the electric field shown in Figure We have verified that the linearly graded model is compatible with the variation of the electric field with bias. In a linearly graded junction, following eq. S12, |EE mmddmm | ∝ (MM bbbb -MM) 2 The analytic equations in SI5 assume that the space charge region is fully depleted. As a consequence, the built-in potential is determined by the doping level at the edges of the depletion region (xx = ±WW dd /2). Assuming α = 1.5 × 10 23 cccc -4 , we obtain NN(xx = ±WW dd /2) = 5.9 × 10 17 cccc -3 , which leads to MM bbbb = 0.918 MM, as presented in Table To incorporate these thermal effects in our model, 1D simulations of the silicon p-n junction have been performed solving the Poisson equation numerically using the nextnano3 software. Figure It is worth highlighting that the 4D-STEM provides a direct measurement of the electric field (Figure The main challenge for quantitatively evaluating the electric field by 4D-STEM is the unknown value of the electrically inactive sample thickness In summary, we have combined in-situ biasing and momentum-resolved 4D-STEM measurements of a symmetric silicon p-n junction, previously analyzed by SIMS and electron holography. We have obtained a maximum electric field EE mmddmm = (0.176 ± 0.03) MMMMcccc -1 , in agreement with electron holography results. The charge density distribution in the space charge region was directly extracted from the 4D-STEM measurement of the electric field. The comparison of the measured values with analytical equations, as well as finite element simulations, demonstrate that the dopant density profiles do not drop abruptly at the junction. Instead, this sample can be reasonably well modelled as a linearly graded p-n junction with an impurity gradient in the range of αα = (1.5 ± 0.7) × 10 23 cccc -4 . The development of more efficient semiconductor devices, currently reaching the nanoscale, demands tools able to provide fast feedback for further device optimization. Our results show that in-situ biased 4D-STEM is a suitable approach to study the interface quality of p-n junctions, enabling the measurement of crucial electrical properties of such devices. See supplementary material for additional information of the measurements and details of the calculations presented here. Figure 