The consequences of hydrogen on the formation and growth of GP zones during natural ageing in an Al-5Cu alloy is investigated experimentally down to the atomic scale and numerically using ab initio calculations. As observed through scanning/transmission electron microscopy, the hardening kinetic is delayed due to a slower growth of GP zones during natural ageing when hydrogen is incorporated. According to ab initio calculations, the delayed hardening results from hydrogen trapped in vacancies that reduce significantly the diffusion coefficient of copper and the self diffusion of aluminium. This reduction of the diffusion coefficient is either due to hydrogen being in the path of the atom that exchange with the vacancy (and increasing the energy barrier) or due to hydrogen being dissociated from the vacancy (and leading to a less stable state). Aluminium alloys are widely used in industry for their various advantages: they are light weighted metallic alloys, have a high corrosion resistance and good mechanical properties GP zones in Al-Cu alloys are circular nanoscaled disks parallel to {100} planes, isolated in one layer Besides, aluminium alloys are among materials bearing the highest potential to contain, and to facilitate the transport of hydrogen fuel due to their various advantages and they are already used in fuel-cell-based, electric vehicles Aluminium alloys are also not immune to hydrogen ingress and when hydrogen is introduced as a solute, it easily diffuses and segregates to crystalline defects on the GP zone formation and hardening kinetics The investigated material is provided by Goodfellow with the following composition (wt.%): 5.3%Cu-0.7%Fe-0.4%Si-0.3%Pb, Al balance (standard AA2011, called Al-5Cu further). Disc shaped samples (with a diameter of 6 mm and a thickness of 1 mm) are solutionised at 810 K during 1 h, water quenched, then naturally aged at room temperature either in air or 5 h in a 0.1 M NaOH solution. Before the introduction in the solution, samples are quickly (few minutes) mechanically grinded using SiC foil paper with a particle size of 8 μm to remove the oxide layer grown during the solution heat treatment. Aqueous solution containing NaOH is aggressive towards aluminium and its oxide, it prevents the formation of a passive layer and leads to H incorporation in the alloy Al-5Cu alloy due to hydrogen After water quenching, the hardness of the alloy is 91±1 HV, and it increases progressively to reach a maximum of 117±2 HV after ∼ 50 h (see fig. Naturally aged materials are observed by HAADF-STEM in (001) zone axis to clearly exhibit GP zones. They are observed after being naturally aged 1 and 9 days. When the alloy is directly aged 1 day in air, small GP zone diameters d are directly measured on STEM-HAADF images and their distributions are plotted in fig. Due to the limited foil thickness, some GP zones are partially imaged and the true diameter d t of GP zones can be determined from the apparent diameter d using with δ the thin foil thickness. In this work, thin foil thickness δ was measured by electron energy loss spec-troscopy. Assuming an electron mean free path in aluminium of 120 nm The density of GP zones may be also estimated, following with N x , N y N z , the number of GP zones counted in the x, y and z axes, parallel to the [100], [010] and [001] directions, respectively and S the surface of observation (S = 5.10 -3 μm). Since only GP zones perpendicular to (001) Al planes are visible on HRSTEM images (fig. Assuming that the thickness of all GP zones is half the aluminium lattice parameter (a Al = 0.404 nm), their volume fraction writes as: Fast Fourier transforms (FFTs) of each HAADF images are also displayed in fig 2 . Spots in FFTs at the {110} positions are clearly exhibited for the alloy directly aged during 1 day, but they disappear after 9 days when GP zones are well developed. These spots also appear for the alloy aged 5 h in NaOH, followed by 1 day in air with a stronger intensity as compared to the directly aged alloy. These spots do not completely disappear after 9 days and thus seem to be linked to features appearing before GP zones. {110} reflections are forbidden reflections on diffraction pattern and they appear only on FFTs of HRSTEM images. Similar reflections on FFT patterns have been reported in naturally aged Al-Zn-Mg alloys. Authors have attributed these features to either Al 3 Zn dispersoids or artefacts caused by the TEM sample preparations The determined GP zone and Cu cluster densities n P , Table These experiments clearly indicate a significant change of microstructure due to hydrogen incorporation: there is a delay of GP zone formation, observable using microhardness and HAADF-STEM. Complementary information is detailed in Appendix A where DSC measurements have been performed on this alloy differently aged. Hydrogen strongly interacts with excess vacancies Ab initio calculations are performed to quantify the variation of copper diffusion when the atom is close to a hydrogen vacancy complex. The first step is to estimate the interaction enthalpy between vacancy and hydrogen Vac-H in aluminium and in a diluted Al-Cu alloy. The aim is to determine if this complex is more stable in the vicinity of copper atom before determining the influence of H on the diffusion variation of copper. The following ab initio calculations used density functional theory (DFT) in the Quantum Espresso code Vac-H and H sp Vac , the enthalpies of the supercell containing the hydrogen-vacancy complex and the hydrogen free vacancy, respectively. The enthalpies H sp H Bulk are from the vacancy free systems with and without hydrogen in solid solution, respectively. Since the tetrahedral interstitial sites are the most stable sites for hydrogen near vacancy in pure Al Cu-H =0.04 nm). The distance between Cu and H is also identical when H is in T 3 , T 4 , T 5 and T 6 , these equivalent positions are called P 2 (d P 2 Cu-H =0.08 nm). Finally, the position P 3 stands for H in sites T 7 and T 8 (d P 3 Cu-H =0.11 nm). Therefore, Vac-H has to be calculated for only 3 positions in a diluted Al-Cu system. The interaction enthalpies between hydrogen and vacancy in pure aluminium and in a diluted Al-Cu are displayed in fig. Vac-H = -0.34 eV, similar to the interaction energy reported in previous work using ab initio calculations (E inter Vac-H = -0.335 eV - Further, the diffusion coefficient of copper in aluminium is evaluated using the five jump frequency model from LeClaire with f 0 a correlation factor, which is constant and equal to 0.7815 for FCC crystals, a(T ) the lattice parameter of aluminium determined at finite temperature following the method described in where k B and T are the Boltzmann constant and the temperature of the system, respectively. H f Vac and S f Vac are the vacancy formation enthalpy and entropy written in the hydrogen free system as: with H sp Vac , S sp Vac , H sp Bulk and S sp Bulk the enthalpy and entropy of the supercell of a perfect crystal with and without a vacancy, respectively. The obtained formation enthalpy H f Vac is equal to 0.64 eV, in agreement with the literature assuming that S f Vac-H = S f Vac and with H f Vac-H defined as with H H 2 the enthalpy of the hydrogen molecule at zero pressure p = 0 MPa as a reference. It leads to H f Vac-H = 1.05 eV, close to data reported in the literature (1.32 eV The jump frequency ω 0 (T ) is defined as with ν 0 the attempt frequency equal to √ (3/5)k B /hθ D (h and θ D are the Planck constant and Debye temperature of aluminium, respectively) Without H, the vacancy migration enthalpy presented in fig. Vac-H (P 3 ) = 0.61 eV, close to E m Vac . However, the final state is less stable when H is in P 3 , the energy difference corresponding to the hydrogen-vacancy binding energy. The self-diffusion coefficient calculated as a function of the temperature is displayed in fig. with D 0 a pre-exponential factor and Q the activation energy. From ab initio calculations (fig. The influence of hydrogen on the diffusion coefficient of copper (D Cu ) is investigated in this section using the five jump frequency model developed by LeClaire ω 1 corresponds to the jump frequency for Al atomvacancy jumps between a pair of sites that are both nearest neighbours of Cu atom. ω 2 is the jump frequency for Cu atom-vacancy exchange. ω 3 is the jump frequency of Al, which dissociates the vacancy and Cu. ω 4 is the opposite of ω 3 (i.e.: jump frequency of Al atom, which binds Cu and the vacancy). The fifth jump is ω 0 , the self-diffusion of Al (see eq. ( T 7 [010] [100] [001] NEB calculations are performed to determine the migration energies of the different jumps without H and with H in P 1 and P 3 positions. Like in section 4.1, these positions are chosen over P 2 in order to have H either still associated with the vacancy before and after the jump or dissociated from it . Besides, all calculations are performed at zero pressure, therefore it is also assumed that the migration enthalpies H m i are equivalent to the migration energies E m i with f 2 a correlation factor, similar to f 0 in eq. ( where α = ω 4 /ω 0 and The concentration C j 2 (T ) is similar to C j 0 (T ) of eq. ( with the ∆G b , corresponding to the binding energy between copper and vacancy. This energy is linked to the concentration of copper atoms near vacancies and can be determined using the jump frequencies ratio within the assumptions detailed in the beginning of this section Identical to section 4.1, the concentration and migration energy of hydrogen-vacancy complexes are calculated for systems having hydrogen in P 1 and P 3 and the resulting coefficient diffusion of copper is plotted in fig. While a slightly higher diffusion coefficient is obtained at low temperature compared to literature data, relatively consistent values are obtained at high temperatures (T < 500 K). Moreover, the diffusion coefficient of copper is systematically lower in presence of hydro-gen. Assuming that hydrogen atoms stay in its interstitial site, the effect is more important when H is far from the copper atom (in P 3 ) than when it is close to Cu (in P 1 ). This result is obtained because when H is far from Cu, the energy barrier to associate the hydrogen vacancy complex (E m 4 ) or to dissociate it with the Cu atom (E m 3 ) is large. Besides, when Cu atom is exchanged with the vacancy, it dissociates H-vacancy complex (which is less stable than the initial state). These effects have a more important impact on the diffusion coefficient than having hydrogen in P 1 , which increases the migration energy of copper E m 2 . Assuming that the diffusion of copper also follows an Arrhenius type temperature dependence (eq. 13), D 0 and Q can also be estimated for Cu in pure Al, by fitting curves of fig. Table The experiments of section 2 show a delay of the formation and growth of GP zones when hydrogen is introduced in solid solution. In the following section, a classical strength model is applied to correlate the microstructure evolution observed through HAADF-STEM with the hardness measurements. Then, results from experiments are compared with the diffusion coefficients obtained in section 3 and discussed further. Classical strengthening model is applied to establish a relationship between the hardness measurements and the HAADF-STEM observations (model developed in previous work for Al alloys The stress τ Y can be determined from microstructural features and additive contributions; which may be considered as a first approximation as where τ 0 is the friction stress, τ d the forest hardening due to dislocations, τ gb the stress contribution of the grain boundaries, τ ss the stress contribution Cu of solid solution and τ P the stress contribution of particles. The stress contributions τ 0 , τ d and τ gb are assumed constant for all ageing times and they are determined from hardness measurements of the alloy naturally aged 10 minutes, assuming that all the copper atoms are in solid solution. The stress contribution τ ss may be written with X Cu the mass fraction of Cu in solid solution in the Al matrix. H and n two constants equal to 7.2 MPa and 1, respectively with b and μ, the Burgers vector and shear modulus equal to 0.286 nm and 27 GPa Fig. The microhardness measurements show a delay of the hardening kinetic when the alloy is stored in 5 h in NaOH. The HAADF-STEM observations confirm this delay and even after being naturally aged 9 days, microstructures are still different when the alloy is directly aged in air or stored 5 h in NaOH. This difference can be due to hydrogen reducing the diffusion of copper or/and an increase of the energy barrier to form GP zones, locking copper agglomerates as clusters. Since hydrogen strongly interacts with the excess vacancies Ab initio calculations revealed that hydrogen and vacancy are attractive, even with copper in the vicinity of the vacancy (and H is more stable far from Cu atoms, in positions P 2 and P 3 ). The previous calculations for pure Al (sec. 4.1) show that hydrogen affects the mobility of vacancy and thus should also impact the diffusion of copper as confirmed in section 4.2. However, it is important to note that these ab initio calculations have some limitations. It has been established that hydrogen enhances the formation of vacancies in aluminium This present work studied the consequences of hydrogen on the GP zone formation and growth in an Al-5Cu alloy. When it is naturally aged in air, excess vacancies diffuses and are annihilated in residual dislocations and grain boundaries, allowing copper to diffuse leading to the nucleation of GP zones, which that harden the alloys. When the alloy is in contact with hydrogen during the beginning of the natural ageing, a delay of the hardening kinetics is noted with a change of the microstructure observed through HAADF-STEM. According to the ab initio calculations performed in this study, hydrogen-vacancy complexes are stable in the vicinity of Cu in a diluted Al-Cu system. Therefore, these complexes (containing one or more H atoms) . affect the diffusion of Cu in Al matrix leading to a delayed nucleation and growth of GP zones. Modelling at atomic scale the self-diffusion for Al and the diffusion of Cu in Al in the presence of hydrogen-vacancy complexes highlights two phenomenons : (i) hydrogen in the path of the atom that ex-change with the vacancy will increase the energy barrier and (ii) hydrogen far from this atom will be dissociated from the vacancy and it will be less stable after the atom jump. As a consequence, the diffusion coefficient of copper is always smaller in presence of hydrogen close to or trapped in the vacancy. In addition, even if hydrogen always reduces the mobility of Cu in diluted Al-Cu, it was demonstrated that the position of H in the lattice of a diluted Al-Cu alloy influences the diffusion coefficient. Therefore, statistical study using techniques such as kinetic Monte-Carlo simulations would be performed in the near future to determine the evolution of the diffusion coefficient of copper as a function of the hydrogen concentration. This statistical study would also help determining the number of H atoms insides a vacancy for a given temperature and H concentration, which is an unknown parameter in the present work. Finally, these results are obtained without studying the consequences of hydrogen on the precipitate/matrix interface, which will also be the object of a future study. DSC measurements are carried out using a Q100 TA Instruments DSC apparatus. Samples are manufactured in 2 mm×2 mm×0.25 mm dimensions and with a mass lower than 8 mg. The heat flow measurements are carried out linearly from 253 K to 783 K at a rate of 10 K.min -1 . Samples are cooled and then heated a second time from 253 K to 783 K to record the baseline. Then, the heat flows presented in this work correspond to the difference between the two data set. GP zones are observed using TEM with a JEOL-ARM200F microscope operated at 200kV. DSC measurements are carried out to exhibit the exothermic and endothermic peaks of the precipitation sequence, which may vary due to hydrogen. The heat flow curves of five samples of Al-5Cu alloy differently aged are displayed fig. A.13. Since, the time needed to prepare samples after the heat treatment is about 1 h, the heat flow curve of the material aged 1 h in air may be considered as the as-quenched state. In the DA alloy, the endothermic peak corresponding to the dissolution of the copper clustering and the exothermic peak corresponding to the formation of GP zones are observed (peaks a and b in fig. A.13) but disappear after when the material is aged 6 h. It is obtained due to the excess vacancies lead to the formation of GP zones at ambient temperature. When the alloy is aged 5 h in NaOH, these peaks seem to be still observed even up to 24 h. This result is in agreement the one obtained using micro-hardness measurements and HAADF-STEM observations: hydrogen affects the microstructural evolution of naturally aged Al-5Cu alloys by reducing nucleation and growth kinetics of GP zones. with E(V), the static energy and F vibr (V, T ) the contribution from the vibrations of the crystalline lattice calculated with the quasi-harmonic approximation (QHA) using phonon frequencies ω j + k B T q, j ln 2 sinh hω j ( q, V) 2k B T , (B.2) with the first and second terms, the zero-point energy and thermal contributions, respectively. The vibration frequencies of phonons, ω j are the eigenvalues of the dynamic matrix for a wave vector q. The pressure P is calculated for several volumes V, and the pressure variation depending on the volume is fitted with the Vinet equation of states with K 0 the bulk modulus equal and K ′ = [∂K 0 (T )/∂P] T . The lattice parameter a Al is obtained from V 0 the volume of the cell at 0 GPa and at finite temperature. Fig. B.14.a presents the isothermal bulk modulus K T , compared with results from the literature a (nm) C 11 (GPa) C 12 (GPa) C 44