The electrocaloric (EC) effect and energy storage properties of eco-friendly ferroelectric Ba0.9Sr0.1Ti1-xSnxO3 (BSTS-x) ceramics prepared by the conventional solid-state reaction method were studied. Significant energy efficiency exceeding 80% was found in our samples. In particular, BSTS-5 and BSTS-10 samples exhibit 92% and 88% efficiency, respectively, over a wide temperature range around room temperature (RT). Direct EC measurement and an indirect method based on the thermodynamic approach were used to characterize the EC effect, and both yielded consistent results. The largest electrocaloric responsivity of 0.73 K mm/kV was obtained for BSTS-0 at 368 K with an adiabatic temperature change ΔTEC of 0.55 K at a low applied electric field of only 7.4 kV/cm. With increasing Sn-content, the EC response of BSTS-x ceramics decreases, while their diffuseness increases over an extensive temperature range, centered at RT. A significant coefficient of performance (COP > 26) was found for our samples. The obtained results demonstrate the possibility of designing eco-friendly materials with higher EC effect and energy efficiency for potential solid-state refrigeration and energy storage devices. Search for high-efficiency, low-cost and environmentally friendly alternatives to conventional cooling systems has generated a growing interest in the electrocaloric (EC) effect Conventional lead-based ferroelectric materials are used in this direction Besides solid-state cooling applications, BT-based materials have also demonstrated potential applications for energy storage capacitors According to several studies, dielectric materials with large saturation polarization (Pmax), low remnant polarization (Pr), and low dielectric loss, particularly antiferroelectric and relaxor ferroelectric materials, are thought to have excellent energy storage performances In this study, the EC temperature change of BSTS-x ceramics was calculated using Maxwell's relation and the P -E hysteresis curves obtained at different temperatures (indirect method) and directly measured using a high-resolution calorimeter. The results procured by both approaches will be discussed and compared. Furthermore, the EC responsivity, the coefficient of performance (COP) and electrical storage energy performances have been determined and discussed to understand better the versatile properties of the materials towards electronic systems for solid-state refrigeration and energy storage applications. Polycrystalline BSTS-x ceramics with nominal compositions x = 0.00, 0.05 and 0.10 were fabricated via the conventional solid-state reaction method using barium carbonate (BaCO3, 99.8%), strontium carbonate (SrCO3, 99.8%), titanium dioxide (TiO2, 99.8%) and stannic dioxide (SnO2, 99.9%) as starting raw materials from Alfa Aesar company. A detailed description of sample preparation and phase diagram can be found elsewhere The direct electrocaloric measurements were carried out using a high-resolution calorimeter allowing precise temperature stabilization of the bath (within 0.1 mK) and high-resolution measurements of the sample temperature variation. The temperature was measured via a small bead thermistor. More details on direct EC measurement setup are reported elsewhere In our previous paper In order to precisely determine the diffuseness dielectric curves degree, we used the equation proposed by Santos-Eiras where ε′ * is the maximum dielectric constant at the transition temperature T * , the exponent g reflects the character of the ferroelectric-paraelectric (FE-PE) phase transition and D is the peak broadening which defines the diffuseness degree of the FE-PE phase transition. Temperature dependence dielectric constant plots were fitted with Eq. ( The obtained value of g close to 1 reveals the character of BSTS-0 as a normal ferroelectric. In contrast, g = 1.36 and 1.61 were found for BSTS-5 and BSTS-10, respectively, revealing an incomplete ferroelectric phase transition. Furthermore, it is found that the peak broadening values D lie in the range 12.41 -15.70 and increase with increasing Sn-content. These findings indicate that the phase transitions of BSTS-x solid solution are progressively diffused, and EC effect peaks may broaden in varying degrees. Finally, it should be noted that no pronounced relaxor behavior is detected for our compositions. Indeed, significant B site doping strengthens the relaxor behavior (Insert Fig. As a well-known fact, ferroelectric materials possess the electric energy storage capacity and can be obtained from P-E hysteresis loops. According to the definition of the energy storage density, the recoverable energy density (W !"# ) and the total energy density (W +,+ ) are defined as: Based on the above equations ( While W +,+ can be determined by adding the area gathering both W !"# (the green area in Fig. and energy loss density W /,00 (the red area in Fig. To evaluate the energy density stored in our BSTS-x system, we used P-E hysteresis loops measurements shown exemplarily in Fig. For instance, the BSTS-0 ceramic shows a value of W !"# and W +,+ of 24 mJ/cm 3 and 50 mJ/cm 3 , respectively, at a low applied electric field of 7.4 kV/cm. However, it was demonstrated in previous works on energy storage capacities that a large electric field can induce higher polarization. Consequently, the energy storage properties increase inevitably based on the definition of energystorage density. Unfortunately, such a large electric field is not required for energy-storage devices (Insert Fig. From practical applications, the energy storage efficiency (η) is an important parameter for evaluating energy storage performances with no electric field limitation. An expression of η is given as follow: where W !"# and W /,00 are the recoverable energy density and energy loss density, respectively. A small value of η indicates significant losses in the form of the hysteresis (red area in Fig. Therefore, BSTS-5 and BSTS-10 show higher energy storage efficiency than the pure BSTS-0, i.e., 92% and 88% near the RT, respectively. On the other hand, the temperature dependence of energy storage efficiency of BSTS-x samples (Fig. (Insert Fig. Table (Insert Table The indirect Maxwell approach was used to compute the electrocaloric effect. Here, the EC effect is calculated from the measured ferroelectric order parameter P(E,T), extracted from the upper branches of the corresponding P-E hysteresis loops. Fig. Based on the well-known Maxwell's relation (∂P ∂T ⁄ ) 2 = (∂S ∂E) ⁄ 3 , the electrocaloric temperature change (DTEC) and the isothermal entropy change (DS) as the applied electric field changes from (E1 = 0) to E2 can be expressed as follows where ρ is the bulk density of ceramics which was found to be 5.94 gcm -3 , 6.00 gcm -3 and 6.08 gcm -3 for BSTS-0, BSTS-5 and BSTS-10 samples, respectively, as reported in our earlier work which can be obtained from seventh-order polynomial fits of P(T) data shown in Fig. The thermal evolution of the electrocaloric temperature change (DTEC) and the predicted entropy (DS) under selected applied electric fields are shown in Fig. (Insert Fig. The electrocaloric responsivity (x = DTEC/DE) has been chosen as a suitable parameter to compare the EC effect in different materials since it is independent of the geometrical form and the dimensions of the materials. Therefore, we have gathered some data about the EC effect in typical lead-free and lead-based ferroelectric materials reported by other authors with the obtained data in this work. The comparative results are displayed in Table To assess the reliability of the previous indirect EC results, we have performed the direct EC measurements using a high-resolution calorimeter. The results of the direct EC measurements (DTEC vs. T) of the studied samples at various electric fields are plotted in Fig. and BSTS-10 samples, respectively. (Insert Fig. By comparing the electrocaloric responses of BSTS-x samples, we noted that BSTS-0 ceramic displays the highest EC response, more than 50% greater than the peak value of BSTS-10 ceramic. Nevertheless, the dielectric constant (ε′ m ) measured under zero DC-field (shown in Fig. One of the fundamental factors determining a stronger EC response is the latent heat (strongly correlated to the discontinuous change of the polarization at the phase transition), which is considerably higher in materials with first-order phase transitions In terms of EC temperature change (DTEC) and EC responsivity (x), it is found that both measurements show similar estimations of EC responses (insets of Fig. For practical applications, the material coefficient of performance (COP) is also an essential criterion in evaluating the efficiency of an electrocaloric material. Here, COP is given by the following equation where Q and W !"# are the isothermal heat and corresponding recovered density. The COP values obtained of the different samples are illustrated in Fig. Lead-free BSTS-x ceramics were prepared via conventional solid-state reaction method, and the corresponding electrocaloric effect and electrical energy storage properties were investigated. The results show that BSTS-x ceramics exhibit modest values of recovered energy density (W !"# ) compared to other ferroelectrics due to the low applied electric field (< 8 kV/cm). Nevertheless, under the same conditions of the electric field, our results show comparable or even stunning values. Indeed, all compounds have high energy efficiency (η > 80%). In particular, the compositions BSTS-5 and BSTS-10 present efficiency of 92 % and 88%, respectively, over a wide temperature range, centered at RT. Significant electrocaloric response and high refrigeration efficiency (COP) are achieved. Using Maxwell's thermodynamic approach, a maximum value of EC responsivity x = DTEC/DE = 0.73 K mm/kV at 368 under a low electric field of only 7.4 kV/cm is obtained in BSTS-0. The EC effect maximum decreases gradually by increasing Sn-content, and the corresponding peak broadens over a wide temperature range near the RT. This result is in accordance with the diffuse phase transition nature of BSTS-x ceramics. Moreover, the direct EC measurements results are consistent with indirect measurements. The combination of these results demonstrates that BSTS-x ceramics are highly promising candidates for eco-friendly refrigeration applications near RT and an energy storage material for electronic and prototype apparatus over a wide temperature range. Table Table 