Skyrmions with topologically stable configurations have shown a promising route toward magnetic and photonic materials for information processing due to their defect-immune and lowdriven energy. However, the practical application of magnetic skyrmions is severely hindered by their harsh cryogenic environment and complex carriers. In addition, the narrowband nature of magnetic and photonic skyrmions leads to lower data rate transmissions, restricting the development of high-speed information processing technologies. Here, we introduce and demonstrate the concept of phononic skyrmion as new topological structures to break the above barriers. The phononic skyrmion can be produced in any solid structure at room temperature, including chip-scale structures, with high robustness and ultra-bandwidth, which could pave a new path for high-speed and topological information processing technologies. We experimentally demonstrate the existence of phononic skyrmion formed by breaking the rotational symmetry of the three-dimensional hybrid spin of elastic waves. The frequency-independent spin configuration leads to the remarkable ultra-broadband and tunable feature of phononic skyrmions. We further experimentally show the excellent robustness of the flexibly movable phononic skyrmion lattices against local defects of disorder, sharp corners, and even rectangular holes. Our research also opens a vibrant horizon towards an unprecedented way for elastic wave manipulation and structuration by spin configuration, and offers a promising lever for alternative phononic technologies, including quantum information, biomedical testing, and wave engineering. Skyrmion, a topologically stable three-component vector field, was initially developed in elementary particles and has since been demonstrated in condensed-matter systems Elastic waves describe the basic dynamic principle of the deformation (i.e., the threedimensional displacement field u) of solids in a periodic form Hall effect The elastic spin arises from the hybridization between transverse and longitudinal waves in an elastic interface. The interface can be a free surface of a plate-like structure supporting the classical Lamb waves, or a free surface of a semi-infinite (for wavelength) bulk structure supporting the Rayleigh surface waves. Note that the hybrid spin does not exist in an infinite isotropic bulk space without interfaces because decoupled transverse and longitudinal waves are two independent twodimensional wave fields.    along the z-axis (-d<z<2d). Coordinate origin is on the neutral plane of the hosting plate. The 0 S and 0  are the spin angular momentum magnitude and the polarization on the plate surface (i.e., z = d). g, The elliptical spin trajectories of different particles along the plate thickness. To make the structure compact, we have used a thin plate model supporting Lamb waves to build the phononic skyrmion system. The three-dimensional hybrid spin field of plane Lamb waves can be expressed by the axial (out-of-plane) and transverse (in-plane) field components where z a and a  are real amplitude components (detailed derivations can be found in Supplementary Text section 1). r and k are the position and direction vectors of the transverse field, respectively. The motion of any particle      (Fig. approximates the flexural wave mode is linearly distributed along with the plate thickness (along the range of -d<z<d in Fig. To produce the phononic skyrmions, we have designed an hexagonal meta-plate with pillared resonators (Fig. , which is expressed by (detailed derivations can be found in Supplementary Text section 5) ( The corresponding axial and transverse fields in a two-dimensional x-y plane (Fig. where n is skyrmion number density, and  n u u is the three-dimensional unit vector field. Area A covers one single lattice in the x-y plane. For such a lattice in Fig. For classical waves, constructed photonic The horizontal solid line in Fig. fh , it will introduce the first-order antisymmetric Lamb (A1) mode (see the band-like dispersions in Fig. The skyrmion number density contrast is a parameter that provides a quantitative measure of the spatial confinement of the skyrmion density The pillared resonator acts as a new degree of freedom capable of linearly increasing the polarization of the spin trajectory while maintaining the spin configuration (Fig. Theoretically, perfect skyrmion wavefields can be measured at any frequency below the first-order cutoff frequency of high-order Lamb waves, even for ultra-low frequencies when the structure size is large enough. Before measuring the skyrmion wave field, we first only turn on one piezoelectric patch array (i.e., 1 # array in Fig. For all the measured frequencies, we have calculated the skyrmion numbers by the measured wavefields of the central lattices based on Eq. ( We have reconstructed 3D time-resolved Néel-type skyrmion vector field (see Supplementary Video 3). We have extracted the skyrmion number as function of the time delay in Fig. The nontrivial topological phononic skyrmion lattice leads to the robustness of wavefield texture against defects. As shown in Fig. We have theoretically and experimentally demonstrated and observed the formation of ultrabroadband phononic skyrmions based on the three-dimensional hybrid spin of elastic waves. The phononic skyrmion provides an unprecedented topological phononic structure, which has robustness against local defects of disorder, sharp corners, and even rectangular holes due to the nontrivial topological protection. The three-dimensional spin states open new pathways for topological phonons manipulation and may facilitate the exploration of new topological orders. Our research opens possibilities to realize novel topological phononic materials in different scales from macro to microstructures. Although our reported results here concern frequencies around 8 kHz, the dimensionless dispersions shown in Fig. The phononic skyrmion can be created in any elastic wave system with a large impedancemismatch solid-solid interface, solid-gas interface, or solid-liquid interface. The reason is that the longitudinal and transverse waves will hybrid at these interfaces to form elastic spin fields The latter can be used to construct the phononic skyrmion configuration. Especially for the solidliquid interface, phononic skyrmions constructed on the solid surface can induce skyrmions in fluids through fluid-solid coupling, which promotes the excitation and interaction of wavefield information in multiple fields. This fluid-solid coupling also paves the way toward skyrmion lattices "on-demand" for matter systems in fluids (e.g., cell manipulation in microfluidics Finally, efficient transduction between elastic and electromagnetic waves can be achieved using piezoelectric coupling with microwaves (47-49) and optomechanical coupling with light These couplings between different physical fields may give rise to a high-degree-of-freedom topological skyrmion system, and facilitate an advanced integrated information platform of interdisciplinary physics among electronics, photonics, and phononics. Our established paradigm for generating and manipulating phononic skyrmions is universal and applicable to almost all solid materials. Here, we have chosen a 3D printer to fabricate our 