Atomically thin sheets, such as graphene, are widely used in nanotechnology. Recently they have also been used in applications including kirigami and self-folding origami, where it becomes important to understand how they respond to external loads. Motivated by this, we investigate how isotropic sheets respond to uniaxial tension by employing the self-consistent screening analysis method and molecular dynamics simulations. Previously, it was shown that for freely suspended sheets thermal fluctuations effectively renormalize elastic constants, which become scale-dependent beyond a characteristic thermal length scale (a few nanometers for graphene at room temperature), beyond which the bending rigidity increases, while the in-plane elastic constants reduce with universal power law exponents. For sheets under uniaxial tension, σ11, we find that beyond a stressdependent length scale, the effective in-plane elastic constants become strongly anisotropic and scale differently along the axis of uni-axial stress and orthogonal to it. The bending rigidities on the other hand will not exhibit any anomalous behavior beyond this stress-dependent length scale. In addition, for moderate tensions we find a universal non-linear stress-strain relation. For large uni-axial tensions, the Young's modulus of the bare elastic material is recovered. Geometric non-linearities are the mainstay of the study of the mechanics of slender structures Although, 2-D elastic crystals may be viewed as a higher dimensional extension of the D = 1 elastic polymer, there are some major differences between these two physical systems. Analogous to the persistence length of thermalized polymers (the length scale over which a polymer is approximately straight) Experimental measurements of the scale-dependence of the elastic moduli of thermalized membranes and the resulting mechanical properties (such as the non-linear relation ∼ σ η/ (2-η) ) in the absence of quenched disorder have not been realized yet. However, many theoretical and simulation efforts have been realized to extend the original results of Other investigations have been conducted for elastic membranes with an intrinsic anisotropy In this paper we focus on extending the theory of thermalized 2D elastic membranes to a scenario of physical interest in which a homogeneous uni-axial tension is exerted. A snapshot from a simulation can be seen in Fig. We will first begin in Sec. II by introducing the theory in the absence of stress and explore the consequences of introducing uni-axial stresses for the symmetries of the free energy as well as the appearance of a new length scale beyond which stress becomes important. In Sec. III, we study uni-axially stressed membranes via an engineering dimension analysis and Self-Consistent-Screening-Analysis (SCSA) equations to obtain the scaling of effective elastic moduli. Simulations performed in the NPT ensemble using the LAMMPS package confirm the scaling of this theory. In Sec. IV, we will study stressstrain relations using what we will have learned about the elastic moduli. We first discuss the free energy function of a general D-dimensional elastic membrane embedded in (D+1)dimensions undergoing small deformations with respect to the reference flat state. Using Einstein notation in which repeated indices are implicitly summed over, such a function has the form where λ and μ are the elastic Lamé constants and κ and κ G are the bending and Gaussian bending rigidities. Here we use the strain and curvature tensor equations: where the indices i, j run through the D intrinsic dimensions of the elastic membrane. These describe the deformations from a reference flat metric and zero-curvature state, with u i being the in-plane displacements along the i-th axis and f being the out-of-plane displacement. The strain tensor u ij expresses stretching and shearing whereas K ij expresses curvatures. Note that we have omitted (∂u) 2 from the non-harmonic portion of the strain tensor due to the fact that in-plane stretching costs more energy than stretching due to the out-of-plane deformations represented by (∂f ) 2 . By means of an engineering dimension analysis done in Sec. III, one can show that (∂u) 2 is irrelevant and can thus be ignored. The effect of thermal fluctuations in a system with free energy function F can be extracted from the correlation functions, obtained via functional integrals over all membrane configurations where e -F /k B T is the temperature dependent Boltzman weight and Z is the normalizing partition function, Due to the form of the in-plane strain tensor, the free energy function is not harmonic in the displacement parameters u i and f . In the absence of such an-harmonic terms and stress and under periodic boundary conditions (so we may integrate out the Gaussian bending term via the Gauss-Bonnet theorem), the correlation function of the flexural phonons and in-plane phonons of a system of Fourier scale q take the form where A is the membrane area and P T ij (q) = δ ij -q i q j /q 2 is the transverse projection operator. We have taken the form of the Fourier transform to be: A G(q)e iq•r . In this definition of the Fourier transform, Λ is the UV cutoff introduced by the microscopic scale of the system where the continuum elastic theory breaks down i.e. Λ = π/a where a is the lattice spacing of the material. The correspondence between real lengths and Fourier space inverse lengths is taken to be: q = 2π/ . Via scaling analysis, a length scale subtly emerges due to the presence of temperature. It is well known from plate theory that an-harmonic terms play a role once the magnitude of deflection becomes comparable to the thickness of the plate When the two energy costs are of comparable order, anharmonic terms can no longer be ignored. Indeed, one can notice from the form of Eq. ( The non-linear form of the in-plane strain tensor produces long-ranged coupling of Gaussian curvatures and induces a non-trivial scaling of the correlation functions beyond the thermal length scale, th Naively, in the presence of an arbitrary edge stress, σ ij , applied to an edge with unit normal n, one would write the following free energy function where the boundary term expresses the work done by an external stress. However, the effective theory at a given scale * = 2π/q * can be extracted by integrating out faster small-scale fluctuations. This can be done by splitting the phononic fields into pieces: g < (r) = |q|<q * e iq•r g(q) and g > (r) = Λ>|q|>q * e iq•r g(q) where g ∈ {u i , f } and integrating out the latter, g > . By performing this integration we obtain where F a [u i< , f < , u i> , f > ] is the full free energy function without any phononic modes having been integrated out. Trivially, homogeneous isotropic stress will not cause renormalized anisotropies to develop since the stress will not break any rotational or mirror symmetries in the free energy. However, in the presence of a homogeneous anisotropic stress the isotropy of the free energy will be broken. Thus it must be considered that these moduli can develop effective anisotropies for a non-isotropic stress and not only a scale dependence due to temperature. Despite the need for a generalization of the free energy, some symmetries will remain assuming the form of the stress to be "uni-axial". We clarify here that in general D-dimensions we define "uni-axial" stress as the case in which all axes experience an equal tension σ αα = σ with α ∈ {1, ..., D -1} and σ DD = 0 (we call this the case of "uni-axial" tension since in D = 2, which is the case of interest, it is indeed the correct physical scenario). As a brief aside, note here that we will use Greek letters to range over indices between {1, ..., D -1} and Roman letters as indices that range over {1, ..., D}. We take this unusual definition of "uni-axial" to mimic the exact same theoretical formulation of tubules in Radzihovsky and Toner's theory Accommodating orthorhombic anisotropy into the free energy, the generalization takes the form where, the bare elastic moduli tensors have the fundamental major and minor symmetries: Under stress the effective flexural phonon correlation function may be defined: whereas the correlation function for in-plane phonons takes the form: These renormalized elastic constants have been defined based on the analogous correlation functions in the harmonic approximation similarly as one would define λ R (q), μ R (q), κ R (q) in Eq. ( We can now ask ourselves at what scale such a stress becomes important and thus induces anisotropy. Observing Eq. ( The value of stress for which these two length scales are equal can be solved for σ 4-D . For very large stress, σ σ q th , where q σ q th , then anomalous behaviors will not enter into the comparison between the stress and bending portions of the flexural correlation function and thus the bare parameters can be used, σq 2 ∼ κq 4 , resulting in: With this pre-amble we may now begin to investigate the scaling theory of "uni-axial" stresses imposed upon thermalized elastic membranes. In the following text, we aim to derive the scaling of the correlation functions in different regimes which will depend on the ordering of q, q σ , q th (note that order of these Fourier scales can change by tuning the parameters σ, κ, T, Y as well as trivially changing the inverse length scale q). In order to develop a convention for naming these different regimes, we define un-ambiguously that a system under "low" stress to be such that q > q σ and "high" stress such that q < q σ . We also define systems under "low" temperature conditions to be such that q > q th and high temperature such that q < q th . To obtain the scaling of correlation function we must commence with the calculation of the engineering dimensions when stress is "low" and when stress is "high". Engineering dimensions will tell us whether terms are relevant or irrelevant to the theory. Specifically, terms with negative engineering dimension are called irrelevant and can be ignored from the scaling theory of the free energy. On the other hand, terms with positive engineering dimensions are called relevant and cannot be ignored from the scaling of the theory. An-harmonic terms with positive engineering dimension can induce anomalous scaling of the elastic moduli of the theory that is different from the linear theory (such as those for the unstressed isotropic elastic membranes in Eq. ( In the presence of small "uniaxial" stress and high temperatures, engineering dimensions of the order parameters and the elastic moduli of the theory. the effect of an-harmonic terms in the free energy. With these two tools, we will then derive the scaling of the correlation functions in each regime. A. Engineering Dimensions Before engineering dimensions are calculated, it is important to establish what the dominant term of the harmonic portion of the free energy is in order to proceed further into our scale-dependent analysis. In the presence of vanishingly small stresses, one can consider the nonanomalous correlation functions (also known as harmonic propagators) to scale as G f f (q) ∼ q -4 , G uu (q) ∼ q -2 (as can be seen from Eqs. ( Thus, in the presence of the scale-invariant dominant term, B ijkl ∂ i ∂ j f ∂ k ∂ l f , we may calculate how fields f should be re-scaled f (q) ≡ b -∆ f f (q ) as a result of the scale transformation q = bq ≡ b ∆q q where b > 1 is a rescaling parameter. Engineering dimensions give the exponent with which parameters of a theory rescale (in this case C ijkl , σ, B ijkl though B ijkl will be scale-invariant since we set it to our dominant term), O ≡ b -∆ O O , under the scale transformation q = bq . If an engineering dimension, ∆ O , of a parameter is positive then it cannot be ignored as q → 0 since it grows with scale. If on the other hand it is negative, then the parameter rescales to zero as q → 0 and can thus be ignored (unless it is dangerously irrelevant) Proceeding to the counting of engineering dimensions, at low stresses, the dominant term of our theory is B ijkl q i q j q k q l f (q)f (-q). This will automatically imply that the engineering dimensions ∆ B ijkl = 0. This im-plies then: where b -D A = A due to the fact that the area is a D-dimensional area in real space. In order for this term to be scale invariant then we must enforce that b (4-D)/2 f (bq ) = f (q ). Thus, we have obtained ∆ f = (4 -D)/2, and we can use this to obtain how the order parameter u and all other coefficients of terms in the free energy re-scale. Due to the rotational symmetry of the free energy, the strain tensor will be preserved despite renormalization With this, we can finally calculate how the coefficients of an-harmonic terms, C ijkl , of the free energy in Eq. ( which implies then that C ijkl ≡ C ijkl b D-4 and gives us the engineering dimension ∆ C = 4 -D. Given these results then we know that when D < 4, that an-harmonic terms with coefficients C ijkl will be relevant to physical behavior in the limit q → 0. If stresses are not vanishingly small, a similar analysis can be done to show that ∆ σ = 2 which indicates that it will be strongly relevant and that once q < q σ , it can no longer be ignored. Thus the dominant term of the theory would have to be reconsidered in the "high" stress case which we will deal with in the very next section. All engineering dimensions for the "low" stress case are summarized in Table As previously mentioned, when stress is significant, the dominant portion of the Gaussian theory has to be reconsidered. A "uni-axial" stress term, σq 2 α , will dominate over the bending rigidities in the flexural correlation In the presence of a large "uni-axial" tension, engineering dimensions are shown for spatial dimensions, order parameters and the elastic moduli of the theory. function along every axis except for the D th axis. Thus the new dominant term of the Gaussian theory becomes: Rendering these free energy terms scale invariant requires axes co-linear with the "uni-axial" stress must be rescaled such that q 1 ∼ ... ∼ q D-1 ∼ q 2 D [45 where where L i are the system dimensions along axis i and re-scale inverse to how q i rescale). This equation thus implies the engineering dimension ∆ f = (5 -2D)/2. Observing the difference between the two terms B DDDD q 4 D and B ααDD q 2 α q 2 D f (q) 2 and since ∆ B DDDD = 0 and q α ∼ q 2 D , we can conclude that ∆ B ααDD = -2. Likewise, ∆ B ααββ = -4. As was done in the previous section we can compare the terms within the strain tensor q i u j ∼ q i f q j f and we get that q i u j (q) = b ∆q i q i u j (bq ) ≡ b -∆u+∆q i q i u j (q ) ∼ q i q j f (q)f (-q) = b ∆q i +∆q j q i q j f (bq )f (-bq ) ≡ b -2∆ f +∆q i +∆q j q i q j f (q )f (-q ) thus implying ∆ C ααββ = 1 -2D. Similar analysis yields as well that ∆ C αβαβ = 1 -2D. On the other hand, for C αDαD : thus implying ∆ C αDαD = 3 -2D. Similar conclusions can be drawn for ∆ C ααDD = 3 -2D whereas ∆ C DDDD = 5 -2D as summarized in Table Thus, we see that when D > 5/2, all C R ijkl become irrelevant and thus an-harmonic terms do not contribute to the theory and can be ignored in the limit q → 0. On the other hand, in the case of interest D = 2, we can remove all irrelevant terms ) in the expression of the free energy as they only add technical complications and do not contribute to the qualitative scaling behavior. One can then integrate out the in-plane phonons, u i (r), with only the constant C R 2222 present in the free energy since all other C R ijkl are irrelevant. This can be done by means of the functional integral: Such an integration will cause all f 4 vertices to disappear and thus the effective free energy will take a simplified form: Observing this equation, one may note the absence of an-harmonic terms. This implies that B 2222 will no longer renormalize once the "uni-axial" stress is dominant. Thus the bending rigidity satisfies B R 2222 (q) = B R 2222 (q σ ) (and more generally B DDDD ) and actually remains a constant when q < q σ . We will now calculate the SCSA equations corresponding to the theory so that we may later on calculate the potential anomalous scaling of elastic moduli due to the presence of relevant an-harmonic terms in the free energy. In order to derive anomalous exponents of the elastic moduli and more precise values for the cross-over scales q σ , q th where scaling of the correlation functions change, it is important to take a moment to calculate the SCSA equations that take into account the effect of an-harmonic terms into the calculation of effective elastic moduli. Before proceeding to the derivation of the SCSA equations, we will take a brief aside to mention that one can integrate out all in-plane phonons to obtain an effective free energy for the flexural field. This will be necessary to obtain the SCSA equation for the flexural correlation function G R f f (q). For the purpose of obtaining useful expressions, we assume the general orthorhombic symmetry of the elastic tensors. Integrating out the in-plane phonons for general D gives rise to a complicated coefficient of the f 4 vertex. However, the effective energy for flexural phonons under periodic boundary conditions in the presence of a general stress takes the following form in D = 2 where N and E(q) are: to higher order loops to obtain more accurate results, however one can often gain a qualitative understanding from a one-loop analysis. From an SCSA shown in Fig. The symmetrization of the diagrammatic contributions seen in Fig. One can also obtain the corresponding momentum shell Renormalization-Group equations, or β equations, which will be of use to derive the values of q th and q σ more precisely where s is the rescaling parameter, with b = e s ; 0 < s 1. We have extracted the powers of Λ and this leaves us with an angular integral over the unit vectors p. Furthermore ∆ f is the engineering dimension of the order parameter f , though in renormalization, it is generally treated as a degree of freedom In the limit of vanishing stress one can additionally write down a general D-dimensional β function for the isotropic bending rigidity κ where S D is the area of a D-dimensional unit sphere. With the SCSA equations and β-functions calculated, we can now proceed to obtaining the scaling of correlation functions in each regime and obtain the scale limits of each regime. We order the regimes by investigating regimes with different dominant harmonic terms independently: in other words low stress, q > q σ and high stress q < q σ . Within each of these regimes, we investigate each sub-regime depending on whether temperature is significant or not: in other words low temperature, q > q th and high temperature q < q th . C. Scaling At Low Stress q > qσ 1. Scaling At Low Temperature q > max{qσ, q th } The positive engineering dimension of C ijkl when D < 4 signifies the importance of the parameter when q → 0, however this does not mean that an-harmonic effects need to be considered at smaller finite length scales. Indeed, when q > max{q σ , q th }, the scaling of the correlation functions is trivial since both temperature and stress do not contribute significantly, thus the harmonic low stress correlation functions are sufficient to understand the theory and no anomalous effects should be observed in the theory. Reminding the reader once again that we are assuming the Roman letter indices such as i, j, k, l range over {1, ..., D} and Greek letter indices range over {1, ..., D -1} we have: where a Taylor expansion was performed if one is curious of the linear response of the theory and all B ijkl are the bare parameters of the theory since no thermal anomalous effects are relevant. Assuming the bare material is isotropic, we then have: where the stress term is insignificant to the scaling of the flexural correlation function. And for the in-plane phonons we have: where the C ijkl are also the bare parameters of the theory. Assuming a vanishing stress such that q σ q th < q, one can ask at what q th these harmonic approximations are no longer appropriate to use and thus an-harmonic terms play an important role. To do this, it is necessary to resort to the β equations presented in Sec. III B. Specifically we can examine Eq. ( where S D is the area of a unit D-dimensional sphere. Therefore we obtain: Likewise, assuming very small temperatures such that q th q σ < q, one can similarly ask at what q σ the Gaussian theory breaks down due to stress. The answer to this is already in our derivation of Eq. ( 2. Scaling At High Temperature q th > q > qσ Having obtained the engineering dimensions we can make certain inferences of the behavior of these elastic sheets beyond q th . Indeed when q > q σ , the engineering dimensions seen in Table where B R ijkl (q) can be taken to be the isotropic κ R (q) assuming the material is isotropic at T = 0 and thus κ R (q) ∼ (q/q th ) -η . Stress is still not significant in its contributions to the flexural correlation functions and for this reason it can be Taylor expanded. Analogously, and C R ikjl (q) ∼ (q/q th ) ηu . The scaling of the elastic moduli can be observed in Table Assuming, q σ < q < q th we can ask ourselves once more, up to what q σ will this non-trivial scaling hold. To do this we merely repeat the steps indicated to derive Eq. ( where B DDDD is the T = 0 value (which is once again κ for an isotropic material). Similarly, the in-plane phonon correlation functions should not show any anomalous behavior and we should observe: with the T = 0 parameters of the theory being used. These scaling laws can be observed in Table In the high stress case, we can once again ask where is the breakdown of the harmonic theory, in other words the new value of q . It need not be the same as the formula for the low stress case in Eq. ( From the engineering dimensions, we understood that even beyond q th , the flexural phonons should not show any anomalous behavior since B R DDDD = B R 2222 will remain a constant. Indeed the only relevant parameter that can show anomalous behavior is C R DDDD = C R 2222 . Thus we repeat our derivation of q th in a similar manner as the derivation of Eq. ( where ∆ f = 1. Anomalous effects cannot be ignored once Λ takes on a value such that the two terms on the right hand side are of the same order. Here we have once again named this inverse length scale as Λ th . In other words we are interested to know at what scale the anomalous contribution becomes significant with respect to the linear term in the β equation: We can approximately rewrite the denominator with the bare parameters as: where we set κ = B 1111 = B 2222 = B 1122 as the bare isotropic bending rigidity. This is justified since anharmonic contributions are insignificant and thus the bare bending rigidities can be used. Replacing C R 1122 and C R 2222 by their bare isotropic values λ, λ+2μ respectively, one can then perform the integral identity holds when q is less than: Thus in the large stress limit we have a different form for q th which still matches with the low stress limit formula, Eq. 35, for q th when q th ≈ q σ and D = 2. 2. Scaling At High Temperature q < min{qσ, q th } for D = 2 As was shown in Sec. III A 2, we know that below q σ , B R DDDD should not be anomalous and should be a constant at some finite value, we can use the SCSA equations to obtain the scaling behavior of the moduli in the long wavelength limit when q < min{q σ , q th }. Such an analysis is done in However, we again restrict our focus to the scaling analysis of the elastic moduli in strictly D = 2. This is not only the physically interesting case but also the least trivial due to the relevance of C 2222 for D = 2 (whereas for larger dimensions all C ijkl , including C DDDD , become irrelevant as q → 0). Furthermore, the analysis of the SCSA equations will be technically clearer in D = 2. We can now proceed to the SCSA using the same idea of removing irrelevant an-harmonic coefficients. We shall further assume that we have integrated all highfrequency modes with q > min{q σ , q th } and thus all unintegrated wave-vectors in the following analysis satisfy q < min{q σ , q th }. Before beginning the analysis we note once again from Table II that when q < min{q σ , q th } all bending rigidities except for B 2222 are irrelevant. In addition B R 2222 becomes a constant so if we define q min ≡ min{q σ , q th } then we can approximate the correlation function for q < q min as: As a final preliminary step we use a one loop SCSA analysis to obtain an-harmonic corrections to the elastic moduli resulting in Eq. ( where p = (p 1 , p 2 ). In the analysis we will drop the bounds of the integral and take it as a given that |p| < q min . We can now examine the scaling behavior of the elastic moduli as q → 0. However, before beginning, it should be stated that though these results are derived from a one-loop SCSA, that the scalings for the elastic moduli in the rest of this section will be correct to all loops where C 2222 and C 1122 are the bare un-renormalized moduli. We examine Eq. ( We can then extract powers of q 2 : where p2 = p 2 /q 2 , p1 = p 1 /q 2 2 and q1 = q 1 /q 2 2 . We must collect the most divergent terms as q 2 → 0 since the left hand side of the equation is a constant. Since C 1122 is irrelevant we may also remove this term from the numerator and thus obtain the following equation: In the above equation, one can easily see that the in-tegral is a homogeneous function of q1 , thus the self-consistent equation is solved by the ansatz: where Ω 2 C (1/ √ q 1 ) is a universal scaling function that is a constant when q1 → 0. The pre-factor C R 2222 (q min )q 2 /q min is meant to ensure that the correlation functions for q < q min and q > q min transition smoothly at q min . The full form of Ω 2 C can be determined from the fact that C R 2222 (q) should be independent of q 1 when q 1 → 0 and it should be independent of q 2 when q 2 → 0. Thus: Assembling the pieces together we obtain: Therefore, despite the fact that the effective theory in Eq. 24 does not possess anomalous scaling, the full theory with in-plane phonons does have anomalous exponents due to thermal fluctuations. The significance of this intuitively is that sinusoidal waves can form transverse to the axis of stress and are not flattened out by it. In addition, this result will be correct to all loops since one can check that at higher orders, the leading contribution to the SCSA equation of C R 2222 at every order is 1122 . This will result in: and Similarly as before we can extract powers of q 2 , keeping in mind also that C R 2222 (q) ∼ q 2 . Thus giving: and By only paying attention to powers of q 2 and replacing finite integrals with the symbols I (i) we may write that: where the integrals 1122 and 1111 can be found in the appendix in Sec. A 3. Collecting the most divergent powers (divergent as q 2 → 0) in each equation gives: Eq. ( where we have once again a pre-factor that ensures the the correlation functions for q < q min and q > q min match. And the homogeneous function has the following scaling: and hence, C 1122 (q) ∼ q 2 and thus that: When we insert this ansatz into Eq. ( c. Scaling Behavior of C 1212 . Lastly, we can check how the shear modulus should scale via its corresponding self-consistent equation: Repeating a similar analysis as above gives that all contributions of the integral are irrelevant in the limit that q 2 → 0. Hence C R 1212 (q) becomes a constant below min{q σ , q th }. Scaling Exponents q th > qσ, σ11 > 0, σ22 = 0 Scale q > q th q th > q > qσ qσ > q The scaling of the elastic moduli is shown when stress is small enough such that q th > qσ. When qσ > q, the bending rigidities B R 1111 q 4 1 and B R 1122 q 2 1 q 2 2 are dominated by the stress term σ11q 2 1 in Eq. 11 and we term them as masked. Scaling Exponents qσ > q th , σ11 > 0, σ22 = 0 Scale q > qσ qσ > q > q th q th > q C R 1111 /C1111 The scaling of the elastic moduli is shown when stress is large enough such that q th < qσ. When qσ > q, the bending rigidities B R 1111 q 4 1 and B R 1122 q 2 1 q 2 2 are dominated by the stress term σ11q 2 1 in Eq. 11 and we term them as masked. d. Scaling Behavior of B 1122 and B 1111 . Whereas for C R ijkl , we could conduct a scaling analysis corresponding to SCSA equations for the anharmonic f 4 interaction, B R 1111 and B R 1122 are coefficients of harmonic terms and will be masked by the stress in the correlation function, G f f , when q < q σ . With our theoretical results we now move on to verify the scaling of this theory via simulations that measure the in-plane and flexural correlation functions in these regimes. The scaling of these moduli should be reflected in the correlation functions in Eqs. spacing) and 11600 masses (100a × 100a) to show that finite size effects in the correlation functions are negligible. Further details of the simulations can be found in the appendix in Sec. A 1. What gives the dimensional sense of system size are the parameters such as bending rigidity, Young's modulus and temperature, all of which enter into the formula for q th . To make this clearer, in the low-stress limit: where k B T, κ have units of energy but Y has units of energy/m 2 . Understanding this, the temperature, bending rigidity and Young's modulus were varied in order to piece together data from simulations across a large scale change, which allowed us to be more computationally effective. Specific parameters can be obtained in the appendix. Simulations were only done in the low stress limit. This is because replication of similar results in the large stress case were rendered difficult to obtain due to the non-linear responses of the lattice of springs as well. Looking at Fig. Having confirmed our theoretical results with simulations we can now move on to measuring the stress-strain theory that follow from this scaling theory. The stress-strain relationship of thermalized 2D sheets of dimensions L × L under uni-axial stress along axis 1 can be theoretically calculated: where L is the system size, Λ is again the UV cutoff and δL 1 is the change in length along axis 1 where ν is the bare Poisson ratio, in our case +1/3 for a triangular lattice. δL 2 is the change of system length along axis 2. The strains are then defined as: where the subtracted terms express the reference system size in the absence of stress. These terms are necessary to subtract in order to obtain a strain from the un-stressed state where thermal fluctuations naturally induce a shrinking of the membrane. By plugging in our theoretical scaling ansatz for the correlation functions, found in Table Scaling of Strains Strain qσ < 2π/L 2π/L < qσ < Λ Λ < qσ < q th q th < qσ For example, in the case th < a < σ < L(2π/L < q σ < Λ < q th ). Beginning with Eq. (67): and in the first summation we may Taylor expand the correlation function to first order (since for those wave vectors the stress term is not dominant in the denominator of the flexural correlation function). We can then convert these terms to integrals: To make the latter integral tractable we approximate the denominator in the following manner: This approximation is justified since the stress is dominant when θ = π/2 in the domain of the integral, q ∈ [2π/L, q σ ]. These integrals can now be analytically integrated giving rise to: By taking the infinite system size limit (which is appropriate since we are also assuming large separation of length scales that 2π L qσ q th -η/2 κ σ 1 when 2π/L < q σ < Λ < q th ), we can obtain a simpler expression: A similar calculation gives: The rest of the strains for other regimes can be obtained in a similar manner and are shown in Table (74) Theoretically this is expected when the separation of length scales is sufficiently large With simulations we first sought to confirm the nonlinear stress strain relation, which can be observed in Fig. From the same simulations, we can obtain the Poisson ratio by taking the negative ratio of strains 11 and 22 . In Fig. Returning to our own data, for large stresses such that σ > σ q th , the bare Poisson ratio of the triangular lattice of masses connected by springs, 1/3, could not be achieved due to the immediate cross-over to the non-linear elastic regime (in the simulations the data showing the box length along the axis of stress begins to become very large at these stresses leading to a decrease in the Poisson ratio with further application of stress). We examined the effects of uni-axial stress on thermally fluctuating sheets. In particular, we see that anomalous scaling due to thermal fluctuations at scales where the uni-axial stress is dominant still appears in the in-plane moduli orthogonal to the stress, such as C R 2222 . Furthermore the presence of the two length scales q σ and q th provides an interesting foreground for various regimes of the scaling of moduli. We verified these scalings via simulations, in particular the anomalous scaling of C R 2222 as well as the transition at q σ , beyond which the correlation functions becomes anisotropic. These results match with previous investigations of tubules We furthermore verified the existence of a non-linear stress-strain regime ∼ σ η/(2-η) in our simulations with a numerically accurate exponent. However our results measuring the Poisson ratio were less conclusive and require further investigation. FIG. where r ij = |r i -r j | is the Euclidean distance between two neighbors i and j and a is the lattice spacing. The bare continuum moduli of such a system can be derived from the discrete spring stiffnesses The parameters were generally varied and hence the time step had to be chosen carefully to be less or equal to the following reduced times and periods: The simulations were done non-dimensionally so k B , the Boltzman constant, and mass and lattice spacing were set to 1. A simulation generally ran for approximately 1.6 × 10 8 -10 9 time steps each of length Min{τ T , τ Ŷ , τ κ}. In computation time this equates to 6-60 hours on the cluster. The system size was mostly kept constant around 50 × 50 and 100 × 100 for the molecular dynamics correlations. (A5) In this section we summarize the results of how the strains scale with respect to an applied stress for the other two relevant regimes of stress. For small stresses, when q σ < 2π L < Λ < q th we obtain: At low stresses we can ignore the bare response term σ/Y for 11 or -νσ/Y for 22 and since we are not interested in the effects of microscopic physics, the dominant term in the above expressions is the one that involves the system size. This term can then be reformulated in terms of the renormalized Young's modulus, Y R (L) = Y (2π/q th L) ηu . In addition, one can immediately see from the definition of the Poisson ratio, ν R = -1/3 in the linear response. We do not see this linear response value in our simulations however and there is theory that supports other values 11 (σ 11 , T |2π/L < Λ < q th < q σ ) ≈ 22 σ 11 , T 2π L < Λ < q th < q σ ≈ -νσ 11 Y -k B T 8πσ 11 -q 2 + q q 2 + σ 11 κ + σ 11 κ sinh -1 q κ σ 11 where we have approximated that when stress is quite high, the terms from the integrals can be ignored and the bare material properties can be used to obtain the effective mechanical response. Thus the Poisson ratio we should observe should also be that of the bare material. For our simulations with triangular lattices, ν = 1/3. 2 [B 2 [B 2 [B 1 [B ∼ σ .72 appears. The angled dashed line marks the y = x line and shows that for large stresses, a classical response is regained.