Despite their success in microscale modeling of materials, atomistic methods are still limited by short time scales, small domain sizes, and high strain rates. Multiscale formulations can capture the continuum-level response of solids over longer runtimes, but using such schemes to model highly dynamic, nonlinear phenomena is very challenging and an active area of research. In this work, we develop novel techniques within the concurrent atomistic-continuum multiscale framework to simulate shock wave propagation through a two-dimensional, single-crystal lattice. The technique is described in detail, and two moving window methods are incorporated to track the shock front through the domain and thus prevent spurious wave reflections at the atomistic-continuum interfaces. We compare our simulation results to analytical models as well as previous atomistic and CAC data and discuss the apparent effects of lattice orientation on the shock response of FCC crystals. We then use the moving window techniques to perform parametric studies which analyze the shock front's structure and planarity. Finally we compare the efficiency of our model to molecular dynamics simulations. This work showcases the power of using a moving window concurrent multiscale framework to simulate dynamic shock evolution over long runtimes and opens to the door to more complex studies involving shock propagation through composites and high-entropy alloys. Shock waves are complex events which can induce catastrophic damage to materials through plastic deformation and spall fracture. As such, considerable effort has been devoted towards understanding shock propagation within solids at the continuum level Atomistic shock wave simulations have been performed over the past several decades primarily using a technique known as non-equilibrium Molecular Dynamics (NEMD). In these simulations, the shock is typically generated by an impact or with a moving piston and is then allowed to propagate through the domain In the past two decades, alternative atomistic techniques have been developed to counteract such issues, and some examples are the uniaxial Hugoniostat While modern atomistic techniques have greatly expanded our knowledge of shock wave behavior at the microscale, they nevertheless fail to capture the continuum-level response because the total number of particles that can be realistically incorporated into the domain is restricted by computer architecture and limited computational resources. To overcome these issues, concurrent multiscale frameworks have been developed which retain atomistic information around a small region of interest and populate the remainder of the domain with finite elements The Concurrent Atomistic-Continuum (CAC) method overcomes many of the A-C interface issues seen in other concurrent schemes by utilizing a unified multiscale framework built upon Atomistic Field Theory In the present work, we develop a multiscale framework using the CAC method to model long-time shock wave propagation through a two-dimensional lattice. Specifically, we utilize both the Hugoniot shock equations This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 characterizes the shocks studied in the present work and elaborates on both the Hugoniot and Eulerian analytical models. Section 3 describes the framework's geometry and boundary conditions as well as presents the interatomic potential, thermostat, material parameters, and shock constants utilized in the simulations. Section 4 discusses the finite element formulation of CAC and its 2D implementation. Section 5 outlines both the shock propagation technique and the two moving window schemes used to track the shock front. Section 6 presents shock propagation results obtained with the conveyor technique and compares these to both analytical models to highlight the directional anisotropies in single crystals subject to shock loading. Section 7 uses the coarsen-refine technique to perform parametric studies related to the shock front's structure as well as showcases the efficiency of the current model compared to NEMD simulations. Finally, Section 8 concludes the paper and discusses ideas for future work. We consider a two-dimensional monatomic lattice with no defects under compression by an ideal longitudinal shock wave traveling in the x-direction. Mathematically, we represent the shock as a propagating discontinuity across which there exists a jump in particle velocity (v), stress (σ), strain ( ), and temperature (θ). Material quantities ahead of the shock front have the superscript -, and quantities behind the shock front have the superscript +. The notation • denotes the change in a given quantity (•) across the shock front. During each simulation, particles ahead of the shock wave are assumed to be at zero mean particle velocity, unstressed, unstrained, and at room temperature (295 K). Furthermore, the shock propagates at a natural velocity U S along the surface of the primitive unit cell of an FCC lattice. We incorporate these parameters into a moving window CAC framework to simulate long-time shock wave propagation over engineering-scale domains. Specifically, we model the classic Riemann problem of a single shock wave front with constant states on either side as shown in Fig. First, we simulate dynamic shock wave propagation and evolution using the conservation of momentum, continuity equation, Hugoniot equation of state (EOS), and a thermodynamic relationship derived from the shock Hugoniot and release isentrope. By applying the conservation of linear momentum and continuity of displacement across the discontinuous shock front and assuming uniaxial loading, we obtain the following standard one-dimensional shock wave jump equations where ρ denotes the density of the material. To fully parameterize the system, Eqs. ( Here, S is a dimensionless, empirical parameter representing the slope of the shock velocity vs. particle velocity Hugoniot curve, and C 0 is the sound velocity in the material at zero stress. We can use Eqs. ( where compressive stress and strain are considered positive. The Hugoniot stress-strain relationship forms the basis of modern equations of state. Finally, we calculate the rise in temperature across the shock front by solving the following ordinary differential equation where C V is the volumetric specific heat capacity, and γ is the Mie-Gruneisen parameter for the material. We also characterize the propagating shock wave using the nonlinear Eulerian thermoelastic shock equations derived in For an extensive derivation of the Eulerian formulation for shock waves, we refer the reader to In Eqs. ( Here, the term Eulerian refers to a strain which is a function of the inverse deformation gradient F . Hence, the strain tensor D assumes material coordinates rather than spatial coordinates, so it can be applied to simulations of anisotropic materials where Ĉ11 , Ĉ111 , and Ĉ1111 are the Eulerian second, third, and fourth-order elastic constants, Γ1 and Γ11 are the Eulerian first and second-order Grüneisen parameters, and η = 0 is the entropy ahead of the shock front. The elastic constants and Grüneisen parameters in an Eulerian setting are obtained from their non-Eulerian counterparts using the following relations Finally, the conjugate stress Ŝ is represented by where b 3 , b 4 , and b 5 are polynomials for entropy η generated across the shock front, and their expressions can be found in To legitimately utilize the shock equations from Sec. 2.3 as well as avoid intractability with the moving window techniques, we perform shock simulations with relatively small strains such that the resulting stresses are below the HEL of the material (see Appendix A.2). To maintain consistency, we refer to these as elastic shock waves in the present work, but they are also classified as weak shocks in other papers The two-dimensional CAC framework is implemented using an in-house C++ code, and the monatomic lattice is split into three primary regions as seen in Fig. We note that to avoid introducing non-physical strains into the domain during shock simulations, semi-periodic boundary conditions are employed in the x-direction whereby the particles at the ends of the chain (x 0 and x F ) are made neighbors with the nodes at the interfaces (x A,0 and x A,F respectively) To calculate the integrand of the internal force density (Eq. 20), we use the modified Morse interatomic potential function. This potential only considers first nearest neighbor interactions and is given by the following expression where r ij = |x i -x j | is the magnitude of the displacement between particle i and j, and r 0 is the distance at which the potential reaches the minimum (defined as the close-packed neighbor spacing). We perform shock simulations with Cu and Al, and the parameters for these materials are given in Table Table Element mass (u) ρ 0 (g/cm The CAC governing equation (Eq. 24) is a second-order ordinary differential equation in time, and we solve it using the velocity Verlet algorithm. The time step used in the integration algorithm is chosen to be ∆t = 0.001 ps in order to minimize numerical error. To apply temperature to the domain, we use the Langevin thermostat -a stochastic thermostat which adds a random force to the particle motion along with a damping term ζ. In particular, we modify the velocity Verlet algorithm in the presence of the Langevin thermostat by performing the discretization used in LAMMPS Here, x i and v i denote the position and velocity of the i th particle, m is the atomic mass, k B is Boltzmann's constant, and hi is a Gaussian random variable with a mean of zero and a variance of one. As per Langevin's requirements, we generate a different random variable for each particle during each velocity update. Since Langevin is local in nature, the target temperatures θ + and θ - are specified for each particle. For the compressive strains applied in this work, θ + has an upper boundary of ∼ 450 K. In Table Here, we give a very brief overview of the finite element implementation of CAC, but more details can be found in In Eq. ( where f α ext (x) is the external force density, M is the total mass of the atoms within a unit cell, and θ α is the kinetic temperature. We note that the internal force density can be obtained exclusively from the interatomic potential function since it is a nonlinear, nonlocal function of relative displacements between neighboring particles We employ the finite element method to calculate the numerical solution of Eq. In Eq. ( Applying the method of weighted residuals, we obtain the weak form of the governing equation by multiplying Eq. ( Specifically, the Galerkin method is used to obtain the above expression, so the weight function Φ η (x) equals the shape function Φ ξ (x) in this case. Substituting Eqs. ( where In this work, we approximate the inertial term (Eq. 25) using the lumped mass matrix derived in Appendix B.1. Additionally, no external forces are applied, and temperature is incorporated via a thermostat as in By using this finite element implementation of CAC, a majority of the degrees of freedom in the coarse-scaled regions are eliminated. For critical regions where atomistic behavior is required, the finest mesh is used such that each rhombus "element" consists exclusively of four atoms with no additional lattice points. Thus, CAC uses AFT to produce a unified theoretical framework between the fine-scaled and coarse-scaled regions. A unique feature of CAC is that in the finite element implementation, element connectivity is not required because the nonlocal interatomic force field is the only constitutive relation Rhombohedral elements are utilized within the CAC formulation to replicate the primitive unit cell of a monocrystalline lattice (FCC in the present work). A sketch of this can be seen in Fig. A schematic of the two-dimensional rhombus element can be seen in Fig. where In Eq. ( where m is the atomic mass, N ppe is the number of particles per element (including lattice points), and N npe is the number of nodes per element The terms Ü and F int are vectors of the respective accelerations and internal forces for each atom/node in the lattice, and n α represents the total number of neighbors of particle i within a specified cutoff radius. Furthermore, the force f int (x) on particle i at position x is obtained exclusively from the interatomic potential function through relative displacements of particles, and the corresponding net force is obtained through Gaussian integration (see Appendix B.2). When calculating the force f int (x) for a node in the coarse-scaled region, the surrounding lattice points are taken as neighbors. The only difference in the fine-scaled force calculations would be the fact that the neighbors of atoms are other atoms rather than lattice points. For each simulation, the shock wave is characterized using either the Hugoniot (Sec. 2.2) or Eulerian (Sec. 2.3) governing equations, and the shock front is achieved by dividing the grid from Fig. (2) and (3) for the Hugoniot formulation or Eqs. ( In this work, we overcome the runtime-limiting obstacle of boundary reflections present in traditional NEMD shock wave simulations by incorporating two moving window techniques into the multiscale framework. The first technique, known as the conveyor method, draws inspiration from the moving boundary conditions used in Figure A schematic of the coarsen-refine method can be seen in Fig. In this section, we elaborate on the shock velocity and longitudinal stress results obtained with both the Hugoniot and Eulerian formulations and discuss how they relate to the directional anisotropy of materials subject to shock impact. Recent NEMD works have studied shock propagation along different lattice directions of single crystals and observed a significant orientation dependence on the material's shock response The results in this section are obtained from shock wave simulations performed with the conveyor moving window technique using the CAC domain described in Fig. Shock velocity results obtained for both Hugoniot and Eulerian theory can be seen in Figs. We observe a similar phenomenon for the Eulerian results in Fig. To supplement the anisotropic shock velocity results from Sec. 6.2, we perform longitudinal stress vs. strain studies using the shocked data for both Cu and Al, and these results can be seen in Fig. where we note that compressive stress/strain is considered positive. Fig. Without loss of generality, we only reference data from Eulerian theory in this section as both shock models gave similar quantitative results. In Fig. We now use the coarsen-refine simulations to analyze the shock front's spatial width over 5 ns, and the results for + = -0.06 can be seen in Fig. For the sake of completeness, we now present results for speedup/efficiency tests which compare the two-dimensional moving window CAC framework to equally-sized NEMD domains. The data from these two studies can be seen in Fig. In this paper, we developed a dynamic moving window CAC framework to simulate shock wave propagation through a two-dimensional, single-crystal lattice. Specifically, we characterized the shock using both the linear Hugoniot We performed many shock wave simulations within the CAC framework and used the moving window techniques to track the shock front through two different FCC materials: Cu and Al. The unique lattice directions inherent to the CAC formulation provided us the opportunity to study how directional anisotropies in single crystals can give rise to orientation-dependent shock velocities. We observed that longitudinal shocks traveling along the [112] and [110] directions of the CAC domain propagated at distinct velocities for a given strain and particle velocity. These shock velocities were also different from those predicted by polycrystalline Hugoniot and Eulerian analytical models as well as previous one-dimensional atomistic and multiscale data. From these results, we were able to derive new Hugoniot parameters for the CAC formulation, and longitudinal stress calculations further validated the observed anisotropic material response. Our data agreed qualitatively with the results from previous NEMD studies which identified this orientation-dependence of shock evolution in solids Next, in Sec. 7, we exhibited the capability and novelty of the present framework by using the coarsen-refine technique to track a propagating shock wave through the entire grid. By leveraging concepts from previous atomistic and finite element schemes as well as exploiting the unique qualities of the CAC formulation, the fine-scaled region could travel through the domain at the speed of the moving wave front, and we noted the significance of this for advancing non-equilibrium multiscale research. We utilized this techinique to study the shock's structure and planarity over very long runtimes which are typically unattainable in traditional NEMD methods. Finally, we presented multiple plots comparing the efficiency of an NEMD system to an equally-sized CAC lattice. We observed that the present moving window multiscale scheme had significantly faster runtimes for various domain sizes -a necessary quality for realistic and scalable atomistic-continuum models. The present work is innovative in its own right, but it also opens the door to more complex research involving the use of multiscale domains to simulate dynamic, nonlinear phenomena over engineering length scales. While we focused only on elastic shock waves in this work, we hope to expand this formulation to model elastic-plastic shocks Next, we identify the elastic zone of the framework and ensure that the yield strength between a purely atomistic domain and equally-sized CAC domain is comparable. This is done to establish that the CAC force calculations are accurate as well as provide a range of input strains for the shock equations. Specifically, we compress the grid uniaxially along the x-direction ([112] lattice orientation) with strains ranging from 0.01 -0.2 and calculate the virial stress of the domain for each input strain using the following expression In Eq. (A.1), σ is the virial (thermodynamic) stress, A is the area of the grid, m α is the mass of particle α, uα k is the velocity in the k th direction of particle α, ūk is the average velocity in the k th direction of all particles in the given area, φ αβ is the first derivative of the potential energy at a distance r αβ between particles α and β (φ αβ = ∂Π ∂r αβ ), and r αβ k is the distance in the k th direction between particles α and β. Since we consider uniaxial compressive strains for the shock simulations, we only calculate the longitudinal stress (σ kk = σ xx ) in this section and do not perform any tensile tests. The stress vs. strain results for both Cu and Al at 450 K can be seen in Fig A . In each case, the system is equilibrated to 500 K, and the compression is applied uniaxially along the x-direction. For each atomistic simulation, the domain contains 100 columns and 20 rows, and the runtime is 100 ps with an equilibration time of 50 ps. The parameters for the CAC simulations are the same, but the lattice described in Sec. 3.1 (with damped atoms) is utilized instead of the fully atomistic grid. Since 450 K is the highest temperature achieved in the shock simulations, we specifically wanted to identify the yield point at this extreme temperature to inform our shock calculations. In Hence, the Jacobian determinant is which can be simplified using a software program like Wolfram Mathematica. The expression for the mass matrix of the 2D element in global coordinates is given as follows: Writing this in natural coordinates: where and ρ is the area of the element. As a result, we can use the expressions for the shape functions as well as det(J) from Eq. (B.11) to calculate all sixty-four components of the mass matrix for the given element. It turns out, however, that only ten of these components are unique, so we can simplify the mass matrix significantly as follows: In this work, we use the lumped mass matrix approximation, and specifically, the row-sum method. Hence, we can further simplify our calculations and sum the rows of the mass matrix such that Therefore, we arrive at the final result for the accelerations of the four nodes: For the sake of completeness, we provide the expressions for the ten unique components of the two-dimensional mass matrix below: As can be seen, each of these terms is strictly a function of the four nodal positions of the element in the global coordinate system as well as the density ρ. Thus, assuming that we know the global coordinates, we can calculate each component of the mass matrix and thereby obtain the acceleration of each node. The first term in Eq. (B.33) represents the forces at the nodes and is calculated as follows: where we note that all of the weights equal one. Additionally, each shape function equals one at its nodal location and zero everywhere else. Equation (B.34) would be the only force used in nodal integration -a technique which effectively does not alter the forces obtained using the interatomic potential function and relative displacement of particles. Although nodal integration is more computationally efficient, it is less robust than Gaussian integration and only accurate for simple geometries and relatively small elements, so it is not used in this work. The second two forces in Eq. (B.33) are given as follows: ), the summations occur over the eight edge integration points and four surface integration points respectively. Furthermore, the terms w j,x and w j,y are the weights of the integration points along the x and y directions. Finally, Φ(j) is the shape function vector at the given integration point while f int (j) is the force of the integration point obtained through the potential function. For the sake simplicity, we do not write out the full expressions of these terms, but the expansion would be similar to that shown for the nodal forces in Eq. (B.34).