Thermal conductivity is a critical material property in numerous applications, such as those related to thermoelectric devices and heat dissipation. Effectively modulating thermal conductivity has become a great concern in the field of heat conduction. In this study, a quantum strategy is proposed to modulate thermal conductivity by exciting targeted phonons. The results show that the thermal conductivity of graphene can be tailored in the range of 1559 W/m-K (49%) to 4093 W/m-K (128%), compared with the intrinsic value of 3189 W/m-K. A similar trend is also observed for graphene nanoribbons. The results are obtained through both ab initio calculations and molecular dynamics simulations. This brand-new quantum strategy to modulate thermal conductivity paves a way for quantum heat conduction. The modulation of thermal conductivity is of great importance in various applications, including thermal managements Achieving desirable performances requires a deep understanding of phonon scattering mechanisms in different heat transfer regimes, which is essential to modulate the thermal conductivity of materials Recent developments in the field of heat conduction have led to a better understanding of the scattering dynamics of heat carriers at the nanoscale. Heat conduction in dielectrics can be understood as the propagation of phonons and their scatterings such as phonon-phonon Phonon-phonon scattering has been exploited to produce weaker couplings As the understanding of phonon scattering mechanisms has advanced, a variety of new strategies to modulate the thermal conductivity have been developed, motivated by a great demand for thermal management. An enhanced thermal conductivity can be achieved by minimizing phonon-phonon scattering phase space and phonon-impurity scattering in bulk materials Recently, there has been a growing interest in the targeted phonon mode excitation using the terahertz optical pulses or tensile strain to modulate optical and electrical properties. The methods offer several advantages such as in-situ, flexibility, quick response, and directness, without requiring any structural modification. For instance, terahertz excitation pulses have been used to directly excite optical phonons in MAPbI3, resulting in significant perturbations in the electron relaxation dynamics Here, the strategy of quantum excitation of phonons is proposed to modulate thermal conductivity of dielectric materials, where phonons dominate in the heat conduction. This strategy involves exciting targeted phonons to increase or decrease phonon scattering, thus achieving the desired thermal conductivities. The effectiveness and capability of this strategy are demonstrated using ab initio calculations Then, the energy of these modes is artificially increased, allowing for the quantum excitation of dominant phonons with large contributions to thermal conductivity and weak coupling with other phonons. This results in a significant enhancement of thermal conductivity. On the other hand, if phonons with high scattering rates and relatively low contributions to thermal conductivity are excited, scattering processes are promoted, leading to a decrease in thermal conductivity. Phonon DOS determines the number of excited modes around a specific frequency, thus indicates the effectiveness of activating those modes. It is worth noting that thermal conductivity can be modulated over a wide range by exciting only a few dominant phonons, without introducing other scattering mechanisms. The method is basically relying on the nature of phonon scattering. Heat conduction in solids is directly related to phonon scattering, where an individual mode can participate in various scattering processes. By identifying the characteristic time of phonon relaxation time or lifetime, ττ, the thermal conductivity can be generally written as an integration as where parameter 1 3 ⁄ is related to the dimension of the system, CC(ωω) refers to the spectral volumetric specific heat, vv to the phonon group velocity and ωω is the frequency. In general, the diverse scatterings can be incorporated into the Matthiessen's rule [9,24] where ττ pph-pph , ττ iiii , and ττ bb are the relaxation times due to phonon-phonon, impurity, and boundary scattering processes, respectively. The relaxation time of phonon-phonon scattering is calculated using Fermi's golden rule By increasing the energy of targeted phonons, the scattering rate can be changed significantly, leading to the modulation on the thermal conductivity. To change the energy of mode nn , the phonon occupation numbers are modified in ab initio calculations according to the following formulation: where EE nn ′ corresponds to the energy of mode nn after the modification, ħ denotes the reduced Planck constant, kk BB the Boltzmann's constant, TT is the absolute lattice temperature and NN represents the multiple of energy increase. To rescale the mode kinetic energy EE nn,KK in molecular dynamic (MD) simulations, the atomic velocities are rescaled according to the formulation (The derivation is presented in Appendix C): where vv jj ′ and vv jj are the velocity of atom jj after and before the modification, respectively. The rescale factor MM is set to 10 in MD simulations. In addition, mm jj indicate the atomic mass, QQ ̇nn the normal mode velocity coordinate and ee jj,nn the eigenvector. Considering the time evolution of mode kinetic energy in the MD simulation (as shown in Fig. To experimentally realize the proposed strategy, the key step is to excite the targeted phonon modes. This can be achieved by illuminating the sample with THz pulses using a tabletop light source, which are generated by optical rectification using the tiltedpulse-intensity-front scheme. The intensity of the THz pulse can be controlled by a pair of wire grid polarizers operating in the THz frequency region, as described in Ref. Ideally, the frequency of the illuminated photons should be close to the THz magnitude, corresponding to the "targeted phonons" indicated in the thermal conductivity spectrum in Fig. Firstly, the spectral contribution to intrinsic thermal conductivity of graphene κκ Gr 0 is calculated as a guidance to highlight the effectiveness of the modulation strategy, as shown in Fig. Then, the energy is injected to excite more heat carriers into those dominant modes. However, it can be observed from Fig. It should also be noted that there are only a few modes in each 1 THz frequency range, which accounts for 2-7% of all modes of the Brillouin Zone. Moreover, modes around 10 THz make a significant contribution to the intrinsic thermal conductivity, as shown in Fig. In this work, a new strategy for modulating thermal conductivity is proposed, which is realized by exciting targeted phonons in a quantum manner. The results demonstrate that this strategy can effectively modulate the thermal conductivity of graphene and graphene nanoribbons over a wide range compared to their intrinsic values. Ab initio calculations and NEMD simulations provide a detailed validation for the strategy. Firstly, the modes with top-contribution or strong-scattering are identified; and then, the energy of some of these modes is artificially increased. It is worth noting that the feasibility of this strategy has a high possibility to be confirmed experimentally 