The exfoliation energy -quantifying the energy required to extract a two-dimensional (2D) sheet from the surface of a bulk material -is a key parameter determining the synthesizability of 2D compounds. Here, using ab initio calculations, we present a new group of non-van der Waals 2D materials derived from non-layered crystals which exhibit ultra low exfoliation energies. In particular for sulfides, surface relaxations are essential to correctly describe the associated energy gain needed to obtain reliable results. Taking into account long-range dispersive interactions has only a minor effect on the energetics and ultimately proves that the exfoliation energies are close to the ones of traditional van der Waals bound 2D compounds. The candidates with the lowest energies, 2D SbTlO 3 and MnNaCl 3 , exhibit appealing electronic, potential topological, and magnetic features as evident from the calculated band structures making these systems an attractive platform for fundamental and applied nanoscience. The discovery of new two-dimensional (2D) materials -traditionally derived from bulk layered compounds held together by weak van der Waals (vdW) forces -outlined over the last two decades a diverse zoo of representatives showcasing unique topological, 1 electronic, 2-4 magnetic, A key quantity determining the synthesizability of 2D materials is the exfoliation energy ∆E exf . It represents the energy needed to peel off one 2D sheet from the surface of the bulk parent material. It can be computed accurately according to the method of Jung et al. The input structures are retrieved via the AFLOW APIs Ab initio Exfoliation Energies. In Fig. two cation species. Here, only the results for the energetically favorable termination are plotted and a comparison to the unpreferred termination is presented in Fig. The ∆E exf of the newly considered systems extend over a large range of more than an order of magnitude. Ultra low values are achieved for the systems with surface cations in +1 oxidation states (such as Ag + , Li + , K + , Na + , and Tl + ) being as small as 7 meV/ Å2 for SbTlO 3 and 26 meV/ Å2 for MnNaCl 3 . These numbers are comparable to or even below the graphene reference value of ∼20 meV/ Å2 . They are significantly smaller than for any other non-vdW 2D system considered before. The blue curve denotes the results obtained when omitting structural relaxations of the extracted 2D facets, i.e. keeping them "as sliced" from the bulk, as is common reliable practice for traditional vdW 2D systems. These can be accounted for within the SCAN+rVV10 scheme. As a further comparison, there are seven materials (CdPS 3 , CdPSe 3 , CrGeTe 3 , CrSiTe 3 , FePSe 3 , MgPSe 3 , and MnPSe 3 ) in the AFLOW database with the same structural prototype that are clearly layered, i.e. traditional vdW bonded materials as evident from visual inspection of the bulk geometries. Thus, the same structural prototype can host both vdW and non-vdW bonded 2D materials. The exfoliation energies for these well established 2D systems were also computed with the same methods and are provided in Fig. The optimized bulk (layered) structure with the exfoliable facet highlighted is depicted in Fig. It is structurally equivalent to the other non-vdW systems as the Tl cations are at the surface of the 2D sheets in contrast to traditional 2D systems such as the ones from Fig. An important general remark regarding the exfoliation energies must be made. While it is well known that the standard DFT functional PBE(+U ) tends to underestimate binding energies (overestimating bond lengths also known as underbinding, see also the comparison including the PBE+U exfoliation energies in Fig. According to the band structures in Fig. Conclusions. We have outlined a new group of non-vdW 2D materials exhibiting ultra low exfoliation energies -ultimately getting as small as the one of graphene. The investigated sulfides Al 2 S 3 and In 2 S 3 have exfoliation energies a factor of four smaller than the corresponding oxides, which can be traced back to exceptionally strong surface relaxations allowing for a significant energy gain. The smallest values close to the ones of traditional 2D systems are found for SbTlO 3 and MnNaCl 3 , as evident from the comparison to several vdW materials. The computed band structures of these most easily exfoliable compounds exhibit appealing electronic, possibly topological, and magnetic properties. Our results may thus be an important guide for extending the family of non-vdW 2D exfoliable systems representing a new class of low dimensional compounds and for studying their characteristics as well as applications. The ab-initio calculations are performed with AFLOW The bulk and 2D candidate systems with expected magnetic ordering (MnNaCl 3 , CrGeTe 3 , CrSiTe 3 , FePSe 3 , and MnPSe 3 ) are rigorously checked for magnetism using the algorithm developed within the CCE method, The exfoliation energy is computed as: where E slab and E bulk indicate the total energies of the relaxed 2D material and bulk, respectively and A is the in-plane surface area according to the relaxed bulk unit cell. As proven in Ref., Numerical data for the exfoliation energies are included in the Supporting Information. A New Group of Two-Dimensional Non-van der Waals Materials with Ultra Low Exfoliation Energies Supporting Information Tom Barnowsky, 1, 2 Arkady V. Krasheninnikov, 1, 3 and Rico Friedrich * r.friedrich@hzdr.de