Recently, the studies of topological corner states (TCSs) are extended from crystals to quasicrystals, which are referred to as higher-order topological quasicrystalline insulators (HOTQIs). However, the TCSs of complete quasi-periodic structure in photonic systems have yet to be demonstrated. Moreover, there is only one TCS in each corner region in higher-order topological insulators (HOTIs). Increasing the number of TCS is expected to increase application potential of TCSs. In this work, HOTQIs in photonic systems are experimentally observed. It is found that HOTQIs possess TCS arrays, and each TCS array contains several TCSs. Furthermore, the universal theoretical framework of the multimer analysis method is improved, and the difference in the average charge density is proposed as a real-space topological index. These results will open up new ideas for investigating highly integrated, multi-region localized TCSs and are expected to provide new ways to explore topological phenomena and the applications of photonic quasicrystals. Higher-order topological insulators (HOTIs) based on spatial symmetries (such as rotational symmetry and mirror symmetry) are characterized by higher-order topological states with lower dimensions, such as one-dimensional (1D) topological hinge states in 3D systems and 0D topological corner states (TCSs) in 2D or 3D systems. Different from crystals, 2D quasicrystals (quasi-periodic systems) exhibit rotational symmetry, self-similarity, and long-range order. Fractals rely on self-similarity, possess fractal dimensions, and lack conventional bulk regions, Acknowledging the extensive potential applications of photonic and phononic systems, In this work, Stampfli-type and Stampfli-ring-type HOTQIs in photonic systems are theoretically analyzed and experimentally verified. Two HOTQIs contain three corner regions (i.e., corner-I, corner-II and corner-III regions). It is found that the eight (twelve) TCSs in each corner-II (corner-III) region form an array and exhibit a polyline-shaped (ring-shaped) distribution. The universal theoretical framework of the multimer analysis method (MAM) is improved, and the difference in the average charge density (ACD) is proposed as a real-space topological index, which characterizes the HOT. Using an iterative subdivision method, with squares and regular triangles as primitive tiles, a Stampfli-type quasicrystal tiling can be constructed (see Section A in Supporting Information). The vertex of each primitive tile (i.e., the lattice site of the quasicrystal) is used as a basic cell. Since the Stampfli-type quasicrystal satisfies the C6 symmetry, considering the interaction between adjacent basic cells, each basic cell contains six subsites. Subsites can set scatterers corresponding to electronic, photonic, and phononic systems. In a finite-size system, the tight-binding Hamiltonian of the two quasicrystals shown in Figure where ci † represents the electron creation operator of the basic cell i, ci The energy spectrum (E) of the eigenvalues is obtained by solving the Hamiltonian HStampfli. The two quasicrystals have 60 and 72 zero-energy states, respectively, as shown in Figure Therefore, an additional 12 monomers from six corner-III regions are added on the basis of the Stampfli-type quasicrystal, resulting in an additional 12 zero-energy states in Stampfli-ringtype quasicrystal. Filling the band with E < 0, the charge density (C) of the two quasicrystals is shown in Figure The corner anomaly was used as a real-space topological index in previous studies of HOTIs. When the system is in the trivial phase, the ACD of any subsite in the system is very similar, and it is exactly the same at t1/t0  0. When the system is in the topological phase, the electrons below the band gap mainly fill the non-monomers, and the ACD of the subsite corresponding to the monomer is almost 0. When t0/t1  0, the ACD is actually 0. This is because only zeroenergy (E = 0) electrons can fill the monomers (see Section D and E in Supporting Information). E = 0 is in the band gap; thus, the non-zero-energy electrons below the band gap cannot fill the monomer, causing its ACD to be 0. The difference between ACD0 and ACD1(2) can be used as a real-space topological index to effectively characterize the topology of the system, which can be expressed as where ΔACD is normalized, max(ACD0) = N/S0, and min(ACD1(2)) = 0. The ΔACD is 0 (non-0) for the trivial (topological) phase, and the gapless metallic region with ΔACD close to 0 is not included. The variation in ΔACD with t0 and t1 is shown in Figure Moreover, the HOTQI realized in this work is not significantly influenced by the shape of quasicrystal. To verify its universality, the tight-binding Hamiltonian is extended to Ammann-Beenker and Equithirds quasicrystals selected randomly Based on the theoretical model of the electronic system, HOTQIs in photonic system (i.e., photonic HOTQIs) are simulated and experimentally demonstrated. The Stampfli-type photonic HOTQI is shown in Figure The distance between the scatterer and the center of the basic cell is adjusted to construct the different multimers (see Section K in Supporting Information). Different from previous HOTIs that used crystals as the trivial cladding in simulations and experiments, this work uses a metal (perfect electric conductor, PEC) as the trivial cladding to make the structure more compact. From Figure The Stampfli-ring-type photonic HOTQI is investigated, as shown in Figure In addition to photonic HOTQIs, phononic HOTQIs based on the MAM are theoretically demonstrated, and TCS arrays are realized (see Section M in Supporting Information). Photonic and phononic HOTQIs have an extraordinary application potential for use in several fields, such as high-efficiency lossless waveguides, In this work, TCS arrays with polyline-shaped and ring-shaped distributions in Stampfli-type and Stampfli-ring-type photonic HOTQIs were demonstrated through the consistent results of theory, simulations, and experiments. The universal theoretical framework of the MAM was improved, and a real-space topological index was proposed. The experimentally realized photonic HOTQIs and theoretically realized phononic HOTQIs in this work broaden the classification of HOTIs, providing a fresh perspective for designing photonic and phononic devices with stronger localization and higher integration degree. Numerical Simulations: The finite element method is used for numerical simulation and the 3D models are constructed in simulations to better correspond to the experiments. For the eigenstate simulations in Figure Experimental Measurements: The experimental setups are mainly composed of two parts: the 2D near-field scanning platform (LINBOU, NFS02 Desktop Version 2D) and the vector network analyzer (Ceyear, 3672B). The detailed experimental setups and samples are presented in Section N in Supporting Information. By covering the top and bottom of the photonic HOTQI sample with aluminum plates, electric fields point in the out-of-plane z direction and magnetic fields parallel to the x-y plane to form a quasi-two-dimensional structure (TM mode). The metal cladding is used around the sample to equivalent the PEC boundary. The lower aluminum plate is placed above the stepper motor, which drives the sample platform to move with a step of 2.5 mm. There is an air layer of about 4 mm between the sample and the upper aluminum plate to facilitate the movement of the sample platform. The antenna (excitation source) is mounted on the lower aluminum plate through the drilled hole and located near the corner region of the photonic HOTQI. The probe antenna is fixed at the center of the upper aluminum plate. As the stepper motor drives the sample to move horizontally, the electric field Ez can be measured.