The effect produced by surface defects on grazing-incidence fast atom diffraction (GIFAD) patterns is studied by considering the presence of terraces in a LiF(001) sample. For helium atoms impinging along the 110 direction of the LiF surface, we analyze the influence of a monolayer terrace with its edge oriented parallel or perpendicular to the axial channel. We found that the presence of an outward transverse step introduces a diffuse background above the Laue circle, which displays additional peaked structures. For inward transverse steps, instead, such a background is placed below the Laue circle, showing a much weaker intensity. On the other hand, parallel steps give rise to asymmetric angular distributions, which are completely confined to the Laue circle. Therefore, these theoretical results suggest that GIFAD might be used to characterize terrace defects. Grazing-incidence fast atom diffraction (GIFAD) is an exceptionally sensitive technique of surface analysis, which provides detailed information of the electronic and morphological features of the surface In GIFAD the periodic ordering requirement of the crystal sample is particularly crucial along the axial direction because projectiles probe long distances of the surface along the incidence channel, about some hundred Å. Hence, careful crystal manufacture and surface preparation represent central issues in GIFAD experiments. Nevertheless, even under extremely good cleanness conditions, real crystals have step defects that could affect the interference patterns In this paper we address how the existence of terraces in a LiF(001) surface might affect the diffraction patterns produced by grazing impact of fast He atoms. The He/LiF(001) system has been extensively studied with GIFAD, being currently considered as a prototype for this phenomenon. However, all the theoretical descriptions assume an ideal perfect crystal surface The influence of surface terraces on GIFAD patterns is investigated here by considering simple crystallographic geometries: a unique up-or down-step, oriented per-pendicular or parallel to the incidence channel. Different step locations, relative to the focus position of the atomic beam, are analyzed. Although such geometries represent an oversimplified description of actual LiF surfaces, they will allow us to shed light on the expected contribution of more complex step defects. Our study is based on the use of the surface initial value representation (SIVR) approximation The article is organized as follows. The theoretical model is summarized in Sec. II, while results for step defects transverse and parallel to the axial direction are presented and discussed in Secs. III. A and III.B respectively. In Sec. IV we outline our conclusions. Atomic units (a.u.) are used unless otherwise stated. Within the SIVR approximation, the effective transition amplitude for elastic atom-surface scattering reads arXiv:2209.10530v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 21 Sep 2022 where is the partial amplitude corresponding to the classical projectile trajectory R t ≡ R t (R o , K o ), which starts at the initial time t = 0 in the position R o with momentum K o . The functions f s and f m describe the spatial and momentum profiles, respectively, of the incident projectile wave-packet, while the vector b denotes the initial position of the wave-packet center. In Eq. ( is the Maslov factor (a determinant), V PS (R t ) represents the projectile-surface interaction along the projectile path, and Q = K f -K i is the projectile momentum transfer, with K i ( K f ) being the initial (final) projectile momentum and K f = K i . The SIVR phase at time t reads where m P is the projectile mass and K t = m P dR t /dt is the classical projectile momentum. In this work, the projectile-surface potential is evaluated with the PA model of Refs. where v r B (r) describes the short-range binary interaction between the projectile and the crystal ion placed at the Bravais lattice site r B , as a function of the relative vector r, and U PS (R t ) denotes the projectile polarization term, which describes the long-range projectile-surface interaction due to the rearrangement of the electron density of the atomic projectile. The binary potentials v r B are expressed in terms of the unperturbed electron densities of the projectile and the ionic sites, incorporating not only non-local contributions of these electron densities, but also the Madelung contribution, i.e., the effect of the ionic crystal lattice on the electron density around each individual ionic site. In turn, the potential U PS depends on the surface electric field at the position R t of the atomic projectile, reading where α P is the dipole polarizability of the projectile (α P = 1.38 a.u. for He atoms) and E rB (r) is the electric field produced by the asymptotic charge of the crystal ion placed at r B . In Eqs. ( where the integral on b covers an area equal to a reduced unit cell of the crystal surface. This integration, associated with the spot-beam effect With the aim of studying the effect produced by the presence of terraces in alkali-halide crystal surfaces, we evaluated diffraction patterns for 4 He atoms scattered off LiF(001) along the 110 direction considering a crystal sample with one step of height H oriented perpendicular or parallel to the incidence channel. The height of the step was assumed to be equal to the distance between layers, that is, H = ±a/2, where a is the lattice parameter (a = 4.02 Å for LiF) and the sign ± indicates an outward (+) or inward (-) terrace parallel to the surface plane (see Fig. The terrace was simulated by adding or removing a monolayer (according to the sign of H) in the topmost half-plane of the crystal sample, as depicted in Fig. In this article, we chosen a fixed impact energy, E = K 2 i /(2m P ) = 1.25 keV, for which experimental GIFAD distributions are available For different configurations and relative positions of the monolayer step, two-dimensional projectile distributions, as a function of the final polar and azimuthal angles, were calculated within the SIVR approach, as given by Eq. ( In this subsection, we consider a LiF(001) surface with a monolayer step oriented perpendicular to the axial direction. To investigate the influence of the position of the border of the terrace on the diffraction patterns, we determine the relative position of the transverse step by means of the distance d x between the edge of the terrace and the mean focus point of the incident beam, that is, where x step is the step position along the incidence channel ( x) and X F denotes the mean position along x of the focus point of the helium beam. The value of X F is defined as the average of the x-positions corresponding to the turning points (X tp , Z tp ) of projectile trajectories specularly reflected from a perfect surface (see Fig. For an ideal LiF(001) crystal, these trajectories run on the flat regions of the projectile-surface potential, i.e., along the F -or Li + rows. Using the relative step position defined by Eq. ( We start analyzing projectile distributions for the higher normal energy -E ⊥ = 0.46 eV -for which terrace effects are expected to be more important. For this normal energy, corresponding to the incidence angle θ i = 1.1 deg, simulated diffraction patterns respectively derived from a perfect LiF(001) surface and from a surface with an upward step placed at a distance d x +120 Å are compared in Fig. GIFAD experiments Both panels of Fig. . However, as a consequence of the presence of the upward step, the angular distribution of Fig. To thoroughly analyze the step effect on Bragg-peak intensities, in Fig. At this point, it is important to recall that typical GI-FAD patterns for perfect crystal surfaces are essentially determined by the surface potential averaged along the axial direction f , with additional peaks at the central and outermost azimuthal angles. In this case, a large proportion of the scattered projectiles (≈ 54% ) are deflected above the Laue circle due to the steep increase of the surface potential at the step position, while about 15% of the incident projectiles penetrates in the terrace bulk. Since the most remarkable feature of the projectile distribution of Fig. A similar central off -Laue maximum, associated with the presence of the transverse terrace, can be seen in Fig. As expected, the step effects gradually disappear as the distance d x increases. The projectile distribution for an upward step placed at d x +200 Å, plotted in Fig. f , while only a very small fraction (≈ 2%) penetrates into the bulk at the step, indicating that the projectile distribution tends to the one corresponding to a perfect LiF surface. The distance d x for which unperturbed GIFAD patterns can be obtained depends on the normal energy. When θ i decreases, so E ⊥ does, grazing projectiles probe longer distances along the axial direction, being affected by transverse upward steps placed at longer distances d x . This fact can be observed in Fig. Finally, we analyze the influence of a transverse downstep, as depicted in Fig. f , there are trajectories whose outgoing paths are distorted by the decrease of the potential at the edge of the terrace, being deflected below the Laue circle. It gives rise to a diffuse background below the Laue circle, whose intensity is several orders of magnitude lower than those of Bragg peaks. The terrace effects described in Sec. III. A change when the monolayer step is oriented parallel to the axial direction. Analogously to the case of transverse terraces, we determine the relative position of the parallel step by means of the distance d y between the edge of the terrace and the mean focus point, that is, where y step is the step position across the incidence channel ( y) and Y F denotes the mean position of the focus point of the incident beam along y. As a consequence of the symmetry of the problem, only outward steps placed at positive distances d y will be considered in this subsection. Taking into consideration that the transverse length of the surface area that is probed by helium projectiles is much smaller than the axial one, in Fig. To investigate in more detail the asymmetry introduced by parallel steps, in Fig. In this work, the influence of surface defects on GIFAD patterns for the He/LiF(001) system was investigated by considering the presence of a monolayer step in the coherently illuminated region of the crystal target. Our theoretical description was based on the use the SIVR method to represent the grazing scattering process, combined with a PA atom-surface potential In order to simplify the analysis, only two different orientations of the terrace edge -transverse and parallel to the incidence channel -were considered. For transverse up-steps placed close to the focus point of the incident beam, at distances d x smaller than a few hundred Å, simulated projectile distributions display the characteristic Bragg peaks on the Laue circle, along with a diffuse background above the Laue circle, which presents additional central and outermost peaks. The upward step