Hydrogen embrittlement in Zr alloy fuel cladding is a primary safety concern for water based nuclear reactors. Here we investigated the stabilisation of planar defects within the forming hydrides by Sn, the primary alloying element of Zircaloy-4 used in the cladding. In order to explain formation of hydrides and planar defects observed in our experiments, we performed atomic-scale ab initio calculations focusing on the solute interactions with generalized stacking faults in hcp α-Zr and fcc zirconium hydrides. Our calculations showed that an increase in Sn concentration leads to a stabilisation of stacking faults in both α-Zr and hydride phases. However, the solution enthalpy of Sn is lower in the α-Zr as compared to the other hydride phases indicative of two competing processes of Sn depletion/enrichment at the Zr hydride/matrix interface. This is corroborated by experimental findings, where Sn is repelled by hydrides and is mostly found trapped at interfaces and planar defects indicative of stacking faults inside the hydride phases. Our systematic investigation enables us to understand the presence and distribution of solutes in the hydride phases, which provides a deeper insight into the microstructural evolution of such alloy's properties during its service lifetime. Zirconium-based alloys are commonly used as fuel cladding material in the core of nuclear power reactors because of their low thermal neutron capture cross section and good corrosion resistance While in operation, the fuel cladding is in contact with water, which promotes the oxidation of Zr The wide use of zirconium alloys in nuclear power reactors has motivated numerous studies on pure zirconium and zirconium hydrides over the past few decades Hydride nucleation and growth processes involve dislocation behaviors, including dissociation, spreading motion, recombination and cross-slip, in the basal plane of the α-Zr lattice Details of the experiments underlying this work can be found in Refs. The theoretical investigations were designed to be compared directly to the experimental results. The calculations were carried out using projector augmented wave (PAW) potentials as implemented in the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) In the present work, bulk properties of α-Zr such as the lattice constant and the solution enthalpy of Sn were calculated as a function of its concentrations. The solution enthalpy ∆E s of m substitutional Sn atoms was calculated as where E(Zr n-m Sn m H nx ) is the total energy of a α-Zr or Zr-hydride system consisting of n-m Zr atoms and m substitutional Sn atoms. The chemical potential of hydrogen, E(H), has been determined as the concentration dependent energy difference in the δ-hydride. The same chemical potential of hydrogen has been assumed for the other hydrides, because its determination is more complex in ordered phases. Alternatively, the hydride reference could be replaced by -nE(ZrH x ) + mE(Zr), shifting the reference to the chemical potential of Zr. Eventhough, changing the two references changes the absolute values for the solution enthalpy by up to 1 eV, we have ensured that our qualitative results do not depend on the specific choice. The energy E(Sn) is determined for the I4 1 /amd β-Sn system, but this choice is not relevant when comparing the Sn solublity in different phases. Full volume relaxation was performed in all calculations. A slab supercell was constructed, separated by 10 Å of vacuum from its periodic image, to calculate the generalized stacking fault (GSF) energies. The slab is divided into two blocks of equal atomic layers. When the upper block is subject to a relative displacement by an arbitrary vector, f , parallel to the slip plane as shown in Fig. where A is the area of the glide plane of the supercell. The size and shape of the supercell were never changed with slip displacements. For further reference, the coverage ratio C is defined for substitutional atoms adjacent to the slip plane. For example, when C is equal to 0.25 in Fig. Three hydrides are studied in this work, the metastable ζ phase, which later transforms into δ-ZrH x , is also observed in experiments Figure Hence, the composition profile in Fig. It is further documented from transmission electron microscopy (TEM) that the stacking faults start growing ahead of the hydrides. The crucial question we ask here is the reason behind such an increase in accumulation of Sn in planar features, while the solubility inside the hydrides is apparently small (Fig. To understand and explain why our experiments show a lower solubility of Sn inside the hydrides as compared to the Zr matrix, but at the same time a substantial increase in the Sn concentration along All supercells have been constructed by using these lattice parameters as initial values. Subsequently, the effect of changing the atomic concentration of Sn from 1.04 to 8.33 at.% has been studied. The solution enthalpy of Sn in α-Zr is calculated to be -1.15 eV, the energy gained by the Sn atom with reference to its bulk phase. Here, the supercell is chosen such that one Zr atom is substituted by Sn in a (0001) plane containing eight Zr atoms. In order to understand the interaction of Sn with planar defects, we follow the above mentioned stacking fault structure in α-Zr. At the same time, this means that Sn tends to segregate to these planar defects. Indeed, the solution enthalpy of single Sn in the (0001) plane with 8 atoms (C = 0.125) is lower at the SF (-1.45 eV) as compared to pure Zr without fault (-1.15 eV). Fig. Furthermore, both USE and SFE increase again significantly towards C = 1, and there is an optimum coverage of the glide plane for less than half of a monolayer of Sn atoms. We will now focus on the effect of Sn on the GSF in the different hydride systems. Similar to the previous analysis in α-Zr, Zr is substituted by Sn on the GP in the hydrides for various coverage ratios. We first note that the calculated solution enthalpy of Sn in δ-hydride is 1.81 eV, which is positive, clearly supporting our earlier statement of the larger solubility in α-Zr, where the value was -1.15 eV. The GSF energy profiles are plotted along the ⟨ 211⟩ direction in the fcc {111} plane for the hydrides. As shown in Fig The GSF energy profiles of the three hydrides are plotted in Fig. plane with and without Sn atoms. In the case of the ε-hydride it is seen from Fig. For (unrealistically) high coverage ratios of more than 50% in the GP the lattice becomes even unstable. For the case of γ-ZrH as shown in Fig. Since the effect of Sn is most substantial for the ε-ZrH 2 hydride and its SSF, Sn has a strong segregation effect to stacking faults in particular in regions with high H concentrations. Also in the other hydrides with different H content, the addition of Sn yields a substantial softening of the energy profiles particularly for the SSF, but the effect is less pronounced. To convince ourselves that the amount of hydrogen is decisive for the differences between the hydrides and not, for example, the c/a ratio, we have analyzed the Sn impact in ε-ZrH 2 with and without a hydrogen vacancy. Fig. Another way of interpreting these results is the explicit evaluation of the H vacancy formation energy of ε-ZrH 2 with and without Sn as shown in Fig 6b . It is seen that independent of the deformation, the vacancy formation energy of H is much lower in the presence of Sn as compared to pristine ε-ZrH 2 . This indicates that Sn is strongly attracted by these vacancies. The segregation to the stacking faults is, therefore, mainly a consequence of avoiding H-rich environments as present in the bulk hydride phases. Indeed the positive solution enthalpy of Sn in δ-hydride (1.81 eV) is substantially reduced to -0.59 eV, when stacking faults are present inside the hydride. The results outlined in the previous section suggest a complex interplay of the compositiondependent formation energies of planar defects and the segregation behaviour of Sn solutes in all relevant phases. Together, these insights explain the experimentally observed phenomena reported above, in particular the accumulation of Sn at planar features in the hydrides. As outlined in the last section, the direct segregation of Sn atoms solved in the hydride to the forming stacking faults, is one possible mechanism. The moderate annealing at 400 ○ C for 5 h will, however, limit the kinetics of segregation. An alternative mechanism for the microstructural evolution next to a grain boundary (GB) is schematically depicted in Fig. It is assumed that this process is kinetically more likely than the diffusion in the bulk hydride phase itself. Next to the hydrides the formation of planar defects has been observed. The presence of stacking faults could be explained by a strain accumulation, originating from the lattice mismatch between the forming hydride and α-Zr matrix. Wang et al. As the stacking faults grow into α-Zr, they get stabilised by the presence of Sn as suggested by the above calculations. As a consequence, the Sn atoms that are accumulated locally at the growth front of the hydride are attracted to the stacking faults as depicted schematically in Fig 7b The DFT results have shown (Fig. The energetics of this mechanism is depicted in terms of the Sn solution enthalpy in Fig. Step 3 is the transfer of Sn from a stacking fault in α-Zr into a stacking fault in the δ-hydride. It is denoted by a dashed arrow, because the increase in solution enthalpy indicates a missing driving force for Sn diffusion in this direction. Instead the step is determined by the transformation of the matrix phase into the hydride phase and the subsequent formation of stacking faults therein due to the Sn enrichment. The driving force for Sn to find its way out of the hydride again (opposite direction of arrow 3), is much reduced as compared to the one in step 1. Additionally, the corresponding kinetics of the Sn atoms is assumed to be slower as well. The overall change in the solution enthalpy is the same for both mechanisms. However, the comparison of the solution enthalpies of Sn in stacking faults of α-Zr and hydrides (Fig. In general, the introduction of Sn in hydrides lowers the SFE depending on the structural symmetry and therefore reduces the structural stability. The reduction effect by Sn is increasing with the hydrogen content in the hydride phases. At the same time, the stacking fault energy under Sn free conditions is also increasing with the Sn content. Therefore, the overall impact of Sn containing SFs on structural stability and deformation mechanisms is comparable in all hydrides. In summary, using ab initio simulations of the effect of Sn on the stacking faults in hcp α-Zr and in fcc zirconium hydrides allowed us to propose an interesting multi-step mechanisms for the microstructure formation during hydride growth in Zircaloy-4. The DFT simulations of the hcp α-Zr phase showed that an increase in Sn concentration leads to a stabilisation of the stacking fault structure up to a optimal coverage of 40 atm % of the glide plane. A similar attraction to stacking faults is also observed in the fcc hydride phases. The dominant contribution to the thermodynamic driving force of Sn to segregate to stacking faults is its interaction with H. Sn shows a much lower solubility in Zr-hydrides than in pure α-Zr, while the presence of H vacancies improves the solubility ε-ZrH 2 . The trend continues with an increasing number of H vacancies in the hydrides, yielding lower stacking fault energies in γ-ZrH as compared to ε-ZrH 2 . From the experiment it is seen that a series of hydrides is formed at each side of the GB. Small pockets of pure Zr are found along side the hydride phases. With our analysis we understand not only a Sn decoration of stacking faults, but also the reason for the formation of stacking faults inside the hydride. The chemical stabilization of the defects by Sn, which would otherwise not be present, belongs to the category of defect phases IM and BG are grateful for the Max-Planck Society and the BMBF for the funding of the Laplace and the UGSLIT projects respectively, for both instrumentation and personnel. BG and PC are