The signal-to-noise ratio of a multistage cascade network is often estimated using Friis formulas for noise factors (or the noise figures in decibel). In this letter, the correct formulas to calculate the stage-wise noise factors and the total noise factor in terms of the stage-wise noise factors of an n-stage cascade network are derived. A comparison of our derived formulas for noise factors with Friis's formulas is presented. Contrary to Friis's total noise factor in terms of the stage-wise noise factors, we define the actual total noise factor of the n-stage cascade network as the product of its stage-wise noise factors. Cascade systems are widely used in various electrical and electronics engineering domains such as telecommunications and signal processing In this letter, we briefly discuss the existing theory to calculate the noise factors of a cascade structure and the well-known Friis formulas for the stage-wise and the total noise factors of a cascade structure. We then derive the correct formulas for the stage-wise noise factor and the total noise factor in terms of the stage-wise noise factors of n-stage cascade networks. Our derived formulas are then compared with Friis's formulas, with a discussion on the correction required to Friis noise factors. Fig. The total noise factor of the n-stage cascade network (F T ) is defined as the ratio of input SNR to output SNR (1) According to Friis Substituting equation ( Therefore, Friis defines the total noise factor (F Friis T ) in terms of the stage-wise noise factors (F Friis x ) of an n-stage cascade network as For cascade networks, the output of the previous stage will be the input to the next stage. Therefore, the stage-wise noise factor must be equal to the ratio of SNR at the input of the stage to SNR at the output of the corresponding stage Solving equation ( From equation ( Therefore, the correct generalized formula for the stage-wise noise factor at the x-th stage (F Cor x ) must be, Comparing equations ( n . Therefore, our formula for the stage-wise noise factor is a correction to Friis's formula. Moreover, the correct generalized formula for the stage-wise noise factor at the x-th stage in terms of the stage-wise noise factors of the previous stages is written as, x Figure Rearranging equation ( Therefore, the correct total noise factor of the nstage cascade network (F Cor T ) in terms of the stagewise noise factors (F Cor x ) is given by equation We conclude that our derived formulas for the stagewise noise factor for stages x ≥ 2 and the total noise factor in terms of the stage-wise noise factors of the n-stage cascade network are a correction to Friis's formulas.