Magnetic droplet soliton is a localized dynamic spin state which can serve as a nanoscale information carrier and nonlinear oscillator. The present opinion is that the formation of droplet solitons requires the compensation of magnetic damping by a torque created by a spin-polarized electric current or pure spin current. Here we demonstrate theoretically that nanoscale droplet solitons can be generated and routed in ferromagnetic nanostructures with voltage-controlled magnetic anisotropy in the presence of uncompensated magnetic damping. Performing micromagnetic simulations for the MgO/Fe/MgO trilayer with almost perpendicular-to-plane magnetization, we reveal the formation of the droplet soliton under a nanoscale gate electrode subjected to a sub-nanosecond voltage pulse. The soliton lives up to 50 ns at room temperature and can propagate over micrometer distances in a ferromagnetic waveguide due to nonzero gradient of the demagnetizing field. Furthermore, we show that an electrical routing of the soliton to different outputs of a spintronic device can be realized with the aid of an additional semiconducting nanostripe electrode creating controllable gradient of the perpendicular magnetic anisotropy. Magnetic droplet soliton is a type of strongly selflocalized mode of magnetization oscillations. Early theoretical studies predicted that a conservative version of such a soliton could form in an ideal ferromagnet having no magnetic damping In STNOs, the soliton forms under the nanocontact owing to local magnetization reversal induced by the spin-transfer torque. The droplet size is governed by the nanocontact size and can exceed the latter significantly In this paper, we show theoretically that droplet solitons can be created and routed in ferromagnetic nanolayers without compensation of magnetic damping. This opportunity appears in ferromagnet-dielectric heterostructures having strong interfacial PMA, which can be reduced significantly by an electric field created in the dielectric nanolayer. Such a voltage-controlled magnetic anisotropy (VCMA) represents an efficient tool for the excitation of magnetic dynamics in ferromagnetic nanolayers, including the precessional magnetization switching We model the dynamics of the magnetization M(r, t) in a (001)-oriented Fe nanolayer grown on MgO(001) and capped with an ultrathin MgO overlayer (Fig. to-plane (PP) orientation of M becomes energetically favorable in the MgO/Fe/MgO structure where K 1 and K 2 are the coefficients of the fourth-and sixth-order terms defining the cubic magnetocrystalline anisotropy of bulk Fe at constant lattice strains u, B 1 is the magnetoelastic constant, c 11 and c 12 denote the elastic stiffnesses at fixed magnetization, u xx and u yy are the substrate-induced in-plane (IP) strains of the Fe nanolayer, while K s , K s , K s⊥ and K s , K s , K s⊥ are the parameters characterizing the magnetic anisotropy created by the bottom and top Fe|MgO interfaces, respectively. The factor 1/t F in the last three terms reflects the introduction of only one computational cell in the thickness direction z, which is justified by the condition In our simulations, the numerical integration of the LLG equation is carried out using the projective Runge-Kutta algorithm with the time step of 10 fs, which is much smaller than the duration τ V > 0.1 ns of the rectangular voltage pulses applied to the gate electrode. To make possible a nonparametric excitation of the magnetic dynamics by VCMA, we introduce an IP magnetic field H||[110] creating an oblique orientation of the equilibrium magnetization We first consider the heterostructure of a circular shape, which includes a nanoscale gate electrode on top of the MgO overlayer (Fig. In accordance with the available experimental data The simulations show that the initial magnetic state of the considered 0.75-nm-thick Fe disk is practically homogeneous. Owing to strong PMA of such a nanolayer, the deviation of the magnetization vector M from the PP orientation, which is induced by the external IP magnetic field H, appears to be small even at the strongest field H = 400 Oe used in our simulations. At the chosen field orientation along the [110] crystallographic direction, which represents the easy axis of the nanolayer's IP anisotropy due to the condition K 1 +(K s +K s )/t F < 0, the mean value of the magnetization polar angle θ is found to be less than 8 • (see Appendix). In the study of electrically induced magnetization dynamics, we consider the MgO/Fe/MgO heterostructures subjected to rectangular voltage pulses with the duration τ V ranging from 0.1 to 1 ns. The pulse amplitude is set to -4 V, at which the electric field E z in the 2-nm-thick MgO nanolayer is below its breakdown field E b ≈ 2.4 V nm -1 the switched region represents a magnetic droplet soliton. Figure The soliton lifetime τ S depends on the pulse duration τ V , gate radius R G , and strength of external magnetic field H. By analyzing the results of simulations performed at different values of τ V , we find that the optimal pulse duration τ * V , which maximizes the soliton lifetime, corresponds to the minimum of the quantity At a fixed magnetic field, the optimal duration τ * V first grows with the increasing gate radius R G (see Appendix). However, above some threshold radius R th two or three solitons form under the gate instead of one. In what follows we present only the results of simulations performed for the heterostructures involving gates with R G < R th subjected to voltage pulses of the optimal duration τ * V (R G , H). Variations of the soliton lifetime τ S with the gate radius and the field strength are presented in Fig. To evaluate the influence of thermal fluctuations on the soliton lifetime, we carry out additional simulations with the account of a stochastic Gaussian noise. In these simulations, the effective field H eff involved in the LLG equation includes a thermal random field H th in the form employed by the MuMax3 software Next, it is important to determine how far the generated droplet soliton can propagate along a ferromagnetic waveguide. To address this question, we carry out micromagnetic simulations for the MgO/Fe/MgO trilayer with a rectangular shape, representative IP dimensions L x = 1.5 μm and L y = 300 nm, and a circular gate electrode placed near the waveguide beginning [see Fig. Figure Finally, we describe an efficient method of electrical routing of the droplet solitons to different outputs of a spintronic device. Such a routing can be realized in the MgO/Fe/MgO-based structure shown in Fig. The demonstrated electrical control of the soliton trajectory makes it possible to transfer the magnetic signal to one of several outputs of the device. The signal can be read electrically with the aid of a magnetic tunnel junction (MTJ) formed by a nanoscale ferromagnetic electrode deposited on the upper MgO nanolayer and the underlying region of the Fe interlayer. Indeed, owing to the phenomenon of spin-dependent tunneling, the MTJ resistance changes strongly after the magnetization reversal in one of ferromagnetic electrodes In summary, we theoretically studied the electrically driven magnetization dynamics in the MgO/Fe/MgO trilayer with the voltage-controlled magnetic anisotropy. The micromagnetic simulations demonstrated that the application of a sub-nanosecond voltage pulse to the nanoscale gate electrode placed on the MgO nanolayer gives rise to the formation of the magnetic droplet soliton despite the presence of nonzero magnetic damping. The soliton lifetime, which depends on the gate size and the strength of in-plane external magnetic field, can reach 50 ns at room temperature and 100 ns in the absence of thermal fluctuations. When generated near the edge of the Fe microstripe, the soliton can propagate over a distance exceeding one micrometer with the mean speed about 40 m s -1 owing to the existing gradient of the demagnetizing field. By passing a small electric current density ∼ 10 8 A m -2 along additional Si nanostripe electrode, we also achieved an efficient electrical routing of the soliton in the extended Fe interlayer. Our theoretical results provide guidelines for the development of an energy-efficient information-processing device based on the electrical generation, propagation, and routing of magnetic solitons. The device converts the input voltage signal into the magnetic information carrier, which propagates to one of several outputs. The desired output is selected by the voltage applied to the routing electrode and involves the magnetic tunnel junction, which provides electrical reading of the output signal via the measurement of the junction's resistance.