Realizing effective manipulation and explicit identification of topological spin textures are two crucial ingredients to make them as information carrier in spintronic devices with high storage density, high data handling speed and low energy consumption. Electric-field manipulation of magnetism has been achieved as a dissipationless method compared with traditional regulations. However, the magnetization is normally insensitive to the electric field since it does not break time-reversal symmetry directly, and distribution of topological magnetic quasiparticles is difficult to maintain due to the drift arising from external fluctuation, which could result in ambiguous recognition between quasiparticles and uniform magnetic background. Here, we demonstrate that electric polarization-driven skyrmionic and uniform ferromagnetic states can be easily and explicitly distinguished by transverse voltage arising from anomalous valley Hall effect in the Janus magnet-based multiferroic heterostructure LaClBr/In2Se3. Our work provides an alternative approach for data encoding, in which data are encoded by combing topological spin textures with detectable electronic transport. Controlling magnetism by electric field is the fundamental avenue for realizing highefficiency and extremely low-power consumption memories and logic devices For example, the switchable topological edge states, valley polarization, and metal-tosemiconductor phase transition are found in bilayer-Bi(111)/In2Se3 and β-Sb/In2Se3, HfN2/CrI3/In2Se3, and CrI3/Sc2CO2, respectively Here, employing the first-principles calculations and atomistic spin model simulations, we propose a type of magnetoelectric effect which can be realized in 2D Janus-based multiferroic vdW HS, LaXY/In2Se3 (X/Y=Cl, Br, I, X≠Y), where LaXY can be constructed by replacing one of halogen atom in 2H-LaX2 and considered as an ideal candidate to realize FEcontrolled electronic states and topological magnetic quasiparticles since it combines longrange ferromagnetism, robust valley polarization and inversion symmetry breaking-allowed DMI All first-principles calculations are performed using the density functional theory (DFT) as implemented in the Vienna ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) code Figure The structural stability, including the phonon dispersions (Figure Table where is a unit vector representing the orientation of the spin of the ith La atom, and 〈 , !〉 represents the nearest-neighbor (NN) La atom pairs. The magnetic parameters K, J, and in the first three terms represent the magnetic anisotropy, exchange coupling, and interatomic DMI, respectively. And the and in the last term represent the magnetic moment of La and external magnetic field, respectively. Here we adopt the sign convention that K>0 and K<0 The calculated details about these parameters are explained in Section S4 of Supplementary material, and the results are shown in Table We then calculate the NN exchange coupling with magnetization along positive directions of x, y, z axis, Jxx, Jyy, Jzz, and spin-orbit coupling (SOC) effects are also considered in calculations. We find that the NN exchange coupling of all systems remain FM state and are almost isotropic along different directions, indicating that the average of magnetic coupling parameter J can be defined to represents coefficient of the second term in the Eq. ( The easy magnetization orientation of LaClBr/In2Se3 is along +z and it can be turned form OOP to IP by overcoming an energy barrier of 10 and 9 meV for LaClBr/P↓ and P↑, respectively. When we rotate the magnetization from -z to +z axis, the valley polarization for P↓(P↑) defined as the energy different between VBM at +K and -K, ∆E = EVBM,+K-EVBM,-K, varies from -26.09 (-24.43) to 26.09 (24.43) meV [Figure / 0 12 .3 45 42 . 6 3 782 . 6 3 95 92 .3 : (; < =; < 6 ) > .?. 6 . (2) where -. is Fermi-Dirac distribution function, 5 ( ) is velocity operator along x(y) direction, and 2 .3 is Bloch wave function with eigenvalue En. Figure As shown by labelled shadow in Figure In summary, we systematically investigate the chiral spin configurations in real space and electronic band structures in reciprocal space by modulating FE polarization of 2D vdW multiferroic LaXY/In2Se3 HS via the first-principles calculations and atomistic simulation. The strength of DMI decrease apparently when the polar orientation is turned from P↓ to P↑, resulting in skyrmions in domain walls are transformed into uniform ferromagnetism. By applying OOP or IP magnetic field, the skyrmion or bimeron solitons can be achieved in P↓, respectively. The generation of these topological magnetic quasiparticles could be used as a carrier of information transmission in spintronic devices. On the other hand, the electronic band structures are modulated easily by reversal of electrical polarization of LaXY/In2Se3 HS. Especially for LaClBr/In2Se3 HS, the metal-to-semiconductor phase transition is realized by flipping the polarization states from down to up, accompanied with valley polarization emergence. Detailed analysis demonstrates that charge transfers between LaClBr and In2Se3 layer play a crucial role in band alignments of HS: when P↓ is reversed to P↑ state, the conduction bands are lifted away from the Fermi level due to the reduce of the interlayer transferred charge. Therefore, the unambiguous recognition of different spin configurations is realized under the assistance of AVHE. Our work provides an alternative approach for data encoding, in which a data can be encoded by combing chiral spin configuration with untrivial electronic effects. of LaXY/In2Se3 HSs by shifting or rotating the position of LaXY layer. The site of each atom in LaXY is provided at the top of each stacking sequence. The total energies of 12 optimized structures for LaXY/P↓, and the energy for LaXY/P↑ corresponding to the most stable stacking configuration is labeled in Figure In these four states, the spins of all the other spin sites are the same and are along the y axis, and corresponding ∥ equals , where the ∥ >0 and ∥ <0 favor spin configuration with anticlockwise and clockwise, respectively All atomistic spin model simulations of LaXY/In2Se3 HSs are performed using the VAMPIRE package where is a unit vector representing the direction of the magnetic spin moment of site i, j is the gyromagnetic ratio, and the damping constant λ is set to 0.2. f Agg is the net magnetic field on each spin and is obtained from , where H is spin Hamiltonian of LaXY/In2Se3 HSs. 