Low-dimensional ferroelectricity and polar materials have attracted considerable attentions for their fascinating physics and potential applications. Based on first-principles calculations, here we investigate the stacking modes and polar properties of a typical series of quasi-one-dimensional ferroelectrics: double-chain oxyhalides NbOX3 (X=Cl, Br, and I). The geometry of their double-chains allows both the interchain/intrachain permutation. Thus, different stacking modes of double-chains lead to a variety of ferroelectric and antiferroelectric phases in both the tetragonal and the monoclinic crystals. The proximate energies of these phases may lead to multiphase coexistence in real materials, as well as the hydrostatic pressure driving structural phase transition. Their spontaneous polarizations and piezoelectricity of the ferroelectric phases are prominent, comparable to commercially used ferroelectric BaTiO3 and piezoelectric ZnO, respectively. Our paper demonstrates that the van der Waals NbOX3 are promising materials for exploring quasi-one-dimensional ferroelectricity and antiferroelectricity. Ferroelectrics with spontaneous electric polarizations have stimulated great interests in condensed matter and material communities, due to their significant scientific importance and wide applications in devices When FE-related devices are reduced to nanoscale, traditional three-dimensional (3D) FE materials may become incompetent, since their ferroelectric properties are usually severely suppressed due to the depolarization field and surface reconstruction with dangling bonds Later, intrinsic ferroelectricity has also been achieved or predicted in many monolayers or few-layers, most of which are exfoliated from van der Waals (vdW) materials The dimension of FE materials can be further reduced to one-dimensional (1D). For example, organic PVDF-TrFE nanowire NbOX 3 (X=Cl, Br, and I) bulks with vdW interactions between 1D double-chains were experimentally synthesized many years ago In this paper, we thoroughly investigate the stability and polarity of NbOX 3 bulk structures using firstprinciples calculations. The different stacking patterns of these 1D double-chains lead to the presence of seven possible polar phases within the tetragonal and monoclinic frameworks. Our calculation confirms that the displacements of Nb ions break the local inversion symmetry, which lead to robust ferroelectricity or antiferroelectricity in bulks. The proximate energies of FE and AFE phases allow possible MPB's in these systems, whereas the original experimental x-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns might miss the FE phase. Furthermore, a moderate hydrostatic pressure can tune the phase transitions between the tetragonal and the monoclinic structures. Our first-principles density functional theory (DFT) calculations are carried out using the Vienna ab initio simulation package in the framework of density functional theory The energy cutoff for the plane-wave basis is set to be 520 eV. The Monkhorst-Pack k-mesh of 3 × 3 × 9 is adopted for the Brillouin zone (BZ) sampling for both the tetragonal and monoclinic lattices. The lattice constants and ionic positions are fully optimized until the residual force on each atom is less than 0.005 eV/ Å. The energy convergence criterion is set to be 10 -6 eV. Besides, to accurately describe the vdW interaction between doublechains, zero damping DFT-D3 of Grimme correction is applied Dynamical stability is demonstrated by phonon spectral calculations based on finite differences and PHONOPY In recent years, machine learning interatomic potentials becomes more and more popular to predict material structures and properties Besides the ground state, the thermal stability has also been checked using the ab-initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) simulations. Such as WOX 4 and VOI 2 Since the nominal value of Nb is +5 here, its 4d 0 electron configuration will be a primary driving force for polar instability. According to the experimental structure, all Nb ions exhibit relative displacements from the center of octahedra along the Nb-O-Nb 1D chain direction, leading to local dipoles. In the previous study, two polar structures of 1D NbOX 3 double-chain have been explored Their calculations found the 1D FE phase is energetically more stable than the AFE one (0.1/1.0/1.1 meV/Nb for Cl/Br/I) In the following, we will explore the polarity of NbOX 3 beyond the simple 1D double-chain, but focus on the more realistic bulks. Since its unit cell contains a pair of 1D double-chains, there are more possible configurations, including: (1) the bulk FE states with all Nb dipoles pointing to the same directions (++, ++); (2) the bulk AFE phases (named as AFE-1) consisted of 1D FE double-chains with opposite dipoles (++, --); (3) the AFE-2 (+-, -+) and AFE-3 (+-, +-) structures consisted of 1D AFE double-chains with different stacking modes, as shown in Fig. Our calculated results are summarized in Table Surprisingly, it is noted that the calculated ground states of both NbOCl 3 and NbOBr 3 are tetragonally FE (teFE) phases, which are slightly lower in energy (∼ 1 meV/u.c.) than the tetragonal AFE-1 (teAFE-1) expected from the experimental structure To verify this hypothesis, we simulated the powder XRD patterns of tetragonal NbOCl 3 using vesta Taking the tetragonal NbOCl 3 and monoclinic NbOI 3 as examples, the phonon spectra and symmetry analyses are performed to investigate the dynamic stability and the evolution of phases. As shown in Fig. Similar analyses are also performed for monoclinic NbOI 3 . As shown in Fig. More phonon spectra of monoclinic NbOCl 3 , tetragonal NbOI 3 , and monoclinic/tetragonal NbOBr 3 can be found in the SM (Figs. S3-S6) To investigate possible structural phase transition, the structures of NbOI 3 are optimized under hydrostatic pressures. The enthalpies are compared to determined the possible ground states under the pressure, as shown in Fig. The vdW interaction between chains make the material softer on the ab plane. For the monoclinic phase, the b axis is even more softer than the a axis, in agreement with the intuitive view of its structure [Fig. The polarization is a key physical quantity of a FE material. Here the spontaneous polarizations of NbOCl 3 /NbOBr 3 /NbOI 3 are estimated to be 24.3/19.8/14.2 μC/cm 2 for tetragonal FE phases, and 27.2/20.0/15.27 μC/cm 2 for monoclinic FE phases, respectively, as shown in Fig. The ferroelectricity of NbOX 3 can be described by a classical polarization model based on the Landau-Ginzburg-Devonshire formula ) where P 1 and P 2 denote the (local) polarization from double-chains 1 and 2, respectively, and the last item corresponds to the interchain coupling. All these coefficients can be obtained by fitting the polarizationpotential curves. The coefficients of the NbOX 3 FE phases and the fitting polarization-energy barrier curves are shown as Table Besides ferroelectricity, piezoelectricity is another important physical property for FE materials. Crystallographic symmetry analysis shows that the elastic matrix C's have 7 and 13 independent non-zero coefficients for the tetragonal and monoclinic lattices respectively where S denotes the tensor of the elastic compliance coefficient (S = C -1 ). The key piezoelectric coefficient d 33 represents the piezoelectric constant when the polarization direction is the same as the stress direction. Here the calculated piezoelectric d 33 's are 34.6/36.9/60.1 pC/N for FE tetragonal NbOCl 3 /NbOBr 3 and monoclinic NbOI 3 phases, respectively. All these d 33 's are larger than those of quasi-1D WOX 4 (where their d 33 =27.3/27.7/39.8 pC/N for X = F/Cl/Br) The thermal stablility has also been checked. With a 1 × 1 × 5 supercell, our AIMD simulations at 500 K for 5 ps show robust structures for both the tetragonal NbOX 3 (X=Cl/Br) and monoclinic NbOI 3 , as shown in Fig. Furthermore, the SOC has also been tested on the NbOI 3 ground state, which owns the heaviest atom iodine. However, the lattice constants, band gap, and polarization are almost unchanged with SOC, as shown in Table To summarize, the quasi-1D NbOX 3 bulks have been systematically studied, going beyond the individual double-chain scenario but considering more relastic fact of inter-chain interactions. From the parent PE phases, seven possible FE or AFE states are derived according to the symmetry analyses, whose dynamic stabilities are further confirmed by phonon spectra. The FE and AFE phases are energetically proximate, which may allow the coexisting in real materials at ambient conditions. And for NbOI 3 the monoclinic to tetragonal structural transition can be triggered by a small hydrostatic pressure. The polarities of FE NbOX 3 are prominent, with considerable spontaneous polarizations, moderate switching barriers, and large piezoelectric d 33 coefficients, which allow promising potentials for applications.