We demonstrate that surface morphogenesis in compressed thin films may result from spatially correlated plastic activity. A soft glassy film strongly adhering to a smooth and rigid substrate and subjected to uniaxial compression, indeed, does not undergo any global elastic pattern-forming instability, but responds plastically via localized burst events that self-organize, leading to the emergence of a series of parallel ridges transverse to the compression axis. This phenomenon has been completely overlooked, but results from common features of the plastic response of glasses, hence should be highly generic for compressed glassy thin films. Few physical phenomena are more fascinating than morphogenesis, the spontaneous emergence of shapes in materials that are out of equilibrium as a result of, e.g., internal growth or chemical processes or in response to external driving forces. A case of primary interest, which plays a prominent role in a variety of natural and technological processes ranging from thin film metrology Theoretical studies of pattern formation in athermally compressed films have almost exclusively focused on cases when the phenomenon results from elastic instabilities taking place well below the material yield stress. The hallmark of these studies is the wrinkling instability, which may occur at rather low strains, from a few percent to much smaller values, depending on conditions, yet is only relevant to thin films that are either stiffer than the substrate Meanwhile, surprisingly little attention has been dedicated to the possible role of plasticity in surface morphogenesis in compressed films. While some experiments clearly point to the occurrence of plastic strains accompanying, e.g., the growth of surface ridges or labyrinthine patterns Here, we demonstrate that surface structures may emerge solely as a result of correlated plastic activity, in the absence of any macroscopic elastic instability. This phenomenon is relevant to thin films having a low elastic limit, such as biofilms, metal or oxide layers, adhering strongly to a rigid substrate. The relevant macroscopic elastic instability, creasing, would then occur much beyond the elastic limit of the material and is thus superseded by plasticity. Using atomistic simulations we demonstrate that multiple parallel ridges transverse to the compression axis emerge as a result of the spatially correlated accumulation of burst events corresponding to a local upward motion of the material. The emergence of multiple ridges results from a type of interrupted strain localization: (i) local bursts give rise to long-range, spatially anisotropic, Eshelby fields, which promote avalanches transverse to the compression axis; (ii) occasionally, a single massive avalanche facilitates (nucleates) strain localization, which is then sustained for a large macroscopic strain interval, thus causing the emergence of a single ridge; (iii) eventually this process stops, plastic activity abruptly delocalizes and almost immediately relocalizes elsewhere, thus leading to the emergence of another ridge. The iteration of this nonstationary process eventually gives rise to the emergence of multiple parallel ridges. Molecular Dynamics simulations are performed using the atomistic model defined in Due to the Poisson effect, we expect that, during the initial elastic response of the film, the mean stresses verify σ xx = νσ yy , with ν 0.4 the 2D Poisson ratio. Both of these stresses (and them only), respond macroscopically to uniaxial compression, and must hence be released by the consequent plastic activity. A typical example of film response is described in Fig. It must be emphasized that, although these stresses appear to plateau beyond 0.04, the system, by construction, cannot reach a steady state: we are examining an intrinsically transient phenomenon. The core finding of our work is evidenced by the height maps of panel (a): the plastic deformation of the film results in the progressive emergence of a series of ridges transverse to the compression axis. Moreover, ridges appear in sequence, one after another, which demonstrates that the plastic activity is not only spatially correlated along ridge lines, but also concentrates on the emergence of single ridges over finite macroscopic strain intervals. In order to evidence this effect, we consider the local x-averaged height change, ∆H x (y; ), as accumulated over slightly coarse strain steps to enhance legibility, and report it in Fig. The most striking and fundamental aspect of this whole process is that the plastic activity concentrates along lines transverse to the compression axis, thus enabling the formation of ridges. In order to understand why it is so, we first examine, in Fig. Why would such events self-organize into ridges? In the light of bulk plasticity studies, we expect that this might arise from the stress changes they induce in their surroundings. Taking advantage of our thin film geometry, we focus on the α, β = x or y components of stress. Moreover, we note that thanks to the boundary conditions (zero stress on the upper surface and free sliding on the bottom), the integrated stress τ αβ ≡ dz σ αβ (α, β = x, y) is divergence-free, i.e., can be interpreted as a 2D stress In doing so, we have diagonalized the mechanical problem, in the sense that loading now only drives τ u , but not τ ⊥ which, as we observed in Fig. We display in panel (d) the change ∆τ u of the uniaxial stress induced by event E 1 inside a square region around the event core: this field presents marked anisotropies. As explained by Eshelby where ρ u is the elastic dipole characterizing the event, r = x 2 + y 2 and θ = arctan(y/x) . We have numerically extracted the cos(2θ) and cos(4θ) components from the field ∆τ u induced by E 1 and by a few other localized events, and have thus checked that they do systematically present the expected 1/r 2 decay. The Eshelby prediction for E 1 (after matching the corresponding dipole ρ u ), reported in Fig. The angular prefactor 2πr 2 ∆τ u /ρ u vs θ, plotted in Fig. From plasticity studies In bulk plasticity, these biases are documented to induce strain-instantaneous plastic avalanches Two main questions remain about the phenomenology identified in Fig. We now see that event E 2 takes place when σ u x,z fluctuates around -1.5 throughout the film, which provides a scale of the yield stress σ y prist u in the pristine material. Right after the event, σ u has dropped significantly (in absolute value) inside the first ridge, compared with the rest of the system, due to the local increase in height. The observed persistence of plastic activity in this ridge implies that the material there is flowing at significantly smaller stress (in absolute value) than σ y prist u : this is similar to shear localization in bulk materials, and merely signals that the damage (rejuvenation) induced by the ridge inception event (and possibly its precursors [23]) significantly reduce the local yield stress Here, the second ridge is triggered when σ u x,z reaches about -1.4 (not shown); and the third (see = 0.112 in panel (c)), when it reaches about -1.5. In conclusion, we have identified a new mechanism of surface morphogenesis in uniaxially compressed thin films, leading to the emergence of a series of parallel ridges due to the accumulation of spatially correlated local burst events. We showed that plasticity is controlled by single stress, σ u , which synthesizes the whole stress response to uniaxial compression and that the σ u -releasing burst events give rise to anisotropic Eshelby fields, causing the occurrence of massive avalanches, contributing to the emergence of measurable fractions of full-blown ridges. Following a large avalanche, the plastic activity localizes in y, thus leading to the progressive emergence of a ridge. This process, however, eventually stops as the local increase in height causes an inversely proportional evolution of the local stress, which eventually crosses under (in absolute value) the flow stress of the damaged material. The emergence of a series of parallel ridges thus results from a form of interrupted strain localization, enabled by the contrast between the yield stresses of the pristine (undamaged) material and rejuvenated (damaged) one, and by the decay of stress at ridge locations imposed by the thin film geometry. This mechanism of surface morphogenesis drastically contrasts with the formation of ridges, or wrinkles, arising from elastic instabilities. Yet, it appears to be rather generic, as it merely follows from commonly found features of the plastic response of glassy materials. We thus believe that it has been overlooked in the past patternformation literature, primarily due to the absence of a theoretical framework, and possibly due to experimental difficulties in characterizing microscale plasticity in thin films. Our findings imply that, whenever there are experimental hints of plastic activity during pattern formation, one must envision that plasticity may be a main driver for pattern formation. We want to show that our elastic problem can be reduced to a 2D problem. In doing so, it is worthwhile to do a recap of the problem, in particular its geometry and boundary conditions. Consider a box with flat faces, except the upper one in the (x, y) plane with a profile given by H = H(x, y). Suppose it is traction free everywhere except some normal tractions acting on the lower surface in the (x, y) plane and on both surfaces in the (x, z) plane. The stress inside the system σ ij = σ ij (x, y, z), with i and j in {x, y, z}, must satisfy the three equilibrium equations: Now integrating each component along z and writing them explicitly, one obtains : We can separate all these integrals in two classes according to whether the integrand has a partial derivative respect to z or not. The first kind of integrals are of the form: since the traction is zero on the top of the system. For the second class of integrals, we can bring the partial derivative out of the integral sign using the Leibniz integral rule: for Thanks to the traction free conditions at the top, we furthermore observe that: So, we have obtained that in our case the following equality holds: Now defining τ αβ ≡ H 0 dz σ αβ , where α, β = {x, y}, and putting together Eq. ( The first two equations can be interpreted as the mechanical balance (divergence-free condition) of a 2D problem with stress τ αβ . Let us emphasize that our rigorous proof did not require any assumption regarding the height H or the degree of deformation. We display in Fig. In Fig. 