Organic solar cells (OSCs) based on ADA-type (acceptor-donor-acceptor) nonfullerene acceptors (NFAs) exhibit improved power conversion efficiency (PCE) compared to the conventional fullerene-based analogues. The optoelectronic properties of the OSC active layer are correlated to the underlying structural dynamics of the active layer blend, and therefore influence the device performance. Using synergistically different neutron spectroscopy techniques, we studied the dynamics of binary and ternary blends made of the non-fullerene acceptors O-IDTBR and O-IDFBR, and the regioregular donor polymer poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT). Considering key factors like structural relaxation, miscibility and morphology, within a chosen temperature range, we probed the dynamical responses of the neat phases and the blends using time-of The active layer of polymeric organic solar cells (OSCs) is composed of an electron-donating polymer and (an) electron-accepting small-molecule semiconductor(s). The electron-accepting organic semiconductors, which have been developed to date, can be broadly separated into two classes: (i) fullerene acceptors and (ii) non-fullerene acceptors (NFAs). Although NFAs were developed early on for vacuum-deposited OSCs, fullerene acceptors have been dominating the field since the introduction of the first solution-processed bulk heterojunction due to their compatibility with a large range of donor materials and relative ease of processing. Recently, ADA-type (Acceptor-Donor-Acceptor) NFAs started to compete with fullerene acceptors. Although kinetically trapping a favourable microstructure seems a good strategy, it is in practice challenging and the time evolution of such a microstructure can be detrimental to the lifetime of the OSCs. Introducing a second acceptor with a high-enough miscibility with the donor polymer to reach electron percolation has proven to be an efficient strategy to stabilise the morphology. The measured activation energies ranged from 30 to about 45 kcal.mol -1 . Those activation energies are significantly larger than the activation energy of 13 kcal.mol -1 measured for the diffusion of fullerene derivative [6,6]-Phenyl C61 butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) in P3HT, with 13 kcal.mol -1 is significantly higher than the thermal energy. Within the families of ADA-type NFAs, O-IDTBR 7,14-20 and O-IDFBR In particular, time-of-flight (TOF) quasielastic neutron scattering (QENS) and neutron spin echo (NSE) methods cover together a picosecond-to-nanosecond time window. The time domain can be further extended to shorter time scales using neutron vibrational spectroscopy, dealing with vibrational modes in the femtosecond range. These time scales match perfectly those of the molecular electronic processes, e.g. charge hopping, in the active layers of OSCs. Furthermore, neutrons probe efficiently light elements such as hydrogens, unlike X-rays. Using the deuteration technique offers the unique opportunity of varying efficiently the contrast between different parts of the systems (for instance deuterating the donor in a blend to better highlight the acceptor structural dynamics in the blend). Neutrons do not interfere with the electronic behavior of materials, 31 allowing probing the full Brillouin zone without selection rules. All vibrational modes can hence be mapped out. We previously studied structural dynamics of the fullerene-based blend P3HT:PCBM using TOF-based QENS The QENS technique measures the dynamical structure factor, S(Q, ω), convoluted with an instrumental resolution R(Q, ω). For the samples studied here, the incoherent neutron cross-section is much larger than the coherent neutron cross-section and thus, S(Q, ω) can be well approximated in terms of its incoherent component S inc (Q, ω). S inc (Q, ω), from QENS, and S inc (Q, t), from NSE, are related to each other by a Fourier transform as: Or via the inverse Fourier transform as: Data from QENS and NSE can then be represented in the time domain as: We further quantify the relaxation of the NFAs and compare with the behavior of h-P3HT by fitting S(Q, t, T ) with a stretched exponential: Considering a value of 0.5 for the exponent β is reasonable for polymeric systems. To ensure that the signal is dominated by h-P3HT, we limited the content of acceptors to 25 wt%. Therefore, the content of O-IDFBR is limited to 7.5 wt% in the ternary blend. O-IDFBR has been shown to be more miscible than O-IDTBR and thus, we further study the binary h-P3HT:O-IDFBR and compare it with the binary h-P3HT:O-IDTBR. No significant differences are observed between h-P3HT:O-IDTBR and h-P3HT:O-IDFBR in terms of dynamics nor in terms of structure (Figures In this work, we focused on probing microscopically the structural and dynamical behavior of specific binary and ternary blends, namely polymer:NFA and polymer:NFA1:NFA2, respectively. For the sake of reference and comparison, the study also included the case of a binary blend NFA1:NFA2 and its neat constituents. Neutron spectroscopy is getting recognized as increasingly valuable established tool to study dynamics of these systems at the nanometer length scale, with a suitable time scale coverage relevant to the associated molecular optoelectronic processes of the active layer. In this context, local and relaxational dynamics were investigated combining synergistically QENS and NSE. The former allowed covering the picosecond time domain, which was then extended to the nanosecond region using the latter. QENS and NSE measurements were complemented by INS to probe vibra-tional dynamics, within the femtosecond range. As a polymer we considered the regio-regular P3HT, under both its protonated and deuterated forms. The selected NFA molecules were O-IDTBR and O-IDFBR, under their protonated form. Deuteration allowed to tune the P3HT signal within the blend thanks to the specific isotopic sensitivity of neutrons. Our findings can be summarized as follows: (i) our results confirm the difference in miscibility behavior between O-IDTBR and O-IDFBR reported previously. The change of structural dynamical behaviour between the presently studied NFAs with P3HT and the previously reported fullerene-based case, PCBM with P3HT, is striking. This opens the questions: (i) what is the role of this change in structural dynamical behavior in the improvement of the solar PCE and (ii) how much this structural dynamical behaviour is dictated by the changes in chemical structure? A dedicated thorough computational investigation would, in principle, help providing some answers by gaining deeper insights into these multifaceted aspects. As a perspective, our present studies provide important information about the relationship between chemical structure and structural dynamics and can be used to validate such a computational investigation as proposed previously. Details of the synthesis steps of regio-regular protonated and deuterated P3HT, h-P3HT and d-P3HT, respectively, can be found in reference. Sample preparation Both the neat constituents and the blends were measured. To prepare the blends, the as-received materials were dissolved in chloroform (30 mg/mL) and drop-cast on a glass slide. The drop-cast films were then scratched from the glass substrates and stacked in aluminum foil. Each measured sample was about 400 mg. A small sample thickness of 0.2 mm was used for the neutron, spectroscopy measurements, as it is relevant to the minimization of effects like multiple scattering and absorption. Neutron Diffraction Although this is not the primary goal of neutron spectroscopy, neither intended for a quantitative purpose but rather to make a qualitative observation, diffraction patterns were also extracted from IN5 and IN6 measurements in terms the energyaveraged quasielastic component of the TOF signal. Further technicalities and details of data reduction, treatment and analysis can be found in reference 