We developed a grain growth model that is based on the energy minimisation of surfaces with respect to the volume energy and the grain's environment. We used the well known FePt L1 0 system to discover the physical factors that drive the shape and size of FePt grains. It was found that the preferred growth directions are along symmetry planes that are determined by the basic crystal and driven by surface energy minimisation. The model developed here can be used to predict a grain's growth and shape as a function of atomic number and composition. This means that by tailoring a grain's surface and grain boundaries the shape of the magnetic grains can be manipulated. Magnetic materials have a long history of driving technological growth and societal progress However, since the discovery of Nd 2 Fe 14 B in 1984 The success of microstructure engineering demonstrates the importance of controlling magnetism through structural control. The implication of this is that physical models must capture defects, phase inhomogeneities, grain shape, grain size, and grain orientation if they are to reproduce realistic magnetic effects. Currently microstructure informed modelling is limited -a combination of Voronoi tesselation and integranular phase definition is the most accurate template used for both micromagnetic and spin dynamic modelling To address this problem, we took the view that accurate representation of microstructure starts with an understanding of what drives its development. This led us to produce a grain growth model that let us investigate how surface energy defines preferential grain shapes, and how preferential shapes change with grain size. We applied this model to FePt L1 0 for two reasons, firstly, it is a well studied structure, and secondly, grain size and shape are crucial to its application in the magnetic hard drive industry Our model uses Molecular-Dynamics-based energy minimisation to calculate the preferability of grains composed of identical elements; their identical composition makes the grains different states of the same thermodynamic system. Using the Boltzmann distribution of the underlying system, we assigned an energy based probability to each of the grains (which are considered states within the same Boltzmann distribution), which made it possible to establish the relative probability of each type of grain -see the methodology section. This is a first step towards a general methodology for producing realistic atomistic models, that can be used as input to Heisenberg spin models and finite element based micromagnetic modelling. Future applications of this model will include the investigation of granular rare-earth intermetallics for the automotive industry. To produce realistic grain shapes, we calculated the surface energies of the five lowest index symmetry planes of FePt L1 0 in LAMMPS, the results of this can be seen in Table As the table shows, the {111} surfaces have the lowest energy, informing our choice for three of the grain shapes, which can be seen in Figure From Figure We calculated the energy of our as-matched grains using conjugate gradient energy minimisation at 0K In Figure In the case of the Octahedron, on average, the surface is 87% {111} planes, giving it the lowest surface energy per unit area of the all grain shapes. However, as a result of maximising the {111} surface, this grain shape has the worst surface area to volume ratio, giving it substantially more surface for the same volume. In contrast, the Truncated-Octahedron-Minor has an average of 71% {111} surface planes, with the best surface area to volume ratio out of all the shapes -owing to the truncation of the {111} plane corners. The fact these two structures have similar energy, demonstrates two things, firstly, that, at these sizes, the dominant factor is surface type; secondly, that when two grains have similar percentages of the same surface type, the deciding factor is surface area to volume ratio. For the remaining shapes, the order of preference is Sphere/Trunacted-Octahedron-Major followed by Cuboid, where Sphere and Truncated-Octahedron-Major can be considered interchangeable. In contrast to the previous pair, the Sphere and Truncated-Octahedron-Major have comparable energies due to their energetically similar surface types only. For Truncated-Octahedron-Major, this means a surface composed of, on average, 46% {111} surface planes, with {100} and {001} surface planes making up the remaining surface area; for the Sphere, this means a surface composed of, on average, 53% {111} planes, with a wide spread of surface planes making up the remaining surface area. The spread of the Sphere's remaining planes includes multiple high index, high energy planes that give the Sphere an overall surface energy per unit area of similar value to the Truncated-Octahedron-Major's, despite it's 7% advantage in {111} surface plane coverage. The fact these two structures are alike, in both surface area and volume, further supports our conclusion that, at these length scales, surface type is the dominant factor controlling grain shape. As expected, the Cuboid is significantly less likely than every other shape, possessing no {111} surface planes, except those incidentally caused by surface deletion, and a poor surface area to volume ratio. To demonstrate the predominant role of surface type, we calculated the surface energy for each of the grains across the size range. Figure We have developed a model which uses crystal symmetries to predict grain growth and shape as a function of size -measured in total atoms. The methodology we have developed is applicable to any crystal structure, and we anticipate using it in the future to study the probable shapes of Rare-Earth Intermetallics, particularly RT 12 phases, whose stability, and therefore manufacturability, is dependent on the microstructure surrounding its grains. Magnetron-sputtering-based gas-phase condensation experiments, by Qui and Wang Further to this, the surface energy basis of our model allows us to make predictions about the microstructure of as-annealed FePt L1 0 thin films, which we predict will organise into FePt L1 0 configurations that maximise the {111} plane. As the underlayer that supports the FePt L1 0 thin film, pre-disposes the crystal structure to align its {001} direction perpendicular to the plane, for isolated FePt the reordering will cause the as-deposited material to conglomerate into hill like structures, whose slopes are composed of {111} surface planes. A review of the literature shows that this does occur With development, the model will evolve from a single methodology into a suite of tools, which we are building into a Python package: Grain Modeller. We believe our package has two benefits, firstly, theoreticians and modellers can use it to calculate realistic grain shapes and reduce assumptions in their work; secondly, experimentalists can use it to create models that test grain shape preferability under a range of conditions, allowing them to fine tune their apparatus for a greater degree of structural control, before undertaking an experiment. We believe that this extension to the material science toolbox will increase our communities collective ability to control microstructure and increase the speed of magnetic material development. To create FePt L1 0 grains, we produced a Python package, for defining grain shapes, creating grain shapes, matching grain compositions, and creating LAMMPS data and input files. To make grain shapes reproducible over a wide range of sizes, we developed a method of defining them abstractly, using a unitcell, a set of cuts, and a repeat ratio. For clarity, these are defined below: • Unitcells, are the basis of the grain, defined by three lattice vectors a, b, c and a list of constituent atoms in fractional coordinates. • Cuts, are defined by a plane normal and a plane point, both given in fractional coordinates. For example, the cut with normal [111] and plane point (0, 0, 1) would cut along the (111) plane that passes through the point at the grains maximum extent in the c lattice direction. • Repeat Ratio defines the ratio between unitcell repeats in the three lattice directions. For example a repeat ratio of [1, 2, 1] would repeat the unitcell two times in the b direction for every single repeat in the a and c directions. Together, Cuts and Repeat Ratio define a scalable general shape. To create grains of definite sizes, we used an integer scaling factor, which works in the two following ways: 1. Multiplies the repeat ratio to get the unitcell repeats in each direction. For example if the repeat ratio is [1, 2, 1] and you have a scaling factor of 10, the final repetitions in each direction are [10, 20, 10]. 2. Scales the plane point of each cut. For example, if a cut is defined by the plane normal [111] and the plane point (0, 0, 1), having a final number of unitcell repeats equal to: [10, 20, 10], scales the plane point to (0, 0, 10). With size factor, we have all the required information to build a grain. We create the grain by using the repeat ratio to turn the unitcell into a supercell, and cutting the supercell along the defined planes. To compare grain preference using Boltzmann factors they must have the exact same chemical composition. To achieve this, we used a composition matching algorithm. The process starts with defining two or more grain shapes, then selecting a grain size target, measured in atoms. Each grain shape is scaled so that it's close to, but above, the target number of atoms. We call grains in this state "as built". Each as built grain's element ratio is used to define a best fit composition. Using FePt L1 0 as an example, grain ratios of 49:51, 49.5:50.5, and 51:49 (Fe:Pt), give you an average of 49.83:50.17, which is used to decide the number of each atom type in the grains. Continuing the example, for grains with 10,000 atoms total, the best fit composition would be 0.4983×10,000 = 4983 iron atoms, and 0.5017×10,000 = 5017 platinum atoms. To match the compositions, atoms must be removed from the surface of the grains; defining a best fit composition ensures that each grain's surface will always have the desired atoms for removal. Once the best fit composition has been defined, atoms are progressively removed from the surface of the as built grains, until they match the desired composition. Atoms are preferentially removed from the least energetically favourable positions first, starting with corner atoms, then edge atoms, and finally general surface atoms. This produces physically realistic grains. An example of the as built, and the compositionally matched final grain can be seen in Figure As the figure shows, the as built grain has clean surfaces with defined edges, in contrast the compositionally matched grain has rounded edges, although it maintains the same underlying morphology. To choose our grain morphologies, we calculated the surface energies of L1 0 's low index planes to see which should dominate our grains' surfaces. Our calculated surface energies can be see in Table Our calculations showed that {111} surfaces have the lowest energy, due to a greater number of interplanar bonds (6 vs 4). Using this as a basis, all our grain shapes used cuts along the {111} planes to expose as much of this preferential surface as possible; {100} and {001} planes, which naturally accompany {111} plane cuts, were left to compose the remaining surface. As noted in the results, we looked at five types of grain shape, three with {111} dominated surfaces: Octahedron, Truncated Octahedron Minor, and Truncated Octahedron Major; and two with energetically unpreferable surfaces: Sphere and Cuboid. The five grain types can be seen in Figures For each grain, we used an FePt L1 0 unitcell with the following parameters: a = b = 3.83Å, c = 3.711Å, and α = β = γ = 90°2 The shape of each grain was decided by changing the distance of each point from the centre of the supercell. Figure As can be seen in Figure We used MEAM potentials within the LAMMPS molecular dynamics package to perform energy minimisation calculations. The constants for our MEAM potentials are given in Table 's 2 and 3. The potentials were taken from a paper by Kim et al. Before performing energy minimisation, each grain was equilibrated in an NPT ensemble to avoid convergence to a local minimum. The NPT ensemble is set at 1K with a pressure of 0Pa and evolved the system over 15,000 time steps. The simulation's time steps were 0.001ps, making this phase 15ps long. Minimisation used the standard conjugate gradient algorithm in LAMMPS and occured over a minimum of 10,000 time steps to ensure the maximum level of covergence. Generally, convergence was reached much sooner. Fe 1.0 2.2 β 1.0 1.0 t , and t (0) which scales the contribution of each of the MEAM partial electron densities: ρ To calculate the probability of each grain shape we used their minimised energy to produce their Boltzmann factors via the following equation: where p i is the probability of grain i, ε i is the minimised energy of grain i, k B is the Boltzmann constant, and T is the