Multilayer graded-bandgap avalanche photodiodes (APDs) are the future deterministic photomultipliers, owing to their deterministic amplification with twofold stepwise gain via impact ionization when operated in the staircase regime. Yet, the stepwise impact ionization irregularities worsen as the number of steps increases. These irregularities in impact ionization are the major source of noise in these APDs. These solidstate devices could replace conventional silicon photomultiplier tubes if they are carefully studied and designed. A noise model for multistep staircase APDs, considering equal stepwise ionization probabilities is previously reported. However, we derive a generalized noise model for multilayer graded-bandgap APDs, applicable for all operating biases, which include the sub-threshold, staircase, and tunnelling breakdown regimes. Moreover, the previous noise model's expression for the total excess noise factor in terms of ionization probabilities of the multistep staircase APD follows Friis's total noise factor. However, we demonstrate that our derived expression matches Bangera's correction to Friis's total noise factor. Photomultiplier tubes (PMTs) Although the conventional avalanche photodiodes (APDs) are alternate solid-state devices for PMT applications such as photon counting Recently, multilayer graded-bandgap APDs operated in their staircase operating regime have been the solid-state analogue of PMTs with deterministic amplification Here, the function of the steps is similar to the metallic dynodes in a PMT. Thus, these APDs operated in the staircase regime may be referred to as multistep staircase APDs. Moreover, these solid-state devices have the advantages of micro-size, are low-cost, and are operated at low voltages. However, the irregularities in the stepwise impact ionization worsen as the number of steps increases This article first briefly discusses the existing theory and noise model of the conventional p-i-n APDs The theory and noise model of a conventional p-i-n APD is well known in the literature Where α is the injected photoelectron count; N 0 is the total number of charges generated by the incident radiation or the total injected photoelectrons; h(t-t α ) is the pulse function that defines the input photocurrent corresponding to the injected photoelectron generated by the pulse of radiation incident at time t α , such that, h(t)dt = q, where q is the electron charge. Then, the time-dependent output current of the conventional p-i-n APD, neglecting the dark current will be, Where t o is the time taken for the photoelectron to reach the output, and M C is the avalanche gain of the conventional p-i-n APD for each pulse of charge. Here, M C = 1 when the device is operated in the unity gain mode regime such that the incident photon count is equal to the number of photoelectrons generated and collected at the output, which implies that no carrier multiplication happens The noise current spectral intensity (A 2 Hz -1 ) of this conventional APD Where q is the electron charge which is a constant, MC 2 is the excess noise factor of the conventional p-i-n APD, The spectral noise current (A √ Hz) is defined as the square-root of the noise current spectral intensity The noise power spectral density (W•Hz -1 ) is defined as the product of the noise current spectral intensity and the noise figure analyser's AC load resistance (R L ) The block diagram shown in Fig. If h(t-t α ) is a pulse-shaped function that represents input photocurrent corresponding to the injected photoelectron generated by the pulse of radiation incident at time t = t α , then, h(t -t α -t x ) is the pulse-shaped function shifted by a time instant 't x '. In comparison to the conventional p-i-n APD, the time-dependent output current of an n-layer graded-bandgap APD, neglecting the dark current is given by, Where 'n' is the total number of layers in the n-layer graded-bandgap APD, δ(t-t n ) * h(t-t α ) represents the time-shifted pulse-shaped function and ' * ' indicates convolution operator. The noise current spectral intensity of this n-layer graded-bandgap APD is Where F (M 0 ) is the excess noise factor corresponding to the gain M 0 and F (M S ) is the excess noise factor corresponding to the gain M S of the n-layer gradedbandgap APD. The spectral noise current of this n-layer gradedbandgap APD is given by, The noise power spectral density of this n-layer graded-bandgap APD is, Further, this article defines the noise power ratio of the n-layer graded-bandgap APD (NPR Sn ) as the ratio of the noise power spectral density of the n-layer graded-bandgap APD to the noise power spectral density of the conventional p-i-n APD. When, Similarly, we define the noise current ratio of the n-layer graded-bandgap APD (NCR Sn ) as the ratio of the spectral noise current of the n-layer gradedbandgap APD to the spectral noise current of the conventional p-i-n APD. This may also be defined as the square-root of the noise power ratio. Therefore, In the new noise model proposed by us, let X x be a random variable for multiplication at step 'x' that defines the number of extra electrons generated by a single electron at the input of each step, such that Then, the generalized form of the time-dependent current at the output of the step 'n', in terms of the random variable for multiplication 'X x ' of an n-layer graded-bandgap APD, can be written as, Where the generalized equation for the total step gain may be represented as, Similarly, the generalized equation for the noise power ratio and noise current ratio of the n-layer graded-bandgap APD may, respectively, be formulated as and (17) Here, since the X x is considered a random variable ranging from 0 to m with different probabilities, this is a generalized noise model for a practical n-layer graded-bandgap APD applicable for all operating biases, which includes the sub-threshold, staircase operating, and tunneling breakdown regimes. An n-layer graded-bandgap APD operated in its staircase operation regime is called a multistep staircase APD or an n-step staircase APD. Considering that each incident photon generates only one photoelectron and no carrier multiplication happens in the absorption region of the APD, the photo-generated electron gain is expected to be M 0 = 1. Thus, the excess noise factor corresponding to M 0 will be F (M 0 ) = 1. Therefore, the time-dependent output current of the n-step staircase APD will be, The noise power spectral density of this n-step staircase APD is, Fig. Further, comparing the equations ( (21) However, in the case of a practical n-step staircase APD, an electron at the input of step 'x' would generate one or more extra electrons when ionized, or the input electrons may not ionize The simplified time-dependent current of a staircase APD at the output of step 'n' will be, Moreover, the noise power ratio of the proposed new noise model is, Equation ( The derivation and proof of the above equations ( From one of the previous noise models Another literature on the noise model Here, both the previous models are equivalent where the F (M S , p) prev2 will be the same as F (M S , δ) prev1 when the 'δ' is replaced by (1 -p), and the total step gain of the n-step staircase APD in terms of 'p' will be M prev2 S = (1 + p) n . As reported in the literature ) For comparison with the previous models, if our proposed new noise model's ionization probabilities at all the 'n' steps are equal to 'p,' then M S = M S = (1 + p) n is in accordance with the literature and previous models Therefore, the new noise model's expression for the excess noise factor F (M S ) new is, Fig. From Fig. An illustration of how the excess noise factors obtained using the previous noise models follow Friis's total noise factor formula for cascade networks is included in Appendix B. However, our new model's excess noise factors F (M S ) new of the multistep staircase APDs agree with Bangera's total noise factor of nstage cascade networks From the literature, it is known that Bangera's expression for the total noise factor of an n-stage cascade network in terms of the stage-wise noise factors is a correction to the corresponding Friis's formula For better understanding and visualization of our proposed new noise model, the variation of the noise current ratio (NCR Sn ) and staircase gain (M S ) of the n-step staircase APD with the ionization probabilities is shown in Fig. We conclude that our generalized noise model for multilayer graded-bandgap APDs is applicable to estimate various noise expressions for all operating biases, which includes the sub-threshold, staircase operating, and tunnelling breakdown regimes. To better understand our noise model, a detailed discussion of our proposed noise model for an n-layer graded-bandgap APD in its staircase operating regime is presented and compared with the two previous noise models. From the discussion, the expressions for the staircase gain of the multistep staircase APD obtained using all three models are equivalent. Moreover, comparing the previous noise models, both models provided equivalent noise expressions. However, comparing our proposed and previous noise models A Derivation of the expression for the noise power ratio of the newly proposed noise model and its proof Consider that an electron at the input of step 'x' would generate only one extra electron when ionized and no extra electrons if not ionized. Then, X x is a random variable for multiplication at step 'x' with just two possibilities 0 or 1 with probabilities (1 -p x ) or p x , respectively. A.1 Solution for a 1-step staircase APD Then, the NPR new Sn of only a single-step staircase APD is, If the ionization probability p 1 = p, then NPR new Sn of the staircase APD with number of steps n = 1 may be rewritten as, 2 Solution for a 2-step staircase APD Then, the NPR new Sn of a 2-step staircase APD is, If ionization probabilities at both the steps are equal i.e., p 1 = p 2 = p, then NPR new Sn of the staircase APD with number of steps n = 2 may be rewritten as, 3 Solution for a 3-step staircase APD Then, the NPR new Sn of a 3-step staircase APD is, If ionization probabilities at all the steps are equal i.e., p 1 = p 2 = p 3 = p, then NPR new Sn of the staircase APD with number of steps n = 3 may be rewritten as, Then, the NPR new Sn of an n-step staircase APD is, Solving the above expression, NPR new Sn may also be formulated as, If ionization probabilities at all the steps are equal i.e., p 1 = p 2 = p 3 = ... = p n = p, then NPR new Sn of the staircase APD with number of steps 'n' may be rewritten as, B Illustrations: Previous noise models follow Friis's total noise factor formula for nstage cascade networks Friis's total noise factor formula for cascade networks Moreover, the Friis noise factor at the x-th stage of a cascade network is, Where N a(x) is an externally added noise at the output of the x-th stage or x-th step. However, the above expression for F Friis x is valid only when all the multiplication probabilities are unity (or the multiplication gain is deterministic). Here, if N a(x) = 0, then F Friis x = 1 for all stages or steps. However, if the multiplication probabilities are less than unity and non-zero, then F Friis x will be greater than 1. In the case of solid state devices such as staircase APDs, since there is no external noise added at every step (i.e., N a(x) = 0) and if all the stepwise ionization or multiplication probabilities of an n-step staircase APD are equal i.e., p 1 = p 2 = ... = p n = p; we could consider that all its stepwise excess noise factors will also be equal. According to previous models The total gain of the n-step staircase APD in terms of 'p' will be M prev S = (1 + p) n . Illustration 1: If p = 0.3 and n = 1, then substituting the values of 'p' and 'n,' we get the total excess noise factor of a 1-step staircase APD as F prev T1 = 1.12426. Since this corresponds to a staircase APD with only one step, it could be considered that the stepwise excess noise factor at step one of a 1-step staircase APD is Illustration 2: Similarly, if p = 0.3 and n = 2, the total excess noise factor of a 2-step staircase APD will be F prev T2 = 1.12426. Since we have considered the same values of 'p' as in the previous illustration, we get F 2 = F 1 = 1.12426. Therefore, substituting F 2 = F 1 = 1.12426 in Friis's equation, we get Illustration 3: Similarly, if p = 0.3 and n = 3, the total excess noise factor of a 3-step staircase APD will be F prev T3 = 1.293372. Since we have considered the same values of 'p' as in the previous illustration, we get Thus, we conclude that the previous noise models are in accordance with Friis's total noise factor formula for cascade networks. Our noise model follows Bangera's total noise factor expression for n-stage cascade networks Bangera's total noise factor of n-stage cascade networks Moreover, Bangera's formula for the stage-wise noise factor at the x-th stage or x-th step (F Cor x ) is, Where N a(x) is an externally added noise at the output of the x-th stage or x-th step. Similar to Friis conditions, the above expression for F Cor x is valid only when all the multiplication probabilities are unity (or the multiplication gain is deterministic). Here, if N a(x) = 0, then F Cor x = 1 for all stages or steps. However, if the multiplication probabilities are less than unity and non-zero, then F Cor x will be greater than 1. Again, in the case of solid state devices such as staircase APDs, since there is no external noise added at every step (i.e., N a(x) = 0) and if all the stepwise ionization or multiplication probabilities of an n-step staircase APD are equal i.e., p 1 = p 2 = ... = p n = p; we could consider that all its stepwise excess noise factors will also be equal. According to our new model, if 'p' is the ionization probability at each step, then the excess noise factor F (M S ) new of an n-step staircase APD is given by, The total gain of the n-step staircase APD in terms of 'p' will be M new S = (1 + p) n . Illustration 1: If p = 0.3 and n = 1, then substituting the values of 'p' and 'n' we get the total excess noise factor of a 1-step staircase APD as F new T1 = 1.12426. Since this corresponds to a staircase APD with only one step, it could be considered that the stepwise excess noise factor at step one of a 1-step staircase APD is F 1 = F new T1 = 1.12426 = F Cor T1 . This value matches the total excess noise factor of a 1-step staircase APD obtained using the previous models. From the above illustrations, when n ≥ 2, the total excess noise factors of n-step staircase APDs obtained using our model are greater than the corresponding total excess noise factors obtained using the previous models. Moreover, we conclude that our noise model follows Bangera's total noise factor expression for cascade networks.