Ginzburg-Landau (GL) parameters formed the basis for Abrikosov's discovery of the quantum vortex of a supercurrent in type-II superconductor with a normal core of size ξ, the superconductor coherence length and circulating supercurrent induced magnetic field diverging as log(1/r) from the core with a decay length of the London penetration depth, λL. In 1964, J. Pearl predicted the slowly decaying (1/r 2 ) field around a vortex spreading out to Pearl length, P L = 2λ L 2 t , in a superconductor film of thickness t < λL. However, his quintessential theory failed to predict the existence of giant kinetic inductance (GKI) that arises from the enlarged screening currents of the vortex. Here, we discover giant kinetic inductance in a high-Tc metasurface due to the 1400% expansion of the vortex screening supercurrent from λL to 14λL in ultrathin film meta-atom of λL/7 thickness, which leads to the emergence of terahertz superinductance possessing quantum impedance exceeding the resistance quantum limit of R Q = h (2e) 2 = 6.47 kΩ by 33%. Our discovery presents a new class of high-Tc superconductor electronic, photonic, and quantum devices enabled through metasurface designed at the Pearl length scales, providing novel applications in quantum circuitry, metrology, and single photon kinetic inductance detectors. The superinductors are the quantum circuit elements with zero DC resistance, low internal losses, and characteristic impedance exceeding the quantum resistance R Q = h (2e) 2 = 6.47 kΩ. , where 'a' is the constant. . Intrinsically LK depends on the scattering time (), and DC conductivity (0) of the material and is expressed as, , where m * , n and e are the effective mass, number density, and charge of the current-carrying carriers, respectively. However, LK becomes significant for metallic systems at higher frequencies (ω~10 15 rad s -1 ). The schematic of thin current-carrying SC wires of thickness smaller than λL and width comparable to or larger than the Pearl length is depicted in Fig. where λ0 is the penetration depth at T=0K, and α is the exponent determining temperature dependence. Experimentally measured temperature-dependent transmission spectra of 25 nm YBCO Pearl metadevice are shown in Fig. where LG represents the geometric inductance. The detailed fitting parameters are revealed in Table 