We present a study of a very seldom used way of measuring magnetic domain wall velocity, which makes it possible to have a real-time probing of the domain movement in the area illuminated by a laser spot. We have compared this method to the most usual one: although the velocities are similar, the different method do not give the same results if the laser spot is too small. It can be explained by a dendritic shape of the domain wall. By changing the size spot, we propose a basic model which describes quite well the transit time in the laser spot as a function of its size and makes it possible to extract the velocity and the depth of the dendrites. Propagation of magnetic domain wall is involved in the principle of many potential devices such as the racetrack memory Several ways have been used to measure the propagation velocity of a magnetic domain wall in a magnetic thin film. The most common methods consist in, first, creating a domain wall, second, getting a Kerr picture, third, applying a magnetic pulse of known duration and fourth get a second Kerr picture Another way of measuring this velocity, is the use of a nanowire with two Hall crosses 16-18 . It requires a nanowire, which means not really 2D propagation. In addition, the Hall crosses can act as pinning positions and one cannot be fully sure of what is obtained. To finish, you get the time reversal at each Hall crosses, but you do not really know what is happening between these two points. For example, you cannot guarantee that a nucleation hasn't occurred in the nanowire, which would mean reversal was not due only to propagation and the deduced propagation velocity is wrong. In the cases of nanowires, an interesting way to measure propagation velocity is the use of magnetoresistance We have studied here another way to probe the propagation velocity of domain walls real-time, which can apply to really 2D films: a polarized laser spot is focused on the sample, and the change of polarization due to Kerr effect is monitored in real-time. This method has already been used a few times, but it was not compared to the usual way of measuring velocity 24,25 . Thanks to our setup which makes it possible to do simultaneously Kerr imaging and realtime probing, we have been able to compare this method to the usual one. The two ways give similar results, but, there is an interesting difference, which seems meaningful of the domain shape. The setup has been created from a home-made Kerr microscope. This Kerr microscope is a usual one A lens has been put between the laser and the mirror to get a better focusing of the laser beam on the sample. The second mirror has been put on the detection branch of the microscope, between the beam splitter and the camera. When removed, the usual Kerr picture arrives on the camera detector. When in position, the light is reflected towards a fast light-detecting diode. A lens has been added to focus the light on the active part of the diode. The two movable mirrors can be controlled independently, so that it is possible to have the laser arriving on the sample and the camera still working: we have used this configuration to check the size of the laser spot on the sample. The signal from the photodiode being very small, a 60dB amplifier has been added after the photodiode. However, because there is a big DC signal, the reversal inducing only a small change of 1%, we have added a RC high pass filter between the photodiode and the amplifier. The cut-off frequency was 1 Hz, which meant negligible effect on the signal due to the filter for a duration shorter than 10 ms. The bandwidth of the amplifier was 100 kHz, limiting the shortest transit times which could be detected to 2.4 μs. An oscilloscope of bandwidth 50 MHz was recording the signal after the amplifier. To make sure not to change the signal because of multi-reflections in the connecting cables, a 50  terminator was put at the entrance of the oscilloscope channel. The magnetic field pulses were created using a very small coil (not represented in figure The sample was a multilayer Ta(5nm)/Co40Fe40B20(1.1nm)/MgO(1nm)/Ta(5nm) multilayer grown on a Si/SiO2 substrate. It has been annealed at 380°C for 20 minutes. Properties such as hysteresis loop have been already published in a previous paper When applying a magnetic field pulse, we can see very well the reversal on the oscilloscope, as can be seen in figure 2. To get the transit time, we have used the following hypothesis: -We assumed the laser spot to be Gaussian, with a mean diameter 0: From what we see using the camera, this hypothesis seems good (figure Figure -The velocity is assumed to be constant during the whole transit time in the spot. These hypothesis leads to a change in the Kerr signal given by This theoretical result is in very good agreement with the experiment, as can be seen in figure In this case, it is possible to get something satisfying using Tanh instead of Erf, these two functions are very similar. When fitting with Tanh((t-t0)), velocity can be deduced from v = 0/1.70, where r is the radius of the spot defined by the Gaussian beam. The first task was to check if the velocity obtained using transit time in the spot gave a result coherent with what we usually get using Kerr pictures. The results have been plotted on figure 4. In the case of the spot measurement, we have used several sizes for the spot. On the field range used, which corresponds to the creep regime Using the real-time laser spot detection requires to know the size of the spot. Using configuration of figure We attribute this difference of velocity to the shape of the domain wall: indeed, to get formula (2), we have assumed the domain wall to be a straight line, but, this hypothesis is wrong. In fact, the domain wall has a dendritic shape, and the successive positions of the domain wall looks like figure where v is the domain wall propagation velocity of the front part for the magnetic field applied. Assuming dendrites of depth D = 20μm, which is what we get looking at Kerr pictures (see figure Looking at the transit time of the Kerr signal in a laser spot focused on a thin magnetic film is an interesting way to measure magnetic domain wall velocities. We have compared this method with the usual one using Kerr pictures: there is a shift between the curves obtained using the two ways. This shift disappears as the size of the spot is increased. We have explained this shift by the dendritic shape of the domain wall. As a result, we could get a very good agreement between both ways. These results open a new way to check domain wall propagation in a magnetic thin film. One of the interesting features of this method is the real-time detection 