Interfacial Phase Change Memory (iPCM) retrench unnecessary power consumption due to wasted heat generated during phase change by reducing unnecessary entropic loss. In this study, an advanced iPCM (GeTe/Ti-Sb2Te3 Superlattice) is synthesized by doping Ti into Sb2Te3. Structural analysis and density functional theory (DFT) calculations confirm that bonding distortion and structurally well-confined layers contribute to improve phase change properties in iPCM. Ti-Sb2Te3 acts as an effective thermal barrier to localize the generated heat inside active region, which leads to reduction of switching energy. Since Ge-Te bonds adjacent to short and strong Ti-Te bonds are more elongated than the bonds near Sb-Te, it is easier for Ge atoms to break the bond with Te due to strengthened Peierls distortions (Rlong/Rshort) during phase change process. Properties of advanced iPCM (cycling endurance, write speed/energy) exceed previous records. Moreover, wellconfined multi-level states are obtained with advanced iPCM, showing potential as a neuromorphic memory. Our work paves the way for designing superlattice based PCM by controlling confinement layers. Phase change memory (PCM) is one of the promising candidates for next-generation nonvolatile memory (NVM). There have been many attempts to design superior PCMs based on single phase materials mainly composed of Ge, Sb, Te alloys 1 . However, there remains a fatal problem: the unnecessary diffusion of heat through the liquid phase generated during the RESET process due to the melt-quenching process 2 . To solve these problems, many research has been conducted on various methods such as pulse design optimization, device structure improvement, and material design to present new paradigms for designing advanced PCMs Meanwhile, outstanding device characteristics for interfacial phase change memory (iPCM) composed of alternately stacked GeTe (GT) and Sb2Te3 (ST) within nm ranges has been reported Despite the deficient evidence on the properties of each phase in iPCM for the switching process, advanced results which include ultralow-switching current and multi-level characteristics with the GT/ST superlattice on flexible substrates were reported In this study, advanced iPCM composed of alternately stacked GT and Ti-doped Sb2Te3 (Ti-ST) were synthesized with MBE and evaluated by various measurements. Furthermore, outstanding figure of merits were obtained with the advanced iPCM, including ultra-low power consumption (~2 pJ), high cycling endurance (~3 × 10 9 ), fast speed (~8 ns) and multi-level characteristics (~6 level). Considering structural analysis and various experimental measurements, appropriate unit cells are constructed, and density functional theory (DFT) calculations are used to investigate atomic switching characteristics within the microstructure. The structural confinement and interfacial extension of iPCM with Ti atoms enable the above advancement. Phase change process is facilitated by strengthened thermal confinement of Ti-ST blocks and the improved structural coherence near the interface. Peierls distortions of the Ge-Te bonds vicinity to Ti atoms are strengthened due to robust Ti-Te bonding and expansion of the interfacial distance by intra-structural localization of Ti-ST blocks, which also enables triggered Ge atoms to change bonding motifs through smooth atomic movement. Due to the well-controlled interfacial thermal confinement and intra-structural localization of Ti-ST layers, multi-levels with electrical pulsing are obtained. Above properties will pave the way for designing iPCM as a neuromorphic memory, in addition to their application in PCM Furthermore, in the case of alloy-based PCM such as GST, phase change proceeds from random positions during the phase change process. Therefore, as a method of improving phase change characteristics of these thin films, material design is used to directly modify the entire region with several dopants The structures of GST-based superlattice device and characteristic changes caused by Ti incorporation are expressed as a schematic using atomic modeling. (Fig. It is observed structural modification at the atomic level after device operation through transmission electron microscopy (TEM) measurement (Fig. To investigate the change in the local structure of Ge atoms at the vdW interface using DFT calculations, unit cells of GT/(Ti)-ST SL were constructed using Ferro structure taking Ge/Sb intermixing Structural change occurs from octahedral to tetrahedral motif for Ge atoms when phase change proceeds, three relatively weak bonds among the six metavalent Ge-Te bonds in LRS are broken and new identical covalent bonds are formed through sp3 hybridization. However, the original p orbital alignment is quite distorted due to spatial expansion vicinity to the interfaces as well as enhanced structural localization due to robust Ti-Te bond (Fig. Ti atoms substituting Sb atoms pull nearest Te atoms strongly (Fig. Ge-Te bonds near Ti atoms are easier to break by the strengthened Peierls distortion (Rlong/Rshort) The effects on structural coherency in GT/Ti-ST superlattice Significant improvements in GT/Ti-ST superlattice films with Ti incorporation are also elucidated through several structural analyses. Using time-domain thermo-reflectance (TDTR) measurement, the decrease in thermal conductivity of iPCM was confirmed. It is very interesting that the reduction in thermal conductivity of 5%-doped GT/Ti-ST is larger than the 10% doped Ti-ST SL (Fig. Another important role of Ti is in synthesizing an ideal iPCM by inducing the coherent growth of HCP QL ST and GT blocks by changing the process of forming HCP QL ST blocks from growth-dominant to nucleation-dominant method, which prevent deterioration of the roughness due to abrupt change of grain size during the synthesizing process In addition, the chemical states of composed elements are studied using x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), with an in-situ transfer system to prevent oxidation, to obtain accurate bonding state of the constituent elements, measured chemical states showed that there were no phase segregations despite Ti is incorporated and it is observed that all elements except for Te atom itself are combined with Te (Fig. In summary, an ultra-efficient and structurally coherent advanced iPCM was developed in this study, which led to the following figure of merit: high cycling endurance (~3 × 10 9 ), ultra-low RESET energy (~2 pJ), and high speed (~8 ns). After sufficient electrical pulsing, it is observed that internal structure of superlattice device was well maintained, i.e., Te terminated layers were preserved. The layers corresponding to Ferro structure (-Te-Ge-Te-Ge-Te-Sb-Te-Sb-Te-) contain some extent of Ge/Sb intermixing in cation sites. Interestingly, it is also confirmed that Advanced iPCM is expected to pave the way for developing advanced memory devices by suppressing wasted heat generated during the phase change process and effectively forming structurally coherent interfaces. Advanced iPCM has an enormous potential to be one of the strongest candidates for non-volatile memories in highly integrated memory systems such as 3D X Point structure, which is suitable to perform deep learning operations with matrix-vectormultiplication in neuromorphic computing Sample Preparation. The thin film preparation process for structural analysis is as follows: iPCM is synthesized with MBE. In the case of molecular beam epitaxy, the substrate is fixed at the center of the upper range under high vacuum (base pressure ~ high 10 -9 Torr) and the constituent elements of the material to be deposited are evaporated in gaseous form onto the substrate through thermal evaporation. When synthesizing the film on the silicon substrate, which is oriented in the (111) direction, the substrate (silicon wafer) is soaked in acetone and isopropanol successively for a few minutes to desorb organic matter, ultrasonicated, and soaked in a buffered oxide etchant to remove the native oxide (SiO2) of the substrate, and finally, rinsed with deionized (DI) water. Then, the Si wafer is transferred to the MBE chamber and annealed at a high temperature (about 600 °C) to remove the remaining impurities, cooled to room temperature, and then Ti-ST is deposited at room temperature with a thickness of 3 nm. Heat treatment at 190 °C (for the 5% doping; the higher the doping percentage, the higher the required heat treatment temperature) for 30 minutes follows, and then 4~5 nm of Ti-ST is stacked while maintaining the above temperature. A robust seed layer is formed through the above two-step process. After lowering the temperature slowly to about 20 °C, the temperature of the effusion cell containing each element is adjusted to evaporate each source with the intended ratio (1.0 Å/min for Ge, 1.5 Å/min for Sb, 3 Å/min for Te, and about 0.4 Å/min for Ti). Each source (Ge, Sb, Te) is heated in an isolated Knudsen cell containing a cylindrical crucible, and then a beam of each component directed toward the substrate is ejected from the cell and adsorbed on the surface. Ti is evaporated with an e-beam evaporator where a hot electron beam is generated from the filament and accelerated by an electric/magnetic field; it hits the source rod to vaporize Ti from the source and then transfer it to the substrate. Each material has a different desorption rate depending on the selectivity of the substrate and the pre-deposited material. Considering this, the deposition rate on the substrate surface is precisely controlled through the Proportional-Integral-Differential (PID) controller to enable the precise control that responds to every moment for the growth of a very high-quality thin film. After synthesizing the seed layer and lowering the temperature to about 20 °C, approximately 1 nm of the GT layer and approximately 2~3 nm of Ti-ST is deposited alternately. The above process is repeated until the top layer (Ti-ST) is deposited. X-Ray Diffraction/Reflection (XRD/XRR). The XRD measurement is performed using a high-resolution X-ray diffractometer with a 9 kW Cu Kα (wavelength ~ 1.5406 Å) radiation source. The measurement was conducted with the Po-hang accelerator 5D beam line. Raman Spectroscopy. Raman spectra were obtained through micro-Raman spectroscopy (Horiba Lab Ram ARAMIS) using a 532 nm wavelength Nd: YAG laser with a 100x objective and 2400 grooves/mm grating. The spectra were calibrated at a silicon peak of 520 cm -1 . X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). In-situ XPS spectra of the core levels were measured using the PHI 5000 Versa Probe made by ULVAC-PHI, where the base pressure was about 4 x 1 -10 Torr. The XPS spectra were obtained using monochromatic Kα radiation with an analyzer pass energy of 23.5 eV, providing an overall experimental resolution of 200 meV. The background of each spectrum was subtracted by the Shirley method. For the depth profile, a 500 kV Ne + ion beam was used, a modest condition to prevent transformation of the samples. To probe the operation of the test cells, an Agilent 33600A pulse generator and a Keithley 2636B source-meter were used for applying electrical pulses and measuring the resistance during the switching process, respectively. To switch the cells between several reversible phases, electrical pulses which were 8~200 ns in width and 0.1~3 V in height were applied, and each state's resistance was measured at 0.1 V. Transmission Electron Microscope (TEM). TEM specimens for cross-sectional observation of the super-lattice devices were prepared using a focused ion beam (FIB, NX2000; Hitachi Inc., Japan) instrument. To maintain the initial state of the specimen, tungsten and carbon were used as protective layers. During the FIB process, the TEM specimen was etched with Ga + ions at 30 kV, 10 kV, and 5 kV, successively. The TEM images were taken at an accelerating voltage of 200 kV using a JEM-ARM200F (JEOL Ltd.) and One View camera (Gatan Inc.). The STEM images were acquired at an accelerating voltage of 200 kV using an aberration-corrected STEM (JEM-ARM200F, JEOL Ltd.). STEM images were collected using a convergence semi-angle of 21 mrad and a high-angle annular dark field (HAADF) detector with a collection semi-angle of 68-280 mrad. Density Functional Theory (DFT) Calculation. The electronic structures of the GT/(Ti-)ST SL were calculated using DFT with the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP). Time-Domain Thermo-Reflectance (TDTR). To measure the thermal metrology based on thermo-reflectance, the N8-200 made by TMX Scientific Transometer TM was used. A pulsed heating laser of 4.7-5.8 μJ was illuminated to change the temperature of the surface and heat reflection energy of the sample with the film stack. At the same time, a probing laser (18.5-23.3 mW) was used to record the change in light reflectivity (i.e., thermal decay) as a function of time. Two unknown independent parameters can be extracted after fitting by combining the experimental data with known material parameters. These unknown parameters can be calculated using the coefficient of thermal reflectance, representing the relationship between temperature and reflectivity changes. During the fitting process, optimal calculations were performed through an iterative optimization process that minimized the root-mean-square error between the experimental and numerical decay curves. Eventually, the inverse numerical solution can acquire the film stack's thermal conductivity and boundary resistance.