Understanding how the interplay between higher-order and multilayer structures of interconnections influences the synchronization behaviors of dynamical systems is a feasible problem of interest, with possible application in essential topics such as neuronal dynamics. Here, we provide a comprehensive approach for analyzing the stability of the complete synchronization state in simplicial complexes with numerous interaction layers. We show that the synchronization state exists as an invariant solution and derive the necessary condition for a stable synchronization state in presence of general coupling functions. It generalizes the well-known master stability function scheme to the higher-order structures with multiple interaction layers. We verify our theoretical results by employing them on networks of paradigmatic Rössler oscillators and Sherman neuronal models, and demonstrate that the presence of group interactions considerably improves the synchronization phenomenon in the multilayer framework. Network theory Simplicial complexes namely the 0-simplices are the vertices, the edges are 1-simplices, while 2-simplices correspond to full triangles and so on. A simplicial complex S is a collection of simplices with an extra constraint that if simplex σ ∈ S then all the subsets of σ also belong to S , i.e., a three-body interaction, for example, necessitates the presence of all pairwise connections corresponding to the same triangle. A simplicial complex is called D-dimensional if the maximal simplices contained in it are of dimension D. Although the concept of sim- * Electronic address: dibakar@isical.ac.in plicial complexes is not new Synchronization On the other hand, multilayer systems are other generalized network structures in which interactions of different kinds and meanings can coexist, resulting in networks of networks In this work, we fill this gap by investigating the interplay between multilayer and higher-order structures and providing a generic multilayer framework to study the synchronization phenomenon on simplicial complexes. Our goal is to develop a comprehensive mathematical approach for evaluating the stability of the synchronization state for nonlinear dynamical systems growing in simplicial complexes with numerous interaction layers. To do so, we first derive the condition of invariance for the synchronization state and then conduct the linear stability analysis of the synchronization solution, which as a result generalizes the well-known master stability function (MSF) approach The remaining of this article is structured in the following manner. A mathematical framework for the sim-plicial complexes with multiple interaction layers is proposed in Sec. II. Section III shows the theoretical results on the stability of the synchronization state. The invariance criterion for the synchronization state is obtained in Sec. III A. Following that, in Sec. III B, we develop the analytical condition for the stable synchronous solution. To validate our theoretical findings, in Sec. IV, we reported numerical results on systems of coupled oscillators. Finally, in Sec. V, we summarize all of our findings and draw a conclusion. We consider a simplicial complex of dimension D = 2, i.e., the interactions between dynamical units are not only limited to pairwise but also three-body interactions are allowed. The simplicial complex is composed of N dynamical units connected through M distinct interacting layers. It is worth noting that the nodes communicating on each layer in this setup are essentially the same nodes. The node i in the layer-1 is identical to the node i in all the other layers. Various sorts of transport between cities or electrical and chemical synaptic couplings between neurons are examples of complex systems with multiple interaction layers where essentially the same nodes are interconnected by different means of connections. This differs from other works We suppose that the equation of motion characterizing the simplicial complex dynamics can be stated in terms of the following equation, (1) Here the p-dimensional state vector x i (t) indicates the dynamics of the unit i, F : R p → R p illustrates the isolated node dynamics presumed to be identical for all units, ǫ β (β = 1, 2, • • • , M ) are the real-valued coupling strengths corresponding to the pairwise interactions within the layers, whereas ǫ q SI describes the coupling strength associated with the three-body (2-simplex) interactions among dynamical units of the layer where higher-order interactions are allowed. G β : R (2×p) → R p , G q SI : R (3×p) → R p are the real-valued continuously differentiable functions illustrating the coupling forms corresponding to pairwise and non-pairwise interactions, respectively. Here we can consider the coupling functions in arbitrary linear or nonlinear form. Furthermore, the N ×N adjacency matrices A [β] (β = 1, 2, • • • , M ) recount the network structures of the layers, where A [β] ij = 1, if the i-th and j-th units are interconnected and zero otherwise. A [q,SI] describes N ×N ×N adjacency tensors that account for 2-simplices, where A [q,SI] ijk = 1, if (i, j, k) construct a full triangle and zero otherwise. If one considers M = 1 and L = 1, then our mathematical framework will eventually coincide with the generalized framework proposed earlier in A schematic illustration of the proposed simplicial complex with N = 7 nodes and M = 2 distinct interaction layers is shown in Fig. In this section, our main goal is to analytically derive the necessary conditions for the stable complete synchronization state of the simplicial complex (1). To do so, we first look into the conditions for invariance of the synchronization state. The invariance condition gives the necessary requirement on the network topology by which a stable synchronization state may observe depending on the critical value of the coupling strengths. A complete synchronization state arises in the simplicial complex (1) when each node follows in unison with the rest nodes. Mathematically, there exists a solution Following this, the corresponding synchronized manifold is defined as follows, If the functional forms of coupling schemes are synchronization noninvasive then the existence and invariance of the synchronous solution will be assured. However, we cast away any restriction on functional forms of coupling mechanisms, consider arbitrary linear or nonlinear coupling functions, and derive the invariance condition for such board circumstances. If the simplicial complex starts evolving with the synchronization state at any instance of time t = t s , then x i (t s ) = x 0 (t s ), for i = 1, 2, . . . , N . The evolution of the i th node of the simplicial complex at t = t s can then be expressed from Eq. ( where ij denotes the number of links incident to node i in each individual layer β, i.e., in-degree of node i and k indicates the number of 2-simplices (full triangle) incident to node i, i.e., generalized in-degree of node i (4) Since the functional forms of coupling schemes are arbitrary linear or nonlinear, Eq. ( Hence for the consistency of complete synchronization state, the same number of edges must be incident to each node of layer-β and for the layers with three-body interactions, exactly the same number of 2-simplices must incident to each node. However, we here stick ourselves with only the undirected connection structure of the simplicial complex. Therefore, in this case, k β (in) = k β , the degree of each node and k ] , the generalized degree of each node. As a result, the synchronous solution evolves according to the following equation, At this point, we would like to emphasize that the derived invariance condition is only necessary for the layers with arbitrary linear or nonlinear coupling schemes between individual units. If the forms of interaction functions within any layer are synchronization noninvasive (i.e., satisfies Eq.( Therefore, the invariance of the complete synchronization state depends either upon the synchronization noninvasive form of coupling schemes within the layers or upon the regular topology of the layers (i.e., equal indegrees of the nodes in a particular layer). However, to investigate the stability of the synchronization solution, we proceed with the case of arbitrary coupling schemes. The study corresponding to synchronization noninvasive coupling forms is just a special case of this, as the last two terms of Eq. ( To derive the conditions for stable synchronization state, one considers a small perturbation δx i = x ix 0 around the synchronous solution x i = x 0 (i = 1, 2, • • • , N ) and performs linear stability analysis of Eq. ( where JF (x 0 ) indicates the Jacobian of F calculated at the synchronization solution x 0 . J 1 , J 2 , and J 3 are the Jacobian operators with respect to the first, second and third variables, respectively. L [β] , β = 1, 2, • • • , M are standard zero row-sum graph Laplacian matrices, defined by and the invariance condition At this stage of derivation, it is important to note that our approach does not require any specific functional form of coupling functions, for instance, diffusive or synchronization noninvasive Let us now use the fact that the Jacobians J 2 G q SI (x 0 , x 0 , x 0 ), J 3 G q SI (x 0 , x 0 , x 0 ) are independent of k and j, respectively. This simplifies the Eq. ( Then the symmetric property of the adjacency tensors A [q,SI] , i.e., N j=1 A [q,SI] ijk and the fact that , where K [q,SI] ij counts the number of 2-simplices to which the link (i, j) participates, modifies Eq. ( where L [q,SI] illustrates the generalized zero row-sum Laplacian matrix associated with three-body interactions, defined by Let us now rewrite the Eq. ( where [ ] tr denotes the matrix transpose and denoting the terms as Eventually, the equation in terms of stake vectors becomes as follows, where ⊗ and I N symbolize the Kronecker product and N -dimensional identity matrix, respectively. This linearized set of variational Eq. ( are zero row-sum real symmetric matrices. Hence they are diagonalizable, and all their eigenvalues are nonnegative real numbers with one common smallest eigen-value γ 1 = 0, and the set of eigenvectors form an orthonormal basis of R N . To separate transverse and parallel modes from Eq. ( tr is the eigenvector corresponding to the smallest eigenvalue γ 1 = 0. The set of eigenvectors chosen is fully arbitrary; any other basis can be chosen, and all other sets of eigenvectors will ultimately change to it via unitary matrix transformation. Then in terms of the new variable, the variational Eq. ( where V [1] . Now, as all the Laplacians are zero row-sum matrices, the transformed Eq. ( where η 1 indicates the parallel mode and the transverse modes are symbolized by η i , i = 2, 3, • • • , N . Therefore, the problem of synchronization stability is reduced in solving the coupled linear differential Eq. (13b) associated with transverse mode to calculate the maximum Lyapunov exponent (MLE). The Eq. ( Due to more complexity of multiple layers and higherorder structures, the transverse variational Eq. (13b) is a (N -1)p-dimensional linear coupled differential equation, and in general, it is difficult to decouple it to lower dimensional form. However, there is a suitable instance for which the coupled transverse modes can be optimally separated, and as a result, the (N -1)p-dimensional coupled equation transforms into (N -1) numbers of pdimensional linear differential equations. The relevant instance is as follows-When all the pairwise Laplacians L [β] and the generalized Laplacians L [q,SI] commute with each other then the transverse Eq. (13b) can be decoupled into (N -1) numbers of p-dimensional equations as, where }, as in this scenario each of the Laplacians are diagonalizable with respect to the eigenvector matrix of the Laplacian of 1st layer L [1] . A series of outcomes is presented below, all of which support the validity and broad applicability of our method. Here we consider two three-dimensional chaotic oscillators, namely the Sherman neuronal model where • symbolizes the Euclidean norm, t trans determines the transient of the numerical simulation, and T is a sufficiently large positive number. The zero value of the synchronization error E indicates the emergence of complete synchrony. The simplicial complex (1) is integrated using the 4th order Runge-Kutta scheme subject to integration time step dt = 0.001 for neuron dynamics and dt = 0.01 for Rössler system, over a period of t = 50000 time units with a transient of 40000 time units. Each dynamical node's initial condition is randomly selected from the solitary node dynamics phase space. Throughout this section, we study the impact of higher-order interactions on complete synchrony with arbitrary coupling mechanisms and verify all the results with our analytical conjectures. In a chaotic bursting regime, we select the system parameters of individual nodes and focus on variation of coupling strengths along with different coupling schemes and network topologies. Recent studies in neuroscience have revealed that neurons may communicate through many-body interactions One neuron generally transfers information to other neurons through gap junctions and chemical synapses. A signal is sent chemically through a chemical synapse by neurochemical compounds like acetylcholine, gammaaminobutyric acid, dopamine, and serotonin, which are contained inside microscopic synaptic vesicles. Exocytoses release neurotransmitters probabilistically from a presynaptic neuron into the synaptic gap. Following that, these compounds attach to certain receptor molecules in nearby postsynaptic neuronal cells. The gap between the pre-and postsynaptic ends could be as much as 20-40 nm Here we analyze a group of pancreatic β cells, represented by the paradigmatic Sherman model where two fast currents: calcium I Ca , persistent potassium I K , and a slow potassium current I S are given by , respectively. V is the membrane potential corresponding to the reversal potential 075, E Ca = 0.025. m, n, and s are the voltagedependent gating variables. The maximum conductance and time constants are g Ca = 3.6, g K = 10, g S = 4 and τ = 0.02, τ s = 5. μ = 1, an auxiliary scaling factor, manages the time scale of the persistent potassium channels. The values of the gating variables at steady state are The parameter values are taken in such a way that the isolated node dynamics exhibits chaotic behavior (spiking bursting). We assume that the neurons are interconnected concurrently through two (M = 2) distinct interacting layers, subject to gap junction coupling via electrical synapses and chemical ion transit via chemical synapses. Therefore, the pairwise connections in the layers are described by the coupling functions G 1 (x i , x j ) = [V j -V i , 0, 0] tr to describe gap junctions, and G 2 (x i , x j ) = [(E S -V i )Γ(V j ), 0, 0] tr to describe chemical ion transportation through chemical synapses. For three-body interactions, we consider two different instances: (1) only the layer with electrical synapse coupling allows three-body connection, described by the diffusive coupling function Here, the sigmoidal input-output function is, describes the procedure for activation and deactivation of nonlinear chemical synapse. The synaptic reversal potential is E s = -0.02. Slope of the sigmoidal function, and synaptic firing threshold are determined by the real-valued constants λ s and Θ s , which are fixed at Θ s = -0.045 and λ s = -1000. Therefore, the equation of motions describing the dynamics of the neuronal simplicial complex for two instances are given by, and where ǫ, g c symbolize electrical and chemical synaptic coupling strengths, and ǫ e SI , ǫ c SI are the corresponding higher-order coupling strengths. The adjacency matrices A [e] and A [c] describes the pairwise network connectivity of electrical and chemical synapses, and A [e,SI] , A [c,SI] represent adjacency tensors corresponding to three-body interactions. In general, the connectivity network of electrical and chemical synapses are taken to be bidirectional and unidirectional, respectively. But for our case, we consider both the connectivity network to be bidirectional. Furthermore, since the coupling forms associated with chemical ion transportation are nonlinear synchronization invasive (i.e., G 2 (x, x) = 0 and G c SI (x, x, x) = 0), we consider identical node degree ] , the number of 2-simplices adjacent to a node for synchronization invariance condition to be satisfied. However, since the coupling forms corresponding to gap junctions are linear diffusive, no further restriction on connection topology is needed in this scenario. We first consider the layer with a connection through electrical synapses to allow three-body interactions among the neurons. Therefore, the equations of motion governing the dynamics of our simplicial complex satisfy Eq. ( We begin by examining the development of synchronization error E (given by ( To verify our numerical result, we then proceed through the linear stability analysis of the synchronization state based on the MSF approach. Followed by a series of calculations detailed in Sec. III B, the variational equation transverse to synchronization manifold can be written analogous to Eq. (13b) as, where J denotes the Jacobian operator, ′ represents derivative with respect to V , and L [e,SI] are the (N -1) × (N -1) real matrices ob-tained through transformation the Laplacians L [c] and L [SI] by the matrix of orthonormal eigenvectors of L [e] . Here x 0 = (V 0 , n 0 , s 0 ) tr represents the states of the synchronized solution given by, Solving 3(N -1)-dimensional linearized Eq. ( Thereafter, we concentrate on the effect of higher-order interaction in the (ǫ, g c ) parameter plane by varying pair-wise electrical and chemical synaptic coupling strengths for fixed values of non-pairwise electrical synaptic coupling parameter ǫ e SI . We plot the corresponding synchronization error E(ǫ, g c ) in Figs. Now we investigate the effect of higher-order electrical synaptic coupling on neuronal synchronization by changing the network topology of the layer interacting via chemical synapses. Therefore, we consider that each neuron is connected to all the other neurons through chemical synapses, i.e., the connection topology of the layer interacting through chemical synapses is considered to be an all-to-all network. Figure We now consider that the layer interacting through chemical synapses allows the three-body interactions among neurons, and the layer interacting via gap junction allows only pairwise connections. Then the equation of motion governing the dynamics of the simplicial complex is given by Eq. Figure where the eigenvalues of the Laplacian L [e] are symbolized by γ e are the eigenvalues of the Laplacians L [c] and L [c,SI] , respectively. In Fig. To further illustrate how higher-order interactions play a crucial role in the emergence of the synchronization state, we investigate the simplicial complex Eq. (1) composed of N = 100 nodes having individual node dynamics as Rössler oscillators, interacting with nonlinear coupling functions through two (M = 2) distinct interaction layers, where three-body interactions are allowed in only one layer. Then the equation of motion describing the dynamics of the simplicial complex can be written as fol- 2 , 0] tr are the pairwise coupling forms in the layers with corresponding coupling strengths ǫ 1 , ǫ 2 and G SI = [0, (αy i ){(y jβ) 2 + (y kβ) 2 }, 0] tr is the functional form of the non-pairwise coupling acting in the second layer with coupling strength ǫ SI . The connection topology of the first layer is considered to be the random network with constant node degree k 1 = 5 to fulfill the synchronization invariance condition, and for the second layer, we consider the nodes are all-to-all connected. Here, the system parameters are chosen as a = b = 0.2, c = 5.7 for the isolated node dynamics to be in a chaotic state and the coupling parameters are taken as α = 0.37, β = -0.37. Figure where the eigenvalues of the Laplacian L [1] are symbolized by γ N . γ [2] and L [SI] , respectively. The number of links adjacent to each node in second layer is given by k 2 = (N -1), and each node is involved in k To conclude, here we have developed the most generic model that accounts for higher-order interactions between dynamical units in simplicial complexes with multiple interaction layers and studied the complete synchronization phenomena. In the presence of arbitrary sort of coupling schemes, we derive the invariance condition for the synchronization state. Under the requirements of invariance condition, we determine the necessary condition for the stable synchronization state, which certainly generalizes the well-known MSF approach Our investigation is based on the most prevalent and well-studied synchronization behavior, namely, the com-plete synchronization phenomenon. However, many additional types of synchrony occurs in the systems with multiple interaction layers such as chimeras 