The authors have numerically studied how to enhance reservoir computing performance by thoroughly extracting their spin-wave device potential for higher-dimensional information generation. The reservoir device has a 1-input exciter and 120-output detectors on the top of a continuous magnetic garnet film for spin-wave transmission. For various nonlinear and fading-memory dynamic phenomena distributing in the film space, small in-plane magnetic fields were used to prepare stripe domain structures and various damping constants at the film sides and bottom were explored. The ferromagnetic resonant frequency and relaxation time of spin precession clearly characterized the change in spin dynamics with the magnetic field and damping constant. The common input signal for reservoir computing was a 1 GHz cosine wave with random 6-valued amplitude modulation. A basic 120-dimensional reservoir output vector was obtained from time-series signals at the 120 output detectors under each of the three magnetic field conditions. Then, 240-and 360-dimensional reservoir output vectors were also constructed by concatenating two and three basic ones, respectively. In nonlinear autoregressive moving average (NARMA) prediction tasks, the computational performance was enhanced as the dimension of the reservoir output vector becomes higher and a significantly low prediction error was achieved for the 10th-order NARMA using the 360-dimensional vector and optimum damping constant. The results are clear evidence that the collection of diverse output signals efficiently increases the dimensionality effective for reservoir computing, i.e., reservoir-state richness. This paper demonstrates that performance enhancement through various configuration settings is a practical approach for on-chip reservoir computing devices with small numbers of real output nodes. Reservoir computing (RC) is an emerging machinelearning scheme suitable for information processing of timeseries data We proposed a spin-wave-based RC device on a chip and have demonstrated its basic capabilities for information processing, using numerical experiments In this study, we develop an efficient method to realize higher dimensionality in output node states for RC, by collecting output signals in response to a time-series input signal while the physical condition of the device is changed by the magnitude of an external magnetic field. Figure Figures Fundamental properties of spin dynamics were characterized by the ferromagnetic resonant (FMR) frequency f 0 and the relaxation time τ 0 of the spin precession under μ 0 H EX (= 2 -8 mT in steps of 1 mT). After the relaxation of a magnetic state under a specific μ 0 H EX value, μ 0 H z = 0.1 mT along the +z direction was added at t = 0 and the averaged s z over the entire film was recorded at every 1 ×10 -11 s. Finally, f 0 and τ 0 were estimated by fitting Asin(2π f 0 + φ 0 )exp(-t/τ 0 ) to the signal, where A and φ 0 are constants. Figure Based on the f 0 results, a cosine wave with 1 GHz was used as a carrier wave for input signals. To characterize fundamental properties of the carrier wave, a cosine wave with a constant amplitude ∆K U = 500 J/m 3 was fed into the input exciter and output waveforms at various detectors were observed under α = 0.001, 0.01, 0.1, and 1. Figures In the preprocessing part, a sequential random input data u(n) with a discrete time step n (= 1, 2, . . . , 4100) was converted to a time-series input signal K U (t) with a continuous time t: An input value (= 0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4 and 0.5) was converted to the corresponding K q (q = 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5) value with a constant interval ∆K q = 100 J/m 3 . The amplitude of the carrier wave was modulated by K q with a time step length X = 2 ns, as shown by a red curve in Fig. In the reservoir part in Fig. To analyze the effect of μ 0 H EX on output signals, wave- forms at the center-left detector and their DFT spectra were observed for α = 0.1 and μ 0 H EX = 2, 5, and 8 mT, as shown in Fig. It is noteworthy that this study uses a 1 GHz cosine wave as a carrier wave instead of time-series triangular pulses in our previous paper In the readout part, x i (t) were converted to the time-step reservoir output state y i (n) (n = 1, 2, . . . , 4100) using a postprocessing step: an envelope extraction, a low-pass filtering, and the averaging signal over X. Hereafter, x i (t) and y i (n) obtained under μ 0 H EX = 2, 5, and 8 mT are denoted by x j,i (t) and y j,i (n), corresponding to j = 1, 2, and 3, respectively. To exclude unstable responses, y j,i (n) in the first 100 steps were discarded, y j,i (n) in 101 ≤ n ≤ 3598 were used for the training, and the remaining y j,i (n) in 3599 ≤ n ≤ 4098 were used for the testing. Note that y j,i (n) in the last two n steps were also discarded because of higher error in the envelope processing. Next, the reservoir output vector y j (n) was given through a row-wise collection of y j,i (n): Then, combination of y j (n) with different j values were considered as follows: where N y is the dimension of a vector and [a; b] represents a vertical concatenation of vectors. Using the system output at the lth node z l (n), a system output vector z(n) was given by: The output weight matrix W out was defined as follows: Then, the system output was given by: In the training phase, the target of the system output vector d(n) was given by a collection of the target (desired) signal d l (n) for the lth system output: The target matrix D and reservoir output matrix Y were formed by column-wise collections of d(n) and y(n) for 101 ≤ n ≤ 3598, respectively. The optimum weight matrix Ŵout was calculated by where Y † is the Moore-Penrose pseudoinverse of Y. In the testing phase, the system output vector z * (n) was obtained by: We performed two time-series benchmark tasks that are widely used for evaluating RC systems. The first one is to predict time series data generated from the mth-order nonlinear autoregressive moving average (NARMA-m) model (m = 2, . . . , 10) derived from Eq. (86) in ref. The performance was evaluated by the normalized mean square error (NMSE m ) for the NARMA-m task: where Var denotes variance and L = 500 is the step length in the testing duration. The second one is delay tasks whose targets are given by: The performance was evaluated by memory capacity where Cov and z * (n, k) denote covariance and the predicted value for d k (n), respectively, and the time step length was 400. The total MC is the summation of MC k over k = 1 -120. In Fig. Figures To analyze the results in Fig. On the other hand, the difference between the results with α = 0.1 and 1 possibly originates from the difference in τ 0 : τ 0 = 5.3 -10.7 ns for α = 0.1 and τ 0 = 1.5 -2.7 ns for α = 1 (Fig. Figures Figure At m = 10 (NARMA-10), the NMSE 10 values for N y = 120, 240, and 360 are 0.120, 0.063, and 0.042, respectively, when α = 0.1. The minimum NMSE 10 = 0.042 is comparable to those obtained in the most advanced physical RC that utilizes optical systems with a feedback loop For further study, the vectors y(n) with various N y (= 120 -330) values were constructed by collecting y j,i (n) with j (= 1, 2, 3) and i (= 1, 2, . . . N y /3). Figure Considering that our method employs the spin dynamics under the different conditions in parallel, the whole system can be interpreted as a multi-reservoir system such as the grouped echo state networks We have numerically studied the performance enhancement in RC utilizing the single spin-wave-based reservoir device with the 1-input exciter and 120-output detectors. The input signal was the 1 GHz cosine wave whose amplitude was modulated following a series random 6 values and the output signals at the detectors were found to have nonlinear phenomena changing with the spatial position, external magnetic field, and damping constant at the sides and bottom of the magnetic garnet film. The reservoir output vectors with various dimensions, including higher than 120 dimension, were constructed by collecting the output signals under the three different magnetic fields. With the optimum damping constant, the computational performance in NARMA tasks was enhanced with the increase in the dimension of the reservoir output vector. The result is evidence that our method efficiently increases the dimensionality effective for NARMA tasks. We demonstrated that the single spin-wave-based device with the μ 0 H EX -controlled different physical conditions can generate diverse output signals that are essential for higher computational performance. This strategy is also very useful for other physical RC, along with the virtual node method, to tackle nonlinear time series prediction tasks. In particular, since it is quite strict to implement a vast number of real output nodes on a chip device, performance enhancement through various configuration settings is a practical approach.