We study spin-transfer-torque driven magnetization dynamics of a perpendicular magnetic tunnel junction (MTJ) nanopillar. Based on the combination of spin-torque ferromagnetic resonance and microwave spectroscopy techniques, we demonstrate that the free layer (FL) and the weak pinned reference layer (RL) exhibit distinct dynamic behaviors with opposite frequency vs. field dispersion relations. The FL can support a single coherent spin-wave (SW) mode for both parallel and antiparallel configurations, while the RL exhibits spin-wave excitation only for the antiparallel state. These two SW modes corresponding to the FL and RL coexist at an antiparallel state and exhibit a crossover phenomenon of oscillation frequency with increasing the external magnetic field, which could be helpful in the mutual synchronization of auto-oscillations for SWbased neuromorphic computing. The dc current can control the magnetization state or drive the stable procession of magnetization in a sandwiched magnetic structure by the spin-transfer torque (STT) effect because the unpolarized electrons passing through the two magnetic layers separated by a nonmagnetic metal or ultra-thin insulating layer first are polarized by the fixed magnetic layer and then transfer the spin angular momentum to the free layer Modern STT-MRAM is based upon nanoscale MgO-CoFeB-based MTJs with high tunneling magnetoresistance (TMR) and strong perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (PMA). Compared to in-plane MTJs, perpendicular MTJs (pMTJs) have a relatively low critical current and high thermal stabilization, providing a route toward scalable STT-MRAM technology With the development of 5G wireless communications, there are increasing need for this low power consumption, high speed, and multi-function next-generation rf technology The pMTJ nano-pillar with 70 nm diameter were nanofabricated by combining photolithography and ion beam milling technique based on the multilayer stack of Ta (5) / Pt(5) / [Co(0.4)/Pt(0.4)]6 / Co(0.4) / Ru(0.9) / [Co(0.4)/Pt(0.4)]2 / Co(0.4) / Ta(0.55) / Co20Fe60B20(1) / MgO(0.9) / Co20Fe60B20(1.6) / Ta(0.43) / Co20Fe60B20 (1.0) / MgO(0.9) / Ta(5) / Ru(5), as shown in Fig. The size of two external electrodes of the studied pMTJ cell is shown in Fig. Firstly, the current-driven magnetization switching experiments are adopted to investigate STT switching behavior in our MgO-CoFeB-based pMTJs. Figure where e is the electron charge, ħ is the reduced Planck constant, α, M S and t F are the damping factor, the saturation magnetization and thickness of the FL, η is the effective spin-transfer efficiency. The effective magnetization 4πM eff can be further rewritten as 4πM s - where ∆H is the linewidths, H r is the resonance field, S and A are the symmetric and antisymmetric components of Lorentzian function, respectively. The several dispersion curves of f vs. H are observed in ST-FMR spectra under the AP state. Three of them have the resonance frequency f decreasing with H ext increasing, indicating that the corresponding total effective magnetization decreases with increasing H ext . These results are consistent with the fact that the FL (RL) magnetization direction is antiparallel (parallel) to the total effective field, which is confirmed by R vs. H ext + H offset curve in the top panel of Fig. Since the nanopillar shape induced the spatial confinement effect on the dynamic modes, additional localized standing wave modes are also observed. In principle, the frequency dispersions of these modes can also be simply described by Kittel formular where k is the spin-wave vector, D is the exchange-stiffness, and H stray is the total effective field on the active dynamic layer, including the stray field and IEC-induced bias field from the SyFi layer. Here, we use the FMR mode of the FL as an example to illustrate our analysis process. Except for the external magnetic field, the FL also suffers To explore the dynamical states induced by dc current in this pMTJ, we perform microwave spectroscopic measurements with varying the tilted angle θ of H relative to the multilayer plane. Tilting H from the vertical direction can enhance the amplitude of the procession and improves the output power of the microwave generation signal. the device has a preferable AP as the initial state and will not happen STT-induced magnetization switching of the FL at the positive currents. The power spectral density (PSD) of the observed spectra can be well approximated by a Lorentzian function, indicating a good coherent dynamic mode rather than thermally-excited precession. Note that the observed magnetization auto-oscillation in the AP state at large positive currents is still driven by current-induced STT, because the magnetizations of the RL and FL are not completely antiparallel to each other under a tilted H (θ = 45 ̊). The auto-oscillation spectra show much higher PSD at the P state than at the AP state, indicating that the FL has a larger precession angle in the P state, which is also consistent with the fact that the polarized electrons prefer to drive the FL magnetization antiparallel to the RL at the positive current due to STT effect. We also find that the oscillation frequency exhibits a significant red shift with the current in the AP state As ST-FMR spectra discussed above, the studied pMTJ device exhibits two distinct types of dynamics corresponding to the FL and RL, respectively. Therefore, to obtain more information on its auto-oscillating dynamics, we further perform dependence of the microwave generation characteristics with a wide frequency range on the magnetic field tilted angle θ at I = 0.12 mA and four different fields H = -0.52 kOe, -1.0 kOe, -1.47 kOe, and -1.95 kOe, as shown in the bottom panel of Fig. The obtained microwave generation spectra exhibit two opposite frequency dependences on θ for all four applied fields, similar to the f vs. H dispersion obtained in the ST-FMR spectra. The low-frequency modes f FL-P and f FL-AP with a larger PSD, corresponding to the oscillating magnetization of the FL, decreases its frequency with increasing θ in the AP state and reverses the variation tendency after switching to the P state from the AP state above the critical angle (e.g., θ = 120 ̊ for H = -1.0 kOe). While the high-frequency mode f RL-AP corresponds to the RL is only observed in the AP state and exhibits an opposite angular dependence of frequency with the primary f FL-AP mode. Since the AP state exhibits the opposite angular dependence for f RL-AP and f FL-AP , there exists the oscillation frequency crossover behavior for these two modes when the applied external magnetic field is above 1.47 kOe. From the analysis of angular dependence of the spectra frequency and power, we confirm no synchronization (level attraction) or hybridization gap occurrence at the frequency cross point for these two modes corresponding to the RL and FL, respectively, suggesting a negligible mode coupling between RL and FL in the studied MTJ. Furthermore, to directly compare the frequency of auto-oscillation and uniform FMR, we theoretically calculate the FMR frequency with the parameters extracted from our experimentally obtained ST-FMR data by using the Kittel model 41 : The calculated FMR frequency f FMR dispersions of the FL and RL are illustrated in Fig. In summary, our field-and current-driven magnetization switching and ST-FMR experiments reveal that the FL and RL have a strong interfacial PMA field (H ⊥ = 13.88 kOe for the FL, 11.32 kOe for the RL) and suffer a considerable stary magnetic field of 0.96 kOe from the bottom SyFi-PL layer. Besides the stary field, the RL also suffers an additional bias field of 1.16 kOe due to the moderate IEC between the RL and SyFi-PL. Furthermore, the FL and RL exhibit distinct dynamics with opposite f vs. H dispersion relations. The current-driven magnetization auto-oscillation for the FL can be achieved at both P and AP configurations but for the RL only at the AP state. Our results demonstrate a frequency crossover behavior for the FL and RL modes at the AP state when H is above 1.47 kOe at certain oblique angles. Our results provide valuable information for the selective excitation and electronic control of coherent magnetization auto-oscillation of a pMTJ-based STNO for rf applications and magnon-based neuromorphic computing by tunning the magnetization configurations between the FL and RL and their magnetic properties, e.g., various effective bias fields through tailoring the material parameters of the pMTJ multilayer structure.