We report high resolution polar Kerr effect measurements on CsV3Sb5 single crystals in search for signatures of spontaneous time reversal symmetry breaking below the charge order transition at T * ≈ 94 K. Utilizing two different versions of zero-area loop Sagnac interferometers operating at 1550 nm wavelength, each with the fundamental attribute that without a time reversal symmetry breaking sample at its path, the interferometer is perfectly reciprocal, we find no observable Kerr effect to within the noise floor limit of the apparatus at 30 nanoradians. Simultaneous coherent reflection ratio measurements confirm the sharpness of the charge order transition in the same optical volume as the Kerr measurements. At finite magnetic field we observe a sharp onset of a diamagnetic shift in the Kerr signal at T * , which persists down to the lowest temperature without change in trend. Since 1550 nm is an energy that was shown to capture all features of the optical properties of the material that interact with the charge order transition, we are led to conclude that it is highly unlikely that time reversal symmetry is broken in the charge ordered state in CsV3Sb5. Symmetry-breaking is the phenomenon where an infinitesimal perturbation can cause the system to break the underlying symmetry of the Hamiltonian. And it is a cornerstone concept in the understanding and manipulation of quantum materials. The state of a system can also be manipulated without explicit symmetry-breaking by controlling topological aspects of the material in momentum space, thereby regulating the electronic bandstructure. When strong electron correlations dominate, the system is often observed to be close to multiple competing ordered phases with similar energies. For example, the appearance of charge order may trigger competition with an emerging new electronic state, which in turn leads to the phenomenon of "intertwined order" A particularly interesting material system in that respect are the quasi-two-dimensional kagomé compounds AV 3 Sb 5 (A=K, Rb and Cs) Focusing on the transitions at T * , a key issue of a possible co-occurrence of time-reversal symmetry breaking (TRSB) has emerged through claims of observation of anomalous Hall effect (AHE) In this paper we aim to closely examine possible TRSB in high quality crystals of CsV 3 Sb 5 via high resolution measurements of the polar Kerr effect. To substantiate our findings, we use crystals grown in two different laboratories (MPI-Dresden and UC Santa Barbara), all showing salient attributes of the charge order transition at T * ≈ 94 K. Further we use two different zero-arealoop Sagnac interferometers (ZALSI) Our results stand in stark contrast to previously published optical measurements claiming finite spontaneous Kerr effects. Two experiments In this study we use high quality and well-characterized single crystals of CsV 3 Sb 5 obtained from two different sources. Samples grown at UCSB (dubbed sample 2) followed the previously published procedure found in High resolution Polar Kerr effect measurements presented in this paper were performed using zero-area-loop Sagnac interferometers (ZALSI) first introduced by Xia et al. The main result of this work is the test for spontaneous Kerr effect in CsV 3 Sb 5 . Kerr signal was recorded during zero field warmup after removal of a "training" magnetic field applied during cooldown. Results from the two laboratories are presented in Fig. Our main result raises doubts to whether time reversal symmetry is indeed broken below T * in CsV 3 Sb 5 . On the other hand, measurements at a finite magnetic field oriented along the c-axis show a clear and relatively abrupt diamagnetic shift in the Kerr effect, which near T * behaves similarly to the in-field magnetic susceptibility measurements The bulk magnetic susceptibility of CsV 3 Sb 5 has been previously shown to develop a paramagnetic response below ∼ 50 K The susceptibility measurements on CsV 3 Sb 5 further show that the diamagnetic drop with the field along the ab plane is almost 5 times weaker than if the field points in the c-direction, where earlier results on KV 3 Sb 5 show no diamagnetic shift for the field along the ab-plane Next we provide our speculations on why results reported here are in contrast to other optical measurements that attempt to measure Kerr effect in the AV 3 Sb 5 systems The above discussion suggests that at least within the technical aspect, those other optical measurements fall short in comparison to the ZALSI, which inherently measures only non-reciprocal effects, thus returning a zero signal if time reversal symmetry is not broken. On the materials side we note that if the CDW is chiral along the c-axis of the material, mirror symmetries are broken as was previously observed in STM Finally we briefly comment on the reported onset of anomalous Hall effect In conclusion, we have used high resolution polar Kerr effect measurements to scrutinize previously reported submissions Note added: during the review process of this manuscript, we've learnt that recent measurement In the present study two CsV 3 Sb 5 samples grown in different laboratories were measured in two Sagnac interferometers. First samples dubbed "sample 1" is from Cluadia Felser group in Dresden, it was measured in Kapitulnik group at Stanford, second sample dubbed "sample 2" grown at Stephen D. Wilson's group at UCSB was studied at UC Irvine in Xia group. Samples were measured using zero loop area fiber Sagnac interferometers (ZALSI) The apparatus is based on the Sagnac interferometer A schematics of ZALSI as well as polarization states at each point are shown in Fig. where P is the returned power without modulation, and depends on focus of the objective lens and sample reflectivity. P (t) can be further expanded into Fourier series of ω if we keep φ nr as a slowly time-varying quantity compared to ω: where J 1 and J 2 are Bessel functions. Therefore, the detected powers P 0 , P 1 and P 2 are: (A.2) Hence Kerr signal θ K = φ nr /2 can be obtained using equation A.5, which is independent of optical power, sample reflectivity and focus of the objective lens. For optimal θ K sensitivity φ m is often chosen to be close to 0.92. Here we provide a qualitative argument on why ZALSI only detects a signal when TRS is broken. Assume a sample with its surface in the x-y plane and a linearly polarized electric field propagating along the z-direction which is perpendicular to the surface of the sample. Adopting the common convention where the sense of circular polarization is determined with respect to a fixed axis (here the +z axis), the handedness of the reflected light with respect to the direction of propagation flips. This convention defines four different indices of refraction: n R↗ and n L↗ are the refractive indices for right circularly polarized (RCP) light and left circularly polarized (LCP) light propagating along +z (reflected light) and n R↘ and n L↘ are the refractive indices for RCP and LCP propagating along -z (incident light). Where TRS is preserved however, if TRS is broken at least one equality in (A.6) fails. Focusing on a polar configuration where light impinges on the sample at normal incidence (as it is in our ZALSI apparatus) and using scattering theory to calculate the Kerr effect from the difference between the reflection amplitudes for right and left circularly polarized light It is then clear that θ K is finite only for the case of TRSB. The above results are robust, independent of whether the material that we study is isotropic, or it possesses linear birefringence or natural optical activity. In addition to the Kerr signal, we record the total (P0) and the coherence (P2) parts of the reflected optical power, as their ratio serves as a measure of the linear and/or circular birefringence. The above calculations of the ZALSI assume perfect retardance of the quarter-wave plate and absence of either linear or circular birefringence and dichroism of the sample. In reality, commercial zero-order quarter-wave plates have a typical retardance error of 1% even for normal incidence, and samples such as CsV 3 Sb 5 display birefringence and/or dichroism. As a result, the reflected beams, after passing the quarter-wave plate again, become elliptical instead of being perfectly linearly polarized. And a small fraction of the light will be incoherent with the major beams and thus won't participate in the interference. These incoherent components will not be captured by P 1 or P 2 , but will still be detected as part of the average power P 0 . And pre-factors need to be added to the formulas for P 0 , P 1 and P 2 : P 1 /P = (1 + A 1 )(sin(φ nr )J 1 (2φ m )), (B.2) where A 0 , A 1 and A 2 are small correction pre-factors for sample birefringence and/or dichroism, and retar-dance error of the wave plate. The Kerr signal θ K can be obtained using updated equation B.4, with a small correction to the scaling factor. There is no change to the zero point of θ K , which is guaranteed by the symmetry of the interferometer. On the other hand, a change in sample birefringence and/or dichroism will induce changes to P 0 and P 2 . However, as previously mentioned, they are also dependent on P , which changes with focus of the objective lens and sample reflectivity. Their ratio P 2 /P 0 is independent of these factors and represents the ratio between the coherent and the total optical powers, dubbed "coherent reflection ratio". Since the wave plate retardance error is a slow varying quantity usually dominated the slow drifts of its tilt and rotation, P 2 /P 0 can be used to measure that change of sample birefringence and/or dichroism during temperature sweeps. In a typical experiment, we align the focused beam to an optically flat area of the crystal after cleaving. This can be facilitated by scanning imaging as shown in Fig. To reveal the diamagnetic shift below T CDW = 93.5K, it is necessary to perform Sagnac measurements when the sample is subject to a magnetic field. In our normal Sagnac setups we have verified that it is indeed independent of sample temperature, as shown in Fig. In general Magneto-optical (MO) effects appear because in the presence of magnetism right and left circularly polarized lights propagate differently in solids. When a magnetic field is applied to a diamagnetic insulating solid, magneto-optical effects will originate from the direct effect of the magnetic field on the orbital electronic motion. On the other hand, for ferromagnetic materials, or paramagnetic materials at low temperatures (when their Curie susceptibility is large enough), the effect of the magnetic field on the orbital motion is negligible compared with effects associated with spin-orbit interaction DC resistances measured on sample 1 and sample 2 are shown in Fig. 