In fiber Reinforced Composites (FRC) fiber breakage is a common phenomenon resulting in stress concentration. This high stress gets transfer in the vicinity of the breakage which is quantified by Stress Transfer Coefficient (STC). In this paper, an attempt is made to check the effect of fiber volume fraction and the distribution of the fibers on STC and ineffective length. The fiber volume fraction is changed considering three cases: 1) by changing the number of fibers, 2) by changing the dimension of the Represntative Volume Element (RVE) and 3) by changing the fiber radius. Cases with change in dimension of RVE and change in fiber radius, periodic and semi-random arrangents of fibers are considered. From the analysis of 200 RVE's for each volume fraction in random and semi-random arrangements, it is observed that the distribution of STC does not follow any standard distribution, even if the fiber arrangement follows the normal distribution. The fiber cross-sectional dimension plays a critical role in regaining the broken fiber strength. The periodic arrangement of fibers can be said to be beneficial over the random arrangement considering the stress transfer from the broken fiber. Material selection is a very important and complex task for a design engineer. With the advancement in the technology, it is now becoming easy to analyse these material for a structure under different loading conditions. Nonetheless, the proper characterization of the material is a cumbersome task. The conventional materials are well characterized but the non-conventional or engineered materials like composite materials are still needed to be properly characterized. The tailoring of properties makes the composite find its application in many fields like automobile, aerospace, biomedical, etc. Among all the composites the Fiber Reinforced Composite (FRC) is widely used. Hence the characterization of the FRC is important. Many researchers have tried different characterization methods to get different properties of FRC's. Stress concentration in FRC is one of the parameters that need to be studied. Since stress concentration can cause very adverse effects in the structure. There are numerous reasons for the stress concentration in FRC, one of the reasons is the breakage of fiber. When a fiber break in the FRC structure, stresses in its vicinity increases. To maintain the equilibrium, this high stress gets transferred to other neighbouring fibers through the matrix The current study deals with the characterisation of FRC under fiber breakage condition, which is mostly dictated by the "micromechanics". While doing the micromechanical analysis it is not necessary to analyse the complete microstructure, but a part of it is considered which is known as Representative Volume Element (RVE). Being the representation of the composite, the RVE has the same effective mechanical properties as that of the complete macrostructure. Ideally, the fibers in the microstructure should be arranged periodically, but due to various errors during manufacturing, the fibers remain no longer periodic and are distributed randomly. In the literature, researchers have considered both types of fiber distribution i.e. periodic and random in the RVE to conduct the micromechanical analysis. The analysis of the micromechanics after the fiber break in the FRC can be broadly classified as analytical and numerical. Both the analysis have vast literature showing that many researchers have contributed towards the characterization of the FRC. Cox Rosen Handling the approximations of the shear lag model Zhao and Ji Various theoretical models discussed above are the attempt, to study the physics governing the composite behaviour having broken fibers under applied axial load. These models have however limitations. All these models use assumptions to prove their validity. The analytical models generally are not useful in predicting the stress distribution for low fiber volume fractions and low fiber/matrix stiffness ratios Another approach used for the micromechanical analysis is by using the numerical methods (most common is the Finite Element Method (FEM)). The researchers have considered different parameters to study their effects on stress transfer. Chen The effect of randomness, volume fraction, and fiber-matrix stiffness ratio on the STC and the ineffective length was studied by Swolf et al. From the above literature, it is found that none of the researchers have tried to compare the different ways in which the volume fraction can be varied and its effect on STC and ineffective length. Also, a compromise between complete randomness and complete periodicity in fiber arrangement i.e. the semi-random arrangement of fibers in the RVE is not studied. The literature on the effect of randomness on the STC does not consider a large set of data to analyse completely the effect of fiber position on the stress transfer. In this paper, an attempt is made to study the effect of volume fraction and fiber distribution on the STC and the ineffective length using Finite Element Analysis (FEA). Three cases of variation of volume fraction are considered Case 1: by changing the number of fibers, Case 2: by changing the dimension of the RVE (Matrix volume fraction) and Case 3: by changing the fiber radius. A wide variation in the fiber volume fraction is applied (10 to 70%). In Case 1 the fiber arrangement is random. For Case 2 and Case 3 two types of fiber arrangements were considered, semi-random and periodic. 200 RVE's for each fiber volume fraction, in the random and semi-random arrangements of fibers were analysed to get a large set of data. Based on the data an attempt is made to do a statistical study on the distribution of the STC in the random and semi-random fiber arrangement. A comparison study is performed among the three cases of the volume fraction variation. This paper is further divided into three sections. In Section 2 the finite element model is discussed in brief for the three cases, to carry out the desired study. Section 3 discuss the results obtained by solving the FEM using the commercial software ABAQUS. Lastly, section 4 concludes the paper by summing up the findings of the results. The volume fraction of fiber is defined as the ratio of the volume of total fibers to the total volume of the RVE. Mathematically it can be written as Where, n are the number of fibers, R f is the radius of the fiber, l is the length of fibers, L is the length of RVE, and D is crossectional size of the RVE. For present study, which deals with continuous fibers, as the length of fibers (l) and length of the RVE (L) are same, the above expression of volume fraction simplifies to: From the above expression it can be observed that n, R f , and D influence the volume fraction and in turn influence the associated properties. The randomeness in these parameter influences the overall response of composite, which in turn reflects the stochastic nature of the FRC. A deeper study is essential to quantify the influence of these parameters. The present work, following three cases are considered: Case 1: The dimension of the RVE (D) and the radius of the fiber (R f ) are kept constant while the number of fibers (n) is altered to change the volume fraction. Case 2: In this case, the volume fraction(V f ) is varied by changing the dimension of the RVE (D) while keeping the number of fibers (n) and the radius of the fiber (R f ) constant. Case 3: In this case the dimension of the RVE (D) and the number of fibers (n) are kept constant while the radius of the fiber (R f ) is varied to change the volume fraction. Table In literature random microstuctue is generated either through (a) using image processing based techniques, or (b) using an algorithm. In the image processing technique first a realistic microstructure image is obtained of an FRC using a characterization technique e.g. Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM). Then this image is processed to get the location of fibers. The data of fiber location is then used to generate Statistically Equivalent Representative Volume Element (SERVE) using any of the predefined algorithms The algorithm base RVE generation technique is more preferred as it enables generation of large number of representative sets. Feder In this case the size of the RVE is 26.5 × 26.5 × 100 μm. The radius of the fiber is 2.5μm. To generate the complete RVE with random fiber arrangement following steps are performed: Step 1: A block of the size corresponding to size of the RVE (D) and of length 100 μm is generated. The centre of each of these unit cells makes the centre of the fibers. All RVE's have the central fiber located at the geometrical centre of the RVE.This fiber is considered to be broken by applying the appropriate boundary condion. Step 3: Corresponding to the volume fraction, number of the centres excluding the central fiber (Table Fig. Number of fibers, in this case, is (n =) 25 and the radius is 2.5μm. The variation of D for volume fraction is shown in Table The mean (μ) for the normal distribution is the centres of the unit cells. The standard deviation (σ) for different volume fractions is shown in Table Here, 2e is subtracted so that the fiber does not touch the boundaries of the unit cells, e is the minimum distance from the boundary of the unit cell to the fiber periphery. The value of e is taken to be equal to 0.25μm. Complete Periodic: In this, the position of the fibers is exactly at the centres of the unit cell. The standard deviation (σ) is zero in this case. D for this case is taken to be 25μm and n is kept 25. The values of R f for different volume fractions are shown in Table The paper of Yu et al. In Case 1, as the fibers were placed randomly, it was difficult to maintain a structured mesh in all the RVE's. So, in Case 1, hex dominated meshing was used having linear brick element (C3D8R) and wedge element (C3D6) with an approximate global element size of 0.5 μm for meshing the RVE's. In Case 2 and Case 3, linear brick type 8-node with hourglass control (C3D8R) element is used for meshing of the matrix, while fibers are meshed using C3D8R and C3D6 element type. For Case 2 the element size of a unit cell in x and y direction is taken to be equal to 0.5 μm and in the z direction it is 4 μm up to breakage and in the breakage region, the element size is 1 μm. To mesh the fiber it is partitioned to have an inner cell of radius 0.5 μm. The inner cell only consists of wedge elements (C3D6) while the rest of the fiber is discretised using C3D8R elements. Along the circumference of the fiber including the inner cell, there are 48 nodes, while along the radius up to inner cells there are 13 nodes and in the inner cell, there are only two nodes along the radius. In Case 3 the element size of the unit cell along the x and y direction is the same as Case 2 but the element size along the z direction up to the fiber breakage region is 3 μm and in the fiber breakage region it is 0.5 μm. For meshing the fiber similar technique was used as in Case 2 but having 68 number of nodes along the circumference and 17 number of nodes along the radius up to the inner cell. Fig To have reliable results it is essential to have convergence study both from the point of view of FEM and stochastic analysis. As the meshing and other FE based conditions are adapted from Yu et al. To predict the accurate behaviour of the effect of volume fraction on the STC in these three cases, a large set of data needs to be evaluated. For this large number of RVE's with different fiber arrangements for every volume fraction in the respective cases needs to be analysed. To find the optimal number of RVE's a convergence study for the stochastical The process of generating these 200 RVE's for each volume fraction in each case was automated using Python script. The script includes all the information right from generating the model to exporting the desired result. The current study as mentioned earlier involves the study of the effect of volume fraction on STC and ineffective length and the study of effects of fiber distribution on STC and ineffective length. STC is defined as the ratio of the average stress near fiber breakage (S ) to average stress in the far field (S). Ineffective length is the fiber length corresponding to 90 % of the far field stress As discussed earlier the volume fraction, in this case, is varied ( To get the sense of the distribution of STC for a volume fraction due to the random arrangements of fibers, a brief overlook of the distribution of fibers in an RVE is discussed. In Fig Thus we can say that for any fiber except broken fiber there are these 5 locations to be placed randomly. Now, coming back to the distribution of STC for a volume fraction, the RVE's shows a particular pattern for each bin range. For range 1 which is seen in volume fraction 10 and 20 %, it is observed that the RVE's corresponding to this range does not have fibers at the location 1 and 2, but are present either at locations 3, 4 and/or 5. Thus in these RVE's the distance of the 1 st nearest fiber is more which results in a low STC value. The RVE's corresponding to bin range 2 does not have fibers at location 1 but, all other locations are occupied. In these RVE's the nearest fiber distance is less as compared to bin range 1 RVE's, hence the STC value is more. Bin range 3 has the highest STC values because there is at least one fiber at location 1 which is at the minimum distance from the broken fiber in all the RVE's corresponding to it. The standard deviation of STC distribution for volume fraction 10 % is high; as in this volume fraction the number of fibers are less and as there are in all 24 locations excluding the broken fibers to be filled the number of ways they can be arranged at different locations are more. As a result, all three bin ranges have values that imply, that there is a lot of variation in STC values and hence we get the highest value of standard deviation. As the volume fraction is increasing the number of values in range 1 and range 2 can be seen to be decreasing and hence the variation in the value of STC is less resulting in low values of standard deviation. In other words, we can say that with the increase in fiber volume fraction the RVE is tending towards periodicity. Analysing the distribution of STC, now the effect of volume fraction on the average value of STC can be predicted. Fig Another parameter that is affected along with the STC due to the distribution of the fibers and the volume fraction is the ineffective length. When a fiber breaks in the microstructure of the composite, its strength (load carrying capacity) in the loading direction reduces to zero. But as the loading continues the fiber starts regaining its strength. This regaining of strength is because of the shearing of the matrix. It is assumed that the bond between matrix and fiber is perfect. The surrounding fibers play a very important role in the fast gaining of strength. For better understanding, three scenarios are discussed below. The boundary conditions are the same as mentioned in section 2.2. Number of neighbouring fibers = 0 : In this case, there is only one fiber in the RVE which is broken. As the loading continues the fiber tries to move out of the RVE since there is no restriction at the z = 0 plane to restrict the applied displacement. The tendency of the fiber to displace will stretch the matrix due to the perfect bond between them. The stretching of the matrix imposes restrictions on the fiber from displacing as at z = 0 plane the matrix has zero degrees of freedom in the loading direction. Due to restriction, the fiber starts building the stress in the loading direction. In other words, the fiber starts regaining its strength to oppose the applied displacement. In this case, the rebuilding of the fiber strength is all because of the matrix. The non-broken neighbouring fiber present inside the region of the shearing of the matrix will act as a catalyst in building the stress in the broken fiber. This is because the intact fiber resists the shearing of the matrix due to the perfect bond between them along the length. Thus this fiber will give an extra hand to the matrix in holding and building the stress in the broken fiber. The more the number of non-broken neighbouring fibers present within the shielding region of the matrix the less shearing of the matrix will suffice the recovering of the strain in the broken fiber. The length of the broken fiber which is responsible for the shearing of the matrix before it regains its strength to oppose the applied load is, in fact, the length of the broken fiber which does not support any loading, and hence it is called ineffective length. Thus, in case with no neighbouring fibers, ineffective length will be very large and scenario with more than one neighbouring fibers will show the least ineffective length, the ineffective length with only one neighbouring fiber lies in between. The values of ineffective length for 200 RVE's for each volume fraction is obtained with the help of an algorithm written in the form of code in Python. This algorithm obtains the values of normal stresses, S 33 , in the longitudinal direction of the fiber on the broken fiber at an interval of 1 μm. After this, the stress at the far-field i.e. at z = 100μm is obtained and as per the definition, it is multiplied with 0.9. The value obtained after multiplication is matched with The standard deviation of ineffective lengths of all 200 RVE's in a particular volume fraction is plotted against the fiber volume fraction as in The standard deviation of the ineffective length is highest for the fiber volume fraction of 20%. The reason for this is there are 6 fibers to be placed excluding the broken fibers. Unlike for 10% volume fraction, there can be four fibers taking location 1 in the RVE resulting in the lowest value of the ineffective length. As the number of fiber at location 1 is reducing from 4 to 0 the RVE's will have higher values of ineffective length respectively. Also in this volume fraction the number of fibers at location 2, if no fiber is at location 1, will affect the value of the ineffective length. The largest value of ineffective length is observed when there are no fibers present at locations 1 and 2. Since there is a lot of variation in the position of the fibers at locations 1 and 2 this volume fraction shows the highest standard deviation value. As the volume fraction is further increased with the increase in the number of fibers, as shown in Table As mentioned earlier the volume fraction, in this case, is changed by changing the size of the RVE keeping the number of fibers and radius of the fibers constant. First, the case of semi-random distribution of fibers is studied for the effect of fiber distribution and fiber volume fraction on STC, and then the special case of periodic RVE is analysed. Up to 50% volume fraction is considered in the semi-random case as the standard deviation of the fiber distribution for 60% and 70% volume fraction is very small, as shown in Table ) Variation of average STC along with the standard deviation with respect to volume fraction. position but within the unit cells. For the analysis the STC of the nearest fibers (fibers at location 1 in Fig. As there are a total of 25 number of fibers, there will fibers in all unit cells (locations 1 to 5 in Fig. As the fiber volume fraction is increasing with the decrease in the value of 'd', the mean value of 'a' is decreasing implying more stress is transferred to the nearest fibers and less stress is depleted in the shearing of the matrix. Thus, the value of STC is increasing. The change in the mean value of 'a' results in the variation of STC values for different RVE's of the same volume fraction. As the volume fraction is increasing, stress transferred is shared by the nearest fibers instead of shearing the matrix. The standard deviation of STC distribution is thus increasing with the volume fraction. However, after a volume fraction of 40% i.e. for volume fraction 50%, there is a small decrease in the value of standard deviation. The reason for this can be seen from Table The average ineffective length decreases with the increases in the volume fraction similar to Case 1. The plot of the average ineffective length for different volume fractions is shown in Fig. The mean value of 'a' for the fiber volume fraction of 10% is very large. Even the minimum value due to the repositioning of the fibers is very large. This means that there is a large volume of the matrix surrounding the fiber, implying large shearing of the matrix. Thus the observed value of the average ineffective length is large among all the volume fractions. As mentioned earlier that the standard deviation of the distribution of the ineffective length is zero for the fiber volume fraction of 10% which implies that all the RVE's results in the same value of ineffective length. The mean value of 'a' being very large, the changes in its value especially for 1 st and 2 nd nearest fibers will affect the ineffective length negligibly. The ineffective length obtained from the algorithm is the rounded value as stated earlier, and as the variation in ineffective length observed due to changes in the value of 'a' is negligible, a constant value of ineffective length is observed in all RVE's resulting in zero value of standard deviation. As the volume fraction is increasing with the decrease in the size of the unit cell (value of 'd' in Fig. , (f) Variation of average STC along with the standard deviation with respect to volume fraction. With further increase in the volume fraction, the average value of ineffective length decreases due to less shearing of the matrix. However, the value of the standard deviation of ineffective length decreases to zero for the fiber volume fraction of 50% and 60%. This is because the value of 'd' the size of the unit cell becomes small with the increase in the volume fraction. The standard deviation of the distribution of fibers in the unit cell is very small, as shown in Table In this case, the volume fraction is changed by changing the radius of the fibers keeping the number of fibers and size of the RVE constant. For the semi-random case, 20% -60% of volume fraction is considered as the standard deviation of the fiber distribution for 70% volume fraction is very small, as shown in Table The reason for this trend remains the same as that for Case 2, the means of changing the value of 'a' is different. It is varied by changing the fiber radius 'R f ' while 'd' in this case remains constant. Also, it is observed that in this case also the values of STC for periodic RVE approximately match with the average STC values for the corresponding fiber volume fraction, as shown in Fig. A thorough analysis has been done to study the effect of volume fraction and fiber distribution on the STC and the ineffective length. To the best of author's knowledge, this is a first attempt comparing the effects of volume fraction on STC and ineffective length in three different cases of fiber volume fraction variation has been performed. The three cases considered were Case 1: change in the number of fibers, Case 2: considering change in the dimension of the RVE, and Case 3: change in the fiber radius. The results obtained and discussed in all three cases suggest that the trends of the distribution of STC and ineffective length for 200 RVE's for each fiber volume fraction, can be generalized for the same loading conditions with different numerical values. From Case 1 and semi-random fiber distribution of Case 2 and Case 3, it is observed that even though the fiber arrangement follows the normal distribution, the distribution of STC does not follow any standard distribution. A similar kind of observation was observed by From Case 2 and Case 3 it is observed that the semi-random arrangement of fibers does not provide any significant benefit in micromechanical analysis over the periodic arrangement as the average values of the STC's and the average values of the ineffective length in both the arrangements are almost the same. In Case 2 and Case 3 as all the 25 unit cells are always occupied by the fibers, the shielding effect due to the intact fibers (assuming all the fibers at their mean position) is the same. The variation in the values of the STC and ineffective length in the semi-random case is due to the change in the average distance between the broken fiber and the nearest fibers. The effect of the change in the average distance from the broken fiber and second, third fourth, and fifth nearest fibers decreases respectively. From Case 3 it is observed that the ineffective length of the fiber depends on the cross-sectional dimension of the fiber. The smaller the radius of the fiber smaller is the ineffective length. Considering the perfect fiber-matrix bond and the same fiber dimensions, for random fiber distribution (Case 1) higher fiber volume fraction FRC is advisable. Case 2 suggests that the fiber volume fraction 40% to 50% is the optimum volume fraction considering the trends of the average STC and average ineffective length. While Case 3 suggests that low fiber volume fraction is the suggested, since in low volume fraction the average STC and average ineffective length is the minimum. Comparing all three cases, the average STC is found to be high in the random arrangement. Hence, while manufacturing the FRC's care should be taken to minimize the error to maintain the periodic arrangement of the fibers. The central broken fiber remains at its mean position in all the RVE's. The least value of the length measured is 1μm, so the ineffective value is the rounded value corresponding to the multiplied value of the stress. l being constant equal to 100 μm.