Helical edge states in quantum spin Hall (QSH) materials are central building blocks of topological matter design and engineering. Despite their principal topological protection against elastic backscattering, the level of operational stability depends on manifold parameters such as the band gap of the given semiconductor system in the "inverted" regime, temperature, disorder, and crystal orientation. We theoretically investigate electronic and transport properties of QSH edge states in large gap 1-T' WTe2 monolayers. We explore the impact of edge termination, disorder, temperature, and interactions on experimentally addressable edge state observables, such as local density of states and conductance. We show that conductance quantization can remain surprisingly robust even for heavily disordered samples because of an anomalously small edge state decay length and additional protection related to the large direct gap allowed by glide symmetry. From the simulation of temperature-dependent resistance, we find that moderate disorder enhances the stability of conductance by localizing bulk states. We evaluate the edge state velocity and Luttinger liquid parameter as functions of the chemical potential, finding prospects for physics beyond linear helical Luttinger liquids in samples with ultra-clean and well-defined edges. Quantum spin Hall (QSH) insulators are a pillar of topological matter in which helical edge states offer a novel route towards dissipationless transport and quantum computation Quantum well heterostructures accomplish the QSH insulating regime from band inversion through the reduction of the inherent point group symmetry of the core semiconductor. By construction, these setups are suitable for performing transport experiments where as local spectroscopy is nearly impossible due to their composite layer nature. While quantum wells have provided the first observation of QSH effect The transition metal dichalcogenide WTe 2 is an intriguing platform which provides a promising realization of QSH edge states accessible through both transport experiments and local spectroscopy. In its 3D form, it is a type-II Weyl semimetal The plethora of experimental results stimulated a significant body of theoretical work related to analyzing the electronic, spin, and many-body properties of WTe 2 . Various intertwined methods have been used to address the principal electronic structure in this material, including density functional theory In our article, we center the theoretical analysis around the assertion that the standalone microscopic features of WTe 2 are rooted in its glide symmetry To set the stage, let us begin with the discussion of structural and electronic properties of WTe 2 bulk and nanoribbons, focusing on two types of edge terminations. In Fig. Throughout this work we use ab initio based tightbinding model developed in Ref. Precise form of the elements and parameters are listed in Appendix B. The total spinful Hamiltonian Ĥtot. is given by where σ, ρ, τ are Pauli matrices acting on spin, sublattice A/B and orbital d/p degrees of freedom. Spin-orbit coupling strength is defined by the parameter V = 0.115 eV. The Fermi level is set at the top of the valence band. This model has an indirect band gap of 165 meV exactly on Γ -X line in the rectangular Brillouin zone, as shown in Fig. The energetic position of 1D Dirac cones greatly influences the local density of states in both clean and disordered systems. Penetration depths are calculated using ribbon wavefunctions and local density of states (LDOS), given by computed from the retarded Green's function G r ( r, α, E) for both clean and disordered cases. Summation over α is performed over the spin, orbital, and atoms inside the "block", as described in Appendix A and Appendix D. The disorder effects are introduced using Anderson model with disorder strength W defining on each atom the random potential chosen from uniform distribution [-W/2, W/2]. Fig. Transport properties are calculated using standard Landauer-Büttiker formalism which is obtained using recursive Green's function scheme We begin a discussion of transport by comparing clean and disordered relatively short ribbons. The results of two-terminal conductance as a function of disorder strength W for the Fermi energy exactly in the middle of the bulk band gap, E F = 82.5 meV, are analyzed in Fig. We also note that due to the anomalously small penetration depths of the edge states in WTe 2 , the quantized conductance G = 2 e 2 /h survives up to much larger values of the disorder strength W as compared to the HgTe quantum well (QW). In Fig. Next, we address the transition from short to long channel behavior in WTe 2 samples, in analogy to the experiment reported in Ref. In realistic experiments, the disordered sample should be described by one average disorder strength parameter W . In Fig. We now consider a disordered quantum spin Hall edge in the presence of a non-zero temperature. The effect of increased resistance (decreased conductance) close to the band edges (see Fig. using 1 meV energy E discretization and again setting the Fermi level to middle of the bulk gap, E F = 82.5 meV. The dependence of the integration kernel on energy and disorder is studied in Appendix G. We conclude that due to the reduced conductance of the bulk states close to the edge of the band, the temperature stability of G = 2 e 2 /h conductance quantization is enhanced in realistic samples with moderate disorder, as shown e.g. for the response of G(T ) in Fig. Fig. In the last part we discuss the role of strong electronelectron interactions. Because of the strong 1D localization, one may expect effects related to the helical Tomonaga-Luttinger liquid (TLL). It is well established that in two-dimensional semiconductors Coulomb interactions screening is reduced as compared to 3D. This may lead to strong electron-electron interactions in quasi-1D channels in such systems, as recently reviewed in Ref. where for hBN encapsulated WTe 2 the relative static dielectric constant of hBN is ε r = 4.5, the effective thickness of the system w = 0.7 • 10 -9 m. The Fermi velocity v F and the edge state penetration depth λ pen. both depend on the Fermi energy and are calculated in Appendix C and shown in Fig. Our prediction of values of K (which can be K < 3/8 in both types of edge termination) suggests that when disorder is present, insulating behavior may be expected due to Anderson localization of the edge state Interestingly, non-linear contribution to edge dispersion, complicating significantly the Luttinger liquid picture Note added: During the preparation of this manuscript, we became aware of the experimental results of the group of B. Weber We have analyzed the response of disordered WTe 2 ribbons with a focus on possible experimental differences due to two types of edge terminations. Our study suggests that careful sample preparation with respect to edge termination can serve as an additional tuning knob to optimize properties of quantum spin Hall edge states in WTe 2 and related compounds. We have theoretically rationalized that even for heavily disordered samples, WTe 2 states are identifiable in STM and transport measurements, due to their short penetration depth into the bulk. From the modelling of several types of observables such as edge state tunneling spectra, gate tunable longitudinal resistance, length dependence of channel resistance, and temperature dependence of conductance, we conclude that the edge termination crucially determines the robustness of topological protection (with zigzag edge termination being more robust) and also impacts a possible helical Luttinger liquid description of the QSH edge modes. Now we elaborate further on the geometric properties of WTe 2 . Six relevant atom positions inside the unit cell of W 2 Te 4 are (z=0 plane chosen between W atoms) are given in Table Now we discuss further details of the tight-binding model. We recall the low-energy effective Wannier orbital model derived in Refs. The vectors defining atoms inside the unit cell are checked that in the system without edges (periodic 2D system) there are no in-gap states, as shown by density of states in Fig. The band structures of the quasi-1D ribbon (width 200 Å) for the zigzag and armchair are given in Fig. In the next step, the quantum spin Hall edge states shown in Fig. The ability to obtain retarded Green's function G r of our 20 nm x 20 nm scattering region allows us to study the local density of states In Fig. Next, we study the Fermi energy dependence of the conductance G. First, we calculate G in clean samples. The Landauer formula for the differential conductance is given by G = e 2 h T , where T is a transmission coefficient between left and right contacts, calculated using the recursive Green's functions method. Remembering that we divided our scattering region to "slices" (shown, e.g., as grey regions in Fig. , where G r 1,N is a matrix representing the retarded Green's function between the first and the N-th slice. Γ L(R) is defined as a difference of semi-infinite lead self-energies (Γ , where electron self-energies are calculated using the Sancho-Rubio iterative algorithm. Those calculations are performed for the non-interacting case and at T = 0. Semi-infinite leads, attached to the edges of the system, are considered to be made from the same material as the studied system to avoid the contact resistance effect. Disorder can be introduced only in the scattering region. Then, for the Fermi energy window 1 meV we calculate average over 10 3 disorder realizations for W = 1.5 eV, producing the G(E) that is plotted in Fig. Now we explain the rationale behind the short-to-long channel transition, as shown in Fig. In the next part, we focus on temperature dependence of conductance G(T ). We include the temperature using the standard where and the transmission T (E) is averaged over 10 3 disorder realizations for each energy E. The integral is calculated numerically in 600 meV window around center of bulk gap with 1 meV discretization. In Fig. As described above, one can expect that the density of the states of the bulk bands will determine the temperature response of the edge state. Due to the computationally demanding nature of the problem we were able to calculate the temperature dependence of G(T ) only for wider ribbons in the clean (therefore translationally invariant) case, in which we do not need to average over disorder realizations. As expected, the number of bulk states in both CB and VB becomes larger for wider ribbons in both zigzag and armchair cases. After calculating G(T ) curves, see Fig. The TLL Hamiltonian for 1D helical edge states has to take into account the energy-dependence of both the velocity and the coupling constants. For a single edge the Hamiltonian is given by, where for example ĉk,R↑ are fermion annihilation operator for right mover with spin up. Forward scattering interaction coupling strength is λ 2 = g 2⊥ is in standard 'gology' notation while the Luttinger liquid parameter is given as where λ 2 and λ 4 are calculated for k 1 = k 2 = k F and p = 0. We note that we do not take into account umklapp scattering (2-particle backscattering) which in the clean case becomes imporant only for very specific filling at k F = π/(2a), although for both zigzag and armchair it is in principle possible for the in-gap state in both zigzag (close to the valence band) and armchair (close to the middle of the gap) terminations. Because uniform umklapp scattering is relevant when K < 1/2, it might be important for both terminations in long and ultra-clean samples. Then, one may expect a gap opening Finally, we note that we have also ignored the 1-particle backscattering interaction Next, we discuss in more detail how the coupling constant λ 2 , defined in Eq. In the equation above, k is a 1D wavevector, n describes a left/right mover with spin up/down, N U C is the number of unit cells (understood as stripes described in Appendix A) that formally go to infinity and N y is the number of atoms in a given slice of ribbon. The two dimensional vector τ describes the position of a given localized orbital inside the unit cell. The ribbon wavefunction ν and are obtained from the numerical diagonalization of the Hamiltonian H(k). Localized orbitals are denoted by φ. Next, conceptually following the procedure known from exciton physics where interactions need to be calculated including microscopic wavefunctions where K 0 are modified Bessel functions of the second kind. The Luttinger K parameter is then calculated (using λ 2 = λ 4 ) as K = 1/(1 + λ 2 /(π v F )). We note that K calculated in this way depends on the effective 1D channel "radius" R, as shown in Fig. 