Resonant scattering of electromagnetic (EM) waves by small particles is considered as one of the basic problem in metamaterial science. At present, special subwavelength resonators are considered as structural elements in chiral and bianisotropic metamaterials. There is a general consensus that these small scatterers behave like "artificial atoms"meta-atomswith strong electrical and magnetic responses and an interconnection between these responses. However, the observed effect of magnetoelectric (ME) coupling in these meta-atoms is not associated with the near-field manipulation properties caused by intrinsic magnetoelectricity. This arises the question whether ME point scatterers of EM radiation really exist. In this paper, we show that there are mesoscopic structures with electric and magnetic dipole-carrying excitations that behave like point scatterers with their inherent magnetoelectricity. In such subwavelength resonators, coherent oscillations of the electric polarization and magnetization can be considered as quasistatic oscillations described by electrostatic (ES) and magnetostatic (MS) scalar wave functions. The ME resonance effect arises from the coupling of two, ES and MS, oscillations. The near fields of these resonators, called the ME near fields, are characterized by simultaneous violation of time reversal and inversion symmetry. In study of ME fields and EM problems associated with these fields, we put forward the concept of MEfield electrodynamics. Like the axion-field electrodynamics and the axion-polariton problem, we are talking about modified Maxwell equations with a presudoscalar source terms and the quantum field theory for massive particles. While the axion fields are boson scalar fields, the ME fields are fermionic fields. These fields are characterized by energy eigenstates with rotational superflows and quantized vortices. The relationship between electromagnetism and magnetoelectricity is a subject of a strong interest in microwave and optical wave physics and material sciences. Electromagnetism is based on the fact that a moving charge has a magnetic field. The magnetic field in electromagnetic processes is controlled by electric current, macroscopic or microscopic. Magnetoelectricity is associated with the structures in which the polarization and magnetization are coupled in some way. One of the interesting questions about whether electromagnetism and magnetoelectricity can coexist without an extension of Maxwell's theory arises when we study EM wave scattering from subwavelength resonant objects with assumed ME properties. This is related to the fundamental problems of ME interactions in metamaterials and polaritons. It can also refer to ME phenomena associated with the concepts of axion electrodynamics. Confining the EM radiation on a strongly subwavelength scale is one of the key elements that make it possible to achieve a high interaction strength of the field-matter interaction. An intuitive physical paradigm is that the propagation of a wave is not significantly affected by subwavelength objects. However, a widespread aspiration in wave physics is to be able to affect at scales that are much smaller than the wavelengths. Furthermore, free-space coupling to strongly subwavelength individual optical elements is a central theme in quantum optics, as it allows to control and manipulate the properties of quantum systems. For objects that are very small compared to the incident wavelength, the EM non-retarded approximation becomes applicable. Usually, such subwavelength scatterers are treated as dipoles or a set of dipoles. The value of subwavelength resonators is that they can be used as building blocks for large, complex structures. One example that can exhibit a variety of exotic and useful properties of these subwavelength resonators is metamaterials The question about ME polarizability and the near-field manipulation arises also in the studies of EM effects of chirality. Electromagnetically, chiral samples are often considered as a particular case of bianisotropic samples. To intuitively explain the optical responses of small chiral particles, the dipole approximation is used. A point-like chiral system is described by the dynamic polarizability tensor, which is applied to study chiral optomechanical and scattering processes. Since chiroptical effects are usually hampered by weak chiral light-matter interaction, it is argued that to enhance the chiral effects it is necessary that the near field remains chiral in the process. This is an attempt to enhance the near-field intensity while preserving the ME properties. Based on an analysis of the interaction of chiral light and chiral specimens, new mechanisms of enantiomer discrimination and separation in optics have been proposed. Different plasmonic, dielectric, and semiconductor nanostructures have recently been proposed as a viable route for near-field enhancement of chiral light-matter interactions A question on the evanescent-wave characteristics of bianisotropic and enantiomeric "artificial atoms" remains open. Without knowing the near field structure of such a 3D-confined subwavelength samples, a deep understanding of electrodynamics of bianisotropic and enantiomeric metamaterials is still missing. The observed phenomena can hardly be associated with the near-field manipulation effects caused by intrinsic magnetoelectricity. Constitutive elements of these metamaterials are made of matter without any microscopic or mesoscopic properties of a natural ME effect. It is evident that 3D-confined subwavelength samples with intrinsic ME resonances should be characterized by the ME energy. It is known that as volumes smaller than the wavelength are probed, measurements of EM energy of usual (non-ME) samples become uncertain, highlighting the difficulty with performing measurements in this regime. There is Heisenberg's uncertainty principle binding the electric and magnetic fields of the EM wave The intrinsic ME polarizability is observed in multiferroicsthe materials in which both ferroelectric and magnetic orders are present. Fundamental microscopic excitations that exhibit the electric and magnetic dipole moments in multiferroics, are electromagnons. ME coupling of the electromagnon resonance are the magnon excitations accompanied by the magnetic and ferroelectric orders. In controlling of light with electromagnons, the effects of optical activity and asymmetric propagation arise due to dynamic ME susceptibility that cross-couples the electric and magnetic fields of light The ability to focus EM radiation far beyond the diffraction limit has enabled numerous applications. A primary strategy to achieve such subwavelength light confinement is to use polaritons. Polaritons are structures with strong interaction of photon with dipole-carrying excitations in materials. The energy stored in the wave is partitioned among the driving fields and the internal degrees of freedom excited by the incident electric and magnetic fields. Various types of polaritonic light-matter effects are observed. They differ in resonant responses of the materials. Among the most discussed types of polaritons there are phonon polaritons, exciton polaritons, surface-plasmon polaritons, and magnon polaritons In the above cases of plasmon and magnon polaritons, 2D structures are used and no subwavelength resonators are considered. Such 3D-confined effects are possible only for the case of ME polaritons, where the field-matter coupling is through both the electric and magnetic dipoles and both the electric and magnetic fields are enhanced. This is the photon trapping effect. The only way to focus EM radiation far beyond the diffraction limit in a 3D-confined subwavelength region is to use power-flow vortices defined by cross EB  field products in a near-field region. In this case, we are not talking on the momentum mismatch problem, but about the angular momentum mismatch problem. By the angular momentum conservation, the spin and orbital momenta of the dipolecarrying excitations in a sample should be coupled to the spin and orbital angular momenta of EM radiation in the subwavelength near-field region. It is worth noting that in the case of plasmon polaritons or magnon polaritons, the momentum matching is in the field region near the interface. This is a local (quasistatic) matching. At the same time, the matching of the spin and orbital angular momenta in the case of ME polaritons is global. It means that the angular momentum matching is implemented globally, involving both the near-and far-field regions. This integration will lead to an extremely strong light-matter interaction. We term such phenomena the ME-field electrodynamics. In ME-field electrodynamics, we observe photons with curved wave fronts of circularly polarized waves. These are twisted polaritons. It can be postulated that the effect of strong interaction of light with a 3D-confined subwavelength ME sample occurs when near fields are twisted. Another aspect, which should also be noted, concerns the fact that the realization of the light-matter interactions in this case requires that internal dynamical processes in the sample are characterized by breaking both the spatial and time-reversal symmetry. We call a subwavelength resonator with an intrinsic ME effect an intrinsic-ME resonator (IMER). A special attention should be paid to ME cavity polariton, when a subwavelength IMER is placed inside a reflective cavity. In this case, strong coupling regime is due to the formation of entangled eigenstates of dipolar excitations in an IMER and EM radiation confined in a reflective cavity. When a reflective cavity is nearly resonant with a ME oscillation, trapped photons may be emitted and reabsorbed multiple times before being lost to dissipation or cavity leakage. Absorption and reemission of photons in the cavity give rise to light-matter mixed eigenstates. Photons become strongly interacting and condensation of photons can be observed. To certain extent, such effects look similar to cavity exciton polaritons Coherent oscillations of electric polarization and magnetization in a 3D-confined subwavelength IMER are viewed as quasistatic oscillations with electrostatic (ES) and magnetostatic (MS) scalar wave functions. Coupling of two, ES and MS, oscillations is considered as the effect of magnetoelectricity. Near fields of an IMERthe ME near fieldsare generated by simultaneous time reversal and inversion symmetry breakings. For EM radiation, subwavelength regions with quasistatic magnetoelectric ME resonances, are regions of singular states. Our purpose is to study ME fields and EM problems associated with these fields. Particular attention should be paid to the fact that the ME coupling observed in a subwavelength resonator is a relativistic effect of rotating fields. Like the axion-field electrodynamics and the axion-polariton problem One of the effective ways to enhance the interaction of EM radiation with matter is to bound both dipole-carrying excitations and photons to a 3D-confined subwavelength resonant region. In this paper, it is shown that at a proper geometry and boundary conditions of a subwavelength resonator, one observes coherent oscillations of electric polarization and magnetization. We show that mesoscopic structures with electric and magnetic dipole-carrying excitations can behave as point scatterers with intrinsic magnetoelectricity. The effect of magnetoelectricity is due to coupling of two, ES and MS, concurrent orders generated by simultaneous time reversal and inversion symmetry breakings. For EM radiation, subwavelength regions with quasistatic magnetoelectric ME resonances, are regions of singular states. These singularities are found in a variety of forms. The near-fields of open quasistatic ME resonators are topological-nature fieldsthe ME fields. Our purpose is to study ME fields and EM problems associated with these fields. While the axion fields are boson scalar fields, the ME fields are fermionic fields. These fields are characterized by energy eigenstates with rotational superflows and quantized vortices. There the field structures of cross EB  and dot EB  products of the electric and magnetic fields in a subwavelength vacuum region. In our search for the IMER point scatterer, the main concepts are as follows. We do not apply the model of a scatterer with coupled electric and magnetic dipoles, which is widely used in numerous studies of metamaterials. We also do not consider the effects of ME polarizability of hypothetical "artificial atoms" made of a multiferroic material. We assume that in our case, the specially shaped specimen is made of a lossless solid material that has the properties of electric polarization and magnetization, but is not possessed of microscopic intrinsic magnetoelectricity. We are addressing to an analysis of a mesoscopic effect of dynamical magnetoelectricity in a subwavelength sample, which originates from coupled MS and ES resonances. Herewith MS resonances arise due to magnetization dynamics and ES resonances appear due to electric-polarization dynamics in the material. It is supposed that in the resonance states of coupled MS and ES oscillations, a violation of both spatial and temporal inversion symmetry occurs. Any EM retardation effects are disregarded. It means that no Mie resonances are taken into account. This is the case of scattering of a small particle at the quasistatic limit ( 0 ka  , where k is an EM-wave wavenumber in a medium and a is a characteristic size of a particle). The MS and ES resonances can be observed in a temporally dispersive regime, when the light frequency is close to the resonance frequency of dipole-carrying excitations in the material. In these resonances, a continuum approach is applied and quantum confinement effects are considered based on the concept that the MS function  ( H  = - ) and the ES function  ( E  = - ) are scalar wave functions. Each of the scalar wave functions is characterized by a module and a phase. In the spectral problem solutions, MS and ES wave functions play a role of order parameters for interacting dipoles. The coupling states of two, MS and ES, concurrent orders are considered as the ME states. The strongest effect of the field-matter interaction is observed when these internal ME resonances are characterized by energy quantization with discrete energy levels. While the quasistatic oscillations are not identified with the scales of individual atoms, they can be represented as dynamics of quasiparticles of the elementary dipole-dipole excitations. Scalar wave functions are the generating functions of the vector fields. For electromagnetic radiation, quasistatic ME resonances caused by dipolar excitations in a subwavelength sample are dark states. In this section, we present an initial formal analysis of MS and ES oscillations in a subwavelength resonator, considering these oscillations as topological quantum states. In a subwavelength 3D sample of a magnetic insulator with strong temporal dispersion of permeability ( ) , magnetic dipole oscillations can be considered, neglecting the time variations of the energy of the electric field as compared to the time variations of the energy of the magnetic field. His is a case of MS resonances. A system of differential equations for the electric and magnetic fields is without the electric displacement current: When the electric displacement current is excluded, for the MS-wave function is given as From the Fraday law (3), we write Assuming the sample is a dielectric with an isotropic permittivity, we have . So, it follows that the magnetic field in small resonant objects vary linearly with time. This leads to arbitrary large fields at early and late times and is excluded on physical grounds. An evident conclusion suggests itself at once: the magnetic field in MS resonances is a constant quantity. This contradicts the resonant conditions of dynamic processes. Thus, it becomes clear that in a proposed subwavelength resonator with magnetic-dipole oscillations the curl electric field arising from the Faraday law is unphysical Nevertheless, "electromagnetic democracy" can be someway restored if we assume that the magnetic-dipole dynamics in a magnetic insulator sample is accompanied with the induced electric polarization characterized by temporal-dispersion permittivity tensor ( ) ind  . In such an assumption, ( ) in Eq. ( In analyses of MS-wave problems in a magnetic insulator, Eq. ( In a subwavelength 3D sample of a dielectric material with strong temporal dispersion of permittivity ( ) , electric dipole oscillations can be considered. With these oscillations, we neglect the time variations of the energy of the magnetic field as compared to the time variations of the energy of the electric field. In such a case, the electromagnetic duality is broken. We have a system of differential equations for the electric and magnetic fields without the magnetic displacement current: When the magnetic displacement current is excluded, for the ES-wave function is written as Formally, it can be assumed that for a certain geometric shape of a subwavelength dielectric sample, solutions of the boundary volume problem based on Eq. ( From the Ampere-Maxwell law (8), we write Suppose that the sample has no magnetic anisotropy. In this case, assuming that the magnetic displacement current is zero, we have . So, it follows that the electric field in small resonant objects vary linearly with time. This leads to arbitrary large fields at early and late times and is excluded on physical grounds. An evident conclusion suggests itself at once: the electric field in ES resonances is a constant quantity. This contradicts the resonant conditions of dynamic processes. Thus, it becomes clear that in a proposed subwavelength resonator with electric-dipole oscillations the curl magnetic field arising from the Ampere-Maxwell law is unphysical Nevertheless, the problem of the "electromagnetic democracy" in ES resonances can be solved if we assume that electric-dipole dynamics in a dielectric sample is accompanied with the induced magnetization characterized by temporal-dispersion permeability in Eq. A suitable way to induce the magnetization in a dielectric can be a topological effect associated with chiral electric currents at the sample boundary. In this regard, it is appropriate to refer to structures of topological insulators (TI). In particular, it was shown that the edge of a 2D TI supports counterpropagating chiral states with opposite spin projections on the axis perpendicular to the plane of the sample. These edge modes serve as conducting channels that give rise to the quantum spin Hall effect. As a result, ferromagnetic ordering can be observed Neglecting any EM retardation processes in a subwavelength sample, we assume, at the same time, that the dimensions of the sample are large enough to ignore the microscopic effects associated with the dipole-dipole interactions. When the characteristic size of a sample is of the same magnitude as the wavelength of the scalar wave functions, the confinement effects can be observed. In this case, we are talking about resonances of scalar wave functions: the MS-wave function  and the ES-wave function  . To describe these resonant effects of electric or magnetic dipolar oscillations, the Schrodinger-like equations for functions  and  should be used. Assuming that the MS and ES wave functions satisfy, respectively, Eqs. ( However, it turns out that in some specific geometry of a magnetic sample and a specific form of the permeability tensor (1): We know that in macroscopic electrodynamics of a magnetic insulator, there are three types of current densities: the density of the electric displacement current 0 , the electric current density arising from polarization , and the divergenceless electric current density arising from magnetization m  [74]. Following the Helmholtz decomposition of any vector field into potential and curl parts When the electric displacement current is zero, ( ) , we identically have 0 H  = , that is H  = - . If, from the other hand, we assume that ( ) we also have: 0 H   and thus H   - . An inequality Eq. ( For ES resonances, with use of the constitutive equation for dielectric material we have from Eq. ( We also can use the Helmholtz decomposition ( ) When the magnetic displacement current is zero, From the other hand, we can suppose that for the terms of the Eq. ( As a result, we also obtain: But, along with this, inequality (17) may mean that in a dynamical process in the subwavelength dielectric sample, vector H rotates quite synchronously with vector p  in the lab coordinate system. So, in the rotational coordinate system, the lines of the magnetic field H are "frozen" in the lines of p  . Obviously, such a situation can take place when both the magnetic field and electric polarization vectors have the spin and orbital angular momenta. Since, following Eq. ( Inequality The effects of orbital magnetization and orbital electric polarization manifest themselves in a subwavelength quasi-2D disk, made of a magnetic insulatoryttrium iron garnet (YIG). In such a sample, magnetization is the primary order parameter, which can induce electric polarization dynamics. . These modes, called magnetic dipolar modes (MDM), are due to magnetic dipole-dipole interaction in the ferromagnetic order subsystem. Oscillations caused by electric dipole-dipole interaction in the electric polarization subsystem we call electric dipolar modes (EDM). These oscillations, described by the ES scalar wave function ( ) , are considered as an extension of MDM oscillations. The theory of spectral properties of MDMs in a ferrite-disk resonator is published in When analyzing MDM oscillations in a ferrite disk, two types of solutions for scalar wave function using the EM boundary conditions. Obviously, when characterizing the MDM oscillations, the resonant states of the G and L modes should be considered together. Analyzing the G-mode solutions in a cylindrical coordinate system ( , , ) zr , we determine the membrane function ( , ) r  by the Bessel-function order and the number of zeros of the Bessel function corresponding to the radial variations. Membrane functions ( , ) r  is a single-valued function. On a lateral surface of a ferrite disk, the ND boundary conditions for mode n are written as ( ) ( ) and where is a disk radius. For G modes, the spectral problem gives the energy orthogonality relation: . The quantity n E is considered as density of accumulated magnetic energy of mode n. This is the average (on the RF period) energy accumulated in a flat ferrite-disk region of in-plane cross-section and unit length along z axis. Since the space of square integrable functions is a Hilbert space with a well-defined scalar product, we can introduce a basis set. The mode amplitude can be interpreted as the probability to find a system in a certain state n. Using the principle of waveparticle duality, one can describe this oscillating system as a collective motion of quasiparticles. There are "flat-mode" quasiparticles at a reflexively-translational motion behavior between the lower and upper planes of a quasi-2D disk. Such quasiparticles are called "light" magnons. In our study we consider "light" magnons in ferromagnet as quanta of collective MS spin waves that involves the precession of many spins on the long-range dipole-dipole interactions. It is different from the shortrange magnons for exchange-interaction spin waves with a quadratic character of dispersion. The meaning of the term "light", used for the condensed MDM magnons, arises from the fact that effective masses of these quasiparticles are much less, than effective masses of "real" magnonsthe quasiparticles describing small-scale exchange-interaction effects in magnetic structures where n  is the propagation constant of mode n along the disk axis z. In the L-mode solutions, we determine the membrane function ( , ) r  at the same way as the membrane function ( , ) r  for G-mode solutions. The continuity of ( , ) r  on a lateral surface of a ferrite disk is characterized by the equation like Eq. ( This is the EM boundary condition of continuity of the magnetic flux density on a lateral surface of a ferrite disk. In Eqs. ( ,, Lr  = is not equal to zero. On a lateral border of a ferrite disk ( r = ), we express function  as where   is a double-valued edge wave function on contour  is an observable quantity. It follows from the fact that because of such a quantity one can restore single-valuedness (and, therefore, Hermicity) of the spectral problem. We can represent this observable quantity as a linear integral of a certain vector potential. Because of the existing the geometrical phase factor on a lateral boundary of a ferrite disk, MDM oscillations are characterized by a pseudo-electric field (the gauge field) € . The pseudo- electric field € can be found as ( ) , where a vector function ( )  can be considered as the Berry connection. The gauge-invariant field € is the Berry curvature. The corresponding flux of the field € through a circle of radius  is obtained as:, , where ( ) are quantized fluxes of pseudoelectric fields and K is the normalization coefficient. The physical meaning of coefficient K concerns the property of a flux of a pseudo-electric field. There are the positive and negative eigenfluxes. In the MDM spectral problem, it is impossible to satisfy the EM boundary conditions without a flux ( ) . Each MDM is characterized by energy eigenstate and is quantized to a quantum of an emergent electric flux. In our system, there should be a certain internal mechanism which creates a nonzero vector potential ( ) . This internal mechanism becomes apparent when comparing the ND boundary condition ( . Just due to this term a nonzero vector potential appears. The annular magnetic field H  is a singular field existing only in an infinitesimally narrow cylindrical layer abutting from a ferrite side to a border of a ferrite disk. One does not have any special conditions connecting radial and azimuth components of magnetic fields on other inner or outer circular contours, except contour 2 = . Because of such an annular magnetic field, the notion of an effective circular magnetic current can be considered. The Berry mechanism provides a basis for the surface magnetic current at the interface between gyrotropic and nongyrotropic media. Following the spectrum analysis of MDMs in a quasi-2D ferrite disk one obtains edge chiral magnetic currents. This results in appearance of an anapole moment. For mode n, the anapole moment is calculated as where () m s j is the edge persistent magnetic current. At a large distance from the disk, localized distribution of an edge magnetic current is viewed as an electric field () e a . The electric moment () e a is considered as the density of the electric flux ( ) Based on of Eq. ( where ( ) is a surface power-flow density on contour 2 = . It is evident, however, that the power-flow-confinement states can be realized when a softer boundary condition on contour is used: This implies the presence of the edge persistent power-flow circulation. Due to the surface power flow density, the membrane eigenfunction  of the MDM rotates around the disk axis. When for every MDM we introduce the notion of an effective mass ( ) by Eq. ( . With this assumption, an orbital angular momentum a mode is expressed as . Supposing, as the first approximation, that the membrane eigenfunction n  is viewed as an infinitely thin homogenous disk of radius ( in other words, assuming that for every MDM, the radial and azimuth variation of the MS-potential function, are averaged), we can write for the effective moment of inertia The orbital angular momentum a mode is expressed as With use of the EM boundary conditions, we consider the spectral solutions for the MS wave functions  as generating functions for determining the fields. For any mode n, magnetization field is found as ( ) and where V and S are a volume and a surface of a ferrite sample, respectively. Vector n is the outwardly directed normal to surface S. In the vacuum near-field region adjacent to the MDM ferrite disk, there exist power-flow vortices, defined by the cross product . Together with this, there is another quadratic-form parameter determined by a scalar product between the electric and magnetic field components The presence of this parameter, called the parameter of helicity, in the vacuum region is a fundamental effect in our analysis. In Ref. However, the question arises: What is the physics of quantization of magnetic dipole-dipole interactions in a quasi-2D ferrite disk? In Ref. The energy () n W  is the microwave energy extracted from the magnetic energy of a ferrite disk at the n-th MDM resonance. It was supposed that the demagnetizing magnetic field is reduced due to effective magnetic charges on a ferrite-disk planes. For the reduced DC magnetization of a ferrite disk, we have the frequency ( ) ( ) , that is less than such a frequency 00 M M   = in an unbounded magnetically saturated ferrite The properties of dynamic magnetoelectricity are related to the processes of transition of magnetic energy into electric energy and vice versa. At the MDM resonances, the inhomogeneous magnetization structures are accompanied by the induced electric polarization properties. Since in a subwavelength ferrite-disk the EM retardation are neglected, the EDM oscillations should be described by the ES scalar wave functions. YIG is an electrically isotropic material. To solve analytically the ES-wave spectral problem in a quasi-2D ferrite disk, the effective parameters of the permittivity tensor of the induced electric anisotropy in should be found. When analyzing magnetically induced electrical anisotropy, we can initially use a simple model based on symmetry considerations. This is model of electric polarization induced by magnetic ordering of spiral spin waves The quantity ( ) ( ) is called Lifshitz invariant. From the vector calculus identity , we obtain: We have the following components of the electric polarization: ( ) where is a coefficient of proportionality. In the ferrite-disk structure, a spiral spin-oscillation states appear due to the presence of the z-coordinate derivative of magnetization. At the MDM resonances, polarization of the electric subsystem is due to electric flux () e  . This flux polarizes the electric subsystem in accordance with general symmetry arguments regarding the form of coupling between the magnetization and electric polarization. The electric polarization in a ferrite disk is the rotation-field induced polarization. It occurs when the inversion symmetry of the magnetization-dynamics distribution is spontaneously broken. For a magnetically saturated ferrite disk with a normal bias magnetic field directed along the z axis, the MDM magnetization distribution shows that the real-time electric polarization component z p is an antisymmetric quantity when geometry of the microwave structure is symmetrical along z axis s jz in Eq. ( This situation is illustrated in Fig. From Fig. , where Q is the quadrupole moment tensor When a ferrite disk is placed in a spatially non-symmetric microwave structure, the DC electric polarization of a disk can occur. Direction of the electric moment () e a is related to the direction of a bias magnetic field 0 H . This is shown in Fig. The problem of EM wave scattering by proposed ME meta-atoms with coupled ES and MS oscillations seems to be rather complicated. The structure of the near fields of these subwavelength resonatorsthe ME fieldsis defined by internal dynamical processes of magnetization and electric polarization in a quasi-2D ferrite disk and is distinguished by simultaneous violation of time reversal and inversion symmetry. It is evident that for small ferrite particles with quasistatic oscillations one cannot use the classical theory of Rayleigh scattering. Due to violation of a spatial symmetry of the fields, the standard method of expansion in terms of spherical or cylindrical harmonics is not applicable in this case. While for an incident wave there is no difference between left and right, in the fields scattered by a MDM ferrite particle one should distinguish left from right. To analyze the scattering problem, expansion of the fields by eigenmodes of quasistatic oscillations in a ferrite particle must be used. Generally, these oscillations are characterized by the helical-mode resonances. In our structures, we have the orbital ME polarizability due to the "magnetic" and "electric" Berry connections. The ME field is a (3 + 1)-dimensional quantum field. It is well-known that while considering time as the fourth dimension, one is usually related to the second law of thermodynamics. There is, however, also the possibility to measure time by a so-called Larmor clock While considering the ME field is a (3 + 1)-dimensional PT symmetric quantum field, we find an analogy with the axion-field electrodynamics and the axion-polariton problem. Definitely, in the MEfield electrodynamics we are talking about modified Maxwell equations with a presudoscalar source terms and the quantum field theory for massive particles. The MDM MDM EB  term of a MDM oscillation is the density of the ME energy. This is a pseudoscalar which couples nonlinearly to the external EM-field combination EM EM EB  . However, when the axion fields are boson scalar fields, the ME fields are fermionic fields Energy density of the ME near-field structure is defined by the helicity-factor density F . In a microwave structure when a ferrite disk is placed symmetrically with respect to metallic waveguide walls, a scalar parameter of helicity F, defined by Eq. ( () ( ) ( ) Similarly, the negative helicity (the negative ME energy) is defined as integral of the ME-field density over the entire near-field vacuum region () -with the helicity-factor density () F -: of this reaction torque, the precessing magnetic moment density of the ferromagnet will be under additional mechanical rotation. In a dark-mode singular point the time by Larmor clock stops because the power-flow vortex of the magnetic subsystem is suppressed by the power-flow vortex of dielectric subsystem. As a result, we can have a quantized effect of ME coupling where both magnetic and electric dipoles precess but without orbital rotations. (B) A quasi-2D ferrite disk in a microwave cavity is a non-Hermitian system. At the MDM resonance, it can support entirely real eigenvalue spectra in a so-called exceptional point (EP) at which two or more eigenvalues and underlying eigenvectors coalesce. EPs are associated with sharp phase transitions in the eigenvalue spectrum that can dramatically alter the response of the system. When we admit that the EP exists, we should observe a coalescence of the clockwise and counterclockwise azimuthal modes. Since the term on the right-hand side of Eq. ( It is with noting that in a dark-mode singular point, effective interaction of ME meta-atoms with EM fields can be observed even in loss-dominated microwave systems. An innovative sensing technique for different types of high lossy materials placed inside a microwave cavity, shown in Refs. Connection between magnetoelectricity and electromagnetism is a subject of great interest and numerous discussions in microwave and optical wave physics and material sciences. Like EM phenomena, described by Maxwell equations, the physics of ME phenomena deals with the problems of the relationship between electric and magnetic fields. Fundamental questions related to the restrictions imposed by the space dimension, symmetry, and the energy conservation law on the type and properties of the singular points -3D confined ME resonant regionsremain open. The ME near field of a subwavelength ME particle can be characterized by space-time symmetry, which is different from space-time symmetry of the EM field. Free-space coupling to strongly subwavelength ME resonant elements arises as one of the central themes in quantum electrodynamics. In this paper we showed that the realization of point ME scatterer is possible when we have a subwavelength resonator with both space and time breaking effects. In a quasi-2D ferrite disk, ME excitations are considered as combined excitations of the magnetization and electric-polarization orders. The ME interaction is expressed by coupling of the MS and ES oscillations. We clarify the concept of ME energy density. The near-fields of open quasistatic ME resonators are topologicalnature fieldsthe ME fields. Our purpose is to study ME fields and EM problems associated with these fields. In a case of ME-field electrodynamics, we have to consider the Dirac equation (instead of the Klein-Gordon equation). That is, we have the equation for massive spin 1/2 particles. Together with the axion mass we have to consider also the axion moment of inertia. While the axion fields are boson scalar fields, the ME fields are fermionic fields. These fields are characterized by energy eigenstates with rotational superflows and quantized vortices. In this connection, we discussed a problem of "bianisotropic meta-atoms". In a case of bianisotropic metamaterials, we have just a far-field view of magnetoelectricity. Due to nonacquaintance of the near-field magnetoelectricity of local 3D confined subwavelength structure of "bianisotropic meta-atoms", the question on ME properties of such point scatterers remains open. We can foresee numerous effects associated with the very idea of bianisotropy. We can also have numerous experimental tests of these models. But until we can determine the properties of the ME near fields, we will mislead ourselves about the basic physics of the bianistropic metamaterial structures. ( )  and ( )  are gyrotropic tensors. While analyzing what is a suitable geometrical shape of a 3D-confined subwavelength sample where topological edge currents can occur, we should not consider the spherical sample, since the sphere is simply connected and, thus, every current loop can be contracted on the surface to a point. Obviously, there should not be also an ellipsoid. At the same time, a quasi-2D disk turns out to be the most suitable sample shape. When the current loop is on the lateral surface of such a disk, we have a non-simply connected domain with topologically protective edge currents.