There has been intense recent interest in the two-dimensional electron gases (2DEGs) that form at the surfaces and interfaces of KTaO3 (KTO), with the discovery of superconductivity at temperatures significantly higher than those of similar 2DEGs based on SrTiO3 (STO). Here we demonstrate that KTO 2DEGs fabricated under conditions that suppress the superconductivity show a large spontaneous Hall effect at low temperatures. The transverse response is asymmetric in an applied perpendicular magnetic field and becomes hysteretic at millikelvin temperatures. The hysteresis is due to long range magnetic order arising from local Ta 4+ moments. However, the most striking features of the data are the asymmetry of the transverse response and the large spontaneous transverse resistance at zero field, which can be a significant fraction of the longitudinal resistance and depends on crystal orientation. Both effects are due to the presence of a dominant contribution to the transverse response that is symmetric in perpendicular field, suggesting that its origin is topological in nature. We argue that this contribution arises from Berry curvature dipoles coupled with nonequilibrium conditions induced by the measuring current. Two-dimensional electron gases (2DEGs) in complex oxide heterostructures have seen a great deal of interest in the past two decades due to the variety of phenomena they exhibit. The most studied of these 2DEGs are those formed at the interface and surface of SrTiO 3 (STO) Many of the studies done on STO 2DEGs mentioned above have also been performed on KTO 2DEGs. However, there are two key differences between STO and KTO 2DEGs. First, although superconductivity is observed in both STO and KTO 2DEGs, the superconducting transition temperatures in KTO 2DEGs are significantly higher than in STO 2DEGs The devices in this study were Hall bars of length 600 μm and width 50 μm patterned by photolithography followed by successive deposition and oxidation of thin layers of Al on KTO substrates with three different surface crystal orientations: (001), ( We focus here on measurements of the longitudinal and transverse low-frequency differential resistance as a function of V g , temperature T and applied external field H using standard low frequency ac lock-in techniques. Importantly, the ac longitudinal and transverse voltages are measured at the same frequency as the ac current drive, with small drive amplitudes (∼100 nA). A schematic of the sample can be found in Fig. Figure The sweep hysteresis seen in Fig. We now discuss the transverse and longitudinal magnetoresistance (MR) of the devices. While anomalous behavior is seen in both R T (H) and R L (H), we focus on R T (H) as it is easier to separate the anomalous contributions from the contribution due to the ordinary Hall effect. Figure Three different contributions to the transverse response can be identified, which become clearer if we decompose the Hall response into its symmetric and antisymmetric components. This decomposition is shown in Fig. The second contribution is the hysteresis observed at lower temperatures. Hysteretic behavior in the MR is usually associated with long range ferromagnetic order in the system that interacts with the conduction electrons, with the fields at which the hysteresis occurs corresponding to the coercive field of the ferromagnet. To demonstrate that the hysteresis we observe does indeed arise from magnetic order, Fig. The presence of ferromagnetic order in our samples is surprising. In contrast to the EuO/KTO samples studied by other groups where hysteretic behavior has been reported The third contribution to the transverse response is the part that is symmetric in field, shown in Figs. Observation of a transverse resistance R T is thought to require time reversal symmetry (TRS) breaking, typically introduced by applying an external magnetic field. In this case, fundamental symmetries dictate that R T be antisymmetric in the external field, as is well known from the ordinary Hall effect, implying that R T vanishes in zero field. One might observe a finite R T at zero field if there are intrinsic sources of TRS breaking like a finite magnetic moment, but this would result in hysteresis associated with magnetization switching superposed on an antisymmetric background. Importantly, the zero field value in this case would still swtich sign as the magnetization reversed. The most direct evidence that the symmetric component does not arise from an intrinsic magnetization is shown in Fig. There have been reports of spontaneous Hall effects in three-dimensional crystals with no net magnetization The Berry curvature density is finite only only in those regions of momentum space when a single band in the Rashba-split subspace is occupied for a specific chemical potential μ: if both bands are occupied their contributions cancel, As a result, the area in momentum space over which the Berry curvature density is finite will correlate directly with the strength of the Rashba splitting, i.e., a stronger Rashba splitting yields a large area supporting a finite Berry curvature density at a given μ. KTaO 3 is known to support a significantly larger Rashba coefficient when compared to SrTiO 3 To demonstrate this, we directly calculate the Berry curvature on the (111) surface utilizing a Wannier tight binding model with a surface potential well. Details of the calculation are discussed in the Supplementary Materials. The band structure for the (111) surface is shown in Fig. In summary, we have observed a colossal spontaneous Hall effect in KTO heterostructures arising from the topological nature of its band structure. We also observe evidence of long range magnetic order at millikelvin temperatures that arises from local Ta 4+ magnetic moments. The dependence of these phenomenon on gate voltage makes this a promising platform for further controlled study. In particular, further experimentation would test if these effects coexists with the superconductivity observed in samples fabricated through similar processes. This work was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Basic Energy Sciences, under Award No. DE-FG02-06ER46346. This work also made use of the NU-FAB facility of Northwestern University's NUANCE Center, which has received support from the SHyNE Resource (NSF ECCS-2025633), the IIN, and Northwestern's MRSEC program (NSF DMR-1720139). Additional equipment support was provided by DURIP grant W911NF-20-1-0066. superconducting transition, which is shown for the (111) terminated samples in Figure To investigate the marked change in transport behavior around V g = 90V a finer spaced measure of transverse voltage was taken. Data for the (001), (110), and (111) were taken simultaneously and presented in Fig. Carrier Concentration Carrier concentration and carrier mobility were calculated from the slope of the antisymmetric part of the Hall resistance R H = ∆R/∆B. Assuming a single band model gives the Hall coefficient as R H = -1/ne, where e is the charge of the electron and n is the areal density of the two dimensional conducting gas. The sign of the Hall coefficient, R H , gives the sign of the carrier, which was confirmed to be electron-like. Our calculated carrier concentrations as a function of gate voltage are given in Figure Temperature Dependence of Hysteretic Magnetoresistance A detailed study of the samples' temperature dependent magnetoresistance was conducted to trace the evolution of the hysteresis with increasing temperature, and at a fixed gate voltage of V g = 200V . These data revealed the temperature dependence of the three components of the magnetic transport signatures in the samples, as demonstrated in Figures S7. Figure The partial charges of each atom were then compared for the systems with and without the charge vacancy. The atom which displays most significant change in partial charge is the Ta atom on the surface, closest to the oxygen vacancy with a change in charge of approximately 0.5e. This is visible in the density plot shown in Fig. 