To accelerate exploration of chemical space, it is necessary to identify the compounds that will provide the most additional information or value. A large-scale analysis of mononuclear octahedral transition metal complexes deposited in an experimental database confirms an under-representation of lower-symmetry complexes. From a set of around 1000 previously studied Fe(II) complexes, we show that the theoretical space of synthetically accessible complexes formed from the relatively small number of unique ligands is significantly (ca. 816k) larger. For the properties of these complexes, we validate the concept of ligand additivity by inferring heteroleptic properties from a stoichiometric combination of homoleptic complexes. An improved interpolation scheme that incorporates information about cis and trans isomer effects predicts the adiabatic spin-splitting energy to around 2 kcal/mol and the HOMO level to less than 0.2 eV. We demonstrate a multi-stage strategy to discover leads from the 816k Fe(II) complexes within a targeted property region. We carry out a coarse interpolation from homoleptic complexes that we refine over a subspace of ligands based on the likelihood of generating complexes with targeted properties. We validate our approach on 9 new binary and ternary complexes predicted to be in a targeted zone of discovery, suggesting opportunities for efficient transition metal complex discovery. In recent years, virtual high-throughput screening (VHTS) Despite the challenge of combinatorial explosion, there are some established precedents of ligand additivity A set of 85,575 mononuclear octahedral transition metal complexes was curated from the Cambridge Structural Database To identify the set of unique ligands in each complex, a dummy atom with identical connectivity to the metal with atomic number of 0 was introduced to preserve the connectivity of the ligands to the metal without preserving metal identity. For this ligand and dummy atom combination, the atomic-number and bond-order weighted connectivity matrix determinant was calculated as described in Ref. DFT geometry optimizations were performed using a development version of TeraChem v1.9. Singlet calculations were carried out in a spin-restricted formalism, while quintet calculations were unrestricted. Level shifting For the representative model complexes of CH3CN, H2O, CO, and NH3, initial structures were generated with molSimplify The diversity present in the chemical space of transition metal complexes is derived from variability in the metal, its oxidation and spin state, as well as the chemistry of the coordinating ligands. Our experimental knowledge of this chemical space is unevenly distributed. We thus first examined the structures deposited in the CSD to uncover trends in the arrangement of ligands in previously characterized complexes (see Computational Details). From 85,575 mononuclear octahedral transition metal complexes of which 17,085 are identified as unique and computationready (e.g, have user-defined charges), the vast majority (95-98%) contain no more than three unique ligands (Figure Stacked, unnormalized histogram of the number of complexes in the CSD grouped by number of unique ligand types and by the highest denticity of ligands in the complex (monodentate in brown, bidentate in gray, tridentate in orange, tetradentate in blue, pentadentate in green, and hexadentate in red, as indicated in inset legend). These counts are shown for all complexes (top), unique and computation-ready complexes (middle), and the Fe(II) unique, computation-ready subset (bottom). To identify how the structures sampled in the CSD compare to the theoretical space of all hypothetical complexes, we enumerate the overall pool of theoretical complexes and the number in each symmetry class to compare to the most frequently characterized symmetry classes in the CSD. We applied Pólya's enumeration theorem to octahedral coordination geometries to obtain all possible symmetry classes from the cycle index (i.e., theoretical sum) of a symmetry group. where the subscript, j, on f indicates the number of unique sites (e.g., 2 for M(L1)5(L2)1) up to a theoretical maximum of 6. Each individual term in the cycle index is computed as: where N is the total number of unique ligands that can occupy the sites, and each xi corresponds to one unique ligand set choice. For a worked example of N = 12 unique ligands, we determine the theoretical number of complexes, the cardinality, as where its respective symmetry class C = {L1, ..., LM} is built from M distinguishable sites, j, and N are the ligand index and number of ligands as before. The indicator function, , where e.g., |L1| would be 6 for (L1)6, counts how many occurrences of each substituent combination exist. For example, in (L1)4(L2)2 there is one occurrence of a 4-substitution site and 1 occurrence of a 2substitution site, whereas in (L1)2(L2)2(L3)2, there are 3 occurrences of a 2-substitution site. For low-symmetry cases, this generalized equation simplifies significantly (Table Table In total, 6,920 complexes can be formed from N = 12 ligands for the three symmetry classes considered here. For the same ligand pool, there is a much larger set of 82,160 theoretical complexes that could be created from a greater number of unique ligands. This analysis does not consider cases where the ligand chemistry prevents formation of a complex, e.g., only monodentate and pentadentate ligands can form the 5+1 symmetry class, whereas monodentate, bidentate, tridentate, or hexadentate ligands can form HO complexes. Returning to the diversity observed in complexes deposited in the CSD, we can qualitatively observe that relatively little of the theoretical space has been sampled. As we have shown for a representative example, for any set of unique ligands a much larger theoretical number of binary and ternary complexes can be formed in comparison to homoleptic complexes. Nevertheless, there are far fewer binary and especially ternary complexes in the CSD (Supporting Information Table To simplify a quantitative comparison between the theoretical space and the enumerated space, we focus on Fe(II) complexes with only monodentate ligands in any of the fourteen symmetry classes considered. For this set, we identify 40 unique monodentate ligands present in 40 HO complexes (Supporting Information Table Taking the set of 88 ligands from any HO, binary, or ternary Fe(II) complex as the theoretical space for which compatibility across symmetry classes should be maximal, we then quantified the theoretical versus actual coverage of Fe(II) complex chemical space. A significant number (39%) of all HO complexes have been characterized. In comparison, the binary symmetry classes have not been as well explored, with TS complexes the highest at 0.3% (i.e., 26 of 7,656 theoretical complexes and Supporting Information Table We next aimed to determine the extent to which the properties of lower-symmetry heteroleptic transition metal complexes could be inferred from those of higher-symmetry complexes. We constructed complexes with two to three unique ligand types from small sets of ligands that spanned a large range of ligand field strengths: weak-field water, strong-field carbonyl, and either strong-field methylisocyanide or weak-field ammonia. For calculation of the adiabatic high-spin (e.g., quintet Fe(II)) to low-spin (e.g., singlet Fe(II)) splitting, DEH-L, it can be expected that the weak-field ligands will lead to homoleptic complexes that favor high-spin states, whereas strong-field ligands will make homoleptic complexes that favor low-spin states. Thus, heteroleptic combinations of these ligands are expected to reside between the two limits. One simple way to obtain estimates of the spin splitting of the heteroleptic complexes (e.g., with up to three unique ligand types) is to take a weighted average of the spin splitting of the parent homoleptic complexes: Indeed, we observe that heteroleptics reside between the homoleptic limits for spin splitting, and the linear averaging roughly holds for complexes with methyl isocyanide (CH3CN), H2O, and CO ligands (Figure For the case of CO, H2O, and NH3, mixing between weak-field NH3 and H2O is relatively accurately predicted from homoleptic averaging, whereas for NH3 and CO, it is the MS and TS complexes that are more accurately predicted than the FS or CS counterparts (Supporting Information Figure Because adiabatic spin splitting involves geometry optimizations in two distinct spin states, we also evaluated HOMO levels of each singlet complex as a property that depends only on a single geometry. Overall, interpolation of HOMO energies of heteroleptic complexes of CH3CN, CO, and H2O from homoleptic complexes reproduces trends between the homoleptic limits (Figure where E(5+1) is the interpolated energy of the M(L1)5L2 complex from the M(L1)6 HO energy and the M(L1)4(L2)2 TS energy. Similarly, we estimate the FS and MS energies as: In practice this corresponds to computing six energies and interpolating four remaining energies for each pair of ligands for a computational savings of 40%. Indeed, we observe reduced mean absolute error (MAE) over the remaining points that are interpolated (2.4 kcal/mol vs 5.1 kcal/mol) in comparison to the HO-only interpolation (Figure In particular, FS complexes of CO and H2O are now correctly predicted to be much more lowspin-directing than the MS complex of the same stoichiometry (Figure Although the CS/TS-derived interpolation schemes greatly reduce errors in estimating the energetics of heteroleptic complexes, they still require significant computational overhead. Thus, we next aimed to identify if FS and MS complexes, which contain three ligands cis to each other or two ligands cis and two sets of ligands trans, respectively, could be used instead in the interpolation (see Figure where E(5+1) is the interpolated energy of the M(L1)5L1 complex from the M(L1)6 HO energy and the M(L1)3(L2)3 FS energy. Similarly, we obtain expressions for the CS and TS complexes as: Indeed, using this approach we achieve errors only slightly larger than that for the CS/TS averaging scheme, with the added benefit of requiring fewer energies to obtain the same fidelity of the interpolation (Figure Mixing of the weak-field NH3 and H2O ligands, which had slightly worsened with CS/TS interpolation, is also significantly improved in this scheme, and the other sets of complexes are of comparable accuracy (Supporting Information Figure We next investigated whether we could generalize our observations to heteroleptics with three unique ligand types (Figure Similar differences in TA and CA HOMO levels are also missed in this averaging scheme (Figure ) where the third ligand in the EA complex is the one that is trans to itself so energies involving that ligand are derived from the binary MS complexes, whereas the remaining components are derived from FS complexes. Analogous expressions were also obtained for the CS/TS energetics (Supporting Information Text S3). Overall, both interpolation schemes significantly improve the estimation of both spin splitting and HOMO level energies for both sets of ternary complexes in comparison to HO-only interpolation (Figures ). Differences in CA and TA complex properties are much better predicted by both interpolation schemes, with the CS/TS scheme performing best for the combination that includes CH3CN (Figures Given the strength of the interpolative trends we observed, we chose Fe(II) complexes from the CSD to explore the potential of interpolation from previously synthesized complexes. For these 1202 complexes, the majority (661) are homoleptics, followed closely by binary complexes (407) and ternary complexes (129), with only six having more ligand types (Figure We then computed the adiabatic spin-splitting energies and singlet HOMO levels of all 56 homoleptic Fe(II) complexes (see Computational Details). This set is strongly biased toward highspin structures, with only a few ligands giving rise to low-spin ground states (Figure First, we select a targeted region of DEH-L values in the range of -4.0 to 4.0 kcal/mol and HOMO levels in the range of -14 to -13 eV. This region was selected because no homoleptic complexes were present in this range, but interpolation of the space predicted that heteroleptic complexes would be found there. These complexes could be of interest in chemical discovery applications that target spin-crossover candidates (i.e., with near-degenerate spin states) with good oxidative stability (i.e., deep HOMO levels). Next, we identify 12 common ligands from the parent homoleptic complexes that are predicted to give rise most frequently to binary and ternary complexes in the targeted zone on the basis of the simple HO-only model (Figure Returning to the properties predicted from FS/MS-interpolation, we identified a total of three additional binary complexes predicted to be in the targeted zone from FS/MS-interpolation but not in the targeted zone according to HO-only interpolation and we computed their properties (Figure (Figure As a more stringent test of our FS/MS interpolation scheme, we also selected six representative ternary complexes predicted to be in the targeted zone from FS/MS interpolation but out of the targeted zone when estimated with homoleptic interpolation (Figure where errors on DEH-L are below 0.1 kcal/mol and HOMO level are around 0.05 eV (Supporting Information Table These results demonstrate that coarse interpolation of large spaces with homoleptic complexes can be followed up by improved interpolation using selected FS/MS compounds to identify the most promising binary or ternary complexes for explicit calculation. Overall, the demonstrated approach represents a data-efficient strategy to infer properties across large compound spaces with systematically improvable fidelity. A large-scale analysis of the mononuclear octahedral complexes deposited in the Cambridge Structural Database revealed a propensity towards specific, higher-symmetry classes. In addition, few complexes contained more than three unique ligand types. To assess the relative diversity of these complexes compared to the enumerated chemical space, we obtained expressions for the theoretical number of complexes of the five binary and eight ternary symmetry classes for octahedral complexes. We showed that even for a relatively small number of neutral, monodentate ligands present in Fe(II) complexes, the total theoretical space of 816,200 binary and ternary complexes far exceeded those that had been characterized in the CSD. An aim of identifying which uncharacterized compounds are most likely to be valuable or informative motivated our evaluation of interpolative schemes to determine the extent to which heteroleptic complex properties could be inferred from parent homoleptic complexes. Over representative test cases, we observed that a linear weighted averaging of homoleptic properties could reasonably (to ca. 4 kcal/mol for DEH-L and 0.24 eV for the HOMO level) predict properties of binary and ternary heteroleptic complexes. We demonstrated a refinement of the approach to be able to distinguish isomers (e.g., CS vs. TS or CA vs. TA) by using expressions that also incorporated either CS/TS or FS/MS binary complexes at a slightly higher computational cost but with errors that were half as large (ca. 2 kcal/mol for DEH-L and 0.15 eV for the HOMO level). The most data-efficient approach required four FS/MS and three homoleptic energies (i.e., 7 total) to infer 18 binary and 29 ternary complex properties. Finally, we demonstrated a two-stage discovery approach to leverage and validate our interpolative schemes. We first used 56 homoleptic Fe(II) complexes composed of neutral, closedshell monodentate ligands to infer the properties of 816,200 binary or ternary complexes of these ligands using HO-only averaging. We then defined a targeted zone of HOMO level and DEH-L that contained none of the homoleptic complexes. To avoid explicit calculations for all (ca. 3,000) of FS/MS complexes needed to achieve high fidelity over the full range of ligands, we then refined our analysis to the top 12 most frequently occurring ligands predicted to be in the targeted zone. From this set, we studied 66 each of FS and MS complexes to refine our interpolation of 6,776 complexes. This approach helped us to identify 3 FS/MS complexes in the targeted zone that had not been predicted by homoleptic averaging alone. It also had a higher validation rate for binary and ternary complexes than homoleptic averaging, with all FS/MS-interpolation predicted complexes residing in the targeted zone or just outside it. Overall, errors for DEH-L of around 5 kcal/mol with homoleptic averaging and 2 kcal/mol with FS/MS-interpolation are also comparable to prior machine learning (i.e., artificial neural network) model predictions on similar data sets 51 . Thus, this approach represents a promising multi-stage strategy for efficient chemical space exploration at low cost: an initial coarse interpolation from homoleptic complexes can be systematically refined by incorporating cis and trans isomer effects over a smaller subspace of ligands. While demonstrated here for magnetic and orbital energy properties, this approach is expected to have similar applicability in predicting other properties where ligands can be expected to behave in an approximately additive manner, such as in redox potentials or catalysis. This observed additivity could also be integrated into machine learning model property predictions or used synergistically to augment datasets for machine learning. Pickle file of CSD structures; xyz files of all structures studied; csv file of energies and properties of complexes studied. (ZIP) Naveen Arunachalam 1,# , Stefan Gugler Text S1. Description of mononuclear complex curation. The Conquest interface was used to query for structures containing a transition metal atom (here, groups 3-12, periods 4-6, excluding La) that forms at least 4 bonds with either p-block (here, the first five rows of groups 13-17), noble gas, or group 1 or 2 elements. The only constraint imposed on the search was that 3D coordinates were determined. This initial query produced 462,012 Refcodes for unique structures. The CSD Python API was then used to iterate through every "component" molecule in each x-ray crystallographic structure to identify all non-polymeric molecules with distinct molecular weight (within the same crystal structure) and only one transition metal atom. For each of the resulting 240,117 mononuclear transition metal complexes the CSD mol2 files were saved after adding any missing hydrogen atoms, preserving both the connectivity and bond orders present in the CSD. From this diverse set, 6-coordinate metal centers without edge-bound or sandwich-type ligands were evaluated for deviation of the angles (as defined in Ref. 1) between the metal-connecting atoms from the VSEPR ideal angles for octahedral, pentagonal pyramidal, or trigonal prismatic structures. Structures with lowest angular deviation from ideal octahedral molecular structure over other geometries were identified as octahedral. Text S2. Description of complex symmetry identification. Within each complex, a 3-hydrogen difference criterion was introduced to heuristically capture ligands that only differed in protonation state. If none of the equivalence conditions were met the ligands were identified as chemically identical. Ligand symmetry was identified by binning the octahedral structures by: (1) Ligand denticities (e.g., 5-denticity + 1-denticity) (2) maximum number of connecting atoms from a single ligand in the equatorial plane (e.g., 3denticity + 3-denticity has at most 2 connecting atoms from the same ligand in the equatorial plane -> fac binding) (3) total number of unique ligands (e.g., for a monodentate-only complex with 5 unique ligands, two must be duplicates) and (4) for lower denticities, counts of pairs of trans ligands that are identical (e.g., for a monodentate-only complex with 3 pairs of identical ligands, if only 1 pair of trans ligands are identical -> other unique pairs must be cis). A nomenclature for ligand symmetry was created to describe the observed symmetries following these rules (1) Denticities are denoted by numbers as the base of the ligand symmetry representation with higher denticities listed first. (2) If ligands are identical they are surrounded by "||" markers, with ligands with the highest number of identical copies of the same denticity listed first. (3) Tridentate ligands are identified as either fac-or mer-by f/m labels, and corresponding sets of three identical monodentate ligands are given equivalent f/m labels. (4) Pairs of identical monodentate ligands are identified as either cis-or trans-with c/t labels, pairs of non-identical monodentate ligands are given c/t labels only when there is one pair of non-identical monodentate ligands, and the ligand symmetry of identical pairs is ambiguous. Examples of ligand symmetry using this nomenclature are "|111111|" for a homoleptic monodentate-only complex, "4|11|t" for an equatorial tetradentate with trans identical monodentate ligands, and "2|11|c11" for a complex with a bidentate and 2 identical monodentate ligands in the equatorial plane with 2 chemically-distinct monodentate ligands in the axial positions. Table computationready percent Fe(II) percent Text S3. Expressions for interpolating ternary complex energies from CS/TS binary complexes. We indicate the stoichiometry in the complex to distinguish where the energies are derived from: where the third ligand in the EA complex is the one that is trans to itself so energies involving that ligand are derived from the binary TS complexes, whereas the remainder are derived from CS complexes. Table complexes (Figure