The quantum many body states in the BCS-BEC crossover regime are of long-lasting interest. Here we report direct spectroscopic evidence of BCS-BEC crossover in real-space in a FeSe monolayer thin film by using spatially resolved scanning tunneling spectra. The crossover is driven by the shift of band structure relative to the Fermi level. The theoretical calculation based on a two-band model qualitatively reproduces the measured spectra in the whole crossover range. In addition, the Zeeman splitting of the quasi-particle states is found to be consistent with the characteristics of a condensate. Our work paves the way to study the exotic states of BCS-BEC crossover in a two-dimensional crystalline material at the atomic scale. are two asymptotic limits of a fermionic superfluid. In the BCS limit, the Cooper pairs strongly overlap in space, and the condensation occurs at the onset temperature T c of pair formation. On the other hand, the fermions in the BEC regime are bound into dimers at a pairing temperature T * and the preformed dimers condense at a lower T c < T * as composite bosons. At the BCS-BEC crossover BCS-BEC crossover has been experimentally observed in ultra-cold Fermi gases Most of these works demonstrate the renormalized band structure by angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy, which only probes the occupied states under the Fermi level. The measurement of the predicted asymmetric gap at the Fermi level in the single-particle spectrum High-purity Fe (99.995%) and Se (99.999%) were co-deposited onto the substrate at ∼400 ] reveals an in-plane lattice constant of 0.375 nm which is consistent with the 0.377 nm of bulk FeSe The 2D crystalline semi-metallic FeSe monolayer is an ideal platform to realize the BCS-BEC crossover because the Fermi energy is only a few meVs and can be fine-tuned by the underneath Fourier transform of dI/dV mapping with scattering vector along the direction of the white dashed line. graphene layers The spatial variation of the Fermi energy of electronic band of FeSe monolayer on top of TLG [Fig. As the tip moves toward the region II along the dashed line in Fig. When the tip moves to the orange point in Fig. In order to further investigate this BCS-BEC crossover behavior, we consider the two-band model defined in In FeSe, the two bands overlap in energy, so that the parameter We assume that the dominant pairing interaction is spin fluctuation mediated inter-band scat-tering with interaction strength U = -V SF > 0 where ρ h (ξ k ) (ρ e (ξ k )) is the densities of states in the hole-like (electron-like) band . The chemical potential μ is determined by particle number conservation, We assume that the films have a constant 2D density of states, ρ e (ξ) = me 2π when E C < ξ < D + E C , and ρ h (ξ) = m h 2π when -D + E V < ξ < E V , and that m e = m h . All pertinent features of the BCS-BEC crossover reported in this experiment can be reproduced with this simple choice, which has the advantage that the integrals in the formula (1) of the manuscript and the formula The parameter regime applicable to the experiment is defined by the following limits: V = E V -F and the gap/overlap parameter ∆ 0 . Both axes are plotted in units of the binding energy ∆ m = 2Λ exp (-2/U ρ). In the semimetal regime, ∆ 0 < 0, there is always a non-zero order parameter ∆ h , ∆ e > 0. The crossover between the BCS and BEC regimes occurs close to μ = E V . When the chemical potential is far above (below) the hole band edge, the hole band is in the BEC (BCS) regime. In order to model the real-world material, we choose parameters for the two-band model to reproduce the properties of FeSe monolayers. Within the limits described above, the two-band model is uniquely described by choosing the set of parameters (∆ m , ∆ 0 , Λ). The solutions of the equation are effectively independent of Λ as long as it is chosen to be large enough. We use Λ = 50 meV. The band overlap parameter must be chosen such that the density of overlapping carriers between the hole and electron bands is comparable to real FeSe. Since we are approximating a density of states that scales as √ ξ k by a constant density of states, the band overlap in the model has to be fixed at 2∆ 0 = - , where 2∆ real 0 = -5.8 meV is the band overlap in real FeSe. Finally, we choose the binding energy ∆ m such that the pairing gap in the hole band in the BCS regime is comparable to the experimental value of ∆ BCS h = 0.9 meV. We empirically determine this to be ∆ m = 1.1 meV. We use the experimentally measured values of the doping parameter V (x) across the dashed line boundary [shown by the red triangles in Fig. The response to magnetic field is an essential property of a condensate and helps to identify the different phases. We also show how the density of states looks in the presence of an applied magnetic field. The expression for the density of states becomes a sum of the Zeeman-shifted spin-up and spin-down terms, where μ B is the Bohr magneton, and g is the Landé factor. The resulting density of states in the BEC regimes is shown in Fig. . More investigation is needed to explore the exotic phases under strong magnetic fields. In summary, we have provided direct spectroscopic evidence for a real-space BCS-BEC crossover in a FeSe monolayer on trilayer graphene substrate. The work function of the graphene substrate tunes the hole band edge in the FeSe monolayer crossing the Fermi level. As the top of hole band is shifted to and across the Fermi level, the BCS-BEC crossover is realized. The properties of the condensate are characterized by the the local density of states which we measured using scanning tunneling spectroscopy. We see a clear transition from a symmetric gap structure with sharp coherence peaks and sloped background in the BCS regime, to an asymmetric step-like gap structure with subdued peaks at gap edges. It is revealed that a pairing gap can even be formed in the incipient hole band when it is completely shifted below the Fermi level 