Heterogeneous catalysts consisting of supported metallic nanoparticles typically derive exceptional catalytic activity from their large proportion of under-coordinated surface sites which promote adsorption of reactant molecules. Simultaneously, these high energy surface configurations are unstable, leading to nanoparticle growth or degradation, and eventually a loss of catalytic activity. Surface morphology of catalytic nanoparticles is paramount to catalytic activity, selectivity, as well as degradation rates, however, it is well-known that harsh reaction conditions can cause the surface structure to change. Still, limited research has focused on understanding the link between nanoparticle surface facets and degradation rates or mechanisms. Here, we study a model Au supported catalyst system over a range of temperatures using a combination of in situ Transmission Electron Microscopy, kinetic Monte Carlo simulations, and density functional theory calculations to establish an atomistic picture of how 1 variations in surface structures and atomic coordination environments lead to shifting evolution mechanisms as a function of temperature. By combining experimental results, which yield direct observation of dynamic shape changes and particle evaporation rates, with computational techniques, which enable understanding the fundamental thermodynamics and kinetics of nanoparticle evolution, we illustrate a two-step evolution mechanism in which mobile adatoms form through desorption from low-coordination facets and subsequently evaporate off the particle surface. By understanding the role of temperature in the competition between surface diffusion and evaporation, we are able to show how individual atomic movements lead to particle-scale morphological changes, and rationalize why evaporation rates vary between particles in a system of nearly identical nanoparticles. Supported metal nanoparticles (NPs) are commonly used in industrial catalysis. As heterogeneous catalysts, under-coordinated active sites on the surfaces of nanoparticles promote adsorption of reaction gas molecules and facilitate chemical reactions to enhance both catalytic activity and selectivity. However, the high surface free energy associated with these under-coordinated surfaces and instability of under-coordinated active sites simultaneously drive nanoparticle evolution to reduce the total free energy of the system by reducing the catalyst surface area. Maintaining catalytic activity for important commercial reactions therefore commonly relies on preventing this coarsening, and keeping nanoparticles small. In reality, it is well known that nanoscale particles are commonly faceted and that the surface energy of each facet is not the same and can change with environmental conditions e.g. temperature, oxidizing or reducing conditions, reacting gases. Our model catalyst consisted of 5 nm Au nanoparticles supported on a silicon nitride in situ heating chip. The system was heated to high temperature within the TEM, and images were collected as a function of time (see Methods section for further details). Nanoparticle sizes were measured from TEM images, and particle size as a function of time was tracked for each particle. Experimental data show that below 750 • C particle size changes very little throughout the experiment. At 600 -700 • C a few nanoparticles evaporate and there are some examples of particle coalescence (seen as discontinuous growth/disappearance), however, most particles do not change size significantly (Figure To better understand the kinetics and temperature-dependence of the system, the evaporation rate was plotted as a function of temperature. Assuming that evaporation is the only process which removes Au mass from the model catalyst, the total volume of gold in the system (assuming spherical particles) was calculated in each frame of the TEM dataset, fit to a line as a function of time, and the evaporation rate was taken as the slope of the Figure We find an agreement with the familiar Arrhenius form (Figure Motivated by our experimental observations of evaporation as an activated process and clear transitions between stable surface structures in coalescing and evaporating nanoparticles, we carried out kinetic Monte Carlo (KMC) simulations to stochastically model the atomic processes that lead to morphological changes in the nanoparticles. Our simulation starts with model particle corresponding to an equilibrium-shape Au nanoparticle with atoms fixed on a perfect face-centered cubic (FCC) lattice and considers diffusion of surface atoms to unoccupied neighboring lattice sites (diffusion into vacuum, or lattice sites with coordination number zero, represent evaporation). The nanoparticle is modeled as an without considering the support even though the experimental system consists of supported particles. Our previous research demonstrated that Au nanoparticle evolution (on an identical support) is dominated by evaporation from free surfaces with only a minimal contribution from diffusion along the support surface, and, due to our particle deposition method, the particle-support contact area is very small. For example, removal of the edge between {1 1 1} and {1 0 0} facets creates a {3 1 1} plane, while the removal of an edge between two {1 1 1} facets creates a {1 1 0} plane. In order to more clearly understand the changes induced by the formation of new layers The Debye equation calculates diffraction patterns based on the wave interference caused by all unique pairs of atoms in the system; summing over all interference patterns builds a diffraction pattern which agrees with experimental results and calculations based on other methods, and does not require a mathematical description for shape and structure factors. Using the assumption that, for a monometallic particle, changes in diffraction peak intensities corresponds to changes in the volume fraction of diffracting surfaces, peak intensity ratios with respect to the dominant {1 1 1} diffraction intensity as a function of time were used to qualitatively describe morphological changes in the nanoparticle during evaporation. The {n 1 1} surfaces (for odd n) are vicinal surfaces for the {1 0 0} family. This means that they are slightly misoriented from the low index {1 0 0} planes, and that increasing n corresponds to increasing the width of {1 0 0} terraces. The surface science literature shows both experimental and theoretical verification for the formation of specific, stable vicinal surfaces during the roughening process to help stabilize high energy or highly misoriented surfaces. For example, Bartolini demonstrated that {3 1 1}, {5 1 1} and {11 1 1} are "magic" vicinals for FCC crystals which are exceptionally stable in evolving surfaces. DFT calculations were utilized to provide an atomistic explanation for nanoparticle evaporation via preferential desorption from specific crystal facets. The model consisted of calculated surface defect formation energies (∆G def ect ) and gold adatom adsorption energies (∆G adsorption ). We considered low Miller index (1 0 0), (1 1 0), (1 1 1), (2 1 1) and ( 1 1) facets which would be expected to dominate nanoparticles in the size and temperature ranges considered experimentally. Since initial surface defect formation energies and adsorption energies of adatoms on the (1 1 1) surface sites were significantly higher than the experimental activation barrier (Supplemental Table . Calculated adsorption energies for gold adatoms on the three-fold and bridge sites of the (1 1 1) surface confirm that the activation barrier for the surface diffusion of these adatoms is very small (0.01 eV), implying that they have For temperatures of 750 • C and below, where the evaporation rate is low and surface roughening occurs slowly, we see experimental evidence for preferential evaporation from specific crystallographic surfaces. Our experimental data show the evolution of an evaporating particle (Figure Based on our results, which show experimentally that evaporation begins around 750 • C and, computationally that the evaporation process depends on a morphological departure from a smooth surface structure, we expect that the ability of Au atoms to evaporate is closely related to the roughening transition. While the actual appearance of a discontinuity in surface roughness to signify the roughening transition is debated in the literature, our combination of experimental and simulated data show the presence of rough crystal surfaces and rapid fluctuations in surface structure that cause roughening. Roughening also decreases the mean coordination number of surface atoms compared to the clean crystal surface. Considering the physics behind our KMC model, where the probability of desorption/evaporation is inversely related to the coordination number, we can see how the roughest surfaces at the highest temperatures are exponentially more prone to evaporation due to thermal activation and large concentrations of under-coordinated adatoms. Previous KMC studies have shown the link between evaporation and surface roughening, and described the acceleration of roughening and evaporation in systems where mass is not conserved. Our use of a combination of experimental and computational techniques has allowed us to understand the mechanisms and rates of supported nanoparticle evaporation as a function of temperature and particle surface characteristics. Using time-resolved in situ TEM, we were able to observe the real behavior of systems containing hundreds of supported gold nanoparticles at various processing temperatures, and track their evolution in time. Motivated by experimental results which signaled that an activated mechanism drives nanoparticle evaporation, KMC simulations allowed us to suggest atomistic pathways that enable evaporation alongside morphological changes observed experimentally. Finally, DFT calculations were used to reinforce the link between surface morphology and propensity for degradation. These calculations show that evaporation occurs through a two-step mechanism where, first, highenergy edge atoms form adatoms on larger {1 1 1} terraces, and subsequently the high temperature in the system enables evaporation with an activation barrier confirmed in our experimental analysis. While our experimental and computational results focus specifically on the evolution of Au nanoparticles, our approach -utilizing common experimental techniques and simulations which include minimal material-specific assumptions -is generalizable to other systems. With our model of the process by which high system temperatures induce surface roughening and subsequent evaporation, and the knowledge that this process initiates at the edges of high-index surfaces, we can move towards understanding subtleties of supported catalyst degradation without relying on simplifications and assumptions about nanoparticle shape and surroundings. In this way, findings like ours, which suggest important parameters for catalytic particles, can inform research in materials synthesis to create novel catalyst materials which are less susceptible to degradation under harsh reaction conditions. Au nanoparticles coated with dendrimer ligands to enable self-assembly at specified particle spacings were synthesized according to previous study. After synthesis, nanoparticles were drop-cast directly on to Hummingbird Scientific in situ heating chips. Experimental temperatures range from 650 -850 • C in 50 • C increments. After each experiment, an unsupervised CNN pipeline was used to segment images and extract particle sizes and positions as a function of time; background information, machine learening Python code, and an interactive image segmentation tutorial are provided in the references. A homemade script was used for kinetic Monte Carlo (KMC) simulations (simulation scripts are available on the github repository listed above). To begin, a NP model was made by sampling the experimental particle size distribution, and forming the equilibrium FCC structure for the particle based on the Wulff construction applied in the Atomic Simulation Environment (ASE) python package to use as simulation input. 30 KMC event probabilities were calculated according to Equation where v 0 is an attempt frequency chosen to match the experimental physics, is an energy per bond (taken as 0.1 eV / bond) multiplied by coordination number N . In each KMC step, the event probability was calculated for each atom in the particle to determine which atoms will move/evaporate. where ∆E dif f usion = -(N 1 -N 0 ) for coordination numbers N 1 of the candidate site and N 0 at the current site. Correspondingly, ∆E evaporation = N 0 since evaporation requires breaking all surface bonds. By this model, diffusion to a more coordinated lattice site is favorable, and evaporation occurs with low probability but is still possible for atoms with low coordination number at high temperatures. Simulations were run until all atoms in the system evaporated. To ensure that KMC results matched the expected physical behavior, KMC evaporation rates were plotted to show that dR dt ∝ 1 R , in agreement with our previous research on nanoparticle evaporation (Supplemental Figure For the DFT work, all systems are built using the Atomic Simulation Environment (ASE) Entropy corrections are calculated using the ASE Thermochemistry package. Surface lattice atoms are treated as harmonic oscillators with only vibrational entropy contributions. Gas phase atoms are treated as ideal gas with an entropy of 0.002 eV/K. DFT calculated ground state energies are then corrected with these entropies to get the free energy of the system according to Equation 3: