A spontaneous ferromagnetic moment can be induced in Bi 2 Te 3 thin films below a temperature T ≈ 16 K by the introduction of Mn dopants. We demonstrate that films grown via molecular beam epitaxy with the stoichiometry Mn 0.14 Bi 1.86 Te 3 maintain the crystal structure of pure Bi 2 Te 3 . The van der Waals nature of inter-layer forces in the Mn 0.14 Bi 1.86 Te 3 crystal causes lattice mismatch with the underlayer to have a limited effect on the resulting crystal structure, as we demonstrate by thin film growth on tetragonal MgF 2 (110) and NiF 2 (110). Electronic transport and magnetic moment measurements show that the ferromagnetic moment of the Mn 0.14 Bi 1.86 Te 3 thin films is enhanced as the Fermi level moves from the bulk conduction band and towards the bulk band gap, suggesting that electronic surface states play an important role in mediating the ferromagnetic order. Ferromagnetic Mn 0.14 Bi 1.86 Te 3 /antiferromagnetic NiF 2 bilayers show evidence that the ferromagnetic moment of the Mn 0.14 Bi 1.86 Te 3 film is suppressed, suggesting the existence of an interface effect between the two magnetic layers. Topological insulator (TI) materials with intrinsic ferromagnetic ordering are interesting due to their wide variety of novel quantum states. One such magnetic quantum state has been observed via the quantum anomalous Hall effect (QAHE) There are two primary strategies for inducing a spontaneous moment in the surface states of TI. The first is by proximity to a magnetic insulator, usually through the fabrication of a heterostructure of two different materials with an atomically smooth interface which creates some overlap in the electronic and spin states of the two systems. Inducing magnetism by proximity effects has the advantage of maintaining a high crystal quality of the TI, but is limited by a perceived lack of materials that have magnetic and topological properties and which can also support the growth of the TI-magnetic insulator heterostructure In order to maximize the potential utility of magnetically-doped topological insulators, it is important to understand the mechanism of magnetic ordering and how it is affected by microscopic and macroscopic features. In the case of ferromagnetic Mn-doped Bi 2 Te 3 , which has a ferromagnetic moment pointing along the [0001] crystallographic direction of the crystal (using a hexagonal basis) and a Curie temperature of T C ≈ 16 K, the mechanism responsible for the magnetic ordering in these materials is unclear. In Mn-doped TI films, proposed mechanisms include Mn clustering and Ruderman-Kittel-Kasuya-Yosida (RKKY) interactions, either through bulk conduction channels or two dimensional (2D) surface states To gain insight into the mechanism of ferromagnetic ordering in the Mn-doped Bi 2 Te 3 system, we present here magnetic, electronic, and structural measurements on a series of Mn 0.14 Bi 1.86 Te 3 (MBT) thin film crystals. Samples were grown on three different types of insulating substrates: non-magnetic Al 2 O 3 and MgF 2 , and antiferromagnetic NiF 2 . Our results show that subtle, but significant, differences in electronic and magnetic properties develop even between samples that are nominally identical in their growth conditions. By keeping the Mn concentration, film thickness, and other growth parameters constant throughout a series of thin film growths, we approach the question of the nature of induced magnetism in Mn-doped Bi 2 Te 3 topological insulators from a different angle than previous studies, testing variations in the type of substrate, Hall mobility, and charge carrier density for their influence on the magnetic properties of this system. By doing so we present evidence that the ferromagnetic ordering in this system is, in large part, electronic charge carrier mediated and that the antiferromagnetic NiF 2 interface acts to reduce magnetization in the MBT film. This work also demonstrates advancements in the fabrication novel TI-antiferromagnetic insulator bilayers using crystallographic, magnetic, and electronic characterizations of MBT films grown on epitaxial thin films of the antiferromagnetic insulator, NiF 2 . We present evidence that single phase, (0001)-oriented hexagonal MBT films can be grown on the (110) face of tetragonal NiF 2 and MgF 2 substrates despite the significant lattice mismatch and difference in crystal structure. Our measurements show that the MBT films grown on NiF 2 and MgF 2 have nearly identical crystallographic properties compared to those grown on hexagonal Al 2 O 3 (0001). These results suggest the existence of a much wider range of potential TI bilayer constructions with unique proximity effects that may emerge at those interfaces. MBT films were grown via molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) in an ultra-high vacuum (UHV) chamber (base pressure < 10 -10 Torr) by sublimating from separate elemental sources of 99.999% pure Mn, Bi, and Te. Flux ratios and film thickness was determined by measuring the elemental flux rate with a retractable crystal monitor located at the same position as the sample substrate. Reflection high energy electron diffraction (RHEED) oscillations associated with layer by layer growth were measured and used to calibrate the elemental flux to film thickness ratio. Film thickness was measured using x-ray reflectivity (XRR), an independent measurement which reveals that the film thickness calibration from elemental flux had a random error of about 4%. Each sample was grown under identical conditions, keeping the Mn/Bi flux percentage at 7 ± 1% and film thickness to 13.6 ± 0.5 nm, approximately 12 quintuple layers (QL). Mn percentage was calculated by a combination of partial pressure ratios during growth and by x-ray fluorescence measurements after growth. Seven distinct MBT samples were grown in a series of five growths or batches over the span of about five months. For the MBT films grown on Al 2 O 3 (0001) and MgF 2 (110), commercially purchased single-crystal substrates were used. For the MBT/NiF 2 bilayers, a separate UHV chamber was used to first grow the epitaxial NiF 2 (110) film on a MgF 2 (110) substrate to a thick-ness of approximately 30 nm, before MBT film growth. NiF 2 MBE growths were performed using thermal sublimation of commercially available NiF 2 source material as described elsewhere X-ray diffraction (XRD) and XRR measurements were performed using Cu K α radiation from a Rigaku Smartlab thin film x-ray diffractometer. XRD measurements confirmed that all MBT films have the (0001) hexagonal crystal structure of Bi 2 Te 3 . The XRR data were analyzed quantitatively by performing non-linear least squares fits using an optical model with the GenX software package Calculations of the anomalous Hall effect (AHE) and carrier density were done by performing a linear regression fit to the measured Hall resistance at T = 2 K in the magnetic field range between μ 0 H = ±3 T and μ 0 H = ±1 T, in order to probe only the AHE saturated regions. The intercept on the Hall voltage axis of this fit was used to determine the magnitude of the AHE while the slope, along with the film thickness, was used in the calculation of carrier density. The Hall mobility μ was calculated from the measured longitudinal resistivity ρ xx of the device together with the carrier density n determined from the transverse resistivity excluding the AHE, ρ xy = μ 0 H/ne, using ρ xx = 1/neμ, where e is the charge of the electron. The MBT thin films were grown on three types of substrates, hexagonal Al and no evidence of additional peaks that could be associated with other crystal structures or orientations. This result is consistent with a Bi 2 Te 3 film with randomly distributed Mn dopants substituting at the Bi sites, rather than with the layered MnBi 2 Te 4 family of crystals, which has a larger (0001) lattice parameter due to the addition of an ordered Mn layer It has been shown previously that attempting to incorporate too much Mn into the thin film crystal will degrade the structure significantly Figure In the films studied here, the lowest carrier density was calculated to be 0.92 × 10 25 m -3 , which suggests that the Fermi level of this film lies very close to the bottom of the bulk conduction band There are two interesting conclusions that can be made from these results. The first is that the magnetization of the MBT films are enhanced as the Fermi level moves from the bulk conduction band towards the bulk band gap, which can be explained by surface state mediated magnetic ordering via the Ruderman-Kittel-Kasuya-Yosida (RKKY) interaction The second conclusion is that the NiF 2 interface appears to suppress the magnetization of the MBT films. In Fig. In this study, we have shown how a spontaneous ferromagnetic moment below T = 16 K can be induced in Mn 0.14 Bi 1.86 Te 3 thin films by doping Bi 2 Te 3 with Mn atoms that randomly substitute into the Bi sites. We have presented evidence of successful MBT thin film growths on tetragonal crystal substrates, MgF 2 (110) and NiF 2 (110). Electronic transport and magnetic moment measurements show how the magnetization of the MBT films is enhanced as the Fermi level moves from the bulk conduction band towards the bulk band gap. When taken alongside previous works layer is not similarly as rough, likely due to Van der Waals bonding with the substrate, rather than epitaxial growth. These XRR data, in conjunction with XRD and RHEED data, offer compelling evidence that smooth, single phase MBT films can be grown on the tetragonal (110) surfaces of MgF 2 and NiF 2 .