We propose a method to distinguish between trivial and topological, Majorana, zero-energy states in both short and long superconductor-normalsuperconductor junctions based on Rashba nanowires using phase-biased equilibrium transport measurements. In particular, we show how the sawtooth profile of the supercurrent, due to the Majorana oscillation suppression in the topological phase for sufficiently long superconductor regions, leads to a strong signal in its zero-frequency susceptibility for a phase difference of φ = π. This signal is notably insensitive to the chemical potential in the normal region, while trivial zero-energy states only causes signals in the susceptibility that is highly varying with the chemical potential, thus turning gating of the normal region into a simple experimental control knob. Furthermore, we obtain that, by tuning the junction transparency, critical currents in both short and long junctions undergo a reduction in the number of oscillations as a function of magnetic field only in the topological phase, an effect that find to be intimately linked to Majorana nonlocality. Finally, we show that our results also hold at finite temperatures, thus highlighting their potential measurability under realistic experimental conditions. Majorana bound states (MBSs) have drawn much attention due to their non-locality and non-Abelian statistics An important signature of MBSs is the zerobias conductance peak (ZBCP) of height 2e 2 /h, theoretically predicted in NS junctions A promising approach toward the detection of topological zero-energy states is using equilibrium phase-biased transport, see e.g., Refs. The phase difference can be controlled by a magnetic flux in a SQUID geometry, which enables the determination of the phase-dependent supercurrent profile by sweeping the magnetic flux. In particular, it has been shown that, in junctions of nanowires with Rashba SOC, phasedependent supercurrents in the topological phase are characterized by a discontinuity at φ = π in the limit of very long S regions, thus producing a characteristic sawtooth profile as a clear sign of the topological phase In this work, we exploit the phase-biased equilibrium transport and investigate how the zerofrequency supercurrent susceptibility is affected by the sawtooth profile developed in the topological phase in both short and long SNS nanowire junctions. We show that the zero-frequency supercurrent susceptibility develops distinct features that can be clearly related to the emergence of trivial ZESs and MBSs, respectively. In particular, we demonstrate that the zero-frequency supercurrent susceptibility is very sensitive to the chemical potential in the N region, μ N , when trivial ZESs are present but notably not when MBSs emerge, thus allowing for identification of the topological phase transition by simply gating the N region. We are able to explain this behavior by finding that the onset field for trivial ZESs depends on μ N , while B c does not, since the topological phase and its MBSs emerge in the S regions. This allows the zero-frequency supercurrent susceptibility to provide an easily accessible signature of the topological phase transition and thus become a tool for distinguishing trivial ZESs and MBSs. Having identified the topological phase transition, we also exploit the MBSs energy oscillations as a function of magnetic field to test the spatial nonlocality in the topological phase. In particular, we find a reduction in the number of oscillations of the zero-frequency supercurrent susceptibility when tuning the junction transmission, which allows us to identify the topological phase itself, beyond only finding the topological phase transition point. This is similar to what has been observed with critical currents in Ref. The remaining of this work is organized in the following way. In section 2 we detail how we model the system, while in section 3 we present and discuss our results. In particular, in 3.1 we study the low-energy spectrum and explore the formation of trivial and topological ZESs in both short and long junctions. In 3.2 we then use the energy spectrum to investigate and understand the supercurrent and its The junction is comprised of a single nanowire divided into three parts. In the outer parts (S regions) the order parameter ∆ is taken to be finite, with its phase given by φ L/R , and the chemical potential is μ S . In the N region, the order parameter is zero and the chemical potential μ N . An external magnetic field B is applied perpendicularly to the axis of the spin-orbit coupling of strength α. zero-frequency susceptibility in order to find signatures of ZESs and identify the topological phase transition. In 3.3 we study the effects of lowering the junction transparency and how it can be used to identify the topological phase itself. Then, in 3.4 we establish the robustness of our results at finite but low temperatures. Finally, in section 4 we summarize our results. We consider SNS junctions made out of a single nanowire with Rashba spin-orbit coupling (SOC) of which two superconducting regions (S) are separated by a normal metallic region (N), as shown schematically in Fig. We model the nanowire as a single-channel one-dimensional system with the following effective Hamiltonian where p x is the electron momentum along the nanowire, m its effective electron mass, α R is the Rashba SOC strength and B is a Zeeman field, which comes from an external magnetic field applied perpendicularly to the spin-orbit axis. The Pauli matrices σ i and τ i act on spin and particle-hole spaces, respectively. The spatially dependent chemical potential μ and superconducting order parameter ∆ are defined piece-wise by and where S L and S R represent the left and right S regions, respectively. Here, ∆ corresponds to the proximity-induced superconducting order parameter in the nanowire. We discretize the continuum model of Eq. ( Furthermore, we stress that here we focus on finite length SNS junctions with both short and long N regions. The terms short and long are not randomly chosen, but depends on the comparison between the superconducting coherence length ξ and the length of the N region We are interested in trivial and topological ZESs in both short and long junctions. As discussed in the introduction, a very common mechanism for trivial ZESs, usually present in experiments, is the presence of chemical potential inhomogeneities, e.g., by considering the chemical potential in N and S to be different In this part we present the low-energy spectrum and supercurrent and its susceptibility, obtained by using the model introduced in previous section. Before going further, it is perhaps important to point out the main features of Josephson junctions with MBSs when the chemical potentials in the N and S are the same, such that in the following sections we contrast when they are distinct and ZESs emerge. First, the model in Eq. ( We start by presenting the low-energy spectrum based on the model described in section 3.1 and identify the main features related to each type of ZESs, both of which can present similar experimental signatures, especially zero-bias conductance peaks. Later, we use the energy spectrum to calculate quantities that can distinguish between trivial and topological ZESs. Fig. By looking at the phase dispersion of these lowenergy states we gain more insight into how trivial ZESs appear. In Fig. We have checked that, for a fixed value of the Zeeman field B, a change in μ N either moves the phase at which the short junction trivial ZESs appear away from φ = π or removes them altogether. This is in stark contrast with the behavior of the topological MBSs, for which we show in Fig. In order to describe the low-energy spectrum further, it is instructive to consider the limit of semiinfinitely long S regions. In this limit and in the topological regime, the outer MBSs are not present and the low-energy spectrum is dominated by the inner MBSs. Their phase dispersion (S) ± (φ) in a short junction is then described by where (S) 0 depends on system parameters such as SOC strength, Zeeman field, and junction transparency. For a topological junction with perfect transmission, the proportionality constant takes the value of the induced gap (S) 0 = ∆ ind , but in general this state is a subgap state with (S) 0 < ∆ ind . Since we are interested in the low-energy behavior of the state around φ = π, it is useful to expand the dispersion around this point and we find, up to second order, (S) As seen in Fig. Another important difference between the short and long junctions is that for long junctions in the trivial regime, although we do observe ABS crossings similar to short junctions [Fig. Finally, we also consider the semi-infinite L S limit of a long junction in the topological regime, where the dispersion can be approximated by Around φ = π this behaves similarly to the case of short junctions. However, in the long junction case, a perfect transmission now leads to a proportionality constant (L) 0 = ξ∆/(2L N ) In summary, we find that, although the emergence of topological MBSs, always occurs above B c , trivial ZESs can easily emerge before this transition. These states have different origins, as MBSs arise due to the topological phase, while trivial ZESs emerge due to ABS zero-energy crossings which strongly depend on the chemical potential of the normal region. Furthermore, the behavior of MBSs at φ = π for both types of junctions induce a linear dispersion proportional to ±|φ -π|. This causes the derivative of the dispersions to be discontinuous at φ = π and consequently the second derivative will diverge. It is this behavior that we will exploit in the next subsection. In the previous subsection, we calculated the lowenergy spectrum and showed that both short and long junctions can easily host accidental and robust trivial ZESs, respectively. These states present an obstacle in the detection of MBSs and methods of differentiating these trivial states from the topological MBSs are urgently needed. In order to propose a solution to this issue, we next investigate the supercurrent of the junction and also its susceptibility. The phasedependent supercurrent of a Josephson junction can be directly obtained from its spectrum as where κ B is the Boltzmann constant, T the temperature and the summation is performed over positive eigenvalues. Another quantity we are interest in is the supercurrent susceptibility As it will be obvious later, we are here mostly focusing on the value this quantity takes at φ = π, which we denote simply by S π = S(φ = π). We investigate how the above quantities depend on system parameters and begin by considering the zero temperature case, while finite temperature effects are covered in section 3.4. In Fig. In order to better understand the change in supercurrent profile induced by changing L S , we first point towards the (S) ± ∝ ±|φ -π| dispersion of junctions with infinitely long S regions in the topological regime around φ = π, see Eq. ( The supercurrent behavior in Fig. Next, in Fig. In order to further differentiate between signatures in S π coming from trivial or topological ZESs, we exploit the fact that the trivial ABS crossings are strongly influenced by μ N , the chemical potential in the N region, while B c depends only on μ S , as it is tied to the topological phase transition in the bulk S region. This means that tuning μ N should only affect features the zero-frequency susceptibility coming from the emergence of trivial ZESs, and not the topological MBSs. In Fig. Next, we consider junctions with a long N region. Figure In the topological regime, S π develops a strong dependence on L S , as can be seen in Fig. For the parameters considered in this subsection, the short junction hosts phase-induced (finite φ) trivial ZESs, and the long junction hosts both zero-phase (φ = 0) and phase-induced trivial ZESs. We have also checked that our overall conclusions remain the same in chemical potential configurations where also zerophase trivial ZESs are present in short junctions, such as for the effective values reported in Refs. We also remark that our conclusions depend on the phase dispersion of the inner MBSs pair not being completely flat. This may happen when the chemical potential configuration is such that it does not allow hybridization of the inner MBSs at φ = 0, leading to a vanishing proportionality factor in the long S region limit dispersion, (S/L) ± ∝ ±|φ -π|. We avoid such pathological regimes in our calculations, but focus on parameter regions where |μ N | < |μ S |, where we never found such issues. In this work we also set μ S = 0.5 meV, but we checked that our conclusions hold for other values of μ S for long enough S regions. As a consequence, we find that gating the N region and measuring S π can be used as an easy, distinctive tool to differentiate trivial ZESs from MBSs appearing in the topological regime, in both short and long junctions. In the previous subsection, we identified the topological phase transition and differentiated it from features produced by trivial ZESs in the zero-frequency supercurrent susceptibility measured at φ = π. Here we show how changing the junction transparency, which can be done by tuning localized gates at the NS interfaces, allows us to additionally determine if the junction is inside the topological phase or not, still using only measurements of S π . As a consequence, S π can both determine the topological phase transition and the topological phase itself. The latter is done by exploiting the energy oscillations of the MBSs as a function of Zeeman field. We note that a similar study has been done in Ref. For a high transparency junction at φ = π in the topological regime, the two pairs of MBSs oscillate out-of-phase with respect to each other. This gives rise to periodic, intermittent crossings at zero energy as the pairs switch ordering as the pair closer or further apart from zero energy, see Fig. We finally note that in long junctions the robust trivial ZESs can also show energy oscillations with the Zeeman field, which lead to corresponding oscillations in S π . This is displayed in the inset in Fig. The results we have presented so far were all calculated in the zero-temperature limit. In order to showcase their experimental relevance, we now consider finite temperature effects. As a direct consequence of the hyperbolic tangent term in Eq. ( This means that at higher temperatures, near-zero-energy states have their contribution to S π strongly suppressed. In particular, the sawtooth profile in the supercurrent is affected by this suppression, as well as signatures coming from trivial ZESs. Figure Interestingly, in short junctions the features introduced by trivial ZESs are much less suppressed by temperature. Still, as the temperature is decreased, both the trivial and topological signatures appear much more clearly, reaching the same order of magnitude as their zero-temperature values for temperatures of ∼ 20 mK. These are quite low temperatures, but are clearly within the range of low temperatures achieved in similar setups in recent experiments Lastly, in Fig. As a final note, we also briefly discuss the effect of disorder, very likely present in hybrid semiconductorsuperconductor platforms with Rashba SOC such as the one studied here. In particular, disorder is expected from scalar impurities or charge inhomogeneities To conclude, we proposed a way to differentiate between trivial and topological zero-energy states in Josephson junctions based on nanowires with Rashba spin-orbit coupling using experimentally accessible phase-biased Josephson measurements. In particular, we explored how the supercurrent and, especially, its zero-frequency supercurrent susceptibility behave as a function of Zeeman field and phase difference across the junction. In particular, we found that the sawtooth profile of the supercurrent in the topological regime, due to the topological MBSs, can be exploited as it produces a discontinuity at φ = π, which generates a clear peak in the zero-frequency supercurrent susceptibility at φ = π, S π . This peak is also not sensitive to the chemical potential in the N region μ N as it is a property of the S region. On the other hand, any trivial ZESs in the junction have their origin in the N region and we found that they produce signatures in S π that are inherently sensitive to μ N . As a consequence, clear peak features in the S π profile as a function of Zeeman field B can be clearly assigned to trivial and topological ZESs by just sweeping the gating in the N region. This result holds for both short and long junctions, despite otherwise quite different properties between them. We additionally showed that the tuning of the junction transparency can be used to further distinguish between the topological and trivial phases by means of a reduction in the number of MBSs oscillations in S π as transmission is decreased. This happens when the oscillations seen in S π in the topological regime have their period effectively increased, doubled or more, as the MBSs pairs start to oscillate in-phase as the tunneling regime is achieved in the junction. We observed this phenomenon for both short and long junctions, although the latter requires a lower transparency in order to enter the appropriate regime. To support the robustness of our findings, we verified that they hold at low finite temperatures and for weak-to-moderate disorder, thus making our proposal relevant for experimental implementation. Finally, we point out that Josephson junctions similar to those studied here have already been fabricated and phase-biased supercurrents have even been measured 