Mid-infrared spectroscopy probes molecular vibrations to identify chemical species and functional groups. Therefore, mid-infrared hyperspectral imaging is one of the most powerful and promising candidates for chemical imaging using optical methods. Yet high-speed and entire bandwidth mid-infrared hyperspectral imaging has not been realized. Here we report a mid-infrared hyperspectral chemical imaging technique that uses chirped pulse upconversion of sub-cycle pulses at the image plane. This technique offers a lateral resolution of 15 μm, and the field of view is adjustable between 800 μm × 600 μm to 12 mm × 9 mm. The hyperspectral imaging produces a 640 × 480 pixel image in 8 s, which covers a spectral range of 640-3015 cm -1 , comprising 1069 wavelength points and offering a wavenumber resolution of 2.6-3.7 cm -1 . For discrete frequency mid-infrared imaging, the measurement speed reaches a frame rate of 5 kHz, the repetition rate of the laser. As a demonstration, we effectively identified and mapped different components in a microfluidic device, plant cell, and mouse embryo section. The great capacity and latent force of this technique in chemical imaging promise to be applied to many fields such as chemical analysis, biology, and medicine. Hyperspectral imaging is a mapping technique that combines imaging and spectroscopy to characterize and identify the distribution of chemical constituents. A spectral image is a data cube with two spatial dimensions and one spectral dimension, namely, the full spectrum can be extracted from each pixel in the hyperspectral image. A general color image based on the RGB color model has only 3 bands and a multiband with more than 3 bands (generally less than 10) is called a multispectral technique, while hyperspectral imaging has hundreds to thousands of bands. In recent years, hyperspectral images in the visible and near-infrared band have been widely used in many fields, such as food Another limitation of MIR imaging is the light source. For example, although the incoherent IR light source emits a continuous spectrum of 1-25 μm, the intensity cannot satisfy the SNR required for scanless imaging with MCT cameras. In recent years, wavelength-tunable quantum cascade lasers (QCL) have been used as a light source for MIR imaging with a useful SNR range for MCT detectors Another strategy is up-conversion of the MIR pulses to visible or near-infrared light. Visible or near-infrared light can be detected with Si-based detectors, which have much higher performance than MIR detectors Here, we propose the most efficient mid-infrared hyperspectral chemical imaging method to our knowledge, which employs scanless global imaging to save time on raster scans. Additionally, it covers the entire MIR bandwidth, and we can create either a monochromatic or a hyperspectral image by using a wavelength filter or a grating to save time on tuning wavelengths. A general method for characterizing ultrashort mid-infrared pulses is through upconversion using a stretched chirped pulse The MIR signals were converted to visible light while preserving absorption spectrum information. Since the pulse energy of the light source was sufficient for full wavelength upconversion efficiency, a thin crystal (< 5 μm) with a wide phase matching bandwidth can be used. Finally, hyperspectral images were obtained by a hyperspectral camera with a silicon-based detector. The innovation of the MIR light source and the fusion with the snapshot method and upconversion not only meets the requirements of the spectrum for identifying chemical substances in chemical imaging but also dramatically improves the speed of chemical imaging. As shown in the conceptual diagram of Fig. The experimental setup of the MIR hyperspectral imaging system is shown in Fig. The light source is a Ti:sapphire laser system based on a regenerative amplifier and a single-pass amplifier (Spectra-Physics Spitfire Ace) with a pulse duration of 35 fs, output pulse energy of 2.8 mJ, repetition rate of 5 kHz, and wavelength of 800 nm (ωF). The laser beam was split into two by a beam splitter with transmittance and reflectance of 7:3. The transmitted beam was used for the generation of the MIR pulse through two-color filamentation The transmitted beam was sent to a doubling crystal (β-BBO, type-I, cut angle 29 ̊, thickness 100 μm) to generate a second harmonic (SH) pulse (ωSHG, 406 nm). The collinear two-color pulses pass through a birefringent calcite crystal (thickness 1.7 mm) and the relative delay between them is aligned by controlling the angle of the crystal. After that, a dual wave plate (λ for ωSHG, λ/2 for ωF) is used for rotating the polarization of the fundamental pulse so that the fundamental and SH pulses have the same polarization and the efficiency of the four-wave difference frequency generation (FW-DFG) process is optimized. The fundamental and SH beams were focused by a concave mirror (CM1, highly reflects 800 nm and 400 nm wavelength, radius of curvature: 1.5 m). The MIR pulse (pulse width 13.6 fs, pulse energy 1.2 μJ) was generated through the two-color filamentation. After the filament, the beam is collimated with an aluminum-coated concave mirror (CM2, radius of curvature: 0.5 m) with a 7 mm diameter hole. Since the generated MIR beam has a much larger divergence than the excitation beam, the fundamental and SH beams are removed by 83.5% in this way. The residual fundamental and SH beams were reflected and then removed by a 200 μm thick silicon wafer. The silicon wafer was set at Brewster's angle to maximize the transmittance of the MIR beam. After that, the MIR beam was focused and irradiated to the sample by a concave mirror (CM3, gold coating, radius of curvature: 0.5 m). The image of the sample was transferred to the sum frequency generation (SFG) crystal by the two concave mirrors (CM4 and CM5, gold coating, radius of curvature: 0.4 m and 0.3 m respectively). Assuming the optical system from the sample to the sum frequency generation crystal plane as a microscope, the combination of CM4 and CM5 acts as an objective lens. A ~4.4 μm thick GaSe crystal film (cut angle 90 ̊) was set on the image plane and the crystal surface was parallel to the image plane. The reflected beam from the beam splitter was stretched to a chirped pulse of 1.8 ps by using a pair of diffraction gratings. The chirped pulse was overlapped with the MIR pulse on the ITO mirror. The MIR pulse EMIR(t) and the chirped pulse ECP(t) are sent to the GaSe crystal film and the sum frequency between the chirped pulse and the MIR pulse is generated. The phase matching condition is Type I, namely, sum frequency (extraordinary wave) generation between the chirped pulse (ordinary wave) and MIR (ordinary wave). The SFG signal ECP(t)EMIR(t) preserves the information of the MIR spectrum. The long wavelength component of SFG, which corresponds to the low-frequency component of MIR, overlaps with the short wavelength component of the chirped pulse itself. Therefore, a long pass filter (cut off at 783 nm) on the chirped pulse and a short pass filter (cut off at 752 nm) on the SFG were set to avoid wavelength overlap. As a result, the measurable wavelengths were limited to 638-752 nm which corresponds to 3316-15634 nm of the MIR pulse (wavenumber: 3015-640 cm -1 ). Nonetheless, this wavelength range is sufficient for chemical imaging. Finally, a silicon-based hyperspectral camera (EBA JAPAN, SIS-H-0.45nm) was used to detect images for each wavelength, the so-called hyperspectral image. For hyperspectral imaging, the data cube consists of 640 × 480 pixel images with 1069 wavelength points. The wavelength resolution of hyperspectral imaging was 0.15 nm, which corresponded to a wavenumber resolution of 2.6-3.7 cm -1 . It takes a minimum of 8 s to obtain a hyperspectral image data cube. On the other hand, in the case of the discrete frequency imaging, the SFG signal was switched to a high-speed gated image intensifier unit (Hamamatsu, 10880-13F) via mirror M5. A high-speed camera (Phantom, VEO 410L, maximum number of pixels is 1280 × 800) was installed behind the image intensifier unit to measure the amplified image signals. The wavelength was selected by a tunable bandpass filter set (Semrock TBP01-704/13-25x36 and TBP01-790/12-25x36) before the image intensifier unit. The tunable bandpass filter set can choose any bandwidth of 50 cm -1 within 640-3015 cm -1 . The trigger signal of the image intensifier unit and the high-speed camera was synchronized with the laser light source. Discrete frequency imaging achieves a video rate of 5 kHz. The optical configuration shown in Supplementary Information Fig. The optimal crystal thickness must be found to achieve phase matching of 640-3015 cm -1 . The upconverted spectrum using thicker crystals (e.g. 100 μm thick GaSe in Fig. The spatial resolution of the imaging system was measured with a copper mesh grid and the width of the bar of the copper mesh grid is 30 μm. Figs. The bit depth of the MIR hyperspectral chemical imaging is 12 bit and the maximum SNR is 1365. As shown in Fig. We tested the analytical capability of our system for chemical imaging by injecting five different kinds of samples (i.e. glycerin, glucose, albumin, 1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3phosphocholineglucose and soybean oil) into microfluidic. Fig. Here, we prepared 5 samples where glycerin and soybean oil were liquids at room temperature (27 ̊C), glucose was 50 mg/mL aqueous solution, albumin was 10 mg/mL aqueous solution, and 1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine was a mixture with water (specific weight of 1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine/water was 3/100). 0.5 μL of each was extracted and injected into 5 microchannels respectively. Fig. Here, we need to extract the spectra of 5 samples as teaching data for the hyperspectral analysis. We determined the wavenumber that extracts preliminary teaching data based on the known infrared transmittance spectra of that 5 samples (see FT-IR data in Fig. Discrete frequency chemical imaging refers to high-speed imaging of a specific wavenumber. The highest time resolution of the system is evaluated by imaging the fast-flowing water in a microchannel at a fixed frequency band. As shown in Fig. The analytical ability is tested by imaging a more complex composition ── A. cepa bulb leaves epidermal cells. Fresh A. cepa bulb leaves epidermal cells were affixed to CaF2 substrates with a thickness of 200 μm. In Fig. We randomly selected 125 non-overlapping areas of pixel size which limited 4 < x < 35, 3 < y < 55 and 20 < x × y < 720 in the whole hyperspectral image to construct teaching data and classified them into four classes to map the components. The spectral angle mapper analysis results are shown in Figs. To verify the accuracy of the mapping results, after the hyperspectral image measurement, the sample was stained with acetocarmine solution and was observed by a visible light microscope. As shown in Fig. In addition to microscopic observation, the advantage of our system is also significant when being used to screen large areas. The field of view of our system can be up to 12 mm × 9 mm for the large samples. Here, we explain the hyperspectral chemical imaging for a section of the mouse embryo with the millimetric scale view. The sample was a 13.5 days age mouse embryo sagittal plane with a thickness of 3 μm fixed on a 100 μm thick silicon substrate. Fig. For the section of the mouse embryo, our system only needs 8 s to obtain the hyperspectral chemical imaging of 1069 point wavenumbers, which covered 640-3015 cm -1 . Whereas for this task, the imaging of a ~10 mm sample would take tens of hours using a QCL-based discrete frequency imaging system and would take an FT-IR system upward of 1000 h or more. In contrast, our results indicate that our method has great potential not only for microscopic scale analysis, such as cells, but also for centimeter scale analysis, such as biological tissues (e.g., surgical tissue sections, etc). We implemented high-speed scanless MIR hyperspectral chemical imaging using sum frequency generation for upconversion by a broad-spectrum MIR ultrashort pulse as the light source. The light source of the broad-spectrum MIR ultrashort pulse saved the time required for wavelength scanning. The up-converted visible light can be imaged with a silicon-based detector while maintaining the infrared absorption spectrum. The SNR is much higher than that of the traditional MIR detector, which greatly improves the sensitivity. The observable field of view is from the micro-to the centimeter scale. The measurable wavenumber band is 640-3015 cm -1 and an MIR hyperspectral image of 640 × 480 pixels with 1069 wavenumber points can be obtained in the shortest time of 8 s. Furthermore, the maximum speed of hyperspectral imaging reaches 0.32 s for a 640 × 480 (skipped every 25 pixel rows) pixel image, and it can be applied for rough screening. The measurement speed for discrete frequency imaging reaches a video rate of 5 kHz. The chemical imaging results of the microfluidic device, onion (A. cepa) bulb leaves epidermal cells, and sections of mouse embryos fully confirm the validity of our method and its great potential in chemical imaging. We believe that the method of this study has broad application prospects in many fields such as chemical analysis, life sciences, and medicine. The microfluidic device was fabricated by performing the etching process on the silicon wafer. The following is the manufacturing process. A positive photoresist was coated to a silicon wafer (thickness 525 μm) with a thickness of 1.4 μm. After that, the solvent was removed by heating at 90 ̊C for 2 min. The resist-coated silicon wafer was irradiated with ultraviolet light of 370-380 nm wavelength using a maskless exposure device (Japan Science Engineering Co., Ltd., MX-1204). The exposure of 150 mJ/cm 2 modified the pattern of the microfluidic part into alkali-soluble. The computer-aided design (CAD) of the microfluidic device is shown in Supplementary Information Fig. The portion of the alkali-soluble modified resist was removed by immersing in a tetramethylammonium hydroxide developer for 90 s. After that, the remaining developer and residue were washed with pure running water for 2 min. The photoresist was baked and hardened by heating at 120 ̊C for 2 min. The silicon in the portion from which the photoresist was removed was deep-drilled etched by the Bosch process, which is by repeating the three steps of isotropic etching of Si with SF6 gas, deposition of protective film with C4F8 gas, and anisotropic etching (removal of protective film on the bottom surface) of Si with SF6 gas. The photoresist was dissolved and removed by hot dipping the wafer for 10 min in a mixed solution of sulfuric acid and hydrogen peroxide at a liquid temperature of 110-130 ̊C. The wafer was washed with pure running water for 2 min to remove the remaining mixed solution and residue. 8) Dicing 20 mm × 20 mm microfluidic device chips were cut using a dicing saw as shown in the design drawing. The additive averaging analysis is based on the average spectral intensity of any wavelength region. By setting the wavelength range and threshold (intensity of maximum and minimum), the intensity distribution in the specified wavelength range within the threshold range is mapped. The addition average value Iave is calculated by Iave = S / n (1) where S is the summation of the intensities of each pixel at the selected wavelength, n is the number of wavelength points. The peak intensity slope analysis is based on the difference in spectral intensity between the two selected wavelengths. The spectral intensity difference is analyzed using the normality differential spectral index (NDSI) and is calculated by NDSI = (Iλ1 -Iλ2) / (Iλ1 + Iλ2) (2) where, Iλ1 and Iλ2 are the intensities of the two selected wavelengths, respectively. By specifying the threshold range of NDSI, the component of the specified spectral intensity difference is mapped. We should note that, when the MIR absorption bands of different samples overlap, the additive averaging method may not be applicable, but usually organic compounds have more than two infrared absorption peaks and are suitable for the peak intensity slope method. In the analysis of identification and mapping of multiple chemical compounds of the microfluidic device, peaks that do not cause spectral interference with other species were selected for analysis. The spectral angle mapper analysis classifies each pixel into the closest class of the teaching spectra. The correlation between each pixel and each teaching spectrum is calculated by the inner product of each pixel spectrum vector (Iλ1, Iλ2, ..., Iλn) and the teaching spectrum vector (Itλ1, Itλ2, ..., Itλn). Each pixel is classified into a class of teaching spectra with the maximum internal product value and mapped. • Linear discriminant analysis The linear discriminant analysis classifies pixels that have the same or similar spectrum as the teaching spectrum based on Fisher's linear discriminant. It is well known that Fisher's linear discrimination is to find a projection vector w that maximizes the degree of separation (Fisher criterion J(w)) of the projected teaching spectrum class. Here, the Fisher criterion J(w) is defined as where, SB is the between-class variance and SW is the within-class variance. The attribution of the pixel was determined according to the projection vector w. A bulb of onion (A. cepa) was divided into 8 equal parts with a sagittal plane, and one bulb leaves was picked off. A scalpel cut was made near the center of the bulb leaves in a grid pattern of about 10 mm × 10 mm. The 10 mm × 10 mm epidermis was peeled off with tweezers and placed on a 200 μm thick, 20 mm × 20 mm CaF2 substrate. The epidermis was dripped with a drop of water, and the four corners of the epidermis were pulled with a dissecting needle to spread it flat. Excess water was sucked off with filter paper. The sample was a 13.5 days age mouse embryo sagittal plane with a thickness of 3 μm fixed on a 100 μm thick silicon substrate and was purchased from GenoStaff Co., Ltd. The experiment of Fig. The experiment of Fig. The experiment of Fig. 