The manipulation of the Rashba spin-splitting is crucial for the development of nanospintronic technology. Here, it is proposed that the Rashba spin-splitting can be turned on and off by reversing electric-field direction. By the first-principle calculations, our proposal is illustrated by a concrete example of Janus monolayer RbKNaBi. The designed RbKNaBi possesses dynamical, thermal and mechanical stability, and is a large-gap quantum spin Hall insulator (QSHI) with Rashba spin-splitting near the Fermi level. A small built-in electric field is predicted due to very small electronegativity difference between the bottom and top atoms, which is very key to switch Rashba spin-splitting through the experimentally available electric field intensity. Due to out-of-plane structural asymmetry, the Janus monolayer has distinctive behaviors by applying external electric field E with the same magnitude but different directions (z or -z). Our results reveal that the Rashba energy (ER) and Rashba constant (αR) are increased by the positive E, while a negative E suppresses the Rashba splitting to disappear, and then appears again. In a certain E region (0.15 V/ Å to 0.25 V/ Å), switching Rashba spin-splitting can be achieved by only reversing electric-field direction. Besides, the piezoelectric strain coefficients d11 and d31 (5.52 pm/V and -0.41 pm/V) are predicted, which are higher than or compared with those of many 2D materials. By piezoelectric effect, the strain can also be used to tune Rashba spin-splitting of RbKNaBi. In Janus RbKNaBi monolayer, the combination of piezoelectricity and Rashba spin-splitting with topological insulating phase is pregnant to promote the integration of fantastic physical phenomenons. Moreover, a possible spintronic device is proposed to realize the function of spintronic switch. Our proposed manipulation of the Rashba spin-splitting may make a special contribution to semiconductor spintronics. Spintronics has attracted considerable attention, which can transmit information using spins rather than charges by manipulating the spin degree of freedom of electrons Generating spin currents is necessary for semiconductor spintronic devices, which can be achieved by spin-orbit coupling (SOC) When an electron moves across an electric field E, it experiences an effective magnetic field B ef f ∼ E × p/mc 2 in its rest-frame. The effective magnetic field can induce a momentum-dependent Zeeman energy H SOC ∼ μ B ( E× p)• σ/mc 2 . In crystals, the electric field E is the gradient of the crystal potential. For 2D Janus materials, there is a built-in electric field E along the z ( E = E z z), and the spin degeneracy of the energy spectrum is lifted, which can be described by the Rashba Hamiltonian where α R is proportional to E. The spin splitting of the energy spectrum is called Rashba spin-splitting. The Rashba semiconductors have been predicted in many 2D Janus materials The MoSSe is a representative 2D Janus material, which has been synthesized experimentally RbKNaBi material by replacing one of two K/Rb layers with Rb/K atoms in monolayer K 2 NaBi/Rb 2 NaBi. The artificial RbKNaBi meets the three conditions mentioned above to switch Rashba spin-splitting by reversing electric-field direction. By the first-principle calculations, our idea is illustrated in Janus monolayer RbKNaBi as a QSHI. It is found that the increasing positive external electric field can enhance Rashba energy (E R ) and Rashba constant (α R ). However, the increasing negative external electric field firstly quenches Rashba spinsplitting, and then recover it again. In a certain electric field region, simply reversing electric-field direction can switch Rashba spin-splitting. Finally, the piezoelectric properties of RbKNaBi are studied, and the straininduced electric field by piezoelectric effect can be used to tune Rashba spin-splitting of RbKNaBi. Our proposed manipulation of the Rashba spin-splitting can be used for future spintronic devices. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we shall give our computational details and methods. In the next few sections, we shall present crystal Structure and structural Stability, electronic structures along with electric field effects and piezoelectric properties of Janus monolayer RbKNaBi. Finally, we shall give our discussion and conclusion. Within density functional theory (DFT) Å-1 on each atom are set to obtain accurate results. A vacuum spacing of larger than 16 Å along the z direction is included to avoid interactions between two neighboring images. The SOC is incorporated for band structure calculations. The phonon dispersions are performed using a finite difference approach with a supercell of 5×5×1, as implemented in Phonopy code A Γ-centered 12 ×12×1 k-point meshes in the Brillouin zone (BZ) is adopted to calculate C ij and electronic structures, and a 8×12×1 Monkhorst-Pack k-point meshes for e ij . The Wannier-Tools code As shown in Figure The phonon spectra, ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) simulations and elastic constants C ij are calculated to confirm the stability of RbKNaBi. As shown in Figure Due to P 3m1 symmetry, the 2D elastic tensor with using Voigt notation can be reduced into: The calculated two independent elastic constants ). We calculate the direction-dependent Young's modulus C 2D (θ) where )/C 66 -2C 12 . Calculated results show that the RbKNaBi is mechanically isotropic due to P 3m1 symmetry. The C 2D of RbKNaBi is 17.04 Nm -1 , which is between ones of K 2 NaBi ( 18.83 Nm -1 ) and Rb 2 NaBi (16.44 Nm -1 ) The calculated ν 2D is 0.272. Intrinsic polar electric field is responsible for the emergence of out-of-plane piezoelectricity and Rashba effect. The difference in atomic size and electronegativity of K and Rb atoms leads to inequivalent Bi-K and Bi-Rb bond lengths (3.727 and 3.855 Å), and K-Bi-K and Rb-Bi-Rb bond angles (97.12 and 92.90 • ), giving rise to a net electric field pointing from the K layer to the Rb layer. To identify the inherent electric field further, the planar average of the electrostatic potential energy is plotted in Figure Monolayer K 2 NaBi and Rb 2 NaBi are predicted are large-gap QSHIs To further confirm nontrivial topological properties of RbKNaBi, we calculate the Z 2 topological invariant. For a material with inversion symmetry, we can calculate Z 2 topological invariant by the product of parities of all occupied states at four time-reversal-invariant-momentum points in the 2D BZ. However, for RbKNaBi with broken spatial inversion symmetry, the Z 2 can be obtained by the calculation of Wannier charge center (WCC) A perpendicular electric field is used to explore the manipulation of the Rashba spin splitting of RbKNaBi. There are different atomic species on its upper and lower facets for Janus RbKNaBi, implying that applying +z and -z directional electric field are not equivalent. The energy band structures as a function of electric field E are calculated by using GGA+SOC. Some representative energy band structures are plotted in Figure Next, we mainly investigate electric field effects on Rashba spin splitting of RbKNaBi. The calculated E R as a function of both positive and negative E are presented in FIG. Besides , the constant energy (at an energy surface 0.16 eV below the Fermi level) spin-resolved 2D contours for the spin texture centered at the Γ point are plotted in Figure When a strain or stress is applied on a noncentrosymmetric material, the electric dipole moments can be induced and produce electricity, called piezoelectric effect. The piezoelectric response of a material can be described by third-rank piezoelectric stress tensor e ijk and strain tensor d ijk . The relaxed piezoelectric tensors (e ijk and d ijk ) include the ionic and electronic contributions: and in which P i , ε jk and σ jk are polarization vector, strain and stress, respectively, and the superscripts elc and ion is used to denote electronic and ionic contributions. The e elc ijk and d elc ijk are also called clamped-ion piezoelectric coefficients, while e ijk and d ijk mean relax-ion cases. The e ijk is related with d ijk by elastic tensor C mnjk : With respect to K 2 NaBi and Rb 2 NaBi, for RbKNaBi, the introduction of Janus structure results in a lower degree of C 3v symmetry, and both the in-plane and out-ofplane piezoelectric effects are allowed, when a uniaxial inplane strain is applied. By using Voigt notation, the 2D piezoelectric stress and strain tensors can be expressed as Some suggestions on experimental synthesis aspects of RbKNaBi are discussed. Firstly, the dynamically stable bulk compounds K 2 NaBi and Rb 2 NaBi are ther-modynamically stable against disproportionation into the competing phases Secondly, by exfoliating these Na 3 Bi-like alkali bismide three-dimensional Dirac semimetals K 2 NaBi and Rb 2 NaBi, their monolayer structures are also dynamically, thermally and mechanically stable The SOC effects (Rashba spin-splitting) can be reversibly turned on and off by reversing electric-field direction, which provides a high-speed switch for the subsequent development of spin devices to control the passage of electrons (see Figure In summary, we have demonstrated that Rashba spinsplitting can be reversibly turned on and off by reversing electric-field direction in RbKNaBi. Calculated results show that the E R and α R are increased by the positive E, while a negative E suppresses the Rashba splitting to disappear, and then appears again. In a certain electric field region, simply reversing electric-field direction can achieve switching Rashba spin-splitting. Besides, it is proved that RbKNaBi is a QSHI and possesses excellent piezoelectric properties, which makes RbKNaBi become a multifunctional 2D material. Our findings can inspire more works about electric filed-tuned switch of Rashba spin-splitting.