Metal halide perovskites (MHPs) combine extraordinary optoelectronic properties with chemical and mechanical properties not found in their semiconductor counterparts. For instance, they exhibit optoelectronic properties on par with single-crystalline gallium arsenide yet exhibit near-zero formation energies. The small lattice energy of MHPs means they undergo a rich diversity of polymorphism near standard conditions similar to organic materials. MHPs also demonstrate ionic transport as high as state-of-the-art battery electrodes. The most widespread applications for metal halide perovskites (e.g. photovoltaics and solid-state lighting) typically view low formation energies, polymorphism, and high ion transport as a nuisance that should be eliminated. Here, we put these properties into perspective by comparing them to other technologically relevant semiconductors in order to highlight how unique this combination of properties is for semiconductors and to illustrate ways to leverage these properties in emerging applications. Metal halide perovskites (MHPs) exhibit outstanding optoelectronic properties 1-6 featuring long carrier lifetimes and diffusion lengths, tunable bandgaps, and exceptional defect tolerance that result from a crystalline-like electronic band structure combined with liquid-like ionic lattices. MHPs undergo a variety of structural changes near standard optoelectronic device operational conditions. Though MHP-based photovoltaic (PV) devices have achieved a remarkable >25% power conversion efficiency (PCE) within a decade of research, 10 fundamental material properties are easily changed by exposure to humidity, heat, electric fields, and light, which, if not managed, result in undesirable transitions between crystal structures, changes in electronic structure, ion migration, and irreversible decomposition. In MHP literature, "stability" generally refers to resilience to changes in material properties. In this perspective, we discuss the fundamental properties of MHP materials that underpin stability by comparing the formation energy, lattice energy, and ionic transport of MHP materials to technologically relevant semiconductors. This comparison illuminates just how unique MHP properties are across materials science. Instead of the stabilization-centric narrative driven by PV literature, we highlight MHPs as switchable and stimuli-responsive semiconductors Unlike traditional semiconductors, MHPs are entirely solution processable at low temperatures and atmospheric pressure, Low-energy synthesis is a consequence of low formation energies in MHPs. The Gibbs free energy of formation (ΔfGo) is a measure of the thermodynamic driving force for synthesis under standard conditions (25 °C and 1 atm = 101,325 Pa) without external stimuli (e.g., light, heat, H2O, O2, etc.). ΔfGo is represented by: where enthalpy of formation (ΔfHo) is the energy released or consumed when one mole of a product is synthesized from reactants and can be thought of as a measure of the strength of bonds broken and formed, while entropy of formation (ΔfSo) describes the degree of compositional and energetic disorder in the system. Formation of a compound is thermodynamically favorable for ΔfGo < 0, and unfavorable for ΔfGo > 0. We compare the formation energy of MHPs to binary and elemental semiconductors due to their similar applications, with ternary oxide perovskites as a direct structural comparison to MHPs (Figure Large, negative ΔfHo values suggest these compounds are unlikely to decompose into precursors due to their strong bonding. Indeed, these compounds are highly stable at > 500-1000 °C, leading to their commercial use in challenging environments. In contrast to conventional semiconductors, the ΔfHo term of MHPs is between +5 and -10 kJ mol - 1 (Figure Resiliency of MHPs to decomposition follows the intuitive trend Cl > Br > I, in agreement with the Pb-halide bond strengths and redox potentials. The ΔfHo term typically dominates the ΔfSo term in technologically relevant semiconductors due to large, negative ΔfHo values and small ΔfSo values (0 to -20 J mol -1 K -1 ) which are often ignored (Figure 3D MAPbI3 films prepared with excess MAI (EG = 1.80 eV) form the 0D hydrated phase MA4PbI6•2H2O (λmax = 370 nm = 3.35 eV) above 40% RH and MAPbI3 can be regenerated by dehydrating above 75 °C (Figure MHP materials adopt highly symmetric cubic structures at elevated temperatures. Cornersharing MX6 octahedra tilt with respect to one another at decreasing temperatures, which results in several polymorphic transitions to lower-symmetry structures (Figure polymorphs (Figure In general, the temperature range increases from I > Br > Cl, from Pb > Sn, and from FA > Cs > MA. Polymorphism reflects lattice energy (ΔUL), the energy released when infinitely separated ions in the gaseous state under vacuum coalesce to form an ionic lattice. A more negative ΔUL indicates stronger cohesive forces whereas a near-zero value of ΔUL indicates a weaker lattice and a small change in energy for transformations to occur. ΔUL for most ionic semiconductors is significantly larger than the equivalent cohesive energies (ΔUC) of covalent elemental semiconductors and organic compounds. ΔUL of binary chalcogenide, pnictide, and oxide compounds is typically in the range of -3000 to -5000 kJ mol -1 , and up to -18000 kJ mol -1 for oxide compounds (Figure Metal halides compounds (AX, A2BCl4, BX2) exhibit smaller ΔUL values of -500 to -3500 kJ mol - 1 . ΔUL of MHPs is significantly lower, -450 to -600 kJ mol -1 , Research on conventional applications of MHPs seek to mitigate phase transformations to maintain the desired phase. Though α-phase MAPbI3 launched perovskite PV, FA-rich compositions now yield the highest efficiencies, We illustrate polymorphic transformations in MHPs by a reaction coordinate diagram where an activation energy (EA) barrier must be overcome to transform the original structure (phase 1) into a perovskite or non-perovskite structure (phase 2) with an energy difference of ΔHpolymorph (Figure ΔHpolymorph can be manipulated by controlling composition or crystal size. For example, crystal symmetry breaking in CsPb(I1-xBrx)3 polymorphs leads to anisotropy in carrier transport, high power factor, and ultralow thermal conductivity resulting in promising thermoelectric figures of merit (ZT) of up to 1.7 at room temperature. have not yet been investigated. Mass transport is undesirable for conventional optoelectronic devices because ion transport competes with carrier transport. In PV devices, mobile ion accumulation impacts carrier extraction at the electrical interfaces by screening or permitting the formation of defects that cause nonradiative recombination. Despite these concerns, PVs based on MHPs exhibit comparable PCE's to state-of-the-art PV materials 10 while exhibiting high levels of solid-state ion transport even at room temperature. where Dion is the diffusion coefficient of an ion, D0 is the temperature-independent prefactor, kB is the Boltzmann constant, and T is the temperature. EA,d can describe both intrinsic diffusion (diffusion of ions that makeup the lattice) and extrinsic diffusion (diffusion of external ions throughout the lattice). Conventional binary and elemental semiconductors typically exhibit intrinsic EA,d values > 1.0 eV (Figure The X-site exhibits exceptionally low EA,d values ranging from 0.2-0.5 eV, which is on the same order of magnitude as Li + diffusion in state-of-the-art Li-ion battery anode (CxLi) and cathode (Li1-xClO2, Li1-xMn2O4, Li1-xFePO4) electrodes (Figure The high Ionic diffusivity of MHPs enables remarkable radiation hardness, and their high Z elements and long carrier lifetimes make them promising candidates for next-generation radiation detectors. While ionizing radiation can displace nuclei, creating vacancies and trap states, MHPs "self-heal" as displaced ions diffuse back to lattice sites and restore electronic quality. As a result, MHPs have a damage threshold to proton irradiation nearly three orders of magnitude higher than crystalline Si, which holds promise for non-terrestrial PV. High ion transport in MHPs renders them excellent materials for energy storage applications such as Li/Na-ion batteries, photorechargeable batteries, and as solid-state electrolytes. MHP have also been used as Li-ion cathodes with 200 cycles, but their specific capacity was an order of magnitude lower than commercial LiNiCoMnO2 cathodes. Wh/kg, retained 98% and ~100%, respectively, of their initial performance after charge 1,000 cycles. The 3D material offered greater capacitance and energy density, while the improved diffusion kinetics of the 2D material offered greater power density. ΔfHo, ΔfSo, ΔfGo, ΔULo, EA,d values used for all plots and their references.