Intervalley collisions, which scatter electrons from one valley or band to another, can be detrimental to thermoelectric performance in materials with multiple valleys/bands. In this study, density functional theory is used to investigate the electron-phonon scattering characteristics of three lead chalcogenides (PbS, PbSe, PbTe) and three half-Heuslers (ScNiBi, ScPdSb, ZrNiSn), which all possess multiple equivalent conduction valleys, in order to characterize and analyze their intravalley/intervalley components. To elucidate what controls the degree of intravalley and intervalley transitions, the scattering rates are decomposed into the product of the phase space (a measure of how much scattering is possible) and the average electron-phonon coupling. To help guide the search for improved thermoelectric and high-conductivity materials, simple and approximate approaches are demonstrated that can be adopted to identify materials with reduced intervalley scattering, which circumvent the need for computationally-demanding electron-phonon scattering calculations. In addition, the benefits of selecting materials with large-energy zone-edge phonons are explored in the limit ω kBT , and found to potentially suppress intervalley processes by up to an order of magnitude, leading to a 70% and 100% increase in conductivity and power factor, respectively. Materials that efficiently convert heat energy into electrical energy, or vice versa, display a high thermoelectric (TE) figure of merit ZT = S 2 σT /κ, where S is the Seebeck coefficient, σ is the electrical conductivity, T is the temperature and κ is the sum of electronic and lattice thermal conductivities Band convergence, in particular, has been the focus of much research over the past decade, and is based on a strategy aligning multiple electronic valleys and/or bands within a narrow energy range (compared to k B T ). Multiple valleys can arise from valley degeneracy and/or secondary higher-energy bands that may themselves be degenerate. Control over band alignment can come from alloying, strain and temperature, each of which can shift the relative energy of the band edges. Aligning multiple valleys/bands can enable a higher |S| with a similar σ, when assuming a fixed carrier concentration, thereby enhancing the power factor. The effect on the TE parameters depends on a number factors, including the shape of the bands, number of valleys and scattering rates. Improved TE performance by band convergence has * jmaassen@dal.ca been illustrated in many cases. Pei et al. experimentally demonstrated ZT of 1.8 in p-PbTe 1-x Se x originating from the alignment of multiple valleys tuned through alloying of Se and temperature Tang et al. explained, through a combination of measurements and DFT, how the high ZT of the skutterudite n-CoSb 3 stems from the convergence of a single primary conduction band with highly degenerate secondary bands Although having multiple valleys participate in carrier transport has been shown to benefit TE performance, the degree of improvement will depend sensitively on the scattering details -in particular, the magnitude of intervalley (or interband) scattering. In materials with a single valley, only intravalley scattering processes occur, wherein the electron (or hole) transitions between initial and final states both residing within the same valley. However, in the case of multiple valleys or bands, carriers can additionally scatter from one valley to another giving rise to intervalley scattering. Intervalley processes activate when aligning multiple valleys and add to the intravalley processes, thereby increasing the overall scattering rates and potentially reducing the conductivity. As a result, intervalley scattering will tend to offset, and in some cases potentially eliminate, the benefits of band convergence. Thus, reducing intervalley collisions can help achieve the maximum benefits of band convergence. Theoretical studies capturing the effect of intervalley transitions have revealed that the advantage of band convergence can be significantly offset with strong intervalley scattering. DFT calculations of electron-phonon (el-ph) scattering in silicon, among its six equivalent conduction valleys, showed that the intervalley scattering rates are much larger than those from intravalley processes, which negatively impacts its TE performance The el-ph momentum scattering rate for each electronic k-state (includes band and spin index) is calcu-lated using where g(k, k ) is the el-ph coupling between the initial state k and the final state k = k ± q, E k is the electron energy, v k is the electron velocity, f k is the Fermi-Dirac distribution, q is the phonon wavevector (includes branch index), n q is the Bose-Einstein distribution, and the upper "+" and lower "-" correspond to phonon absorption and emission processes, respectively. The elph coupling matrix elements include both standard and polar contributions A solution of the linear Boltzmann transport equation within the relaxation-time approximation provides the following expressions for the electrical conductivity and Seebeck coefficient where μ is the chemical potential, e is the electron charge magnitude and Ω is the sample volume. The power factor is obtained from P F α = S 2 α σ α . The DFT simulations were carried out using the Quantum Espresso (QE) code The el-ph scattering and transport calculations were performed with the EPW code The lead chalcogenides, PbX (X = S, Se, Te), crystallize in a rock-salt structure (Fm 3m) that contains a basis of two atoms in the primitive cell, as shown in Fig. The electronic band structures for the PbX and HH materials are shown in Figs. The HH materials are indirect gap semiconductors with the conduction and valence band edges located at the X and Γ points, respectively. As a result, the conduction band has three-fold degeneracy, N v = 3, as confirmed from the iso-energy contour plot shown in Fig. Comparing the PbX and HH materials, aside from the different number of equivalent conduction valleys mentioned above, another important distinction is that the more shallow conduction bands of the HH lead to significantly larger density of states. Important features shared by all the materials under study are that they possess multiple equivalent conduction valleys, and that their secondary bands have enough energy that they do not significantly participate in conduction (∼ 10 k B T above the CBM). This type of band structure naturally includes both intravalley and intervalley scattering, with the latter only arising from processes between one equivalent valley to another and no processes involving secondary bands that are out of range. This provides a convenient test case to characterize intravalley and intervalley el-ph scattering, which can easily be identified and separated depending on the phonon |q| involved. The general features of the electronic band structures of PbX and HH are consistent with the available literature The (unscreened) phonon dispersions for the PbX and HH materials are shown in Figs. The HH materials display nearly the same maximum phonon energies around 30 meV. Their zone-edge phonons, in particular those near the X point that result in intervalley scattering, have energies starting at 10 meV, which is higher than those of the PbX materials. A feature of the HH phonon dispersions is the presence of energy gaps that originate from the large difference in the constituent masses Overall, our phonon dispersions are consistent with that of others Figure A general feature of the scattering rates is that they increase in energy away from the CBM. Qualitatively, this occurs since scattering scales with the number of final states, and thus generally follows the density of states which increases with energy. Focusing initially on the PbX materials, near the CBM the intravalley rates increase more rapidly than the intervalley rates, leading to overall higher contributions from intravalley scatter-ing over the relevant energy range for carrier transport (roughly ±10 k B T around the chemical potential). This suggests that the PbX materials are good candidates for band convergence, from an intrinsic scattering perspective. The difference between intravalley and intervalley collisions grows further when comparing them on a per final valley basis (corresponding to dividing the intervalley rates by N v -1 = 3). The PbX materials all display similar scattering rates below roughly 0.2 eV, while at higher energies PbTe has the largest collision rates. With the HH materials, one can more clearly observe the onset of optical phonon emission scattering near 30 meV resulting in a noticeable increase in the el-ph collision rates, particularly with ScNiBi. The intravalley and intervalley components are more similar compared to the PbX materials, and only when comparing both on a per valley basis (dividing the intervalley rates by N v -1 = 2) does intravalley scattering appear slightly larger. Among the HH materials, ZrNiSn and ScPdSb display the lowest and highest collision rates, respectively. Having highlighted the general features of the el-ph scattering rates, next we analyze their properties in further detail. In particular, we seek to understand what controls the degree of intravalley and intervalley processes, and how do these factors compare among the studied PbX and HH materials. To help address these questions and gain new insights, we rewrite the expression for the momentum scattering rate (Eq. ( where W k is the el-ph scattering phase space and g 2 k is the average el-ph coupling squared. These two quantities are defined as: in terms of W k,k given by: The explicit conservation of crystal momentum is introduced into Eq. ( Figure , where ω max is the maximum phonon energy and the DOS averaging occurs over the possible energy range of final states. The excellent agreement between W k and D(E) indicates that the phase space is largely controlled by the DOS, which is easy to interpret and compute. This explains why the PbX materials display much lower phase space compared to the HH materials -the lower DOS of the PbX materials results in fewer possible el-ph transitions -and describes the trend within each material class. It is interesting to compare W intra k and W inter k /(N v -1), because both are expected to scale with the DOS of an individual valley. And while both these quantities run parallel to each other, the intravalley component is consistently larger. The reason for this can be understood from the definition of W k given by Eqns. ( Next, we focus on the contribution of the average el-ph coupling squared g 2 k to the scattering rates, which are presented in Fig. Note that the total g 2 k is not equal to the sum of the intravalley and intervalley contributions. , we arrive at the relation: where . Equation Decomposing the scattering rates into the phase space and average el-ph coupling helps understand the origin of the scattering characteristics. As shown above, the phase space -a measure of how many el-ph transitions are possible -is largely determined by the density of states (or equivalently in terms of effective mass), which can be easily calculated for different materials. When the average el-ph coupling is energy independent, which appears to be a reasonable starting assumption based on the calculated g 2 k in Fig. It is also interesting to note that while the scattering rates are fairly similar among both classes of PbX and HH materials (in the range 15-25 ps -1 for 0.1 eV above the CBM), our analysis of the phase space and average el-ph coupling indicates that this arises for different reasons; the HH materials display lower g 2 k and higher W k compared to the PbX materials in which this trend is reversed. Next, we explore how one could search for or design materials with limited intervalley collisions, leading to improved thermoelectric power factor and ZT . Equation (4) informs us that a reduction in intervalley scattering can originate from the phase space or the average el-ph coupling. Focusing first on the phase space, Eqns. ( To explore the potential reduction in intervalley scattering, we calculate the phase space for intervalley transitions assuming that n q = 0, which represents a hypothetical limit where the energy of the zone-edge phonons is very large, ω q k B T . Figure Figure So far we have focused on how the intervalley phase space W inter k could be suppressed, however the average el-ph coupling g 2 k inter is equally important. Unlike the phase space that can be reasonably approximated by the DOS, an easily computed quantity, obtaining the average el-ph coupling for intervalley processes requires a rigorous calculation that is computationally demanding. Here, we propose a simple and efficient method for estimating g 2 k inter that can be used, for example, to screen through material candidates. Inspired by the deformation potential approximation This supercell approach can potentially identify which phonon branches control the intervalley el-ph coupling. To verify that the results of this simple method are qualitatively consistent with those from DFT, we calculate the mode-resolved el-ph coupling g(k, q) versus phonon wavevector q along the line Γ-X, as shown in Fig. With the PbX semiconductors, Fig. Intervalley collisions in semiconductors comprised of multiple valleys/bands can significantly deteriorate thermoelectric performance, through enhanced scattering that lowers the electrical conductivity and power factor. In this work, first-principles electron-phonon scattering and electron transport calculations were carried out in three lead chalcogenides (PbS, PbSe, PbTe) and three half-Heuslers (ScNiBi, ScPdSb, ZrNiSn), which all possess multiple equivalent conduction valleys giving rise to intervalley scattering. The individual intravalley and intervalley el-ph scattering components were isolated and compared. The results show that intervalley collisions represent a smaller fraction of the total el-ph scattering in the lead chalcogenides (PbX) compared to the half-Heuslers (HH), and that the intervalley scattering rates scale with the valley degeneracy leading to stronger en-ergy dependence versus intravalley processes. To better understand what controls the scattering characteristics, the collision rates are expressed as the product of the phase space W k , a measure of how much scattering is possible given the constraints of conservation of energy and crystal momentum, and the average el-ph coupling squared g 2 k , a measure of the probability of transitions occurring. The phase space is found to follow the electronic density of states, which can easily be computed, and explains why the HH materials show larger W k over the PbX materials. The average el-ph coupling for intravelley transitions is significantly larger than intervalley transitions with the PbX materials, due to a stronger polar interaction for the small q phonons participating in the intravalley processes and prohibited intervalley processes at the conduction band minimum. The HH materials displayed more similar g 2 k for both intravalley and intervalley, however the overall el-ph coupling is weaker compared to the PbX materials as a result of their particular bonding properties. While the el-ph scattering rates are somewhat similar for both the PbX and HH semiconductors, an analysis of their phase space and average el-ph coupling reveal different underlying characteristics. Lastly, we explored two approaches that could help guide the search for new and improved thermoelectric materials with reduced intervalley scattering. First, increasing the energy of the zone-edge phonons responsible for the intervalley processes lowers the transition rate. In the limit when ω k B T , we find that the intervalley phase space can drop by an order of magnitude and the power factor can double. Second, we introduce a simple and efficient supercell approach to estimate the intervalley el-ph coupling strength arising from zone-boundary phonons. When compared to rigorous DFT-computed el-ph coupling, this supercell method is found to be in good qualitative agreement, and correctly identified trends among the different materials as well as the two dominant phonon modes in each case. The findings of this study help advance our understanding of what controls intravalley and intervalley el-ph scattering, which, coupled with the proposed strategies to identify and design materials with suppressed intervalley scattering, may lead to the discovery of new high-performance thermoelectrics and high-mobility semiconductors. such that the wavelength of the atomic displacements matches a 1×2×2 supercell. Thus, for a particular phonon mode at the X point, the atomic displacements in the 1×2×2 supercell are obtained by the product of the cell-periodic eigenvectors times the phase factor that loops over n 2,3 = 1, 2 (each of the four sub-cells that make up the supercell are multiplied by a different phase factor as determined by the value of n 2 and n 3 ).