Persistent spin textures (PSTs) in momentum space have the potential to enable spintronic devices which are currently limited by low spin lifetimes in nonmagnetic spin-orbit coupled materials. We perform a first-principles study on the proustite mineral family, Ag 3 BQ 3 (B=As, Sb; Q=S, Se), and show these chalcogenides exhibit a non-symmetry protected PST, which we refer to as symmetryassisted PSTs. Chemical substitution can be used to tune the PST quality and properties, e.g., spin lifetime, and we find that a Rashba anisotropy criterion correlates with the PST area and spin lifetime for two of the three proustites examined. Last, we show that a first-order effective SOC Hamiltonian, often used in two-dimensional systems, is insufficient to describe the PST state in all proustites, suggesting that higher order models are necessary to fully describe PSTs in bulk three-dimensional materials. Nonmagnetic materials with unidirectional spinmomentum locking, or a persistent spin texture (PST), exhibit electrical transport properties useful for spintronic applications The 3D PST materials predicted thus far all exhibit a symmetry-protected PST (SP-PST), also known as a Type-I PST The proustite family consists of three compounds in space group R3c: the namesake mineral Ag 3 AsS 3 , as well as Ag 3 SbS 3 and Ag 3 AsSe 3 . The former two are naturally occurring minerals and all three have been experimentally synthesized as bulk single crystals Ag 3 AsS 3 is a semiconductor with an experimental bandgap of E g = 1.99 eV The DFT-computed band structure with SOC (Fig. The orbital-projected density-of-states (DOS) shows that the valence band is made up of primarily hybridized Ag 4d and S 3p orbitals (Fig. The MO diagram grants us insight into the chemical origin of the band gap: the interaction between the As and S atoms. If the orbital overlap is increased (decreased) between the p orbitals of the two species, we would expect the bandgap to increase (decrease) due to further destabilization (stablization) of the anti-bonding orbitals. Since the proustite variants are isoelectronic and isostructural, the frontier orbitals are the same and we should expect the same mechanism to control the bandgap. Fig. Fig. We now perform a symmetry analysis of the band structure of proustite near the F point to describe the SOC characteristics and attain a better understanding of the origin of the PST. Proustite exhibits R3c symmetry and the little group of the F point is C s , i.e., the only symmetry operators are the identity and mirror plane: {E, My }. Following previous symmetry analyses Eq. 1 allows us to immediately discern how the observed spin-momentum locking results along the F → Γ and F + k x paths. Along the F + k x path, k y = 0 and the only relevant term couples k x with σ y , which explains the locking of the spin direction along the s y axis on this path. Along the F → Γ path, k x = 0 and the relevant terms couple k y to both σ x and σ z , explaining the oblique spin texture along this path. We assume that the full Hamiltonian describing the system near the conduction band minimum takes the form H = H 0 +H SOC , with H SOC given by Eq. 1 and H 0 being the free electron Hamiltonian, H 0 = 2 k 2 /2m * . Although H 0 is a poor approximation of the real system as a whole, the approximation holds utility as an analytic tool to understand the mechanisms of the PST in proustite since the CBM can be locally approximated as parabolic. Since the Hamiltonian is quadratic in k and is otherwise only dependent on system-specific parameters, the Schrödinger equation can be solved analytically to give the following eigenvalues: Along each F → Γ and F + k x path, one of the momentum components k i is zero and the energy dispersion takes the form of a simple parabola with a linear coupling term. We can also solve for the eigenstates and their corresponding spin expectation values; by doing so, we are able to fit the computed DFT data to extract α ij coupling coefficients and plot the resulting spin textures to assess whether the model reproduces the DFT-simulated PST. Table We show the spin texture resulting from the two band model with the fitted parameters in Fig. It is of particular interest that the Rashba anisotropy is an effective predictor of PST area in both Type-I symmetry-protected PSTs, such as in Ref. 9, and Type-II accidental PSTs, as in this work. This finding blurs the lines between the current field of Type-I and Type-II PSTs, especially because if α xy were to dominate the SOC Hamiltonian in Eq. 1, the resulting PST would be along a mirror plane and thus potentially be categorized as a Type-I SP-PST. Consequently, the particular symmetries do not appear to dictate the quality of the PST, and instead the chemical interactions of the system and their interplay with the momentum-space physics determines the PST quality. This has been noted for some quasi-2D layered perovskite PSTs where the structural characteristics combine with the crystalline symmetries to constrain the relevant SOC terms to one in-plane direction, producing a PST which is occasionally labeled as symmetryprotected. However, this type of symmetry-protection is distinct from that of Ref. 6, in which symmetry constraints alone guarantee the existence of a PST near certain highsymmetry points. This strict symmetry requirement for defining SP-PSTs has been disputed Additionally, the result of our model is in contrast to the analysis presented in Ref. 7 for the layered perovskite CsBiNb 2 O 7 , where the cubic SOC splitting terms dominate and the anisotropy between those terms determines the PST quality. The difference in results can be explained by the difference in band dispersions. Since the PST in proustite is observed near the F point, the first order expansion is sufficient to describe the PST near it. In CsBiNb 2 O 7 , the band extremum and associated PST is seen at large momentum, where higher order terms dominate and are thus necessary as part of the analysis. We now examine the two isostructural and isoelectronic proustite variants: Ag 3 SbS 3 and Ag 3 AsSe 3 . Although they are chemically similar, there are significant changes in the spin-orbit coupling strengths. In addition, the location of the CBM changes drastically in Ag 3 AsSe 3 . Fig. An important note is the location of the conduction band minimum. The PST states must lie at the CBM since they are transport states which need to be electron doped to access. While the band structure shown suggests that the conduction band minimum of Ag 3 AsSe 3 lies within the F → Γ path, it is rather located in the Γ → M( 1 /3, -2 /3, 1 /3) path (Figure We also recognize the necessity of finding appropriate dopants to access the PST states. The PST states lie in the conduction band so n-type doping is needed to access the PSH transport mode. One possible route to doping could be through vacancies on the chalcogenide site as in MoS 2 Although the recent research into 3D bulk PST compounds has focused on PSTs formed by specific crystalline symmetries, such as the C 2v point group, we showed that such symmetries are unnecessary constraints in the search for new PST materials. We showed that the proustite mineral family offers a flexible platform to design structural and electronic properties, including tuning the low-symmetry PST in the conduction band. We also distinguished symmetry-assisted PSTs from symmetryprotected PSTs, categorizing the majority of previously identified PST materials along with the proustites as symmetry-assisted PSTs. We propose that the Rashba anisotropy γ SOC is a useful parameter in evaluating PSTs near a high-symmetry k vector and that this concept may be extended to higher orders. We conjecture that high Rashba anisotropy at multiple orders could result in an ideal PST that spans a significant portion of the Brillouin zone. We propose that this Rashba anisotropy criterion could be used in high-throughput screening of materials for future bulk PST identification in a manner similar to searchers for novel Rashba materials 