Controlling audible sound requires inherently broadband and subwavelength acoustic solutions, which are to date, crucially missing. This includes current noise absorption methods, such as porous materials or acoustic resonators, which are typically inefficient below 1 kHz, or fundamentally narrowband. Here, we solve this vexing issue by introducing the concept of plasmacoustic metalayers. We demonstrate that the dynamics of small layers of air plasma can be controlled to interact with sound in an ultrabroadband way and over deep-subwavelength distances. Exploiting the unique physics of plasmacoustic metalayers, we experimentally demonstrate perfect sound absorption and tunable acoustic reflection over more than two frequency decades, from several Hz to the kHz range, with transparent plasma layers of thicknesses down to λ/1000. Such unprecedented bandwidth and compactness opens new doors in a variety of applications, including noise control, audio-engineering, room acoustics, imaging and metamaterial design. Sound, as a key vector of information and energy, is ubiquitous in our everyday lives. Its importance goes way beyond our daily conversations, and impacts a broad range of applications from the conception of noise-free systems, isolated buildings, to high-quality audio systems, medical therapy, and imaging. Yet, due to the macroscopically large wavelength and the broad frequency range involved, controlling audible sound with structured materials remains to date a difficult challenge In this paper, we propose to leverage the inherently non-inertial dynamics of ultrathin layers of air plasmas to construct fundamentally broadband active plasmacoustic layers that can manipulate sound over more than 2 decades, with systems of unprecedentedly small sizes, down to λ/1000. Our method can manipulate an acoustic field by directly steering fluid particles, without resorting to any non-fluidic interface, simply by leveraging the partial ionization of air, controlled by an electrical field. Our theory of plasmacoustic metalayers unlocks the possibility to use the associated acoustic monopolar and dipolar sources to control the plasmacoustic surface impedance. We experimentally demonstrate practical applications of the concept to extremely thin and broadband perfect sound absorbers and tunable mirrors, with bandwith/size ratios at least 3 orders of magnitude larger than the currently available solutions. Figure The principal idea behind the design of the plasmacoustic metalayer is the use of a controlled dynamic corona discharge. This air-ionization phenomenon is used, for example, in flow control The plasmacoustic metalayer considered in this work is schematically illustrated in Figure Let us now model more accurately these two acoustic sources. The voltage-current curve can be approximated by the Townsend formula where d is the interelectrode distance and μ i is the effective ion mobility in the air. The heat power is assumed to be the total Joule losses in the discharge H(t) ≈ U (t)I(t), and its AC linear component in the frequency domain can be written as These two phenomena can be included as sound source terms in the acoustic wave equation. Remarkably, they are independent on frequency, which suggests that they can form the basis for an active actuator that can be controlled over a potentially broad frequency range, as we now demonstrate. To demonstrate the potential of the plasmacoustic metalayer for sound manipulation, we must identify a control law between an acoustic quantity and the discharge voltage, hence making the plasmacoustic metalayer an actively controlled acoustic device. An interesting target application is perfect sound absorption, which is achieved by matching the metalayer surface acoustic impedance to the characteristic impedance of air Z c = ρ o c, where ρ o is the air density and c is the speed of sound. For this purpose, let us mount the plasmacoustic metalayer right before the termination of an air-filled duct of same cross-section (Figure When the plasmacoustic metalayer is active, and in the presence of an exogenous acoustic field (characterized by sound pressure p ac and particle velocity v ac , accounting for both the incident and reflected sound waves), the total sound pressure p t and particle velocity v t at the microphone position -x 0 is the sum of the terms produced by all the sources: In equation ( Then, p ac (-x 0 ) and v ac (-x 0 ) are linked through the impedance Z ac in a lossless transmission line at distance x 0 + l from the termination with impedance Z l as: The same relation holds in the active case since the operation of the metalayer does not introduce any physical interface which could cause scattering of the incident sound wave. Since the control aims at creating an impedance matched condition to absorb sound, the total pressure and velocity at the microphone position should be such that Our prototype of active plasmacoustic metalayer is illustrated in Figure α 0 = 0.1, almost constant over the considered frequency range (red dashed line in Figure As a reference case, we also plot the absorption curve of a porous material of similar thickness backed by a hard wall. Clearly, it does not provide sufficient energy dissipation at low frequencies, as illustrated by the blue curve in Figure Although passive resonators of comparable size can be designed to absorb low frequency sound, their performance is much more limited frequency-wise (see green curve on Figure where β is a dimensionless scaling factor of the termination impedance Z l , and the parameter ∆l relates to the virtual actuator thickness. If β = 1 and ∆l = 0, the target impedance equals to passive Z ac and no active control is required. However, as β changes, the target imitates the presence of a termination with impedance equal to βZ l placed right behind the metalayer. Lowering the value of β leads to the softening of the virtual termination, thus, to higher sound absorption and lower reflection coefficient. When β = Z c /Z l , the target impedance equals the characteristic air impedance, yielding the full absorption case discussed previously. Figure When the parameter ∆l differs from zero, the sound wave reflects with a delay that corresponds to an additional propagation path of length 2∆l. Therefore, on top of varying the reflection magnitude, we can artificially increase the size of the system, inducing delays that would normally occur over lengths exceeding by far the actual size of the device (∼3 cm with enclosure). Effectively, we expand or squeeze the space seen by the sound wave. The concept is demonstrated experimentally in Figure In this paper, we have presented an active plasmacoustic metalayer capable of manipulating audible sound waves over two decades of frequencies, efficiently manipulating wavelengths as large as 17m despite a total thickness of only a few mm. By showcasing broadband perfect sound absorption and several examples of magnitude and phase control of the reflected signal, we have experimentally established the non-resonant behavior and the tunability of the concept. A remarkable feature is that the plasmacoustic metalayer does not introduce any physical discontinuity within the fluid medium, due to the absence of a membrane. Instead, it produces controllable monopolar and dipolar acoustic sources directly in the fluid, without the need for inertial mechanical elements, thereby circumventing the drawbacks of standard passive and active sound control strategies. Its simplicity of construction and versatility in terms of control and target functionality opens up the way for new directions in active sound control and acoustic metamaterial research, in which efficient non-Hermitian, timedependent and reconfigurable unit cells are much sought. Plasmacoustic metalayers could be used as building blocks in a new generation of non-reciprocal, non-Hermitian and topological systems with unprecedented bandwidth bringing them closer to real applications. The control law could be varied in time to break time-invariance, opening the door for the exploration of the acoustics of time-varying systems especially when a nonconventional shape of the active unit cell is required. Altogether, our work establishes active plasmacoustic metalayers as a promising broadband approach for deep-subwavelength control of sound. We consider an air-filled duct assuming plane wave propagation (for frequencies below plane waves cut-off), thus limiting the study to a one-dimensional problem. The duct is terminated by the plasmacoustic metalayer, with cross section equal to the one of the duct. Since the distribution of force F and heat release H is homogeneous along the metalayer area S where k = ω/c is the wave number, C P is the heat capacity of air per unit mass, T o is the static ambient air temperature, ρ o is the static air density, c is the speed of sound in the air. The external acoustic excitation emanates from the left relative to the plasmacoustic layer (negative x values). Further, all acoustic pressures and velocities are considered for negative coordinates x (where the measurement microphone is located). Using the principle of superposition, acoustic pressures and velocities generated only by either the heat source or the force source can be found independently from equation ( In equation The solutions of equation ( Taking into account that v t (-x o ) = p t (-x o )/Z tg as we aim to realize a target impedance at position -x 0 and substituting all components from (7) in In equation ( The measurements under normal incidence are carried out in an impedance tube of length L duct = 1.1 m and square cross-section S duct = 50 × 50 mm 2 which is schematically illustrated in Figure To estimate the behavior of the plasmacoustic metalayer with analytical model and set up the control transfer function θ(s), several parameters related to the corona discharge process should be estimated. They include the effective mobility of positive ions μ i , the offset voltage U DC , the onset voltage U 0 , and constant C. The value of μ i is taken from corresponding to a relative humidity 50-55 %, as it was observed during the measurements. The other parameters are estimated from experimentally-obtained voltage-current curve (supplementary Figure However, before implementation on digital platform the transfer function should be expressed in terms of Laplace variable s = jω. One must ensure that θ(s) is a stable and proper transfer function.