In the past decade, photoemission orbital tomography (POT) has evolved into a powerful tool to investigate the electronic structure of organic molecules adsorbed on surfaces. By measuring the angular distribution of photoelectrons as a function of binding energy and making use of the momentum-space signature of molecular orbitals, POT leads to an orbital-resolved picture of the electronic density of states at the organic/metal interface. In this combined experimental and theoretical work, we apply POT to the prototypical organic π-conjugated molecule bisanthene (C28H14) which forms a highly oriented monolayer on a Cu(110) surface. Experimentally, we identify an unprecedented number of 13 π and 12 σ orbitals of bisanthene and measure their respective binding energies and spectral lineshapes at the bisanthene/Cu(110) interface. Theoretically, we perform density functional calculations for this interface employing four widely used exchange-correlation functionals from the families of the generalized gradient approximations as well as global and rangeseparated hybrid functionals. By analyzing the electronic structure in terms of orbital-projected density of states, we arrive at a detailed orbital-by-orbital assessment of theory vs. experiment. This allows us to benchmark the performance of the investigated functionals with regards to their capability of accounting for the orbital energy alignment at organic/metal interfaces. Interfaces between organic molecules and metals play a central role in functional devices in nanoscience and nanotechnology. Owing to these inherent problems with the density functional description, it would be highly desirable to be able to benchmark density functional approaches and also methods that go beyond them, e.g., the GW method within the framework of many-body perturbation theory. The geometry and electronic structure of the gas-phase and surface-adsorbed bisanthene was calculated in the framework of DFT. For the former, we have utilized the quantum chemistry package NWChem, In POT, the momentum-space signatures of molecular orbitals, so-called momentum maps, serve as fingerprints of orbitals which can be used for their identification in ARPES experiments. In this section, we review the underlying theory and assumptions. In the onestep model of photoemission, the photoemission intensity I(k x , k y ; E kin ) is given by Fermi's golden rule 67 (1) Here, k x and k y are the components of the emitted electron's wave vector parallel to the surface, which are related to the polar and azimuthal emission angles θ and φ, where k is the wave number of the emitted electron, with its kinetic energy being given by E kin = , where is the reduced Planck constant and m is the electron mass. The photoemission intensity of Eq. 1 is given by a sum over all transitions from occupied initial states i, described by wave functions Ψ i , to the final state Ψ f , characterized by the direction (θ, φ) and the kinetic energy of the emitted electron. The δ function ensures energy conservation, where Φ denotes the sample work function, E i the binding energy of the initial state, and ω the photon energy. The transition matrix element in Eq. 1 is given in the dipole approximation, where p and A, respectively, denote the momentum operator of the electron and the vector potential of the exciting electromagnetic wave. A more detailed discussion regarding the applicability of the PW approximation and its limitations can be found in previous publications. For the full bisanthene/Cu(110) interface, we applied the repeated-slab approach. As described previously, 52 Momentum space representations of bisanthene's orbitals using the PBE-GGA functional. The red-yellow and blue-green color-scales indicate π and σ orbitals, respectively. The orbitals are ordered according the number of nodal planes along the x and y directions corresponding to zigzag and armchair edges of bisanthene, respectively. the Cu(110) substrate was modeled with five atomic layers, a lattice parameter of a = 3.61 Å and a vacuum layer of at least 17 Å between the slabs to avoid spurious electric fields. Based on the relaxed adsorption geometry which turned out to be the short-bridge site, the electronic structure was further analyzed in terms of the molecular orbital-projected density of states (MOPDOS). This MOPDOS was calculated by projecting the Kohn-Sham orbitals of the interacting bisanthene/Cu(110) system onto the orbitals of the freestanding bisanthene layer, as described in more detail in a previous publication. Our experiments were performed in ultra-high vacuum (≈ 10 -10 mbar). The Cu(110) single crystal was cleaned by several cycles of sputtering by Ar + ions at 1 keV and subsequent annealing at 800 K. A film of the 10,10'-dibromo-9,9'-bianthracene precursor (Sigma-Aldrich, CAS number 121848-75-7) was deposited by evaporation from a molecular evaporator (Kentax GmbH) onto the crystal surface held at room temperature. Subsequently, the sample was annealed at 525 K to trigger the chemical reaction as described elsewhere. Photoemission experiments were conducted at the Metrology Light Source insertion device beamline of the Physikalisch-Technische Bundesanstalt (Berlin, Germany). Despite the rich information in the band maps, it is clear that, because of the nodal structure of the orbitals which is also reflected in the momentum maps (see Fig. In the orbital deconvolution procedure, FIG. by adjusting the N weights w i of all orbitals i with the simulated momentum maps I i (k x , k y ) that are allowed to contribute to the measurement data. Since the minimization is performed for each binding energy E b separately, one thereby obtains a set of orbital-projected densities of states given by the weight functions w i (E b ). From Eq. 5, it is clear that the so-obtained experimental pDOS will also depend on the set of simulated momentum maps I i (k x , k y ) that are used in the deconvolution procedure. It is therefore important to check how sensitive these computed momentum maps are with respect to the choice of the exchange-correlation (xc) functional. We found that the momentum maps are robust and remain almost unaffected by the choice of the xc functional. As an example, this is illustrated for the PBE and HSE functionals in Fig. Using a grey-scale density map, we note the maximum deviation from perfect overlap to be less than 9%, in most cases, however, the similarity between the PBE and HSE orbitals is much better and the resulting momentum maps from these two functionals are essentially indistinguishable. Also note that a similar agreement is found when comparing the PBE orbitals with those of the other two xc functionals studied in this work. We start the analysis of the electronic structure of the bisanthene/Cu(110) interface by comparing the density of states as obtained from various exchange-correlation functionals. Fig. Similar trends are also observed when comparing the densities of states (DOS) originating from the adsorbed organic molecule. To this end, we have projected the DOS of the bisanthene/Cu(110) system onto the carbon atoms of bisanthene (grey shaded areas) and also computed the MOPDOS for all 15 π orbitals introduced in Table Regarding the influence of the exchange-correlation functional, we recognize the same trend as for the π orbitals. There is an overall shift to larger binding energies when going from PBE to HSE and to PBE0, accompanied by an increase in the bandwidth. Also in this respect, the HSE functional shows the best agreement with the experimental pDOS: the peak positions of the two topmost σ orbitals, σ (0,8) and σ (7,3) , at about -5.2 eV are in almost perfect agreement with the experimental energy location, and also the lowest σ orbital that could be observed ex-perimentally, σ (5,3) at -9.3 eV, appears very close to the HSE peak position of 9.2 eV. On the other hand, all PBE σ energy positions are too small, as is the total width of the σ band, while PBE0 slightly overestimates the binding energies and total width of the σ band. In addition to the peak positions, it is also important to inspect the widths of the individual peaks, both in the experimental pDOS as well as in the calculated MOP-DOS. Starting with the theoretical MOPDOS, we notice little variation over all σ orbitals and almost no influence of the functional, with an overall full width at half maximum (FWHM) of approximately 0.25 eV. This is to be contrasted with the considerably larger FWHM in the theoretical MOPDOS of the π orbitals (Fig. The goal of this section is to disentangle the effects that lead to the energy level alignment of the molecular states with the states of the metal upon adsorption on the metal surface. To this end, we dissect the adsorption process into several steps. First, we start with the bisanthene molecule in the gas phase in its native D 2h point group symmetry. The respective orbital energies are presented in Tables I and II for the π and σ orbitals, and are reproduced in the row labeled "gas phase" in Fig. In the third step, we calculate a freestanding layer of bisanthene molecules, i.e., we take the relaxed geometry of the bisanthene/Cu(110) interface and cut away the Cu(110) substrate, but keep the distorted structure of the molecules frozen. The resulting orbital energies are labeled "freestanding" in Fig. Finally, we investigate how the orbital energies are further affected when the freestanding layer of molecules is brought into contact with the Cu(110) surface. These results of this last step of our gedanken experiment are depicted in the row labeled "adsorbed" and should also be directly compared with the experimental observations (row "exp"). The thin lines in the row "adsorbed" are in fact the MOPDOS curves already presented in Figs. The same effect, namely an overall energy shift of 0.5 eV to lower energies, also affects the π orbitals. However, the π orbitals are additionally stabilized due to the hybridization with the underlying Cu atoms. This latter effect can, for instance, be observed for π (4,0) and π (2,3) , i.e., the LUMO and HOMO, respectively, which exhibit shifts of 1.1 and 0.8 eV, respectively. Subtracting the shift of 0.5 eV from the overall bonding dipole, we are left with orbital-specific bond stabilizations of roughly 0.6 and 0.3 eV for the LUMO and HOMO, respectively. It must be noted, however, that this analysis is somewhat subjective because of the ambiguity of assigning a single energy position to each molecular orbital of the adsorbed system, while, more precisely, molecular resonances of finite width are formed. This is particularly true for those π states which overlap energetically with the Cu d band between -6 and -10 eV below the vacuum level. For instance, the HOMO-1 and HOMO-2 (π (1,3) and π (2,2) ), although having their MOPDOS maxima at the low binding energy side of the d band, are spread out over the whole d band region, making a definite assignment to a single binding energy questionable. Below the copper d band, however, for instance in the case of the lowest lying π (0,0) , we can again understand the energy shift of 1.25 eV from "freestanding" to "adsorbed" as an overall shift of 0.5 eV due to the bonding dipole potential step and an additional bond stabilization of 0.75 eV owing to the molecule-substrate bond. We now return to the issue of quantifying the performance of commonly applied exchange-correlation functionals for predicting the energy level alignment at organic/metal interfaces, making use of the comprehensive experimental information gained by photoemission orbital tomography. Some general trends regarding orbital energies computed with the help of the three functionals PBE, HSE and PBE0 have already been discussed in Sec. IV A. In the following, we quantify their accuracy by computing mean errors (ME) and mean absolute errors (MAE) defined as follows Here, E exp i is the binding energy of orbital i, measured with respect to the vacuum level, as determined from the orbital deconvolution using the photoemission data cube. These values are shown in Fig. The largest errors are found for the generalized gradient approximation PBE, for which we observe also a significant difference between the π and σ orbitals. The reason that PBE errors for the σ orbitals are about 0.4 eV larger than for π orbitals can be attributed to the selfinteraction error: the σ orbitals are more localized than π orbitals and therefore more vulnerable to self-interaction errors. This self-interaction error is clearly mitigated in the hybrid functionals by incorporating a fraction α of Hartree-Fock (HF) exchange. Note that α is 0.25 for HSE and PBE0 and 0.2 for B3LYP. Among these three hybrid functionals, HSE performs best, followed by B3LYP and PBE0. The fact that in the range-separated HSE functional HF exchange is only included in the short range, apparently outperforms the global hybrid PBE0. The cause might be that, in the language of optimally-tuned range separated hybrid functionals, Using the example of bisanthene/Cu(110), we have shown that photoemission orbital tomography (POT) is able to provide experimental data on the orbital binding energies of individual molecule-derived states at the interfaces between organic molecules and metallic surfaces. The so-obtained binding energies of 13 π and 12 σ orbitals in an energy range from the Fermi energy to 10 eV binding energy have been used to benchmark four exchange-correlations functionals commonly applied in density functional calculations. For the investigated bisanthene/Cu(110) system, the range-separated hybrid functional HSE was found to show the best performance regarding the energy level alignment of both the π and σ orbitals. While the present work has focused on the occupied molecular orbitals, first steps to extend POT to unoccupied states have already been undertaken. By transiently exciting electrons into unoccupied orbitals, the measurement of momentum signatures in excited states has recently been demonstrated by pump-probe angleresolved photoemission experiments. 