In this study, we report the progress made towards the definition of a modular compact modeling technology for graphene field-effect transistors (GFET) that enables the electrical analysis of arbitrary GFET-based integrated circuits. A set of primary models embracing the main physical principles defines the ideal GFET response under DC, transient (time domain), AC (frequency domain), and noise (frequency domain) analysis. Other set of secondary models accounts for the GFET non-idealities, such as extrinsic-, short-channel-, trapping/detrapping-, self-heating-, and non-quasi static-effects, which could have a significant impact under static and/or dynamic operation. At both device and circuit levels, significant consistency is demonstrated between the simulation output and experimental data for relevant operating conditions. Additionally, we provide a perspective of the challenges during the scale up of the GFET modeling technology towards higher technology readiness levels while drawing a collaborative scenario among fabrication technology groups, modeling groups, and circuit designers. By combining graphene devices with interconnects and other components, innumerable circuits can be designed for analog and radio-frequency (RF) applications Figure In this study, we present the progress made towards the definition of a modular compact modeling technology for the graphene field-effect transistor (GFET), which is considered as the building block of the graphene platform in the IC. For a circuit simulation to be realistic, various non-idealities must be modeled at the device level. They include the effect caused by the parasitic network (parasitic resistances, capacitances, and inductances) associated to the contact pads and interconnections, as well as the effect of extrinsic resistances (contact and gate resistance), which significantly reduce the expected device performance. Additionally, the effect of the charges trapped/detrapped in the dielectric materials and interfaces must be included, which are related with the observed time-dependent drift of the operating bias point. In contrast, as short-channel length devices are needed to upscale the RF performance of graphene devices and circuits, short-channel effects (SCE) must be properly accounted by considering the two-dimensional (2D) electrostatics and velocity saturation effect. It is also important to consider the self-heating effects (SHE) at high fields that might produce an important reduction of the drain current. In addition, if the excitation frequency is close or above the device intrinsic cutoff frequency, the effect of carrier inertia should be considered, which requires a non-quasi static (NQS) model. For the noise, the relevant physics must be collected into an appropriate compact model to obtain the noise indicators at the circuit level. This requires an analysis of the different noise sources and their dependence on the substrate, dielectric environment, as well as contact technology. A deep understanding of the mechanisms of local noise propagation to terminal currents and voltages is necessary. At high-frequency (HF) range, a careful analysis of the coupling mechanisms between the channel and the gate(s) is required. These efforts are relevant because figures of merit are limited by noise. A set of models capturing the relevant physics is needed to deal with the different types of electrical analysis, which forms the basis for a compact modeling technology targeting the simulation of ICs based on GFETs. As shown in Figure Figure Here, a model accounting for the DC behavior of GFETs is presented. §2.1 introduces the intrinsic GFET core DC model, which is based on the Poisson's equation coupled with a driftdiffusion current equation, the former describing the device electrostatics ( §2.1.1) and the latter describing the electron transport along the graphene channel ( §2.1.2). In §2.2, various non-ideal effects affecting the operation of a GFET are added to the intrinsic model; thus, their inclusion is proven to be necessary to get consistency with experimental results from real devices. Those encompass charges trapped in the dielectric materials and interfaces ( §2.2.1); SHE ( §2.2.2); SCE ( §2.2.3). Finally, some relevant analytical models for the contact resistance, which can be used towards extending the intrinsic model with the obtained values of this parameter, have been presented ( §2.2.4). Here, we present the model for the electrostatics of a four-terminal GFET in §2.1.1, which sets the basis for the later formulation of a drain current model in §2.1.2. Let us consider a general GFET as that depicted in Figure where W is sufficiently large such that the transistor can be considered uniform along the z axis. The electrostatics of the GFET can be evaluated by applying the Poisson's equation across its structure where T is the temperature, ε is the permittivity, ψ is the electrostatic potential, and ρ free is the free charge density. Considering a one-dimensional (1D) approximation for the GFET electrostatics along a transversal cut, the following charge-balance equation, which can be represented by the equivalent capacitive circuit shown in Figure where (V S and V D at the active channel edges) cannot be shorted to reference in practice; therefore, we adopted a general formulation where none of the terminals are grounded. Thus, the GFET is driven by terminal voltages defined with respect to some arbitrary reference point. V(y, T) is the quasi-Fermi level along the graphene channel, i.e., the electrochemical potential, and it must fulfill the following boundary conditions: (i) V(y = 0, T) = V S and (ii) V(y = L, T) = V D at the source and drain edge-sides, respectively, where L is the gate length. V(y, T) is assumed to be the same for both electrons and holes because the generation/recombination times for carriers in graphene are very short (1100 ps-) where Δ is the amplitude of the electrostatic potential inhomogeneity that causes the electronhole puddles; V c (y, T) could be calculated as a function of the terminal biases ( V G , V B , V D , V S ) from Equation 2 and 4. However, this formulation is not convenient for a compact model compatible with circuit simulators. Using a square-root-based approximation for C q , where k = 2q 3 (π(ħv F ) 2 ) ⁄ and c 1 = (k B T q ⁄ ) ln(4). The chemical potentials at the source V cs = V c (0, T)| V=V S and drain V cd = V c (L, T)| V=V D sideedges are the relevant quantities required to calculate the drain current. They can be easily determined by implementing the Verilog-A algorithm reported in, Here, we deal with the development of a compact model for the GFET drain current. For such purpose, we assumed that the drift-diffusion theory is applicable. That implies that the carrier mean free path (MFP) is significantly shorter than L. The MFP is related to the graphene quality and values below 100 nm have been reported at room temperature. where ρ sh (y, T) = p(y, T) + n(y, T) is the transport carrier sheet density and μ(y, T) is the field-dependent carrier mobility that reads as where β is a parameter of the model describing how sharp the transition between low-and high-field mobilities is and μ LF refers to the low-field carrier mobility. Saturation velocity v sat (y, T) is limited by optical phonon scattering according to the following equation: π√πρ sh (y, T) where N OP (T) and ħΩ are the optical phonon occupation and energy, respectively. Low-field mobility and saturation velocity strongly depend on the dielectric materials surrounding the graphene layer, namely on the substrate and top-gate insulator used for the specific GFET geometry. These parameters depend on various scattering mechanisms that drive the carrier transport. To obtain an explicit expression for Equation (ii) A soft-saturation model (β = 1) is adopted. This value is consistent with numerical studies of electronic transport based on the Monte Carlo simulations; where c 2 = (πk B T) close to it, whereas the release of these trapped carriers is fast in the channel region and slow at the interfaces. In contrast, traps within the oxide region far from the channel have slow capture and emission time constants. The upscaling of RF performance in GFETs can be achieved by the progressive reduction of the channel length. When analyzing a short-channel GFET, velocity saturation is an important factor, but 2D electrostatics should also be considered. The strong electric fields caused at high bias affect the charge distribution along the graphene channel; thus, the 2D electrostatics across the plane perpendicular to graphene must be analyzed. Therefore, we developed a model that solves the 2D Poisson's equation coupled with the drift-diffusion equation, which includes the velocity saturation effect, to consider SCE effectively. In contrast, power dissipation in the graphene channel imperfectly spread out of the device increases its temperature, Finally, in §2.2.4, we studied the bias-dependent contact resistance, which embraces the phenomena at the metal-graphene interface as well as the junction formed between the graphene layer under the metal electrode and the graphene channel. The actual performance of GFETs can be revealed by a device model correctly describing the hysteresis in both trap-affected and trap-reduced scenarios. In the literature, graphene transistor models including trap-effects have been reported; The density of trap centers in a high-κ device, including GFETs, is higher in the gated region because all types of traps are present, i.e., material, interface, and border traps. Hence, the modeling approach reviewed next focuses on the specific device region. A high-κ oxide has been considered without loss of generality, i.e., trapping mechanisms in 2D oxides are qualitatively similar to the ones in 3D oxides but differ in temperature and vertical field dependence. Trapping mechanisms in ungated regions can be implicitly included in scattering-related parameters. Figure ). Notably, a trap-free state is not possible in real conditions. However, a reduced impact of the charged traps on the I-V characteristics, i.e., minimum hysteresis window, can be obtained by controlling the measurement conditions with sophisticated characterization techniques, e.g., pulsed measurements. To reproduce and understand the impact of traps on critical device figures of merit towards using the devices in circuits, a compact model describing the behavior of trap-affected and trap-reduced device performance accurately is required. The former characteristics can be obtained with a staircase characterization whereas an opposing-pulse technique can be used for the latter as shown in Ref. To reproduce the traps impact on the performance, the net charge expression in the model should account the corresponding scenario, i.e., Equation Additionally, the trap density of the studied device is obtained for the different measurement sweeps from experimental data (see Ref. Source-to-drain current within the graphene channel generates energy by the Joule effect, which can increase the temperature of the device considerably if the heat is not properly dissipated. The increase in graphene temperature, T, with respect to the ambient temperature, T A , can be expressed as where P dis = |I DS V DS | corresponds to the power dissipated in the graphene channel and R th is the effective thermal resistance, which embraces all the paths through which the heat can be dissipated out of the channel. R th can be estimated according to the methodology proposed in Ref. To demonstrate the impact of SHE, we simulated the device described in Ref. shows that the performance of the SHE-affected device observed in DC does not imply an improvement in the RF figures of merit, as the actual AC small-signal output conductance is larger than the one observed at DC. To study the performance of short-channel GFET, we developed a numerical model that aims to find the self-consistent solution of the 2D Poisson's equation (Equation Although GFET has emerged as a promising device for analog/RF applications, the contact resistance (R c ) embracing the phenomena arising at the interface between graphene and source/drain metal electrodes remains a major limiting factor that affects the electronic transport properties. For conventional (3D) semiconductors, a Schottky contact can be turned into an ohmic contact by lowering the Schottky barrier height with opportune metal choice or lowering the barrier thickness sufficiently, in the order of few nanometers, by heavily doping the semiconductor. Therefore, electrons can go through the barrier driven by the quantum tunneling effect. However, for metal-graphene (MG) junction, the difference between the dimensional nature of the metal (3D) and graphene (2D) as well as the strong influence of the contact metal and the impact of the device fabrication details on the graphene properties hinder its description by the conventional Schottky-Mott picture. Furthermore, graphene zero energy bandgap prevents the formation of conventional Schottky contact and its small density of states near the Dirac point strongly limits the current injection from the metal. When a finite metal electrode is deposited to cover part of a graphene sheet as in the GFET contact shown in Figure Here, the gate voltage dependence of ∆E m and ∆E g , in a standard back-gate GFET configuration, is conveniently solved using a 1D model, as illustrated in Figure where palladium was assumed as the metal electrode. These two quantities are key factors to determine R c as a function of the gate voltage. Different types of junctions could be developed depending on the back-gate bias, namely pp-type, pn-type, and nn-type junctions. By assuming a chemical doping of the graphene channel Q 0 /q = -5.4 × 10 12 cm -2 , the transitions from pp-to pn-type at V G ~ 23 V and from pn-to nn-type at V G ~ 46 V were captured in accordance with reported measurements. is found; thus, its gate voltage dependence for arbitrary metals is predicted. Here, R sh m is the sheet resistance of graphene under the metal; L c and W c are the contact dimensions. Additionally, R gg strictly depends on the effective length, λ, of the potential step that builds up between the graphene under the metal and the graphene channel, which can be calculated as where k F = min(|∆E m |, |∆E g |) /ħv F and T gg is the transmission probability of Dirac fermions across the potential step given by Cayssol et al. Recently, a physical model of R c in titanium-contacted graphene-based FETs Ref. where is the total carrier transmission probability and the Gaussian functions G(E, t) with effectives broadening t 1 and t 2 have been considered to get a more realistic model. Parameter t 1 considers the coupling between the metal and the quasi-bound graphene states underneath; t 2 is a parameter embedding information of the random disorder potential in the graphene channel, which depends on the minimum sheet carrier concentration. The probability of carrier transmission through the potential is given in Ref. The above comprehensive physics-based calculation of R c can be used as a confident reference for the values of this parameter in a device model. For compact modeling approaches, however, R c in GFETs has been either extracted from experimental data-based methodologies When a time-varying signal is applied to a GFET terminal, the dynamic operation of the device is strongly influenced by internal capacitive effects. Therefore, it is necessary to develop a large-signal model of intrinsic GFET capacitances. Various capacitive models for general FETs have been developed over the years. Basically, they can be categorized into two groups: (i) Meyer-like Notably, this hypothesis might give unphysical results when dealing with some class of circuits (such as switched capacitor filters); furthermore, earlier models based on this assumption could not ensure charge conservation. Dutton, Considering all the aforementioned, we presented a large-signal model for the GFET elsewhere and summarized it in §3.1. Assuming a quasi-static (QS) operation, the entering terminal currents in the time domain can be expressed by considering that the charges per unit area at any time controlled by the timevarying terminal voltages, (v G (t), v B (t), v D (t), and v S (t)), are identical to those found if DC voltages (V G , V B , V D , and V S ) were used. where m stands for G, D, S, and B, and they denote the top gate, drain, source, and back gate, respectively. The possible leakage current through the top and back insulators is neglected, that is, I G = I B = 0. In addition, to guarantee charge conservation, I D = -I S = I DS , where I DS is calculated according to Equation Each row must sum to zero for the matrix to be reference-independent, and each column must sum to zero for the device description to be charge-conservative. ; { Q G = Q 0 - where Q 0 = WLC t C b (V G -V G0 -V B + V B0 ) (C t + C b ) ⁄ . The charge controlled by the drain and source terminals is calculated based on the Ward-Dutton linear charge partition scheme, which guarantees charge conservation Both terminal charges and intrinsic capacitances can conveniently be written using V c as the integration variable, as it was done to model I DS (cf. §2. where The drain current model presented in §2.1.2 is combined with the charge-based compact intrinsic capacitance description as shown in Equation To demonstrate the predictive capabilities of the large-signal model presented, V GS,e -V Dirac (V) corresponding parameters given in Figure When the input signal is increased up to f in = 200 kHz and beyond, a significant decay of the output signal amplitude was observed in the experiment, Furthermore, with the use of a single GFET (Figure the intermediate frequency (IF), f IF ; and other intermodulations. The drain-to-source resistance, R DS = V DS,e I DS ⁄ , versus the gate bias is shown in Figure To reach subharmonic operation, the device is biased at V GS,e = V Dirac = 1 V through a bias tee. In contrast, Figure Trapping and detrapping dynamic processes in MOS-like transistors can be characterized by their corresponding capture and emission time constants, τ c and τ e , respectively. These phenomena can occur over a wide time span depending on the location of the traps centers within the device (cf. §2.2.1), as well as on the bias and temperature conditions. Trap dynamics in graphene transistors have been systematically characterized Currently, physics-based models for τ c and τ e in GFETs have not been reported in the literature. However, previously developed high-κ dielectric MOS-models of oxide traps, e.g., a non-radiative multi-phonon model A numerical device simulation solution, enabled by the drift-diffusion-based description of transport in graphene transistors, Depending on the input frequency of the time-varying signal, two operating regimes can be distinguished, QS and NQS. In the QS regime, the fluctuation of the varying terminal voltages is sufficiently slow such that the channel charge can follow the voltage variations. This regime applies whenever the transition time for the voltage to change is larger than the transit time of the carriers from source to drain. Contrarily, the NQS regime where carrier inertia effects are important should be considered. When dealing with circuit simulations, assuming a QS regime is not appropriate for long-channel GFETs operating at HFs or when the load capacitance is extremely small. These predictions for GFETs are in qualitative agreement with the NQS studies that have been conducted for conventional silicon-based MOSFETs. When considering analog and RF electronic applications, FET terminals are polarized with a DC bias over which a time-varying voltage is superimposed (Figure In §4.1, we derive a small-signal equivalent circuit for the GFET assuming the QS hypothesis b) valid in the MF range. Later in §4.2, we introduce some important non-ideal effects. Specifically, the small-signal model derivation has been extended to cover the NQS regime at HF in §4.2.1. A brief review of the dynamic self-heating model in GFETs is presented in §4.2.2. Finally, in §4.2.3, we discuss a procedure adapted to GFETs to go from the extrinsic to the intrinsic AC frequency response, which requires a model for the parasitic network that should include the effect of the contact pads, metal interconnections, and substrate. Currently, many small-signal models proposed for GFETs have been directly imported from Meyer-like capacitance models. The small-signal model parameters could be either extracted by applying a direct methodology based on S-parameter measurements Here, we present a set of secondary models to enhance the prediction capability of the smallsignal model presented in §4.1 by including some relevant non-idealities. We first describe a NQS small-signal model suitable for HF simulations in §4.2.1. Thereafter, a dynamic SHE model, developed in the context of small-signal analysis, is presented in §4.2.2. Finally, a parasitic network model that considers the effect of contact pads, metal interconnections, and the substrate is discussed in §4.2.3. Here, we discuss ways for expanding the frequency range that can be reached with the smallsignal model while keeping the accuracy to acceptable levels. Therefore, NQS effects arising at HF should be incorporated into the model. A small-signal NQS model can be derived from the analytical solution of the drift-diffusion equation coupled with the continuity equation, which can be expressed in terms of the modified Bessel functions of the first kind. (angular frequency) are neglected in the GFET ω-dependent admittances, a first-order NQS equivalent circuit of the GFET can be obtained (Figure where: where the positive (negative) sign applies when C t [V G -V G0 -V X ] + C b [V B -V B0 -V X ] < 0(> 0) and the subscript X stands for drain (D) and source (S). The time constants τ 1 , τ 2 , τ 3 , and τ 4 from Equation with γ = C t /(C t + C b ). Because of the simplifications made in the model derivation, the selected bias point should be placed far enough from the Dirac voltage for the device to operate in the linear region. The assumption is V cx0 2 ≫ (πk B T (√3q) ⁄ ) 2 + 2qΔ 2 (kπ(ħv F ) To demonstrate the impact of NQS effects on the RF performance of GFETs, we considered the device described in Figure both in an analytical and numerical way through the evaluation of the modified Bessel functions of the first kind. Figure Figure The equations we have presented so far to describe the drain current include a dependence on the bias point and the temperature. To analyze the impact of self-heating on HF performance, the dependence of the small-signal parameters on temperature must be studied. Here, we present a model valid for AC input voltages, assuming that the GFET presents a complex thermal impedance, Z th , that depends on the angular frequency, ω (= 2πf ), and on the different thermal paths through which the power, P dis , is dissipated from the graphene channel. This heat crosses the different device thermal boundaries defined by the interfaces between the materials. Z th can be represented by various thermal RC networks characterized by the values of thermal resistances, R th,i , and thermal frequencies, f th,i , as follows: The sum of all thermal resistances gives the total thermal resistance, which causes the increase of graphene temperature owing to DC self-heating, as addressed in §2.2.2 R th = ∑ R th,i i (28) Figure Generally, the parasitic network plays a significant role in determining the GFET performance. For on-wafer RF FETs, it is determined by the contact pads, metal interconnections, and the substrate. method are R sa and R da (cf. Figure with different channel lengths whereas the second one is a more general approach because it can be applied to individual devices regardless the gate architecture. Once the values of R s and R d are known, their impact can be removed from the dynamic characteristics by following a matrix algebra process as shown elsewhere. values have been obtained in the literature using numerical device simulations (of the dummy structure) Graphene-based FETs have proven to be excellent contestants for forthcoming RF applications owing to graphene's exceptional characteristics that can ensure high speed performance. There are three major mechanisms responsible for the generation of LFN in transistors: (i) carrier number fluctuation effect (ΔΝ), Moreover, the study of variability issues in currently immature GFET technologies is very critical for the transition to large-scale wafer fabrication and eventually to massive applications production. 1/f noise statistical deviation is a significant variable and it should be investigated thoroughly. Although low-frequency noise variance has been adequately researched in CMOS devices following empirical, In general, the noise models presented in §5 are extracted based on a methodology of dividing the device channel in very small slices where each one of them is a local noise source; all these local noise sources are considered uncorrelated and thus the integration of the local power spectral densities (PSDs) from source to drain results in the total channel noise. The proposed 1/f noise model's compact expressions are presented in Equations A1-A5 in Supporting Information. Regarding the 1/f noise variance model, Equations A6-A10 in Supporting Information are derived and presented. First, there are some relevant physics discussed along the manuscript that deserve further modeling and/or experimental validation, such as: (i) trapping/detrapping mechanisms under dynamic operation, (ii) self-heating effects at frequencies below and close to the thermal frequency, (iii) non-quasi-static effects at frequencies near and beyond the cut-off frequency, and (iv) high-frequency noise including the gate induced noise and its correlation with channel noise at frequencies close or beyond the cut-off frequency in the non-quasi static regime. Second, moving to higher TRLs requires the successful application of state-of-the-art modeling technology to integrated circuits working in a relevant/operational environment towards the improvement and strengthening of the GFET technology by a constant feedback between fabrication technology groups, modeling groups, and circuit designers. That requires a more systematic characterization of RF building blocks such as frequency multipliers, mixers, and low-noise amplifiers, to mention a few. This would allow the full demonstration of the consistency between simulation and experiment for the relevant operation conditions. Finally, statistical variability in device characteristics is an important aspect that should be addressed in future investigations, which is critical for the transition to the large-scale wafer fabrication and eventually to massive applications production.