3Rh4Sn13 is a rare system that has been shown to display an interesting interplay between structural quantum criticality and superconductivity. A putative structural quantum critical point, which is hidden beneath a broad superconducting dome, is believed to give rise to optimized superconducting properties in (CaxSr1-x)3Rh4Sn13. However, the presence of the superconducting dome itself hinders the examination of the quantum critical point through electrical transport, as the transport coefficients vanish in the superconducting state. Here, we use critical current density to explore within the superconducting dome. Our measurements reveal a large enhancement of the critical current density at the zero-temperature limit when the system is tuned towards the structural quantum critical point. A quantum critical point (QCP) is a location in parameter space where a second-order quantum phase transition occurs at zero temperature. Its prominence in condensed matter physics is tied to the observation of superconductivity in a large variety of materials in the vicinity of the putative QCP Critical current density J c is just such a parameter that does not vanish inside the superconducting dome. J c in the zero-temperature limit, J c (0), is particularly suitable for detecting the presence of a QCP, as it is a singular point which exists precisely at the absolute zero temperature. In the heavy-fermion system Sn-doped CeRhIn 5 , an antiferromagnetic QCP can be reached by applying a hydrostatic pressure of 1.35 GPa To establish the extent to which J c (0) can detect a QCP, it is important to look beyond a magnetic QCP, be-cause a nonmagnetic QCP can also support the optimization of superconductivity in an analogous manner. Quasiskutterudite "Remeika" compounds M 3 T 4 Sn 13 , where M is an alkaline-earth metal and T is a transition metal, are promising systems to explore this relationship In this manuscript, we report our J c data for the entire substitution series (Ca x Sr 1-x ) 3 Rh 4 Sn 13 , straddling the putative structural QCP. With the availability of J c data down to 50 mK a reliable extraction of J c (0) for all samples can be achieved. Our J c (0) reveals a significant enhancement when the system is tuned to x c , offering compelling evidence for the existence of a structural QCP in (Ca x Sr 1-x ) 3 Rh 4 Sn 13 . Single crystals of (Ca x Sr 1-x ) 3 Rh 4 Sn 13 were synthesized by the Sn-flux method as described elsewhere Figure We proceed to measure the critical current I c for 13 samples spanning the entire substitution series. For x = 0, 0.65, 0.9, and 1, two samples from the same batch have been measured for each composition (see Supplemental Material For a sample with a width of 2a and a thickness of 2b, J c = I c /(2a × 2b), as conventionally defined. Figure with α = 0.5 and β = 0.2 (red solid curve in Fig. In fact, Eq. ( where φ 0 is the flux quantum, μ 0 is the vacuum permeability, and ξ is the coherence length. For our samples, the thickness 2b is of the order of several tens of μm -the thinnest sample has 2b = 17 μm [42]. On the other hand, λ in the zero-temperature limit, λ(0), has been reported to be ∼290 nm in the related compound Sr 3 Ir 4 Sn 13 1. Equation (2) in the 'thick limit' becomes Near T c , λ diverges and can potentially complicate the analysis, because λ will eventually exceed b. However, given the thickness of our samples [42], this would occur very near T c . In the Bardeen-Schrieffer-Cooper weakcoupling limit, λ will only reach 10λ(0) at T /T c = 0.995. Here, our sample thickness is roughly two orders of magnitude larger than λ(0). Therefore, the condition b/λ(0) 1 is essentially valid for all samples at all practical T < T c . From Eq. ( Despite the confirmation of the 1/b scaling, the measured J c values are lower than the J c values calculated from Eq. (3). Take, for instance, x = 0.9 (sample S2) with 2b = 17 μm. Assuming λ(0) ∼ 290 nm and λ/ξ ∼ 30 The realization that the self-field J c is proportional to λ -2 offers a means to evaluate the superconducting gap. Since the ratio λ/ξ enters the logarithm, whose temperature dependence is weak, J c (t)/J c (0) is dominated by λ -2 (t)/λ -2 (0), which reflects the temperature dependence of the superfluid density. As Fig. We now present our J c data in relation to the T -x phase diagram, compactly summarized in Fig. Our finding of a peak in the critical current is reminiscent of the recent discovery by Jung et al. The peak in the critical current density would imply a dip in the London penetration depth (see Eqs. ( In summary, we have probed the T -x phase diagram of the Remeika series (Ca x Sr 1-x ) 3 Rh 4 Sn 13 via critical current measurements. The critical current density is significantly larger for x = 0.9 samples, the composition at which a putative structural quantum critical point has been identified using other techniques. Some of these techniques require the removal of the superconductivity by a magnetic field, or a long-range extrapolation of the normal state properties to the zero-temperature limit. Thus, the singular behaviour of the critical current density at zero field is valuable for revealing the existence of a quantum critical point masked by the superconducting dome. Given that the transport critical current is relatively straightforward to measure, our scheme can have a wider impact in identifying the quantum phase transition in a wide range of tunable quantum materials. For a superconductor to be useful for application, it must support a large transport current flow. As such, tremendous efforts have been devoted to the enhancement of the critical current density. Our work, as well as the studies on cuprates and Ce-based heavy fermion systems 