In nano-capillaries of large aspect ratio, the attractive image charge force is strong enough to affect the trajectory of ions passing through capillaries and consequently to diminish the fraction of transmitted beam ions. We calculated the theoretically transmitted fraction, using an approached but CPU-friendly expression of the image charge force valid in the case of a static ion and an infinite cylindrical dielectric interface. When comparing the theoretically transmitted fraction to available experimental data for nano-capillaries with an inner diameter of less than 200 nm, we found a surprisingly large disagreement, i.e., the theoretically transmitted fractions were easily an order of magnitude lower than the experimental ones. Noting that the image charge force depends on the velocity of the ion via the frequency dependent relative permittivity of the insulator, we investigated whether the disagreement could be lifted using a velocity depend image charge force. We give the exact expressions of the dynamical image charge force for a plane and cylindrical dielectric interface as a function of the ion velocity. We then re-evaluated the theoretically transmitted fractions in the case of SiO2 and PET dielectric interfaces. Our findings are discussed in the light of the available experimental data. Guiding of low-energy ions by insulating capillaries was first reported by On the theoretical front, models for the charge dynamics in insulating capillaries were contentiously refined over time in order to improve the description of the charge injection and charge relaxation in insulating capillaries In this work, the author proposes to focus in more detail on the modeling of the image charge force acting on beam ions through cylindrical nano-capillaries. In particular, we want to investigate whether experimentally observed transmission rates through insulating straight nano-capillaries are well reproduced using the expression of the image force inside a cylindrical dielectric. Several experimental studies reported the transmission rates of keV ions through insulating nano-capillaries The paper is organized as follow. In section II, we present and discuss a CPU-friendly expression of the image force acting on a charge inside a cylindrical dielectric interface. We then calculate the theoretical transmitted fraction in the case where the injected beam is aligned with the capillary axis. Next, we highlight the discrepancy between the theoretical and the experimental transmitted fractions found in the literature. That finding made us question the validity of the expression of the image charge force used here. In section III we propose to improve the expression of the image charge force by explicitly taking into account the velocity of the ion and the frequency dependence of the relative permittivity of the capillary. We then calculate the image charge force as a function of the ion velocity and discussed its influence in the case of an arbitrary dielectric response function. In section IV we re-evaluated the theoretical transmitted fractions using this time the velocity depend image charge force, mainly for those cases for which experimental data is available in the literature. We discuss then in how far the velocity dependent image charge force lifts the initially mentioned discrepancy. In the following, we highlight the apparent disagreement between the theoretical and experimentally observed transmitted fraction and of ions trough nanocapillaries. In a first step we will define the theoretically transmitted fraction f th of an injected ion beam at zero tilt angle, in the ideal case where the capillary is a straight tube and the uniform, mono-kinetic ion beam has zero divergence. Then, we compare the theoretical transmitted fraction to the one found in former published works and discuss the observed discrepancies. The ion trajectories through charged capillaries is mainly affected by two fields, the electric field generated by the accumulated charges in the capillary walls and by the image force. For a beam aligned with the capillary axis the deposited charge distribution has axial symmetry, generating an axisymmetric electric potential V (ρ, z). Such a potential yields an inner electric field that competes with the image force only if the accumulated charge density in the bulk exceeds a certain amount. But because the insulator cannot withstand an electric field larger than the dielectric strength field, typically 50 kV/mm A. Theoretically transmitted fraction Let us assume a translationally invariant cylindrical dielectric interface of radius R, separating the inner vacuum from the outer insulating medium of dielectric relative permittivity ε r > 1. A charge q is located inside the cylinder at position ρ < R, where ρ is the distance from the symmetry axis Oz. The modeling of the image force acting on the charge q is described in details in where u ρ is the radial unit vector, I m () the modified Bessel function of order m and A m () a dimensionless function, accounting for the dielectric permittivity r of the capillary. The expression of A m () is given by Eq. 11. Because of the sum over m and k, computing the image charge force F im may be too time consuming in simulations and a simpler, CPU-friendly expression approaching F im would be welcomed. On the basis of the image charge force of a perfectly conducting cylindrical interface (Eq. 12) given by Kökési et al. In order to check how well F 0 im approaches F im , we compute the ratio F im /F 0 im as a function of ρ/R and for various values of ε r . Results are shown in Fig. FIG. We assume that a charge q of mass m and energy E k enters the cylindrical capillary with an initial radial distance ρ 0 < R and with an initial velocity v 0 = 2E k /m , u z , so that at z = 0 one has dρ/dz = 0. The trajectory ρ(z) of the ion can then be readily computed by solving the differential equation with the initial values ρ(0) = ρ 0 and dρ dz z=0 = 0. Introducing the dimensionless quantities = ρ/R and ζ = z/H, equation ( with 0 = ρ 0 /R and d dζ ζ=0 = 0 and where the dimen- accounts for the length H, inner radius R and dielectric constant ε r of the capillary as well as the kinetic energy E k of the charge. Remarkably, the factor Γ tells us that the dimensionless image charge force scales with the square of the capillary length H and but with the inverse cube of the capillary radius R. This explains why, for nano-and macro-capillaries of same aspect ratio H/R, the force can be neglected in macro-capillaries (R ∼ 1 mm) but not in nano-capilleries (R ∼ 100 nm). Also note that the force is inversely proportional to the kinetic energy of the ions. Equation ( defines the theoretical transmitted fraction f th of the ion beam in the ideal case where the nano-capillary is a straight cylinder and the ion beam has zero divergence. The fraction f th depends only on the factor Γ and has to be understood as an upper bound value, obtainable only in ideal conditions, i.e. the injected beam is spatially uniform, mono-kinetic, parallel and the capillary is perfectly cylindrical. In figure In experimental works on nano-capillaries, authors usually give the transmitted ion rate I out through a large number of capillaries rather than the transmitted fraction I out /I in . Indeed, the injected ion rate I in has to be deduced from the current density and size of the beam, as well as transparency of the foil containing the capillaries, parameters which are difficult to obtain with sufficient precision. We nevertheless found three experimental studies which give the transmitted fraction at zero tilt angle. Surprisingly, when comparing the theoretical transmitted fractions f th to experimental data found in In 2010, Stolterfoht et al. measured the transmission rate of PET nano-capillaries of various diameter 2R i , ranging from 100 to 400 nm This trend is shown in figure so that the transmitted fraction I in /I out was found grossly independent from the capillary radius R i . This is surprising because equation 5 tells us that Γ scales as R -3 and thus a strong dependence of the transmitted fraction on the capillary radius is expected, i.e. figure for each capillary diameter used in In their work of 2006 on highly ordered SiO 2 nanocapillaries, Sahana et al. The observed transmitted fraction in those three studies Apart from cylindrical nano-capillarie, experimental studies were also done on muscovite mica nano-capillaries with rhombic (long axis 248 nm and short axis 142 nm) and rectangular section (215 × 450 nm 2 ) We conclude this section by noting that significant disagreements were found between measured and theoretical transmitted fractions in the case of cylindrical nano-capillaries made in PET and SiO 2 . Better agreement was noticed in the case of rhombic shaped mica nano-capillaries, but was not further confirmed in nanocapillaries with rectangular sections. Where disagreement was fount, the experimental transmitted fraction was always significantly larger than the theoretical or simulated one. The disagreement highlighted in the previous section made us question the validity of expression (2) of the image charge force in the case where keV ions pass through a nanocapillary of large aspect ratio. There are indeed two effects that we ignored in the evaluation of the image charge force F im (ρ). If the inner surface of the capillary is hit by ions, the accumulated charge may modify the dielectric response of the insulator. For example, in pre-charged PET samples, the trapped charge was found to partially inhibit the dipolar polarization, reducing by about 5% the dielectric permittivity with respect to untreated PET The other effect is that the ions are moving and the velocity of the ions influences the induced polarization at the interface. The dynamical effects in the image charge force were already investigated by The relative permittivity of bulk describes the ability to polarize a material subjected to an electrical field. In dielectrics, his polarization originates from a number of sources: electron cloud displaced relative to nucleus, relative displacement of atoms, alignment of dipoles in electric field and accumulation of charge carriers at the interface. These sources have different response times so that the relative permittivity ε r ≡ ε r (ω) depends on the angular frequency ω of the external electric field. We assume that the dependence of ε r on the wave vector k can be neglected if the spatial extension of the induced dipole moments is small compared to the wavelength 2π/k, which is the case for frequencies of the electromagnetic field well below optical frequencies We will now evaluate the influence of the velocity of a moving charge on the image force. In a first step, we investigate the image force in the case of an infinite plane interface, which yields for the velocity dependent image force a handy expression, facilitating the discussion. Then, we check its effect on in the case of a cylindrical interface. Let us consider a homogeneous dielectric which fills the region x < 0. The region x > 0 is empty. A projectile of charge q is situated at x = x p > 0 and moves along the Oz coordinate with the velocity v > 0. The expression of image charge force acting on a moving ion has been detailed in appendix VI B and is given by The image charge force depends on the velocity v of the ion and on the frequency response of the dielectric function ε r (ω). For angular frequencies ω v/(2x p ), the modified Bessel function K 1 (2ωx p /v) decreases as exp(-2ωx p /v), so that the ratio v/(2x p ) can be regarded as a cut-off angular frequency and only angular frequencies ω smaller than v/(2x p ) will contribute significantly to the image charge force. For example, 7 keV Ne 7+ ions (as used by Sahana et al. For much lower ion velocities, the cut-off frequency v/(2x p ) may fall below 1 Mhz. In this low frequency range, the relative permittivity of insulators is usually constant, interfacial polarization apart. Taking r (ω) = ε r and integrating over ω yields the well-known image charge force for a plane vacuum-dielectric interface Equation ( The dependence of the image charge force on the ion velocity is shown in figure In the next step, we consider an infinite cylindrical interface of radius R having its symmetry axis along Oz. The interface separates the inner vacuum from the outer insulating medium of dielectric permittivity ε r (ω). The latter is assumed complex valued and depending on the frequency. Let a charge q move in the xOz plane with the velocity v u z , so that its time-dependent position is given by the vector (ρ , 0, vt), with ρ < R. The expression of the dynamical image force is similar to the static one (Eq. 1) but takes now explicitly into account the dielectric response and depends on the velocity v, The function I m () and K m () are the modified Bessel functions and A m () is a dimensionless function depending on the dielectric permittivity ε r (ω), evaluated at the pulsa- Here I m and K m are the partial derivatives of the Bessel functions with respect to ρ. Note that the imaginary part of A m cancels so that A m is real valued. We may highlight the special case of a perfectly conducting interface. For the latter, one has ε r (ω) → 1+i∞, and the functions A m tend to, A m → K m (kR)/I m (kR). The expression of the image charge force of a perfectly conducting interface becomes then independent of the ion velocity v and can be integrated over k and summed over m to yield Finallay note that in the adiabatic limit, v → 0, the functions A m () are evaluated using for the relative permittivity its static limit, ε r (kv → 0) = ε r , yielding expression (1). A. Image force for keV ions in SiO2 and PET nano-capillaries We may now check in how far the velocities of keV ions reduce the image charge force for those cases highlighted in section II B, namely for 7 keV Ne 7+ ions through SiO 2 nanocapillaries and 3 keV Ne 7+ ions through PET nanocapillaries. The dielectric response functions of SiO 2 nano-layers and of a thin samples of PET are pictured in Fig. For a PET interface, the ratio F im (v)/F im (0) for a moving charge of 1.8 × 10 5 is about 0.88 and mainly in- dependent on the radial coordinate ρ. This is due to the fact that the dynamical corrections to the image force come from the finite response time of dipole alignment in PET, as indicated by the small decrease of ε r from 2 to 2.6 in the sub 3 THz domain, as shown in Fig We may now check to what extend the dynamical corrections to the static image force lift the discrepancy found between the experimentally observed and theoretically evaluated transmitted fraction, as described in section II B. Again we solve equation 3, but this time using the image force as given in Fig. We evaluated the theoretically transmitted ion beam fraction through straight insulating nano-capillaries by calculating the fraction of ion trajectories that were not intercepted by the capillary wall. The only force acting on the ions was the image charge force due to the induced polarization at the inner dielectric interface of a straight cylindrical capillary. For the calculation of the trajectories we used an CPU-friendly expression of the image force. We verified that the latter approaches well the exact image charge force in the adiabatic limit. The transmitted fraction was evaluated in the ideal case of a mono-kinetic divergence free beam injected at zero tilt angle. When comparing the theoretically transmitted fraction to the three experimental data available in the literature, we found large discrepancies in the transmitted fractions, especially for nano-capillaries with an inner diameter below 200 nm. As the relative permittivity of a dielectric material depends on the frequency of the applied electric field, the surface polarization induced by a charge moving along the interface depends on the its velocity. We evaluated thus the velocity depend image charge force for a plane and cylindrical SiO 2 and PET interface. We found that for keV ions having typically a velocity about 10 5 m/s, the image charge force is controlled by the near infrared domain (THz) of the dielectric response function. For a SiO 2 interface, the velocity of the ions affects notably the image force when the ion is close to the interface. For PET interface, the dynamical effects of the image force are negligible in the chosen keV range. We then checked in how far the theoretically transmitted fractions are modified when using the velocity de-pendent image charge force instead of the static (adiabatic) one. The calculations were performed for 7 keV and 3 keV Ne 7+ ions. We found that the newly calculated transmitted fractions are only slightly larger than those found previously in the case of adiabatic limit and still disagree with the experimental results. We conclude thus that a velocity dependent image charge force is not able to lift the highlighted disagreement. And because the electric field inside the capillary due to an uniformly charged interface can be neglected for large aspect ratio capillaries, there is still no convincing explanation for why the theoretical transmitted fraction was found well below the observed one, especially for capillaries with inner diameters below 200 nm. With this work we hope to motivate new experimental work on the ion transmission through insulating nano-capillaries of different sections. We think that new data will guide authors to model more accurately the image force of keV ions trough capillaries, shedding new light on the phenomenon. We simulated the trajectories of 7 keV Ne 7+ ions through an insulating SiO 2 nano-capillary embedded in semi-conducting silicon. The inner radius of the capillary tube is 60 nm, the outer radius is 150 nm and the length is 25 mum. The forces acting on the ions are the image force expressed by Eq. 2 and the Coulomb force due to accumulated charges at the inner capillary surface. The beam axis is aligned with the capillary axis and the injected beam intensity is 10 ions per second, thus about 10 -17 A. The outer surface is grounded and accounts for the grounded semi-conducting Si layer. The bulk conductivity κ of SiO 2 is field dependent and given by the non-linear Poole-Frenkel relation The field independent bulk conductivity κ 0 is set to 10 -15 S/m Let us consider a homogeneous dielectric of relative permittivity ε r which fills the region x < 0. The region x > 0 is empty. A projectile of charge q is situated at x p > 0, y p = 0 and moves along the Oz coordinate with the velocity v > 0, z p = vt. The x-component of the electric field at the interface x = 0 generated by the moving charge at position r p (t) = (x p , 0, vt) reads E q x (x p , y, z, t) = q 4π 0 -x p (x 2 p + y 2 + (z -vt) 2 ) 2/3 . (14 Because of the discontinuous jump of the relative permittivity ε r at the interface x = 0, the electric field E q x induces at the interface surface charge density σ. The electric filed generated by the surface charges σ at the dielectric side x = 0 -is -σ 2ε0 but + σ 2ε0 at x = 0 + , so that the total electric field at each side reads while in the empty region side, x = 0 + , it reads In the absence of free surface charges, the x-component of the displacement field D x is continuous across the interface. The relation between D = ε E is non-local in time and position and is more comfortably used in the frequency and wave-number domain. The latter relation is more convenient when expressed in the Fourier space, where it simplifies to D( k, w) = ε( k, ω) Ẽ( q, ω) , Let Ẽq x be the Fourier transform in the frequency domain of the electric field E q x , Ẽq x (ω, x p , y, z, v) = -q 4π 0 ∞ -∞ x p e iwt dt (x 2 p + y 2 + (z -vt) 2 ) 3/2) -q e iwz/v 2π 0 where K 1 () is the modified Bessel function of order 1. In the following we assume that the dielectric function is local in space so that ε r (ω, k) ≡ ε r (ω). This assumption is valid for |k| π/a, where a 0.5 nm is the typical length of the molecules responsible for the polarization. Using dy e -iωt x p σ(ω, y, z, v)dz (x 2 p + y 2 + (z -vt) 2 ) 3/2 (22) Integration over z gives one has