Improving and homogenizing time and space reference systems on Earth and, more directly, realizing the Terrestrial Reference Frame (TRF) with an accuracy of 1 mm and a long-term stability of 0.1 mm/year are relevant for many scientific and societal endeavors. The knowledge of the TRF is fundamental for Earth and navigation sciences. For instance, quantifying sea level change strongly depends on an accurate determination of the geocenter motion but also of the positions of continental and island reference stations, such as those located at tide gauges, as well as the ground stations of tracking networks. Also, numerous applications in geophysics require absolute millimeter precision from the reference frame, as for example monitoring tectonic motion or crustal deformation for predicting natural hazards. The TRF accuracy to be achieved represents the consensus of various authorities, including the International Association of Geodesy (IAG), which has enunciated geodesy requirements for Earth sciences. Moreover, the United Nations Resolution 69/266 states that the full societal benefits in developing satellite missions for positioning and remote sensing of the Earth are realized only if they are referenced to a common global geodetic reference frame at the national, regional and global levels. Today we are still far from these ambitious accuracy and stability goals for the realization of the TRF. However, a combination and co-location of all four space geodetic techniques on one satellite platform can significantly contribute to achieving these goals. This is the purpose of the GEN-ESIS mission, proposed as a component of the FutureNAV program of the European Space Agency. The GENESIS platform will be a dynamic space geodetic observatory carrying all the geodetic instruments referenced to one another through carefully calibrated space ties. The co-location of the techniques in space will solve the inconsistencies and biases between the different geodetic techniques in order to reach the TRF accuracy and stability goals endorsed by the various international authorities and the scientific community. The purpose of this white paper is to review the stateof-the-art and explain the benefits of the GENESIS mission in Earth sciences, navigation sciences and metrology. This paper has been written and supported by a large community of scientists from many countries and working in several different fields of science, ranging from geophysics and geodesy to time and frequency metrology, navigation and positioning. As it is explained throughout this paper, there is a very high scientific consensus that the GENESIS mission would deliver exemplary science and societal benefits across a multidisciplinary range of Navigation and Earth sciences applications, constituting a global infrastructure that is internationally agreed to be strongly desirable. The GENESIS proposal is dedicated to improving and homogenizing time and space references on Earth and, more directly, to realizing the Terrestrial Reference System (TRS) with an accuracy of 1 mm and a long-term stability of 0.1 mm/year. These numbers are relevant for many scientific and societal endeavors for which a precise realization of the TRS and the knowledge of the Earth's kinematic parameters are crucial. Knowledge of Celestial Reference Frame (CRF) and of Terrestrial Reference Frame (TRF) is fundamental for orbit computation, in particular for metrological applications such as altimetry (e.g., ocean radar altimetry, laser and radar altimetry over land surfaces and ice sheets, and interferometric Synthetic-Aperture Radar mapping of land surface change), as well as for more precise position determinations of Earth orbiting satellites. For instance, quantifying sea level change or the effects of ice melting using altimetry strongly depends on an accurate determination of the position of continental and island reference stations, such as those located at tide gauges, as well as the ground stations of tracking networks. Also, numerous applications in geophysics require absolute millimeter precision from the reference frame, as for example in the case of monitoring tectonic motion or crustal deformation for predicting natural hazards and inferring climate driven mass changes (non-tidal ocean, ice, atmospheric, and hydrological) from observations of vertical and horizontal displacements of the Earth's surface. A stable and accurate reference frame is needed for robust policy making in light of climate change. The quality of many operational monitoring systems are tied to the accuracy of the underlying reference systems. Reliable evidence based policies, which make use of such operational data, and are expected to become more important in adaptation measures, are therefore directly dependent on the quality of international reference frames. The TRF accuracy and stability to be achieved, respectively 1 mm and 0.1 mm/year, represent the consensus of various authorities, including the International Association of Geodesy (IAG), which has enunciated geodesy requirements for Earth science through the Global Geodetic Observing System (GGOS) initiative (see The General Assembly of the United Nations (UN) adopted a resolution on 26 February 2015: "A global geodetic reference frame for sustainable development" Several space missions in order to reach the GGOS accuracy and stability goals were proposed in the past, such as GRASP A very large and strong scientific community involved in the worldwide networks and data and analysis centers of the four geometrical IAG Services supports the GENESIS proposal as part of the FutureNAV program of the European Space Agency (ESA). Clearly, GENESIS will deliver exploratory results across many Earth's science disciplines, mainly where precise positioning, surface motions and mass movement are critical. The mission is thus supported by an active and broad community, and the downstream science and policy-making users will continuously benefit from the improvements in the TRF and of its link to the CRF. The GGOS was initiated by the IAG with the goal of providing a consistent high-quality TRF, crucial for the present day and future science application needs The GGOS accuracy and stability goals are required to detect the smallest variations in the Earth system components. These requirements are especially driven by the fact that the stability in the present TRF of about 0.5 mm/year is the most important contribution to the uncertainty in global sea level rise (see Nowadays, the TRF is realized by station coordinates and velocities for a globally distributed set of ground stations using a combination of the four major space geodetic techniques: GENESIS mission primary goal is a significant improvement of the International Terrestrial Reference Frame (ITRF). The ITRF is recognised to be the metrological foundation for all space-and ground-based observations in Earth Science and Navigation, and therefore this mission will potentially have a major impact in a large number of GNSS and Earth Observation applications. This figure shows some of them. • Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS); • Doppler Orbitography and Radiopositioning Integrated by Satellite (DORIS), a radio satellite tracking system; • the Satellite Laser Ranging (SLR) technique; • and the Very Long Baseline Interferometry (VLBI) technique, which normal operation is to record the signals from quasars. In order to develop a unique, consistent and accurate TRF, these four techniques are combined and linked together thanks to co-location sites located on the ground, where more than one space geodetic technique is located at the same site. Thereby the local ties, i.e., the vectors connecting the reference points of the individual instruments (GNSS and DORIS antennas, radio and optical telescopes), must be realized at the 1 mm level or better. Unfortunately, one of the major deficiencies in the realization of a TRF originates from the difficulty to accurately measure the local ties between the reference points (intersection of axes of large instruments, phase centres of antennas). A second issue of the reference frame is that each technique has its own systematic effects. Thus, a second deficiency includes the (as yet unknown) systematic effects present in the observations of the individual space geodetic techniques. Finally, a third deficiency is the poor spatial distribution of co-location sites on the globe. In order to improve this situation fundamentally, the GENESIS satellite mission will provide a highly accurate co-location of the four space geodetic techniques in space, on board the satellite with carefully and fully calibrated reference points, as illustrated in Figure Secondary goals could be reached by with the addition an Active Laser Retro-Reflector (A-LRR) and an accelerometer. The A-LRR would allow for a high precision synchronization of the onboard USO with ground clocks through time transfer by laser link from ground stations. This would provide metrology users with a common view, time transfer technique, accurate at intercontinental scales. More specifically, in addition to the benefits of the already present P-LRR, the A-LRR would allow (1) to perform ground-tospace and ground-to-ground time and frequency transfers with an extended common view compared to the T2L2 and ACES missions, by taking advantage of the higher altitude of the GENESIS satellite, (2) to compare GNSS and laser time transfer techniques with an uncertainty below 100 ps and (3) to accurately monitor the behaviour of the onboard clock for precise orbitography. An accelerometer, in combination with a well tested macro model of the satellite's geometry and reflectance, would provide insight in non-conservative forces and their effect on the GENESIS orbit. All the mechanical and electronic properties of the platform must be characterized to within sub-millimeter tolerances. An accelerometer could be used to measure surface accelerations up to 10 -11 m s -2 Hz -1/2 and would (1) guarantee high-precision orbit determination and mitigating the errors mapping into the modeling of non-conservative forces, (2) allow in-orbit Center of Mass (CoM) determination. These characteristics are important in the determination of station positions and geophysical products such as the geocenter and Earth's orientation parameters. Another role of this accelerometer would be to serve as a position reference for the geodetic instruments on the platform in order to determine the correction of angular motion between each instrument. The availability of high-precision measurements from the GENESIS mission will fundamentally improve the accuracy and stability of the TRF by a factor of 5-10 and will allow us to achieve the GGOS requirements. This paper reviews the science applications of the GENESIS mission (see also Figure Moreover, an ESA Concurrent Design Facility (CDF) study has confirmed that the GENESIS Mission is feasible within the ESA FutureNAV defined program boundaries, with a target launch date in 2027. The conclusion of this study is given in Sect. 6.1. This section is followed by a high-level description of laser ranging (Sect. 6.2) and VLBI transmitter (Sect. 6.3). 3 Reference frames Reference frames provide the necessary absolute basis for the relative-only geodetic measurements. They are indispensable to study the dynamic Earth, and to be able to meaningfully relate changes across space and time. They are also essential for positioning and navigation in the civil society and for proper georeferencing of geospatial information. The provision of accurate and stable reference frames is one of the major tasks of geodesy. The TRF is the realization of the TRS and is currently provided by precisely determined coordinates and velocities of physical points on the Earth's surface. The main physical and mathematical properties of a TRS (at the definition and conventions level) or of the TRF (at the realization level) include each its origin, scale, orientation, and their time evolution. The Center of Mass (CM) of the Earth System, or geocenter, as the realized origin of the TRF on long-term scales, needs to be accurately determined including its temporal motion (e.g., Any bias or drift in the TRF components propagates into the estimated parameters based on the reference frame. It concerns for instance the measurements of vertical land motion and crustal deformation. This encompasses geological hazards but also human-induced effects (subsidence of land and coastal areas due to different effects) or even measurement of ongoing coastal erosion (National Academies of As stated in the introduction, the importance of accurate and stable reference frames was highlighted by the UN (United Nations General Assembly, 2015). The implementation of the GGRF is intended to support the increasing demand for positioning, navigation, timing, mapping, and other geoscientific applications. Indeed, the GGRF is essential for a reliable determination of changes in the Earth system, for natural disaster management, for monitoring sea level rise and climate change, and to provide accurate information for decision makers. Furthermore, due to globalization and interoperability requirements, there is a growing demand for spatial data infrastructure. Precise spatial information is needed in many areas beneficial to society, including transportation, construction, infrastructure, process control, surveying and mapping, and Earth sciences, and is especially important for monitoring progress towards the UN' Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) (UN SDGs' Website, 2022) (see, e.g. UN-GGIM, 2021). The The ITRF long-term origin is defined by SLR, the most accurate satellite technique in sensing the Earth's CM. The ITRF long-term scale, however, is defined by an average of the SLR and VLBI intrinsic scales. The consistency of these scales still needs to be improved, since both techniques are subject to systematic errors and other technical limitations, such as time and range biases for SLR, antenna deformation for VLBI, etc. The GENESIS mission will help to solve these inconsistencies. The ITRF orientation and its time evolution are defined to be the same for the successive ITRF realizations. Although the ITRF is the most accurate TRF available today, it still needs at least an order of magnitude of improvement in order to meet the scientific challenges of observing Earth system variability. The ITRF is not only a fundamental standard for Earth science applications, but its elaboration, using extensive data analysis, also allows to evaluate the level of consistency between space geodetic techniques and to assess the systematic differences that are a major limiting factor in the ITRF accuracy. The analysis of the input data submitted to the latest ITRF version, ITRF2020 (ITRF, 2022), was the occasion to re-evaluate the current level of consistency among the four main space geodetic techniques and their strengths and weaknesses. There are still a number of factors that limit the ITRF accuracy, as shown (or reconfirmed) by the ITRF2020 results. Although the ITRF2020 long-term origin is defined solely by SLR, weaknesses in its realization include the poor number and geometry of SLR stations in operation today: the number of the most prolific SLR stations does not exceed 16, and not all of these stations have the same level of performance. The only internal evaluation that can be made is the level of agreement between ITRF2020 and previous ITRF versions, namely ITRF2005, ITRF2008, and ITRF2014 whose origins were also defined using SLR data submitted in the form of time series. ITRF2020 results indicate that the agreement in the origin components, with respect to the past three ITRF versions, is at the level of 5 mm in offset and 0.5 mm/year in rate, values that are still far away from the science requirements. Counting the number of ITRF2020 co-locations between VLBI, SLR and DORIS, 11 VLBI-SLR, 12 VLBI-DORIS and 11 SLR-DORIS ties exist. These numbers of colocations are too small to provide a reliable combination of these three techniques alone. The GNSS network is fundamental in determining the ITRF by connecting the three other techniques to GNSS, since almost all SLR and VLBI stations, and about two thirds of the DORIS stations are colocated with GNSS. Only 32 % to 50 % of these co-location sites (with time spans > 3 years) have an agreement between the terrestrial tie vectors and the space geodetic estimates of better than 5 mm in the three components. It is likely that most of the tie discrepancies (differences between terrestrial ties and space geodetic estimates) are caused by systematic errors in the techniques. The poor spatial distribution of colocation sites is also a major limiting factor for the present accuracy of the terrestrial reference frame realization, which would be tackled by the GENESIS mission. The ITRS Center of the International Earth Rotation and Reference Systems Service (IERS), hosted by Institut national de l'information géographique et forestière (IGN) France, is responsible for the maintenance of the ITRS/ITRF and the official ITRF solutions. Two other ITRS combination centers are also generating combined solutions: Deutsches Geodätisches Forschungsinstitut at Technische Universität München (DGFI-TUM; GENESIS, as a fully calibrated satellite-based platform, will provide a complementary co-location of the four techniques in space, a "Core co-location site in space", as an optimal supplement to the existing co-locations on ground. This is essential to identify and potentially reduce the systematic errors and/or determine whether the errors come from the terrestrial ties or from the space geodetic estimates. The GENESIS mission will improve our ability to simultaneously identify the systematic errors and to consequently improve the ITRF accuracy and stability, particularly the origin and the scale that are the most critical parameters for scientific applications. GENESIS will leverage the crucial existing ground-based co-location network, allowing the development of future-proof terrestrial reference frames. We define herein the geocenter motion as the motion of the Center of Mass (CM) of the whole Earth (solid body and fluid envelope) with respect to the geometrical Center of Figure (CF) of its deformable terrestrial crust. This motion is strongest at the annual frequency (2 mm to 3 mm in the equatorial plane and up to 5 mm in the direction of the polar axis) where it mostly reflects non-tidal fluid mass redistribution on the Earth's surface. The long-term secular variation represented by a linear rate is believed to be less than 1 mm/year The geocenter motion is accessible by ground station observations (tied to the crust's CF), used to observe the natural orbital motion of the satellites about the Earth's CM. Yet, space geodetic observation of the geocenter motion is still in its infancy. Independent solutions derived using different techniques have systematic differences as large as the signal level. Estimating geocenter coordinates is one of the most demanding applications of high precision geodetic techniques due to the current precision of the geodetic data, and the nature and magnitude of different types of systematic error. Up to now the geocenter motion is traditionally measured by SLR using the observations to geodetic satellites (see Figure However, the accuracy of SLR data is extremely sensitive to the presence of observational biases therein, e.g., range biases and network effects GNSS-based determinations of the geocenter motion suffer from orbit modelling deficiencies due to an inherent coupling of the GNSS orbit dynamic parameters: the GNSS geocenter Z-component is strongly correlated with the parameterization of the Solar Radiation Pressure (SRP) Other approaches DORIS as the third satellite technique is in principle also sensitive to the CM of the Earth. DORIS benefits from the well-distributed network of stations but trails other geodetic techniques in terms of the quality of station coordinates because of the limitation of non-gravitation perturbing forces modeling and precise orbit determination of active satellites equipped with DORIS receivers. Moreover, the problems mentioned for GNSS also apply to the DORIS system. Yet, SRP modelling error on the Jason-type satellites can be identified and mitigated without compromising the Z geocenter estimate VLBI in its current application is a purely geometric technique, thus, it has no connection to the Earth's gravity field (including the CM of the Earth). VLBI can currently be connected to the satellite techniques only via the station network and the local ties, and is not able to contribute to the geocenter determination. However, numerical simulations demonstrated that geodetic VLBI is able to observe geocenter motion using observations of Galileo satellites For the current ITRS, the origin is assumed to be aligned to the long-term Earth's CM. In parallel, the geopotential models assume that on average the Earth's CM is at the centre of the geodetic network (i.e., zero values for degree-1 geopotential coefficients). Thus, the importance of an accurate geocenter motion cannot be overstated. Not accounting properly for the geocenter motion affects both satellite altimetry, precise orbit determination and satellite-derived estimates of the change in regional mean sea level. Because of climate change, and the need to both measure the change in the ice-sheets and understand their impact on sea level and global fluid mass redistribution, we must explore strategies to better observe and model these subtle variations in the Earth's geocenter. GENESIS is a unique opportunity to properly calibrate the space geodetic techniques against each other. By this, GENESIS helps to improve our understanding of the aforementioned systematic differences between geocenter solutions derived using independent techniques, allowing the best possible accuracy in the recovery of the geocenter time series. In addition, the VLBI tracking of GENESIS is a unique opportunity to attach also the VLBI technique to the CM of the Earth. As a result, the TRF determined from the GENESIS measurements will realize the origin located in the CM of the Earth consistently for all four space geodetic techniques for the first time. The same reasoning holds true for another fundamental property of the ITRF, i.e., the scale that is currently deter-mined by means of SLR as well as by VLBI data analysis. The scale is defined in such a way that there exists no scale factor and no scale factor rate with respect to the mean of VLBI and SLR long-term solutions as obtained by stacking their respective time series. But similar to the problems mentioned related to geocenter, SLR and VLBI suffer from systematics also affecting the scale, e.g., unknown range biases for SLR stations and unknown antenna deformations for VLBI. Due to the very limited number of co-located SLR-VLBI stations on the Earth's surface and due to the lack of a common satellite, the agreement of the SLR-and VLBIderived scales is difficult to assess, and the two techniques cannot be well calibrated against each other. In ITRF2020 the scale discrepancy between SLR and VLBI could be significantly reduced, however only selected VLBI sessions until 2013.75 and SLR observations from 1997 until 2021.0 were used due to trends and jumps with unknown nature. GEN-ESIS will probably help to reveal the reasons for them and improve the scale realization significantly. Undisclosed information about the ground calibrations of the satellite antenna Phase Center Offsets (PCO) prevented the use of GNSS for the scale determination. Thanks to the release of the Galileo phase center calibrations for both the ground (receivers) and space (satellite antennas) segment Studies have already demonstrated that the SLR-based scale can be well transferred to the GNSS network, if a satellite is used as co-location platform GENESIS will enlarge the satellite co-location to all four space geodetic techniques allowing cross-calibration of all techniques to determine a homogeneous scale. Thanks to the common platform on board GENESIS, the scale will be transferrable to all techniques, resulting in the best possible materialization of the ITRF. Geodetic VLBI uses the emission by extragalactic radio sources with well-defined positions in the sky. If it is pos-sible to transmit a quasar-like signal from an orbiting platform with a precise orbit, then we would be able to better understand biases between the CRF realized with positions of extragalactic radio sources and dynamical realizations by satellite orbits. CRF, TRF, and the Earth Orientation Parameters (EOP) that describe the transformation between these two frames are fundamental for any kind of positioning on the Earth and in space and provide most valuable information about the Earth system. The International Celestial Reference System (ICRS) is a quasi-inertial reference system defined by extragalactic radio sources, mostly quasars, billions of light years away, and is realized as International Celestial Reference Frame (ICRF) with a set of quasar coordinates with a noise floor of about 30 μas The VLBI technique provides direct access to the ICRS and is the best technique for observing the full set of EOP. Specifically, VLBI is the only technique able to determine the position of the celestial intermediate pole in the ICRF, expressed as celestial pole offsets to a conventional precession/nutation model, and the Earth's rotation angle, typically referred to as Universal Time or UT1-UTC. Table GENESIS will link all the technique frames in space (see gray rows in Table Another issue of the ICRF and ITRF is that the realizations of the frames are independent of one another. The ITRF is fixed when computing the ICRF and vice versa. The approach leads to inconsistencies that map into the EOP that connect the two frames. International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics (IUGG) Resolution Moreover, GENESIS will not only combine GNSS and VLBI, but also SLR and DORIS. Table The time variations of Earth rotation parameters contain subtle information about the mass transport in the system made up of the solid Earth, the external fluid layers, and the outer and inner core. An accurate determination of EOP has long been at the origin of challenging studies related to the Earth's interior: e.g., insights into the coupling mechanisms at core-mantle and core-inner core boundaries by inversion of nutation data Given that GENESIS will provide a direct link between the kinematic (VLBI, quasar-based) and dynamic (satellitebased) reference frames and is expected, thus, to improve the consistency of the TRF, CRF, and EOP realizations, all the above scientific domains will be positively impacted, extending thus the challenges of GENESIS well beyond its first scope. The continuous tracking of the GENESIS satellite and the connection to GNSS satellites will allow for mitigation of some technique-specific systematic effects currently observed in the GNSS-derived Earth rotation parameters. These errors come from constellation repeatability and orbital resonances between Earth rotation and satellite revolution period, as well as draconitic errors due to the limitations in the Precise Orbit Determination (POD) of GNSS satellites The sub-daily Earth rotation can be monitored using space geodetic techniques. However, the current empirical sub-daily EOP models derived from GNSS or VLBI differ from the geophysical models derived from ocean tides GENESIS, with its completely different orbit characteristics than the GNSS satellites, will introduce an ever bigger step in this direction. Therefore, the sub-daily polar motion, libration terms, or sub-daily length-of-day variations will be better understood. Due to the continuous tracking of GEN-ESIS, the derivation of sub-daily variations will be possible based on integrated observational techniques. Moreover, GENESIS will help in deriving sub-daily variations of the pole caused by the mass redistribution in the atmosphere, which are currently affected by large determination errors. Therefore, GENESIS will pave new opportunities for better understanding the sub-daily Earth rotation and relate their causes to the geophysical processes. Changes in the Earth's gravity field provide information about the redistribution of mass within the Earth system. These changes are measured with exquisite precision by dedicated gravity satellites such as GRACE-FO. Historically, geodetic tracking data (primarily SLR data, but also DORIS and GNSS) has also been used to provide information about the long-wavelength (low-degree) time-variable gravity field (e.g., GENESIS can provide independent estimates of the lowdegree Stokes coefficients based on all geodetic techniques. SLR studies and simulations showed that adding one satellite to a solution based on five SLR satellites may significantly improve the determination of the low-degree spherical harmonics of the Earth gravity field Moreover, GENESIS will be of benefit in the refinement of the Earth GM, which helps to define the scale of the TRF. The current value of 3.986 004 415 × 10 14 m 3 s -2 was determined by An exciting prospect is that the precise tracking on GEN-ESIS by multiple geodetic techniques, together with SLR tracking to the satellites LARES and LARES-2 could lead to improve Earth GM determination with a much lower uncertainty. Measurements of sea level rise over the last century (and more) have been derived from observations of sea level change as recorded by a global distribution of tide gauges. Tide gauge observations are relative observations, i.e., the changes in sea level are provided relative to the land to which they are attached. But processes such as glacial isostatic adjustment and tectonics cause the land to move in the vertical direction. To measure sea level change in a global reference frame, the tide gauges are geodetically tied to the TRF using co-located GNSS stations. Thus, the ability to observe contemporary sea level rise at global or local scales is limited by the stability of the terrestrial reference frame, i.e., the metrological basis for the determination of the vertical motions of stations on the Earth's surface. The reference frame stability is one of the major error sources in the determination of global and regional sea level rise As recognized by GGOS, sea level poses the most stringent requirements on the accuracy and stability of the TRF. In addition to the tide gauge problem outlined above, precise satellite orbits in a highly stable and accurate TRF are crucial to observe sea level using satellite radar altimetry. Since the launch of the TOPEX/Poseidon satellite in 1992, followed later by the Jason and Sentinel series of altimetry satellites, sea level variations have been routinely observed from space while tide gauges are also required to detect drifts in satellite radar altimetry data (International Altimetry Team, 2021). Moreover, it is acknowledged that the continuous improvement of satellite POD, through the precision and quality of the tracking systems, reference frame, Earth Rotation Parameters, and static and time-variable geopotential models are crucial in order to reach the specifications of altimetry missions (International Altimetry Team, 2021). To be useful in long-term sea level studies, sea level and the vertical land motion should be measured in a reference frame at least one order of magnitude more accurate than the contemporary climate change signals of 1 mm/year to 3 mm/year observed on average in sea level records, either from tide gauges or satellite radar altimetry, leading to the GGOS accuracy and stability goals. The GGOS stability goal of 0.1 mm/year of global and regional sea level variations over several decades can only be achieved by more accurate and more stable reference frame realizations, which is the primary goal of the GENESIS mission. Direct local observations and space geodetic techniques including gravimetry, radar and laser altimetry, optical and synthetic aperture radar imagery and GNSS, have provided clear evidence for large changes in the world's glaciers and ice sheets, in response to present climate change (e.g., Direct observations of glaciers and ice sheets are local and only partially resolved in time, while space observations provide insights into the cryosphere evolution at global scale and at regular timescales. Space altimetry (e.g., ICESat, ICESat-2, CryoSat-2 missions; e.g., Space geodetic techniques, in particular GNSS, provide also useful information on ice sheets and glaciers evolution, by showing the ground deformation at geodetic stations induced by local ice mass changes (e.g. It has been shown that the global ice sheet melting may induce today an accelerated CM motion, possibly up to ∼1 mm/year with respect to the CF, towards south pole along the Earth's rotational axis (e.g., An error of a few tenths of mm/year in the frame origin stability estimation is well known to have a large impact on the orbit calculations of satellites and in the water mass redistribution on the surface (See Table As mentioned before, we expect that GENESIS will improve the determination of the reference frame. Such a stable ITRF should drastically reduce the frame dependency of ice mass balance estimations. Post-Glacial Rebound, also known as GIA, is the delayed viscoelastic response of the solid Earth to unloading caused by the melting of ice after the last glacial maximum (∼13 000 years ago). The induced vertical uplift can reach more than 1 cm/year in North America and Fennoscandia, where the ice thickness was the largest. This long-term deformation depends on the ice coverage (both extent and thickness), the melt history, and the viscoelastic properties of the Earth's mantle. GIA models currently are built using various observations, from moraines to relative sea level variations, Earth's oblateness variations, length-of-day variations, etc. Vertical rebound velocities from GNSS permanent stations provide an independent but also absolute observation of the GIA in high latitudes (where there is no ice today), and improve our knowledge of the Earth's rheology at long timescales. Improving GIA models (Earth's rheology and ice history) requires better estimates of uplift rates which can only be achieved with a more precise and stable reference frame (see, e.g., GNSS time series from dense networks can be used to refine the information provided by space gravimetry missions (GRACE and GRACE-FO) at longer spatial wavelengths (see Sect. 4.1). Amplitude and spatial extent of surface water mass variations can be inferred from both vertical and horizontal deformation measurements. In particular, horizontal displacements help to refine the determination of the location and the spatial extent of the load. This elastic Earth's response to surface loads has to be separated from a longer-term deformation, which can only be obtained with a more accurate and stable reference frame as proposed by the GENESIS project. Observed ground movements at the Earth surface are manifold and related to a whole set of processes. Common and essential to all these movements are detection and monitoring to execute and develop risk assessment strategies. Natural hazards, such as earthquakes, volcanic hazards or landslides may be preceded by small displacements of the Earth's surface. Dense networks of GNSS stations in Japan, the western United States, and South America have been installed to monitor these surface displacements, related to the seismic cycle. In particular, pre-earthquake surface deformation can be related to the stress and the state of stress in the lithosphere. Surface displacements from increasing stress in the lithosphere may have small amplitudes. Therefore, a very stable and precise reference frame is required to be able to interpret these observations as reliable prediction tools for the onset of hazards versus errors in the techniques themselves. The radiative imbalance at the Top Of the Atmosphere (TOA) is the most fundamental metric to estimate the status of climate change. At equilibrium, the climate system receives as much visible energy from the sun as it emits infrared radiation towards space. Over the last decades, greenhouse gases and aerosol concentrations have been increasing in the atmosphere, blocking longwave radiation and leading to an imbalance at TOA between the incoming solar radiation and the outgoing longwave radiation The OHU can be estimated with an accuracy of a few tenths of W m -2 and thus provides an approach to estimate the mean EEI generated over the past decades by anthropogenic greenhouse gases emissions. This is possible with 2 approaches: (1) from direct in-situ measurements of temperature-salinity profiles mainly derived from the Argo float network; (2) from the thermal expansion of the ocean derived from a space geodetic approach The EEI shows time variations in response to anthropogenic emissions and natural variability like ocean-atmosphere interactions or volcanic eruptions. The coupled natural variability of the ocean and of the atmosphere leads to monthly to interannual variations of the order of a few W m -2 To reach an accuracy of ±0.1 W m -2 and a stability of ±0.02 W m -2 /year in EEI on decadal time scales an accuracy of ±0.25 mm and a stability of ±0.05 mm/year is necessary on sea level and ocean mass rates estimates at decadal time scales. This is achievable only with more accurate and more stable reference frame realizations, which is the primary goal of the GENESIS mission. The Earth's ionosphere is defined as the atmospheric layer, typically between 80 km and 1000 km altitude, where the electron density is sufficient to significantly influence the propagation of electromagnetic waves that travel into it The electron density profile is characterized by a Chapman-profile shape, with a peak at an altitude typically ranging from 200 km to 350 km. At mid and low latitudes, above the ionosphere is the plasmasphere, constituting a reservoir of cold particles (mainly electrons, protons and helium ions) that fills during the day and drains at night During the last two decades, an important number of GNSS receivers has been included on board LEO satellites orbiting at various altitudes, besides an extensive network of ground-based receivers. They continuously receive the signal broadcasted by GNSS satellites offering an excellent time and space coverage and allowing to reliably monitor the TEC above a given LEO satellite In the framework of a circular orbit at an altitude of 6000 km, as planned for the GENESIS mission (see Sect. 6.1), the plasmaspheric TEC would be very small, and even negligible. The LEO-DCB (Differential Code Biases) computation software should be able to quantify this contribution and provide, if plasmaspheric TEC contribution is actually negligible, accurate and reliable DCB values for GNSS satellites and onboard receiver. In addition to the zenith GNSS antenna, a nadir-pointing GNSS antenna would enable the observation of radiooccultation profiles of GNSS satellites, as the same manner as for dedicated missions COSMIC and COSMIC-2. Using appropriate inversion methods on such observations will provide additional electron density profiles that will benefit the ionosphere/plasmasphere community. Moreover, the high inclination of the GENESIS orbit will provide occultations above polar and sub-polar regions, which are not geographically covered by the dedicated missions COSMIC and COSMIC-2. By providing electron density profiles at polar regions, GENESIS will improve the observability and the understanding of the dynamics in this region where the ionosphere meets the solar environment. 5 Benefits for navigation sciences and metrology The positioning of stations in a GNSS network relies on global solutions of complete satellite constellations and on the simultaneous adjustment of station coordinates. These solutions involve a large number of parameters that will degrade the observability of the station coordinates, and may also introduce biases in the solutions: tropospheric propagation models, empirical solar radiation pressure parameters of the satellites, antenna characteristics such as PCO, Phase Variations (PV), which may or may not be adjusted. In a global GNSS solution, the clock biases of the transmitters and receivers must be managed. Regardless of the strategy used (estimation or differentiation), the resulting information for the geometry is the same. The result is a significant reduction in the observability of the Earth's center of mass, i.e. the origin of the reference frame Some improvements could be achieved if the GENESIS onboard oscillator can be modeled with sufficient accuracy over long periods (typically one day), allowing a drastic reduction in the impact of receiver-related clock parameters. A comparison of the onboard USO to ground atomic clocks could be achieved thanks to an A-LRR (see Sec. 6.2). For example, a model of the USO on board Jason-2 satellite was developed thanks to the Time Transfer by Laser Link (T2L2) instrument The frame scale factor is also directly connected to the transmitters' and receivers' PCO/PV characteristics. For the ground receivers, independent calibration methods are used by the International GNSS Service. For the transmitters, only Galileo provides calibrations performed on ground before launch. It has been shown that this has an important impact on the observed scale factor. The GENESIS satellite, carrying a GNSS receiver, can provide a lot of information about the scale and the motion of the geocenter (see Sect. 3.3 for more details). Therefore, careful design of the GENESIS platform is required to minimize the sensitivity of the dynamic modeling to external effects such as direct and reflected solar radiation pressure. For the measurement of long-term variations of these accelerations, the currently used accelerometer technology, which requires a posteriori calibration, is not suitable. Contributions to the performance of GNSS by GENESIS will include the following: 1 The well-calibrated satellite platform will provide local tie vectors in space between physical antenna phase centres allowing for a high-precision linking of GNSS observations with the other space geodetic techniques, referencing GNSS positioning results to a well-defined reference frame (see The satellite antenna provides a clean absolute reference for accurate and consistent calibration of the transmitting antennas of all GNSS satellites, without atmospheric propagation errors. In the case of Galileo, the antenna phase maps measured on the ground will allow a better validation of these calibrations (see Sect. 5.2). Pseudo-range biases will also be observed with much better accuracy due to the reduction of ionospheric pseudo-range errors (see Conventionally a mechanical reference point is defined for each GNSS antenna while the actual transmitting or receiving point might differ by up to few centimeters. For the receiving antenna these PCOs and direction-dependent phase variations have been discussed since the early 1990's leading to sophisticated calibration methods A totally independent method to estimate scale-free GNSS PCOs is given via the usage of space-based GNSS observations and the gravitational constraints from the orbital dynamics of the corresponding low Earth orbiter As the antennas of GENESIS will be fully calibrated together with the entire satellite structure, this mission offers a pure absolute reference for a precise and consistent calibration of the transmit antennas of all GNSS satellites, including Galileo and BeiDou. The orbiting geodetic observatory thus offers the possibility to determine consistent GNSS transmit phase patterns without relying on a scale from external sources, thus providing GNSS with the capability to contribute independently to the realization of the scale of the terrestrial reference frame GENESIS will provide a breakthrough in space geodesy and by this will contribute to improving the accuracy of many satellite orbits, and consequently, the accuracy of the parameters that these satellites observe. POD is an integral part of analyzing the data of numerous Earth science missions and of inter-planetary space probes. Prominent examples of past, present and future missions devoted to Earth observation are radar altimetry missions such as TOPEX/Poseidon, Jason-1, -2, -3, Sentinel-3, and Sentinel-6A, laser altimetry missions such as ICESat-1 and -2, gravity missions such as CHAMP, GRACE, GOCE, and GRACE-FO, and many other missions such as the SAR/InSAR missions TerraSAR-X, TanDEM-X, and Sentinel-1, the magnetic field mission Swarm or further satellites of the Copernicus Earth observation program of the European Union. All above mentioned missions significantly rely on POD, some of them even critically, as the quality of the science products may directly depend on the accuracy of the orbit determination, e.g., requiring a radial orbit accuracy of 15 mm with a goal of 10 mm for the science products of Sentinel-6A Similar to the orbit determination of the GENESIS spacecraft, POD of any other Earth science spacecraft refers to the positioning of the satellite CoM in a TRF. POD thereby occurs across a range of time-scales: near-real-time, intermediate latency, and longer latency for mission science products and climate data records. Missions with stringent accuracy requirements on POD usually employ multiple and independent POD payloads for this purpose. Onboard GNSS receivers, DORIS receivers, and SLR reflectors are used to improve the quality and robustness of the orbit determination and to enable cross calibrations (e.g., Usually GNSS data provide one of the strongest POD contributions due to the almost continuous tracking of allin-view GNSS satellites. As the quality of GNSS-based POD critically depends on a proper modeling of systematic errors, e.g., phase centre variations of the GNSS receiver and transmitter antennas (see GENESIS will also benefit the DORIS, SLR and VLBI techniques. For DORIS, the limiting error source at present is the USO sensitivity to radiation-induced perturbations, particularly while traversing the South Atlantic Anomaly The GENESIS spacecraft will provide an additional platform to isolate residual biases in the ranging systems of SLR stations (e.g., Provided that the locations of the spacecraft CoM and of the individual POD sensors are all known in the respective satellite body-fixed frame with sufficient accuracy from prelaunch assessments, it will, therefore, be possible to translate the high precision of the GNSS, DORIS, and SLR data collected by Earth science spacecraft into mm-accurate satellite positions expressed in the highly accurate and long-term stable reference frame provided by GENESIS. The International Astronomical Union recommended to introduce the General Theory of Relativity as the theoretical background for the definition of space-time reference systems 6 Mission design and instruments The GENESIS high level Mission Objectives have been defined as follows: • Obj-1: Improve ITRF accuracy and stability by providing in-orbit co-location and necessary combined processing of the four space geodetic techniques that contribute to its realization, namely GNSS, SLR, DORIS and VLBI, on a highly calibrated and stable platform. The goal is to contribute to the achievement of the GGOS objectives for the ITRF realisation, aiming for a parameter accuracy of 1 mm and a stability of 0.1 mm/year to the GGOS, in order to provide significant scientific benefits in Earth modelling. • Obj-2: To improve, compared to the current state of the art, the operational time and frequency transfer and synchronisation globally. Target performance 10 ps in time transfer and 10 -18 for relative frequency transfer. Thanks to the onboard VLBI, which is the only geodetic technique allowing access to the ICRF, GENESIS shall also allow obtaining a direct link between the ITRF and the ICRF (differencing the radio signal emitted by GENESIS with the signals from the fixed quasar radio sources). The CDF study identified initial high-level Mission Requirements, given in Table 1. The need of a Very Precise onboard Metrology (calibrated ties): the offset between each payload and the satellite CoM shall be known with accuracies < 1 mm. Offset stability shall remain within 1 mm-level during the whole duration of the mission. (requiring adequate thermoelastic materials; extremely accurate on-ground calibration tests; etc). 2. A common time reference for all onboard instruments shall be ensured (all geodetic instruments shall be referenced and synchronized to each other) GENESIS shall be able to determine the orbit with accuracies at mm level (< 1 cm) (excellent GNSS POD, requiring high success rate Integer ambiguity resolution and a very accurate radiation pressure model of the GENESIS satellite). 4. Simultaneous operation of Geodetic techniques, guaranteeing the maximum contemporary use of the 4 onboard geodetic techniques (and at least 2 at all times) with best possible performances. As a result of the different optimisations performed at the CDF, it has been concluded that a suitable compromise in terms of POD and contribution of each technique results to be a 6000 km circular orbit with quasi-polar inclination. This is selected as baseline orbit for GENESIS (ref. SS-01 from Table The adoption of the circular orbit is compatible with requirement SS-11 from Table To reach this orbit two concepts have been conceived, within the program boundaries: • Satellite launched with VEGA-C in a sun-synchronous orbit in a piggyback configuration and the satellite being raised to the 6000 km using electrical propulsion; • Direct injection into 6000 km orbit using a direct dedicated launch with several potential options being considered (e.g., Rocket Factory launcher, ISAR Aerospace launcher, a combined launch with Ariane 62/Galileo). Depending on the launch option two different solutions have been defined with resulting satellite masses (wet) around 375 kg (electrical propulsion option) and 218 kg (Direct injection option). The study has been instantiated for a generic platform, based on the PROBA-V concept, although it is concluded that several other platform options may be considered, resulting in the satellite dimensions shown in Figure The current realisation of the ITRF is based on a multitechnique approach that suitably combines different observing methods taking advantage of their peculiar strengths. In particular, the frame origin is materialised by means of SLR observations; the frame scale is based on the average contribution of SLR and VLBI; DORIS disseminates the frame information to radar altimetry missions; and finally GNSS participates in a large number of ground ties, contributes to establishing and maintaining the conventional frame orientation and is essential to distribute the frame to a large community of users (see Sect. 3 for more details). Therefore, GENESIS will carry on board the payloads of all these space geodetic techniques, exploiting their co-location on a Table The GENESIS mission shall be designed to achieve the main mission objective Obj-1, through the colocation in space of the following 4 geodetic techniques: GNSS, VLBI, SLR, DORIS. 002 The GENESIS mission should be designed to achieve the main mission objective Obj-2, for operational time and frequency transfer and synchronisation 003 The mission shall comply with the space debris mitigation regulations 004 The casualty risk for the mission shall not exceed 1 in 10000 for any re-entry event (controlled or uncontrolled). If the predicted casualty risk for an uncontrolled re-entry exceeds this value, an uncontrolled re-entry is not allowed and a targeted controlled re-entry shall be performed in order not to exceed a risk level of 1 in 10000 005 The mission shall comply with the space debris mitigation requirements in the nominal and also in the failure case 006 The mission operational lifetime shall be at least 3 years, as a minimum, excluding LEOP, commissioning and disposal 007 The GENESIS mission should be designed for a development time of 3 to 4 years 008 The GENESIS mission should target a launch date in 2027 009 Use of high-Technical Readiness Level, demonstrated instruments and payloads shall be preferred, whenever possible. 010 Maximum re-use of existing facilities at ESA and ESA Member States 011 The satellite should be launched into an orbit capable to fulfil the mission and payload requirements. A small satellite platform should be targeted 013 The satellite platform shall be able to accommodate all the GENESIS payloads associated to the geodetic techniques. Additionally, the platform should host the other enabling subsystems, as needed (and optional payloads as appropriate). 014 The platform nominal lifetime shall be at least 4 years. 015 The offset between each payload and the satellite CoM shall be known with accuracy of 1 mm. Offset stability shall remain within 1 mm level during the whole duration of the mission 016 The CoM position should be known with 1 mm accuracy in the satellite reference frame. 017 The satellite shall have a Nadir-pointing face for the whole mission duration, with a pointing accuracy less than 1 degree and a pointing stability of 0.1 degree along the whole orbit. 018 The satellite platform shall be able to operate at the least 2 geodetic techniques in parallel at all times. 019 Attitude determination shall be maintained at all times with accuracy below 0.1 degree. 020 The POD will have to be able to determine the orbit with an accuracy better than 1 cm. POD is also affected by optical and thermal material properties (absorption, reflection and such) of the satellite outer surfaces to make an accurate radiation pressure model of the satellite. This has to be taken into account in CDF in particular with respect to impact on costs. 021 The S/C shall be able to download a volume of science data as follows:GNSS tracking data (1Hz) 0.2 GB/day; DORIS tracking data (0.1 Hz) 0.04 GB/day; Active SLR (SLR related, for synchronization between a ground clock linked to a laser station and a clock on board the satellite) 0.05 GB/day; accelerometer 0.002 GB/day 022 To provide the link with current ITRF realizations, the selected orbit shall be accessible by the established global tracking networks of the different techniques 023 VLBI shall be visible for 20 % time from at the least 2 VLBI stations separated by 10 000 km 024 The GENESIS Payloads are: GNSS receiver, VLBI transmitter, a DORIS Receiver and a SLR retroreflector. A common time reference for all onboard instruments 026 An accelerometer for measuring the non-gravitational accelerations, contributing to POD should be included highly calibrated platform to further improve the ITRF accuracy and stability. The first ever co-location of VLBI with all satellite geodetic techniques will also strengthen the integration of Earth geometry and rotation. GENESIS will be equipped with an array of passive SLR retroreflectors (P-LRR), a VLBI transmitter, one DORIS and a GNSS receiver (baseline configuration accounts for 2 GNSS Rx in cold redundancy connected to 2 sets of antennas on the nadir and zenith faces). The DORIS instrument and GNSS Rx will require specific adaptations to fly on a 6000 km orbit. The additional installation of an Active Laser Retro-Reflector (A-LRR) device is also examined to allow accurate time transfer between SLR ground stations. At this stage, the A-LRR is considered as an optional payload, but it is considered highly desirable and easy to be integrated as part of the baseline given its reduce mass/power requirements (< 1 kg; < 1 W). All active payloads will rely on a single time standard, realized by a USO connected to a time distribution unit. An additional optional payload considered for GENESIS mission is the integration of an onboard accelerometer, to further support high-precision orbit determination, the modelling of non-conservative forces and allowing also in-orbit determination of the satellite CoM (with several existing and under evolution instruments being identified in Europe). The design of the satellite and instruments integration is shown in Figure In the framework of a potential international collaboration with NASA, an assessment has also been made on the possible integration of the NASA Geodetic Reference Instrument Transponder for Small Satellites (GRITTS) instrument. This instrument combines a GPS receiver and VLBI transmitter. The GRITSS concept is to upconvert the received GNSS signal and transponding it to VLBI stations (1-way biased range). This approach does not require the satellite to have a view of more than one VLBI station at a time, allowing it to be in LEO but could be adapted to MEO orbit as well. If agreed to be included, it would increase the redundancy of geodetic payloads, and would support the simultaneous testing of different approaches for satellite VLBI. The CDF GENESIS feasibility assessment has covered all GENESIS mission technical and programmatic aspects, including: system analysis; orbit options; mission analysis; chemical propulsion; electrical propulsion; AOCS; communications; data handling; power; thermal; structures; radiation; risks and programmatics; costs. A detailed CDF GENESIS Report is currently under conclusion. A public version of this CDF Report will also be available. As a main result of the ESA CDF assessment, the GEN-ESIS Mission has been confirmed to be feasible within the ESA FutureNAV defined program Boundaries, with a target launch date in 2027 (assuming the program is started in Q1 2023). The SLR observable is the round-trip time of flight of a laser pulse between a ground station and a target equipped with a Laser Retro-Reflector. Timing and time transfer techniques are at the heart of this activity. This technique makes a fundamental contribution to the establishment of the ITRF, thanks to a network of observatories spread over a large part of the globe, the International Laser Ranging Satellite Network (see Sect. 3 for more details). The majority of satellites tracked by the International Laser Ranging Service (ILRS) carry P-LRR. The size, the number and the arrangement of Corner Cube laser Retro-reflector are a compromise between the link budget at the given satellite altitude, the orbit eccentricity and the metrological performances. Corner Cube laser Retro-reflector can be arranged spherically, e.g., in LAGEOS, LAGEOS-2 and LARES-2 (which are premiere geodetic satellites of the ILRS) or as a flat panel as for the Galileo satellites (ILRS Website, 2018). Spherical arrays give the best accuracies. For example, LARES-2 (40 cm diameter, ∼ 300 kg mass) is a P-LRR delivered by the Italian Space Agency designed to achieve a SLR accuracy of 1 mm (compared to the 5 mm of LAGEOS). It was launched successfully by ESA on July 13, 2022, with the qualification flight of the Vega C and it was successfully tracked by the ILRS SLR network from July 14. Another spherical P-LRR of significantly reduced size (∼ 10 cm) and mass (kg level) compared to LARES-2 has been designed to achieve a SLR accuracy of 2 mm for LEO satellites to be launched from 2024. Alternatively, an A-LRR can synchronise ground-based atomic clocks at intercontinental distances using standard satellite laser ranging techniques. An A-LRR allows the precise determination of the onboard clock and the monitoring of its behaviour in the space environment (gravity field, radiation, temperature) as a supplement to the POD provided by the conventional SLR. Such an idea has been demonstrated by SLR ground stations with the T2L2 instrument on board the Jason-2 satellite An A-LRR on board GENESIS would allow: • to benefit from a modern retro-reflector designed to achieve millimeter accuracy and metrologically attached to the other space geodetic instruments; • be able to perform ground-to-space and ground-toground frequency and time transfers with an extended common view compared to T2L2 and ACES missions by taking advantage of the higher altitude of the satellite; • to compare GNSS and laser time transfer techniques with an uncertainty below 100 ps; • to be able to accurately monitor the behaviour of the onboard clock for precise orbitography. The P-LRR is typically less expensive than an A-LRR counterpart. Being completely passive, is does not use any resources on board GENESIS (except its mass and volume envelope). A combination of both a P-LRR and A-LRR would provide all combined benefits, as well as the sum of the resources and mass/volume envelopes needed on board GENESIS. Observations to distant radio sources, such as quasars, with the VLBI technique enable the determination of a spacefixed celestial reference frame like the ICRF with its current realization ICRF3 The fundamental VLBI measurements are signal delay observations of the incoming radio signals between pairs of tracking stations. Over time, and using multiple distant radio sources, these measurements enable the determination of the baseline vectors between pairs of stations. The orientation of these vectors in the CRF defines the Earth orientation in that frame. The lengths of these vectors, known to millimeter accuracy, critically contribute to the determination of the scale of the ITRF One of the unique features of GENESIS is the VLBI Transmitter (VT) that will accurately connect geodetic VLBI stations through a space-tie to the other geodetic techniques. The VT instrument will transmit signals in different frequency bands in order to eliminate the ionospheric dispersive delay along the paths to each observing VLBI station, and comply with the evolving observations procedures at all VLBI stations. The signals can be observed by all geodetic VLBI stations, including the new VLBI Global Observing System (VGOS) fast slewing stations that are coming online, in their standard geodetic receiver setups. The VT will exploit the full extent of the frequency bands allocated on a worldwide co-primary basis to the Earth exploration satellite service through the International Telecommunications Union Radio-communication Sector. The ultra-low-power density signals of the VT will be well below the applicable coordination thresholds, ensuring easy compatibility with ITU rules. Using the conventional VLBI technique of correlating received signals across baselines it will be possible not only to determine the baseline vectors, as in conventional VLBI, but also the absolute geocentric position of the receiving sites. VLBI observations of GENESIS will therefore enable these stations to be accurately located within the GENESIS TRF consistently with the other geodetic techniques, enable a frame tie between the celestial frame and the dynamic reference frames of satellite orbits as well as a frame tie between the GENESIS TRF and the extremely accurate and stable inertial celestial frame. A European VT, compatible with the accommodation constraints on board the Galileo satellite, performance of the receiving stations as well as with the ITU regulations in all transmission frequency bands is currently under development for consideration of Galileo second generation satellites (H2020 HSNAV Website, 2020). The VT is currently designed to transmit at different frequencies between 2 GHz to 14 GHz but also higher frequency bands can be considered. The present setup for regular VGOS observations use four 1 GHz wide bands within the S, C, and X frequency bands. Discussions of including higher frequencies in Ka band is ongoing in order to maximise the covered signal bandwidth since the VLBI estimates of group delay is approximated by the reciprocal of the observed bandwidth. It may be possible to investigate linking the ICRF across frequency bands using the GENESIS satellite as a well-calibrated multi-frequency target. The VT is designed to transmit both pseudo-noise and random noise. The random noise signal mimics the broader-band noise emitted by quasar radio sources routinely observed by VLBI, hence can be processed by essentially the usual station software. The required and projected precision of phase measurement supported by the VT are 0.1 mm and 0.01 mm, respectively, for 1 second observable (see The feasibility of a dedicated VLBI transmitter on board future Galileo satellites and the assessment of the impact of quality and quantity of satellite observations on the derived geodetic parameters were studied recently by various authors (see Observations of quasars and GENESIS satellite within the same sessions will provide the geodetic community with a great opportunity for directly linking the dynamical reference frame of satellite orbits to the quasi-inertial reference frame of extra-galactic radio sources and redefining the role of VLBI in space geodesy. The first objective of the GENESIS mission is to contribute to the achievement of the GGOS accuracy and stability goals concerning the ITRS realization, aiming for 1 mm and 0.1 mm/year, respectively. To this aim, GENESIS will provide in-orbit co-location of the four space geodetic techniques: GNSS, SLR, DORIS, and VLBI, on a highly calibrated and stable platform. We have shown in this article the primary and critical importance of the International Terrestrial Reference Frame (ITRF) and associated geodetic infrastructure and products for many scientific applications in Earth and navigation sci- (National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine, 2020) ences. This is illustrated in Figure In addition, the ITRF improvements strengthen the geodetic infrastructure, including the Galileo constellation, by reducing biases and errors between different techniques. GENESIS will be complementary and enhance the products of several other missions such as gravimetry and altimetry satellites. The addition of optional payloads such as an Active Laser Retro-Reflector (A-LRR) and an accelerometer can pave the way for very interesting and complementary objectives in navigation and time/frequency metrology. The crucial necessity of an accurate and stable realization of ITRS is endorsed by a large community of scientists and industries as well as various authorities, including the IAG and the UN. Finally, a study by the CDF of ESA has demonstrated the feasibility of the GENESIS mission within the ESA FutureNAV defined program boundaries, with a targeted launch date in 2027. 