Gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) are increasingly used for their thermoplasmonic properties, i.e. their ability to convert light into heat upon plasmon resonance. However, measuring temperature gradients generated at the microscale by assemblies of AuNPs remains challenging, especially when they are randomly distributed in three dimensions. Here, we introduce a label-free thermometry approach, combining optical wavefront microscopy and numerical simulations, to infer the heating power dissipated by a three-dimensional model system consisting in emulsion microdroplets loaded with AuNPs. This approach gives access to the temperature reached in the core of droplets upon irradiation without need of extrinsic calibration. These quantitative results are validated qualitatively via the observation of the phase transition of a thermoresponsive polymer added in the droplet as an in situ thermal probe. This versatile thermometry approach is promising for non-invasive temperature measurements in various three-dimensional microsystems involving AuNPs as colloidal heat sources, such as several light-responsive drug delivery systems. When localized in gold nanoparticles (AuNPs), light-excited surface plasmons quickly dissipate energy under the form of heat, making AuNPs efficient light-to-heat converters at the nanoscale. Among quantitative phase imaging techniques, cross-grating wavefront microscopy (CGM), also known as quadriwave lateral shearing interferometry in the literature, is a diffractionbased wavefront imaging technique that has several advantages: it benefits from high signal/noise ratio and high spatio-temporal resolution, and it is compact and very little sensitive to environmental perturbations. In this paper, we demonstrate the capability of CGM to provide label-free in situ microscale temperature measurements in a three-dimensional thermoplasmonic system, by combining CGM measurements and simulation-based inference of temperature fields. We illustrate this approach on water droplets loaded with randomly dispersed AuNPs in their volume, and dispersed in an oil phase. This system constitutes a relevant model of complex three-dimensional thermoplasmonic source since (i) the calculation of a thermal Green's function for a random distribution of several thousands of AuNPs is essentially ruled out, and (ii) the geometry of the system (spherical microdroplets) is well defined and suitable for heat transfer numerical simulations. In addition, emulsion droplets loaded with AuNPs is a versatile system that has been recently used for droplet manipulation, The system under study is a water-in-fluorinated oil emulsion in which the water droplets were loaded with 50-nm gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) at a concentration of 0.5 g/L (2.2 × 10 -3 vol%). To preserve the integrity of the droplets, especially against heat-induced destabilization, the water/oil interface was stabilized by interfacial complexation For cross-grating wavefront microscopy (CGM) imaging experiments the emulsion was injected in a rectangle glass capillary (Materials and Methods in SI). Since water is less dense than the continuous oil phase, the droplets were lying onto the upper internal side of the capillary (Figure By quantitatively measuring wavefront distortions of the imaging light as it propagates through the sample, CGM maps the optical path difference (OPD, denoted δl) created by the imaged object. From a physical point of view, the OPD corresponds to the integral of the local variation of refractive index n -n e (where n and n e are the indices of the object and its environment respectively) over the sample thickness, i.e. δl = ∫(n (z) -n e )dz -assuming that light propagates along the z axis (this assumption being essentially valid in the oil phase, and for light passing through the upper cap of the droplets). In this work, all the OPD values measured were negative (as heating induces a decrease of refractive indices), but have been converted into positive values in data treatment and figures for convenience. In the case of the sample described in Figure Since OPD images are generated by integration of wavefront gradients up to a constant, they come along with an arbitrary offset. Ideally, this offset could be determined by measuring the OPD infinitely far from the droplet (where there is no temperature increase) and setting it as the origin of OPD (δl = 0). However, due to the limited field of view of the microscope and the longrange temperature profile (slowly varying as 1/r), we could not capture a large enough image to easily determine the proper OPD origin. Consequently, an offset was arbitrarily set to the experimental OPD values so that it equals zero at ~ 50 μm from the droplet center, as shown in the radial profiles plotted in Figure Because the AuNPs were uniformly distributed within the core of the droplet, we considered this latter as a uniform heat source dissipating a heating power Q (Figure Figure Performing these numerical simulations for different heating powers Q eventually gave a direct correlation between heating power, temperature, and OPD values (e.g., the correlation between the heating power and the maximum/mean temperature rise in the droplet core is shown in Figure When fed with the appropriate inferred values of heating power, simulations provided numerical profiles that nicely fitted the experimental OPD decay observed in the oil phase (Figure In summary, this article introduces a label-free thermometry approach that enables the measurement of in situ temperature fields generated at the microscale by three-dimensional thermoplasmonic sources upon laser excitation. This technique is based on the measurement of heat-induced variations of optical path difference (OPD) in the sample by cross-grating wavefront microscopy. This approach was tested on a model system consisting in emulsion droplets loaded with gold nanoparticles, for which the thermoplasmonic-induced OPD signature cannot be straightforwardly converted into temperature values using analytical tools. Numerical simulations of steady-state heat transfers were used to predict the relationship between optical path difference and temperature fields in the geometry of the system. A simulation-based inference protocol comparing experimental and numerical data eventually yields the temperature effectively reached in the experimental conditions. Typically, this approach enabled to measure temperature rises of 15 °C in ~30-μm droplets under laser excitation up to 20 μW/μm2. The droplets were also loaded with an extrinsic thermosensitive probe, namely a water-soluble thermoresponsive polymer exhibiting a collapse transition towards microaggregates at 33 °C. Experimentally, this transition was observed when the temperature measured by our quantitative approach precisely exceeded 33 °C, confirming its potential for accurate in situ thermometry. Being non-invasive, label-free, robust, and versatile, we believe that this approach based on wavefront microscopy could be applied to many three-dimensional thermoplasmonic sources, including soft and biological systems loaded with AuNPs such as hydrogels, ASSOCIATED CONTENT Supporting Information. Detailed experimental procedures (including the synthesis of PLL-g-PNIPAM, the formulation of the emulsions, and details on the wavefront microscopy set-up) and supplementary Figures Poly(L-lysine) hydrobromide (PLL, 15-30 kDa), (N-hydroxysuccinimidyl ester)-terminated poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAM-NHS, 2 kDa), and Fluorinert FC-70 oil were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Krytox 157 FS(L) (MW = 2.5 kDa) was purchased from Samaro. Econix TM gold nanoparticles coated with 40 kDa poly(vinyl pyrrolidone) (50 nm diameter, 5 mg/mL in water) were purchased from nanoComposix. Unless otherwise noticed, all chemicals were used without further purification. PLL-g-PNIPAM was prepared according to a protocol described in Ref [1]. Briefly, PLL hydrobromide (MW = 15-30 kg/mol, 15 mg) was dissolved in sodium tetraborate buffer (5 mL, pH = 8.5). PNIPAM-NHS (MW = 2 kg/mol, 48 mg) was then added and the solution was stirred at 4 °C until complete dissolution of the polymer. Then, the solution was stirred for an additional 4h at room temperature. The resulting solution was dialyzed against deionized water for 3 days in a Thermo Scientific Slide-A-Lyzer cassette (3-12 mL, MW cutoff = 3.5 kDa) and finally freezedried for 2 days in a Labconco Freezone Plus 2.5 apparatus. The effective grafting ratio in the final PLL-g-PNIPAM was around 0.20. The turbidimetry curve was deduced from the measurement of the transmittance of a polymer solution in the visible range. Transmittance spectra were recorded on a single cell Thermo Scientific Evolution Array UV-Vis spectrophotometer equipped with a Peltier temperaturecontrolled cell holder (+/-0.1 °C). The solution of PLL-g-PNIPAM (at 20 g/L) was injected in a 150 μL quartz micro-cuvette (length 1 cm) and submitted to an increase of temperature from 20 °C to 60 °C by steps of 2 °C. A spectrum was recorded at every step temperature after 3 min thermalization, and the mean transmittance between 650 and 750 nm was used to plot the turbidimetry curve. 4. Formulation of the emulsions 5 vol% water-in-oil emulsions were prepared as follows: 5 μL of aqueous phase (containing PLLg-PNIPAM at 20 g/L, and AuNPs at 0.5 g/L in 7.7 mM phosphate buffer, pH = 7.3) and 95 μL of FC-70 oil phase (containing Krytox at 0.5 g/L) were mixed in a 0.5 mL Eppendorf tube and manually emulsified until the mixture became turbid. For microscopy experiments, a few μL of emulsion were injected in a hollow rectangle capillary (H × W = 0.1 × 1 mm, CMScientific) previously coated with PLL-g-PEG (incubated at 1 g/L in 7.7 mM phosphate buffer) to prevent the breakage of water droplets at the contact with bare glass side. After injection of the emulsion, the capillary was sealed with Vitrex putty. Cross-grating wavefront microscopy (CGM) was performed on a home-made optical set-up (see Figure Figure For CGM experiments, the emulsion was diluted to get quasi-isolated droplets, at least at the scale of the imaging field of view. Heat transfer simulations were performed with COMSOL Multiphysics ® . The simulation domain was defined as an oil layer (length = 1000 μm, thickness = 100 μm) sandwiched between two glass spherical caps (radius of the cap base = 1000 μm, height = 500 μm). An isolated water droplet (radius R) was placed in the oil phase, and was flattened over a distance e at the contact with the upper capillary side to match the experimental observation shown in Figure The simulation provided side-view cross-section temperature maps that could be converted into maps of variation of refractive index, whose integration along the height of the capillary eventually generated radial OPD profiles. 4. Estimation of the heating power dissipated in the experiments. To estimate the relevant range of heat power to be set in the simulation, the heat power experimentally generated in the droplets was derived from simple order of magnitude considerations regarding the formulation of the droplets and the conditions of irradiation. We assumed that the total heat power Q which was dissipated in a droplet was the sum of the heat power dissipated by each individual AuNP loaded in the droplet. Hence, in a droplet of volume V containing a concentration of AuNPs C AuNPs (0.5 g/L = 0.45 NP/μm 3 according to the datasheet) and uniformly irradiated by an irradiance I, Q was estimated by the following formula: Q = C AuNPs Vσ abs I, where σ abs is the absorption cross-section of a single AuNP, which is equal to 6 × 10 -3 nm 2 for a AuNP with a diameter of 50 nm. The (dn/dT) coefficient of FC-70 oil was measured using cross-grating wavefront microscopy. Briefly, a 12 μm-deep crater etched in a glass slide was filled with oil. An OPD image of the crater was taken at different temperatures upon heating between room temperature (22 °C) and 105 °C (Figure n O = n air + δl/h, with n air = 1.00 the refractive index of the air, h = 12 μm the depth of the crater. The evolution of n O with the temperature is shown in Figure Reminding that, by convention, the OPD was taken in absolute values in this work, we add a conventional minus sign in the equation, and rewrite it as: -δl = α + dn w dT β where α = The discrepancy between simulated and experimental OPD values in the droplet core (Figure - 