Since the preliminary work of Anisimov and co-workers, the Hubbard corrected DFT+U functional has been used for predicting properties of correlated materials by applying on-site effective Coulomb interactions to specific orbitals. However, the determination of the Hubbard U parameter has remained under intense discussion despite the multitude of approaches proposed. Here, we define a selection criterion based on the use of polaronic defect states for the enforcement of the piecewise linearity of the total energy upon electron occupation. A good agreement with results from piecewise linear hybrid functionals is found for the electronic and structural properties of polarons, including the formation energies. The values of U determined in this way are found to give a robust description of the polaron energetics upon variation of the considered state. In particular, we also address a polaron hopping pathway, finding that the determined value of U leads to accurate energetics without requiring a configurational-dependent U. It is emphasized that the selection of U should be based on physical properties directly associated with the orbitals to which U is applied, rather than on more global properties such as band gaps and band widths. For comparison, we also determine U through a well-established linear-response scheme finding noticeably different values of U and consequently different formation energies. Possible origins of these discrepancies are discussed. As case studies, we consider the self-trapped electron in BiVO4, the self-trapped hole in MgO, the Li-trapped hole in MgO, and the Al-trapped hole in α-SiO2. Density functional theory (DFT) including a Hubbard U correction has been largely used to overcome limitations of standard DFT for correlated systems [1-10]. However, the parameter U associated with an effective on-site Coulomb interaction on selected orbitals needs to be selected. In 2005, Cococcioni and de Gironcoli introduced a nonempirical linear-response approach based on density-functional perturbation theory In the linear-response approach of Cococcioni and de Gironcoli Localized states represent a prototypical case for enforcing the PWL. For instance, for hybrid functionals, this can be achieved by using either electron probes Hence, it is of interest to investigate whether such robustness can be used to validate the determination of U in DFT+U functionals. In this work, we determine the Hubbard parameter U by using polaronic defect states to explicitly enforce the piecewise linearity of the total energy upon electron occupation. We achieve electron densities, lattice distortions, and formation energies in accord with results from piecewise linear hybrid functionals, thereby validating the accuracy of the method. The resulting energetics is accurate also for polaron hoppings, whereby the use of configurational-dependent U values can be avoided. In this approach, the selection of U is based on physical properties that are directly associated with the orbitals to which U is applied, without involving more global properties, such as band gaps and density of states. For comparison, we also calculate U values through a widely-used linear-response approach The DFT+U energy functional can be written in its simplified rotationally-invariant form as (1) where E 0 is the semilocal energy, ψ U iσ are the wave functions, n U σ = i |ψ U iσ | is the total density, σ the spin index, U the Hubbard parameter, I the atomic site, and n Iσ the occupation matrix of localized orbitals φ I m of state index m, which is defined as where f iσ are the occupations of the Kohn-Sham orbitals. Variational minimization of the energy functional E U leads to the following equations: where H 0 σ is the PBE Hamiltonian, U iσ are the eigenvalues, and V U σ is the DFT+U potential given by [13] From Eq. ( We here consider enforcing the PWL through polaronic defect states associated with the orbitals subject to the correction U . The PWL can then be determined nonempirically by finding the value U = U k such that the concavity of the total energy upon partial electron occupation vanishes, namely where q is the fractional charge. Through Janak's theorem, the condition in Eq. ( which requires the energy level to be independent of electron occupation. Equation ( where ψ U k p is the wave function of the localized state and d 0 p /dq the variation of the energy level with q as calculated with PBE. We remark that the second term on the right-hand side of Eq. ( For a Hubbard parameter U , the formation energy of the defect state is calculated as where E U (Q) and E U ref (0) are the total energies of the defect state and of the reference system, respectively, and U b is the relevant band edge of the pristine system. In Eq. ( As case studies, we consider self-trapped and impuritytrapped polaronic defects. In particular, we take the selftrapped electron in BiVO 4 the O atoms surrounding the impurity. At variance, for the polaronic defects under consideration, DFT+U can stabilize the localized states. We apply the U correction to the orbitals that constitute the localized states, namely the 3d orbitals of V atoms in BiVO 4 , the 2p orbitals of O atoms in MgO, and the 2p orbitals of O atoms in α-SiO 2 . In BiVO 4 , the self-trapped electron localizes on a V atom. In MgO, the self-trapped hole localizes on a O atom. In Li-doped MgO, the hole localizes on a O atom neighbouring the Li site. In α-SiO 2 , the hole localizes on a O atom neighbouring the Al site. Additional computational details are given in Methods. We determine the Hubbard parameter U k through the enforcement of Eq. ( It is of interest to investigate the band gaps resulting from our selection of U . In Fig. g ) compared to reference experimental values after adding appropriate corrections (∆Eg) taken from Ref. We further investigate the accuracy of the DFT+U k energetics along a polaron hopping pathway. As test case, we consider the hopping of a hole polaron between two neighboring sites in MgO. We construct a 7-image migration pathway through linear interpolation of the initial and final states. First, we evaluate the energy along the path using the determined value of U k , as given in Fig. for each image. As illustrated in Fig. For comparison, we also determine U using the linearresponse approach introduced by Cococcioni and de Gironcoli where χ and χ 0 are screened and unscreened response matrices, respectively, which are defined as variations of the occupations n I = σm n Iσ mm with respect to perturbations α J of the electronic occupations at site J. We determine U lr on neutral bulk structures using the PBE wave functions. We find U lr = 5.4, 10.9, 10.1 eV for BiVO 4 , MgO, and α-SiO 2 , respectively. The resulting formation energies of the polaronic defects studied in this work are E Ulr f = -1.34, -1.67, 3.09, and -4.00 eV, as given in Table BiVO4 (self-trapped) 3. of U . Additionally, we remark that our U k is found for a Hubbard correction acting on all the atoms of the same species at the same time, whereas in the linear-response approach U lr is found through a variation on a single atom. Hence, for an even closer comparison, we also determine the value U k by enforcing the PWL upon the application of U to the sole atom where the polaron localizes. In the case of the hole polaron in MgO, we find U k = 8.5 eV, which still differs sizably from U lr = 9.4 eV. This further confirms that the differences between the two methods are not only related to the computational setup. The significant differences between U k and U lr call for a deeper investigation. Since both approaches are designed to enforce the PWL, we explicitly verify the extent by which the PWL is satisfied in the two schemes. This can be achieved by studying the total energy and the defect level as a function of q for the two choices of the parameter U . As illustrated in Fig. where α I is the amplitude of the perturbation, and α I iσ and ψ α I iσ are the corresponding eigenvalues and wave functions. The Hamiltonian in Eq. ( In conclusion, our work addresses the determination of the Hubbard U in the DFT+U functional through enforcing the piecewise linearity condition on polaronic defect states. Our selection of U yields electronic and structural properties of such defects in good agreement with results from hybrid functionals satisfying the same constraint. Our scheme is further validated by the excellent agreement found for formation energies obtained with piecewise linear functionals. We demonstrate that our criterion for U leads to accurate energy barriers in polaron hoppings, whereby configurational-dependent U values can be avoided. We emphasize that our approach targets physical properties related to the U -corrected orbitals, while more global properties, such as band gaps and band widths, are not directly involved. For comparison, we also calculate U through a widely-used linear-response method, finding values of U that break the piecewise linearity condition and give larger formation energies. To sum up, we showed that polaronic defect states can effectively be used for determining the value of the Hubbard U parameter in DFT+U . Additionally, we demonstrated that the resulting electronic, structural, and energetic properties of such defects closely correspond to those obtained with hybrid functionals, but at a noticeably lower computational cost. The calculations are performed using the version 7.1 of the quantum espresso suite The Brillouin zone is sampled at the Γ point and the energy cutoff is set to 100 Ry in all cases. We obtain the electron and hole polarons by either adding or removing one electron, respectively. The defect structures are relaxed at fixed supercell parameters. The high-frequency and static dielectric constants used for the determination of the finite-size effects Hybrid functional calculations. The procedure for determining α k is analogous to that for U k (see Refs. Finite-size corrections. For a system with supercell charge q * in a geometry R Q * , relaxed in the presence of a charge Q * , the finite-size correction for the total energy is given by where Em denotes the finite-size correction for defects screened through either the high-frequency (ε∞) or the static (ε 0 ) dielectric constant Em(q * + Q * pol , ε∞) q * + Q * pol . ( We remark that the supercell charges q * and Q * coincide with the polaron charges q and Q for self-trapped polarons, as in BiVO 4 and MgO. At variance, in the cases of Li-doped MgO and Al-doped α-SiO 2 , q * = q -1 and Q * = Q -1 since the hole trapping occurs in the neutral state. as a function of α. In correspondence of U k , DFT+U yields band gaps of 2.52, 6.67, and 8.82 eV for BiVO 4 ,